The Welspring of Sciences, which teaches the perfect work and practice of
Arithmeticke both in whole numbers and Fractions, with such easy and
compendious instruction into the said art, as has not heretofore been by any
set out nor labored.

Beautified with most necessary Rules and Questions, not only profitable for
Merchants, but also for all Artificers, as in the Table does plainly appear.

Now nevvely printed and corrected.

Set forth by Humfrey Baker Citizen of London.

IMPRINTED AT LONdon by Henry Denham, for James Rowbothum.

Anno Domini. 1564.

TO THE Right Worshipful Master John Fitzvvilliams Governor of the most
famous society of Marchaunts Adventurers into Flaunders. And to the right
worshipful the Consuls, Assistents, and communaltie of the same society,
Humfrey Baker wishes health with continual increase of commodity by their
worthy travel.
ALTHOUGH heretofore (right worshipful) diverse and sundry well skilled men in
the feate, and science of numbering, have not spared their labor, not only in
beautifying, but also in augmenting the same with such increase of wit, as
has excedinglye contented the students therein, and made them riper in the
exact knowledge and readiness of it: Yet because an art can not have to much
setting forth, neither can be to much commended, I (among, and after so many
pregnant wits) am bold to put forth the fruit of my blunt understanding and
travail, in the like science, not correcting or reproving any man's former
edition, but making an attempt of my gross, and mean study herein, to the
intent that this my enterprise may (by other men's doings) be either gently
amended, or frendely received. And because I desire specially that it may be
gratefullye accepted, I have chosen you (worshipful) to be as defendours of
this little lucubration, to whom I know it shall be welcome, not so much for
my sake, as for the scien^^ ^oue it self, wherein it is well known you have
ripe judgment, and good understanding, as by your daily exercises it may
appear. And although some foolish heads of fancy overthwart, think this
arithmeticall art peculier only to a few using the trade of marchaundise, as
though it were not so necessary for other men: Yet I am sure, the wisest and
best learned perceiving the wonderful art, the deep diuises, and the cunning
co^clusions that are comprised in it: affirm it (and that of right) to be the
best whetstone, or sharpening of the wit of every man, that ever was
invented, and think it most necessary to be taught unto children, without the
which, nothing either private or common can be well ordered. And true it is,
that whosoever is ignorant of this science of numbering, he slepeth in all the
rest, and lacks that promptitude of wit, which other have in casting and
accompting of great sums. Yea, I say he that has the exact knowledge of
it, has a special gift of GOD, and carries about him a note and token of a
good wit: and I doubt whether ever any was counted or esteemed simple or
foolish, that had this science in his head.

Now if some curious brain would ask me this question: Sir you commend
much your Art of numbering, can you tell who was the first inuentor of it, or
what this word ARITHMETICA does signify, I would answer him that it is
uncertain who invented it first, but well I know, it is one of the seven
liberal sciences: which if I say God gave unto man to adourne his life with
all, I say as it is, and as we ought to believe, of whom we acknowledge to have
received them and not of the Poets or heathen Gods, as some scholemen will
say. Moreover, I know that Abraham taught it first unto the Egiptians, and no
man will deny but that he received al his knowledge of God, for he worshipped
no strange Gods neither received any gifts or sciences of them. And although
many years after, Pythagoras declared it to the Greeks, yet was not he the
first inuentour of it, but god. Plato also commended it as most necessary,
willing it to be taught to all youth before al other things. And thanks be to
God, it appears that his precept has been very well followed here in
England, for I find not in any nation (I speak not flattering my
countrymen but commending them) more ready knowledge in this science, than
there is in the most part of our youth here in England, and namely in London,
which I seeing it is in them, it is (out of question) in their masters and
tutours, which by their great care over them, have trained them up unto the
practice thereof, to whom the greatest part of the praise redoundeth. And now
right worshipful, when I consider how little profit my simple travail shall
bring, being but as it were an assay of further attempt, I am compelled to
crave at your hands only to accept my good will with the work: for will and
ability are somewhat unequal in me, but if ability were correspondent to
will, I would gladlye pleasure you in greater things tha^ this is, which is
but only a shadow in comparison of other men's substanciall labor and trauail
in this art: yet I trust it is not altogether so unpolished, but it has
passed under the file of some workmanship, whereby some men may take occasion of
profit and furthera^ce herein, which is my chief desire, although I know many
are able to do better: for England is not so destitute of learned heads, but
my doings may sone be followed, yea rather amended. But yet forasmuch as I
would they should know, that know not, I thought it not good to hide that
which has been opened unto me. And so casting with my self the sum of all,
I desire you eftsoon, right worshipful (to whom I thought it most mete to
present the fruit of my study) thankefullye to receive it, as your wonted
wisdoms does all things well and vertuousely purposed.

Thus fare you well, desiring God to maintain you in your estate, to prosper
and further all your good purposes, all your trafficks and voyages, increase
you in virtue, and keep you in good health.

AMEN.
The diffinition of number.
NVMBER IS AS much to say, as a multitude co^pounde of many unities, as two is
compounde of two unities, three is compounde of three unities, four of four
unities, five of five unities ten of ten, fourtene of fourtene, fiftene of
fiftene, twenty of twenty unities, etc.

And therefore an unity is no number, but the beginning and original of
number, as if you do multiply or divide an unity by it self, it is resolved
into it self without any increase. But it is in number otherwise, for there
can be no number, how great soever it be, but that it may continuallye be
increased by adding evermore one unity unto the same.

Numeration. The first Chapter.
NVmeration is the art whereby to express and declare the value of any sum
or number proposed, and is of two kinds, the one gathers the value of a
sum proposed, and the other expresses any sum conceived by due figures and
places, for the value is one thing, and the figures are another thing: and that
comes partlye by the diversity of figures, but chiefly of ye places wherein
they be orderly set. And first mark, that there are but ten figures or
characters which are used in Arithmetic, whereof nine of the^ are called
signifying figures, and the tenth is called a Ciphar, which is made like an 0,
and of it self signifies nothing, but it being joined with any of ye other
figures, encreseth their valu, and these be they. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 one two
three four five six seven eight nine.

Also you shall understand that every one of these fygures has two values:
One is always certain and has his signification of his own form, and the
other is uncertain which he takes of his place.

A place is called the seat or rome that a figure stands in, A place.
and how many figures soever are written in one sum or number, so many
places has the whole value thereof. And that is called the first place (which
next is toward the right hand) of any sum, and so reckning by order
toward the left hand, so that that place is last which is next the left
hand. And contrarywyse, when you express the value of the fygures in any
sum, you must begin at the left hand, and so reckon toward the right
hand.

Every of these nine fygures, (which are called signifying fygures) has his
own simple value when he is found alone, or in the first place of any sum.
In the second place toward the left hand, he betokens his own value ten
times. As 70. is, seven times ten: that is to say seventy. 80. is eight times
ten: that is to say eyghtie. In the third place every figure betokens his
own value a hundredth times. As 700. in that third place betokens a hundredth
times 7. that is to say, seven hundred: In the fourth place every figure
betokens his own value a thousand times. As 7000. is seven thousand, and
8000. is eight thousand. These four first places must be had perfectly in
mind, yea and that by heart, for by the knowledge of them you may express
all kind of numbers how great so ever they be.

In the fifth place every figure betokens his own value ten thousand times.
As 70000. is ten times seven thousand, that is to say seventy thousand: In
ye sixth place every figure stands for his own value, a hundredth thousand
times. As 700000. is seven hundredth thousand. The seventh place M. M. times,
or a million: as 7000000. is seven M. M. or seven millions. And the eight place
ten M. M. times, or ten millions, so that every place toward the left hand,
excedeth the former ten times. But now for the easy reading, and redye
expressing orderly of any sum proposed, you shall practice this manner,
following. And for example I propone this number 765432658. in the which are.ix.
places. In the first place is.8. and betokens but eight, in the second
place is 5. and betokens ten times five yt is fiftye, in the third place is
6. and betokens a hundredth times six, that is vj. C. In the fourth place is
2. and that is two M. And 3. in the fifte place is ten M. times 3. that is
xxx. M. So.4. in the first place is C. thousand times 4. four, that is
four. C.M. then.5. in the seventh place is a M. M. times 5. yt is five M.M. or
rather five millions. And 6. in the eight place is six times ten millions, yt
is lx. millions. And last of al.vij. in the ix. place, is vij. C. millions. Now
follows ye practice. First put a prick over the fourth figure, and so over
the seventh, and likewise over the tenth. And also over the 13.16. or.19. if
you had so many, and so still leaving two figures between every two pricks
and these rooms from one prick to an other are called ternaries, Ternaries.
then you must pronounce every three figures from one prick to an other as
though they were written alone from the rest. And at the end of their value,
add so many times a thousand, as your number has pricks (that is to say, if
there be but 1. prick, it is but 1. M. if 2. pricks a M.M. or else a million,
if 3. pricks M.M.M. or a M. million, and so conseque^tli of al other figures
following) Then come likewise to the next iij. fygures, and sound them as if
they were a part from the rest, and add to their value so many times
thousands as there are pricks between them and the first place of your whole
number. And so do by the next iij. figures following and of all ye rest
likewise as in example. 451234678567. The first prick over 8. in the fourth
place, which is the place of a M. the second prick is over 4. in the seventh
place, which is the place of a M.M. or one million, ye third prick is over the
tenth place which is the place of a M.M.M. or of a M. million, as in the former
example. Then for the expressing of this number by the value of every figure
according to the place wherein they stand, you shall first begin at the
last prick over 1. and take it and the other two fygures 5. and 4. which do
follow him, and value them alone and they are four Clj. MMM. or else CCCCli.
M. millions. Then take the other three fygures from 1. to the next prick, and
value them as if they were a part from the other, and they are.234. which are
CCxxxiiij. millions, or 234. MM. Then come to the third prick over.8. and take
the other two figures behind it, and reckon them likewise as if they were
alone, and they are six Clxxviij.M. And last of all come to the other three
figures which remain, that is.567. and they are five Clxvij. Thus ye whole sum
of these figures, is four Clj.M. two Cxxxiiij. millions, six Clxxviij. M. five
Clxvij, as before.

Three kinds of Number.
Note also that whole number is divided into three kinds, that is to say, diget
number, article and mixed or compounde number. The diget number, Diget.
is all manner of numbers under ten, which are these nine fygures, 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
8 9. of the which I have spoken before. Article.
The Article number is any kind which begins with a Cipher as this 0. and
they may ever be divided just by 10. without any remain, as these, 10. 20.
30. 40. 50. 100. and all other such like. The mixte or compounde number, Mixed
or co^pounde.
contains diverse and many articles, or at the least one article, and a diget,
as.11. 12. 16. 19. 22. 38. 108. 1007. and so forth. And as any article number
may be made a compounde, by putting thereto a diget, even so likewise every
co^pounde number, may be made an Article number by adding thereunto a 0.

And here follows a brief rehersall of the order and Denominatours of the
places. And this shall be sufficient for Numeration.

The order of the places. Tenth. Ninth. Eight. Seventh. Sixte. Fyfthe. Fourth.
Third. Second. First. 4 3 2 1 0 1 8 3 4 5 M. of Millions. C. of Millions. X.
of Millions. Millions. C. of Thousands. X. Thousands. Thousands. Hundrethes.
Tenthes. Unities. The Denominatours of the places.

Addition in whole number. Chap. 2.
ADdition is as much as to bring together two sums or numbers or more into
one, as if there were due to any man 223. li. by some one body, and 334. li.
by another, and 431. by another, and you would know how many pounds is due to
the same man in all, these three sums shall you set down orderly the one
under the other writing ye greatest sum highest and the next to the greatest
under it, and the least sum under the last, in such sort yt the first figure of
the one sum be directly under the first figure of the other, and the second
under the second, and so forth in order. When you have thus done, draw under
them a straight line, and then will they stand thus. example of numbers to be
added, with a horizontal line below the bottom number 431 334 223



Now begin always at the first places toward your right hand, and put
together the three first fygures of these three sums, and look what comes
of them, write that under them beneath the line, as in saying 431 334 223 8
3.4. and 1. being put together do make 8. write 8. under three as thus.

And then go to the second fygures and do likewise: 431 334 223 88 as in
saying. 2.3. and 3. makes 8. write 8. under 2. as here you see.

And likewise do with the fygures that be in the third place, in saying 2. 3.
and 4. 431 334 223 988 are 9. put nine under them, and so will your whole su^me
appear thus: whereby you may perceive that those three sums being added
together do make 988. li. And this is the art of addition according to his
simplicity, if the sum of any place do not exceed a diget number. But in case
ye sum of any one place cannot be expressed by one figure, but by two, you
shall put ye first of those figures under the line, and keep the other in your
mind, for to add it unto the first figure of ye next place. And if ye same
next place cannot be aualued but by two figures, you must in like manner put the
first of those figures under the line, and reserve the second for the other
place next after, and thus must you do from one place to another until you
have come to the last place, where in case you do find that the sum be of
two figures, you must set them both down because it is the end of that
work, as in this example.

734682456 450932345 13467891 4672123 1203754815

Where the first figures are 3.1.5.6. which added together makes 15. and for
that, that 15. is of two figures, I do put the first figure 5. under the
line, and keep the second figure (which is 1.) in my mind, ye which. I must
add with the next fygures of the second place, that is to say with 2.9.4.
and 5. the which together make 21. I write 1. under the line for the second
figure of that addition, that is to say after 5. and I keep 2. to be added
unto the third place the which with the other fygures 1.8.3.4. do make 18.
therefore I put 8. next after 1. in the third place under the line, and keep
1. to be added unto the fygures of the fourth place, which is with 2.7.2.2.
the which with the 1. that I keep do make 14. I set down 4. for ye fourth
figure (under ye line) that is to say, after 8. and I keep 1. to be added
unto the figures of the fifth place, the which is 7.6.3.8. with the 1. yt I keep
makes 25. I put 5. in the fifth place under the line next after 4. and keep 2.
in mind to be added with the fygures of the sixth place, that is with 6.4.9.6.
and that 2. which I keep, makes 27. I write down 7. under the line in the
sixth place, and I keep two which I add with the fygures in the seventh place,
and they make 13. I put down 3. under the line in the seventh place, and add
1. unto the fygures in ye eight place and they are 10. I do put 0. under the
line in the eight place, and then I add 1. unto the ninth place, that is to
say with 4.7. and they make 12. the which 12. I write at length under the line
because it is the end of this addition, and this is to be done of all such
like. And for the easier understanding of that which we have spoken of
addition, you may examine these two other examples following, in ye which ye
first has these numbers. 3570.2763.579.28. which being added together, do
make this number 6940, and in the second example does resulte this number
51683. by adding together of these numbers, 47630, 3756, 272, 25, as here under
written.

The numbers to be added. 3570, 47630 2763 3756 579 272 28 25 The line put
between. The sum of this addition. 6940 51683

Of Substraction in whole number. The. 3. Chapter.
SVbstraction teaches how you shall abate one lesser number from a greater,
and what there does remain after that you shall have abated the same, I speak
not of the abating of one egall number, from an other egall unto it, for the
facility thereof requires no rule.

In Substraction are found three numbers, the one is yt, from ye which the
substractio^ is made. The second is the number yt is to be subtracted and the
third is the number which remains after ye substractio^ is ended. As when I
would substract. 25. from 40. The 40. is the number from the which ye
substractio^ is made. 25. is ye number to be subtracted, and 15. is the number
which remains after you have done the substractio^, here follows ye
practice. You shall put ye lesser number under the greater in such sort that
every figure of the one number may answer unto every figure of the other
orderly, and then draw a right line under those two numbers as you did in
Addition. Then must you begin at the right hand and take the first figure of
the undermost number and abate that from the first figure of ye uppermost
number, and that which remains you must set underneath the line right under
ye figure which you have subtracted. Then afterward take likewise the second
figure of ye nethermost number, and abate that also from the second figure of
the higher number. The third from the third, and so forth of all the rest
till you come to the end, putting always ye remain of every figure under the
line in his order, example. I will substract. 2345. from 9876. after that I
have put them down according to the manner aforesaid. 9876 2345 7531

I take first 5. from 6. and there rests 1. the which I set under the line
right against 5. Secondly I abate 4. from 7. and there rests 3. the which I
set in the second place under the line, next after 1. Thirdlye, I abate 3.
from 8. and there rests 5. The which I put under the line in the third
place, finally I do abate 2. from 9. and there rests 7. the which I put under
ye line in the fourth and last place, and thus is this Substractio^ ended, by
ye which there rests. 7531.

But when two figures of one likeness do chance to meet, so yt the one
must be abated from the other, as if I should abate 7. from 7. there remains
nothing, and then must I set a cipher 0. under the line. But when the figure
which is to be abated, does exceed ye figure which is over him, so that it
cannot be taken out of the same figure. Then must you abate the nether figure
from 10. And yt which does remain you shall add unto the same figure which is
uppermost. And the sum which comes thereof shall you set under the line. But
whenever you do borrowe any such 10. of the over number: you must add 1.
unto the next nether figure following which is to be abated. And there is
nothing else to be done in substraction. Exaumple, I will substract 93576. from
4037479. after that I have placed my two numbers, 4037479. 93576. 3943903. as
I ought to do, I do first abate. 6. from 9. and there rests 3. then I put
the 3. under the line right against 6. And secondely I abate 7. from 7. And
there rests nothing. I do put a cipher 0. under the line right against 7. in
the second place. Then I come to the third place where I find 5. which I
cannot bate from the figure over him, which is but 4. therefore I do abate it
from 10. as before I taught and there rests 5. the which I do add with the
4. which is over him, and that makes 9. I put 9. in the third place under the
line for the third figure. Fourthly, for the 10. which I borrowed I add one
unto the next nether figure which is three, and they make 4. the which I do
abate from the over figure 7. and there rests 3. I put 3. under the line for
the fourth figure. And then I come to the fifth place where I do find 9. which
I cannot abate from the figure over him which is but 3. but I abate 9. from 10.
and there rests 1. the which I do add with 3. and they make 4. I put 4.
under the line for the fifth figure. And if it were not, for that I did last
borow 10. the substractio^ should have been ended. But for because that I must
(for every such ten that I borowe) always add 1. unto the next nether figure
following, I must therefore proceed unto the substraction. And for yt that
there is no other figure following in the nether number, it shall suffice to have
kept the unity, and to abate it from the next over figure. But I find there
0. and cannot abate 1. from 0. therefore I abate it from 10. and there rests
9. which I do put under the line in the sixte place, finallye for the ten
which I borrowed, I keep 1. in mind. The which I do abate from 4. and there
remains 3. the which I do put under the line in ye seventh place after 9. And
ye operation is thus ended.

An other example.

576084026 485675437 90408589

But if there were many numbers to be subtracted from one number alone, then
must you first add those numbers together according unto the doctrine of the
Chapter going before, and the^ to make your substraction as above said. As if
I would abate these three sums 123.234.456. from. 98925. first I do add
the three sums into one, and they are. 813. The which I do abate from 98925.
and there rests. 98112.

Of Multiplication. Chapter. 4.
IN multiplicatio^ there are iij. numbers to be noted, yt is to say the number
which is to be multiplied, the which we will call the Multiplicande: and the
number by the which we multiply, we call the multiplyer, or multiplicatour.
And ye third number is that which comes of the multiplication of the one by
the other, which is called the product. As when I would know how much mounteth
10. multiplied by 9. yt is to say how much are ten times nine. I find that
they are worth. 90. then 10. is ye multiplicand, 9. is the multiplier.

And 90. is called the product. The^ for to multiply, is none other thing, but
to find a number which co^teineth the multiplicande so many times, as the
multiplier contains unities, As 10. multiplied by 9. do make 90. as before
said. And 90. contains 10. so many times, as 9. contains unities, that is
to say nine times.

In multiplication, it forces not much which of the two numbers be the
multiplicande, nor which be the multiplier. For ten multiplied by 9. makes as
many as 9. multiplied by 10. yet nevertheless it shall be more commodious that
the lesser number be always the multiplier.

And for that, that the multyplication of figures the one by the other, is ye
most chief and necessariest kind whereby to know how to work in the
multiplication of compound numbers, and that every man has not at the fingers
end: I will therefore give you here certain easy ways of multiplicatio^ of
diget numbers. When you would multiplye two simple figures, or digets ye one by
the other, abate each of those dyget numbers from 10. Then multiply the two
remains the one by the other. And if the sum do exceed 10. write only the
first figure, and keep the other to be added to the next operation, which is
thus. Add your two simple figures together: And of yt which resulteth of ye
addition, take only the first figure, unto the which you must add ye unity
which you keep before. And yt shall be the second figure of the sum which you
do seek. Example, I would multipli 7. by 6. I take 7. from 10. and there
rests 3. likewise I abate 6. from 10. and there rests 4. then I say thus 3.
times 4. make 12. I write 2. for my first figure, and I keep 1. in my mind,
the^ I add 6. with 7. and they are 13. of the which I cast away the second
figure 1. and I take only the first figure 3. unto the which I add ye unity
which I kept, and they make 4. which I write in the second place, after 2.
And thus I find 42. which is the valor of 7. multiplied by 6.

Otherwise, and all comes to one effect, set down your two diget numbers the
one right over the other, and right against every of them toward the right
hand write his own distaunce from. 10: Then multiple the two differences
together, the figure which comes thereof, shall you set down under both the
differences. But if there be two fygures, set down but the first, and keep
the other in your mind afterward abate (from one of ye two diget numbers)
the difference of the other diget number that is to say, crossewise. And unto
the remain add the figure which you kept, and that shall be the second
number, and thus you shall have your multiplication. Example of the like
figures that is to say ^ of 7. multiplied by 6. the distaunce of 7. unto 10. is
3. And the distaunce of 6. from 10. is 4. I set them down croswayes as you
see: And then I say three times four are 12. I set down two and keep one
in my mind, then I abate 4. from 7. or else three from 6. it forces not from
which of them: and there rests always 3. unto the which I add the unity
which I kept in my mind, and they are four, which shall be the second figure
of the multiplication. And thus I find that 7. multiplied by 6. makes 42. as
in the other operation. This practice has no place where the 12. diget numbers
(do not exceed 10.) by adding them together, and then is multiplication easy
enough without any rule.

Another way to know the multiplication of simple numbers, is by this table
following: the use whereof is thus.

First you shall understand that the numbers from 1. and so downewardes to 9.
set in the left part or hanging margin of this table do betoke the
multipliers of all simple numbers. And the elements or fygures being put
highest in every square room drawing toward your right hand right against
every of the multipliers, do signify the multiplicands, unto ye multipliers of
the hanging margin. And the lower or inferior numbers in every square room,
do betoken ye product of that multiplication, which is made in multiplying the
upper number over it, with the figure in the ha^ging margin, answering dyrectly
unto ye said square: as by example, The Table of multiplication by all the
Diget numbers.
1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 2 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 3
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 9 12 15 18 21 24 27 4 4 5 6 7 8 9 16 20 24 28 32 36 5 5 6 7 8 9
25 30 35 40 45 6 6 7 8 9 36 42 48 54 7 7 8 9 49 56 63 8 8 9 64 72 9 9 81

First because 1. does not multiplye, I set in the upper margin the figures
from 1. to 9. both in the higher and also in the inferior rows, for 1. in the
hanging margin, multiplied by 1. the upper number in the first square brings
but 1. so likewise 2. being the higher number in the second square of the
upper margin multiplied by 1. in the ha^ging margin, brings two for the
lower number in the second square of the upper margin, for one times 1. makes
but 1. and 1. times. 2. makes 2. then 1. times 3. makes 3. and 1. times 4.
makes 4. and so continuing toward the right hand until you come to the
figure of 9. which is 1. times 9. makes 9. Then after multiple two of the
hanging margin by 2. the upper number of the square next toward the right
hand and that makes four which is ye product of 2. multiplied by 2. which 4.
is set under the 2. for 2. times. 2. are. 4. and 2. times. 3. makes 6. then 2.
times 4. makes 8. and two times 5. makes 10. and so continuing unto 2. times
9. which makes 18. The like is to be done with the third row, and so
likewise of all the resydue.

Exaumple, I would know what is the product of 9. multiplied by 8. I seek in
ye hanging mergin the multiplier 8. and amongst the squares directlye against
eight drawing toward the right hand, I seek the multiplicand 9. in the
higher row, and I find the product right under 9. to be 72. Then 72. is the
number which comes of the multiplication of 9. by 8. and so is to be
understand of all the reast of the table, which table must be of all men
learned by heart, or as they say without book, which being learned you shall
the better attain to the rest of multiplication.

To come now unto the practice of multiplication, when you would multiply
two numbers the one by the other, you must set them down after the same manner
as you did in addition, and in substraction. That is to say, the first figure
of the multiplier under the first figure of the multiplicande, the second
under the second, and the third under the third, if there be so many, and then
draw a right line under them, as in the other operations going before. After
you shall multiply all the figures of the multiplicande by the multiplier, and
set down the figures (coming of any such multiplicatio^) under the line every
one in order.

Exaumple, I would multiply 123. by 3. that is to say, I would know how
much amounts three times one hundredth, twenty and three. The two numbers
being placed in such order as is before said, you must begin toward ye
right hand: and say thus 3. times 123 3 369 3. are 9. write down 9. under the
line, right against 3. for the first figure: secondly by the same 3. you must
multiply ye second figure 2. and they make 6. put down 6. after the 9. under
the line: Thirdly by ye same 3. you shall multiply the last figure 1. and they
are but three, set down 3. after 6. for the third and last figure. And thus
is ye work ended: whereby you shall find, that 123. being multiplied by 3.
makes 369.

But when that of the multiplicatio^ of one figure by an other. The sum which
comes thereof shall be of two fygures, as it happens most often, then shall
you write down the first figure, and keep the other figure to be added unto
ye multiplication of the next figure.

Exaumple, Syx men have gained (every one of the^) 345. crowns I would know
how many crowns they had in all. 345 6 2070 First I multiply 6. times 5. are
30. I write 0. under the line, and keep 3. to be added to the next
multiplication: Secondely I say 6. times 4. are 24. unto the which I add 3
which I reserved. And they make 27. I write 7. in the second place under ye
line, and I keep 2. to be added to ye next multiplication, thirdely I say
six times 3. are 18. unto the which I add the 2. which I keep. And they make
20. ye which I write al down for because that is ye last work. And so I find
ye 345. being multiplied by 6. do make 2070. When the multiplier is of many
figures you must multiply all the whole multiplicand by every one of those
figures, and write the productes every one under his own figure.

Example. I would know how many days are past from the nativity of Jesus
Christ until the year 1560. full complete. I have to multiply 1560. by 365.
which are the days of one whole year. The leap years not being reckened,
which have every one of them 366. days.

First by the figure 5. I 1560 365 7800 multiply all the higher figures, saying
thus five times 0. makes 0. I writ 0. under the line for the first figure, and
because I keep nothing for the next place, I proceed and say 5. times 6. are
30. I set 0. under the line for ye second figure, and I keep 3. to be added to
ye next multiplication, thirdlye I say 5. times 5. are 25. The which with 3. that
I keep are 28. I set down 8. and keep 2. to be added with ye next
multiplication. Then coming unto the fourth and last figure, I say 5. times
1. are 5. the which with 2. that I reserved are 7: I put 7. for ye last figure of
this first operation by the figure 5. with the which figure we have no more to
do. And therefore I cancel the same 5. with a little strike through it, to
signify yt we have finished with that figure. And forasmuch that in
multiplication there is always as many simple operations, as the multiplier
contains figures. There rests yet 2. operato^is to be made. I come then
unto the second operation, which is by ye figure 6. by ye which I must again
multiply all the figures of the multiplicande as I did by 5 and the first
figure (which shall be produced) you must put one rank more lower then ye figures
of the operation even now made by 5. not right under ye first figure of the
multiplier 5. but under 6. yt is to say: one place more forewarde than the fifth
toward the left hand: and one rank more lower than the first operation: and
you shall put afterward every of ye other figures which comes of the same
multiplication in their order: thirdly you must make the multiplicatio^ by ye
third figure and that which shall come thereof you must set in his rank, as
here under you se. And now we need make no further discourse hereof, because
yt he which can do the first multiplication by 5. may as easily do all the
others. It shall therefore suffice to set here under the examples.

1560 365 7800 9360 1560 365 7800 9360 4680

Now, if you will know how much ye operations thus placed do amou^t unto, which
in value are but one number: you must add those three numbers together, but not
after ye same manner as we have done in ye chapter of addition, the first figure
of ye first rank with the first figure of the second rank, and of the third:
but you must add them in the same sort as you shall find them situated or
placed: that is to say, the first figure of the first rank alone by it self:
the second of that rank with the first of the second rank. The third of
the first rank with the second figure of the second rank and the first of
the third rank: and so of all other as hereafter does appear.

And thus the 1560 1560 365 7800 9360 4680 569400 years do contain five
hundredth sixtye and nine thousand four hundredth days not counting herein the
days of the leap years, which are here in number 390. for then the whole sum
of the days should be 569790.

Another example.

34560 2456 207360 172800 138240 69120 84879360

The sum of multiplication, when you would multiply any number by 10. you
must only add one cipher unto all the number. As 345. multiplied by 10.
makes 3450. if you will multiply by 100. Add unto the whole number two
ciphers. 00. if by 1000. add 000. And to be brief. when the last figure of
the multiplier is 1. and all the rest be ciphers, add so many ciphers to your
multiplica^de, as there shall be found in your multiplier. But if in multiplying,
the last figure were not 1. but that there were only certain ciphers in the
beginning: and that the other were signifying fygures, and likewise those of
the multiplicand, then shall you put those ciphers apart, and multiply the
signifying figures of the one by the signifying fygures of ye other. Then add
unto the product of that multiplication, all the ciphers which you did before
put a part. As if I would multiply. 46000. by 3500. I put a part ye three
ciphers of ye first, and the two ciphers of the second numbers. And then I
multiply 46. by 35. and thereof comes 1610: unto the which I add the 00000.
and then the whole product will be. 161000000.

46 35 230 138 161000000

Of Division the fifth Chap.
Division or partition is, to seek how many times one number does contain an
other for in this operation are first required two numbers for the fynding
out of the third. The first number is called the diuidende or number which is
to be divided and that must be the greater number, the other number is called
the divisor, and that is the lesser. And the third number which we seek is
called the quotie^t. As if I would divide 36. by 9. the dividend shall be.36.
and the diuisour is 9. And for because that 9. is contained in 36. four times,
that is to say yt 4. times 9. do make 36. The quotient shall be 4. as in
marking how many times 9. is contained in.36.

The practice.
Write down first the deuidende in the higher number, and the diuisour
underneath, in such sort, that the first figure of the diuisour toward the
left hand be under the first of the dividend and every figure of the same
divisor under his like, that is to say, the first under the first, the second
under ye second, the third under the third, and so consequentlye of the
other, if there be any more, which is contrary to the other three kinds
before specifyed, but you must consider if all the lower figures of the
divisor, may be taken out of the higher fygures of the dividend, by the order
of substraction. The which if you can not do, then must you set the first
figure of the Divisor (toward the left hand) under the second figure of ye
dividend, and so consequently the reast, if any be to be set down every one of
them under his like as before is said. And the^ draw a line between the
diuidende and the divisor. And at the end of them an other crooked line,
behind the which toward the right hand, shall be set your quotient. As by this
example following where the divisor is but of one figure.

If you would divide 860. by 4. you must set down 4. under the 8. with a line
between them as here under you may see.

The diuidende 860 Divisor. 4

And then you must seek how many times the divisor is contained in ye higher
number, or dividend aunswering to him, as in this our example I must seek how
many times 4 is contained in 8. in ye which I find 2. times, then I write
down 2. apart behind the crooked line, as you se, which shall be the first
figure of the quotient to come, secondly by this figure (being thus 860 4 (2 8
put apart) I must multiple the divisor: and under the same multiplication. I
must set that number which comes of the same multiplication as 2. times 4.
do make 8. which 8. I do set under the 4. which is the divisor. Thirdly, I do
substract the product of the said multiplication (of the quotie^t by the
divisor) from the higher number correspondant to the same, as if I abate 8.
from 8. there remains nothing, and then I cansell or strike out that which is
done as you see. In these three operations is comprehended the art of
division. The which are to be observed from point to point for there is no
diversity in the finishing of the same which is thus.

I must remove my divisor one place nerer toward my right hand: as in proceeding
with our 2 260 (21 4 example I remove my deuisor 4. which was under 8. and I
set it under 6. then I seek how many times 4. is contained in 6. where I find
but one time the^ I set 1. behind ye crooked line behind 2. afterward by
this last and new figure 1. I multiply the divisor 4. and that makes but 4.
(for an unity which is but 1. increases nothing) I abate 4. from the higher
figure 6. and there rests 2. ye which 2. I set over the 6. and I cancel the
6. for so must you do when there rests any thing after you have made ye
substraction. Thirdly for yt there yet remains another figure in the
dividend, I remove again the divisor, and I set it under the cipher 0. Then I
seek how many times 4. is in the higher number which is 20. where I 2 860 (215
4 20 find 5. times, I put 5. behind ye crooked line for the third and last
figure of the quotient. Then by the same 5. I multiply ye divisor 4. and yt
makes 20. the which I abate from ye higher number, and there rests nothing.
And so is this division ended: and I have found yt. 860. being divided by 4.
brings for the quotient 215. that is to say, that 4. is contained in 860.
two hundredth and fyftene times. This is the most easiest working that is in
division, but that which follows, apperteyneth to the whole and perfect
understanding of the same. When the first figure of your divisor toward your
left hand is greater than the first of ye diuidende, you must not place the
first figure of your diuisour right underneath the first of the diuidende, but
under the second figure of the same diuidende, nearer to your right hand, as
before is said. When ye divisor is of many figures, and yt you have to seek
how many times it is contained in the higher number (for the more easyer
working) you must not seek to abate the divisor all at one time, but you
must see and mark how many times the first figure of the same toward the
left hand is contained in the higher number aunswering to the said number,
and then to work after the same manner as is before taught.

Example, I have 316215. crowns to be divided among 45. men for to make my
division I must not put the first figure of the divisor which is 4. under the
first of the diuidende, which is 3. because that 4. is greater number than 3.
And further, I cannot take 4. out of three, wherefore I must set the 4. under
the second figure of the higher number which is 1. and the figure 5. of the
divisor next right under the 6. as you may see.

316215 45 I must first seek, how many times 45. is contained in 316. which is
but part of the diuidende, wherefore for the more easy working I need but to
seek how many times 4. is contained in 31. and because I may have it seaue^
times I put 7. behind the crooked line, as is aforesaid, then by 7. I
multiply all the divisor 45. and they are 315: the which I set under ye same
divisor, the first figure under the first: And the other in order toward the
left hand. Then I substract. 315. from the higher number 316. and of this
first working there remains but 1. the which I set over 1 316 215 45 (7 315
the 6. and I cancel the. 315. and the other fygures 3, 1, 6, and also the
divisor: and then it will stand thus.

And when I come to remove the divisor, and that I must seek how many times it
is contained in the higher number, if I see that I cannot find it there, that
is to say that if the higher number be lesser than the divisor, as it is in
this example, then must I put a cipher in ye quotient behind the crooked line,
and if there remain any figures in ye diuidende which are not finished, I must
remove the divisor again nerer toward my right hand by one place, for to
find a new figure in the quotient. As in this our example, for after that I
have removed the divisor, 1 52 6215 45 (70 I seek how many times. 45. is
contained in. 12. and because I cannot have 45. in 12. I put a 0. behind the
crooked line after 7. then without multipliyng or abatyng, I remove again the
divisor nerer toward my right hand, and I seek how many times 4. (which is
the first figure of the divisor) is in the higher 1 316215 45 (703 135 number,
that is to say, in 12. whereas I find it 3. times: I put 3. behind the
crooked line, for the third figure of the quotient: then by 3. I multiply the
divisor. 45. and thereof comes. 135.

A note.
But here is to be noted, that if it happen that the figure being last found
which is put in the quotient, do produce or bring forth a greater noumbre
(in multipliyng all the dyuisor by the same) then that which is over the said
divisor: you must then make the same figure of your quotient (which you do
put down) lesser by one: and after that you have cancelled the first
multiplication, you must make a new. And the same must be so done as often
times: as (in decreasing the same) it produces a lesser noumbre, or at the
least, a noumbre egall to that which is over it. As in the last work: for
because that the divisor, being multiplied by 3. brings forth. 135. which
amounts more then. 121. the same producte must be cancelled. And likewise the
figure. 3. which I did put in the quotient, must be changed into a figure of
2. Then by the said 2. I must multiply the divisor. 45. and thereof comes
90, the which I abate from. 121. and there remains. 31. And then will ye
sum stand thus.

13 316215 45 2 135 (703 90

And here is also to be noted that the sum which remains must be always
lesser then the divisor. A note.
The^ finally I remove the divisor to the 2. last figures toward the right
hand, and I seek how many times 4. is in 31. And for because I find it 7.
times, I put 7. in the quotient: by the which I multiply the divisor, and
thereof comes 315. the which I abate from the higher noumbre of the
dividend, and there remains nothing as here you may see.

13 516215 45 (7027 515

But in case that after the division is ended, there do remain any thing in
the diuidende, as most often times there does: I must them set that remain
aparte behind the crooked line after the entier quotient, and the divisor right
under the same remain, with a line between them both, as in this division
followyng, where there remains 3. in the last work of the same. And we shall
see what the same does signify, when we shall treat of fractions or broken
numbres.

^

In sum, all the whole practice of division may be kept in remembrance by
three lettres, that is to say: S. M. A. which three letters do signify to
seek, to multiply, to abate.

First, I must seek how many times the divisor is contained in the higher
number: then, by the quotient (which I find) I must multiply the divisor:
finally, I must abate the product of that multiplication, from the higher
number to the same correspondent, that is to say: out of the diuidende,
aunswering to the divisor.

And further, besides this kind of woorkyng in division. The which is reguler
and commune: I will here put an other manner of woorkynge very easy. The
which shall serve for soche divisions as are difficyll to be wrought. That is
to wit, when the number to be divided is very great, and the divisor great
also, and it shall serve again for to avoid error in supputacion, and for
the placing of fewer figures in the quotient: and consequently it shall save
much labor unto them which as yet have much studied in this art. The
practice whereof is thus, as follows.

I have to divide 7894658. by 643. In the first place, you shall understand,
that although the first figure of the divisor toward your left hand, may
be found many times in the higher noumbre as 10. times 12. times or more: yet
is it so, that you must never put but one figure only at a time in your
quotient.

And thus you shall at no time put any noumbre in your quotient which
exceadeth the figure of. 9. that is to say any noumbre being greater then 9.
for to come then unto our practice, write down your dyuisor one time: and
behind it toward your right hand, draw a line down straighte, and right
against the same divisor behind the line put this figure 1. The^ double your
said divisor, and right against the same (being doubled) put behind the line
the figure of 2. After, add unto the same noumbre (which you doubled) your
said divisor and right against the same product, behind the line put the
figure of. 3. And unto this third producte, you must add again your
divisor: and right against the same producte behind the line set the figure.
4. And this must you do, until you come to the figure of. 9: in soche sort
that every of the productes do surmounte so much his former noumbre, as all
the diuysor does amounte unto: placing at the right side of every producte
behind the line, the noumbre which signifies how much he is in order. That
is to say, right against the fifte producte, you must put. 5. right against
the sixte producte, you must put. 6: And so likewise of all the other.

Example of the divisor proponed, 643. first, I write down 643. and 643 1 1286
2 1929 3 2572 4 3215 5 3858 6 4501 7 5144 8 5787 9 right against the same
behind the line I put.1. secondely, I double 643. and they make 1286 and right
against him behind the line I put.2. Thirdlye, unto that same 1286. I add
the divisor 643. and they are 1929. and right against the same I set 3.
Fourthely, unto the said 1929. I add the divisor 643. and they are 2572. and
right against the same I put.4. And thus must you do always by increasing so
much every product, as the divisor does amounte unto, until you have so done
nine times, as you see in this present table.

This being done, you must set down your divisor under the diuident after
the same manner as is before declared: that is to say, 643. under the three
first figures of the diuidende toward your right hand, which are.789. Then
must you seek how many times.643. are contained in.789. And for to know the
same, I look in my foresaied table if I may there find the same numbres, 789.
the which is not there: Therefore I must take a lesser noumbre the nerest to
it in quantity that I can find in the table, the which is.643. which
noumbre has against it on the right hand of the line this diget. 1. Then I
take the said 1. and I put it behind the crooked line, for the first figure of
the quotient.

Then I do abate.643. from 789. and there remains.146. the which I put
over the.789. and I cancel the 789. and thus is the first operation ended.
Then I set forward the deuisour one figure nerer to my right hand, and I
seek a new quotient as I sought this, where I find the higher noumber over
my diuisour to be 1464. The which I do seek in the table, and because I can
not find it there, I take a lesser noumbre, the nighest to it that I can
find, and that is 1286: which noumbre has against it this digette.2. I
put.2. for the second figure of the quotient behind the line, and I do abate
1286. from.1464. and there remains.178. Thirdly, I remove forewarde the
diuisour, as before, and I find the higher noumbre to be.1786. and that the
next lesser noumbre to it in my table, is again.1286. I put therefore ones
again.2. in the quotient for the third figure: and I abate.1286. from, 1786.
and there remains.500. Fourthly, I set forward the diuisour, and the higher
noumbre over it, is 5005. and the next lesser noumbre to it in my table
is.4501. right against the which noumbre is.7. I put my.7 in the quotient, for
the fourth figure. And after that I have abated.4501. from.5005. there
remains.504. Finally, I remove forward my divisor unto the last place: and I
find the higher noumbre to be.5048. And the next lesser noumbre to it in my
table, is. 4501. I set.7. again in the quotient, for the fifte and last
figure. Then I take.4501. from.5048. and there remains.547. which must be
put at the end of the whole quotie^t with the divisor under it, and a line
between them in this manner following.

(1227 547/043

The sum of division.
WHen you would divide any nu^bre by.10. you must take away ye last figure next
toward your right hand and the rest shall be ye quotient. As if you would
divide.46845. by.10. take away the.5. and then.4684. shall be the quotient, and
the.5, shall be the nombre that does remain. Likewise when you would divide any
number by 100. take away the two last figures toward your right hand, and
if you would divide by.1000. take away three figures, if by.10000. take away
four figures. And so of all other, when the first figure of the dyuisor
toward the left hand shall be only 1. and the rest of the same divisor being
but ciphers.

Here follows the proofs of addicion, substraction, multiplication, and
division.
The proof of Addition.
WHen you would prove whether your addicion be well made, consider the figures
of the noumber which be added, every one in his simple value: not having any
regard to the place where he stands, but to reckon him as though he were
alone by himself and then reckon them all, one after an other, casting away
from them the noumber of 9. as often as you may.

And after your discourse made, keep in mind the same figure which remains
after the nynes be taken away, or set the same in a void place at the upper
end of a line. For if your addicion be well made, the like figure will
remain, after that you have taken away all the nines, out of the total sum
of the 24567 2 5329 431 30377 2 same addicion, as of ten as you mayther find
any: as in this addicio^ which here you se. There remains.2. for echepart.

The proof of substraction.
Add the noumbre which you do substract with that number which remains
after the substraction, is made: and if the total sum of that addicion, be
like unto the nombre from the which the substraction was made you have done
well, otherwise 5463 3584 1879 5463 not: as in this example does appear, where
you see the nombre which is to be subtracted is, 3584. and the noumbre which
does remain, is.1879. the which two sums being added together, do
make.5463. which is like to the higher noumbre, out of the which the
substraction was made, as before is said.

The proof of multiplication.
THe proof of multiplication is made by the help of division, for if you
divide the nombre produced of the multiplicatio^, by the multiplier: you shall
find the higher noumbre, which is the multiplicande.

The proof of division.
TO know if your division be well made: you must multiply all the quotient by
your divisor, and if any thing remained after your division was made. The Same
shall you add unto the producte which comes of the multiplication: and you
shall find the like nombre unto your dividend if you have well divided:
otherwise not.

Of progression the vi. Chapter.
PRogression arithmetical, Progression arithmetical.
is a brief and spedy assembling or adding together of diverse figures or
nombres, every one surmounting the other continually by equal difference: as
1.2.3.4.5. etc. here the difference, from the first to the second is but of 1.
and so do all the other, every one excede another by 1. still to thend. Like
ways. Here.2.4.6.8. etc. do proceed by the difference of 2. also 3.6.9. 12.
etc. do every one differ from other by 3. and so may these noumbres continue.
Infinitely after this order, in adding unto the third noumbre, the quantity
wherein the second does differ from the first: Like ways addinge the same
difference unto the fowerth noumbre, also to the fyfte, and so unto all the
other. As.1.4. the difference of the second to the first is 3. add 3. unto 4:
and they are 7. for the third noumbre: Then add 3. unto 7: and they make 10.
for the fowrth noumbre, and so of all other.

Then if you will add quickly the noumbre of any progession, you shall do
thus, first tell how many noumbres there are, and write their sum down by it
self, as in this example, 2. 5. 8. 11. 14. where the noumbres are 5. as you
may see, therefore you must set down 5. in a place alone, is the just sum
of al those figures added together, as in this example: 8. multiplied by.5. do
make.40. and that is the sum of all the figures. An other example of parcels
that are even, as thus.1.2.3.4.5.6. in this example you must likewaies note
down the number of the places, as before is taught, and tha^ add together the
last number and the first. And the sum, which comes of that addicion, shall
you multiply by half the number of the places, which before are noted, and
that, which resulteth of the same multiplicacion, is the wholesomme of all
those figures, as in this former example, where the number of the places is.6.
I note the.6. a part, and then

Progression Geometrical is, Progession, geometrical.
when the second number contains the first in any proporcion: 2.3. or.4.
times and so forth. And in like proporcion shall the third number contain the
second, and the fowerth, the third, and the fifth the fowerth. etc.
As.2.4.8.16.32, 64: here the proporcion is double.

Likewaies.3.9.27.81.243. are in triple proporcion.

And.2.8.32.128.512. are in proporcion quadruple.

That is to say, in the first example, where the proporcion is double, every
number contains the other.2. times. In the second example of triple
proporcion, the noumbers exceade each other three times. And in the third
example, the nombers exceade each other four times, and thus you se that
progression Arithmeticalle, differs from Progression Geometricalle for that,
that in the Arithmeticalle.

The excess is only in quantity, but in the Geometricalle, the excess is
in proporcion.

Now if you will easelie find the sum of any soche nombers, you shall do
thus, consider by what noumber they be multiplied, whether by.2.3.4. 5: or any
other, and by the same number, you must multiply the last sum in the
progression. And from the producte of the same multiplicacion, you shall abate
the first number of the progression. And that which remains of the said
multiplicacion, you shall divide by.1. less then was the number, by the which
I did multiply. And the quocient shall show you the so^me of all the nombers
in any Progression. As in this exaumple.5.15.45.135. 405. which are in triple
proporcion: now must you multiply.405. by.3. and they are.1215. from the
which you shall abate the first number of the progression, which is.5: and
there rests 1210. the which you shall divide by the number less by.1. then
by the which you did multiply, that is to say, by.2: and you shall find in
the quocie^t 605: which is the total sum of the nombers of that progression.
Like wise.4. 16.64 256.1024. which are in proporcion quadruple: therefore
multiply 1024. by.4. and thereof comes 4096 from the which abate the first
number.4. and there rests.4092: The which you must divide by.3. and you
shall find in your quotiente.1364. which is the total sum of that
progression, and this shall be sufficient for progression.

The.vii. chapter treats of the Rule of.3. called the golden Rule.
THe rule of three is the chifest the most profitable, and the most excellent
rule of all the rules of Arithmetike. For all other rules have need of it, and it
passes all the other, for the which cause it is said, that the Philosophers
did name it the golden rule. And after others opinion and judgment, it is
called the rule of proporcions of noumbers. But now in these days, by us it is
called the rule of three, because it requires three nombers in his operacion.
Of the which three nombers, the two first are set in a certain proporcion.
And in soche proporcion as their be stablished, this rule serves to find out
unto the third number, the fourth number to him proporcioned, in soche sort as
the second is proporcioned unto the first. Not for that, that the four
noumbers, nor yet the three, are or be proporcionall, or set in one
proporcion, but soche proporcion, as is from the first to the second, ought
to be from the third unto the fowerth, that is to say, if the second
noumber do contain the first two times or more, so many times shall the
fowerth number contain the third. And note well that the first number, and
the third in every rule of three, ought and must be always semblable, and
of one condition. And the second number, and the fowerth must likewise be of
one sembleaunce and nature.

And are dissemblaunte, and contrary to the other two noumbers: that is to
say to the first, and the third. And if you do multiply the first by the
fowerth. And the second noumber by the third. The two multiplicacions will
be egall. Likewise if you divide the one sembleaunte by the other, that is to
say, the third noumber by the first. And likewise the one dissembleaunte by
the other: that is to say, the fowerth number by the second (which are
dissembleaunte to the other two nombers) your two quocientes will be egall.

Regul.
The style of this rule is thus, you must set down your three noumbers in a
certain order, as by example here under shall appear. And then multiply the
third noumber, by the second. And the producte thereof you must divide by
the first noumber, or otherwise, divide the first noumber by the second. And
the quocient thereof shall be divisor unto the third number, that is to say, the
third noumber shall be divided by the quotient of the foresaied division,
that is of the first noumber divided by the second. Or otherwise divide the
second noumber by the first. And that which comes into your quotiente, you
shall multiply it by the third number. And thus shall you have the fowerth
noumber, which you seek for.

Example.
IF.8. be worth.12. what are 14. worth after the rate, or else if.8.
require.12. for his proporcionall, what will.14. demand? The which three
noumbers may conveniently be set in soche order, as hereafter does appear.

If.8. 12. 14. multiply the third number.14. by the second, which is.12.
And thereof comes (for the whole producte of this multiplicacion) 168. the
which (as the rule teaches) you must divide by the first number, that is to
say by.8. and thereof comes.21. And so much are the 14. worth. This is the
way, which is most used.

Otherwise divide.8. by.12. which you can not do, for they are 8/12. wherefore
abreuie 8/12 and they are 1/9 for your quotient, then divide the third
number.14. by the said, and you shall have.21. as before. Or else divide the
second number.12. by the first number.8. thereof comes.1.1/2. the which 1
you shall multiply by.14. and thereof will come.21. as is above said, and thus
must you do of all other. And although, that the noumbers of this rule may
be found in three differences, for sometimes they are whole no^bers and broken
together, sometimes broken and broken together, and somtymes all whole nombers,
if they be whole nombers, you must do none otherwise, then you did in the
last example. But in case thai be broken noumbers, or broken and whole noumbers
together, the manner and way to do them, receives a certain variacion, and
difficultee, according to the variety of the noumbers, the which operacion
easily to do, and vnuariablie, this rule teaches.

The three noumbers being set down, according unto the order of the whole
noumbers aforesaied, without any broken number, let.1. be put always
underneath every whole number, with a line between them fraccio^ wise, as thus
8/1. and that.1. is denominatour to every soche whole number. When you have
whole number and broken, they must be reduced and added with their broken
number, and if there be broken number without any whole number, the same
broken must remain in their estate.

A Rule.
This being done, you shall multiply the denominatour of the first number, by
the numeratour of the second, and the producte thereof again by the numerator
of the third number And so shall you have the diuidende, or number which must
be divided, then multiply the numeratour of the first number, by the
denominator of the second, and the product thereof by the denominator of the
third number, and that which comes of this multiplicacion shall be your divisor.
Then divide the number, which is to be divided, by the diuisour, and you
shall find the fowerth number that you seek. Of the which manner and fashions
of the rule of.3. are diverse kinds, whereof the first is of 3. whole nombers,
as was the last example, and here follows the second

If.15. pounds do buy me two clothes, how many clothes will.300. pou^des buy
me of the same price, that the two clothes did cost, set down your three
nombers thus.

Lib. Clothes. Lib.

15. 2. 300. 1 2 600 600 155 (40 1

And tha^ as you see, multiply the third number, which is.300. li. by.2.
which is the second number, and thereof comes 600. the which.600. you must
divide by the first number.15. and you shall find in your quotie^t 40. which
is.40. clothes, and so many clothes shall I buy for.300. li. as appears by
practice here above written. And here you must mark that the first number and
the third in this question be of one denominacio^, and likewise the second
and the fowerth which you have found are of one semblaunce: but in case that
the first number and the third in any question: be not of like denominacion,
you must in workyng bring them into one, as in this example following. If.12.
nobles do gain me 6. nobles, how many nobles will.48. pounds gain me: Here
you se that the denominacio^ of the first number is nobles, and the
denominacion of the third, is pounds, wherefore, before you do proceed to
work by the rule of three, you must first turn the pou^des into nobles in
multiplying.48. pounds by three nobles and they make.144. nobles, for that
there is in every pound of money.3. nobles, or otherwise if you will, you may
bring the first number being.12 nobles, into pounds, by dividing the^ by.3.
and thus shall your first and third nombers, be brought into one denominacion.
Then shall you set down your.3. nombers in order thus.

If.12. nobles do gain me.6. nobles, what shall.144. nobles gain? the
which. 144. are the nobles which are in.48. li. Then multiple the third
number.144. by the second number 6. and thereof comes 864. the which you
must divide by.12. nobles, and thereof comes.72. nobles.

But here it may perchance make some men muse, to see all the three nombers
in this rule of three, to be of one denominacion, which can not otherwise be
dooen, if you reduce the third number, to the denominacion of the first. But
if you will reduce the first number, to the denominacion of the third, that
is to say the.12. nobles into pounds, then shall the first and the third
nombers only agree in one denominacion, and the fowerth number which you seek,
shall be of the same denominacion as is the second, as in the former example.
If.12. nobles do yield me.6. nobles, what will.48. pounds yield me: first you
shall divide 12. nobles by three to bring them in pounds, and they shall be
like to the third number, which is also pounds, then will they stand thus.

Pou^des. Nobles. Pou^des. 4. 6. 48. 6. Nobles. 288. 288 (72 44

There is yet a more exact way to work in this rule of three, which is
thus. You must mark if the third and first nombers in the rule of three, may
be both divided by one like divisor: the which after you have divided the^,
you shall write down each of the quocientes orderly, in the said rule of.3.
every one of them in his own place, as though those were two of the no^bers
of your question, and not chaungyng the middle noumber, that is to say the
second, as thus, if.50. Crounes do buy me.44. yardes of clothe, how many
yardes shall I have for 120: here you may see that the third and the first
nombers, may be divided by.10. which in the third number is.12. times, and
in the first.5. times. Wherefore you shall put.12. for the third number in
the rule of three, instead of 120: and 5. for the first number instead of.50.
and let.44. remain still in the midst for the second number, after this sort
as follows, and then work by the rule as before.

Crounes. Yardes. Crounes. 5. 44. 12. 12. 88. 3 44 528 (105 528 355

Multiply.44. by.12. and thereof comes.528. divide the same.528. by 5. and
you shall find in your quocient 105.. and eue^ so many yardes should you have
found, if you had wrought the rule of three, by the first no^bers proposed.
There is yet certain other varieties, in woorkyng by the rule of three, but
for that they require the knowledge of fraccions, and because they are not so
easy as this first way, which is common, therefore content your selves with
this same, until you have tasted the fraccions, the which by gods help I
intend to set forth in second part of this book, incontinently after that I
have first taught you the backer rule of three.

The backer rule of three is so called: because it requires a contrary woorkyng
to that, which does the rule of three direct, whereof we have now treated.
For in the direct rule of three the greater the third noumber is, so much
the greater will the fowerth be But here in this backer rule it is
contrariwise, for the greater the third number is, so much lesser will the
fowerth be. Then, where as in the rule of.3. direct, the third noumber is
multiplied by the second, and the producte thereof divided by the first. Here
you must multiply the second noumber by the first, and divide the producte
of the same by the third, and the number which comes in the quociente,
answers to the question. For soche practice comes often times in use: In
soche sort, that if you work the same by the rule of three direct (not
having a regard unto the Proposicion of the question) you should then commit
an evident and open error.

Example.
If 15. shillinges worth of wine will serve for the ordinarye of 46. men, when
the Tonne of wine is worth 12. pounds: for how many me^ will the same 15.
shillings suffice when the tonne of wine is worth but eight pounds? It is
certain, that the lower the price is that ye tonne of wine does cost, and so
many more persons will the said 15. shillings in wine suffice. Therefore set
down your numbers thus, if 12. pounds suffice 46. men, how many will 8.
pounds suffice, you must multiply 46. by 12. and thereof comes 552. the
which 552. you shall divide by 8, and thereof comes 69. and unto 69. men will
the said 15. shillings worth in wine suffyse, when the tonne of wine is worth
but eight pounds, as hereafter does appear by practice.

Lib. Men. Lib. 12. 46. 8. 12. 7 92. 552 (69. 46. 88 552.

Likewise, a messenger makes a journey in 24 days, when the day is but 12.
hours long: how many days shall he be upon the same journey when the day is
16. hours in length? Here you must perceive, yt the more hours are in a day,
the fewer days will the messenger be in going his journey. Therefore write
down your numbers thus as here you may se.

Hours. Days. Hours. 12. 24. 16. 4 12. 12 48. 288 24 166 288. 1 (18

And then multiply 24. days by 12. hours, and thereof comes 288: divide
the same 288. by the third number 16. and you shall find 18. the which is 18.
days, and in so many days will the messenger make his journey when ye day is
16. hours long.

Likewise, when the bushel of wheat does cost 3. shillings, the penny loaf
of bread waieth 4. lib.

I demand what the same pennye loaf shall way, when the bushel of wheat
is worth but two shillings: here is to be considered that the better cheap
the wheat is, the heavier shall the penny loaf way, and therefore write down
your 3. numbers thus.

Shill. Lib. Shill. 3. 4. 2. 3. 12 12. 2 (6.

Then multiply 4. lib. which is the second number, hy the first number 3. and
they make 12. the which 12. you shall divide by the third number 2. and
thereof comes 6. li. and so much must the penny loaf of bread way, when ye
bushel of wheat is worth but two shillings as may appear.

And now, according to my former promise, shall follow the second part of
Arithmeticke, which teaches the working by Fractions.

Here ends the first part of Arithmetic.
The second part of Arithmetic, which treats of Fractions or broken numbers.
The first Chapter treats of Fractions, or broken numbers, and the difference
thereof.
BRoken number is as much as a part or many parts of 1. whereof there are two
numbers with a line between them both: yt is to say, ye one which is above ye
line is called ye numerator. And ye other underneath ye line is called the
denominator, as by example, three quarters, which must be set down thus,:
whereof 3. which is the higher number above the line is called the numerator,
and 4. which is under ye line is called ye denominator. And it is always
convenient that ye numerator be less in number, than the denominator. For if
the numerator, and ye denominator were egall in value: then should they
represent a whole number thus, as 1/1, 2/2, 3/3, which are whole numbers: by
reason that the numerators of these, and all such like, may be divided by their
denominators, and their quotientes will always be but 1. But in case that the
numerator do exceed his denominator, then it is more tha^ one whole: as
20/18, is more than a whole number by 2/18, other diffinition does not hereunto
appertain. Furthermore it is to be understand that the midst of all broken
numbers is the just half of 1. whole, as 6/12, 7/14, 8/16, 9/18, and other
like, are the halfes of one whole number, whereof does grow, and come forth 2.
progressions natural: the one progreding by augmenting, or increasing, as
these.

6/7 8/9 9./10. etc.

And they do proceed infinitely and will never reach to make a whole number
thus 1/1. And the other progression, does progrede by diminishing or
decreasyng, as thus.

1/7 1/9 1/10. etc.

And these do proceed infinitely, and shall never come to make a 0. which
signifies nothing, but shall ever retain some certain number whatsoever,
whereby it does appear that broken numbers are infinite.

The second Chapter treats of the reducing or bringing together, of 2.
numbers, or many broken dissembling, unto one broken sembling.
REduction, is as much as to bring together, or to put in se^blau^ce 2. or
many numbers dissembling one from the other, in reducynge them unto a common
denominator. For because the diversity and difference of the broken numbers,
do come of the denominators part, or of diverse denominators, and for the
understanding hereof, there is a general rule whose operation is thus.
Multiply the Denominators the one by the other, and so you shall have a new
denominator common to all, ye which denominator divide by the particular
denominators, and multiplye every quotie^t by his numerator and so you shall
have new numerators, for the numbers which you would reduce, as appears by
this example followyng.

Reduction in common denomination.
that set under the cross, then divide 15. by the denominator 3. and you shall
have 5. which multiply by the numerator 2. and you shall find 10. set that
over the and they are 10/11, for the. Afterward divide 15. by the denominator
5. and thereof comes 3. the which multiply by the numerator 4. and you shall
find 12. which set over the head of the and they make 12/15 for the: as
appears more plainer in the margent. ^

2. If you will reduce,,,, together, you must multiply all the denominators
the one by ye other, that is to say, 2. by 3. makes 6, then 6. by 4. and
mounteth 24. Last of all 24. by 6. and thereof comes 144. for the common
denominator. Then, for the first divide 144. by the denominator 2. and thereof
comes 72. the which multiplye by the numerator 1. and it is still 72. set yt
over the and it is 72/144, for the: Then divide 144. by the second denominator
3. and thereof comes 48: the which multiply by the second numerator 2. and
they are 96. which set over the and they make 96/144, for the: The^ divide 144.
by the third denominator 4. and thereof comes 36. the which multiplye by the
third numerator 3. and they make 108. which set over the and they are 108/144
for the.

Finally divide 144. by the last denominator 6, and thereof comes 24: The
which multiply by ye last numerator 5. and thereof comes 120. Which set over
the and they are 120/144, for the, as appears here by practice.

The exaumple.
^

Reduction of broken numbers of broken.
IF you will reduce ye broken of broken together, as thus, the of 7/4 of, 8 60.
multiplye the Denominators the one by the other, that is to say 3. by 4.
makes 12. and then 12. by 5. makes 60. for your denominator, set 8. over 60.
with a line between them, and they be 1/60 which being abbreuied are 2/15 and so
much are ye of of as appears in the margent.

Another example of the same reduction and of the second reduction.
abreuied are 2/15 for ye first part, that is to say, for the of of, secondely
for the of 5/7 multiplye likewise the numerator 3. by 5. makes 15. for ye
numerator, and multiply 4. by 7. makes 28. for the denominator, and then they
be 15/29 for ye second part that is to say for the of 5/7. Thirdely for the of
of of multiply the numerators the one by the other, that is to say, 1. by 1.
and then by 2. and last by 1. and al makes but 2. for ye numerator, likewise
multiply 2. by 2. makes 4. and 4. by 3. makes 12. and then 12. by 3. makes
36. for denominator, and they are 2/36, which being abreuied makes 1/18, for
the third part, ye is to say for of the of of. Last of all take the 2/15 the
15/28 and ye 1/18 and reduce them according to the order of the second
reduction, and you shall find 1008/7560 for the 2/15. And 4050/7500 for ye
15/28. And 420/7560 for ye 1/18: and thus are broken numbers of broken, reduced
as appears by practice.

8 15 2 5/7 1008 4050 420 60 28 36 2/15 15/28 1/18 760

Reduction of broken numbers, and the parts of broken together.
cross, so you shall find that the and the of do make which being abbreuied
does make, which is as much as the and the of. Likewise if you will reduce the
and ye of, you must do as before, set down the and with a cross between
them, multiply the two denominators the one by ye other, that is to say, 3. by
4. makes 12. which set under ye cross as you see in the margent ^ and the^
multiply the first numerator 2. by ye last denominator 4. and thereof comes
8. whereunto add the last numerator 1. and that makes 9. which set over the
Cross, so shall you find that the and the of are worth 9/12, which abbreuied
do make, as appears by example in the margent.

Reduction of whole numbers and broken together into a Fraction.


17. 141. 8. 5. 136. 17. 8. makes 141./8. 5. 141.

In case you have whole number and broken to be reduced, with broken you must
bring the whole number into his broken, in multiplying it by the denominator of
the broken number going therewith, and add thereunto the numerator of the said
broken number, as in the last example, and then reduce that broken number with
the other broken, as here appears by this example. Reduce 10. and 4/7
together, first bring 10 al into thirds, as by the syxt reduction, and you shall
find 32/3, then reduce the 32/3 and 4/7 together, by the first reduction, and
you shall find 224/21 for the 32/3: and 12/21 for 4/7, as appears here by
practice.

^

Also in case you have in both parts of your Reduction, as well whole number
as broken, you must always put the whole into their broken (as by the syxte
reduction) of either part.

Example.
If you will reduce 12. with 14. to bring them into one denomination, first
bring the 12. all into fourthes, and you shall find 49/4: then likewise reduce
14. all into thirdes, and you shall have 44/3, for the 14., then reduce 49/4
and 44/3 together, by the order of the first Reduction, and you shall find
147/12 for the 49/4. And 170/12 for ye 14. as here by practice does plainly
appear.

^

The third Chapter treats of abbreuiation of one great broken number into a
lesser broken.
ABbreuiation is as much as to set down, or to write a broken number by figures
of less signification, and not diminishing ye value thereof. The which to do,
there is a rule whose operation is thus, divide ye numerator and likewise the
denominator, by one whole number the greatest yt you may find in the same
broken number, and of the quotient of that numerator, make it the numerator,
and likewise of that of the denominator make it your denominator, as by example.

1. If you will abreuiat 54/81, you shall understand that the greatest whole
number that you may take, by the which you may divide the numerator and
denominator is 27, which is ye half of ye numerator, and that is a whole
number, for you cannot take a whole number out of the denominator, 81. but that
there will be either more or less than a whole number, therefore if you
divide 54. 54./81. 1 27 27 (2 2 81 27 (3 by 27. you shall find 2. for the
numerator, likewise if you divide 81. by 27. you shall find 3. for the
denominator, then put 2. over the 3. with a line between the^, and you shall
find and thus by this rule the 54/81 are abreuied unto, as appears in the
margent, and so is to be understand all other.

The form and manner how to find out the greater number, by the which you may
wholly divide ye numerator and denominator (to the end yt you may abreuiat them)
is thus.

First, divide the denominator by his numerator, and if any number do
remain, let your divisor be divided by the same number, and so you must
continue until you have so divided yt there may nothing remain, then is it to
be understand, that your last divisor (whereat you did end, and that 0. did
remain after your last division) is the greatest number, by the which you must
abreuiat, as you did in the last example, but in case that your last divisor
be 1. it is a token that the same number can not be abreuied. Example, of 54/11
divide 81. (which is the denominator) by 54. which is his numerator, and there
rests 27. then divide 54. by 27. and there remains nothing, wherefore your
last divisor 27. is the number, by the which you must abreuiat 54/81 as in the
last example is specifyed.

Another style of abbreuiation.
2. Mediate the numerator, and also the denominator of your fraction in case
the numbers be even, that is to say, take always the half of the numerator,
and likewise of the denominator, and of ye mediation or half of the numerator,
make it your numerator, also of the denominator, make your denominator, and so
continue as often as you may in taking always the of the numerator, and
semblably of the denominator, or else see if you may abbreuiate ye numbers
which do remain, by 3. by 4. by 5.6.7.8.9. or by 10: for you must abbreuiate
them as often as you can by any of the said numbers, and it is to be noted,
that with whatsoever number of these, you do abbreuiate the Numerator of your
Fraction, by the same you must abbreuiate likewise the Denominator, so
continuyng until they can no more be abbreuied. And it is to be understand
that if the Numerator and the Denominator be even numbers, as you may know
when the first figure is an even number, or a 0, may you perceive if both the
Numerator and the Denominator may be abbreuied by 10. by 8. by 4. or by 2.
although that some times they may be abbreuied by three. And if they be odd
numbers, then must you consider if they may be abbreuied by 9. by 7. by 5. or
by 3: but when the first number, as well of the Numerator, as of the
Denominator are even numbers, then may you well know that such numbers may be
abbreuied by 2. as is aforesaid. And if you add the fygures of the Numerator
together, in such manner as you do in making the proof by nine in whole
numbers: that is, if you find 9. it appears that you may abbreuye that
number by 9. And likewise by 3. and sometimes by 6. if you find 6. it may be
abbreuied by 6. and always by 3. if you find 3. it is a sign that you may
abreuiate by 3. And by whatsoever number that you do abreuiate the numerator,
by the same must you abreuiate likewise the denominator, and if the first
fygures of the same number be.5. or 0. you may abreuiate them by 5. but if the
first fygures be both 0. they may be abreuied by 10. in cutting away the two
Ciphers thus, as 0/0 which makes, as sometimes by 100. thus, as 00/00 in
cutting away the four ciphers after this sort, 00/00 and then the 100/200 do
make, and after this manner have I set here diverse examples, although that all
numbers cannot be abreuied by this rule, that is to say, all those which may
be well abreuyed by the first rule aforesaid.

Abreuiated.

by 10. 3840/7080 by 9. 1890/4725 by 8. 384/768 by 7. 210/525 by 6. 48/69 by 5.
30/75 by 4. 8/16 by 3. 6/15 by 2. 2/4 2/6

3. Furthermore you shall understand that sometimes it happens, that all the
fygures of the numerator are egall unto them of the denominator, which when it
so happens, you may the^ take one of them of the numerator, and also one of
them of the denominator, and it shall be abreuyed as 555/888, being abreuiated
after this manner comes to. And yet it happens sometimes, that two, or many
fygures of the numerator are proportioned unto two, or many fygures of their
denominators and the other fygures of the same number do behold the one the
other in this proportion? Then may you take two or many figures, as well of the
numerator as of the denominator, and by this manner the same number shall be
abbreuied, as 4747/5959 which being abbreuied by this rule, do come to 47/59.

4. Also it happens sometimes yt you would abbreuiate one number unto the
semblaunce or likeness of another. And for to know if the same may be
abbreuied, and also by what number it may be abbreuied, you must divide the
numerator of ye one number by the numerator of the other, and likewise the
denominator of the one by the denominator of the other, for in case that after
every division there do remain 0. and that the two quotients be egall, then
is one of them the number by ye which the said fraction must be abbreuied, as
by example of 115/207. I would know if they may be abbreuied unto 5/9, and for
to do this, you must divide 115. by 5. and you must divide 207. by 9. and
there will come into both the quotients 23. by the which it appears yt this
number may be abbreuied by 23.

5/9. 115/207 115 ^ 55 (23 207 99 (23.

The 4. Chapter treats of the assembling of two or many broken numbers
together, as by example.
FOr to add broken numbers together, there is a general rule, which is thus,
if ye numbers be unlike the one to ye other you must reduce the^ into a common
denominatio^, which after you have reduced the^, you must then add both the
numerators together, and set ye product of the said addition over the cross,
and divide the same by the common denominator as by this example following.

1. If you will add with, you must first reduce the two fractions both into
one denomination, according to the introduction of the first reduction, that
is to say, in multiplying the denominator of the first fraction which is 3,
by the denominator of the other fraction which is four, and they make 12. for
your common denominator, ye which 12. set under the cross, the^ multiply ye
first numerator 2. by the last denominator 4. and thereof comes 8. which set
over the, and then multiply ye last numerator 3. by the first denominator 3.
and thereof comes 9. which you must set over the, then add the numerator 8.
with the numerator 9. and they make 17. which set over the cross, and then
your fraction will be 17/12 which is the addition of the with.^ And because
your numerator 17. is greater tha^ his denominator 12. therefore you must divide
17. by 12. and thereof will come 1. and 5. remaining, which 5. are worth 5/12,
and so much are ye added with as does appear.

Addition in broken numbers.
2. Also if you will add,,,, together, you must first add the and together,
according to the doctrine of the last rule, and you shall find 7/6: then add
and together by the said last chapter, and they make 31/20. Then finally add
the 7/6 (which came of the and added together) with 13/20, and you shall find
by ye foresaid addition that they amount unto 326/120. Wherefore divide 326.
by 120. and thereof comes 2. and 86. remains, which is 86/120 of one whole,
and they being abreuied do make 43/60: and thus ye,,,, added together do
amount to 2.43/00, as here under does appear.

^

Addition of broken numbers of broken.
3. Furthermore, if you will add the broken numbers of broken together, as to
add the of of with the of of: first you must reduce ye numbers according to ye
order of ye fourth reduction, in multiplying the numerator of the first 3.
fractions, the one by the other, and of the product make your numerator, and
likewise you must multiply ye denominators of ye foresaid three fractions, ye
one by the other and of the product make your denominator, and you shall find
24/60 for the first three broken numbers, which being abbreuied do make, the^
reduce the other 3. fractio^s, by ye said fourth reduction, in multiplying the
numerators by numerators, and denominators, by denominators, as you did by the
first 3. broken numbers, and you shall find 25/96 the^ must you add yt which
came of the first 3. broken numbers, and 25/96 which are of the last 3.
fractions, both together, by the instruction of ye first addition and you shall
find 317/480 which cannot be abbreuied, but is ye product of ye addition: so
much are the of of added with the of of as hereafter by practice does evidently
appear.

^

Addition of broken number with the parts of broken together.
4. Likewise if you will add the, and the of with the and of, you must reduce
the by the fyft reduction and thereof comes for the and, of one of the said
thirdes, the^ reduce the and by the said fifth reduction, and thereof comes
17/20.

Last of all add the and 17/20 together according to the first rule of
addition, and you shall find 202/120 which being divided brings 1. and
82/120 part remaining, which abreuied makes 41/60 and thus you do perceive
that the and added with the and do amount unto 1.41/60 as hereafter by
practice does plainly appear.

^

^

Addition of whole number and broken together.
5. Also if you will add 12. with 20., you may (if you will) add 12. and 20.
together, and they make 32. and then add the two broken numbers together,
that is to say and by ye order of the first addition and they make 49/30:
therefore divide 49. by 30. and thereof comes 1. and 19/30 parts remain,
which 1. you must add unto the 32. and the whole addition will be 33. 19/30, or
otherwise, you may reduce 12. into the likeness of a Fraction by the syxt
reduction and they will be 64/5, and likewise by the same reductio^, reduce 20.
and they be 125/6, then add 84/5 with the 125/6, by the first addition and
you shall find 1009/30. Therefore divide 1009. by 30. and thereof comes
33.19/30 as before, and as by practice of the same both the ways, does here
under appear.

^

The fifth Chapter treats of Substraction in broken numbers.
IF you will substract from you must first reduce both the fractions into a
common denomination by the first reduction, and you shall find 8/12 for the,
and 9/12 for the. Therefore abate the numerator 8. from the numerator 9. and
there remains 1/12 as may appear here by practice.

^

2. But if you have a broken number to be subtracted from a whole number, you
must borowe one of the whole number, and resolve it into a fraction of like
denomination as is that fraction, which you would abate from the same whole
number, and then abate ye said fraction therefrom, and you shall find what
does remain, as by this example. If you abate from 8. you must borow one of
the said 8. and resolve it into fiftes like unto ye fractio^, because it is 4.
fifts, and that 1. will be 5. fiftes thus 5/5, therefore abate from 5/5 and there
will remain, and substract ye 1. which you borrowed from 8. and there does
remain 7. and also the. Thus the being subtracted from 8. does leave 7. as by
practice does plainly appear.

^

3. If you will substract broken number from whole number and broken being
together: thus, as if you would substract from 6., you may by the first
substraction, abate from, and there will remain 1/12, and the 6. does still
remain whole, because ye may be abated from the, thus being abated from 6
leaves 6.1/12 as appears by practice.

^

Likewise if you will abate, from 14., you must first reduce 14. all into
fiftes by the 6. reduction, and they be 72/5, then reduce into a common
denomination, by the first reduction, and you shall find 10/15 for the: and
216/15 for the 72/5: the^ substract the numerator 10. of the first fraction,
from the numerator 216. of ye second fractio^, and there remains 206/15.
Therefore divide 206. by 15. and thereof comes 13.11/15, and so much remain of
this substraction, as may appear.

^

4. If you will substract whole number and broken from whole and broken, as
thus, if you will substract 9. from 20. you must reduce 9. into fourthes, and
likewise ye 20. into halfes by ye syxt reduction: and you shall find 37/4 for ye
9. And 41/2. for ye 20.. The^ reduce 37/4. and 41/2 into one denomination,
according unto the first reduction and you shall find 74/8 for the 37/4, and
164/8 for the 41/2 the^ abate the numerator of 74/8 which is 74. from the
numerator of 164/8 and there remains 90/8 then divide 90. by 8. and thereof
comes 11. which is the remain of this substraction.

^

Substraction of broken numbers of broken.
5. If you will substract, the 2/1 of of from the of of you must first bring
the of of into one fraction by ye 3. reduction, and the 3/6 of of likewise into
one fraction by ye same reduction, and you shall find 6/30 for the first 3.
broken numbers, which being abbreuied do make: and for the other 3. broken
numbers, you shall find 105/192: which being likewise abbreuied do make 35/64,
then you shall substract from 35/64 by ye instruction of ye first substractio^,
in reducing both ye fractio^s into a common denomination, as before is done,
and you shall find remaining 111/320 as may appear by example.

^

The sixth Chapter is of multiplication in broken numbers.
FIrst for to multiply in broken number, there is a rule which is thus,
multiply the numerator of the one fractio^ by the numerator of the other. And
then divide ye fraction if you may, or else abbreuiate it, and you have done,
but if there be whole number and broken together, you must reduce the whole
numbers into broken, and add thereunto the numerator of his broken, and the^
multiply as is before said, as also hereafter by examples shall more plainly
appear.

1. If you will multiply by, you must multiply the numerator 2. by ye
numerator 3. and thereof comes 6. for the numerator: Likewise multiplye the
denominators the one by ye other, yt is to say 3. by 4. and thereof comes 12.
fpr the denominator, so that this multiplication comes to 6/12, which being
abbreuiated do make and so much amounts the multiplication of the by as by
practice.

6 12.

2. Likewise if you will multiplye a broken number by whole number, or whole
number by broken, which is all one, as by 18, or else 18. by, you must set 1.
under 18. thus 8/1: and the^ multiply 18. by the numerator 4. and thereof
comes 72. ye which divide by the denominator 5. and thereof comes 14. for
the whole multiplication, or otherwise abate from 18. his part which is 3., and
there remains 14. as above.

72 22 18/1 72 5 55 (14 2/5

18 3 1^/1 18 18 5 5 (3. 3 14

3. Also if you will multiply a whole number, by whole number and broken, or
else whole number and broken by a whole number, which is al one. As by example,
if you multiplye 15. by 16. or else 16. by 15. First reduce 16 all into
fourthes, in multiplying 16. by the denominator of which is 4. and thereof
comes 64. whereunto add the numerator 3. and it makes 67/4 which multiply
by 15/1 according unto the instruction of the last example, and you shall
find ye product of this multiplication to be 251. as by practice does here
appear.

67 67 1005 15 16 1^/^ ^7/4 335 4 67 1005

2 1 1005 444 (251.

4. And if you will multiplye a broken number, by whole number and broken, or
else whole number and broken by a broken. As by example, if you will multiply
by 18., or else 18. by, which is all one: you must reduce the whole number into
his broken by the syxt reduction. And you shall find 56/3, which you shall
multiply by the, after the doctrine of the first multiplication, that is to
say: in multiplying the Numerator 56. by ye Numerator of, which is 1. And it is
still 56. because 1. does neither multiply nor divide. And likewise you must
multiplye the Denominator 3. by the Denominator 4. and it makes 12. the^
divide 56. by 12. and thereof comes 4.. And so much amounts the
multiplication of the 18. multiplied by as by example.

56 56 18 18 ^6/3 56 12 12 (4 2/3

5. If you will multiplye whole number and broken, with whole and broken, you
must first put either whole number into his broken, according to the
instruction of the syxte reduction, and then multiply the one numerator by the
other, and of the product make your numerator. And likewise multiply the
denominators the one by the other, and thereof make the denominator, then
divide the numerator by the denominator, and the quotient shall be the increase
of this multiplication. Example, If you would multiplye 12. by 6.: first by
the syxt reduction the 12. will make 64/3, and the 6. will make 27/4, then
multiplye the numerator 64. by the numerator 27. and thereof comes 1728. for
the numerator. And then you must multiply the denominator 25. by the
denominator 4. and they do make 20. then divide 1728. by 20. and thereof
comes 86. for the whole multiplication, as by example.

1728 64 64 27 27 12 6 448 20 128 1728 1 1728 200 (86. 2

6. If you will multiply one broken number by many broken numbers, thus: As to
multiply by 5/7 and by 4/9: you must multiply ye numerators of all the
fractio^s, ye one by the other, and of the product make ye numerator yt is to
say: 2. by 5. and they be 10. then 10. by 4. and they be 40. for the
Numerator. Likewise you must multiply the denominators the one by the other,
that is to say 3. by 7. makes 21. then 21. by 9. makes 189. for the
denominator: then set 40. over the 189 with a line between them, and they make
40/189. And so much amounts the whole multiplicatio^ of the multiplied by 5/7
and 4/9 as by example following. And thus is to be understand of all such like.

2 3 5 7 40 10 21 5/7 4/9 4 9 40/189 189 40 189

The 7. Chapter treats of Division in broken numbers.
NOte that in Division of broken numbers, you must set your divisor down
first, next unto the left hand, and the diuidende or number which is to be
divided always toward the right hand. And then multiply cross wise, that
is to say the numerator of your divisor by the denominator of the diuidende,
and the product shall be the denominator, which afterward shall be your
Divisor. And likewise you must multiply the Denominator of your first number,
that is to say of your Divisor: by the Numerator of the Diuidende, which
afterward shall be the Dividend, and that must be set over the Cross, and the
Denominator under the Cross, then shall you divide the Numerator by the
Denominator if it may be divided, if not, you must abbreuiate them, as
hereafter by exaumples shall more plainelye appear.

1. If you will divide by, you must set the Divisor (which is 2/3) next to
the left hand, and the diuidende toward your right hand, with a cross
between them: as may appear by this example in the margent ^. Then you shall
multiply ye numerator of ye, which is 2. by ye denominator of the which is 4.
and and thereof comes 8. which shall be your new divisor: set that 8. under the
cross, as the denominator, then multiply the numerator of the diuidende, that
is to say of the which is 3. by the denominator of the divisor, that is to wit
of the which is 3. set yt over the cross, and it is 9. for the numerator,
which shall be now the diuidende, or number to be divided. The^ finally you shall
divide 9. by 8. and thereof comes into ye quotie^t 1., and so oftentimes is
contained in. as does appear before in the margent. But in case you would
divide by, you must likewise set your divisor next to your left hand, as is
before said. And then proceed, as is above declared, and you shall find that
divided by brings into the quotient 8/9, which cannot be divided nor
abbreuied, wherefore it appears that divided by brings but 8/9 of one unity
into the quotient as does appear.

^

2. Likewise if you will divide a broken number by a whole number or else a
whole number by a broken, as to divide by 13. you shall put 1. under 13. and it
will be 13/1 which is ^ your divisor, set yt toward your left hand, and then
multiply 13. by 4. according to ye first division, and thereof comes 52. for
the denominator, set that under ye cross and multiply 3. by 1. which is 3. for
the numerator, that set over the cross, and it is 3/52 as appears in the
margent. But if you will divide 13. by the^ set the next your left hand and put
one under 13. as in the last example, and it is 13/1 set yt toward your right
hand thus, as appears in the margent, ^ and then work according to ye
doctrine of the first division, and you shall find that 13. being divided by
brings into ye quotient 52/3, then divide 52. by 3. and thereof comes 17.,
and so oftentimes is contained in 13. as does appear. 21 52 33 (17.^/^

3. And if you will divide whole number by whole number and broken, or else
whole number and broken by whole number, as to divide 20. by 5., you shall
reduce 5. into his broken by ye sixth reduction, and it makes 35/6 for your
divisor, then put 1. under 20. And it will be 20/1, then shall you multiply 35.
by 1. and 20. by 6. as is taught in the other divisions, and you shall find
120/35:^ then divide 120. by 35. and you shall find in your quotient 3. 3/7
and so many times is 5. contained in 20. as in the margent does appear. 1 35
120 (3.^/7 35

But if you will divide 5. 9/6 by 20. you must divide 35. by 120, which you can
not, wherefore you shall abbreuiate 35/126, and thereof comes. 7/24.

4. If you will divide a broken number, by whole number and broken, or else a
whole number and broken, by a broken number. As to divide by 13., you must
reduce 13., into his broken, by the syxte reduction And they be 41/3 for your
divisor, then multiplye 41. by 4. and they make 164. for your denominator,
likewise multiplye 3. by 3. and they make 9. for the numerator, and then will
your su^me be 9/164. But if you will divide 13. by then you must divide 164. by
9. and you shall find 18. 2/9.

5. If you will divide whole number and broken, by whole number and broken, as
to divide 7. by 13. you must reduce the whole numbers into their broken, by the
doctrine of the sixth reduction, and you shall find 31/4 for the 7., and 41/3
for the 13.. Then set down 41/3 toward the left hand because it is your
divisor, and the 31/4 toward the right hand, and multiply 41. by 4. for your
denominator, and thereof comes 164. Likewise multiply 3. by 3. for your
Numerator, and it amounts to 93. the which division will be thus 93/164 ^ as
before does appear.

But if you will divide 13. by 7. you must contrariwyse to the other example,
divide 164. by 93. and you shall find in the quotient 1. 71/93.

6. The broken numbers of broken, must be divided in such manner as broken
numbers are, and there is no difference, saving only that of many broken
numbers you must make but two broken numbers, that is to say ye divisor, and
the dividend, or number that is to be divided, example. If you will divide the
of of, by the 2/2 of 4/7. For the first, the of of are 49/40 by the third
reduction: and ye of 4/7 are by the same Reductio^ 8/21, then have you 8/21 for
your divisor, and 9/40 for your number to be divided, then multiply 8. by 40.
which makes 320. set that under the cross and multiply 9. by 21: and thereof
comes 189. which set over ye cross for the numerator, ^ and they make
189/320 for this division as does appear.

But if you would divide 8/21 by 9/40. you must work contrary to the last
example, that is to say, you must divide 320. by 189. And thereof comes in
the quotient 1. 131/189.

The eight Chapter treats of duplation, triplation, and quadruplation of all
broken numbers.
IF you will double any broken number, you shall divide ye same by: likewise if
you will triple any fraction you must divide it by 1/3. And for to quaduple any
broken number, you shall divide it by, and so is to be understand of all other.

Example of Duplation.
IF you will double you shall divide by, and thereof comes 6/8 ^, which being
abbreuied are: as by example. Or otherwise, in case the denominator of any
fraction be an even number, you may take half the said denominator, without
any other operation, and the numerator to abide still ye numerator, unto the
said half of the denominator of the Fractio^, as by the other example before
rehearsed: that is to say of, take of 8. which is 4. and that is the
denominator, and 3. remains still numerator to 4. and it makes and so of all
other. But in case the denominator be an odd number, that is to say, not
even, the^ you may multiply the numerator by 2. or else double ye numerator,
which is al one thing, and that fraction shall be doubled. Example, if you will
double you must only multiply the numerator 3. by 2. and they be 6. which
makes that fraction to be 6/5, ye which 6. being divided by 5. brings 1. and
so much is the double of.

Example of Triplation.
If you will triple you must divide by and thereof comes 9/5 which being
divided brings 1, or otherwise, because the denominator is an odd number you
may multiply the numerator 3. by 3, and thereof comes 9. which makes 9/3 as
before.

Example of quadruplacion.
If you will quadruple, you shall divide by and thereof comes 16/5 which 16.
being divided by 5. brings 3, or otherwise, because the denominator of ye
fraction is an odd number, you shall multiply the numerator of the that is to
say 4. by 4. and thereof comes 16. the which divide by 5. and you shall find
3. as before, and this suffices for duplacion, triplacio^ and quadruplacion.

The 9. Chapter treats of the proves of broken numbers. And first of
Reductio^.
IF you do abbreuiate ye broken numbers which be reduced, you shall return
them into their first estate: as by example, if you reduce with you shall find
10/15 and 12/15, then abbreuiate 10/15 and you shall find, abbreuiate likewise
12/15 and thereof comes as before.

The proof of Abbreuiation.
IF you do multiplye that number which you have abbreuied by that or those
numbers, by the which you have abbreuied them, you shall return them again
into their first estate. Example, if you will abbreuiate 32/48 by 16. in
taking ye 1/16 part both of the numerator, and also of the denominator, you
shall find, ye proof is thus, you must multiplye both the numerator and
denominator of by 16. that is to say, three by 16. makes 48. for ye
denominator, and 2. by 16. makes 32. for the numerator, the^ set the numerator
32. over the denominator 48 and they be 32/48 as before.

The proof of Addition.
If you do substract one of the numbers, or many of them (which you have
added) from the total sum, there shall remain ye other, or others. Example:
if you do add with you shall find 7/12. The proof is, if you substract from
7/12 you shall find remaining the other number which is, or else if you do
substract from 7/12 there will remain the other number, which is.

The proof of Substraction.
If you do add that number which remains, with the number which you did
substract, you shall find the total sum, out of the which you made ye
abateme^t: or otherwise, if you add ye two lesser numbers together, you shall
find the greater. Example: if you do abate or substracte from there will
remain 1/12. The proof is thus: you must add 1/12 and together, and you
shall find, which is the greatest number.

The proof of Multiplication.
If you divide the producte of the whole multiplication, by the multiplicator,
you shall find in your quotient, the multiplicande or number by the which you
have multiplied: or else if you divide the total sum which is come of the
multiplication, by the multiplicande: you shall find in the quotie^t the
multiplicator. Example, if you multiply by, the product of this multiplication
will be 8/15. The proof is thus: you shall divide 8/15 by ye multiplicator,
and thereof comes. Or else divide 8/15 by and you shall find the which is the
multiplicator.

The proof of Division.
If you do multiplye the quotient by the divisor, you shall find the number
which you did divide, yt is to say, your diuidende. Example: if you divide by,
your quotient will be 8/9 ye proof is thus, you must multiply 8/9 by, and
thereof comes 24/36 which being abbreuiated are which is your diuidende, and
by this manner all whole numbers have their proofs as well as broken numbers.

The tenth Chapter treats of certain questions done by broken numbers. And
first by Reduction.
Answer: you shall reduce 2/7 and crossewise, and you shall find 16. over the
2/7 and 21. over the, which are ye two numbers that you seek: for ye of 16.
are 6. and so are the 2/7 of 21. likewise 6. wherefore you may perceive that
the of 16. which are 6. are egall unto the 2/7 of 21. which is also 6.

2. Find two numbers, whereof ye of the one may be double to the of the other.
Answer: double and you shall have 2/4, which being abbreuiated is: the^ reduce
and crossewise, and you shall find 4. over the and three over the which are
the two numbers yt you seek. For ye of 3. which is 2. is double unto the of
4. which is but 1.

3. Find two numbers whereof the and the of the one, may be egall unto the
and of the other. Answer: Add the and together, and they make 7/12 then add
and together, and they are 9/20, the^ reduce 7/17 and 9/20 crossewise, and you
shall have 140. over the 7/12 and 108. over the 9/20, which are the two numbers
that you seek. For 63. which are the 7/12 of 108. are also the 9/20 of 140.

4. Find two numbers, whereof ye the and the of the one of them, may be egall
unto the the and 1/7 of the other number. Answer: first you must add, and
together, and they make 13/12: then add, and 1/7 together, and they make
107/210. Then reduce 13/12 and 107/210 crossewise, as by the first question of
reduction, and you shall find 2730. over the 13/12 and 1284. over the 107/210,
which are the two numbers that you seek: for 1391 which is the the and of
1284. is like to the 11/56 and 1/7 of 2730, which is also 1391.

5. Find three numbers, whereof the of ye first, the 3/7 of the second, and
the 4/9 of the third, may be egall the one to the other. Answer: set down
the 23/57 and 4/9, and then multiply the Denominator of the that is to say 5.
by the Numerators of the other two Fractions, that is to say, by the Numerator
of 3/7, and by the Numerator of 4/9, which is 3. and 4. And thereof comes 60.
for your first number, then shall you multiplye the Denominator of the 3/7
which is 7. by the Numerators of and 4/9, that to to say by 2. and 4. and
thereof comes 56. for the second number. Then multiply the Denominator of
4/9, that is 9. by the Numerators of and 3/7 that is by 2. and by 3. and thereof
comes 54. for the third number.

And thus the of 60. which is 24. is likewise the 3/7 of 56. which is the
second number: and the 4/9 of 54. which is the third number.

6. Find three numbers, of which the first and the second may be in such
proporcion as and, and the second and third in such proportion as and.
Answer: reduce and crossewise, and you shall have 3. over the and 2. over
the, then reduce and in like manner, and you shall find 5. over the and 4. over
the. Then say by the Rule of three, if 5. do give me 4. what shall two give
me, which is the second proportional, multiply the second number 4. by the
third number two, and thereof comes eight, the which divide by the first
number 5. and thereof comes 1. for the third proportional, and you shall
find that 3.2.1. are the three numbers proportional that I demand, or else
15.10. and 8. in whole numbers.

1. What number is that, unto the which if you do add 13. the whole amounts
to 31. Answer: rebate 13. from 31. and there will remain 18. which is the
number that you seek.

2. What number is that, unto the which if you add the addition will be.
Answer:: abate from, and there will remain 13/30, which is the number that
you desire.

3. What number is that, whereunto if you add 7., the whole addition will be
12.. Answer: abate 7. from 12.. and the remain will be 4.7/12 which is the
number yt you desire to know.

4. What number is that, whereunto if you add the of it self, that is to say,
of the number that you seek, the whole addition may be.

Answer: Here follows a general rule for all such like questions. First, of
3. which is ye numerator of make still the numerator and likewise of 3. and 4.
together, which is both ye numerator, and the denominator of the make your
denominator, so you shall find 3/7, then take the 3/7 of which is 15/42 or
5/14, and substract them from, and there will remain 10/21 which is the number
that you seek.

5. What number is that, unto the which if you add his own yt is to say of it
self, ye whole addition shall be 20. Answer: do as in the last question:
of the numerator of, that is to say, of 2. make still your numerator. And
likewise of ye numerator. 2. and the denominator 3. of the, make of them both,
your denominator, and you shall find, the^ take the of 20. which are 8. And
abate them from 20. and there will remain 12. which is the number that you
desire and so is to be done of all such like reasons.

1. What number is that, from the which if you do abate 17. the rest may be 19.
Answer: add 17. and 19. together and you shall find 36. which is the number
that you seek.

2. What number is that, from the which if you abate the rest may be.
Answer: add and together: and you shall find 29/40 which is the number
that you demand.

3. What number is that, from the which if you deduct 13. the rest may be
5.5/7. Answer: add 13. and 5.5/7 together, and thereof comes 19.3/14,
which is the number that you seek.

4. What number is that, from ye which if you substracte his the rest may be.
12. Answer: and a rule for such like reasons, yt is to say from the
denominator of which is 5. abate 2. which is his numerator, and there rests
3. for ye denominator, and thus of you have now made, then take the of 12.
which are 8: and add them unto 12. and thereof comes 20. for the number
which you desire.

5. What number is that, from the which if you do abate his, the rest may be
8/9. Answer: from the Denominator of which is 4. substracte his Numerator 3.
and there rests 1. Thus of you have made 3/1. Then multiplye 3/1 by 8/9, and
thereof comes 2, the which add unto 8/9, and you shall have 3.5/9, which is
the number that you seek.

6. What number is that, from the which if you abate his, the rest may be 12..
Answer: Do as you did in the last question, and you shall find that the will
be 4/1. And therefore multiply 12. by 4/1, and thereof comes 50., the which
add unto 12., and you shall find 93., for the number that you demand. And
thus of all such like questions.

1. What number is that, which being multiplied by 13. the whole.
Multiplication shall mount to 221. Answer: divide 221. by 13. and thereof
comes 17. which is the number that you seek.

2. What number is that which being multipled by 15. ye whole multiplication
will amou^t to. Answer: divide by 15/1 and thereof comes 1/20 which is the
number, that you seek.

3. What number is that, which being multiplied by 21. the whole multiplication
will be 16. Answer: divide 16. by 21/1, and you shall find which is the
number that you demand.

4. What number is that, which being multiplied by the multiplication will
amount to 18. Answer: divide 18/1 by, and thereof comes 24. which is the
number that you desire to know.

5. What number is that, which if it be multiplied by the whole multiplication
will be. Answer: divide by and the quotient will be which is ye number that
you require to know.

6. What number is that, which being multiplied by, the product of ye
multiplicatio^ will be 16.. Answer: divide 16.2/3 by and thereof comes 26.
which is the number yt you seek.

Here ensues other necessary Questions, which are wrought by Multiplicatio^
in broken numbers.
Answer: you must multiplye by 20/1 and ye product will be 100/8, therefore
divide 100. by 8. and thereof comes 12., which is to say, 12.s. 6.d. and so
much are ye of 20. shillings worth.

2. I demand what the of of a pound of money are worth, that is to say of
20. s. Auns. multiplye by. And thereof comes. Then take the of 20. shil. as
in the last question going before, and you shall find 12.s 6. pence, and so
much are the of of 20. s. worth.

3. I demand what the of 8. d. are worth. Answer: multiply 8. by or else by
8., which is all one, and you shall find 34/6. Then divide 34. by 6. and your
quotient will be five pence, and so much are the of 8. pence worth.

4. What are the of 14. pence. Answer: multiply 14 by, and thereof comes
219/20. Therefore divide 219. by 20. and your quotient will be ten pence 19/20,
and so much are the of 14..

5. How many quarters or fourth parts are contained in 7.. Auns. multiply 7.
by 4/1 (because one whole contains 4. quarters) and thereof comes 30., and
so many quarters are in the 7., that is to say 30. quarters, and of a quarter.

6. How many thirdes are in and, that is to say in 3. quarters, and of one
quarter, which are by the fifte reduction. Answer: multiply by 3/1 (for
because that in 1 whole are contained 3. thirdes) and thereof will come and of
a third, and so many thirdes are in and or in, which is all one.

Questions done by division in broken number.
1. What number is that, which being divided by 17. the quotient will be 13.
Answer: multiplye 17. by 13. And thereof comes 221. which is the number
that you seek.

2. What number is that, which being divided by the quotie^t will be 21.
Answer, multiply 21/1 by and thereof comes 63/4. Then divide 63. by 4. and
thereof comes 15., which is the number that you seek.

3. What number is that, which being divided by, the quotient will be. Answer:
multiplye by and thereof comes 2/24 which being abbreuiated are 1/12 for ye
number which you require.

4. What number is that, which being divided by the quotient will be 16.?
Answer: multiply 16., by, and thereof comes 200/15. Therefore divide 200.
by 15. and thereof comes 13. which is the number that you desire to find.

5. What number is that, which being divided by 13, the quotient will be 20.
Answer: multiply 20/1 by 13, and thereof comes 800/3, then divide 800. by
3. and thereof comes 266., for the number, which you seek.

6. What number is that, which if it be divided, by 12. the quotient will be
Answer: multiply by 12 and thereof comes 175/16, then divide 175 by 16. and
thereof comes 10.15/16, for the number which you desire.

Other necessary questions done by Division in broken number.
Answer: divide 30. by 70. which you can not, for they are 30/70, but
abbreuiate them and they are 3/7. Thus 30. are the 3/7 of 70.

2. I demand what part 10. is of 16. Answer: divide 10/1 by 16., and
thereof comes 30/50 which being abbreuiated are. And thus 10. is found to be
of 16.

3. More, what part is 25. of. Auns. divide by 25/1, and thereof comes 5/200,
which being abbreuiated is, 1/40. And thus is but the 1/40 of 25.

4. More, what part are they of. Answer: divide by, and you shall find 40/42
which abbreuiated are 20/21.

5. More, what part are they of 13. 1/3. Answer: divide by 13. and you shall
find 12/200, which being all breuiated are 3/80. And thus 4/1 are the 5/50 of
13..

6. More 12. what part are they of 30. Answer, divide 12. by 30/1, and you
shall find 25/60 which being abbreuiated are 5/12 and thus 12., are the 5/12 of
30.

7. More, 16 what part are they of of 57 1/7. Answer, divide 16. by 57 1/7
and thereof comes 350/1200 which being abbreuiated are 7/24, and thus 16. are
the 7/24 of 57.1/7.

8. More, and of, or 3. quarters and of one quarter, what part are they of 1.
Answer, reduce 5/4 and the of into one broken by the first reductio^, and you
shall find 11/12. And thus the and of are the 11/12 of one whole.

9. More, of what number are 9. the 2/3. Answer, divide 9. by, and thereof
comes 13., which is the number whereof 9. are the.

10. More of what number are the. Answer, divide by, and thereof comes 8/15
which is the number whereof are the of the same number.

11. More, of what number are 5. the 3/7. Answer: divide 5. by 3/7, and you
shall find 13.5/12 which is the number whereof 5. are the 3/7.

12. More, 9 what part are they of 33.. Answer: divide 9 by 33.. And thereof
comes 58/201: and thus 9. are the 58/201 of 33. as appears.

The third part treats of certain brief rules, called rules of practice,
with diverse necessary questions profitable for Marchaunts.
The first Chapter.
SOme there be, which do call these rules of practice brief rules, for that by
them many questions may be done with quicker expedition, than by the rule of
three. There be others which call them the small multiplication, for because
that the product, is always less in quantity, than the number which is to
be multiplied. This practice comes not in use, but only among small kinds
of numbers, which have over them, other numbers that are greater. And this
being well considered, is no other thing but to convert lesser and particular
kinds of number, into greater, the which may be done by the means of
division, in taking the half, the third, the fourth, the fifth, or such other
parts of the sum, which is to be multiplied, as the multiplier is part of
his greater kind, and that which comes thereof is worth as much (not in
quantity, but in his own form) as if you did multiplye simply the two
sums, the one by the other: And for the better understanding of such
conuersions, you must have respect to one of these two considerations. The
first is, when one would demand this question. At 6.d. the yard of Cotton,
what are 18. yardes worth by the price? It is manifest that they are worth 18.
pieces of 6. pence the piece, or 18. half shillings, which must be turned into
shillings, in taking ye half of 18.s. and they make 9.s. Or otherwise you must
consider, that at 1.s. the yard, the 18. yardes are worth 18.s. wherefore at
6.d. they shall be but half so much, for 6.d. is but the of 1.s. Therefore you
must take the of 18. and they make 9.s. which are worth as much as 108.d. that
is to say, as 18. times 6. pence.

2. First, if you will multiply any number after this manner by pence whereof
the number of ye same pe^ce, do not extend unto 12. and thereof to bring
shillings into the product: you must know the certain parts of 12. which are
these: that is to say, 6.4.3. 2. and 1. For 6. is the of 12. and 4. is the of
12:3. is ye:2. is the: and 1, is the 1/12. Then for 6.d. which is the half of
1. shilling, you must take the of all the number which is to be multiplied. And
that which comes thereof, shall be shillings, if there do remain 1. it is 6.
pence.

For four pence you must take the of all the number that is to be
multiplied: and if any unities do remain, they shall be thyrdes of a
shilling, every one being in value 4. pence.

For 3. pence you must take the of all the sum: if any unities do remain,
they shall be fourthes of a shilling, every one being worth three pence.

For 2. pence you must take the of all the sum, and if any unities do
remain, they shall be sixte parts of a shilling, being every one of them
worth two pence.

For d. take the 1/12 of the whole su^me, if any unities remain, they are 12.
parts of a shilling, each of them being in value 1.d. as by these examples
following does plainly appear.

j.
At 6. Pence the yard. What 59. yardes. 29. shill. 6. Pence. ij.
At 4. Pence. What 82. 27. shill. 4. Pence. iij.
At 3. Pence. What 927. 24. shill. 3. Pence. iiij.
At 2. Pence. What 346. 57. shil. 8. Pence. v.
At 1. Pence. What 343. 28. shil. 7. Pence.

Here you may see in the first example that 59. yardes, at 6. pence ye yard is
worth.29. shil. 6.d. in taking the of 59. And in the second example, ye 82.
yardes at 4. pe^ce the yard, is worth, 27.s. 4.d. in taking the of 82.

Likewise, in the third example, 97. yardes, at three pence the yard,
brings 24. shil. 3. pence, in taking the of 97. Also in the fourth example,
346. yardes, at 2. pence the yard, makes 57. shillings eight pence in taking
the of 346. And finally in ye fifth example.343. yardes, at 1.d. the yard,
amount to 28. shil. 7.d. in taking the 1/12 of 343. And so is to be done of
all such like, when the number of the pence, is any of the certain parts of
12.

But if the number of the pence be not a certain part of 12. you must reduce
them into some certain parts of 12. and after the foresaid manner you shall
make two or three productes as need shall require, and add them together into
one sum as 5.d. may be reduced into 4. and 1. or else into 3. and 2: wherefore
if you will work by 4. and by 1: you must for 4.d. take first the. of ye number,
that is to be multiplied, and for 1.d. take the 2/12, or rather for 1.d. ye may
take the of the producte which did come of the 4.d. because that 1.d. is the of
4.d. But if you will work by 3, and 2, you shall take for 3.d. the. of the
number which is to be multiplied: and likewise for 2.d. the of the same
number, adding together both the productes. The total sum of those two
numbers shall be the solution to the question. And in like manner is to be done
of all other. As by these forms following may appear.

j.
At 5. d. the yard. What 49. yardes? 16. shil. 4. d. 4. shil. 1. 20. shil. 5.
d. ij.
At 7. d. What 5^? 18. shil. 0 13. shil. 6 31. shil. 6. d. iij.
At 8. d. What 40? 13. shil. 4 13. shil. 4 26. shil. 8. d. iiij.
At 9. d. What 73? 36. shil. 6 18. shil. 3 54. shil. 9. d. v.
At 10. d. What 32? 16. shil. 0 10. shil. 8 26. shil. 8. d. vj.
At 11. d. What 27? 9. shil. 0 9. shil. 0 6. shil. 9 24. shil. 9. d.

Here in this same first exaumple where it is demanded (at 5. pence ye yard)
how much are nine and forty yardes worth? First for four pence, I take ye of
49.s. and thereof comes 16.s. 4.d. the^ for 1.d. I take the of the same
product, that is to say, of 16.s. 4. d. and that brings.4. shil. 1.d. these
two su^mes added together, do make 20.s. 5.d. And so much are the 49. yardes
worth at 5.d. the yard.

For 7.d. take the and the of the whole sum which is to be multiplied, and
add them together, that is to say, for 4.d. the and for 3.d. the: because 4.d.
is the of 12.d. and 3.d. is the as in the second example before does appear:
Where the question is thus, at 7.d. ye yard what are 54. yardes worth? First
for 4.d. I take the of 54: and they make 18.s. Likewise for 3.d. I take the of
54. and they are 13.s. 6.d. Then I add 18.s. and 13.s. 6. d. together, so both
amount to 31.s. 6.d and so much are the 54. yardes worth at 5.d. the yard.

Otherwise for 7.d. take first the, of the whole su^me for 6.d. Then for 1.d.
take the of the same product, and add them together, so shall you have the like
sum as before.

For eight pence you must first take of the whole su^me for 4. pence, and
another for other 4.d. and add the^ together as in the example does evidently
appear. Where the question is thus, at 8.d. the yard, what are 40 yardes
worth? First for 4.d. I take the of 40. which is 13.s. 4.d. Again, I take
another for the other 4 pence which is also 13. shillings and 4. pence. These
two sums being added together, do make 26. shillings 8. pence, and so much
are the 40. yards worth at 8. pence the yard as in the third example abouesayd
does appear.

Otherwise, for eight pence you may take first the of the whole su^me for 6.d.
The^ for 2.d. you shall take the of the product, which did come of the said, and
add them together, so shall you have likewise the solution to the question. As
in the same third example of 40. yardes, I take first the of 40. for 6.d. and
thereof comes 20. shil. then for 2.d. I take of the said product, that is to
say of 20.s. which brings 6.s. 8.d. these two sums (20.s and 6.s. 8.d.) I
add together and they make 26.s. 8.d. as before.

For 9.d. you must take the and the of the whole su^me, and add them together:
or else for 6.d. take first of the whole sum, then for 3.d. take ye of the
same product, because 3.d. is ye half of 6.d. And 6.d. added with 3.d.
brings 9.d. as by the fourth example, where it is demanded after this sort:
at 9.d. the yard, what are 73. yardes worth. First for 6.d. I take the of 73.
and thereof comes 36.s. 6.d. then for 3.d. I take of ye same 36. shil. 6.d.
which is 18.s. 3.d. these two sums do I add together, and they make 54.
shil. 9.d. as in ye said fourth example is evident.

For 10.d. take first the, then ye of the whole su^me, and add the^ together

For 11.d. take first for 4. pence, secondely, another for other 4.d. and
thirdely for 3.d. of all ye whole su^me: and add them together.

Or else for 11.d. take first the then the of the whole sum, and finallye the
of the last product, adding them together.

3. Likewise by the same reason, when you will multiply (by shillings) any
number that is under xx.s. you shall have in the product pounds, if you know
the certain parts of 20: which are these: 10.5.4.2. and. 1. For 10. is the of
20. 5 is the part: 4 is the:2. is the 1/10: and 1. is the 1/20.

Then for 10.s. which is the of a pound: you must take the of the number,
which is to be multiplied, and you shall have pounds in ye product. If there
do remain 1, it shall be worth ten shillings.

For 5. shillinges you must take the of the number which is to be
multiplied, and if there do remain any unities, they shall be four parts of
a pound, every one being in value 5.s.

For 4.s. you must take the of the number which is to be multiplied. And if
there do remain any unities, they shall be fifth parts of a pound every one
being worth four shillings.

At 10. shillings the Piece. What 75. Pieces? 37. li. 10. shil. At 5. shil.
What 89. 22. li. 5. shil. At 4. shil. What 93. 18. li. 12. shil.

For 2. shillings you must take the 1/10 of the number that is to be
multiplied. Wherefore, if you will take the 1/10 of any number: you must
separate the last figure of the same number which is nerest your right hand,
from all the other fygures. For all the other figures which do remain toward
your left hand, from the same figure, which is separated, shall be the said
1/10 of a pound: and that separated figure, toward your right hand shall be
so many pieces of 2. shillings the piece: the which figure must be doubled, to
make thereof shillings, as by these examples appears.

At 2. shil. What 9/8. 9. li 16. shil. At 2. shil. What 40/3. 40. li. 6. shil.

Hereupon depends another exact way for to multiply by shillings (if ye
number of shillings be eue^) which is thus: you shall take the number of the
same shillings, and convert them into pieces of 2. shillings. Then by the
number of this half, you must first multiply the last figure toward your
right hand, of the number which is to be multiplied: And if there be any tennes
in the same product, those must ye reserve in your mind: But if (with the same
or else without the same) you do find any diget number, the same diget number
shall you double, and put it in the place of shillings: The^ must you proceed
to the multiplication of the other figures, adding unto ye product the tennes
which you before reserved: and thereof shall come pounds.

Now, for your better understanding of this which has been said and by the way
of example, I will propone unto you this question.

At 8. shillings the gross, what are 97. gross worth after the rate?

First in this example I take half the number of Shillinges, as before is
taught, that is to say of eighte shillings, which is four shillinges: this 4.
shil. I put apart, behind a crooked line right against 97. toward the left
hand, as here you may see and as here after apereth by diverse examples.

At 8. shil. the Gross. 4) What 9/1 38. li. 16. shil. At 6. shil. 3) What 9/9
29. li. 14. shil. At 12. shil. 9) What 34/5 207. li. 0 shil. At 14. shil. 7)
What 21/0 127. li. 0. shil.

Now in the first example, where it is demanded, at 8.s. the gross, what are
97 gross? First the of 8.s. which is 4.s. being set apart behind the crooked
line, as before is said: the^ I multiplye ye 97 by 4. saying first, 4. times 7.
is 28. I double ye diget number 8. and that makes 16, the which 16, I do put
under the line, in the place of shilli^gs and I keep ye tennes in my mind,
which here are 2. For 20. are two times ten: Then secondly, I multiply 9, by
the said 4, and thereof comes 36: whereunto I add the 2, tennes, which before
I did reserve, and they make 38. Therefore I put 38, under the line in the
place of pounds, and the whole sum will be 38. li. 16.s. Thus much are the
97. gross worth, at eight shillings the gross: the like is to be done of all
other. As of 12. shillings in multiplying by 6. Likewise of 6. shillings if you
multiply by 3, also of 14. if you multiply by 7. And so of all even numbers
after the same manner.

For 1. Shilling you must take the of the 1/10 part of any number that is to
be multiplied. At 1. shil. What 35/0 17. li. 10. shil. And if any thing do
remain, they are shil. Thus by this manner shil. are converted into pounds:
for it is even like, as if you did divide the^ by 20.s. as by this example in
the margent does appear. Where it is demanded at 1.s. the yard, the piece, or
any other thing, what are 350. worth?

First I separate the last figure of 350. next to my right hand, which is the
0 with a line between it and the figure 5. Then I make a line under the 35/0,
and I take the of 35, after this manner: saying the of 3. is 1. and 1.
remains, which remayn signifies 10. in that second place. Then I put 1.
under the line against 3, and I proceed to the rest, saying: the half of 15,
is 7. (which 15. came of the 1. that remained, and of the 5. in ye first place)
I put 7. under the line right against 5, and they make 17. li. The 1, which did
last remain, is 10.s. Therefore I put 10.s aparte under the line, and the whole
sum is 17. li. 10.s. so much are 350. worth at 1.s. the piece.

But when the number of shillings is not some certain part of 20. shil. you
must then convert the same number of shillings, into the certain parts of 20.
and make two or three products, as need shall require, the which must be
added together after this manner following.

For 3. shillings you must first take for 2. shil. the 1/10 of the number that
is to be multiplied, then for 1. shilli^g you must take the of the producte
which did come of the same 1/10 part: and add those two su^mes together, as
appears by this example following.

At 3.s. the piece of any thing, what shall 684 pieces cost me after the
rate. First, for 2 shillings I take the 1/10 of 684, which is 68: At 3. shil.
What 68/4? 68. li. 0. sh 34. 4. 102. li. 12. sh in seperating the last figur
4, which I must double, and they be 8. I set eyghte shillings aparte from the
place of pounds, and then I have 68. pou^des 8.s. for the 1/10 part, that is
to say, for the 2.s. secondlye, for 1. shil. I take the of the product, that is
to say: of 68. li. 8.s. which is 34. li. 4.s. and I put the same under the 68.
li. 8. shil. Then finally, I add those two sums together, yt is to say, 68.
li. 8.s. and 34. li. 4. shil, so they make 102. li. 12.s. and so much are the
684. pieces worth at 3. shillings ye piece, as may appear in the margent.

For 6. shil. take 3/10 of the number which is to be multiplied: that is to
say, first 1/10, then double the product of the same 1/10 and add them
together. Or otherwise for 4.s. take first ye of ye number that is to be
multiplied, the^ take the of the product which is for two. s. and add them
together.

Or else take for 5. shil. the of the whole sum, then for 1. shil. the of the
product and add them together.

Likewise for 7. shil. take first for 5. shil. the then for ^. shillings take
the 1/10 of the number which is to be multiplied, and add them together.

For eight shillings take the at two sundry times, that is to say, first for 4.
shil. and then as much more for other 4. shil. and add them together.

For 9. shil. take first the and likewise the of the number that is to be
multiplied, and add them together.

For 11. shil. take first for 10.s. The^ for 1. shil. take the 1/10 of the
producte, and add them together.

For 12. shil. take first the for 10. shil then for 2.s. take the part of the
product, and add them together.

For 13. shil. take the then the, and again another of the number which is to
be multiplied. And add the productes together, that is to say: first for 5.
shil. take the, then for 4. shil. take the. And again, another for the other
4. shil. and assemble the three productes, the like is to be done in all others,
when the price of the thing which is valued, is only of shillings. And as by
these examples following does plainly appear.

At 6. shil. Whas 67. 13..8 6..14 20. li. 2. shil. At 7. shil. What 347. 86..15
34..14 121. li. 9. shil. At 8. shil. What 540. 108..0 108..0 216. li. 0. shil.
At 9. shil. What 230. 57..10 46..00 103. li. 10. shil. At 11. shil. What 159.
79..10 7..19 87. li 9. shil. At 12. shil. What 349. 174..10 34..18 209. li 8.
shil. At 13. shil. What 267. 66..15 53..8 53..8 173. li. 11. shil.

4. Likewise in multiplying by pence you shall have (at the first instant)
pou^des in the product, in case you know the certain parts of the 1/10 of a
pound or of 24. pence, which are these 12, 8, 6, 4, 3, and 2. For 12, is the of
24: 8. is ye: 6 is the: 4 is the: 3 is the: and 2. the 1/12: but for 12.d.
which is 1. shil. we have before made mention thereof.

For 8.d. you must take the of the 1/10 and the rest which are the pieces of
8.d. must be doubled to make of them pieces of 4.d. And of the same number
being doubled, you must take the which will be shillinges, and if there do yet
remayn any thing, they are thirds of a shilling being in value 4. pence the
piece.

For 6.d. take the of the 1/10, and of that which remains you must take the
which shall be shillings, if there do yet remain 1, it shall be in value 6.
pence.

For 4.d. you must take the of the 1/10 and of that which rests, take the 1/^
to make thereof shillings, if any thing do yet remain, they are thirdes of a
shilling, being in value 4.d. the piece.

For 3.d. take the of the 1/10, and of that which remains, take the, to make
of them shillings: if any thing do yet remain, they are fourthes of a
shilling, every one of them being worth 3.d.

For 2.d. take the 1/12 of the 1/10: and of that which rests take ye the
which are shillings, if there do still remain any thing, they shall be sixth
parts of a shilling, every one being in value 2.d

For 1. d. it is not possible with ease, to bring of pence, pou^ds (into the
product) upon the total sum: But first you must bring the^ into shillings by
ye order of the second rule of this chapter, and then afterward you shall
convert the^ into pou^ds, if need so require. As by this example following may
apeare.

At 8. d. What 59/5. 19. li. 17. shil. 4. d. At 6. d. What 67/8. 16. li. 19.
shil. At 4. d. What 93/4. 15. li. 11. shil. 4. d. At 3. d. What 57/1. 7. li. 2.
shil. 9. d. At 2. d What 36/4. 3. li. 0. shil. 8. d. At 1. d. What 66/5. 5^5.
00. shil. 4. d. 2. li. 16. shillings. 4. d.

But if the number of pence, be not a certain part of 24. pence. Then must
you bring them into the certain parts of 24. and make thereof diverse productes,
which must be added together, as shall hereafter appear.

For 5. pence you shall first take for 3. pence, then for 2. pence, and add
them together, according to the instruction of the last rule. Or else first
take for 4. pence, and then for 1. d.

For 7.d. first take for 4. d. then for 3. d. and add them together:

For 9. d. first take for 6.d. then for 3. d. adding them together.

For 10. d. first take for 6. d. then for 4. d. and add them together.

For 11. d. take first for 8. d. then for 3. d. and add them together: as by
these examples following does appear.

At 5. d What 92/7. 11..11..9 7..14..6 19. li. 6. shil. 3. d. At 7. d. What
51/2. 8..10..8 6..8..0 14. li. 18. shil. 8. d. At 9. d. What 54/6. 13..13..0
6..16..6 20. li. 9. shil. 6. d. At 10. d. What 27/3. 6..16..6 4..11..0 11. li.
7. shil. 6. d. At 11. d. What 26/4. 8..16..0 3..6..0 12. li. 2. shil. 0. d.

5. If you will multiply any number by shil. and pence, being both together you
must take first for the shil. according to ye instruction of the rule of this
first chapter, then take for ye pence after the order of the fourth rule before
mentioned: but if there be any certain parts of 1. li. co^tayning both shil.
and pence, the^ for such parts you shall take the like part of the number that
is to be multiplied, as the number is part of 1. li. the which certain parts
are these, 6. s. 8. d: 3. s. 4. d: 2. s. 6. d: and 1. s. 8. d. For 6. s. 8. d.
is the of a li. 3. s. 4. d. is ye of a li. 2. s. 6. d. is the: and 1. s. 8. d.
is the 1/12. then for 6. s. 8. d. you must take the of the number that is to
be multiplied: and if any thing do remain, they are thirds of a li. every one
being worth 6. s. 8. d

For 3. s. 4. d. you must take ye if any thing do remain, they are sixth parts
of a li. every one being in value 3. s. 4. d.

For 2. s. 6. d. you must take the: if any thing be remaining they are eight
parts of a li. each one being worth 2.s. 6.

For 1. shil. 8. d. you shall take the 1/12 if there do any thing remain, they
are twelfth parts of a pound every one being valued at 1. shil. 8.d.

At 6. shil. 8. d What 647. 215. li. 13. shil. 4. d. At 3. shil. 4. d What 220.
36. li. 13. shil. 4. d At 2. shil. 6. d What 47. 5. li. 17. shil. 6. d At 1.
shil. 8. d What 400. 33. li. 6. shil. 8. d

6. Here shall you accustom your self, to multiply by all sorts of sums,
being compou^d of shillings, and pence, which may come to practice. As thus,
for 1. s. 1. d. for 1. s. 2. d. 1. s. 3. d. for 1. s. 4d. Likewise for 2.s.
1.d. 2.s. 2.d. 2.s. 3. d. 2. s. 4. d. And so of all other: considering
moreover, many subtle abbreuiations, which happen oftentimes that are easy to
be conceived. As thus at 11. s. 3. d. after that I have taken first the for 10.
s. Then for 1. s. 3. d. I take the of the product, because 1. s. 3. d. is the
of 10. s. in taking the said of the product. And by this means, when ye have
taken one product, ye may oftentimes upon ye same, take another more briefly
tha^ upon ye su^me yt is to be multiplied, which thing you must foresee.

At 11. shil. 3. d. What 53. 26..10..0 3..6..3 29. li. 16. shil. 3. d. At 6.
shil. 3. d. What 58. 14. 10.. 3. 12. 6. 18. li. 2. 6. d. At 12. 8. d. What 64.
32. 0.. 6. 8.. 2. 2. 8. 40. li. 10. shil. 8. d.

7. But if you will multiply, by pou^ds, shillings and pence being altogether.
First you must wholly multiply by pounds. Then take for the shillings and
pence, as in the fifte rule of this chapter is plainly declared. And as by
these examples following may apere.

At 3. li. 6. shil. 8. d. What 49. 147..0. 16..6.8 163. li. 6. shil. 8. d. At
5. li. 18. shil. 4. d. What 543. 2715..0.. 271..10.. 135..15.. 90..10..0 3212.
li. 15. shil. 0. d. At 2. li. 7. shil. 4. d. What 927. 1854..0.. 185..8..
154..10.. 2193. li 18. shil. 0. d.

8. So these rules do serve both to bye and sell, at such a price the elle, the
yard, the piece, the pound weight, or any other thing: how much such a thing
Likewise they are very necessary to convert al pieces of gold and silver into
pounds: for I may as well say, at 4. shil. 8. d. the French crown, what are
135. crowns worth?

9. When any one of the sums (which is to be multiplied) is co^pou^d of many
denominatio^s: and the other is of one figure alone: the^ shall ye multiplye all
the Denominations of the other sum, by the same one figure begi^ning first
with that su^me which is least in value toward your right hand, and bring
the product of those pence into shillings, and the producte of the shillings
into pou^ds, as by this example does appear At 3. li. 9. shil. 8. d. What 7.
24. li. 7. shil. 8. d.

10. But (if in any of ye numbers which are to be multiplied) there be with it a
broken number, you must (according to his denominator) take one or many parts
of the other number, as need does require: and set the number which comes
thereof, under the productes, adding the same together. As thus: At 5. li. 7. s.
8. d. the gross, what shall. 34. gross cost? First At 5. li. 7. sh. 8. d What
34 1/7. 170..0 11..6..8. 1..14..0 2..13..10 185. li. 14. shil. 6. d you shall
multiply 5. li. 7. sh. 8. d. by 34. gross, saying 5. times 34. do make 170.
li. then for 6. sh 8. d. take the of 34 which is 11. li. 6. shil 8. d.
Thirdely, for 1 sh. take 34. shillings, which is 1. li. 14. shillings 0.

Lastly, for the gross, you must take of the 5. li. 7. s. 8. d. which is 2.
li. 13. s. 10 And then add them all together, so you shall find that the 34.
gross at 5. pound 7. shillings 8. pence is worth 185. pound, 14. shillings 6.
pence, as apeareth in the margent.

And as in this last exaumple, you did take the half of the money, (which one
gross was worth) for the gross Because that 1. gross being worth 5. pound
7. shillings 8. pe^ce, the gross must be worth half so much. So likewise,
if you have of a gross, or of any other thing, you must take the of the
price, that one gross is worth. Semblably, for the of any thing you shall take
the of the price, also if you have, take the of the price that one is worth,
and of all other fractions, as by these examples following does appear.

At 4. li. 6. shil. 8. d. What 46.. 184..0..0 15..6..8 2..3..4 201. li. 10. 0.
d.

At 8. li. 0. shil. 9. d. What 54. 432..0..0 1..7..0 0..13..6 2..13..7 43. li.
14. shil. 1. d. At 3. li. 16. shil. 8. d. What 17. 51..0..0 8..10..0
5..13..4..19..2 68. li.. 00. shil. 10. d.

11. If you will make the proof of these rules aforesaid, you must first abate
the su^me of money (which the fractio^ of the multiplicatio^ does import) from
the total su^me. And divide the rest of the pou^ds of the said total sum, by
the whole multiplicand, the fraction only accepted. And if any thing do remain
after the division is made, that remain shall be multiplied by 20. and unto the
product of that multiplication, you shall add the shillings which remained of
the rest of the total su^me Again, if any thing do remain after the same
division, you must multiply the same by 12, and unto the product add the pence
of the total sum that remained, if any be left. And thus if ye have truly
wrought, you shall find again the higher su^me of your question that is to say,
the price that one gross or any other thing is worth, whereof you demand.

Or otherwise reduce the remain of the total sum (the value of the money
that the fraction is worth, being first deducted) all into pence, in
multiplying the pounds by 20, and the shillings by 12. adding thereunto, the
shillings and pe^ce, which are joined with the remain of the said total
su^me, if any such be, then divide those pence by the foresaid number that is
to be multiplied, the fraction of the same number being also abated. So shall
you find the price that one piece, one Gross, or any other thing is valued
at. As in the first example going before, where the total sum is 201. pound
10. shillings, from the which I do first abate the price of the half gross,
which is 2. li. 3. s. 4. d, the rest is 199. li. 6. s. 8. d. which being
reduced into pens brings 47840. d. I divide the same by 46. and thereof
comes 1040. pence. Then I divide that 1040. pence by 12. and they bring 86.
shillings 8. pence, that is to say, 4. li. 6. shillings eight pence, which is
the price that one gross, or any other thing did cost, as in that first
example does appear.

12. The like is to be done of any manner of thing that is sold by the
hundred or by the Kyntall.

As thus: at 12. pound 7. shillings. 6. d the 100. pound wayghte: what shall
374. pound wayght cost? You shall first multiply twelve pound, seven
shillings, six pence, by three: that is to say, by three hundredth. Then for
50. li. weight, you At. 12. li. 7. sh. 6. d What 3/74. 37..2..6 6..3..9 2..9..6
0..9..10. 46. li. 5. sh. 7. d. shall take the of 12. li. 7. s. 6. d. because
50. li. is the of 100. li. Likewise for 20. pound weight, which is the of 100.
li. take the of 12. li. 7. shil. 6. d. lastly for 4. li. weight take the of the
last product. This done, you must add all these productes into one sum,
which will make the sum of 64. li. 5.s. 7. d., as by this example above
written does appear.

The proof is made by reducyng the total sum into pence. And to divide ye
product by the number yt is to be multiplied, yt to to say by 374. likewise
divide ye quotient produced of that first diuisyon by 12. so shall you find
again the higher sum 12. li. 7. shil. 6. d. which is the price of 100. li.
weight, as before.

13. Also the like may be done of our usual weight here in England (which is
112. li. for every hundred pound weight) in case you know the certain parts
of a hundred, that is to say, of 112. li. weight, which are these 56. li. 28.
li. 14. li. 7. li, For 56. li. is the of 112. 28. li: is the of 112. li: 14.
li. is the, and 7. li. is the 1/16.

Therefore, for 56. li. take the of the sum of money, that the 112. pound
weight is worth.

For 28. li. take the of the sum of money that the 112. li. is worth.

For 14. li. take the of the sum that the C. is worth.

For 7. li. take the 1/16 of the sum of money that the C. is worth.

As thus: at 3. li. 6. s. 8. d. the hundredth pounds weight, that is to say,
the 112. li. What shall 24. C. 3. quar. 21. li. cost after the rate?

First, you shall multiply 24. hundredth by 3. which is the 3. li. and thereof
comes 72. li. then for 6. s. 8. d. which is the of 20. s. you shall take ye of
24 which is 8. li. for At 3. li. 6. sh. 8 d. What 26..3. 21. li. 72..0..0
8..0..0 1..13..4..16..8..8..4..4..2 83. li. 2. sh. 6. d 24. nobles makes 8.
li. afterward, for the 3. quarters of ye C. you shall first for ye 56. li. take
the of 3. li. 6. s. 8. d. because 56. li is the of the C. and thereof comes
1. li. 13. shil. 4. d. then for 28. li. (which is the quar. of a C.) you shall
take the of 3. li. 6. s. 8. d. or else the of the product, which came of 56.
li. which is 16. s. 8. d. likewise for 14. li. take the of 3. li. 6. s. 8. d.
which is 8. s. 4. d. or else the of the product of 28. li. which is al one:
lastly for 7. li take the 1/16 of 3. li. 6. s. 8. d. or else the of the
product, that came of 14 li. and thereof comes 4. s. 2. d. Then add al these
products together: and the total sum will be 83. li. 2. s. 6. d. so much are
ye 24. c. 3. quar. 21. li. weight worth after 3. li. 6. s. 8. d. ye C. as
appears in the margent.

The proof hereof is made, like to the other proofs aforesaid, saving that
where in those proofs, you abate the price of the money, that the fraction was
worth, from the total sum: here in this example (and in such other like)
you must abate the price of money, that the odd weight amounts unto (over
and above the just hundrethes) from the said total sum, the rest thereof
shall you convert into pence, dividing the product of ye multiplication by the
just number of the hundrethes, so shall you find the pence ye one hundredth is
worth, which you shall bring into pounds by the order of division, and so all
other.

The second Chapter treats of the rule of three compounde, which are four
in number.
THere belongs to the first and second parts of the rule of three compounde
always five numbers: whereof (in the first part of the rule of three compounde
the second number and the fifth, are always of one semblaunce, and like
denomination: whose rule is thus, multiply ye first number by the second, and
that shall be your divisor: then multiplye ye other three numbers the one by the
other to be your diuidende. Example, of this first part: if 100. crowns in 12.
months, do gain 16. li. what will 60. crowns gain in 8. months? Answer,
first multiply 100. crowns by 12. months, and thereof comes 1200. for your
divisor: then multiply 15. li. by 60. crowns, and by 8. months, and you shall
have 7200. divide 7200. by 1200. and thereof comes 6. li. so many li. will 6.
crowns gain in 8. months: this question may be done by ye double rule of 3.
yt is to say by ye rule of 3. at 2 times: yet this rule of 3 co^pou^d is more
brief Crowns. months. pou^ds. crowns. months. 100..12..15..60..8. 1 72 00
12 00 (6. li.

2. In the second part of the rule of three compound, the 3. number is like
unto the fifth, whereof the rule is thus: multiply the 3. number by the 4, the
product shall be your divisor: the^ multiply the first number by ye second, and
the product thereof by the fifth, ye which number shall be your dividend, or
number yt is to be divided: as by example.

When 60. crowns in 8. months do gain 6. li. in how many months will 100.
crowns gain. 15. li. Answer: Multiply the third number 6. by the fourth
number 100: and thereof comes 600 then multiplye ye first number 60. by the
second number 8. and by ye fifth number 15. thereof will come 7200. then divide
7200. by 600. and the quotie^t will be 12: in so many months will 100. crowns
gain 15. li. This question may likewise be done by the double rule of 3.

Crowns months. pounds. crowns. pounds. 60..8..6..100..15. 1 72 00 months.
66 00 (12

3. In the third part of the rule of 3. compound, there may be 5. numbers or
more: and in this rule ye first number and the last are always dissemblaunt ye
one to the other: and the question is from the last number unto the first, whereof
ye rule is thus: multiply that number which you would know by those numbers
which do give ye value, and divide ye product of the same, by ye multiplycation
of the numbers which are already valued, as by example. If 4. deniers Parisis,
be worth 5. deniers Tournois, and 10. deniers tournois, be worth 12. deniers
of Sauoy, I demand how many deniers Parisis are 8. deniers of Sauoy worth?
Answer: Multiply 8. deniers of Sauoy (which is the number yt you would know)
by 4. deniers parisis, and by 10 deniers tournois which are the number yt give
ye value, and they make 320: then multiply 5. deniers tournois, by 12 deniers
of sauoy (which are ye numbers already valued) and they make 60: lastly divide
320. by 60 and you shall find 5. deniers parisis, so much are the deniers of
Sauoye worth.

Parisis. tournois. tournois. sauoy. sauoy. 4. d..5 d..10 d..12 d..8 d. 32 0
par. 6 0 (5. d..

4. In the fourth part of the rule of three compounde: the first number and
the last are always semblant and of one denomination, and the question of this
rule, is always from the last number to ye last saving one. Whereof there is a
rule which is thus. You must multiplye that number which you would know, by
the numbers that are already valued, and divide the product of the same, by
the multiplication which comes of the numbers that give ye value, as by
example.

If 4. deniers Parisis, be worth 5. Deniers Tournois, and 10. Deniers
Tournois, be worth 12. Deniers of Sauoy, I demand how many Deniers of Sauoy,
are 15. Deniers Parisis worth. Answer: Multiplye 15. Deniers Parisis that you
would know, by 5. Deniers Tournois, and by 12. Deniers of Sauoye, which are
the numbers already valued, and they make 900. Divide the same by 4. times 10.
which are the numbers that do give the value, and you shall find 22. Deniers
of Sauoye, so much are the 15. Deniers Parisis worth.

Parisis. tournois. tournois. Sauoy. Parisis. 4. d..5 d..10 d..12 d..15 d. 12
90 0 Sauoy. 44 0 (22. d.

The third Chapter treats of questions of the trade of Marchaundise.
IF 31. Deuonsh. dose^s do cost me 100. li. 15. shil. What shall 4. dosens
cost? Answer: first bring the 100. li. 15. shill. all into shillings, in
multiplying ye 100. li. by 20. adding to the product the 15. shill. and thereof
comes 2015. shill. then multiplye 2015. by the third number 4. and divide
the product by 31. and the quotient will be 260. s. The which divide again by
20. and thereof comes 13. li.

Dosens. Dosens. 31. 100. li. 15. sh. 4. d. 20 2015 4 8060. 1 28 8060 (260.
3111 33

If four Dosens be worth 13. pound. What are 31. Dosens worth by the price?
Answer: Multiply 31. by 13. and thereof comes 403. The which you shall
divide by 4. and thereof comes and thereof comes 100. li., which are 15.s.
and so much are 31. Dosens worth as before.

Dosens. li. Dosens. 4..13..31. 13 393 1 403. 403 444 (100. li.

If 49. else be worth 2. li. 4. s. 11. d. what are 18. else worth by the
price? First you must bring 2. li. 4. s. 11. d. all into pence, in multiplying
2. li. by 20. makes 40. add thereto 4. shil. they make 44. s. ye which
multiply by 12. d and they make 528. d. whereunto add 11. d all is 539. d. the
which 539. d. must be your second number in ye rule of 3. then multiply 539.
by 18. and thereof comes 9702. divide ye same by 49. and you shall have in your
quotient 198. d. ye which divide by 12. and you shall find 16. s. 6. d. so much
are the 18. else worth.

Else: Else. 49..2. li. 4. sh. 11. d..18 20 539 44 162 12 54 99 90 44 539
9702 13 1 427 76 386 198 (16. sh. 6. d 9702 (198. 122 4399 1 44

If 18. else be worth 16.s. 6.d. what are 49. else worth by yt price? Auns.
bring 16.s. 6.d. into pence, in multiplying 16. by 12. and thereof comes
198.d. with the 6. d. added to it, then multiplye 198 by 49. the product will
be 9702. The which divide by 18. else and thereof comes 539.d. Then divide
539.d. by 12. and the product thereof by 20. So shall you have 2. li. 4. sh.
11.d. so much are the 49. else worth.

Else. Else. 18..16. sh. 6. d..49 12 198 32 392 166 441 198 49 9702 17 1 446
151 9702 (539. ^39 (44. shill. 1888 122 ^1 1

If a yard of Velvet cost 19.s. what shall of a yard cost? Answer: set
down your numbers thus. If 1/1 19/1. Then multiplye 1. times 19. by 3. and
thereof comes 57. for your diuidende, or number to be divided. The which 57.
you shall divide by 1. times 1, four times, which are 4, and your quotie^t will
be 14.s., which is worth 3.d. so much are the of a yard worth after 19. shil.
the yard, as by practice follows.

1/1 19/1 11 57 (14. sh. 44

Or otherwise by the rules of practice: first for 2/4 of a yard which is of a
yard, you must take the of 19.s. which is 9.s. 6.d. then for, take the of the
product, that is to say, of 9.s. 6.d. and thereof comes 4.s. 9.d. add these
numbers together, and 19. shil. 9. sh. 6.d. 4..9. 14..3.d. you shall have 14.s.
3.d. as above is said, and as appears here in the margent.

If of a yard of Velvet do cost 14. shil. 3.d. What shall 1. yard cost set
your numbers down thus: if 14 1/1. Reduce 14. into a fraction, and they will be
57/4 the^ multiply 57. by 1.4. times, and thereof comes 228. for your
dividend. Likewise multiply 1. times 4.3. times, and thereof comes 12. for
your divisor: then divide 228. by 12. and your quotient will be 19. shil. so
much is the yard of velvet worth.

57 1 14 1/1 10 228 (19. shil. 122 1

Or otherwise by ye rule of practice: you shall take the part of 14. sh. 3.d.
and add it with the same 14. sh. 3.d. and you shall have 19. shill. as before.

14. shil. 3. d. 4..9. d. 19. shil..0. d.

If one ell of Hollande clothe be worth 5.s. what are worth after the rate?
Answer, say thus if 1/1 5/1. Then multiply 2. times 5. one time, and thereof
comes 10. for your diuidende: likewise multiply three times 1. one time, they
make 3. for your divisor, then divide 10. by 3. and thereof comes 30.s which
is worth 4. pe^ce, and so much are the of an ell worth.

1/1 5/1 1 10 (3. shil. 3

Or otherwise, by the rule of practice: take first the of 5.s. for the of an
ell, which is 1.s. 8.d. Likewise, for the other of an ell take again another
of 5.s. which is also 1. sh. 8.d. and add them together, and so shall you have
3.s. 4.d. as before.

5. shill. 1..8 1..8 3. shill. 4 d.

If of an ell of Hollande cloth do cost me 3.s. 4.d. what shall the el cost?
Answer: set down your su^me thus, if 3 1/1. First reduce 3 all into thirdes,
and it will be. 10/3. Then multiply 1. times 10.3. times, and thereof comes
30. for your diuide^d. Likewise multiply 1. times 3.2 times, your quotie^t
will be 6. then divide 30. by 6. and you shall have 5. s. so much is the ell of
Hollande clothe worth.

10 30 2 3 1/1 6 (5. sh.

Or otherwise by practice, take the of 3.s. 4.d. which is 1.s. 8.d. and add it
to the same 3.s. 4.d. and thereof will come 5.s. as before. For the of 5.s. is
as much as the of 3. sh. 4. 1. 8. 5. sh. 0.d. 3.s. 4. d. which was the price
that the of an elle did cost, as appears.

If one ell cost me 17.s. what shall. 15. else part cost? which is half a
quarter of an elle. Answer: say, of 1/1 17/1 15... First reduce 15 into
eight parts, and they make 121/8 then multiply 121. by 17.1 time, and thereof
comes 2057. for your diuidende. Likewise multiply 8. times 1. 1. time, and
your quotient will be 8. for your divisor, then divide 2057. by 8. and you
shall find 257. sh., which is 12. li. 17. shil. 1.d. and so much are the 15
else worth, as by practice does appear.

121 1/1 17/1 15 1/8

Or otherwise, for 10 sh. take ye of 15 which is 7 li. 10 sh. then for 5 sh.
take the of 7. li. 10.s. which is 3. li. 15.s. thirdly for 2.s. take ye of 7.
li. 10.s. because ye of 10. sh. is 2. sh. Fourthlye, for the of ye ell, you
shall take the of 17.s. which is 2.s. 1.d.. Lastly, add all these sums
together, and the^ shall you find 12. li. 17.s. 1.d. as before, and as appears
more plainly in the margent. 15... 17.s. 7..10.. 3..15.. 1..10.. 2. 1. 12. li.
17.s. 1.d.

If 25. else be worth 2. li. 3.s. 4.d. what are. 18 else worth by yt price?
Answer: first put 3.s. 4.d. into yt part of a li. and you shall have then say,
if 25/1 give me 2. li. what shall 18 give: put ye whole number into his broken,
and then multiply 1. times 13. by 75. ye product will be 975. the which you
shall divide by 25. times 6.4. times, which makes 600. Then divide 975. by
600. and your quotient will be 1. li. and 375. remains, ye which 375. you
shall multiply by 20. thereof comes 7500. divide ye same by 600. your
quotient will be 12.s. and 300. remains ye which abbreuiated brings which is
6.d: thus ye 18 else are worth 1. li. 12.s. 6.d. as by practice appears.

13 75 25/1 2 18.

Or otherwise by the rules of practice: for because that 12. else is the of
25. else, therefore take the of 2. li. 3.s. 4.d. which is 1. li. 1.s. 8.d. then
for 6. else take of 2. li. 3.s. 4.d. or else the of the last product (that is
to say of 1. li. 1.s. 8.d.) which is all one, and add them together, so shall
you have 1. li. 12.s. 6.d. as before.

.2..3..4..1..1..8..10..10. 1. li. 12.s. 6.d.

If 15. yardes be worth 32.s. what are half a yard or half a quarter or else
of a yard worth. Answer: say, if 15/1 give 32/1 what will give? Multiply 1
times 32. by 5. and divide the product by 15. times 1. shil. and 4. remains,
which is of a shil. that is to say 4.d. and so much are the 5/2 of a yard
worth.

15/8 32/1

Or otherwise, se what the yard is worth after the manner aforesaid in ye other
examples, and you shall find yt the yard is worth 2.s. 1.d of ye which number
take first ye for 4/8 which is 1.s. 0 d., of the which number, take the for ye
other which is 3 d., add these two numbers together, and you shall find ye to
be worth 1.s. 4.d. as before is said 2. sh. 1.d.. 1. 0.. 1. sh. 4.d. 0.

If 13. else, be worth 27.s. what are 10. else worth by yt price? Answer: say
if 13. give 27/1, what shall 10. give: put the whole numbers into their broken,
and you shall find 83/6, 27/1, and 32/3. The^ multiply 6. times 27. by 32.
and thereof comes 5184. the which number you shall divide by 83. times 1.
three times, and you shall find 20. sh. 68/83 which is worth 9.d. 69/83 part of
a penny.

83 32 13 27/1 10

If two yardes be worth 4.s. 8.d. what are 8. yards worth? Answer: put the
8.d. into the part of a shilling, which will be then reduce the whole numbers
into their broken, and they will stand thus. 5/2, 14/3, 33/4, then multiply
two times 14. by 33. and divide ye product by 5. times 3.4. times, and you
shall find 15.s. 4.d., so much are the eight yardes worth.

5 14 33 2 4 8

If one kersey be worth 2. li. 6.s. 8.d. how many kerseys shall I bie for 36.
li. 3.s. 4.d. after yt rate? Answer: put 6s. 8d. into the part of a li. and
you shall have 2. li. for the first number in the rule of 3. and 1. ell for the
second number: then put 3.s. 4.d. into the part of a li. and you shall find
36. li.. for the third number, then will your 3. numbers in the rule of 3.
stand thus. 2. 1/1 36.. Therefore reduce the whole numbers into their broken,
and you shall have 7/3 1/1 217/6. Then multiply 3 times 1. by.217. and thereof
will come 651. for your diuidende. Likewise, multiply 7 times 1. by 6. and the
product thereof will be 42. Then divide 651. by 42. and you shall find 15.. So
many kerseys of 2. li. 6.s. 8.d. the piece, shall you have for 36. li. 3.s. 4.
d.

7 217 2 1/7 36.

The 4. Chapter treats of losses and gains, in the trade of Marchaundise.
If 13. yards be worth 22. li. 10.s. how shall I sell the yard to gain, or to
make of 3.4? which is all one? Auns. say by the rule of 3. if 3. be come of 4.
or if 3. yield 4. what will 22. yield: multiply and divide and you shall find
30. li. Then say gain by the rule of 3. if 13. yardes do give 30. li. as well
of principal as of gain: what will 1. yard be worth by the price? Multiply and
divide, and you shall find 2. li. 5.s. and for that price must the yard be
sold to gain the, or to make of 3.4.

45 40. 5/1 4/1 22 13 30/1 1/1

Or otherwise, take the part of 22. li. 10.s. which is 7. li. 10.s. that shall
you add with 22. li. 10.s. and you shall have 30. li. as before. 22..10. s.
7..10. 30..00. Then divide 30. by 13., and you shall find 2. li. 5.s. as above
is said.

If one yard be worth.27. sh. 6.d. for how much shall 16. yards be sold to
gain 2.s. upon ye pound of money, yt is to say: upon 20.s. Answer, add 2.
unto 20. and you shall have 22, the^ say: if 20.s. of principal, do give 22.s.
as well of principal as gain: how much will 27.s. 6.d. principal yield.
Multiply and divide and you shall find 30.s.: then say again by the rule of
3. if one yard do give me 30.s. (which is as well the principal as ye gain)
what shall.16. yardes give me? Multiply and divide, and you shall find 25.
li. 4.s. 2.d. For the same price shall the 16. yardes be sold to gain after
the rate of 2.s. upon the pound of money, or in 20.s. which is all one.

55. 121 50 20/1 22/1 27. 1/1 30 2/4 16

If 10. yardes be worth 25. li. 10.s. For how much shall 2 yardes be sold to
gain after 10. li. upon the 100. li. of money? Answer: say if 100. of
principal yield 110. as well principal as gain, how much will 25. 10.s.
yield me? Multiply and divide, and you shall find 28. li. 1.s. Then say if
10. yardes do yield me 28. li. 1. sh. as well of principal as of gain, how much
shall two yardes yield me? multiply and divide and you shall find 5. li. 18.s.
4.d. 1/12, for so much shall the 2. yardes be sold to gain after 10. li. upon
ye 100. li. of money.

51 100/1 110/1 25 10 28 1/20 2

And although that in these questions of gain and loss, sometimes the first
number is not like unto ye third number, that is to say, of the same
denomination: as one would say: if 20.s. gain 2. shil. what shall 50. li.
gain? or 25. li. etc. Or if 20. li. do gain 2. li. What shall 25.s. gain me,
or what shall 27. sh. gain? Yet nevertheless, the rule is not therefore false.
For if 20.s. do gain 2.s: 20. li. shall gain 2. li. and 20.d. shall gain
2.d. likewise 20. crowns shall gain 2. crowns, and so of all other:
therefore it is to be understand, that the first number in these reasons is
presupposed to be semblable to the third.

When one Merchant sells wares to another, and he gives to the byer 2. upon
15: how much shall the byer gain upon the 100. after the rate? Answer: say
if 15. give 17. what shall 100. give? Multiply and divide, and you shall find
113, so the byer gets after the rate of 13 upon the 100.

15 17 100.

If one northen dosen cost me 3. li. 5. s. and I sell the same again for 3. li.
12.s. 6.d. how much do I gain upon the pound of money after yt rate? Auns.
say if 3. li. do give 3. li. what shall 20/8 give, put the whole number into
their broken and you shall have 13/4, 29/8, 20/1, then multiply 4. times 29. by
20. and thereof comes 2320. for your number that is to be divided, likewise
multiply 13. times 8. 1 time, and thereof comes 104. Then divide 2320. by 104.
and you shall find 22.s. 4/13. So I shall get 2.s. 4/13 upon 20.s. or upon the
li. of money.

13 29 3 3 20/1

If a yard of cloth cost me 7.s. 8.d. and afterward I deliver out 13. yardes,
for 4. li. 13.s. 4.d. I would know whether I do win or lose, and how much
upon the 100. li. of money?

Answer: see first at 7.s. 8.d. the yard, what the 13. yardes shall cost,
and you shall find 5. li. 1.s. 7.d. And I sold them but for 4. li. 13.s. 4.d.
so yt I do lose upon the 13. yardes the sum of 8.s. 3.d. Then for to know
how much is lost upon the 100: say by the rule of three, if 5. li. 1.s. 7.d.
do lose 8.s. 3.d. What will 100. lose? First, put 1. shil. 7.d. into the part
of a li. and it will be 19/240. Likewise put 8.s. 3.d. into the part of a li.
and it is 33/80. Then will your numbers stand thus 5 19/240, 33/80, 100/1, put
the whole into his broken, and then multiply and divide, so you shall find 8.
li. 1184/9752 which is worth.2. sh. 5. d. 169/1219 and so much is lost upon
the 100. li. of money.

1219. 5 19/240. 38/80 100/1.

More, if 12. yardes of scarlet be sold for 30. li. 15.s. upon the which is
gained after the rate of 11 1/9 upon the 100. I demand what the yard did
cost at the first. Answer: from 30. li. 15.s. substract his 1/10 part which
is 3. li. 1.s.6.d. and there rests 27. li. 13.s.6.d the which number
multiplied by 2. brings 55. li. 7.s. of the which is 11. li one shilling and
four pence.

Then take again the of the said 11 pound 1. shil. 4. pence, which is 2.
pound 4. shillinges three pence. 9/25. And so much did the Elle cost at the
first pennye.

30. li. 15. sh. 3. 1. sh. 6.d. 27. 13. 6. 2. 55. 7. 0. 11. 1. 4.. 2. 4. 3.
9/25.

More, if 15. yardes of scarlet do cost me 32. li. 13.s. 4.d. And I sell the
yard again for 2. li. whether do I win or lose, and how much upon the
pound of money.

Answer: Look what the 15. yardes are worth at 2. li. the yard, and you
shall find yt they are worth 31. li.10.s. But they did cost 32. li. 13.s. 4.d.
so yt there is lost upon ye whole 1. li.3.s.4.d. Then, to know how much is lost
upon the li. say by the rule of three, if 32. li. do lose 1. li.: what will
lose? that is to say, what will 1. li. lose? reduce the whole numbers into
their broken, and then multiply and divide, so shall you find 21/588. part of
a li. Then multiplye 21. by 240. because so many pence are in a li. and divide
the product by 588. so shall you find 8.d. 336/588 which being abbreuiated do
make 7/4, and thus you se yt 8.d. 4/7 is lost upon the li. of money.

98 7 32. 1 1/1

If 1. yard of cloth of tissue be sold for 3. li. 15.s. whereupon is lost
after ye rate of 10.s. upon the 100. I demand what 12. yardes of ye same
tissue did cost? Answer: add unto 3. li. 15. his own 1/10 part, which is
7.s.6.d. and al amounts to 4. li. 2.s. 6.d. then look what the 12. yardes will
amount unto, after 4. li. 2.s. 6.d. and you shall find that they will come to
51. li. 11.s. 3.d. so much did the 12. yardes cost.

3. li. 15.s. 12. 7.s. 6.d. 4. li. 2.s. 6.d. 4. li. 2s. 6d. 48..00..0.
1..10..0. 2..01..3. 51. li. 11.s. 3.d.

More, if I sell one wilshire white for 6. li. 12.s. whereupon I do gain
after the rate of 2.s. upon the li. of money, that is to say, upon 20.s. I
demand what 11. pieces of the same whites did cost me? Answer: abate from
6. li. 12.s. (which is 132.s.) his 1/11 part, and thereof comes 12.s. and
there remains 120.s. or 6. li. The^ see at 6. li ye cloth, what the 11.
clothes are worth 66. li. so much did the 11. clothes cost.

132. sh. 11 12. sh. 6 120. sh. 66. li.

If I sell 10. else of Holla^d for 22 s.6.d. whereupon I do lose after the
rate of 2.s. upon the li. of money. I demand what the ell did cost me?
Answer: say by ye rule of 3. if 18. give 20.s. what will 22.s.6.d. give?
Multiply and divide, and you shall find 25.s. Then divide 25.s. by 10., and
thereof comes 2s.4 d. 4/7: So much did ye el cost.

11/1 20/1 22

If I sell one clothe for 5 li. where upon I do lose after 10 upon ye 100, I
demand how much I should lose or gain upon the 100, in case I had sold the
same for 5 li.10 shil. Answer: say, if 90 yield 100, how much will 5. li.
give? Multiply and divide, and you shall find 5. li. 5/9: then say again by
ye rule of three, if 5.5/9 come to 5., what will 100. come unto? Multiply and
divide, and you shall find 99. li. which being abated from 100. there will
remain 1. li. and so much is lost upon the 100.

90. 100. 5. 5 5/9 5 100/1

The 5. Chap. treats of lengthes and breadthes of tapistry, and other clothes.
IF a piece of tapistry be 5 else long, and 4 else in breadth, how mani
else square does the same piece contain? Answer: Multiply the length by the
breadth, that is to say 5. by 4., and thereof comes 26. else so many else
square does ye same piece contain.

More, if a piece of Tapistrie do contain 32. else square, and ye same being
in length 6. else. I demand how many else in breadth ye same piece does
contain. Ans. divide 32. else by 6 and thereof comes 5. 3/25: So many else
does the same piece contain in breadth.

More, a piece of clothe being 13. yardes in length, and 5 quarters 1/2 in
breadth, how many yardes of and broad will the same piece make? Answer: see
what part of a yard, the 5/4 and be, and you shall find yt they make 1
yard. The^ multiply 13. yardes by 1 yard and you shall have 18. yardes in
square ye which you must divide by and yt is to say by, (because yt, being
brought into 1 fraction makes) and you shall find 22. yards: So many yardes
of and large does ye same piece contain.

More, a merchant has bought 4. yardes of cloth being six quarters broad to
make him a gown the which he will line thorowout, with black Say of three
quarters of a yard broad, I demand how much Say he must bye? Answer:
Multiply ye length of the cloth, by the breadth, that is to say 4 by 1., (which
is the syx quarters) and thereof comes 7. yardes 7/12, the which divide by and
you shall find ten yardes 1/9. So many yardes of Say must he have to line the
same 4. yards of cloth of 6. quart. broad.

More, at 6.s. 8.d. the ell square, what shall a piece of tapistre cost me,
which is five else long and 4. else broad? Answer, multiply 5. by 4. and
thereof comes 23. else square: then say by the rule of three, if one ell
square cost me 6.s. 8.d. what shall 23. cost? Multiply and divide, and you
shall find 7. li. 15.s. 10.d. so much the said piece of tapistrie did cost.

Or otherwise, by the rules of practice, take the of 23. 3/8: and you shall
find 7. li. 15.s. 10.d. as above is said.

More, a piece of Hollande clothe containing 42. else flemishe, how many else
english do they make? Here must you first note that 100. else flemishe, do
make but 60. else english, and so consequentlye five else flemishe do make
but 3. else english. Therefore say by the rule of 3. if 5. else flemishe do make
three else english, how many else english will 42. else flemishe make.
Multiplye and divide, so shall you find 25. else english, and so many else
english does 42. 2/3 flemishe contain, the like is to be done of all others.

More, I have bought a piece of Tapistrie, being 5. else long, and 4. else
broad measure of Flaunders, I demand how many else square it makes
English measure?

Answer. First, forasmuch as three else english are worth 5 else flemishe,
therefore put 3 else english into his square, in multiplying 3. by him self
which makes 9: likewise multiplye 5. in him self squarely, and it will be 25.
Then multiplye 5 which is the length of the piece, by 4 2/3 which is the
breadth, and thereof comes 26 else square: the^ say by ye rule of three, if
25 else square of flemishe measure, be worth 9 else square of english
measure, what are 26 else flemish worth? multiply and divide, and you shall
find yt they are worth nine else 33/80 square of english measure.

More at 3 s. 6 d. ye ell flemish what is the english ell worth after yt rate.
Answer,: say if 5. else flemishe be worth three else english, what is 1 ell
flemishe worth? multiply and divide, and you shall find of an english ell.
Then say by the rule of 3, if of an english ell, be worth 3 s. 6 d. what is
1. english ell worth? multiply and divide, and you shall find 5 s. 10d. so
much shall the english ell be worth.

More at 6 s. 8d. the flemishe ell square, what is ye english ell worth.
Answer, say by the aforesaid reason, if 25 else flemishe square, be worth 9.
else square english, what is one ell square flemishe worth? multiply and
divide, and you shall find 9/25 of a square english ell: Then say, if 9/25
of an english ell be worth 6 s. 8 d. what is one square ell english worth?
multiply and divide, and you shall find 18 s. 6d. 2/9, so much shall one
english ell square be worth.

The sixth Chapter treats of ye reducing of the paumes of Genes into english
yardes, whereof four Paumes makes one english yard.
I Have bought 97. paumes of Genes velvet, and I would know how many yardes
they will make? Answer, Divide 97. by 4. and you shall have 24. yardes. So
many yards do the 97. paumes co^teine.

Or otherwise, take some other number at your pleasure, as 20. paumes, which
do make five yardes, and the^ say by the rule of three, if 20/1 paumes, give
5/1 yardes, what will 97. give? Multiplye and divide, and you shall find 24.
yardes 3/2 as before.

More, at two shillings 7.d. ye paume of Genes, what will the english yard be
worth after the rate? Answer, say by the rule of three, if of an english
yard be worth two shillings 7/12. What is 1/1 yard worth? Multiply and
divide, and you shall find ten shillings 4.d. So much is the english yard
worth.

Or otherwise, multiply 4. paumes (which is one yard) by two shillings 7.
pence, and you shall find 10.s. 4.d. as before.

If 257. Paumes be worth 20. li. 16.s. 8.d. What is one yard worth after the
rate? Answer, say: by the rule of 3. if 257. paumes be worth 20., what are
4/1 paumes worth. Multiply and divide, and you shall find 100/309 part of a
pound, which is worth 6.s. 5. pence, 5^/103: so much is one yard worth.

The. vij. Chapter treats of marchaundise sold by weight.
AT 9.d. the ounce, what is ye li. weight worth? Answer, say if 3/2 give 9.
what will 16/1 give multiply and divide, and you shall find 12.s. 8.d. so much
is the yard worth?

Or otherwise, by the rules of practice for six pence, take the of 16. which
is 8.s. then for 3.d. take the of 16.s. which is 4.s. Finally, for the
halpenye, take 16. ob. which are 8.d. add all these numbers together and you
shall find 12.s. 8.d. as before.

More, at 10 d. the ounce, what are 112. li. weight worth after the rate?
Answer: reduce. 112. li. into ounces, in multiplying. 112. li. by 16. ounces
and you shall have 1792. ounces, the^ say by the rule of 3. if 1/1 10 1792/1:
Multiply and divide, and you shall find 18816 d. which do make 78. li. 8 s.
and so much are the 112. li. worth after 10.d the ounce.

At 12.s. 8d. the li. weight, what is the ounce worth? Answer: put 12.s. 8d.
into pence, and you shall have 152. pence: then say by the rule of 3. if 16.
ounces cost 152d. what shall 1. ounce cost, multiply and divide, and you
shall find 9.d., so much is the ounce worth.

Or otherwise, take the of 12 s. 8.d for 4 ounces, and thereof comes 3.s.
2.d. then for one ounce, take the of 3.s. 2d. and you shall have 9.d. as before.

At 32. li. 10.s. the quintall, that is to say, the 100. li. weight: what is
1. li. weight worth after the same rate? Answer, Put 32. li. 10.s. all into
shillings and you shall have 650.s.

Then say, by the rule of three, if 100 650 1. multiply and divide, and you
shall find, 6.s. 6.d. so much is the li. worth.

If one pound weight of saffron do cost me 18.s. 8.d. what shall 355. li. 10.
ounces cost me by ye. same price? Answer say by the rule of 3. if 1/1 18
355. Multiply and divide, and you shall find 331. li. 18.s. 4.d. so much are
the 355. li. ten ounces worth.

Brief rules of weight.
WHo that multiplieth the pence that 1. li. weight is worth by 5. and divides
ye product thereof by. 12. he shall find how many pou^ds in money the quintall
is worth, that is to say, how much the 100. li. weight is worth.

And contrariwise he that multiplieth the pounds of money that the 100. weight
is worth by 12. and deuideth the product by 5. shall find how many pence the
pound weight is worth.

Example.
AT seuentene pence the pound weight, what is the 100. pound weight worth?
Answer, Multiplye 17. by 5. and thereof comes 85. divide the same by 12.
and you shall find 7. pound 1/12, which 1/12 is worth one shilling and eight
pence. So much is the 100. pound weight worth.

More, at 13. li. the 100. li. weight, what is one pound weight worth?
Answer, Multiply 13. by 12. amounts to 156. the which divide by 5. and you
shall find 31.d. which is 2.s. 7.d. and so much is one pound weight worth.

The like is to be done of yardes, else, or of any other measure, when we
reckon but five score to the hundred.

Brief Rules for measure.
Who that multiplieth the pence that one ell is worth, by 6. And divides the
product by 12. he shall find how many pounds in money ye 120. else are
worth, which 120. else we count but for a C.

And contrariwise, he that multiplieth the pounds in money that the 120.
else are worth by 12. and divides the multiplication by 6. shall find how
many pence the ell is worth.

Example.
At ten pence the ell, what are 120. else worth? Answer, Multiply 10.d. by
6. and thereof comes 60: The which divide by 12. and you shall find five
pound, so many pounds in money are 120. else worth at 10.d. the ell.

More, at 9. pound, the 120. else, what is one ell worth? Answer,
Multiply nine pound by twelve, and thereof comes 108. the which divide by 6.
and you shall find 18.d. so much is one ell worth.

The like is to be done of all manner of wares, which are sold after 120. for
the hundred.

Brief Rules for our hundredth weight here at London, which is after 112. li.
for the C.
WHo that multiplieth ye pence that one pound weight is worth by 28. and
divides the product by 60. shall find how many pounds in money the 112. li.
weight is worth.

ANd contrariwise, he that multiplieth the pounds in money that 112. li. is
worth by 60. and divides the product by 28. shall find how many pence one li.
weight is worth.

Example.
AT nine pence the pound weight, what is the 112. li. weight worth? Answer:
multiply 9.d. by 28, and thereof comes 252, the which divide by 60. and you
shall find 4. li. 12/60 which being abbreuiated is 1/5 of a pound, which is
worth 4.s. And thus the 112. li. is worth 4. pound 4. shil.

At 8. li. ye 112. li. weight, what is 1. li. weight worth? Answer, Multiply
8. li. by 60. and thereof comes 480, ye which divide by 28. and you shall
find 17.d. 1/7: so much is 1. li. weight worth.

The. viij. Chapter treats of tares and allowances of marchaundise sold by
weight.
AT 12. li. the 100. suttell, what shall 987. li. suttell be worth? in giving
4. li. weight upon every 100 for tret? Answer, add 4. li. unto 100. and you
shall have 104. Then say by the rule of three, if 104 be worth 12. li. what are
987. li. weight worth? multiply and divide, and you shall find 113. li. 23/26
which is worth 17.s. 8.d. 4/13. So much shall ye 987. li. weight be worth. 104.
12. 987.

At 6.s. 8.d. ye pound weight what shall 345. li. be worth in giving 4. li.
weight upon every 100. for the tret. Answer, see first by the rule of three,
what the 100. pound is worth saying, if 1/1 6 100/1 Multiply and divide, and
you shall find 33. li. then add 4. li. unto 100. and they are 104. the^ say
again by the rule of 3. if a 104. li. be sold for 33. li. for how much shall
345. li. be sold? multiply and divide, and you shall find 110. li. 14.s. 8.d.
12/13 So much shall the 345. li. be worth, at 6.s. 8.d. the pound, in giving 4.
upon the 100.

More, if 100. be worth 36.s. 8.d. what shall 780. li. be worth in rebating
4. li. upon every 100. for Tare and Cloffe? Answer, Multiply 780. by 4. and
thereof comes 3120. The which divide by 100. and you shall have 31. li. abate
31. from 780. and there will remain 748. Then say by the rule of three, if
100/1 do cost 36., what will 748. cost after the rate? Multiply and divide so
shall you find 274.s. 6.d. 18/25, and so much shall the 780. li. cost, in
rebating 4. li. upon every 100. for Tare and Cloffe.

More, whether does he lose more that gives 5. li. upon the 100. or he that
rebateth 5. li. upon the 100. for tare and cloffe? Answer. First, note that
he which gives 5. li. upon the 100. gives 105. for 100: and he which
rebateth 5. li. upon the 100. gives the 100. for. 95. Therefore say by the
rule of 3. if 105. be given for 100. for how much shall ye 100. be given?
Multiply and divide and you shall find 95. 5/21: and he which rebateth 5. upon
the 100. makes but 95. of 100: so that he loses 5. upon the 100. and the
other which gives 5. upon ye 100 loses but 4. 16/21 upon the 100. Thus he yt
rebateth 5. upon the 100. loses more by 5/21 upon the 100. than the other
which gave 5. upon the 100. for tare and cloffe.

If 100. of Allam do cost me. 26.s. 8.d. how shall I sell the li. weight to
gain after the rate of 10. upon ye 100. Answer, put 26.s. 8.d. al into pence,
and you shall have 320.d. The^ say by ye rule of 3. if 100. give 110. what shall
320. give, multiply and divide, and you shall find 352.d. The^ say, if 100.
li. be worth 352.d. what is 1. li. multiplye and divide, and you shall have
3.d. 26/50 which 26/50 is worth, and 1/25 of. That is to say, the pound
weight shall be worth 3.d.. 1/25 of a half pennye, in gaining 10. upon the 100.

If one pound weight do cost me, 6.s. 10.d. and I sell the same for 7.s. 2.d.
I demand how much I should gain upon the 100. li. of money after the rate?
Answer, say by the rule of 3. if 6. yield 7. what will 100/1 yield? Put the
whole numbers into their broken, then multiply and divide, and you shall find
104. 36/41 from the which substract 100. and there rests 4. li. 36/41 so much
is gained upon the hundred pound of money after the rate.

More, if one pound do cost me 5.s. 4.d. and I sell the same again for 4. s.
9.d. I demand how much I shall lose upon the 100. pound of money? say, if 5.
do give but 4., what shall 100/1 give? Put the whole number into their broken.
Then multiply and divide and you shall find 89. 1/16 the which you must
substract from 100. and there will remain 10. li. 15/16, so much is lost upon
ye 100. li. of money.

More if the li. weight do cost me 3.s. 2.d. and I sell it again for 4.s.
4.d. how much shall I gain upon 20.s. Answer: say if 3. give 4. what shall
20/1 give, Multiply and divide and you shall find 27.s. 7/19: out of the
which abate 20.s. and there will remain 7. shillings. 7/19, which is 4.d.
4/19: and so much is gained upon the pound of money that is to say upon 20.s.

If the pound weight do cost me 4.s. 4.d. and I sell it again for 3.s. 2.d.
I demand how much I shall lose upon the pound of money? that is to say
upon twenty shillings.

Answer: say, if 4. give but 3. what will 20/1 give, multiply and divide and
you shall find 14.s. 8/13 the which you must abate from 20.s. and there will
remain 5.s. 5/13 which 5/13, is worth 4.d. 8/13 of a pennye and so much is
lost upon the pound of money.

The. ix. Chapter treats of certain questions, done by the double rule, and
also by ye rule of three compounde.
WHen the quarter of wheat, does cost 6.s. 8.d. the loaf of bread waying 20.
ounces is sold for a ob. I demand yt if ye quarter of wheat did cost ten
shillings, for how much shall the loaf of bread be sold, that wayeth 16.
ounces?

Answer: by the first part of ye rule, of 3. compound which is mentioned in
the third part of this book, and in the second Chapter of the same. Therefore
say by the same first part of ye rule of 3. co^pound, if 6. 20/1 10/1 16/1.

Then multiplye the first number by the second, and the product thereof shall be
your divisor. Likewise multiply the other three numbers the one by the other,
and the product thereof shall be your diuidende: as thus, first multiply 6. by
20/1, and thereof comes 400/3 for your divisor, then multiply by 10/1 and the
product thereof by 16/1, so you shall have 160/2 for your number that is to be
divided, then divide 160/2 by 400/3, and thereof comes 480/800 ye which being
abbreuiated brings of a penny: and for yt price must the loaf of bread be
sold, which wayeth 16. ounces, and the quarter of wheat being worth ten
shillings.

Or otherwise by the rule of 3. at two times. First say if 20/1 ounces give,
what will 16/1 ounces give? Multiply and divide, and you shall find of a
pennye. Then say again, if 6. 2/7 do give me, what will 10/1 give?
Multiplye and divide, and you shall find of a pennye, as before is said.

When the carriage of one hundredth wayghte of marchaundise 50. miles does cost
5s. what shall the carriage of 500 weight cost me for 16 miles?

Answer, By the first part of the rule of 3 compound, saying if 100 50 5 500
16. Multiply 100 by 50 the product will be 5000, which shall be your divisor.
Then multiply 5 times 500 by 16 and thereof comes 40000 for your dividend.
Therefore divide 40000 by 5000 and you shall find 8 s. so much shall cost the
carriage of 500 wayghte 16 miles.

Or otherwise by the double rule of three, that is to say by the rule of three
at two times: first say if 50 miles do pay 5 s. what shall 16 miles pay?
Multiply and divide, and you shall find 1 s.. Then say, again, if 100 weight
do cost me 1 s. what shall 500 wayght cost? Multiply and divide, and you shall
find 8 s. as before.

When the carriage of 100. pound weight of Marchaundise 84. miles, does cost me
six shillings, how many miles may I have 64. pound weight carried for three. s.
4.d. Answer, by ye second part of the rule of three compounde: say if 100/1
14/1 6/1 64/1 3.

Then multiply the fourth number 64/1 by the third number 6/1, and thereof
comes 304/1 for your divisor. Likewise multiply 3 by 100/1, and by 14/1 and
you shall have in the product 14000/3: then divide 14000/3 by 384/1 and you
shall find 72. miles 11/12 of a mile. So many miles shall ye 64. li. weight be
carried, for three shillings 4.d.

Otherwise by the rule of three, at two times: First say, if 100. weight do
cost me 6.s. what shall 64. pound weight cost? Multiplye and divide, and you
shall find three shillings.21/25. Then say, if 3. 21/25 be paid for 84.
miles carriage: for how many miles shall 3.s. be paid? Multiplye and divide
and you shall find 72. miles. 11/12.

If 100. horses in 100. days do spend 180. quarters of otes: how many
quarters of otes will 350. horses spend in 150. days? Answer: by the first
part of the rule of three compounde: multiply 180. times 350. by 150. and
divide the product by 100. times 100: and you shall find 945. quarters. So
many quarters of Otes will 350. horses spend in 150. days.

Or otherwise by the rule of 3. at two times: first say, if 100. days do
yield me 180. quarters of otes: what shall 150. days yield: multiplye and
divide, and you shall find 270. quarters: then say again, if 100. horses do
spend 270. quarters of Otes, how many quarters of otes will 350. horses spend?
Multiply and divide, and you shall find 945. quarters as before.

The tenth Chapter treats of the rule of Fellowship, without any time limited.
THe rule of fellowship is thus: you must set down each ma^s sum of money that
he lays into company, A Rule.
every one directly under the other, ye which you shall add altogether, and
the total sum of all their whole stock being thus assembled, shall be your
common divisor, to the finding out of every man's part of ye gain. Then shall
you multiplye the gain, or the loss, by each man's portion of money that he
laid in, and divide the products by the said divisor: so shall you have in
your quotient every man's part of the gain, or else of the loss, if any thing
be lost.

Example
1. Two Marchaunts have made company together, the first laid in 500. li.
The second put in 300. li. and with occupying they have gained 64. li. I
demand how much each man shall have of the same gains according to the money
that he laid in. Answer: Add 500. and 300. both together, which are the
percels that they laid in, and thereof comes 800. for your divisor: then say
by the rule of three, if 800. li. (which is their stock) do gain 64. li. what
shall 500. li. gain? (which is the first man's money that he laid in)
multiply and divide and you shall find 40. li. for the first man's part of
the gain: then say if 800. give 64. what will 300. give? Multiplye and divide,
and you shall find 24. li. for ye second man's part of the gain.

500 300 800 64 500. 800 800 64 300.

Or otherwise, put 500. li. which is the first man's money yt he laid in, over
the 800. li. which is the whole, stock, and you shall have 500/800 which being
abbreuiated, do make, and such part of the gain shall ye first man take, yt is
to say of 64. li. which is 40. li. And consequentlye, by the same manner, the
second shall take the of 64. which is 24. pound for his part of the gain as
before.

5 00 3 00 8 00 8 00

2. Two Marchaunts have companied together, ye first put in 640. li. and he
takes parts of the gain. I demand what the second Merchant laid in?
Answer, Seeing that the first Merchant takes of the gain, it follows that
ye second must have which is the rest, and therefore say by the rule of three,
if of the gain, which the first man takes, did lay into the stock 640/1. How
much shall the of the gain lay in, which is the second man's gain? Multiply
and divide, and you shall find 384. li. so much ought the second man to lay
into company.

3. Two Merchants have companied together, the first man laid in 640. li.
and ye second has laid in so much, that he must have 60. li. for his part of
100. li. which they have gained. I demand how much the second man did lay
into company? Answer: seeing that the second man takes 60. li. of the gain,
it follows yt the first must have but 40. pound. Therefore say by the rule
of three, if 40. li. do lay in 640. li. what shall 60. li lay in? Multiply and
divide, and you shall find 960. pound, so much did the second merchant lay
in.

4. Two marchaunts have companied together, the first laid in 83. li. 6.s.
8.d. ye second put in 170. ducats: and they have gained 100. li. of the which
the first man must have 60. li. I demand what the ducket was worth? Answer,
seeing that the first man must have 60. li. it follows yt the second must
have 40. li. therefore say by the rule of three if 60. li. of gain yt the first
man takes did lay in 83. li. 6.s. 8.d. of principal, how much shall 40. li.
of gain put in, multiplye and divide, and shall find 55. li. 5/9: so much are
the 170. ducats worth. Then put 55. li. 5/9 into shillings, and you shall have
1111.s. 1/9 the^ to know what ye ducket is worth, say by the rule of three, if
a 170/1 give 1111. 1/9, what will 1/1 give? Multiplye and divide, and you shall
find 6.s. 6.d. 22/51, so much is the ducket worth.

5. Two Merchants have companied together, the second man laid in more by
30. li. than did the first man: and they gained 120. li. of the which ye first
man ought to have 50. li. I demand what each of them did lay in. Answer, from
120. li. abate 50. li. and there rests 70. li. for ye second man's part: so
that by this means ye second man (because he laid in 30. li. more tha^ the
first man did) takes 20. li. more of ye gain: and therefore say by ye rule of
3. if 20. li. of gain did lay in 30. li. of principal, how much shall 50. li.
lay in?

Multiplye and divide, and you shall find 75. li. so much did the first man
lay in, and consequentlye the second laid in 105 li.

6. Two marchaunts have companied together, the second has laid in twice so
much as the first man did, and 10 li. more: and they gained 100 li. of the
which, the first ought to have 32 li. for his part: I demand how much each of
them did lay into company?

Answer, If it were not for the 10 li. that the second man laid in more: he
should have had but 64 li. of the gain which is the double of the first man's
part. But because he laid in 10 li. more, he has four pound more of the
gain, and therefore say by the rule of three, if 4 li. of gain did lay in
10 li. of principal, (which was over and above the double of the first man's
laying in) what shall 32 li. of gaynes lay in? which is the first man's part
of the gaynes that he takes. Multiplye and divide, and you shall find 80 li.
for the first man's laying in: and consequently 170 li. for the second man's
portion that he laid in.

7. Two marchaunts have companied together, and they have gained 100 li. of the
which the first must have after the rate of 10 upon the 100 li. and the second
must have after the rate of 15 li. upon the 100 li. I demand how much each
of them ought to have? Answer, Put 10 li. for the first man's laying in, and
15 li. for the second man's laying in. Add 10 li. and 15 li. together, and
they make 25 li. Then put 10 over 25. and it is 10/25 which being abbreuiated
are. Therefore he that takes 10 li. upon the 100 li. must have the of the
gain, which is 40 li. Then put 15 over 25. and it is 15/25 which being
abbreuiated are. Therefore the second must have of the 100 li. which is 60 li.

8. Two Merchants have companied together, ye first laid in 46. li. 18.s.
and the second laid in 33. li.2.s. so they have gained 30. li. I demand how
much every man shall have for his part of the gain? Answer: Add 46. li.
18.s. and 33. li.2.s. both together and you shall find 80. li. for your common
divisor: then say if 80. li. which is all their stock do gain 30. li. what
will 46.9/10 gain, which is the first man's laying in: Multiply and divide,
and you shall find 17. li. 11.s. 9.d. for the first man's part of the gain.
The^ say again, if 80. li. do gain 30. li. what will 33. li. 1/10 gain, which
was the second man's, laying in: multiply and divide, and you shall find 12.
li. 8.s. 3.d. for the second man's part of the gain.

And after the same manner shall you do, in case there were three or four
Marchaunts that would company together: Adding all their sums of money
(which they lay into the stock) into one total sum: which shall be your common
Divisor: and then work with the rest, as is taught in the former Questions of
ye rule of company.

9. Three Marchaunts have companied together, the first laid in I know not how
much: the second did put in 20. pieces of cloth, and ye third has laid 500.
pound. So at ye end of their company, their gains amounted unto a thousand
pound, whereof ye first man ought to have 350. pound, and the second must have
four hundred pound.

Now I demand how much the first man did lay in, and for how much the 20.
pieces of clothe were put into company?

Answer.
Seeing that the first and the second marchaunts must have 750. li. for their
parts of the gain. Then the third man must have the rest of the thousand
pound which is 250. li.

And therefore say by the rule of three, if 250. of gain, become of 500. li. of
principal: of how much shall come 350. li. of gain? which the first man
takes, multiplye and divide and you shall find 700. li. So much did the
first man lay in: then say if 250. li. of gain be come of 500. li.
principal, of how much will come 400. li. which is the gain yt the second
man takes. Multiply and divide, and you shall find 800. li. For so much were
ye 20. pieces of cloth laid into company.

10. Three Marchaunts have gained 100. li. the first must have the, the
second must have: And ye third must have. I demand how much every man must
have of the gain? Answer, Reduce,,, into a common denominatio^, after the
order of the second reduction in fractions, and you shall find 12/24, for the:
8/24, for the: and 6/24, for the: Then take 12 for ye first man's laying in, 8.
for ye second man's laying in: and 6 for the third man's laying in. The
which three numbers being added together shall be your common divisor, which do
make 26. Then multiply 100 by 12, for the first man, by 8 for the second man,
and by 6 for the third man. And divide every multiplication by 26. So shall you
find 46 li. 2/13 for the first man's part of the gain. 30. li. 10/13 for
the second man's part: and 23 li. 1/13, for the third man's part.

11. Two marchaunts have gained 100 li. the first must have and 5 li. more:
the second must have and 4 li more: I demand how much each of them shall
have? Answer, From 100 abate 5 and 4. so there will remayn 91. then take the of
100. li. which is 50 li. for the first man's laying in: Likewise, take of 100
li. for the second man's laying in, which is 33 li.. Then add 50 li. and 33
li. together, and you shall have 83 li. for your common divisor, then multiply
91. pound by 50. and divide by 83.: and thereof comes 54. pound, unto the
which number add 5, and all is 59. li. for ye first man's part. Likewise
multiplye. 91. by 33.: and divide by 83., and you shall find 36. li. unto the
which add 4: and you shall have forty pound, for the second man's part.

12. Two Merchants have gained a hundred pound, the first must have the
less by 4. pound, the second must have: less by 2. pound. I demand how much
each of them shall have? Answer, Add 4. and 2. with 100. and they make 106.
Then take as before is said 50. pound, for the first man, and 33. for the
second, add them both together, and they be 83. which shall be your divisor.
Then multiply 106. by 50. and divide the product by 83., so thereof comes
63. li.. From the which abate the four pound less yt the first man takes,
and then is there remaining 59. pound, for his part. Likewise multiply 106.
by 33. and divide by 83 and you shall find 42. li.: from the which abate 2.
li. less and there remains 40. pound, for the second man's part.

The Rule of Fellowship with time.
THe money that every man lays in, must be multiplied by the time that it
remains in company: and of that which comes thereof you shall make their new
layings in for each of them: and then multiplye the gains by every one of them
severally, the which you shall divide by all their new layings in added
together, and you shall have proporcionally each man's part of the gain
according to his laying in.

Example.
1. Two Marchaunts have companied together, the first has put in the first of
January 450. pound, the second did lay in ye 2. of May. 750. pound And at the
years end, they had gained 100 li. I demand how much each of them shall
have of the gain? Answer: forasmuch as the first did put 450 li. the first
of January: his money remained in company 12. months, and therefore multiply
450. by 12 months, and thereof comes 5400. for his new laying in. And the
second laid in his 750 li. but at the first day of May: so that his money
remained in company but 8 months. Therefore multiplye his 750 li. by 8. and
thereof comes 6000 for his new laying in: Then add 5400. with 6000. and they
make 11400 for your common divisor: Then multiply 100 li. which is the gaynes
by 5400, and divide the product by 11400. and thereof comes 48 li. 7/19 for
the first man's part of the gain. Likewise multiplye 100. by 6000, and divide
the producte by 11400. and you shall find 52 12/19 and so much must the second
man have for his part of the gain.

2. Two marchaunts have companied together, the first has put in the first of
January 640. li. The second can lay in nothing until the first of April. I
demand how much he shall then lay in, to the end that he may take half
the gaynes? Answer, Multiply 640 li. by 12. months that his money abides in
the company, and thereof comes 7680 li. for his laying in. And so much
ought the second man's laying in to be, for because he takes of the gain:
But for that, that he puts in nothing until the first of April, his money
can be in company no longer than 9 months. And therefore divide 8680 by 9,
and thereof comes 753 li. So much ought the second merchant to lay in the
first of April, to the end that he may take the one moyty of the gaynes.

3. Three Merchants have companied together, the first laid in the first
of March 100 li. The second laid in ye first of June so much money, that of
the gain, he must have the part: and the third laid in ye first of
November so much money, that of the gains he must have likewise and they
continued in company, until ye next March following. I demand how much the
second and the third Marchaunts did lay in? Answer, Multiply 100. which the
first man did lay in, by 12. months that his money continued in company,
and thereof comes 1200. for his laying in: and so much ought the second and
the third merchant each of them to lay in: Because they part the gaynes by
thyrdes. But for that, that the second Merchant puts in nothing till the
first of June, his money can be in company but nine months. Therefore
divide 1200. by nine months, and thereof comes 133.. And so much ought the
second Merchant to lay in: Then, forasmuch as the third Merchant, did lay
in nothing until the first of November: His money abides in company but the
space of four months. Therefore divide 1200. by 4. and thereof comes three
hundred pound. And so much ought the third merchant to lay into company.

4. Three merchants have companied together, the first laid in the first of
January a hundred Duckettes. The second has laid in fyftie pound, the
first of March: And the third put in a Jewel the first of Iulye: And at
the years end, they had gained four hundred crowns: of the which, the
first merchant must have fifty crowns, and the second must have 80. I
demand what ye Ducket was worth, and at what price the Jewel was valued,
which the third Merchant laid in?

Answer: the first man's money is 1200 as before is said, and he takes 50
crowns of the gain: therefore say, if fifty crowns of gain be come of 1200,
which was his stock, of how much shall come 80. crowns of gain that the
second man takes? multiplye and divide, and you shall find 1920. for the
second marchaunts laying in. Then say again, if 50 crowns be come of 1200.
stock: of how much shall come 270. crowns, which the third man takes of the
gain? Multiply and divide, and you shall find 6480. for the third merchants
laying in. Then divide 1920, which is the second man's laying in, by 10.
months that his money did continue in company, and you shall find 192
Ducats, which are worth 50. li. because he laid in 50 li. Then divide 192
Ducats by the said 50. li. (being reduced into shillinges) and thereof
comes 5. shillings 2. pence,. So much was the Ducket worth: Finallye, divide
6480. (which is the third man's laying in) by 6. months that his Jewel
remained in company, and you shall find 1080 Ducats: and for that price was
ye Jewel put into company.

5. Three Merchants have companied together: the first laid in the first of
January 100 li. and the first of April he has taken back again 20. li. The
second has laid in the first of March 60 li. and afterward he did put in
more 100 li. the first of August. The third laid in the first of July 150 li.
And the first of October he did take back again 50 li. And at the years end,
they found that they had gained 160 li. I demand how much every man shall
have? Answer, Multiply 100 li. which the first man laid, by 12 months, and
thereof comes 1200. li. from that number abate 9 times 20 which are 180. and
there will remain 1020. for the first man's laying in. The^ multiply 60. which
the second man laid in, by ten and you shall have 600. unto the which add 5.
times one hundred, which are 500. so all amounts to 1100. for the second man's
laying in: Afterward, multiply 150. pound, which the third man has laid
in, by 6. months, and thereof comes 900. from ye which number abate three
times 50. and they are 150: so there rests 750. for the third man's laying
in. Then proceed with the rest, as in the first Question of the rule of
fellowship with time, in adding 1020, 1100. and 750. altogether, which shall be
your Divisor: Then multiply 160 by 1020. by 1100. and by 750, and divide at
every time by your Divisor, which is by all their layings in added together,
and they make 2870, so you shall find 56. 248/287: for the first man, 61.
93/287 for the second, and 41. 233/287 for the third man.

6. Two Marchaunts have companied together, the first has put in 960. pound,
for the space of 12. months, and he ought to have 8. pound upon the hundred
pound of ye gain. The second has laid in 1120. li. for ye space of eight
months, and he ought to have after 12. pound upon the 100. pound of the
gain.

And at the years end, they have gained eight hundred pound. I demand how
much each of them shall have of the gain. Answer, multiply 960. that the
first man did lay in, by 12. months, and the product thereof, multiply
again by 8. and you shall have 92160. for the first man's laying in: then
multiplye the 1120. that the second has laid in by eight months, and that
which comes thereof you shall multiply again by 12. and you shall find
107520. for the second man's laying in: Then proceed with the rest, as in the
first Question of the Rule of Fellowship, and as in the last Exaumple, and
you shall find 399 3/13 for the first man: and 430. li. 10/13 for the second
man.

The rule of company, between Marchaunts and their Factours.
7. The estimation of the body or person of a Factour, is in such proportion
to the stock, which the Merchant lays in: as the gain of the said Factour
is unto the gain of the said Merchant. As thus: if a Merchant do put into
the hands of his Factour 200 li. to employe, and he to have half the profit,
the person of the said Factour shall be esteemed 200 li, And if the Factour do
take but the of the gain, he should have but so much of the gain as the
Merchant takes, which should take wherefore the person of the Factour is
esteemed but the of that which the Merchant lays in, that is to say 100 li.

And if the Factour did take the of the gain, then the Merchant shall take
the residue, which are of ye gain wherefore the gain of the Master unto that
of the Factoure is in such proportion as 3 unto 2. Then if you will know the
estimation of the person of the Factour, say if 3 give me 2 what will 200 give?
Multiply 200 by 2 and divide by 3 so you shall find 133 Otherwise, consider
that the Factoure takes the of that which the Marchaunte takes. And
therefore take the of 200, and you shall find 133 as before: and so much is
the person of the Factoure esteemed to be worth.

8. And if the Merchant should deliver unto his Factoure 200. li. and the
Factour would lay in 40 li. and his person, to the end he might have the
half of the gain: I demand for how much shall his person be esteemed Ans. abate
40 li. from 200 li. and there will remain 160. li. And at so much shall his
person be esteemed.

And if the factour would take the of the gain, his person with his 40
pound, shall be esteemed twice as much as the stock that the merchant lays
in, which should have but of the gain: for unto, is in double proportion.
Therefore double two hundred pound, thereof comes 400. li. from the which
abate 40. li. and there will remain 360. li. And if the Factour would take but
the of ye gain, that shall be but the of which the merchant takes: then the
estimation of his person, with his laying in should be esteemed but the half of
ye which the merchant lays in: take therefore the of 200. li. which is 100.
li. from the which abate forty pound, and the rest which is 60. li. is the
estimation of his person.

9. If it so chance that for to make traffic of 240. li. the person of ye
factour should be so esteemed, yt he should have but the of the gain, and yet
he would have the, I demand how much he should put in of ready money,
besides his person? Answer, seeing that his person gains the, all the whole
laying in, shall gain the rest that is to say the: now for because is the of
therefore his person shall be esteemed the of all the laying in. Take then the of
240. and you shall have 80. for the estimation of his person, and for that,
that he will have the half of ye gain, you shall add 80. with 240. li. and
thereof comes 320. of the which take the half, which is 160. and from the
same you shall abate the 80. and there will remain other 80. which he ought to
lay in of ready money, and the merchant must lay in the overplus, which
amounts to 160. li.

10. A merchant has delivered to his Factour 1200. li. to govern them in the
trade of Marcha^dise upon such condition that he for his service shall have the
of ye gain if any thing be gained, or of the loss if any thing be lost: I
demand for how much his person was esteemed? Answer, seeing that the Factoure
takes the of the gain, his person ought to be esteemed as much as of the
stock which the Marchaunte lays in, that is to say the of 1200 li. which is
600 li. The reason is, because the of the gain that the Factoure takes, is
the of the of the gain that the Merchant takes.

11. A Merchant has delivered unto his Factour 1200 li. and ye Factour lays
in 500 li. and his person: Now, because he lays in 500 li. and his person,
it is agreed between them that he shall take the of ye gayn: I demand for how
much his person was esteemed? Answer, Forasmuch as the Factour takes the of
the gain, he takes the of that which ye Marcha^t takes, for are the of: and
therefore the Factours laying in ought to be 800. pound, which is the of 1200.
pound, that the merchant laid in: Then abate 500. pound, which the Factour
did lay in, from 800. pound, which should be his whole stock and there
remains three hundred pound for the estimation of his person.

12. More, a merchant has delivered unto his factour a thousand pound upon
such condition, that the Factour for his pains and service, shall have the
gains of 200. pound, as though he laid so much in of ready money: I demand
what portion of ye gain, the said Factour shall take? Answer: See what part
the 200. li. (which the Factour laid in) is of 1200. which is the whole stock
of their company, and you shall find that it is the, and such part of the
gain shall the Factour take.

But in case, that in making the couenauntes, it were agreed that the Factour
should have the gain of two hundred pound of ye stock, which the merchant
lays in, that is to say, of the thousand pound. Then should ye Factour take
the part of ye gain. For 200. li. is the of a 1000. pound.

The xj. Chapter treats of the Rules of barter.
Answer, say, if 7. 1/12 (which is ye price yt the yard of cloth is worth in
ready money) be sold in barter for 8. for what shall 4.7/12 be sold in barter
which 4. 7/12, is the price yt the li. of Synamon is worth in ready money,
reduce the whole numbers into their broken, and then multiply and divide, and
you shall find 5.s. 4.d. 12/17 parts, of a penny, and for so much shall he sell
the pound of Synamon in barter.

2. Two Marchaunts will change their marchaundise the one with the other, the
one of them has Chaumlets of two pound 18.s. 4.d. the piece to sell for ready
money, and in barter he will sell the piece for 4. li. 3.s. 4.d. the other has
fine capps of 35.s. 10.d. ye dossen to sell in barter. I demand what ye dossen
of caps did cost in ready money? Answer, say if 4. li. 3.s. 4.d. which is the
ouerprice of the piece of Chamlet, become of 2. li. 18.s. 4.d. which was the
just price of the same, of what shall come 35.s. 10.d. which is the ouerprice
of the dossen of cappes? Multiply and divide, and you shall find 25.s. 1.d.
and so much are the dossen of capps worth in ready money.

3. Two Marchaunts will change their marchaundise the one with the other: ye
one of them has Fustians of 18.s. 4.d. the piece to sell for ready money, and
in barter he will sell the piece for 26.s. 8.d. The other has tapistry of
15.d. the ell to sell for ready money, and in barter he will sell it for
20.d. the ell: I demand which of them gains, and how much upon the hundred
pound of money?

Answer: say if 18.s. (which is the just price of the piece of Fustian) be
sold in barter for 26.s.: for how much shall 1.s. (which is the just price
of the ell of tapistry) be sold in barter? Multiply and divide, and you shall
find 21.d. 9/11. And he does ouersel it but for 20.d. so that of 21.d. 9/11:
he makes but 20.d. And therefore say by the rule of three, if the second
merchant, of 21 9/11, do make but 20/1 how much shall he lose upon the 100/1?
Multiply and divide, and you shall find 91., ye which being abated from a
hundred there will remain 8.. And after ye rate of 8.. does ye second marcha^t
lose upon ye 100. And consequently, the first merchant, of 20.d. makes 21.d.
9/11: and therefore say again by ye rule of three, if the first merchant of
20/11, do make 21.9/11 how much shall he gain upon 100/1? Multiply and
divide, and you shall find 109. li. 1/11.

Thus the first gains after the rate of 9. li. 1/11: upon the hundred pound
of money.

For your better understanding of these Questions, you must note that when one
merchant gains of an other after the rate of ten pound upon ye hundred pound
he gains the 1/10 of his own principal, and the other which loses after
the rate of 9. 1/11 upon the hundred he loses the 1/11 of his principal. And
it may be proved thus: When one merchant will sell his wares unto another,
which wares stand him but in 100. li. and he will sell them for 110. li. he,
of his 100. li. makes 110. li. wherefore he gains after 10. li. upon the
100. which is the 1/10 of his principal, and the other which byeth wares for
110. li. that cost but 110. pound of the 110. pound he makes but 100. li. And
therefore say by the rule of three, if 110. become of 100. of how much shall
come 100? Multiply and divide, and you shall find 90.10/11, the which abate
from 100: and there rests 9.1/11 is the 1/11 of his principal that the
second loses upon the 100. as before is said. And therefore, who so that will
know what one Marcha^t gains of another, either after the rate of ten upon
the hundred, which is the 1/10 of of his principal, or else after the rate of
twenty upon the hundred which is the, or of any other part, and that he would
likewise know what part the other loses of his principal: he must take for
the numeratour of the broken number of him that loses, as much as for him that
gains, the^ add the numerator and the denominator (of the broken number of
him that gains) both together, and make thereof the denominator of the broken
number of him yt loses, and then shall you have the part of him that loses,
as by exaumple, of him that gayneth after ten. li. upon the 100. li. which is
the 1/10 of his principal: take the numeratour which is 1. and make that the
numerator of the broken number of him that loses, then add 1. which is ye
numerator of the fraction of him that gains with ten, which is his
denominator, and you shall have 11. for the denominatour of the fraction of him
that loses. Then put one over the 11. and so you shall have 1/11. Thus it
appears when one merchant gains of another after ten upon the hundred, he
gains the 1/10 of his principal, and the other loses 9. 1/11 which is the
1/11 of his principal. And if he would gain after 20. upon the hundred which
is the of his principal, the other should lose 16. which is the of his
principal, and so is to be understand of all other fractions.

4. Two marchaunts will change their marchaundise the one with the other, the
one of them has Seies of 20.s. and 10.d. the piece, to sell for ready money,
and in barter he will sell the piece for 23.s. 4.d. and yet he will gain
moreover after ten pound upon the hundred pound. The other has woll of 50.s.
the hundred to sell for ready money. I demand how he shall sell the C. of
woll in barter? Answer, say if 20.s. 10.d. which is the just price of the
piece of Sey, be sold in barter for 23.s. 4.d. for how much shall 50.s. (which
is ye just price of ye C. of woll) be sold in barter? Multiply and divide,
and you shall find 56.s. The^ for because the first merchant gains after 10.
li. upon the C. li. he makes of his C. li. 10. li. and consequently the
second merchant makes of 110. li. but 100. li. And therefore say, if the
second merchant of 110. do make but 100. how much shall he make of 56:
Multiply and divide, and you shall find 50.s. 10.d. 10/11 of a penny, and for so
much shall he sell ye hundred of woll in barter.

5. More, two Merchants will change their marchaundise, the one with the
other, the one of them has Taffeta, of 16. crowns the piece to sell for ready
money, and in barter he will sell the piece for twenty crowns, and yet he will
gain moreover after ten pound, upon the hundred pound. The other has ginger
of 3.s. 9.d. the pound weight, to sell in barter. I demand what the pound
did cost in ready money? Answer: say if twenty crowns which is the
surprice of the piece of Taffata, become of 16. crowns the just price, of how
much shall come. 3.s. 9.d. which is the price of the ouerselling the pound of
Ginger? Multiply and divide, and you shall find 3.s. Then, for because that
the Merchant of Taffeta will gain after the rate of ten upon the hundred: say
if 100. do give 110. what shall 3.s. give? Multiplye and divide, and you shall
find 3.s. 3.d. and so much did the pound of Gynger cost in ready money.

6. More, two marchaunts will change their marchaundise the one with the
other, the one of them has Worsteds of 25.s. the piece to sell for ready
money, and in barter, he will sell the piece for 33.s. 4.d. and yet he loses
after ten upon the hundred: the other has wax of 3. li. 6.s. 8.d. the hundred
to sell for ready money. I would know how he should sell his wax in barter?
Answer: say if 25.s. which is the just price of the piece of Worsted be
sold in barter for 33.s. 4.d. for how much shall three pound 6.s. 8.d. be
sold, which is the just price of the hundred of wax. Multiply and divide,
and you shall find 4. li. 4/9 which is 8.s. ten pence, then for because that
the Merchant of Worsteds, loses after ten upon the hundred: Of a hundred he
makes but 90. And therefore, say: If 90. give 100. what gives 4. pound.
4/9? Multiply and divide, and you shall find 4. 76/81 which is worth 18.s.
9.d. 5/27, and for so much shall he sell ye 100. of Ware in barter.

7. More, two Marchaunts will change their marchaundise the one with the
other, the one of them has Worsteds of 5. pound 6. shillinges, eight pence
the piece to sell for ready money, and in barter he will sell the piece for 6.
pound, 13. shillings. 4.d. and yet he loses after ten upon the hundred, and
the other has Musk of two shillings, nine pence, the pound weight, to sell in
barter? I demand what the pound did cost in ready money? Answer: say if 6.
pound. which is the ouerprice of the piece of Worsted, become of 5. pound,
which is ye just price of the same, of how much shall come two shillings 9.
pence.. Multiply and divide, and you shall find 2. 2/9 which is 2.d. then for
because yt the merchant of Worsteds loses after ten upon the hundred, of a
hundred he makes but 90. and therefore say if 100. give but 90. how much shall
2.s. 2/9 give? Multiply and divide and you shall find 2.s. and so much cost
the pound of Musk in ready money.

Other Rules of Barter, wherein is given some part in ready money.
WHen a Merchant over sells his marchaundise and he will give also some part
of his ouerprice in ready money as the the or the etc. He must substract the
same part of money from the just price, and also from the over price of his
marchaundise: and the two numbers that remain after the substraction is made,
shall be that two first numbers in the rule of three and the just price of the
second merchant shall be the third, to know how much he shall ouersell the part
of his marchaundise.

8. Two Marchaunts will change their marchaundise the one with the other, the
one of them has fine woll at five pound the hundred, to sell for ready money,
and in barter he will sell it for six pound, and yet he will have ye in ready
money. The other has cloth of 13.s. 4.d. to sell for ready money. I would know
how he shall sell ye same in barter? Answer: take the of 6. li. which is the
ouerprice of the 100. of wolle, and you shall have 2. li. the which abate from
5. li. which is the just price of ye 100. of wolle and from 6. li. which is the
ouerprice, and there shall rest 3. li. and 4. li. for the two first numbers in
the rule of three, the^ take 13.s. 4.d. which is the just price of a yard of
cloth for the third number: Then multiply and divide and you shall find 17.s.
9.d.: for so much shall the second sell his cloth in barter.

9. More, two Merchants will change their marchaundise the one with the
other, the one of them has wax of three pound 6.s. 8.d. the C. to sell for
ready money, and in barter he will sell the same for 4. li. 3.s. 4.d. and yet
he will have the in ready money: and the other has fine Crimson sattine of
15.s. the yard to sell in barter. I demand what it is worth in ready money.
Answer, Take the of 4. li. 3.s. 4.d. and abate it from 4. li. 3.s.4.d. and
from three pound 6.s. 8. pence, and there rests 3. li. 2.s.6.d. and 2. li.
5.s. 10.d. for the two first numbers in the rule of three, and 15.s. for ye
third number which is the ouerprice of the yard of sattine. Then multiply and
divide, and you shall find 11.s. And so much did the yard of Sattine cost in
ready money.

10. Two Marchaunts will change their marchaundise the one with the other, ye
one of them has tin of 50. shillings the hundred to sell for ready money,
and in barter he will sell it for three pound 6.s. 8.d. and he will gain
after ten upon the hundred, and yet he will have ye one half in ready money:
and the other has lead of 3. halfepence the li. to sell for ready money. I
demand how he shall sell the pound in barter? Answer: See first at ten upon
the hundred, what the three pound will come unto, and you shall find that they
will come to 3. li., which is 13.s. 4.d. of the which, the half which he
demands in ready money, is 36. shillings and 8. pence, the which being
abated from fyftye shillings, and also from three pounds 13. shillings 4.
pence, there shall rest 13. shillings 4. pence, and one pound 16.s. 8.d. for
the two first numbers in the rule of three, which you must put al into
halfepence, and three halfepence for the third number, and the^ multiply and
divide, and you shall find 4.d., and for so much shall he sell ye pound of
lead in barter.

11. More, two merchants will change their marchaundise the one with the
other, the one of them has steel of 16.s.8.d. the hundred weight to sell for
ready money, and in barter he will sell it for 25.s. and yet he loses after
ten upon the hundred, but he will have the in ready money, the other has
iron of 6.s. 8.d. the hundred to sell in barter, I demand what it did cost
in ready money? Answer: say if a hundred come but to 90. how much shall
25.s. come to? Multiply and divide, and you shall find 22.s.6.d. of the which
number, take the which is 11.s. 3.d. and substract it from 22.s.6.d. and from
16.s.8. pe^ce and there shall rest 11.s.3.d. and 5.s.5. pence, for the two
first numbers in ye rule of three, and 6.s. 8.d. which is the ouerprice of a
hundred of iron for the third number, then multiply and divide, and you shall
find 3.s. 2. pe^ce, 14/27: and so much did the hundred of iron cost in ready
money.

12. More, two marchaunts will change their marchaundise, the one with the
other, the one of them has seyes of 20.s. 10.d. ye piece to sell for ready
money, and in barter he will sell the piece for 21.s. and he will have the in
ready money: The other has capps of 35. shillings the dossen to sell for ready
money: but he will gain after ten upon the hundred. I demand how he shall
sell ye same caps in barter? Answer: say if a hundred be worth 110. What
shall 35.s. be worth, which is the just price of the dossen of cappes? Multiply
and divide, and you shall find 38. shillings 6. pence. Then take the of 25.
which is 6.s. 3.d. and substract it from 20.s. 10.d. and from 25.s. and there
shall rest 14.s. 7.d. and 18.s. 9.d. for the two first numbers in the rule of
three, and 38.s 6.d. which is the just price with his gain of the dossen of
cappes, for the third number: then multiply and divide, and you shall find
49.s. 6.d. and for so much he shall sell the dossen of caps in barter.

The 12. Chapter treats of the exchaunging of money from one place to another.
FIrst, you must note, that at Andwerpe they use to make their accomptes by
Deniers de gros, that is to say by pence Flemishe, whereof 12. do make 1.s.
Flemishe, and 20, shillings Flemishe do make 1. li. de gros.

1. If I deliver in Flaunders, 500. li. Flemishe, at 19.s.6. de gros that is to
say at 19.s. 6.d. Flemishe, to receive 20.s. at London, I demand how much I
shall receive sterling at London for the said 5. hundred pound Flemishe?
Answer,: Say, if 19 give 20/1, what will 500/1 give? Multiply and divide, and
you shall find 512. li.16.s. 4. pence 12/13 of a pennye. And so much sterling
shall I receive in London for my 500. li. Flemishe.

2. If I deliver in London 375. li.sterling, to receive in Andwerp 21.s.9.d. de
gros, that is to say Flemishe, for every pound sterling. I demand how many
pounds Flemish I shall receive in Andwerpe, for the said 375. li. sterling?
Answer, say if 20/1 give 21.: what will 375/1 give? Multiply and divide, and
you shall find 407. li. So many pou^ds Flemish shall I receive for the said
375. li. ster. in Andwerpe.

3. If I take up money at Andwerp after 19.s. 6.d. flemishe to pay for the same
at London 20.s. ster. and when the day of payment is come, I am forced to
rechau^ge the same, and to take up money again here in London to repaye the
same, so that for twentye shillings, which I take up here, I must repay, 19.
shillings 9 d. at Andwerpe. I demand whether I do win or lose, and how
much upon ye 100. li. of money? Answer, Say. if 19. 3/4 give 19., what will
100/1 give?

Multiply and divide, and you shall find 98. 58/79, the which being abated
from a hundred there will remain 1. 21/79. And so much do I lose upon the 100.
pound of money.

4. If I take up at London 20. shill. sterling to pay at. Andwerpe 21. s. 8. d.
Flemishe, and when the day of payment is come. I am constrained to take up
money again at Andwerpe wherewith to repay the foresaid sum: and there I do
receive 22. shillings. Flemishe to pay 20. shill. at London. Now I demand
whether I do win or lose and how much upon the 100. li. of money after the
rate? Answer, say if 21. give 22/1. What will 1000/1 give? Multiply and divide,
and you shall find 101. 7/13, from the which abate 100. and there will remain
1. 7/13, and so much shall I gain upon the 100. li. of money.

The exchange from London into France, is not like as it is into Flaunders
but is delivered by the French crown, which is worth 50. souse Tournois the
piece.

And here must you note that in France they make their account by Deniers
Tournois, whereof 12. makes one souse Tournois, and 20. sou. Tournois makes 1.
li. Tournois, which they call a Liver, and ye French Crown is current among
Marchaunts for 51. souse Tournois, but by exchange it is otherwise, for they
will deliver but 50. sou. Tourneys, which is. 2. li. 10. sou. Tournois for a
crown, or at such price as the takers up of money can agree with the
deliverer. As by Example.

5. If I deliver 340. li. ster. here in London after 6. s. 4. d. sterling the
crown, to receive at Roan, or at Parris 50. sou. Tournois for every crown, I
would know how many Livers Tournois I shall receive there for my 340. li.
ster. Answer: say if 6. s. do give me 2. li.. Tour. what will 6800/1 shil.
give (which is the 340. li. reduced into shillings) multiplye and divide, and
you shall find 2684. Livers 4/19 which is worth 4. s. 4/19 Tournois, and so
much shall I receive in Roan or Parris for my 340. li. sterling.

6. If I deliver in Parris or Roan, or elsewhere in France 1250. Livers
Tournois, at 50. sou. Tournois the crown to receive for every such crown,
6. s. 3. d. sterling at London. I demand how much sterling money I shall
receive at London for my 1250. pound Tournois. Answer: say, if two pound, do
give me 6. shil., what will 1250/1 give? Multiplye and divide, and you shall
find 3125. shil. sterling, which makes 156. pound, 5. shillings sterling.
And so many pounds shall I receive at London, for the said 1250. pound
Tournois, after 6. shillings three pence for every crown.

The 13. Chapter treats of the Rule of Alligation.
THe Rule of Alligation is so named, for that it teaches to alligate or bind
together diverse percelles of sundry prices, and to know how much you must
take of every percell, according to the numbers of the Question.

Example.
1. A Goldsmith has three sorts of Gold. The first is worth thirtye Crowns
the pound weight: The second is worth 36. Crowns. And the third is worth
45. crowns, and of these three sorts he will make a Scepter of six pound
weight, which shall be worth fourtye Crowns the pound. I demand how much
he must take of every sort?

Answer: first you must set down the numbers whereof you shall make ye
Alligation (which are 30.36.38. and 45. orderly the one under the other, as if
you should make of them an addition: and the common number whereunto you will
reduce them, shall you set on the left hand, which common number in this
example is 40. Then mark what sums be lesser than that common number, and
which be greater, and with a draught of your pen, evermore lynke two numbers
together, so that the one be lesser tha^ that common number, and the other
greater than he. For two greater nor two smaller numbers may not be lynked
together, for they will either be lesser, or else greater than the common
number: but one greater number, and one smaller may be so mixed, yt they will
make the common number. And two greater or two smaller numbers, can never make
the common number in due order, as hereafter shall appear.

After that you have thus lynked them, then mark how much each of the lesser
numbers is smaller than the common number, and that difference shall you set
against the greater numbers, which be linked with those smaller, each of them
with his match still on the right hand. And likewise you must set the excess
of the greater numbers against the lesser which be combined with them. Then
shall you add all those differences into one sum, which shall be the first
number in the rule of three, and the second number shall be ye whole massye piece
that you will have of all the perticulers, the third sum shall be each
difference by it self, and by the^ shall you find out the fourth number,
declaring the just portion of every particular in that mixture, as now by the
former exaumple, I will make it plain.

The prices several. The differences. The common price or number. 40 30 5. A
36 2. B 42 4. C 45 10 D 21.

21..6..5. 21..6..2. 21..6..4. 21..6..10.

Here in this former example, you see that I have set down the several prices,
which be 30.36.42.45. and have linked together 30. with 45. and 36. with 42.
The common price 40. I have set on ye left side, and the difference of it from
every several price, I have set on the right hand, against that sum with
the which it is lynked. So the difference of 30. from forty is ten, which I
set against 45. that he is lynked with all, and the difference of 45. about 40
is 5. which I have set against. 30. So likewise, the difference of 42. above
40. is 2. that I have set against 36. And the difference between 36. and 40.
(which is 4.) I have set against 42. Then I add all those differences
together and they make 21. which I make the first number in the Rule of three,
and six the second number, which is the weight of the Scepter of Gold, and
the third number shall be every particulers difference. Then I work by the
Rule of three: saying if twenty and one (which is the differences added
together) do give me syx pound, which ts the weight of the Scepter, what shall
five give, which is the first difference?

Multiplye and divide, and you shall find one pound 3/7: so much must I have
of the first price.

Then do likewise with the rest and you shall find 4/7 of the second price,
one pound, 1/7 of the third price, and 2. li. 6/7 of the fourth, the which
four sums being added together, do make 6. li. which is the total that I
would have. And now to prove if the pryces do agree, you shall do thus: First
multiply this total sum 6. by the common price 40. and it will make 240.
crowns, which you shall keep by it self. And afterward multiply every
several sum of weight by the price belonging to the same weight, and if that
sum do agree with the first that you kept by it self, then is your work well
done, as here one pound, 3/7 is the weight of ye sort of gold which is of 30.
crowns price. Then multiplye 30. by 1. li. 3/7, and it makes 42. crowns 6/7,
which you shall set down. Then multiplye 4/7 (which is the wayght of the
second sort of gold) by 36. which is ye price of ye same and thereof comes
20. crowns 4/7: so again 1. li. 1/7 multiplied by 42. does make 48. crowns.
And last of al 2. li. 6/7 multiplied by 45. makes 128. crowns 4/7. All these
added together does make 240. crowns, agreeable to the former sum of 40.
multiplied by 6 And thus I may affirm that this work is well done.

2. A Tauerner has four sorts of wine, of four several prices, the first
of eight pence the Gallonde, the second of ten pence the gallonde, the third
of 15. pence and the fourth of 18. pe^ce. And he will mingle one punchen with
all these sorts, so that the Gallonde shall be worth but twelve pence. I
demand how many Gallondes he must take of every sort? Answer: First
suppose the punchen to hold some certain measure, as to contain 84. gallonds
and then the form will be after this sort, as you see hereafter following.

12 8 3 10 6 15 4 18 2 15

If 15. do give 18.

What will. 3. They make 16 of the first. What will. 6. 33 of the second What
will. 4. 22 of the third. What will. 2. 11 of the fourth 84

The 14. chapter treats of the Rule of falsehode, or false positions.
THe rule of falsehode is so named, not for that it teaches any deceit or
falsehode, but yt by fained numbers taken at al adue^tures, it teaches to
find out the true number yt is demanded. And this (of all the vulgar Rules
which are in practice) is the most excellent: this rule has two parts ye one
is of one false position alone: ye other is of two positio^s as hereafter shall
appear

Those questions which are done by false positions, have their operations, in a
manner like unto that of the rule of three, but only that in the rule of three,
we have three numbers known, and here in this rule we have but one (I mean
that comes in operation) unto the likeness whereof we must divise two other,
the one multiplying, and the other dividing, as by example.

1. I have delivered to a banker a certain sum of pounds in money, to have
of him by the year 6. li. upon the 100. li. And at the end of 10. years, he
paid me 500. li. for all both principal and gain. I demand how much was the
principal sum that I delivered at the first. Here you see that there are
diverse terms: but the chief to work with all is 500. pound which comes of
the other numbers, that is to say, of 10. and 100. for of them is compounde
the tenor of the question, the practice whereof is thus.

Let us feign a number at pleasure, and with the same let us make our
discourse, even as though it were the principal sum that we seek for. As
by Example. Suppose that I delivered him at ye first 200. li. the which were
worth to me in ten years. 120. li. after the rate of 6. li. upon the hundred
pound. The^ 120. li. added with 200. li. Do make but 320. li. and I must have
500. pound. Thus you see that I have three terms for the rule of three: the
one which shall contain the Question the other two, which I have formed
artificially, which are 200. and 320: in such sort, that 320. ought to have
such proportion to 200, as 500. has unto ye number that I seek: that is to
say, unto the true principal sum, then must I have recourse unto the rule
of three, after this sort, saying.

If 320. li. become of 200. li. of how much shall come 500. li. Multiply 500.
by 200. and they are 100000. the which you shall divide by 320. li. and thereof
comes 312. li. which is ye sum that I deliver at the first. And thus, this
rule has some congruence with the double rule of three.

2. I have a Cesterne with 3. vnegal cocks containing 60. pipes of water: And
if the greatest cock be opened, the water will avoid clean in one hour, at
the second it will avoid in two hours, and at the third it will require
three hours. Now I demand in what space will it avoid, all the cocks being
set open. Suppose that it will avoid in half an hour, that is to say, in 30.
minutes. Then must there avoid at the first cock the, which is thirtye
pipes, and by the second cock the which is 15, pipes, and by the third
cock the, that is ten pypes, all the which sums being added together do
make 55. pipes, but it should be 60. pipes. Therefore I say by the rule of
three, if 55. pipes do void in 30. minutes: in how many minutes will 60. pipes
void? Multiply and divide, and you shall find 32. minutes 40/55. And in that
space will the water avoid if all the cocks be set open.

Of the Rule of two false positions.
A Rule.
THe su^me of this Rule of two false positions is thus, when any question is
proponed appertaining to this rule. First imagine any number at your pleasure,
which you shall name the first positio^, and with the same shall you work instead of the true number, as ye question does import, and if you see yt you
have missed. Then is the last number of ye work either to great or to little,
that shall you note for to be ye first error, in the which you have missed with
ye sign of more, or less, which signs shall be noted with these figures, 4:
--. This figure 4: betokens more, and this plain line -- signifies less,
that is to say the one signifies to much, and the other to little: the^ begin
again, and take another number, which shall be the second position, and work
by the question as before, if you have missed again, note the excess or want,
for that is the second error. The^ shall you multiply the first position by
the second error crossewise, and again the second positio^ by the first
error (and this must always be observed) and keep the two products: then if
the signs be both like, yt is to say, either both to much, or both to little,
abate the lesser product from the greater, and likewise, you shall substract
the lesser error from ye greater, and by ye remain of those errors, you
shall divide the residue of ye products: the quotie^t shall be the true number
that you seek for. But if the two signs be unlike, yt is to say the one to
much and the other to little, the^ shall you add those productes together so
shall you also add both the errors together, and by ye sum of those
errors, divide the total su^me of both the products: the quotient shall be
likewise the true number that the question seeks, and this is the whole rule,
as by exaumple.

3. A man lying at the point of death, said that he had in a certain Coffer
a hundred Ducats, the which he bequeathed to three of his friends by him
named, after this sort. The first must have a certain portion, the second
must have twice so many as ye first abating eight Ducats: and ye third must
have three times so many as the first, less by 15. Ducats. Now I demand how
many every of them must have. Answer: First I do imagine that the first man
had 30. Ducats, then by the order of ye question the second should have 52:
and the third 75. These three su^mes being added together do make 157: and I
should have but 100: so that this first error is to much by 57. then I note a
part the first position 30. with his error 57. to much after this sort
30.457. Therefore I prosecute my work and I suppose that the first had 24.
then by the order of the question, the second should have 40. and ye third 57:
these three sums being added together, do make 121. and I must have but 100.
so the second error is to much by 21. Therefore I note 24.421. under the
30.457. as you may se in the marge^t of the next side following.

Then I multiplye crossewayes, 30. (which is ye first position) by twelve which
is the second error, and thereof comes 630. likewise I multiplye twenty and
4. (which is the second position) by 57. which is the first error, and I
find 1368: then because the signs of the errors are both like: that is to
say to much, I must therefore substract 630. from 1368. and there will remain
738 which is the diuidende: again I must substract the lesser error from ye
greater, that is to wit, 21. out of 57. and there will remain 36. which shall
be my divisor. This done I divide 738. by 36. and the quotient will be 20..
The which 20. is the just number of the Ducats that the first man had for his
part, so consequently the second man had 33. Ducats, and the third 46., as
by proof in the margent, may appear. ^ 11. 738. 20 366. (20. 33 3 46. 100.

The like number will also appear, in case the errors were both to little, as
in making the two positions by 18. and 20. where you shall find the two
errors both to little, the first will be to little by 15. and the second to
little by 3. as by perusing this work in the margent you shall well perceive. ^

Again if one of the errors were to much, and the other to little, yet shall
I have the true number, as before: As if the two positions were 24. and 20. I
shall find that the first error will be 21. to much, and the second will be
three to little: Therefore I multiply 24. by 3. crossewaies, thereof comes 72.

Likewise I multiplye twentye by 21. the product will be 420: These two sums
72. and 420, I add both together because ye signs of the errors be unlike,
and they make 492. the which shall be my diuidende, and again, I add the the
lesser error 3. with the greater error 21. and they make 24. for my divisor,
the^ dividing 492 by 24. the quotient will be 20: as in the margent does plainly
appear. ^

And now because you shall not forget this part of the rule, learn this brief
remembrance following.

The signs both like substractio^ do require.
And unlike signs addition will desire.
The meaning whereof is thus if both the errors have like signs, the^ must
the diuidende and the divisor be made by substraction, as is taught before, and
if those signs be unlike, then must I by addition gather the diuidende, and
the divisor, as I have done in this last example.

4. A man has two silver cups of unequal weight, having to them both, but
one cover, the weight whereof is 5. ounces, if the cover be put to the lesser
cup, it will be in double proportion unto the weight of the greater, and the
cover being put to the greater cup, will be in triple proportion, unto the
weight of the lesser. I demand what was the weight of every cup?

Suppose that the lesser cup did wayghe seven ounces, then with the cover it
must weigh twelve, and this weight should be in double proportion unto the
greater, therefore the greater must waygh six ounces add unto it 5. ounces
for ye cover, all will be 11. ounces, but it should be 21. for to have it in
triple proportion, unto 7. which represents the weight of the lesser cup:
So that this first error is to little by 10. which you shall note after 7. in
this sort 7. -- 10. ^

After you shall suppose some other number, as 9. and make the like work as
before, so shall you find 15. to little, for ye second error, which you shall
put behind 9. and then work with the rest as above is said, and you shall
find that the lesser cup wayed three ounces, and consequentlye the greater
four ounces.

5. One man demanded of another in a morning what a clock it was, the other
made him this answer, if you do add (says he) the of the hours which be
paste since midnight, with the of the hours which are to come until noone,
you shall have the just hour, that is to say, you shall know what a clock
it was: Suppose yt it was 4. a clock in ye morning, so should there remain
8. until none: then I take the of 4. which is 1. and the of eight which is 5.,
and I add them together, so I find 6. and supposed but 4. therefore this
first error is to much by 2., which I note after my position thus, 4.42.: then
again I suppose anothee number, yt is to say 9. so should remain but 3.
hours until none, I take the of 9. and the of 3. which is 2. and 2. these I
add together and they make 4.: but I supposed yt it was 9. therefore the
second error is 4. to little which I note behind my position thus 9.44..

And then I multiply crossewyse, as before is taught, and because the signs
of the errors are unlike, that is to say, the one to much, and the other to
little, therefore in this work I must add the productes, and they will be
40. Likewise I add the errors, and they be 7.1/12. Then I divide 40. by
7.1/12, and thereof comes 5. hours 11/17, and that hour it was in the
morning. ^

The 15. Chapter treats of sportes, and pastime, done by number.
IF you would know the number that any man does think or imagine in his
mind, as though you could divine.

Bydde him triple the same number, then of the product let him take the, if the
number be even, or else the greater half, if ye same be odd, then bid him
triple again the said: after say to him that put away, if he ca^ 36.27.18. or
9. from the last number being tripled: yt is to say, cause him subtellye to
put away 9. as many times as is possible and keep the number secretly: and
when he can no more take away 9. the^ to know if yt yet there remain any
number, bid him abate 3.2. or one, if he can: this done, see how many times 9.
you have caused him to abate, for the which keep you in mind so many times 2.
and if that you know yt he had any thing remaining beside the nines, the same
shall also note unto you 1.

Suppose that he thought 6. which being tripled is 18. whereof the is 9. the
triple of yt is 27: now cause him to abate 18, or 9. or 27. and again 9: but
then he will say unto you that he cannot, bid him then abate 3. or 2. or 1. he
will say also that he can not: wherefore considering that you have made him to
abate three times 9. justly, you shall tell him that he thought 6. for 3. times
2. makes 6. If he had thought 5. the triple thereof is 15. whereof the greater
is 8. the triple of yt makes 24. which co^teineth two times 9. they are worth
4. and the remain signifies 1. the which added together make 5. which is ye
number that he thought.

2. If in any company, one of them has a ringe upon his finger, and you would
know by manner of deuining, who has the same and upon what finger and what
joint: cause the persons to sit down in order, and keep likewise an order of
their fingers: then separate your self from them in some certain place, and
say unto one of the lookers on, that he double the number (marking the order)
of him yt has ye ring: and unto the double bid him add 5. and then cause him
to multiplye this addition by 5. and unto the product bid him add the number
of the finger of the person which has the ring: be it yt the same last sum
did amou^t to 89. then afterward say to him yt he put after the same last
number toward his right hand a figure signifiyng upon which of the ioints he
has the ring. As if it be upon the third joint, let him put 3. after 89. and
it will be 893: this done, you shall ask him what number he keeps, from the
which you shall abate 250. and you shall have three fygures remaining at the
least. The first toward your left hand shall signifye the number of the
person which has the ring. The second or middle figure shall represent the
number of the finger. And the last figure toward your right hand, shall
betoken the number of the joint. As if the number which he did keep were 893.
from that you shall abate 250. and there will remain 643: Which do note unto
you, that ye syxt person has the ring upon the fourth finger, and upon his
third iointe.

But note yt when you have made your substraction, if there do remain a cipher
in the place of tennes, yt is to say in ye second place, you must then abate
from that figure which is in ye place of hundreds, yt is to say from the figure
which is next your left hand, and yt shall be worth ten tenths, signifiyng the
tenth finger: as if there should remain 703. you must say that the syxt person
(upon his tenth finger and upon his third joint) has the ring.

3. And after the same manner, if a man do cast three dice, you may know the
poinctes of every one of the^, for if you do cause him to double ye poincts of
one die, and unto ye double to add 5. and the same sum to multiply by 5. and
unto ye product add the poincts of one of ye other dice, and behind the
number toward ye right hand, to put ye figure which signifies ye poincts of
the last die, and the^ shall you ask him what number he keeps from ye which
abate 250. and there will remain 3. figures, which do note unto you ye poincts
of every dye.

4. Likewise if 3. of your companions, to say, Peter, James, and John that
would (in your absence) give themself every one a contrary name: as for
example: Peter would be called a king, James a duke, and John a cou^tie: And I
would divine which of them is called a king, which the duke, and which the
county. Take 24. stones, or other pieces whatsoever, and give unto Peter 1.
unto James 2. and unto John 3. or otherwise. But mark well unto which of them
you have given 1, unto which 2, and unto whom 3. Then leaving the 18. stones
(before the^) that are remaining, you shall absent your self from their
sight, or else turn your face from them, saying thus unto them, whosoever
names himself a king: for every stone that I gave him let him take one of the
residue, and he that names himself a duke for every stone that I gave him
let him take 2 of them that remain, and he that calls himself a county, for
every stone that I gave him let him take 4: this being done approach nere them,
and mark how many stones are remaining: and know this, that there can not
remain any other number, but one of these six, 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, for the
which six numbers we have chosen to every of them a several name, which are
these: Angeli, Beati, Qualiter, Messiah, Israel, Pietas: each of them
containing three Vowelles, a, e, i, which do show the names by order: That is
to say, A, 1 2 1 2 3 3 2 1 3 3 1 2 3 3 2 1 2 1 a e a e i i e a i i a e i i e a
e a 1 2 3 5 6 7 A B Q M I P shows which is the king, E, tells which is the
duke and, I, shows which is ye county: in followinge the order how, and to
whom you have given one stone, to which 2, and to which 3. Then if there do
remain but one stone, the first name Angeli, (by these three vowels a, e, i,)
shows that Peter is the king, James the duke, and John the county. And if
there do remain 2 stones, the second name Beati, shall show you by these
three vowels, e, a, i, that Peter is ye Duke, James the King, and John the
county. And so of the other as by this Table does plainly appear.

FINIS.
Here begins the Table of this Book.
The contents of the Chapters of the first part.
THe diffinition of number. fol. 1. Numeration in whole number fol. eodem. Cap.
1. Addition in whole number. Cap. 2. fol. 6. Substraction. ca. 3. fol. 9.
Multiplication. ca. 4. fol. 12. Division. ca. 5. fol. 21. Progression
Arithmetical and Geometrical. ca. 6. fol. 32. The Rule of three called the
Golden rule. And the backer rule, unto all these is added their proofs. ca. 7.
fo. 34
The Contents of the second part.
The first Chapter shows what a fraction or broken number is. fol. 43.
Reduction of fractions. ca. 2. fo. 44. Abbreuiation. ca. 3. fol. 50. Addition
in fractions. ca. 4. fol. 54. Substraction. ca. 5. fol. 58. Multiplication in
fract. ca. 6. fol. 61. Division in broken numb. ca. 7. fo. 64. Duplacion,
Triplacion, and Quadruplacion. ca. 8. fo. 68. All ye proofs of fractions. ca.
9. fol. 69. Questions done by Reductio^, by Addition, Substraction,
Multiplication, and by Division in broken numbers chapter. 10. fol. 71.
The Contents of the third part.
Rules of Practice called brief rules. chap. 1. fol. 79. Rules of three
compounde, being 4. in number. ca. 2. fol. 99. Questions of the trade of
Merchandise. ca. 3. fol. 101. Questions of loss and gain in the trade of
merchandise. ca. 4. fo. 108. Questions of diverse breadthes and lengthes of
tapistries. ca. 5. fol. 113. Questions of the reducing of paumes of Genes into
yardes. ca. 6. fo. 115. Questions of marchaundise sold by weight, with brief
rules for ye same. chapter. 7. fol. 116. Questions of Tares and allowaunces.
ca. 8. fol. 119. ^^^stions done by the double rule of (...) ca. 9. fo. 22.
Questions (...) Rule of felow^hip. chap. 10. fol. 124. Questions of bartering.
ca. 11. fol. 138. Questions of the exchaunges* chapter 12. ^^l. 146. Questions
of the Rule of Alligation. chapter. 13. fo. 146. Questions of the Rule of
falsehode. chapter. 14. fol. 152. Questions of sport and pastime, done by
number.
Finis.

