THE PROPHECY of Agabus, concerning a general Famine to come upon the world:
Together with a benevolence for the most distressed: set out by Peter Barker
Minister at Stoure-paine.

Luke 15. 17. How many hired servants in my Fathers house have bread enough,
and I die for hunger.



LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed. 1597.

THE PROPHECY OF Agabus, concerning a general famine to come upon the world,
togi^her with a beneuo^ence for the most distressed.
Act 11. 27. In those days also came Prophe^^ from Jerusalem unto Antioch.

28 And there stood up one of them named Agabus, and signified by the spirit,
that there should be great famine throughout the world, which also came to
pass under Claudius Caesar.

29 Then the Disciples every man according to his ability, purposed to send
succor unto the brethren which dwelt in Judea.

30 Which thing they also did, and sent it to the Elders by the hands of
Barnabas and Saul.

THe Arc of Noah, Ge. 7. 9. was a figure of the church, where into Jews and
Gentiles, clean and unclean should one day be gathered. Jerusalem is walled
about, Psalm. 122. 7. and there the Church of God is enclosed. But Zac. 2. 4,
Jerusalem shall be inhabited without walls. There it is laid common as dispersed
far and nigh over the face of the earth. Two commissions are given to the
Apostles, the former with limitation. Matt. 10. 5 Go not into the way of the
Gentiles, and into the Cities of the Samaritans enter ye not. The latter was
without restraint. Mat. 28. 19. Go and teach all Nations. In the first the
partition wall stands up: In the second that partition wall is broken down.
Ephe. 2. 14. Mat. 22. 2. The kingdom of Heaven is like unto a certain king
which married his son. The feast is made unto all people. Esaias 25. 2.
Therefore both Jews and Gentiles are bidden to it. Mat. 22. They that dwell a
far of shall come and sit do^ne. Mat. 8. 11. The poor and the rich shall
eat and be satisfied. Psalm. 22. 26. 29. May eat and drink cheap enough.
Esaias. 55. 7. But though there be no difference between the clean and
unclean. For Peter in the Chapter before, Acts 10. falling into a trance, and
seeing both sorts come down to him in a vessel, hears a voice, Arise Peter
kill and eat: though the stewardes and commissioners of the high God, might
distribute the food of the soul, and make all nations without stop partakers
of it. And therefore Barnabas and Saul come unto Antiochia in the verse
before, and certain Prophets also came from Jerusalem unto Antiochia, though
(I say) the famine of the bread of life should last no longer, the date was out,
and the handwriting cancelled, yet Agabus in this place tells and foresheweth
another famine, a great famine of material bread, which should come upon all
nations, in the world. In the entreaty whereof, I will speak first of the
famine it self. 2, of the effects it wrought. Concerning the famine: 1, It is
foreshewed, where I observe, 1 the means by which it was revealed to the
Prophet, which was the spirit. 2, The end why it was revealed, which was that
he might signify it to ye people 2 The famine is brought, where I observe the
time in which it was brought, to wit when Claudius was Emperor of Rome* ^, The
reason why it was brought, which is here suppressed, because Claudius himself
(as it is written) was immoderately given to excess, and the rest of the world
ready to surfeit in their diet.

Concerning the effect this famine wrought: it caused the disciples in Antiochia
to send succor and relief to their brethren in Judea, which were more
distressed then themselves, where I note, 1, their charity, 2, their
discretion.

Touching their charity, I mark, 1, their charitable mind, they purposed to
send succor: 2, their charitable practice showed two ways. 1, They made a
beneuole^ce, which thing they also did: 2 they kept it not in their hands but
sent it away, and sent it.

Concerning their charitable mind, in that they purposed to give, I observe,
1, the qualities of the giuers in whom there was:

1 A readiness without delay, noted in the circumstance of the time, As Soon
as the famine came, Then, etc.

2 A willingness, without compulsion: they did not impose ^ law one upon
another: But every man purposed.

3 The quantity of the gift, they which had much, gave much, they which had
little, gave little, Every man according to his ability. Their discretion
appears.

1 In choosing trusty messengers who should carry their benevolence, as
Barnabas and Saul.

2 In appointing wise men to receive it, which might distribute to every one,
as every one had need: They sent it to the Elders. By the spirit. The means by
which the famine was foreshewed was the spirit of God. The prophecies in the
Scripture are not of any private motion, men did not speak of their own
heads, but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost. 2. Pet.
1. 20. The prophets are called criers as John Baptist. Mat. 3. 3. and criers
speak nothing but that which is first put into their mouths, therefore Esaias
makes a noise after the manner of criers. Esaias 55. 1. and hears the voice of
God saying, Cry, Esaias 40. 6. And he said. What shall I cry? All flesh is
grass, and all the glory thereof as the flower of the field. The voice of the
Prophets is like a Trumpet. Esaias 58. 1. They must set the trumpet to their
mouths Hos. 8. 1. And blow the trumpet in Zion. Joel. 2. 1. But the breath of
the Lord must blow it, otherwise it gives but an uncertain sound, and false
alarm. There is a door of the heart: Acts 16. 14: and a door of the lips,
Ps. 141. 3: and he which has the key of David, Revel. 3: 7. must open the
door of the heart, and let the word in, before the Prophet open the door of
the lips to let the word out, Ezech. 10. 11. Therefore the Lord teaches
Balaam what to say, and puts an answer in his mouth. Number. 23. 5. Therefore
Joshua before he delivers the matter, and tells the children of Israel what
shall come after, uses this preface, Come hither and hear the words of the
Lord your God, Therefore Elihu is taught by God, before he would be teacher to
Job: his heart did speak before his mouth. Job 33. Therefore Jeremy must eat
the words Iere. 15: 16: and Ezechiel must eat the roll wherein the prophecies
are written, and then speak to the house of Israel. Ezech. 3. 1. And John must
take the little book out of the angels hand, and eat it up, and then
prophecy again among the people: Reu: 10: 10: and Agabus must be foretaught
by God, and as it were eat the prophecy concerning famine, and then give notice
to the world, how little they shall eat that God will give them cleannes of
teeth in all their riches and scarceness of bread in all their habitations.
That which the ministers are here to learn is to deliver nothing unto the
people, but that which they have gathered out of Gods word: Every minister must
be a Moses, and speak al, Ex. 7: 2: he must be an Isaac, and speak no more
but all. Genesis 27. 37. e Hmus^ teach. 1. Tim. 4. 11. the good and right way. 1.
Sa^. 12. 13. If any teach otherwise let him be accursed. Gal. 1. 8. That which
I have written says Pilate, John 19. 22. As if he should say, that which I
have written truly, shall continue written without alteration. That which God
has spoken, he has spoken once or twice. Psalm. 62. 11. That hi^ word might
be like the Med^ and Persians which alters not Dan. 6. 12. If any man shall
add, God shall add unto him plagues, if any shall diminish of his word, God
shall take away his part ou^ of the book of life. Reu. 22. 18.

That which the people generally are here to learn, is first in respect of the
message that is brogh^ and doctrine which is delivered, 1 To give ear unto it
with diligence. That which Sarah says, Ge. 21. 10. The scripture says. Gal.
4. 30. That which the Prophet speaks, God speaks by the mouth of the
Prophets. Luke 1. 70. The word of the Apostles is the preaching of God. 1.
These. 2. 13. The good doctrine comes from above. Job 29. 22. The people have
it from the minister, as it were at the second hand, they must not therefore
do as Samuel did, who thought the Priest called him, and so after the first,
second, and third call, go and sleep: but do as Samuel after did, and when we
know it is the Lord that calls us, in token of attention, say with Samuel,
Speak Lord thy servant hears. 1. Sa^. 3. If God speaks, let not man be a
deaf Adder. If Paul preaches, fall not with Eutichus into a dead sleep:
Acts 20: 9: Gaze not about, but if Christ expound the Scripture, let the
wandering eye be fastened on him: Luke 4* 20: Do not, as though tho^ had
with Malchus thy righ^ care cut off, bring only thy left ear to the Sermon,
bu^ with Moses draw near to learn^ Exodus: 3: 3: With Jacob note the saving:
Gen: 33: 11: If God offere^ the food of the soul, let hung^ be thy sauce, and
bring a stoma^ with thee: if he brings the water of life, say with Sisera,
Give m^ water, for I am thirsty: Iud* 4: 9: ^ rather with Samson, I die for
thir^ Iud: 15: 18: Secondly, because it ^ the spirit speaks, we must hea^
with reverence, in token where Eglon, when E^ud tells him he has a message from
God, does arise. Iud: 3: 20: as Bala^k must: Number: 23: 18: and Moses puts his
shoes from his feet: Exodus: 3: 5: and Marie sits at Jesus feet, and hears his
preaching Lu. 10: 39: when the law was given, there was thunder and lightning
and a thick cloud upon the mount, Siuai was all on smoke, and all the mount
trembled exceedingly: Ex: 19: that the people might prostrate themselves before
the lord, and receive it with reverence, and ^hese two diligence and reverence
^n hearing, are the outward duties ^ee must perform, because God ^peaketh. The
inward duty we ^we is meditation: Let not the vir^in be as a broken vessel,
but when ^hee has heard Christ speak, ^eepe all these sayings in her ^eart:
Luke: 2: 51: Let not Sermons be as Music, which once ended, there is no more
remembrance of it: there must be virtue to retain a potion, if we will have it
work within us. The clean beasts have not presently done with their meat
as soon as they have eat it, but chew the cud, and bring it up again, and
again, and still do find a sweetness in it. Let the servant be laboring in
the field. Luke 17. 7. and laboring in the house, ver. 8. Let M^^tha go out to
meet Christ, and M^rie keep within doors. John 1^ 20. Let there be the ear
without and the heart within, let there b^ action, let there be co^templation
let there be hearing, let there be meditation, God has joined th^^ together.
Mal. 2. 2: man must n^ put them asunder:

And as we must perform these duties because it is the spirit that speaks,
so because the ministers are the mouth by which he speaks, in respect of them
we must take heed that on the one side we do not persecute, revile, or think
basely on them for their doctrine. If Haman abuses David's messenger, he
abuses David, Sam. 10. They which contemn the Ambassadors, despise those that
sent them: if the dog does bite the stone, he would bite him that threw it,
and he that killes the dog means no good to the master: if Satan stay Jobs
servant, his malice reaches to Job himself. And on the otherside we must take
heed we think not better of the means then of the author of goodness. The
corn is Pharaohs though Joseph must deliver it. Ge. 14. 55. Christ multiplieth
the loaves, ye disciples do but give to the^ that sit down, Ioh. 6. 11. It was
Christ who raised Lazarus, other did but loose him and let him go, Ioh. 11. 43.
To blame are those men of Lystra to sacrifice unto Paul, Acts 14. 13. and the
men of Israel to gaze too much upon Peter. Act. 3. 12. Paul may plant, and
Apollo water, but God gives increase: if Peter take a multitude of fishes, he
falls down at Jesus feet: Luke 5: 8. Set not more by the seedleape then by
the virtue of the seed, and love of him that sowes it: praise not: more the
condite pipe then the spring head, from whence the Water flows.

Lastly let the prognosticators and diuiners especially here learn to keep
silence: they must not enter upon Gods freehold, the stars do not
prognosticate a true event, what health, what wealth, what weather shall
befall, it must be Eliah that tells Ahab there shall be neither dew nor rain
these 3. years and 6. months 1. Reg. 17. 2. and the same Eliah that
foretells the time of much rain 1. Reg. 18. 41. if Hezechiah be weakened
and sore broken, if his health be past away as a cloud and his soul be powered
out upon him, it must be an Esaias that must tell him he shall live fifteen
years longer, Esaias 38. 5. If there be marrow to the rich man's bones, health
unto his navel, no feebleness to his flesh, none but GOD can say, This night
will they fetch away thy soul from thee. Luke 12. 20. If at any time there be
an extreme famine in Samaria, that the fair virgins and young men do perish for
thirst, and God will not help them with the barn or with the winepresse, that
they eat the flesh of their sons, and the flesh of their daughters they
devour: it must be an Elish^ that can prophecy plenty, to morrow this time a
measure of fine flower shall be sold for a shekell, that is to say, twenty
pence, and two measures of barley for a shekel in the gates of Samaria, 2. Reg.
7. 1: If there be plenty in the world that God does bless it with heauently
blessings from above, with blessings of ye deep that lies beneath, and men
sit by the flesh pots and eat bread their belly full: i^ God send them corn,
and wine and oil, and they are satisfie^ therewith, then it must be an Agabus
that signifies by the spirit, the great famine that should be thorowout all
the world.

There stood up one of them named Agabus. Many prophets came from Jerusalem,
yet but one Agabus acquainted with this famine. The body is one, and has many
members, and every member his seueuerall office, that one may not say to
another, I have no need of thee. So is it with the Church which is the body of
Christ, who of every Christian is a member, and these members have their
several gifts, some of doctrine, some of exhortation, some of prayer, and so
forth: and God has thus given his gifts by measure that one might have need of
another. Joseph has a great gift, that can expound the kings dream as soon as
he hears it, Gene. 41. 51. But God has given Daniel twice as much knowledge,
for he not only expounds Nebuchadnezzars dream, but shows the king what the
dream was which the king himself had forgotten, Dan. ^. 28.

Our savior Christ the foundation of foundations had the full abundance of
all grace, for God gave him not the spirit by measure, John 3. 34. and in him
dwells all the fullness of the godhead bodily, Collos. 2. 9. but to other is
given grace according to the measure of the gift of Christ. Ephe. 4. 7* The 12.
Apostles which were 12 foundations, might excel one another in gifts, as one
stone might be more precious then another Reave. 21. 19: Bezaleel and Aholiab
shall have more skill in all workmanshippe then all other to make the
tabernacle and the appurtenances thereof: Exo. 31. 3. He that contriues the
House has most cunning, though he that cuts the Timber may be a good
carpenter: he that draws the knot has most knowledge, though he that digs
the ground may be a good gardener: the master of the work is most expert,
though he which carries brick and mortar may be a good Mason. Iethro may
see more in some thing then Moses, and therefore give him counsel to judge
himself in hard causes, which cannot be decided but by consulting with god,
and for other matters to refer the^ over to the inferior officers. Exo. 18. 19.
the Prophets here which cam^ from Jerusalem, were such as they were, which did
behold as it were from an high tower, things unknown to other, Esaias 21. 6. and
therefore might be called Sears as they were, 1. Sam. 9, 9. yet amongst the^ but
one Agabus sees the famine that is to come. Let us not envy one another, but
covet after the best gifts, and because in the same profession that may be
hidden from one, which is known to another, let not he which is able to teach
other, disdain that other should teach him. To harken is no let, but that a
man may speak: to speak is no let but that a man may hear, therefore Job
joins them together Chap. 34. 34. Let a man of understanding tell me, let
a wise man hearken to me, let a man of understanding tell me, there he is
ready to hear: let a wise man hearken to me, there he is ready to speak:
speaking and hearing cannot be prejudicial one to another. The Apostles were
shepheardes, and therefore had a charge of all, Mar. 16, 15. they were
sheep, and therefore must be looked to.

Paul charge the Elders: Act. 20. 28. with a care of themselves, therefore
they must hear, and with a care of their flocks, therefore they must teach.
The disciples may fall a sleep, and therefore must be awaked: Mat. 26. 40.
The Cock may awake Peter, and one Cock may awake another, therefore let
Eliah be Elishas head. 2. Reg. 2. 3. Let him that sat in Moses chair
sometime sit at Gamaliels feet. And thus much of the means by which this
famine was made known unto Agabus, and only to Agabus.

The end follows, which was that he might signify the same unto the
people. The Prophets were as it were of Gods privy counsel. Amos 3. 7. The
counsel of earthly Princes must be kept secret: great affairs never have
good success, when they are discovered before they take effect: therefore
Alexander communicating a secret to Ephestion, took his signet from his
finger, and sealed therewith Ephestions lips, showing thereby what he
expected at his hands. The king, says David to Ahimelech, has commanded
me a certain thing, and has said unto me, let no man know where about I
send thee, and what I have commanded thee: 1, Sam. 21: 2. But it is not thus
with the counsel of God, the king of kings and Lord of Lords. The Priest
shall die if his sound be not heard when he goes into the holy place, Exodus
28. 35. As he is a husbandman, because he must dress the Vineyarde of the
Lord, that it might bring forth fruit. Luke 20. 9 and a buylder, verse 17.
because he must make the body of the people a Temple fit for God to dwell
in: so is he a messenger, Joel 33. 23. because he must carry tydinges. Esaias
52. chapt. verse 7. and he has discharged his duty, and done his message
best, that can say with Paul, I have kept nothing back, but has shewe^ you
all the counsel of God. Act* 20, 27: Let not Aarons oil re^ upon his head,
but run down on his beard, and go down to the very skirts of his clothing.
L^ him that is a candle tinded afterward light an house. Let Go^ without
means beget Paul, Act* 9: But let Paul be a means to wi^ other, and if he be
a general debtor, Romans 1, 14: let him be ready to discharge his debt, ver:
15, and desirous to preach the Gospel, because it is the honor of the Apostle,
2, the power of God, 3, the salvation of the people. Ver. 6: Le^ Stewardes
dispose their maister^ goods to their gain, Let the servant be blamed that
hides his talent: Mat: 25, 30: Let the fiery pillar go before the children of
Israel to the promised land, Exodus: 13, 21 Let them preach which are bid to
preach, when they see that they which are suspended, and put to silence, Mat:
7, 37. Act: 5, 40, can not hold their peace.

Moisture in spring remains not still in the place where it breeds, but
hasteneth to the watering of drier soiles. The running rivers fill up the
empty places, as they pass by them. The Moon lendes her light unto the
world, which she has borrowed of the Sun. A good stomach receiving in the
meat, sends out nourishment with very good proportion, to every member of
the body, and Agabus receiving from God more knowledge then other, imparts it
to other. Thus you see the end why the Lord makes known to Agabus the which
he purposes to bring ^ pass: see also a little the end which Agabus has in
opening to t^ people the counsel of God.

Ministers are fishers of men. M^ 4. 19. to draw them out of these of this
world, wherein they ^ drowned, and as the fishers are w^shing their nets, Luke
5. 2: so shou^ they cleanse their words from temporal gain, from vainglori^
and from flattery, as Paul di^ 1 Thessalonians. 2. 5, 6. concerning gain^ (says he)
we never used colour^ covetousness, God is record: concerning glory, we
sought n^ praise of men, neither of you n^ of others: concerning flattery, ^
speak not as they that please me^ but God which tries our hear^ neither yet
did we ever use flatt^^ing words: but is it thus with our ^ishers? God forbid
but that there should be some, whose drist is to ^atch men, as it is, Luke 5,
10. who ^bor with Andrew, John. 1. 41. to ^raw their brethren to see the
Mes^as, and to beat down the walls of ^n, like the showte which beat ^owne the
walls of Jericho, Ios. 6, ^0. but he which only leuels at ^his mark, is a
rare man, a very Phaenix, and flies alone, so few there ^e that seek to bear
him compa^ie: but to speak more generally, ^ome fish for gain, to see if
they ^an take a Parsonage, a Prebend, ^ Deanerie, a Bishoprike, and when they
have caught the fish, ^r so many fishes as they can hold, ^hey lay away their
net, and will fish ^o longer: which pope Julius 2. ob^erued, and therefore being
requested to make one Gylos a learned Friar Cardinal, to which intent when it
was alleged that, the man had learning and preached dilligently. Nay quoth
the Pope, that is the only reason why I cannot make him Cardinal, that he
may continue preaching still, which he would not if he were Cardinal, being
far from that dignity and custom of the estate. The naming of a Friar
brings to my remembrance the story of a monk to bear him company, not much
unlike this, always casting his eyes to the ground, at last for his great
humility was made Abbot, being Abbot he looked aloft, saving he looked
downward before, to see if he could find the keys of the Abbey gate, now he
had found them he would look no longer, but carry his countenance according
to his calling. It is not thus with Agabus, he gropeth not for gain, for he
tells them of a general want shall come upon themselves. Other hunt after
praise, these use colors of vain affectation, brave their speech, and set it
out with far sought words, allegorical matters, with which common use is not
acquainted, prune their sillables, mince their phrases: give these men a
plaudite as the people do to Herod, saying: The voice of God and not of man,
Act, 12. 22. you are for their tooth: let them not have this, you shall have no
more of them, they are Chameleons always gaping because they live by the air,
vessels with two handles, you may carry the^ by the ears, whither you list.
Windmils that make no meal^ but according as the blast endures: it is not thus
with Agabus he tells the^ plainly of that which might breed in them a genera^
dislike.

Other use flattering words, and when they know that the people like the
Prophet which will prophecy to them of wine and stron^ drink. Micah. 2. 11.
tell them pleasant talk and speak of their commodities, and that Jeremy
becau^ he does otherwise, shall be threatened: Ier. 11. 21. and railed at, as
Ie^ 43. 2. When they consider this say, they follow the counsel of the people,
Psalm. 30. 10. speak flattering things unto us, prophecy e^rors, threaten us
not by the wo^ of God, tell us not of iudgeme^ and with the false prophts. 2.
Cr^ 18. 11. They declare good with one accord and a general consent, and with
Balaam would feign speak that which might be pleasant to Balacke, who
therefore changed his standing twice. Number. 23. Agabus does not thus, who
prophesies but twice in all the Scripture, and both times of judgments, once
upon one man, he takes Paul's girdle, and binds his own hands and feet,
saying. So shall the jews bind this man that owes this girdle, Acts 21. 11.
and this place tells aforehande of a general plague that shall hereafter
ouerrun all the Nations of the world. Thus the holy ghost acquainteth Agabus
with the purpose of God, that he might acquaint the people with it, and he
signifies ye same not for profit or glory or such like, but fore shows the
punishment (which other prophets also have observed, in setting down Gods
judgment to come) for these reasons hereafter following.

First that we may know that the punishments that befall us, come not by
chance or haphazard, bu^ because they are foretold by God* they come from God
as a rod for our offenses, and a scourge for ou^ sins. The Lord is the
Bishop. 1. Pet. 2. 25. which goes his visitation, sometime in mercy, and then
he says, I will come in vnt^ him: Reu. 3. 20: sometime in justice, and then he
says, I will come against him. Reu. 2. 5. 19.

Secondly to teach us patience if the Dice be already thrown, and the chance
given, the gamester is content to take the poyn^ thed dice affords: if we
know the misery that will befall, we must arm our selves with patience
against they fall, not so much grudging that our case is no better, as
comforting our selves it is no worse. One reason of Jobs great impatience, was
the sudden rushing in of afflictions, I was in wealth (says he) Job 16. 12,
and by and by God turned the Wheel, and brought all my buildings of much joy,
to a castle of com down: he presently set me as a mark to shoot at, his
arrows compassed me about, the arrows of the almighty were in me, and the
venom thereof did drink up my spirits.

Thirdly, God will have his judgments fore showed, to show his patience before
he punish, that we might have space and time to repent: I read of a
Captain, who always when he laid siege to any city, would the first day set
up a white tent in token of mercy, the second day a black ten^ in token of
severity, the third day a red tent in token of blood, to show if the
inhabitants would not yield, he would utterly destroy them: Theodosius the
Emperor suffered not his men to assault any town before ten daye^ were past,
causing this proclamation to be made unto them, tha^ he granted these ten
days to the end they might accept the taste ^ his clemency, before they had
experience of his power. God is man of war, the Lord of hosts his name, he
can besiege our Cities, scale our walls, sack our bu^ warks, set all his
creatures in battle array to charge upon us, and scatter the wings of all the
battles we are able to make against him: but first he causes a trumpet to be
blown to give warning, sets up his several tents, gives many days respit,
sendes his heraldes with words of defiance, to proclaim open war against us,
and this he does that we might follow the practice of the weaker King: Luke
14. 31. While we know he is yet a great way off, send ambassadors unto him,
and desire conditions of peace.

When Jacob Genesis 33. sees his brother Esau come against him with four
thousand men, a greater power then he is able to resist, he provides to
meet him, and to appease Esaus wrath, takes a present with him and delivers
it: Esau seeing the great humility of his brother, is not now the same man he
was, but altered as much as the flesh of Naaman, when he had washed in
Iordane: 2. Reg. 5. for whereas before he did disgrace him, Gene. 27. 36. now
he does embrace him: whereas before he purposed to take him by the throat and
kill him, now he falls upon his neck and kisseth him. The Scripture wishes
us to take that course with our god as Jacob does with his brother, first to
meet God, and this is Amos counsel, chap. 4. 12. for whereas he had said God
had burnt them with hunger smit them with blasting and mildew, with pestilence,
and so forth, thus will I do unto thee says he O Israel: because I will do this
unto thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel. And then do we prepare to meet
God, when we gird our selves, and lament, as it is, Joel 1, 13: when we go to
acquaint our selves with God, as it is, Job 22 21. Then do we carry a present
with us, when we take unto our selves words, and turn to the lord, as it is,
Hos. 14. 3. when with the Israelites. 1. Sam: 7. 6. We draw water out of our
hearts, and power it out before the Lord, when with Marie, Luke 7. 38: we
stand weeping, and be desirous that our eyes which have been as windows to let
sin in, should be as doors to let sin out: then do we offer it up, when
we kiss the Son, as it is, Psalm. 2, 12. and render unto him the fruit of the
lips, as it is, Heb: 13, 15. Thus doing, when the Lord sees our great
humility, our tean which he put into his bottel, when our hearts do melt, he
cease with Esau from the fierceness of his wrath, and will not suffer his
whole displeasure to arise: but i^ we abuse his patience, and take thereby
occasion to sin, we sha^ know that his judgments, which have feet of wool,
and come slowly, have arms of brass, and strik^ surely. If faults be suffered
in hope of amendmente, yet after, ^ hope be none, how shall there be
sufferance? forbearance is no quittance, though God take daye^ for a time, yet
he payth truly at the length, the longer the wicked ru^ on the score, the
harder will be the reckoning when the payment come: they long swimme^ their
sin, but it is to make the sinking more sorrowful: all the while God is
pacient, and puts up our sins, he is lifting up his blow, and a stroke or
blow, the higher it is lifted the heauyer it falls, and when God has tried
us a while with mercy, seeking our good and cannot bow us, he will use
severity, and break us in pieces like a Potters vessel.

Lastly, God will have Agabus reveal the judgments he minds to send upon the
world, to take from the world all excuse of ignorance, as if the Lord
should say, come hither Agabus, thou see the sin whereunto the world is
inclining, men begin to give themselves to all kind of riot and excess, the
drunkard makes in his body a sink, the glutton a dunghill, I will deal with
them as a mother does with her child, when once he begins to play with his
meat, she takes his meat from him. I will call a famine on the land, and break
the staff of bread, men shall be hungry, and thirsty, their soul shall
faint in them, the people shall cry for bread, and all plenty shall be
forgotten, and because the^ shall not say, had we known that thou did mind
in such grievous sort to afflict us, we would have stricken our hearts with the
rod of repentance, beaten down the pleasures we delighted in, rased evil
actions, corrected untamed desires, and been enemies to the disordred will of
the soul, the amendment of our lives should have been as Moses, and stand
in the gap to turn away the wrath from us: because, I say, they shall be without
excuse, stand up Agabus, and signify to them from me, the famine that is to
come, tell them I will send not a dearth, when some men may have plenty, if
they will pay dear for it, but a famine, and a great famine, like the famine
of Samaria, 2. Reg. 6. when they shall not get meat for money: not in one
Country alone, for then the plenty of one might supply the penury of
another, but the famine shall be general in every quarter: stand up Agabus
and ^ell them this: let thy words be as ^ lightning and go before, and my
judgment as a thunder clap shall follow. And Agabus stood up and ^ignified by
the spirit, that there should ^e a great famine over all the world. If God in
this sort open his mouth to speak, before he lift up his hand to strike, let
none plead ignorance, nor yet blame God though his judgments fall upon them:
Let not the standers b^ blame the Archer, though the arrow hurt the^, when he
that shoots cries, away, away, before the arrow co^mes: for the careful for^
warning should have made the^ prevent the danger that was hand, which also
came to pa^ under Claudius Caesar. Man's wra^ may be escaped by seeking refug^
or flying from it: but if gods wra^ be kindled, whither shall we fli^ he will
find us out in the top of ^ highest, or bottom of the deep^ places in the
world: Psalm. 139, o^ whom shall we run for refuge? the woman, when the famine
extreme, shall run unto the king, saying, Help me, O Lord the king, the king
himself must answer, Seeing the Lord does not succor thee, how should I
help thee? 2. Reg. 27. Gods threatenings therefore must not be thought as
scarcrowes, or bulbeggers, to fray children withal: for God is a sowler, and
if he settes a snare, he will not take it up before he takes us in it. Amos
^3. 5. If a Trumpet be blown in the City, shall not the people tremble? If the
Lion roar, who will not be afraid? But because a Lion roareth not in the
Forest, when he has no prey, nor a Lions Whelpe cry out of his den, if
he have taken nothing, nor Agabus threaten, except there be some great
occasion, nor the famine come, as it does in the time of Claudius except it be
sent for. ^ us a little see, what sin especia^ it was, that went to call for
it: ^ was truly said of Claudius, whi^ was untruly spoken of Christ. M^ 11. 19.
Behold a glutton and drinker ^ wine. If Jeroboam sin, he make^ Israel to sin:
if the squared ston^ slip down, a number of little on^ follow after. The life
of the kin^ is a white for the Court, and nob^lity is an aim for the people.
Lo^ degrees level at marks of high^ perfection: whereupon I inferr^ that
gluttony and drunkennes^ reigned at this time. Gut was the god, the pau^che
was a powdrin^ tub, the belly a coupe, a Poulte^ coupe, or rather a Noah's
arc, vi^ tailed with I know not how many kind of creatures: wherevpo^ I note
that to be true, which i^ ^Vis. 11. 13. Whereby a man sin^eth, by the same also
he shall be ^unished. In Iewry was God known, ^ name was great in Israel, he
gave ^s law unto Jacob, his statutes and or^nances unto Israel. He had not
dealt ^ with other nations, neither had the ^athen knowledge of his law. But
^hen they despised his word, and ^f those that brought it beat one, ^illed
another, stoned another, ^od threatened that the Kingdom ^f God should be taken
from them, ^ given to a nation which should ^ring forth the fruits thereof.
^at. 21. 43. which came to pass ^hen the word of god was remo^ed from them to
the Gentiles. As ^od did deal in the old Church ^ith the Jews, so in the new
church with the Ephesians, upon whom God did shine by the light of his Gospel,
and they were ^ first glad, that the light did spri^ up to them which before
did siti^ darkness and in the shadow ^ death, but when they forsoo^ their
first love, God threatened ^ remove the candlestick out of hi^ place, Reave. 2.
5. and was as good ^ his word, when he put out the^ candle, which done, they
fell ^ sleep, falling sick of sundry heresies, died at last of the plague ^
Mahomet. As God brings a famine of his word, when men are as i^ were ouergorged
with it: so he^ brings a famine of bread, when me^ prepare bread for laughter,
Ec. 10. 19. when their sacietie will not suffer them to sleep. Ecl. 5. 11. When
they eat the Lambs out of the flock, and calves out of the stall, Amos 6. 4.
eat until it come ou^ at their nostrils, and be loathsome unto the^, as it is
Number. 11. 20. When men which should be sober are become trencher-men, not
tarrying till hunger overtake them, but preventing it by an artificial
appetite, so sawcing their meats, that they turn substance into accident, and
nature into art: when me^ I say are come to this pass that their greedines
knows no measure, and variety exceeds all the bounds thereof, then God in
token of revenge, sends a scarcity, that me^ shall be glad to eat in time for
strength, and not for dru^kennes, as it is Ecl. 10. 17, and do what they can
their mouths shall not make their flesh to sin, as it is Eccle. 5. 5: thus was
it with ye prodigal child, Luke 15. And thus with Claudius who was made
Emperor of Rome, An. 42. and reigned 13. years and nine months: of this
famine speaks Suetonius in Claud. Oros. 7. cap. 6. Thus was it with the world
at this time, but the punishment being general, I mark thy judgments O
Judea, more then the calamity that befalls other nations, because as it
appears ver. 7. you being before more blessed the^ other, are now more
distressed then other: if thou did sow, thou did find the same year an
hundred fold in estimation, if thou sowed* a little seed, but an handful of
corn* and that on the mountains, nay, on the top of the mountains, the fruit
thereof did shake like the trees of Libanon, thy threshing d^ last unto the
vintage, and the vintage to the sowing time, the plowman did touch the mower,
and the treader of grapes him that sowed the seed. When one kind of fruit was
ripe another followed, and every one in course: thou did eat thy bread in
plenteousnes, eat the old store, and carry out the old because of the new, and
so did laugh at death, because thy greatest want was store. But see an
alteration, thy land, this thy most fruitful land is made barren, the meat is
cut off before thine eyes, ten women do bake their bread at one Oven, and
deliver thy bread by weight: if thou sowest the seed of an Homer, which is
100. pottles, it yields but an Epha, which is but 10. pottles, thou have but
10. of ye 100. and loose the principal, thou do gage out thy lands, thy
vineyards, thy houses because of ye famine, and do howl for the wheat and
the barley, because the harvest of the field i^ perished: but let me tarry a
little it our own land, and leave Judea till I come to it in the verse
following: God embraced our land so kindly, that we sucked the sap of wealth
from branche and root. The fruit of our ground was blessed, for God crowned ye
year with his goodness, the Lord did hear the heavens when they desired
rain for the earth, the heavens did hear the earth, the earth did hear the
corn, and the corn did hear man, and that same blessing did come upon us
which god promised to Israel, Thou shall lend to other nations* but shall not
borrow of any. Deu. 28. 1^ but of late, specially this last year* the ground
has not yielded unto us her strength, Bashan is wasted and Carmell and the
flower of L^banon is wasted, Gods creature have bin deaf, because God himself
has bin as one that hears not, so ye we have bin constrained to borrow of
other nations, but are not able to lend any. Thus God has punished the seed
of our soil for the sin of our soul, and because our folly has bin in the
blossom, our fruit has not budded out of the earth. Sodom was destroyed, but
fulness of bread a sin of Sodom, still continued, men have farced their bodies
and starued their souls: nature is not the Cater, frugalitie the pursebearer,
not hunger the cook to assign the diet. There was but one Bell God but many
belly gods, which have said in effect with the Epicures, Let us eat and drink,
for to morrow we must die. Quaffing has bin the only grace: men have misspent
their time in bibing and shaking hands over their licour profoundly, carowsed ^
hunters hope, drowned the souls in a gallon pot, made the bellies quagmires,
and their brea^ to smell like brewers aprons, the have loved the wine bottels,
a^ is Hos. 3. 1. made themselves sic^ with flagons. Hos. 7. 5. drink wi^ in
bowls, Amos 6. 6. and transgre^ by it. Hab. 2. 5. In Assuerus time the^
changed vessel after vessel an^ drank wine in abundance. H^ 19. but they
drank by an order^ none might compel: but sinc^ they drink without order,
enforc^ one another, give their neighbo^ drink, and make him drunk also, as
Hab. 2. 15. Set thy foot to mine and drink to the soul of such a body, and
the health of my lord or Lady, and by drinking to healths they drink themselves
out ^f health, they do carrowse it, which they say is a Dutch word, and the
English of it may be this, ^ drink all the drink out of the ^ot, all the money
out of his purse, ^l the wit out of the head, and all ^e honesty out of the
body, and ^at is a clean carrowse. These fel^wes if they may have the but^er,
care not though (as it falls ^ut, Genesis 40. 22.) the baker be han^ed up. Thus
because men, as though they had the ear-marke of ^eprobates follow the same
sins with full sail, to which Claudius and other in the world had bound
^hemselues apprentises, no marvel though now also the Lord does use the like
corection. Misery comes not forth of the dust, neither does affliction
spring out of the earth. Job. 5. 6. but our fruitful land is made barren for
the wickedne^ of them that dwell therein. Ps. 10* 34. The earth our mother is
out of heart, dead and barren as the womb of Sarah, and God has so rotted the
seed, pinched the blade, shaken the ear, that it has not answered our
expectation, neither under the flaile, in the mill, in the dough, or in the
oven, and that curse is come upon us, which Job speaks of cap. 31. 40: for
thistles grow in stead of wheat, and cocle in stead of barley. In the ninth of
Matt. ver. 37. The harvest is great, but the laborers are few, the Lord
there speaks by way of comparison, comparing the number of the elect to a
plentiful harvest. But to speak simply of our time, the harvest is small, and
the laborers are many: small, I say, for though the mower has filled his
arms, and he that bound up the sheaues his bosom, yet the yielding has not
bin like the increase of other years. Speak by way of comparison, and pray
the Lord of the harvest to send forth laborers into harvest. Matt. 9. 38. but
speak simply, and pray the Lord of the harvest to send forth a plentiful
harvest for the laborers to bring into the barn: and if we see that our
prayer goes up, and Gods mercy comes down, that our land bring forth her
wonted increase, then sin no more, least a worse thing happen unto thee.
John: 5. 14 Let us hereafter use sobriety, not live to eat, but eat to live,
and taking our portion fit for nourishment, content our selves with it: since
Job speaks of appointed food, Job. 23. 12. and since natu^ is content with
little, and grace wi^lesse, let us be measurable of fe^ding, measurable in
drinking, r^ther of too sparing, then of too l^berall a diet: and thus much of
the famine fore showed to Agabus, b^ means of the spirit, to the end the he
might signify the same vn^ the people, and brought in the dai^ of Claudius,
because of exces^ The effects follow.

Then the disciples, etc. We are deters, not only to God, to who^ we owe love
and obedience, b^ debtors to our selves, debtors t^ our neighbors: to our
selves w^ owe mortification of the corrup^ affections that are in us: we a^
debtors to the flesh, says the Apostle, that we should not live after it: but
we are bad pay maister^ either not at all discharging this debt, or else
putting it of from day to day, saying of the temple of our body, as the ^ewes
of their temple Hag. 1. 2. The time is not yet come to build the house of the
Lord. To our neighbors, besides the love of the heart. Romans 13, 8, the
instruction of the mouth. Rom: 1. 14: we owe good works, and the blessing of
them which are ready to perish should come upon us, as upon Job, cap: 29. 13.
but men's hearts are so hard frozen, that the shining Sun of pity cannot thaw
them, and every man's song is, I am nearest my self, and so they scrape and
scratch and heap, and lay up for them and theirs, and being as brass and
iron, turn both hand and heart clean away, when pitiful suit is made unto
them for some comfort, or else they say come again another time, whereas they
have now to help them: it is not thus with the Disciples in this place, but
they stay them up with their liberality, which are more distressed then
themselves, and being like the Macedonians. 2. Cor. 8. in great afflictions are
prompt to help others. The first thing then that I note in them, is a
readiness without delay, to teach us as soon as we know that extremity, to
relieve the necessitye of our brethren: the bird droupes in the hand while
the head considers whether he shall let her go, or hold her still, and the good
work dies in the birth, when we think, can I spare it or no, shall I give it
away? etc. Delaying hold fasts are like a badde pay master, who knowing that
he must pay the debt, yet bragges with the money in his purse, a day or two
before, like him that goes to hanging, he delayth as long as he can, and when
he comes to mounting upon the ladder, falls to preaching at every step.
Zache making his will and Testament, Luke 19. 8: pays his debts, giving
fourfold restitution, where he had unjustly taken, and bequeatheth legacies
the half of my goods I give to the poor: he says not, I have given as a
bragger, or I will give as a delayer, but I do give, as his own executer: some
few will give in health, but more in sickness, almost all of ability after
death, will have many Gowns, or such and such a Dole given. a gift after
death is lead, in sickness is silver, in health is gold, bu^ with the disciples
here not to tar^ but arise and meet a righteous petition in the teeth, and be
entreated before we be asked, is a jewel which cannot be esteemed. When we
are in adversity, we think^ men can never come time enoug^ to succor us, let
us take this measure for other. Perfect co^passio^ is to prevent the hungry,
ere the beggar desire us. Charity is no^ perfect, when craving exhorts us.

Benevolence is then full of grace and goodness, when it has besides the
quantity, readiness without prolonging spoken of, 2. Cor. 9. 5. Secondly
willingness without grudging, verse. 7. The forme^ of these qualities we have
seen in these Antiochians by the circumstance of the time, the better we shall
perceive, if we consider that they had not a law to compel them, nor yet a
precept from the higher powers, commanding the^ to send succor, as they would
answer to the contrary at their peril, but when they knew the famine waxed
very sore at Jerusalem, of their own accord every man purposed to send
succor. If Zache be ready to receive Christ, and therefore comes from the tree
hastily, let him also be willing to receive him joyfully. Luke 19. 6. When the
scripture commands the matter of goodness, it sets out the manner of doing
good, that we might not sin in the manner, as if it commands to hear, to
read, to suffer, to pray, to give, it teaches how to hear, Mar. 4. 24. how
to read, Matthew. 24. 15. how to suffer, Matthew. 5. 10. how to pray, Luke 11.
1. how to give, Philemon 14. To give readily is to do good, to give willingly
is to do well. A man may sin in doing good, but cannot offend in doing well:
Abimelech does ill but with a pure heart, Genesis 20. 5. Contrariewise, a man may
do good but with a bad mind, and thus he that does good against his will
does evil, let therefore a forewarde gift and voluntary offering meet
together, let readienesse and willingness kiss each other, go hand in hand
like friends, arm in arm like man and wife, be as Hercules two twins, live
and die together.

The Disciples. He that planteth a vineyard should eat of the fruit, he that
feeds a flock, should taste of the milk: there must needs be a famine of
the bread of life, by staruing the ox that should tread out the corn. The
church of Antiochia being planted by the Church of the Jews, as appears in
this Chapter, and these Disciples as good scholars, having learned the word of
God of the brethren in Judea, are very willing, yea, hough Opus and vsus be
ready to knock at their own door, to do good and to distribute to those
which had instructed them, assuring themselves they could not offer their
sacrifice on a better Altar. Let all therefore generally, if they have not
hardened their faces, as it is Pro. 21. 29. Fill their f^ces with shame, as it
is Psalm. 83. 16* which spoil the Lord in tithes and offerings, as it is Mal.
3. 8. especially let cormorant Patrones which crop and girdle the maintenance
of ministers, drink scornefulnesse like water, as it is Job. 34* 7. and cover
themselves wit^ their confusion as with a cloak as Psalm. 109. 29. It were in
these days good friendly dealing, i^ when a Patron lifts a clarke up t^ the
window, he would say, I wi^ let out this benefice to the third^ nay would he
would but say concerning the benefice, as one harlo^ does to another concerning
the child, 1. Reg. 3. 26. Let it be neithe^ mine nor thine, but divide it. Bu^
they will say, the Apostles were poor, Paul wrought with his hands, and these
have the devotion of Judas, when he spoke of the ointment, he was a thief and
bare the bag. I would to God there were not as bad day thieves as night
thieves, which grinding the faces of the churchmen, carry all the tithes into
their own barnes. There were never so many benefices without charge, as there
are now charges without benefices. The foxes spoken of Can. 2. 15. have eat
up sheep and shepherds both, and the merchants which have broke into the
Church have done more hurt by bringing in ignorance and Atheism, then those
which Christ whipped out of the temple. In the 10. of Luke verse. 30. He that went
down from Jerusalem fell amongst thieves, but now he that will go up to
Jerusalem (you know my meaning) shall fall among thieves which will rob him of
all. You shall have a Patron or Chapman, who has bought an aduouson, which
says, I will give a presentation, but he will give like the devil, Mat. 4. 9.
he will give with conditions as this, you may thresh the corn in the Parsonage
barn, to avoid suspicion, but if you will let it be sold to my best
commodity, contenting your self with the straw, which is the greater part,
and small tithes which are a privy thing, you shall have my presentation. The
very name of a Parson carries meat in the mouth, and will get you credit
wheresoever you come.

Thus with his craft he causes him to yield, and he goes into a living as
an ox that goes to the slaughter, as a fool to ^he stocks for correction, or
as a ^irde hastes to the snare, not ^nowing that he is in danger, being
presented, he thinks his ^arthing good silver, and therefor holds up his
beak, soars in the air, speaks big, the rod of pride is in his mouth, as
it is Prou. 14. 3. Examine him of his entrance, he will not St^cke to lie, but
pumpe out one after another, he thinks truth is like a garment, and the less
he use it, the longer it continues: you shall hear him use hunting oaths, and
swear by no beggars he comes as freely by his living as any man in England.
Thus like a landhounde he cares not how much he spendes his mouth though he
smell nothing, for circumstances show, that he like a simple silly ass must
bear the burden, and yet be conten^ with a durtie stable: but you marvel that
such a Symonist is suffered to continue his living, since laws have well
provided to the contrary: I tell you the iuggling bartering is now so close,
that neither Hook nor Crook can pull him out at the doors, that thus has
come in at the Window.

Where shall you find an Agabus, a Patron like Abraham, that bears such an
heroical mind, that he will not take so much as a thread or a shoo-latchet of
Melchizedech, Gene. 14. 23? Where shall you find a David, a patron like David
who will bridle his affection, and though he be overcome with thirst, yet will
not drink of the water brought unto him, if it be fetched with the venture of
blood? 2. Sam. 23. 16. Where shall you find a Peter, a patron like Peter, who,
if Simon offer money, will be at defiance with him, and say, Thy money perish
with thee. Act. 8. 20?

Where shall you find such a patron as was Henry the fourth, who when some
offered golden mountains, other great booties, out of the Abbey lands, other
more service to the common wealth then was accustomed for the Abbey of Fulde,
called unto him one Ruzelin, a Monk, who came to the Court about the business
of his house, at the commandment of the Abbot, and never dreamed of any such
thing, and putting the pastoral staff in his hands, first named him Abbot,
and prayed the rest both Soldiers and Monks, to consent to his election. I
condemn not all, I know there be many good men which prefer the gifts of
the mind, before the gifts of the purse, which mislike the bishop that is a
Balaam, the patron that is a Judas, the minister that is a Magus, which
quickelie cast them off that come far, and bring gold with them, because the
celestial shining star refuse to be their guide, and among those let the
right honorable the Lord Keeper that now is, have the chiefest place, who
regarding more Simon Peter's preaching, then Simon Magus bag, singles out such
to bestow preferments upon them, which have of good continuance been brought
up in Naioth, I mean the schools and Universities, which were first planted
to be nurseryes of Prophets. 1. Sam. 19: 20. If patrones would fetch their
light from this Torch, and patronesses take their work out of this Sampler,
then should men be given to dignities, not dignityes to men, then oh, then
how well would it be with our Church? There would be as little seeking
after benefices as now there is greediness to get them, men would rather
labor to deserve living, then be bold to procure it: but such is the
iniquity of this latter time, into which we are fallen, that I am verily
persuaded that spiritual promotions are as vsully sold of most me^, which have
the^ to bestow, as horses in Smithfield, and sold as garments by the drum, to
those which offer most money for them: There was no City (said Philip of
Macedon) so surely defenced, whereunto a^ Ass laden with gold might no^
enter: so, sed reprimo me, and retur^ again to these disciples which in this
place take a clean contrary course, hereby showing how much they esteem the
Gospel of Christ, because they send succou^ to the place from whence it came. -
To send succor to the brethren. Some are brethren by nature as Pharez and
Zarah, borne both of Tamar, Genesis 38, 30. some by consanguinitie, which are of
the same family: so Laban calls Jacob his brother, Genesis 29. 15. though he
were his sisters son, ver: 13. some by Nation, so Paul calls the Jews his
brethren, Romans 9. 3. some by profession, so the Christians in this place call
brethren: brethren not only because they are made of one God, Mal. 2. 10. came
all out of the loins of one Adam, but because they are called to the same
inheritance, the kingdom of heaven. Luke 12. 32. The very name of a brother
or kinsman is a sufficient argument to stir up compassion. When Laban hears
tell that one Jacob his sisters son is come into the country, he runs to
meet him, embraces him, and kisseth him, and brings him to his house. Ge.
29. 13. When Hester is fatherless, and motherlesse, Mordecai, because she
came of his uncle takes her for his own daughter. Hest. 2. 7. Paul's heart
melts upon the Jews his brethren, and therefore would redeem their
reiection with his own damnation. R^ 9. 3. Israel must not detest an Ed^mit,
because he is his brother. De^ 23. 7. nor Edom detest an Israelite^ because he
is his brother. Amos ^ 11. if nature works thus in thos^ which are brethren
in the flesh shall not Grace rouse up pity toward our brethren in Christ*
There is a marvelous near conjunction between the faithful because they are
members one of an other. 1. Cor. 12. Do good therefore (says the Apostle) Gal.
6. 10. to al, but especially to the household of faith: do good to all
generally, for true virtue sets it self on work, in respect of none other end
the^ of it self. Non est magni animi beneficiu^ dare, and perdere, sed perdere,
and da^e, It argues not so valiant a mind ^o give a benefit and loose, as to
^oose a benefit, and give again. A ^an will sow his ground again ^his year
in hope of good increase, though the last year he had but a ^ad crop. Si non
demus vt homini, ^men vt homines. If we give not to Christians, yet let us
give, because ^ee are Christians: though we ^inde little kindness in other,
let ^s not loose it in our selves: but especially we must be good to ^he
household of faith. Joseph lo^eth all his brethren, but Benia^in with a more
special love, and therefore he shall have a mess by him self, Genesis 43. 34. as
Jacob loves ^oseph more then al his sons* Ge. 37. 3 God makes his sun to
shine upon the good and bad. Matt. 5, 45. but such a brightness shall over shine
his people, as if seven Suns did give light ^ one time, Is. 30. 26. God loves
a^ the dwellings of Jacob, but mo^ the gates of Zion, Psalm. 87. 2. The godly
are vessels of gold, 2. Tim. ^ 20. Therefore the Lord makes ^ special account
of them. Where God has set his heart, there l^ man set his delight: therefore
David said, all his delight was upon the Saints in earth, and upon suc^ as
excelled in virtue. Psa. 16. 3. an^ therefore the disciples here send^ succor
to the brethren. If the di^ciples here give a voluntary offering, and as it
seems of the^ own penury, then let them which have superfluity, consider of
the needy, and the rather for that i^ these distressed times, a specia^
commandment has come from the higher powers, to inioine the^ to it. That
inequality is devilish where one surfetteth, another is hungry. 1, Cor. 11. 21.
that equality is commendable where one man's plenty supplies another man's
want. 2. Cor. 8. 14. If Christ became poor to make us rich, let us of our
riches spare somewhat to the relief of his poverty: we think it theft to
take away another man's goods, yet is it no less sin to to take from him that
has, then not to give to him that want. We cannot abide to hear that our
hands should be imbrued in our brothers blood, yet he kills a man that suffers
him to perish for want of food, when he may relieve him. Let mercy follow
Justice. Matthew. 5. 7. Let justice pay debts, and then mercy give part of that
which remains, the rich man has Lu^ 12. 17, when he says he has n^ row
me to lay his fruits: for poor^ men's bellies are barnes, in which he may put
the extraordinary increase of his corn: and because the generation of the
righteous ar^ to God as the apple of his eye, God loves them as Jacob does
Joseph above his other sons. Genesis 37. 3. let not y^ prophet vpbraide us with
this, that we have not bin sorry for the affliction of Joseph. Amos 6. 6.

Brethren which were in Judea. The land O Jury, was as the garden o^ Eden,
Joel 2. 3. Blessed of the Lord was thy land for the sweetness of heaven, for
the dew, and for the depth lying beneath, and for the sweet increase of the
Sun, and for the sweet increase of the moon, not only the valleys did stand
so ^hicke with corn, that they did showte for joy, and sing, but the hills
were compassed ^^th glad^esse, and the mountains did bring peace unto the
people: sweet was the top of thy ancient mou^tains sweet were thy old hills.
Flumina ^a^ lactis, ia^ flumina nectaris ibant. Thy land did flow with milk and
honey, every place was full of the riches of the Lord, but now the heaven above
thee is as iron, and the earth as brass, there are no fields of offerings, the
seed is rotten under the clods, the garners ^re destroyed, ye corn is
withered, so that when a man sees the little increase of thy ground, he would
think that thou had dealt with it* as Abimelech did with Sichem, sowed salt in
it. Iud 9. 45 let us learn here not only not to promise our selves continual
prosperity, not only not to place our chiefest felicity in any outward
blessings we do enjoy, but especially this, not to make the means an Idol to
tie Gods power unto, or fetter his graces to it. If thou consider e^^ the
constitution of thy body, and see that GOD has given the^ strength to labor
and take pain, and that thou risest while it is yet night, and girdest thy
loins, and in the morning sowest thy seed, and in the evening suffrest not
thy hand to rest, yet trust not too much in thy labor* for it may be thou
shall even weary thy self for very vanity, sow the wind, and reap the while
wind, for thou see many rise up early, and late take rest, and eat ye bread
of carefulnes, yet they never thrive, for neither is he that pla^teth any
thing, nor he that watreth, but god that gives increase 1. Cor. 3. 7. Therefore
Jacob though he had taken great pains, yet ascribes nothing to his labor,
but all to Gods blessing. Genesis 30. 30. If thou art in health, and have a good
appetite to thy meat, and thy table furnished with all manner of cates, trust
not too much in the vanity of thy dishes* for he that can make Daniel fat in
flesh, and in good lyking with pulse and water, Dan. 1. 15. can kindle his
wrath against Israel, while the flesh is yet between their teeth. Number. 11. 33.
or it goes down, he can utterly break the staff of bread, give men their
desire, but send leannes withal into their soul, the Floor, and the
Winepresse shall not feed them, they shall eat but not have enough, drink and
n^^ be filled: and they shall be as 7: evil favored kine in Pharohs dream,
which were still lean though they had devoured the fat kine, and like the thin
ears which were still withered, thin, and blasted with the East wind, though
they had eaten up the fuller corn. Genesis 41. Therefore the Prophet affirming
that a^ things wait on God for meat, says God fills them not with bread but
with blessing. Psa. 124. 28. for it is not the bread of it self, tha^
nourishes, but the grace of the word infused into it: as it is not the running
water it self that helpe^ the disease, but the virtue of the herbs that are
boiled in it: If Go^ ha^h punished thee with sickness honor the Physician. The
Iewe^ were to blame who though the^ would not esteem Christ as God, yet ought
to make some reckning of him, because he cured so many diseases. Luke 4. 40.
but trust not too much in earthly Phisitio^s, for the woman may spend all she
has upon physicians, and not be the better, but the worse. Mat: 5: 26. And
Galienus the Emperor will give his physician Fabatus a sum of money, not for that
he had cured him of the Sciatica, but because he should no more meddle with
him. If thou have friends, trust not in thy friends, let not man trust in man,
and make flesh his arm, and withdraw his heart from the Lord. Ier: 17: 5. let
not Israel trust in Egypt, the Egyptia^s are men, and not God: Is: 31: 3: and
as a broken reed which will run into their hand if they lea^ upon it: trust not
in thy horses, they are flesh, and not spirit, Esaias. 31. 3. a vain thing to
save a man. Psalm. 33. 17. Do not sacrifice to thy net, Hab. 1. 16. Stick not
with the rich man: Luke 12. 19 to thy wealth, Much goods for many years. Lean
not upon thy house it shall not stand: do not hold thee fast by it, it shall
not endure, but be as the house of a Spider, which is to day and to morrow
swept away, Job. 8. 14. Do not promise to thy self plenty, if thou have a fat
soil, for Judea in this place whose very hills, and tops of mountains were very
fruitful, Joel, 3. 18 is made so barren, that other places must send succor
to it: commonly the clay does serve the sand, but of late years, the sand
has served the Clay, and our Dorcetshire, and other dry countries have been
some stay to far more fruitful places. Our God can bless his curses, he
can make Colloquintida rank poison to nourish the children of the prophets, 2.
Reg. 4. 40. He can make our days to be light, and the same God can curse his
blessings. Mal. 2. 2. make our meat to be poison, our table a snare, our
prosperity our ruin, turn out light into darkness, our life into death: and
can turn the Wilderness into pooles of water, and the dry land into
watersprings, can also turn the floods into a wilderness, and the springs of
water into dryness, and Judea a fruit full land into saltness and
barrenness, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein. When therefore we
have all the means which might serve any way to do us good, our best way is to
spread hands abroad before the Lord, as Jacob does, Genesis 43. 14. Hesiodus
will have the husbandman lay his hand upon the plough tail, there he must use
the means: he will have him further to make his vows to Jupiter and Ceres,
before he ploweth or puts in his seed: there must he pray God to bless
the means. In wars Joshua must muster his men and set them in array, and
stretch out the spear in his hand, Ios. 8. this is to use the means: he must
further remember, the name of the Lord his God, Psa. 2. 8. that he may bless
the means. When the waves threaten the ship, let the mariners cut the
ropes and cast anchor, Acts 27. 30. there is the means of safety, and further
with the disciples cry help Lord, Mat. 8. 25. a prayer for safety. Oil was
much used in Palestina, and counted medicinable, Mar. 6. 13. Luke 10. 34.
Therefore the Elders when they visited the sick must use oil, and as well
prayer as oil, James 5, 14. if thou art hungerbit, know the Disciples go to
buy meat, Ioh. 4. 8. but know again that Christ blesses the meat, Mat. 14.
19. by the first learn to receive Gods creatures as a means to refresh thy
body, by the latter, to begin thy meal with prayer, and end it with
thanksgiving: if thou had bad or lean ground, as it is Number. 13, 21. good it
with thy pot or with thy fold, fallow it, twifallow it, bring it into heart,
husband it in the best manner, make it as fat as this Judea, yet for all this
because it is in God to choose whether it shall yield a curse or a blessing,
thistles or wheat, cockle or barley; in this and so in all other thy actions,
let this be as it were the foot of thy song, Prosper thou upon us the work
of our hands O Lord, prosper thou our handie work.

Purposed to send succor, which thing they also did. Before the hand be
stretched out to give, the heart must be touched with compassion, else alms
is not accepted, and when we are touched with pity, then must we give also,
else to say God help thee and not to give, is but a mockery, James 2. 16. The
disciples therefore in this place, first pi^tie with their hearts, and then open
their hands: concerning the heart, where God likes not the giver he likes not
the gift, if he has cast off Cayn, he regards not his offering Genesis 4. 5. and
where he likes not the heart that moves, he likes not the giver that
bestows. God accepts not the offerings of the Jews, Mal. 1. not only
because they are unable as the blind, and lame, and sick, Leuit. 2^. 22. but
offered unlawfully, with a mind and conscience polluted. Tit. 1. 15. I have no
pleasure in you, says the lord of hosts, Mal. 1. 10. neither will I accept any
offering at your hands* as if he would say. I have no pleasure in the
fountain, I will none of the stream: the seed is infected, I will none of the
crop, I mislike the root, it has no good juice, I will none of the fruit, it
has no good taste, I will not drink of the wine is drawn out, the vessel is
mustie from whence it comes: I judge not the heart by the work, but the
work by the heart. To the unclean all things are unclean: be^ the water
never so fair, it is defiled that passes through a myeri^ spring: as the
Jews therefore should have sifted their souls an^ consciences when they
sacrifice^ to the Lord, so do the Disciple^ here enter into themselves, t^
show ye their liberality comes of a charitable mind: when they go about to
sacrifice to their brethren, it is not glory stirs the^ up as it does the
h^pocrits, Mat. 6* 2. nor yet gain, Claw me and i will cla^ thee, but the mere
necessity o^ their brethren, when they consider their want, in charity they
they purposed to relieve them* neither does their determination die while it is
yet Embrio, but li^ertie being conceived brings forth action, for the text
says, They did send succor, the charity of the country is I pity thee,
God ^elpe you, men will not open their ^ips and their purse together, but ^et
your heart as a judge sit on the ^ench and give the charge, then ^et the hand
go to work, let the ^eart be in tune, then let there be ^ consort of the
other members: ^et the heart be a secret treasury, ^r as a larder or pantrie
in an ^ouse, and fetch from thence that which is wanting to others. Let the
heart be as the poyze of a Clock, and turn all the other members as Wheels
one way, let the heart love, let there be love in word and tongue, Ioh. 3.
18. let there be the deed and truth of love, Luke 3. 11. let the plenty of the
fruit show the planting of the tree. Psalm. 1. 3. and the fairenes of the
blossom the goodness of the root.

Every man according to his ability. In every thing a golden mean is ^ good
virtue, running past the goal for slownesse, exceeding brightness dazeleth
the sight, a^ well as darkness obscureth the object: if gifts be too big,
then a^ thou a waster, if they be too small, then art thou a niggard. When the
tabernacle is made, the rich bring gold and silver, the meaner sor^ brass and
gifts of less value, Ec. 25, 4. When the Israelites give cities to the
Levites, every Tribe must give according to his inheritance, Number. 35. 8: Rich
men cast great gifts into the treasury, but the poor widow but two mites,
Luke 21. 1. In this place the disciples which have much, give much, they which
have little, g^ue of that little. We say not, give as we give Mat. 6. 11. but
forgive as we forgive. ver. 12. for we may and must always forgive. Give
always we need not, nor cannot: and when faculty can stretch no further, good
will is taken in good part, he that does what he can, can show no greater
liberality. Grand enemies of this benevolence, are covetousness and
prodigality: the covetous man is like churlish Naball, who will not give a
piece of bread to succor king David. 1. Sam. 25. 11. he himself wants as
well that he has, as that he has not: and how can the greedy mind carry any
disposition to spend upon other, since he counts that ^^ which he bestows
upon himself* The prod^gall man on the other side, because he has suffered
superfluous expenses to surmou^^ his revenues, is compelled by necessity to
take from others, he is not as a little spring running always, but standing
upon reputation, lauisheth and lasheth for a time, and is dry in the end as
those brooks Job. 6. 16. To avoid these extremities lay not up without
measure, lavish not without mean.

Sic vteretuo, vt alieno non indigeas, In such sort guide that which is thine
own, that thou need no^ beg of another? Sin not against others by giving
too little: sin not against thy self by giving too much: God gives riches, let
not covetousness hoord them up: let not prodigality cast them away, but let
liberality bestow them according to every man's ability.

And sent it to the elders by the hands of Barnabas and Saul. What more
delightful to the ear then good music? what more unpleasant then much
noise, and no concord? what more acceptable before god or profitable before man
the^ good orders, daily and duly observed: the disciples therefore though they
are bountiful in giving, yet will not have every one be his own caruer, catch
and latch what he ca^, but will have the elders, the governors of the church
called elders, of their age (among who^ the apostles had the chiefest place)
under whom the deacons were appointed for this business. Act. 6, 3. to deal
as they think convenient in the distribution, to be as Joseph. Ge. 41. ^5. and
opening the places wherein the store is, deliver it out to hunge^-sterued
souls. And besides, to show that provision for the poor is a matter of no
small account, they make choice of such men to carry their beneuole^ce, as
were of very good estimation: Barnab as a good man, and full of the holy ghost
and faith: Act: 11: 24, and Saul a worthy servant of God, a chosen vessel to
bear gods name before the Gentiles, Act: 9: 15. and those like the dove which
Noah sent out of the ark. Ge: 8, 9: having fulfilled their office, returned
again from Jerusalem, and are now gone up to the high and heavenly Jerusalem,
whither he grant we may ascend which did spend his blood for us. To whom with
the father, etc.

FINIS.

