An A, B, C. for children
Here is an A, B, C, devised with sillables, with the Pater noster, the Creed
and the ten Commandments in English.

And by this Book, a man that has good capacity, and can no letter in the
Book, may learn to read in the space of six weeks, both Latin and English,
if he give theretoo good diligence, as it has been diverse times proved. Also
you may learn thereby to write English truly and to know the true Ortographie
of the English tung.

.A.b.c.d.e.f.g.h.i.k.l.m.n.o.p.q r.r.s.s.t.v.u.w x.y. z. and. us. Est. Amen.

A.B.C.D.E.F.G.H.I.K.L.M.N.O.P.Q.R, S.T. V.W.X.Y.Z.

In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghoast, Amen.

a e i o v ab eb ib ob vb ac ec ic oc vc ad ed id od vd af of if of vf ag eg ig
og vg ak ek ik ok vk al el il ol vl am em im om vm a e i o v an en in on un ap
ep ip op up ar er ir or vr as es is os us at et it ot vt au eu iu ou vu ax ex
ix ox vx ay ey oy
Ba be by bo bu Ca ce ci co cu Da de di do du Fa fe fi fo fu Ga ge gi go gu Ia
ie ii io iu Ka ke ki ko ku La le li lo lu Ma me mi mo mu Na ne ne ni no nu Pa
pe pi po pu Qua que qui quo Ra re ri to ru Sa se si so su Ta te ti to tu Va ve
vi vo vu Wa we wi woe wu Xa Xe Xi Xo Xu Ya ye yo you Za ze zi zo zu
Bab beb bib bob bub Bac bec bic boc buc Bad bed bid bod bud Baf bef bif bof
buf Bag beg big bog bug Bak bek bik bok buk Bal bell bil bol bull Bam bem bim bom
bum Ban ben bin bon bun Bap bep bip bop bup Bar ber bir bor bur Bas bes bis bos
bus Bat bet bit bot but Bau beu bou Bax bex bix box bux Bay bey boy
Cab ceb cib cob cub Cac cec cic coc cuc Cad ced cid cod cud Caf cef cif cof
cuf Cag ceg ceg cig cog cug Cak cek cik cok cuk Call cel cil col cul Came cem cim
com cum Can cen cin con cun Cap cep cip cop cup Car cer cir cor cur Cas ces cis
cos cus Cat cet cit cot cut Cau ceu cou Cax cex cix cox cux Cay cey coy
Dab deb dib dob dub Dac dec dic doc duc Dad ded did dob dud Daf def dif dof
duf Dag degrees gig dog dug Dal del dil dol dull Dam them dim dom dum Dan den din don
dun Dap dep dip dop dup. Dar der dir dor dur Das des dis dos dus Dat det dit
dot dut Dau deu dou Dax dex dix dox dur Day dey doy duy
Fab feb fib fob fub Fac fec fic foc fuc Fad fed fid fod fud Fag feg fig fog
fug Fak fek fik fok fuk Fall fell fill fol full Fam fem fim fom fum Fan fen fin fon
fun Fap fep fip fop fup Far fer fir for fur Fas fes fis fos fus Fat fet fit fot
fut Fau fey fou Fax fex fix fox fux Fay fey foy fuy
Gab geb gib gob gub Gac gec gic goc guc Gad ged gid god good Gaf gef gif gof
guf Gag geg gig gog gug Gak gek gik gok guk Gal gel gil gol gul Gam gem gim gom
gum Began gen gin gone gun Gap gep gip gop gup Gar ger gir gor gur Gas ges gis gos
gus Gat get git got gut. Gau geu gou Gax gex gix gox gux Gay gey goy
Hab heb hib hob hub Hac hec hic hoc huc Had head hid hod hud Haf hef hi hof huf
Hag heg hig hog hug Hak hek hik hok huk Hal hell hill hol hul Ham hem him hom hum
Han hen hin hon hun Hap hep hip hop hup Har her her hor hur Has hes his hos hus
Hat het hit hot hut Hau heu hou Hax hex hix hox hux Hay hey hoy
Iab ieb iib job iub Iac iec iic ioc iuc Iad ied iid iod iud Iaf ief iif iof
iuf Iag ieg iig iog iug Iak iek iik iok iuk Ial iel iil iol iul Iam iem iim iom
ium Ian ien iin ion iun Iap iep iip iop iup Iar ier iir ior iur Ias ies iis ios
ius Iat iet iit jot iut Iax iex iix iox iux Iay iey joy
Kab keb kib kob kub Kac kec kic koc kuc Kad ked kid kod kud Kaf kef kif kof
kuf Kag keg kig kog kug Kak kek kik kok kuk Kal kel kill kol kul Kam kem kim kom
kum Kan ken kin kon kun Kap kep kip kop kup Kar ker kir kor kur Kas kes kis kos
kus Kat ket kit kot kut Kau keu kou Kax kex kix kox kux Kay key koy
Lab leb lib lob lub Lac lec lic loc luc Lad led lid lod lud Laf lef lif lof
luf Lag leg lig log lug Lak lek lik lok luk Lal lel lil lol lul Lam lem lim lom
lum Lan len lin lon lun Lap lep lip lop lup Lar ler lir lor lur Las les lis los
lus Lat let lit lot lut Lau leu lou Lax lex lix lox lux Lay ley loy
Mab meb mib mob mub Mac mec mic moc muc Mad med mid mod mud Maf mef mif mof
muf Mag meg mig mog mug Make mek mik mok muk Mal mel mil mol mul Mam mem mim mo^
mum Man men min mon mun Map mep mip mop mup Mar mer mir mor mur Mas mes mis mos
mus Mat met mit mot mut Mau meu mou Max mex mix mox mux May mey moy
Nab neb nib nob nub Nac nec nic noc nuc And ned nid nod nud Naf nef nif nof
nuf Nag neg nig nog nug Nak nek nik nok nuk Nal Nel Nil Nol Null Nam nem nim nom
number Nan nen nin non nun Nap nep nip nop nup Nar ner nir nor nur Nas nes nis nos
nus Not net nit not nut Nau neu nou Nax nex nix nox nux Nay ney noy
Pab peb pib pob pub Pac pec pic poc puc Pad ped pid pod pud Paf pef pif pof
puf Page peg pig pog pug Pak pek pik pok puk Pal pel pil pol pull Pam pem pim pom
pum Pan pen pin pon pun Pap pep pip pop pup Par per pir por pur. Pas pes pis
pos pus Pat pet pit pot put Pau peu pou Pax pex pix pox pux Pay pey poy puy
Quab queb quib quob Quac quec quic quoc Quad qued quid quod Quaf quef quif
quof Quag queg quig quog Quak quek quik quok Qual quel quil quol Quam quem quim
quom Quan quen quin quon Quap quep quip quop Quar quer quir quor Quas ques quis
quos Quat quet quit quot Quau queu Quax quex quix quox Quay quey quoy
Rab reb rib rob rub Rac rec ric roc ruc Rad red rid rod rud Raf ref rif rof
ruf Rag reg rig rog rug Rak rek rik rok ruk Ral rel ril roll rul Ram rem rim rom
rum Ran ren rin ron run Rap rep rip rop rup Rar rer rir ror rur Ras res ris ros
rus Rat ret rit rot rut Raw rue row Rax rex rix rox rux Ray rey roy
Sab seb sib sob sub Sac sec sic soc suc Sad sed sid sod sud Saf sef sif sof
suf Sag seg sig sog sug Sak sek sik sok suk Sal sell sil sol sul Sam sem sim some
sum San sen sin son sun Sap sep sip sop sup Sar ser sir sor sur Sas ses sis sos
sus Sat set sit sot sut Sau sey sou Sax sex six sox sux Say sey soy Tab teb tib
tob tub Tac tec tic toc tuc Tad ted tid tod tud Taf tef tif tof tuf Tag teg tig
tog tug Tak tek tik tok tuk Tal tell til tol tul Tam tem tim tom tum Tan ten tin
ton tun Tap tep tip top tup Tar ter tir tor tur Tas tes it is tos tu Tat tet tit
tot tut Tau teu tou Tax tex tix tox tux. Tay tey toy
Vab veb vib vob vub Vac vec vic voc vuc Vad ved vid vod vud Vaf vef vif vof
vuf Vag veg vig vog vug Vak vek vik vok vuk Val vel vil vol vul Vam vem vim vom
vum Van ven vin von vun Vap vep vip vop vup Var ver vir vor vur. Vas ves vis
vos vus Vat vet vit vot vut Vau veu viu vou Vax vex vix vox vux Vay vey voy vuy
Wab web wib wob wub Wac wec wic woc wuc wad wed wid wod wud waf wef wif wof
wuf wag weg wig wog wug wak wek wik wok wuk wall well will wol wul wam wem wim wo^
wum wan wen win won wun wap wep wip wop wup war were wir worcester wur was was wis wos
wus wat wet wit wot wut wau weu wou wax wex wix wox wux way wey woy
Yab yeb yib yob yub Yac yec yic yoc yuc Yad yed yid yod yud Yaf yef yif yof
yuf Yag yeg yig yog yug Yak yek yik yok yuk Yal yel yol Yam yem yom Yan yen yon
Yap yep yop Yar yer yor Yas yes yos Yat yet yot Yau yeu you Yax yex yox Yay yey
yoy
Zab zeb zib zob zub Zac zec zic zor zuc Zad zed zid zod zud Zaf zef zif zof
zuf Zag zeg zig zog zug Zak zek zik zok zuk Zal zel zil zol zul Zam zem zim zom
zum Zan zen zin zon zun Zap zep zip zop zup Zar zer zir zor zur Zas zes zis zos
zus Zat zet zit zot zut Zau zeu ziu zou Zaz zez ziz zoz zuz Zay zey zoy
Consonantes that go before the vowels.
Bra bre bri bro bru Dra dre dri dro dru Gra gre gri gro gru Tra tree tri tro
true Cla cle cli clo clu Gla gle gli glo glu Pla ple pli plo plu Kna kne kni kno
knu Ska ske ski sko sku Sna sne sni sno snu Spa spe spi spo spu Squa sque spui
squo Two twe twi two Stra stre stri stro stru Spra spre spri spro spru Thra
three thri through thru Thwa thwe thwi thwo Cra cre cri cro cru Fra fre fri fro fru
Pra pre pri pro pru Bla ble bli blo blu Fla fle fli flo flu Kla kle kli klo klu
Sla sle sli slo slu Sha she shi sho shu Sma sme smi smo smu Shra shre shri shro
shru Sta ste sti sto stu Cha che chi cho chu Gua gue gui guo Spla sple spli
splo splu Tha the thy tho thu Two twe twi two Wra wre wri wro
Consonantes that do follow the vowels.
Abs ebs ibs obs vbs Ads eds ids ods vds Aft eft ift often vft Ags eggs igs ogs
vgs Alk elk ilk olk vlk Alp elp ilp olp vlp Alt elt ilt olt vlt Amb emb imb omb
vmb Anc enc inc onc vnc Act ect ict oct vct Ach each ich och vch Agh egh igh ogh
vgh Alb elb ilb olb vlb Alg elg ilg olg vlg Als else ils ols vls Alx elx ilx olx
vlx Amp emp imp omp vmp Ank enk ink onk vnk And end ind and vnd Ang eng ing ong
vng Ans ens ins ons vns Ant ent int ont vnt Anx enx inx onx vnx Aps eps ips ops
vps Arb erb irb orb vrb Ar^s er^s ir^s or^s vr^s Arps erps irps orps vrps Arc
erc irc orc vrc Ard erd ird ord vrd Arf erf irf orf vrf Arg erg irg org vrg Arl
erl irl orl vrl Arm erm irm orm vrm Arn ern irn orn vrn Ars ers irs ors vrs Art
ert irt ort vrt Ask esk isk osk vsk Asp esp isp osp vsp Ast est is it ost vst Ats
ets its ots vts
Here follow seven Vowels, which of necessity we must use needs in the
English tung. a.e.i.o.u.oo.ee.

Here follow their dipthonges which of necessity we must needs use for the
English tung. ay.au.ee.ey.eu.ya.yo.oo.ou.

Of the single (e) and double (ee) and of the single o and bouble oo. when the
one and the other ought to be writ ten. The single e, when he comes alone in
the latter end of a Syllable, or else with a Consonant after him: should be
sound short and out of the mouth, as when I say thus. This beast I sle, this
Conny I fie, I break my head, I go to bed, I hurt my leg, this man does beg All
these words in the latter end of these rimes (that is) sle, fle, head, bed,
leg, beg, are sounded open without the mouth and somewhat short, therefore they
would be written with single (e) and so the Italians use to sound the single
(e) and so we ought to teach Children to sound it in learning their Crosrowe.
But when I say thus, behold I see, I kneel on my knee, this bird does
breed, my nose does bleed, this man I ween, is sick in the spleen, all these
words in the latter end of these rimes, (that is to say) knee, breed,
bleed, ween, spleen, are sounded close within the mouth, and some what more
prolonged, therfo^e they would be written with the double (ee) for it is more
conuement to prolong the double (ee) then the single (e) and also more
convenient to make short the single (e) and not the double (ee) and the same
rule would be observed in the single (o) and the double (oo) for when I say
thus. A barraine Do, is as swilt as a ^o. I love well God, smite with ye rod.
These words do, to, god, red would be written with single (o) But when I say
this woman I woo, this work I do, the blessed rood amend your mood, these
words woo, do, rood, mood, would be written with double (oo) and so ye
double (oo) ought to be sounded long, and within the mouth, and the single (o)
short and out of the mouth, and we ought to teach our children to sou^de the
single (o) in learning them the Croste we as the Italians sound it. Nevertheless
there is many woo, des in English that men use to sound sometime after the
single (e) and sometime after the double (ee) and sometime after the single (o)
and sometime after the double (oo) ye may write them with single (e) or double
(ee) and with single (o) or double(oo) at your pleasure.

When the single (e) should be written in the latter end of an English word
to persou^ me the sound, and when it should not.

There is other words in our English tung written with single (e) and sounded
open out of the mouth and prolonged, as when I say thus. By counsel and ^ede
I walked in a mede of ten Acres bread. These words read, mede, bread, because
they are sounded open out of the mouth they ought to be written with single (e)
and because they are prolonged in sonnd, they ought to have an other single (e)
in the latter end of the syllable to prolong the sound, which we use oftetimes
in the English tung, throughout the five Vowelles. As when I say thus. In the
water I wade, I walk in the shade, my bow is weak, I will it break, this
pere is ripe, give it a stripe, full weil I hope to drink a soap, my Pursse of
tuke, was made in luke. All these words, wade, shade, weak, break, ripe,
stripe, hope, soap, tuke luke, are sounded out of the mouth, and prolonged by
putting to the single (e) in the latter end of the syllable. But if that (e) be
put away: then shall the sillables be sounded short as wad, shad, wek, brek,
rip, strip, hop, sop, etc. Also in these points the English tung is much more
to be praised then the French, because in French they write ofttimes many
Lettrs that leese their proper sound, but in English we use to write no letter
but they are sounded, except it be in certain words used of late, which are
borrowed of the French tung, which shall greatly hurt the English tung if it be
so continued. For in the Latin tung and other substantial congrue languages,
they use seldom such errors.

Also you must understand that most commonly so often as this letter (s) comes
single in the midst of any word, or the latter end having this letter (e)
immediately following (s) the (s) shall bear the sound of (z) as example, to
muse much maseth the mind.

The Dipthonges for the English tung. Ay, au, ee, ey, eu, ya, ye, yo, oo, oy,
ou.
Aid maid raid fraid rain brain swain. Hail wail rail ait wait strait hait
haid. Rained wair aik. Au And baud fraud gaun gaunt grant awn haunt saunt
fraunt. This dipthong au is often written in English with w.
Ee Flee gree fee heed meed greek week creep sweep weep. Ey Eyl eyld heyl reyk
weyk teyk seyn heyn treyn heyr feyr. Eu Eve lewd shrewd lewt rewin fewl new
This dipthong eu is written in English with w.
Ya Yate yeath, Ye Yel yield yest. Yo You youth yole. Oo Do woo brood good
stood wood hoof loof book shook took fool pool sool tool toom boon moon soon.
Oy Roy soy lay soil oil foyl coyf soys noys. Ou Loud clowd town sownd four
tower shower owl knowl bowl sows mows rowt, dowt showt tows frows: This
dipthong ou, written in English with w.

English Terminations.
Ach each ich och vch Ath eth ith oath vth Ash esh ish osh vsh Agh egh igh ogh
vgh Aght eght ight oght vght. Bath crath kath lath math path tath snath Bache
lache crache drache tache. Bech fech, rech thech Beche feche reche leche teache
peche Beech feech keech seech Bych pych lych much rich tych stych wych which
Byche pyche tyche rich diche which miche Boche loche poche much roche Buch
duch gruch luch much Bagh lagh begh legh sigh nigh bogh dogh Kogh bugh hagh
mugh Aght kaht faght beght feght sisight weght bight Sight night wight night
foght noght bught lught Bassh dassh lassh massh nassh rassh wassh trassh Flassh
rassh bessh fressh flessh nessh bissh dissh Syssh wissh rissh bossh dossh
throssh frossh nossh Bush dush frush lush rush thrush Bath lath math b^ath
grath rath Bathe lathe mathe blathe grathe rathe Beth neth heth leth wreth neth
queth sheth beth Wreeth beeth sees teeth Both hoth wroth sooth tooth Buth ruth
buthe ruthe truth Bab bebe bik bake bal bale ban bane Bas base bat bate Bred
bread breed mede meed red read reed Bib bibe hid hide rid ride dik dike fill
file Bob bobe boobe God good good rod rode rood Bub bube rud rude lud lude mul
mule.
Here follow certain breuiatures that may be spelled alone, and some that
cannot be spelled but in other words and examples of the same.

a^, am, an, e^, em, en, i^, im, in, o^, om, on, u^, vm, un, per, par, que,
que, pro pro, quod, quod, quam, quam, and, and, us, us, yt, that, ye, the, you,
thou, with with.

The seven peticions of the Pater noster, in Latin and English.
PAter noster qui es in coelis: sanctificetur nomen tuum, Adueniat regnum tuum.
Fiat voluntas tua, sicut in coelo and in terra. Panem nostrum quotidianom da
nobis hodie. Et dimitte nobis debita nostra, sicut and nos demitumus
debitoribus nostris. Et ne nos inducas in tentationem. Sed libera nos a malo.
Amen.

OUr Father which art in Heaven hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily bread,
and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation. But deliver us from evil. So be it.

The Articles of the faith.
CRedo in Deum patrem omnipotentem, creatorem coeli and terrae, Et in Iesum
Christum filium eius vnicum dominum nostrum. Qui conceptus est de spiritu
sancto. Natus ex Maria virgin. Passus sub Poncio Pilato. Crucifixus mortuus
and sepultus. Descendit ad inferna, tertia die resurrexit a martuis. Ascendit
ad coelos, sedet ad dexteram dei patris omnipotentis. Inde venturus est
iudicare viuos and mortuos. Credo in spiritum sanctum, sanc tam ecclesiam
catholicam, ancto^u^ communionem, remissionem peccatorum, carnis
resurrectionem. Et vitam eternam. Amen.

I Believe in God the father almighty, maker of heaven and Earth. And in Jesus
Christ his only Son our Lord. Which was conceived by the holy Ghoast, borne
of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Ponce Pilate, was crucified, dead and
buried, he descended into hell. The third day he rose again from the dead. He
ascended into Heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the Father almighty.
From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. I believe in the
holy Ghost, the holy catholic Church. The communion of saints. The forgiveness
of sins. The resurrection of the body. And the life everlasting Amen.

The ten commandments of almighty God.
I Am the Lord thy God which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of
the house of bondage.

1 Thou shall have none other Gods but me.

2 Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any
thing that is in Heaven abooue or in the earth beneath, or in the water under
the earth, Thou shall not bow down to them nor woorship them, for I the Lord
thy God am a gelous God, and visit the sins of the Fathers upon the
Children, unto the third and fourth generation, of them that hate me and show
mercy unto thousands, in them that love me and keep my commandments.

3 Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will
not hold him giltles that takes his name in vain.

4 Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day, six days shall thou labor
and do all that thou have to do: but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the
Lord thy God. In it thou shall do no manner of work, thou and thy Son and
thy Daughter, thy Man servant, and thy Maid Servant, thy Cattle and the
Stranger that is within thy Gates, for in six days the LORD made heaven and
earth, the Sea and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day. Wherefore
the Lord blessed the seventh day and hallowed it.

5 Honor thy Father and Mother that thy deies may be long in the Land which the
Lord thy God gives thee.

6 Thou shall do no murder. 7. Thou shall not commit adultrie. 8. Thou shall
not steal. 9 Thou shall not bear falce witness against thy neighbor.

10. Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy
neighbors Wife, nor his servant nor his Maid, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor
any thing that is his.

A prayer before meat.
O Merciful Father, the which nourishest al creatures, feed us with thy
gifts, that we misuse them not, but being strengthened thereby to all honest
labor and good works, may live virtuously and godlily in thy light, th^^owe
Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer after meat.
WE thank thee Lord God heavenly Father, for thy manyfolde benefits, and we
beseech thee further, that as thou have fed our bodies with corporal meat,
so thou will also fatherlye maintain our souls always in true faith and
knowledge of thee, through thy deerlye beloved son Jesus Christ.

Here after follow Precepts of good living.
Fear God. Love God. Keep his commoundements truly. Love thy Neighbor as
thy self. Do to thy Neighbor as thou would be done unto. Be not envious at
the prosperity of thy Neighbor. Thou shall bear no false witness against thy
neighbor. Serve God daily with some prayer. Bridle the affections of thy
mind. Subdue thy sensual appetites. Thrust down pride. Refrain thy wrath.
Forget trespasses. Believe and trust in Christ Jesus. Call often for grace of the
holy Ghoast. Love peace and equity. Dread the judgment of God. Trust in the
mercy of God. Be always well occupied. Lose no time. Stand in grace. Forgive
gladly. Chastise thy body. Be sober at thy mouth. Be sober of meat and drink.
Be sober of talking. Flee swearing. Flee foul laughing. Love clenlynes and
chastity. Use honest company. Beware of riot. Spend measurably. Flee
dishonestie. Be true in word and deed. Reverence thine Elders. Obey thy
superiors. Be fellow to thine equal. Be benign and loving to thine
inferiors. Love all men of God. Love peace and equity. Think of death. Dread
the judgment of God. Ever take a fresh new good purpose. Persevere constantly.
Use oftentimes confession. Sorrow for thy sins. Wash clean. Ask often mercy.
Be no sluggard Awake quickly. Make thee rich with virtue Learn diligent^y.
Teach that thou have learned lovingly, By this way thou shall come to grace and
glory.
Amen.
Imprinted at London for Abraham Veale, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the
sign of the Lamb.


