A MOST HVMBLE SVPPLICATION OF MANY THE KINGS MAJESTY'S LOYAL SVBIECTS, READY
TO Testify all civil obedience, by the oath, as the Law of this Realm
requires, and that of conscience; Who are Persecuted, only for differing in
Religion, contrary to divine and humane testimonies as follows.

Prove. 21.13. He that stops his ear at the crying of the poor, he shall
also cry, and not be heard.

Printed 1621.

This Book belongs to The New England- Library, Begun to be collected by Thomas
Prince, upon his entering Harvard-College, July 6. 1703; and was given by said
Prince, to remain therein for ever.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY Prince James by the grace of God King of Great
Britain, France and Ireland, our Sovereign Lord on earth. TO THE EXCELLENT
AND NOBLE Prince Charles, Prince of Wales, etc. To all the Right Honorable
Nobility, Grave and Honorable Judges: and, To all other the Right worshipful
Gentry of all estates and degrees, assembled in this present Parliament.
Right High and Mighty. Right Excellent and Noble. Right Honorable. and Right
Worshipful.
AS the consideration of that divine commandment of the King of Kings given to
every poor Saint, 1. Tim. 2. (Let supplications, prayers, intercessions, and
giving of thanks be made for Kings, and for all that are in authority, that
we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty) does
cause in us a daily practice thereof in our secret chambers (as of duty we are
bound) of which the searcher of all hearts bears us witness; so let it be
pleasing to your Majesty, and the rest in authority, that we make humble
supplications and prayers to you, for such our bodily miseries, and wants, as
are upon us, in that it is in your power to redress them; and especially at
this present, in this Honorable Meeting, assembled for the public weal of
all your loyal subjects.

Our miseries are: long and lingering imprisonments for many years, in diverse
countries of England, in which many have dyed, and left behind them, widows,
and many small fatherless children; taking away our goods, and other the like,
of which we can make good probation: not for any disloyalty to your Majesty,
or hurt to any mortal man: (our adversaries themselves being judges) but only
because we cannot assent unto, and practice, in the worship of God, such
things as we have not faith in; which if we should do, we should greatly
sin against the most High, Heb. 11.6. Romans 14.23. as your Majesty well
observes in these words. It is a good sure rule in Theology, that in the
matters of the worship of God, Quod dubitas, ne feceris: according to Paul's
rule, Romans 14. Let every man be fully persuaded in his mind.

If we were in error in these things, courses of afflicting our bodies for
conscience cause, are not of Christ, but of Antichrist, as hereafter is most
plainly showed. And if no Church be the rule of faith, but only the holy
Scriptures, as the learned Protestants do truly confess; and that therefore
the doctrine of the Church of Rome, (that All must believe as the Church
believes, and so practice, or else be cruelly persecuted) be most ungodly; then
how can they avoid the like censure that practice the same things, contrary to
their own judgment? For the learned Protestants do say, it is high cruelty,
for the Papists to constrain them to practice those things in Gods worship,
which they have not faith in; nay which they know to be evil, with
imprisonment, fire, and faggot etc. and therefore, why may not we say, it is as
great cruelty, for the learned Protestants to constrain us to practice those
things in Gods worship, which we have not faithin? nay, which we certainly
know to be evil; with lingering imprisonment, loss of goods, and what other
cruelties, they can procure against us of your Majesty, and the civil State.

If the learned say, they have the truth, and we are in error, that rests to
be tried, by the true touchstone of the holy Scriptures: If the learned be our
Judges, the verdit must needs go against us: If their sayings be a safe rule
for us to be saved by, we will rest upon them; and then why may not the
sayings of the Papists be as sure also? and they be the Protestants Judges, and
so bring us all to believe, as the Church believes? The iniquity of which we
have discovered, as briefly as we can, beseeching your majesty, and all that
are in Authority to hear us. It concerns our eternal salvation, or
condemnation, and is therefore of great importance: For what can a man give for
the ransom of his soul?

Oh, be pleased to remember the saying of that Great and good man Job: chapter 29.
I delivered the poor that cried, and the fatherless, and him that had none to
help him: the blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me, and I
caused the widows heart to rejoice. I was a father to the poor; and, When I
knew not the cause, I sought it out diligently, I brake also the jaws of the
unrighteous man, and plucked the prey out of his teeth.

Our prayers are, and shall be, for you day and night, to that God of glory,
by whom you Reign, and are Advanced, that he will put into your hearts, to
let these things enter into your thoughts, and then we doubt not (the evidence
of them being such) that you will be moved to repeal, and make void, all
those cruel Laws, that persecute poor men, only for matters of conscience.
Not that we any way desire for our selves, Papists, or others, any the least
liberty from the strict observation of any civil, temporal, or humane law,
made, or to be made, for the preservation of your Majesty's Person, Crown,
State, or Dignity: For all that give not unto Caesar, that which is his, let
them bear their burden: But we only desire that God might have that which is
his, which is the heart and soul, in that worship which he requires, over
which there is but one Lord, and one Lawgiver, Iam. 4.12. who is able to save
it, or to destroy it, which no mortal man can do. It is not in your power to
compel the heart; you may compel men to be hypocrites, as a great many are,
who are false hearted both toward God and the State, which is sin both in
you and them.

The vileness of persecuting the body of any man, only for cause of
conscience, is against the word of God, and law of Christ; it is against your
Majesty's profession; against the profession and practice of other Princes. The
ancient, and latter approved Writers witness against it: so do the Puritanes,
or Calvinists: yea the establishers of it, The Papists themselves, inveigh
against it. So that God, and all men do detest it, as is herein declared: And
therefore in most humble manner, we do beseech your Majesty, your Highness,
your Honors, your Worships, to consider of it, and do as God directs you in
his Word, that cannot lie: Let the wheat and tares grow together in the world,
until the Harvest: Mat. 13.

And so in humble manner we proceed.

CHAP. I. The doctrine of the Holy Ghost contained in the sacred Scriptures, is
the rule of faith; and not any Church, Counsel, Prince, or Potentate; nor any
mortal man whatsoever. Proved.
BY the Scriptures themselves, which are the writings of Moses and the
Prophets, The Evangelists and Apostles. These are a sufficient Rule to try all
faith and religion by.

Our reasons are. 1. They are inspired of God, and are able to make us wise
unto salvation, and perfect to every good work, 2. Tim. 3.15. Secondly,
because these writings were written that we might have certainety of the things
whereof we are instructed, Luke 1.4. That our joy might be full, 1. Ioh. 1.4.
and that we might believe, and in believing might have life, Ioh. 20.31.
Thirdly, we are commanded, Not to presume (or be wise) above that which is
written, 1. Cor. 4.6. For with this weapon Christ put to flight the devil,
Mat. 4. and taught his Disciples, Luke 24.27. and 46. and Paul taught Christ
Jesus, Act. 17.2. The godly are commended for searching the Scriptures, Act.
17.11. and commanded to search them, Ioh. 5.39. and they that will not believe
these Writings, will not believe Christ's words, nor one that should come from
the dead, Ioh. 5.47. Luke 16.31.

If any Papist, or Atheist ask, how we know all, or any of these Scriptures
to be inspired of God? We answer, The ear, says Job (12.11.) discerns
words, and the mouth tastes meat for it self: And as the eye discerns the
light of the Sun, so does our spirit discern these Scriptures to be of God,
and that for these reasons: First, in regard of the majesty, wisdom, and
Grace of them, from all other writings. For there is as great glory in these
Scriptures, as in the making of this vvonderfull world, which may evidently be
seen: Secondly, by their teachings, which excels all humane teachings,
leading us from Satan, from this world, and our selves; to God, in holiness,
faith, love, fear, humility: Thirdly, the true events of them, or fulfilling
of the Prophesies contained in them: Fourthly, the consent and agreement of all
the parts of them; the like whereof cannot be showed of so many several Writers
since the world began: Fifthly, the admirable preservation thereof against time,
and tyrants, all which could not extinguish them: Sixthly, the devil and his
instruments rage, against those that practice the doctrines contained in them:
Seventhly, the conversion of thousands to God, by the power of the doctrine of
them: Eighthly, the vengeance of God upon such as have not obeyed them: Ninthly,
the acknowledgement of them by the very professed adversaries thereof:
Tenthly, the miracles from heaven confirming them: Eleventhly, the sight of a
Savior to man is only from them: And lastly, the simplicity of the Writers,
and plainenes of the writings. For God has chosen the mean, contemptible and
despised to publish the mysteries of his will.

These are sufficient to persuade, that these holy Writings are inspired of
God, and so able to make us wise to salvation, and perfect to every good work.
These Scriptures contain the Law and Testimony, and if any Council, Church,
Prince, or Potentate, speak not according to this word, it is because there is
no light in them, Esa. 8.20. but we are commanded to hold them accursed, Gal.
1.8.9. For whosoever shall add unto these things, God shall add the plagues
written herein: and who so shall take away from those things, God shall take
his name out of the book of Life, and out of the holy City, and from those
things that are written, Revel. 22.18.19.

Much by us shall not need to be written in this thing, it is so evident, and
so generally acknowledged; except the Papists: only, we will bring some humane
Testimonies. The Protestants affirm ( Whites Way to the Church, Dedicated to
the Bishops, page 12.) That it is the doctrine of the Church of England
(Article six) that the Scriptures, comprehended in the old and new Testament,
is the Rule of Faith, so far, that whatsoever is not read therein, nor cannot
be proved thereby, is not to be accepted as any point of faith, or needful to
be followed: but by it all doctrines taught, and the Churches practice, must be
examined, and that rejected, which is contrary to it, under what title, or
pretense soever, it come unto us. And further they say, ( page 1.) That the
Pope, or any mortal man, should be the rule, that must resolve in questions
and controversies of faith, is an unreasonable Position, void of all
indifferency: when common sense teaches, that he that is a Party, cannot be a
Judge. And again, ( p 17.) Which is the Church is controversall, which is the
Scriptures, is not; therefore let that be the Rule which is out of doubt.
Again ( page 44.) The Scriptures contains the Principles of our faith, and
shall we not believe them? Or cannot we know them of themselves infallibly,
without we let in the authority of the Church?

This, and much more the Protestants have written, and sufficiently confirms:
That no Church, nor man whatsoever, may be a Rule, or Judge, in matters of
Faith, but only the holy Scriptures: and whosoever teaches, or practices
otherwise, they must hold and maintain the Papists Creed, or Colliers faith,
which the Protestants so much detesteth, and mentions (p. 6.) out of
Staphilus his Apology, Thus: The Collier being at the point of death, and
tempted of the devil what his faith was? answered: J believe, and die in the
faith of Christ's Church: being again demanded, what the faith of Christ's
Church was? that faith, says he, that J believe in; Thus the devil getting no
other answer, was overcome, and put to flight: by this faith of the Collier,
every unlearned man, may try the spirits of men whether they be of God or no:
by this faith he may resist the devil, and judge the true interpretation from
the false; and dis erne the Catholic from the Heretical Minister, the true
doctrine from the forged. For if this answer of the Collier, and the Papists
conclusion upon it, be not sound, but detestable, as the Protestants confess,
and cry woe unto the Papists for the same, and that justly: Then is it no less
detestable in the Protestants, or any other, to require, or force any to yield
so in Religion and Faith, that upon such a temptation, he has no better answer
to make, then as the Collier, to say, I believe and die in the faith of the
Church, or of the Prince, or of the learned: For being demanded what that faith
is, if he be not able to prove it by Gods word, contained in the Scriptures, it
is no better then the answer of the Collier, The faith that I believe in, etc.
Oh how many millions of souls in this Nation (not Papists, but Protestants)
live and die, and have no other faith then this!

CHAP. II. The interpreter of this Rule, is the Scriptures themselves, and the
Holy Ghost, in whomsoever.
THe next in order, as the immediate question from this former, is: who must
interpret this Rule, because (as is objected) there are many dark places in
it, hard to be understood: Unto which we answer, The two Witnesses shall be
the only interpreter thereof, which are, the word of God, contained in the
same Scriptures, and the Spirit of God, so are they called, Ioh. 15.26.27. and
Act. 5.32. First, for the Scriptures themselves, although some doctrine in some
places, be dark and obscure, as Peter speaks, 2. Pet. 3.16. yet the self
same doctrines in other places, are plain and manifest: For all the words of
the Lord are plain, to them that will understand, and straight to them that
would find knowledge, Prove. 8.9. And knowledge is easy to him that will
understand, Prove. 14.6 Secondly, the Spirit of God, so says the Apostle, 1.
Ioh. 5.6. It is the Spirit that bears witness, for the Spirit is truth, and
Ioh. 14.26. But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will
send in my Name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your
remembrance which I have told you: And Ioh. 16.13. Howbeit when he is come,
which is the Spirit of Truth, he will lead you into all truth, for he shall
not speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear, he shall speak, and
he will teach you of the things to come. And 1. Cor. 2.10. For the Spirit
searches all things, even the deep things of God: and verse. 11. For the
things of God knows no man, but the Spirit of God. And 1 Ioh. 2.27. But the
anointing that ye have received of him, dwells in you, and ye need not that
any man teach you, but as the same anointing teaches you of all things, and
it is true, and is not lying, and as it taught you, you shall abide in him. And
1 Ioh. 3.24. Hereby we know that he abides in us, even by the Spirit that he
has given us. And 1. Cor. 12.8. For to one is given by the Spirit, the word of
wisdom; and to another the word of knowledge, by the same Spirit.

The Scriptures be so plain in this, that the greatest adversaries thereof do
acknowledge the truth hereof: Only in this lies the difficulty, who it is
that has the Spirit of God to interpret the Scriptures, which is that sure
Rule: which in the next place is to be handled.

CHAP. III. That the Spirit of God to understand and interpret, is given to
all, and every particular person, that fear and obey God of what degree soever
they be, and not to the wicked.
Deuteronomy. 4.5.6. Behold J have taught you Ordinances and Laws, as the Lord my God
commanded me, that you do even so, etc. Keep them therefore and do them, for
that is your wisdom and understanding in the sight of the people, etc. who
shall say, only this people is wise and of understanding, etc. Psalm. 25.12.
What man is he that fears the Lord, him will he teach the way that he shall
choose, and verse. 14. The secret of the Lord is revealed to them that fear him,
and his covenant to give them understanding. And Psalm. 107.43. Who is wise that
he may observe these things, for they shall understand the loving kindness of
the Lord. Dan. 12.10. None of the wicked shall have understanding, but the wise
shall understand; for God will do nothing but he revealed his secrets to his
servants. Amos 3.7. And he that keeps the Law, is a child of understanding.
Prove. 28.7. and Luke 21.15. For I will give you (my Disciples, that obey me and
suffer for my sake) a mouth, and wisdom. And Luke 12.12. And the Holy Ghost
shall teach you what ye shall say: For Mat. 10.20. it is not you that speak,
but the Spirit of my father that speaks in you. And Mark. 4.11. to you (my
followers) is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of God, but to them
that are without, all things are in parables. And Ioh. 14.15. Jf ye love me
keep my commandments, and I will pray the Father, and he shall give you the
Spirit of Truth. And Ioh. 7.17. Jf any man will do his will, he shall know of
the doctrine, whether it be of God or no. And Act. 5.32. Yea, and the Holy
Ghost whom God has given to all that obey him. And Psalm. 119.99. etc. David
had more understanding then all his Teachers, and then all the Ancients,
because he kept Gods precepts.

Hence is plain to whom the Spirit of God is given: Even to every particular
Saint of God, and it is no Private spirit, but even the Public Spirit of God
which is in him, which enableth him to understanding, and so to declare the
things given him of God: For that is a private spirit, that is not of God,
though it be in multitudes: but the Spirit of God, though but in one Saint, is
not Private: Gods Spirit is not private, for it is not comprehended only
within one place, person, or time, but is universal and eternal, so is not
man's Spirit: Therefore men's is private, though in many persons: Gods is
public though but in one person.

CHAP. IV. Those that fear and obey God, and so have the Spirit of God to
search out the mind of God in the Scriptures, are commonly, and for the most
part, simple ones, poor, despised, etc.
Our Savior says, Mat. 11.5. The poor receive the Gospel: and verse. 25. J
thank thee Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have opened these
things to Babes: It is so Father, because thy good pleasure was such. And the
Apostle James 2.5. Hearken my beloved brethren, Has not God chosen the poor
of this world, that they should be rich in faith, and Heirs of the Kingdom,
etc. And the Apostle Paul, 1. Cor. 1.26. etc. Brethren, you see your Calling,
that God has chosen the foolish of this world, the weak of this world, the
vile of this world, and despised, and which are not.

For Gods dealing is, to give unto the simple sharpness of wit, and to the
child knowledge and discretion, Prove. 1.4. The Spirit blows where it lists,
Ioh. 3.8. and is not tied either to learning, or multitudes: Poor persecuted
Michaih had the truth, against 400. of King Ahabs Prophets, 1. King. 22. so had
Jeremy, Ier. 37. against all the Priests and Prophets of Israel. The Lord of
life himself, in his fleshly being, what was he, but a man full of sorrows?
In his birth, laid in a cratch, because there was no room for him in the Inn,
Luke 2.7. A Carpenter by trade, Mark. 6. having not a hole to rest his head in,
Mat. 8. and in his death contemned, and despised. His Apostles, in like manner,
what were they but mean men? Fishermen, Tent-makers, and such like, having no
certain dwelling place: in so much as the worldly wise Scribes and Pharisees
took notice of it, and reproachfully said, Ioh. 7.48. Does any of the Rulers,
or of the Pharisees believe in him? verse. 49. but this people that know not the
Law are cursed.

The truth of this is as plain as may be, that the Scriptures being the rule
of Faith, perfect and absolute, and that the plainness of them is such, as
that by the Spirit of God they may easily be understood of those that fear,
and obey God, but of none else: and that such are, most commonly, the poor and
despised; For if any want wisdom, be he never so simple, let him come unto
God, and he will give him, Iam. 1.5. which is also confirmed by humane
testimony.

The Protestants confess, that in the Primitive Church, the doctrines and
several points of Religion, were known and discovered, by the most mean of
the people, and the Bishops exhorted them thereunto etc. Whits way, page 7. And
that this rule is of that nature, that it is able to direct any man, be he
never so simple, yea the most unlearned alive, may conceive, and understand it
sufficiently for his salvation, page 9. And they relate the sayings of the
Ancients in this time: First, Clemence Alexandrinus: The word is not hid from
any; it is a common light which shines to all men, and there is no obscurity
in it, etc. page 32. Next Augustine: God has bowed down the Scriptures to the
capacity of babes and sucklings, that when proud men will not speak to their
capacity, yet himself might. After him, Chrysostom: The Scriptures are easy
to understand, and exposed to the capacity of every servant, and Plowman, and
widow, and boy, and him that is most unwise; therefore God penned the
Scriptures by the hands of Publicanes, Fishermen, Tent-makers, Shepherds,
Neatherds, and unlearned men, that none of the simple people might have any
excuse to keep them from reading: and that so they might be easy to be
understood of all men, the Artificer, the Householder, and Widow woman, and him
that is most unlearned: Yea, the Apostles and Prophets, as Schoolmasters to
all the world, made their writings plain and evident to all men, so that every
man of himself, only by reading them, might learn the things spoken therein.
Next Iustine Martyr, says, Hear the words of the Scripture, which be so easy
that it needs no exposition, but only to be rehearsed. And this, the
Protestants say, was the perpetual and constant judgment of the ancient
Church etc. And further he alleges, ( page 21.) Theodoret, who writ of his
times: You shall every where see these points of our faith to be known and
understood, not only by such as are Teachers in the Church, but even of
Cobblers and Smiths, and Websters, and all kind of Artificers: yea, all our
women; not they only which are booke-learned, but they also that get their
living with their needle: yea, mayd-servants and wayting-women: and not
Citizens only, but Husbandmen of the Country, are very skillful in these
things; yea, you may hear among us, Ditchers, and Neatherds, and Wood-setters,
discoursing of the Trinity, and the creation, etc. The like is repeated by
others. And, say the Protestants, His doctrine that was President in the Trent
Council, That a Distaffe was fitter for a woman then a Bible, was not yet
hatched etc.

Oh! it were well, if the contempt of these pious practices, were paled only
within the Romish profession, and were not practiced in, and among those that
profess themselves to be separated therefrom: As what is more frequent in the
mouths of many learned Protestants, then these, and such like words: Must
every base fellow, Cobbler, Tailor, Weaver, etc. meddle with the exposition or
discoursing of the Scriptures, which apperteyneth to none but to the learned?
Yea, do they not forbid their own Ministers, to expound, or discourse of the
Scriptures, Read the 49. Canon, which is: No, person whatsoever, not examined
and approved by the Bishop of the Dioces, or not licenced, as is aforesaid, for
a sufficient and convenient Preacher, shall take upon him to expound in his
own Cure, or elsewhere, any Scripture, or matter, or doctrine: but shall only
study to read plainly, and aptly (without glosing or adding) the Homilies
already set forth, or hereafter to be published by lawful Authority etc. So
that not only Jesus Christ, and his Apostles (who are alive in their doctrine,
though not in their persons) are forbidden all exposition of holy Scriptures,
or matter, or doctrine, not being licensed by the Bishops: but also their own
Ministers, who have sworn Canonical obedience to them. Yet when they are put
to answer the Papist, who practice the same thing, they take up both
Scriptures, and ancient Writers to confute it.

CHAP. V. The learned in humane learning, do commonly, and for the most part,
err, and know not the Truth, but persecute it, and the professors of it, and
therefore to be no further followed, then we see them agree with the Truth.
THe next in order is, That seeing the Lord reveileth his secrets to the
humble, though wanting humane learning; That we now prove, that on the
contrary, God usually, and for the most part, Hides his secrets from the
learned, and suffers them to err, and resist the Truth; yea, so far as to
persecute it, and the professors of it.

And first, let us begin with the learned Heathen, who were behind none in
humane learning: The wise men of Egypt, how did they resist the powerful truth
of God, delivered by Moses: yea, they resisted it, with such signs and lying
wonders, as the heart of Pharaoh, and all his people was hardened against it,
Exodus 7.11.12.18. and 8.7. And what was the cause of the destruction of Babel,
but the trusting in the learned, Esa. 47.13. Thou art wearied in the multitude
of thy Counsels, etc. And Esa. 44.25. I destroy the tokens of the Southsayers,
and make them that conjecture fools, and turn the wise men backward, and make
their knowledge foolishness. The things of Gods dealing none of the learned of
Egypt or Babel, could interpret, but Joseph and Daniel.

Next come to the learned Priests and Prophets of the Jews, whose lips should
have preserved knowledge, and at whose mouth, the people should have sought the
Law; But says the Lord, Mal. 2.7.8. They are gone out of the way, they have
caused many to fall by the Law, etc. Also Esaias 29. Stay your selves, and
wonder; they are blind, and make you blind: they are drunken, but not with
wine, they stagger, but not by strong drink, for the Lord has covered you
with a spirit of slumber, and has shut up your eyes, the Prophets, and your
chief Seers, etc. Therefore the Lord said, Because this people come near unto
me with their mouth, and honor me with their lips, but have removed their
hearts far from me, and their fear toward me, was taught by the precepts of
men: Therefore behold I will again, do a marveilous work in this people, even
a mavelous work, and a wonder; for the wisdom of their wise men shall
perish, and the understanding of the prudent shall be hid etc. And Esa. 56.10.
etc. Their watchmen are all blind, they have no knowledge etc. and these
shepherds cannot understand, for they all look to their own way, every one
for his own advantage, and for his own purpose. Also Ier. 8.9. The wisemen
are ashamed, they are afraid and taken, for lo they have rejected the word of
the Lord, and what wis^dome is in them, etc. Read Ier. 14.14. etc. and 50.6.
My people have been as lost sheep, their sheepherds have caused them to go
astray, and have turned them away to the Mountains etc. And Micha 3. chapter Night
shall be unto them for a vision, and darkness for a divination, and he Sun
shall go down over the Prophets, and the day shall be dark over them etc. For
they have no answer of God. They build up Sion with blood, and Jerusalem with
iniquity etc. And Zeph. 3.4. Her Prophets are light and wicked persons, her
Priests have polluted the Sanctuary, they have ^rested the Law.

And in the time of our Savior, how had they made the commandments of God of
no authori^y, by their Traditions? Mat. 15. And Act. 13.27. For the Rulers of
Jerusalem (the high Priests, Scribes and Pharisees) knew not Christ, nor yet
the words of ^he Prophets which they heard read every Sabbath day, but
fulfilled them in condemning him. And our Savior says, thank thee O Father,
because thou have hid these things from the wise, and men of understanding,
Mat. 11. And none of the Pharisees or Rulers believed on him, Ioh. 7.48. And
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.20. Where is the wise? where is the Scribe? where is the
disputer of this world? Has not God made the wisdom of this world
foolishness? And verse. 26. Not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty,
not many noble are called: and others more.

Next, for the learned since the time of our Savior, The Council of Ephesus,
where were present 132. Bishops; of Seleucia, where were present 160. Bishops;
related by the Protestants: how grievously did they err, in decreeing flat
Arianisme? Who is ignorant (knowing the Histories) that from time to time, both
particular Popes, and General Councels, have grossly erred in many things:
Only, one we will mention, passing by Trent and others, the Council Lateran
we mean, which for Universality was behind none; where were present two
Patriarchs, 70. Archbishop Metropolitanes, 400. Bishops, 12. Abbats, 800.
Coventuall Priors, the Legates of the Greek, and Roman Empire, besides the
Orators and Ambassadors of the Kings of Jerusalem, France, Spain, England,
and Cyprus, in which Council it was decreed: That all Heretics, and so many
as in any point resist the Catholic Faith, should be condemned etc. And that
the Secular powers, of what degree soever they be shall be compelled openly to
swear for the defense of the faith, that to the uttermost of their power, to
root out and destroy in all their Kingdoms, all such persons as the
Catholic Church had condemned for Heretics, and if they do not, they shall
be excommunicate: and if they do not reform within one whole year, then the
Pope may denounce all his subjects absolved, and utterly delivered from showing
or owing any fidelity or obedience toward him. Again, That the Pope may give
that land to be occupied and enjoyed of the Catholics to possess it (all
Heretics being rooted out) quietly without contradiction: Tho. Beacon Cum
privil. An. 1567.

And the Protestants say, that this imperfection has hung so fast upon all
Councels and Churches: that Nazianzen says, He never saw any Council have a
good end, White page 83.

Are not here sufficient Testimonies, proved from Scriptures and Experience,
that the learned have usually erred, and that so often, the holy Scripture
warns us to beware of false Prophets, for many are gone out into the world,
1. Ioh. 4.1. etc. And will not your Majesty, your Highness, your Honors,
your Worships, be pleased to consider of these things? but will your selves
submit the guidance of your souls to the learned Spirituality, as they are
called, without due examination by the Scriptures? which if you do, we can but
bewail with the sorrows of our hearts: and are you not herewith satisfied? but
will you with your power (which God has given you to use well) compel and
constrain, your subjects and underlings to believe as the learned? binding our
consciences by not suffering us to read and search the Scriptures? which if you
abhor, as being the Romish practice, will you do that which is worse letting
us read the Scripture, whereby we may know the will of our heavenly Master, and
have our consciences enlightened and convinced; but not suffer us to practice
that we learn and know, and that our consciences are convinced of by the
Scriptures, whereby our sin, and condemnation, is made greater against God,
then the blind Papist, as is proved, Luke 12.47. but we must captivate our
consciences and practice, to that which in our souls we know to be will, and
contrary to the manifest law of the Lord, only because the learned have so
decreed, whom you acknowledge are subject to err as well as others; or else
lie in perpetual imprisonment, and be otherwise grievously persecuted. May it
please you to observe that

The Church of Rome sees, that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, and has
abolished the Priesthood of Aaron, and the Legal sacrifices, but the learned
Jews see it not to this day; nay the high Priests, Scribes and Pharisees saw
it not, but for the publishing thereof persecuted Christ the Lord, and his holy
Apostles to the death, calling their doctrine heresy, and them seditious
enemies to Caesar, and what not? for which their cruelty we all justly condemn
them so often as we read the holy history.

And the Church of England sees diverse damnable doctrines of the Church of
Rome, this among many, That the Scriptures are not the only rule of faith, but
that men ought to be constrained to beleev as the Church believes: the
Protestants see the iniquity of this, because they see all Churches are
subject to err: But the learned Papists see it not, but have decreed, That who
so resists any point shall be judged as an Heretic, and suffer fire and
faggot: for the which the Protestants and we justly cry out against them for all
the innocent blood that they have shed.

And we see most manifestly, that whatsoever is not of faith is sin, Romans
14.23. and that no mortal man may make a law to the conscience, and force unto
it, by persecutions; and consequently may not compel to any religion, where
faith is wanting. But the learned of this land see it not, or rather will not
practice it: but for our profession and practice of this truth, procures your
temporal sword (for their spiritual is without edge) to persecute us by
casting us into prisons, where some of us have remained diverse years in
lingering imprisonment, without hope of release, till our God persuade the hearts
of your Majesty your Highness, your Honors your Worships, to take pity on us,
our poor wives and children; or his heavenly Majesty release us by death.
Will not succeeding ages cry out against these cruel courses of the
Protestants, as well as they cry out against the cruelty of the Jews and
Papists? Yes, we are assured they will: as many millions do in other Nations
at this day.

The Scriptures declare the cause of the blindness of the learned Jews, was:
Not the obscurity of the Scriptures; but, that they winked with their eyes,
lest they should see: and lest their honor and profit should decay, and come
to nothing, Ioh. 11.48. and because their fear toward God, was taught by
men's Precepts, and because they looked to their own way, and to their own
advantage, and had rejected the word of the Lord: and because they builded
their Sion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity, and sought their own
Honor, and not Gods.

So the cause of the blindness of the learned Papists (in denying the
Scriptures to be the only rule of faith) is, not the obscurity of the
Scriptures: but, they receiving not the love of the Truth, God has given them
up to strange, and strong delusions: and the cause of their not receiving the
love of the truth, being all those aforementioned in the Jews. And the Protestant
well observes, that the causes why the Papist deny the Scriptures only
sufficiency, and strive so much for their Churches Authority, are two. First,
That they might make themselves Judges in their own cause: For who sees not,
that if the Church be the rule of faith, and theirs be the Church, which way
the verdit will go? Next, For that the greatest points of their Religion have
no foundation on the Scriptures: So that take away the Scriptures, and
establish their Religion: but establish the Scriptures, and their Religion
vanishes, and that Mother of whoredoms that glorified her self, as a Queen
shall be consumed, for her Merchants that are wexed rich through her pleasure
and profits, shall wail and weep: The which, they now seeing, shut their
eyes, lest they should see that, that should bring them from those Honors,
Profits and Pleasures.

In like manner, it may easily be judged by every indifferent heart, that the
cause why the learned of this land will be blind, in not ceasing to constrain
men to practice that in Gods worship, in which they have not faith; nay, which
is contrary to the light of their consciences: is, Not the obscurity of the
Scriptures. But their winking with their eyes, lest they should see that, that
would take away their honors profits and pleasures; For if Bribes blind the
eyes of the wise, Deuteronomy. 16.19. then honors, profits, and pleasures, much more:
For who sees not, if none should be compelled to practice any thing in Gods
worship, but what they have faith in; which will make them read willingly, and
worship holily: then the Honors, Profits, and Pleasures of the learned men, in
respect of Spiritualty, would decay, although your Majesty might lawfully give
them, what temporal Honors, Profits, and Pleasures, your Highness liked of.

These are the true causes of the blindness of the learned: For so Christ
says, Ioh. 5. How can ye believe when ye seek honor one of another, and
seeks not the honor that is of God? And how can men but be blind in Gods
mysteries, when they look to their own way, for their own advantage, and for
their own purpose: For having rejected the word of the Lord, what wisdom is
in them, they have no answer of God, that build up their Syon (for so they
account their Churches, or professions) with blood, and Jerusalem with
iniquity.

If these learned could free us from the Lords wrath, or that they might answer
for us, and we be free, it were safe for us to submit our selves, and captivate
our judgments and practice to them: but seeing they cannot so much as deliver
their own souls, and that if the blind lead the blind, both must fall into
the ditch, Mat. 15. and every one give account of himself to God, Romans 14.
and be judged by his own works done in the flesh, 2. Cor. 5. and that the
soul that sins shall die, Ezekiel. 18. we dare not follow any mortal man in
matters of salvation, further then we know him to agree with Gods meaning in
the Scriptures.

Paul, the holy Apostle of Jesus Christ, taught, that we should follow him no
otherwise then he followed Christ, 1. Cor. 11.1. yea, Christ himself sent men
to the Scripture to try his doctrine, Ioh. 5. The Apostles suffered their
doctrine to be tried, and commended them that tried it, Act. 17.11. And the
Protestants confess, White page 127. This doctrine was never misliked, till a
Church arose up, whose silver being dross, and whose milk poison, could not
endure the trial: which being true, that we may try, why may we not also
judge and practice according as Gods Spirit shall direct us in our trial. If a
man should drink poison and know it to be poison, were he not in a worse
estate then he that should do it ignorantly, not knowing thereof? even a
murderer of himself in the highest degree: so he that drinks spiritual
poison, knowing it: for so it is unto them, they not having faith in it, he is
in a worse estate, even a murderer of his own soul in the like degree. And
therefore that Church, or those learned, that will suffer their doctrine to be
tried, and yet constrain men to receive it and practice it, when upon trial,
their consciences are convinced of the falsehood thereof, are worse, and do
more highly sin, then they that constrain a blind conscience, though both be
evil.

We despise not learning, nor learned men, but do reverence both it and them
according to their worthiness: only when it is advanced into the seat of God,
and that given unto it, which apperteineth to the Holy Ghost, which is to lead
into all truth; then ought all, as Hezekiah did unto the brazen serpent, detest
it and contemn it.

CHAP. VI. Persecution for Religion is against the Law of Christ.
FIrst, himself commanded, Mat. 13.30. with 38. Let the Tares and wheat grow
together in the world, until the end of this world.

Secondly, the same Christ our Lord, commands, Mat. 15.14. that they which
are blindly led on in false Religion, and are offended at him for teaching true
Religion, should be let alone, deferring their punishment unto their falling
into the ditch.

Thirdly, he reproved his Disciples who would have had fire to come down
from heaven, and devoured those Samaritanes that would not receive Christ:
saying, Ye know not of what spirit ye are, the Son of man is not to destroy
men's lives, but to save them, Luke 9.54.55. which plainly proves that Christ
would have no man hurt for Religion, although they be refusers of him.

Fourthly, the Holy Ghost teaches, the servants of the Lord must not strive,
but be gentle toward all men, suffering the evil, instructing them with
meekness that are contrary minded, proving if God at any time will give them
repentance, that they may acknowledge the truth, and come to amendment out of
the snare of the devil etc. 2. Tim. 2. which plainly shows, that
repentance must continually be waited for, and not constreyned by persecution;
for repentance is the gift of God, and cannot be constrained at man's pleasure.

Fifthly, Christ's Kingdom is not of this world, Ioh. 18. neither are the
weapons thereof carnal, but Spiritual. 2. Cor. 10.4. And therefore the
worldly weapons, of earthly Kingdom cannot accomplish the things of Christ's
Kingdom.

The reason of all these are: Because they who are now tares, may hereafter
become wheat; they that now resist him, may hereafter receive him; they that
are now in the devils snare, even adversaries to the truth, may hereafter come
to repentance: some come not till the eleventh hour: Mat. 20.6. If those that
come not to the last hour, should be destroyed, because they come not at the
first, then should they never come, but be prevented.

CHAP. VII. The Testimonies and practices, of famous Princes against
persecution.
FIrst, your most excellent Majesty says, in your exposition upon Revel. 20.
chapter First Printed in Edenborough, 1588. after in London, 1603. Sixthly, the
Compassing of the Saints, and besieging of the beloved City, declares unto us
a certain note of a false Church to be persecution; For they come to seek the
faithful, the faithful are those that are sought: the wicked are the
besiegers, the faithful the besieged. And in your Highness speech at the
Session of Parliament 1609. you say: It is a sure rule in Divinity, that God
never loves to plant his Church by violence and bloodshed.

And in your Majesty's Apology for the Oath of Allegiance, page 4. you say, I
gave a good proof, that I intended, no persecution against them, for
conscience cause: but only desired to be secured of them for civil obedience,
which for conscience cause they were bound to perform. And Page 60. speaking
of Blackwell, the Archpriest, your Highness says: It was never my intention
to lay any thing to the said Arch-priests charge, as I have never done to any
for cause of conscience, etc.

And in your Majesty's Meditation upon the Lords Prayer, your Highness
advises, that in the matters of Gods worship, we should not do that we doubt.

Also that noble Prince, The King of Bohemia, has written, thus:
Notwithstanding the success of these latter times, wherein sundry opinions
have been hatched about the subject of Religion, may make one clearly
discern with his eye, and as it were touch with his finger, that according to
the verity of holy Scripture, and a Maxim heretofore held and maintained by
the ancient Doctors of the Church, That men's consciences ought in no sort to be
violated, urged, or constrained; and whenever men have attempted any thing by
this violent course, whether openly, or by secret means, the issue has been
pernicious, and the cause of great and wonderful innovations in the
principallest and mightiest Kingdoms and Countries of all Christendom, etc.
For which cause, his Majesty says, So that once more we do protest before
God, and the whole world, that from this time forward we are firmly resolved
not to persecute, or molest, or suffer to be persecuted or molested, any person
whatsoever, for matter of Religion, no not they which profess themselves to be
of the Roman Church, neither to trouble nor disturb them in the exercise of
their Religion, so they live conformably to the Laws of the State etc.

And for the practice of this thing, it is well known, that many great
Monarchs, Princes, and States, suffer Religion free, and do not constrain,
the conscience of any man, by bodily persecutions: not only Heathen Princes,
as the Turk, and Persian: but even Catholic Princes; and many Protestant
Princes also.

CHAP. VIII. Diverse Testimonies of inferior men, against persecution.
HIllar. contra, Auxen. The Christian Church does not persecute, but is
persecuted: and lamentable it is to see the great folly of these times, and to
sigh, at the foolish opinion of this world, in that men think by humane aid to
help God, and with worldly pomp and power to undertake to defend the Christian
Church: J ask you Bishops, what help used the Apostles in the publishing of
the Gospel? with the aid of what power did they preach Christ, and converted
the Heathen from their idolatry to God? When they were in prisons, and lay in
chains, did they praise and give thanks to God, for any Dignities, Graces and
Favors received from the Court? Or do you think that Paul went about Regal
mandates, or Kingly authority, to gather and establish the Church of Christ?
Sought he protection from Nero Vespation, whose envy and hate against Christ
made the Gospel, and the acknowledgement thereof more to flourish? The
Apostles wrought with their hands, for their own maintenance, traveling by
land and water from Town to City to preach Christ; yea, the more they were
forbidden, the more they taught and preached Christ, but now alas, humane help
must assist and protect the faith, and give the same countenance: with, and by
vain and worldly honors do men seek to defend the Church of Christ, as if
he by his power were not able to perform it.

Hill. con. Arian. The Church now, which formerly ^y enduring, misery and
imprisonment, was known to be a ^rue Chruch, does now terrify others by
imprisonment, banishment and misery, and boasts that she is highly esteemed
of the world; whereas the true Church cannot but be hated of the same.

Ambrose in his book of Widows: The Church o^ercommeth the power of the
adversary, not with worldly, but with spiritual weapons, which are powerful
before God, ^o cast down holds and spiritual wickednesses.

Damasc. 3. sent. cap. 33. The Gospel is preached through the world, which
overcame not the adversaries ^hereof, through the sword, or by war: but a few
naked, poor, unlearned, and scourged people, confounded, and brought to naught
the wise men of the world: for how shall ^he Church otherwise have Martyrs, if
she her self martyred others?

Ierom. in proaem. lib. 4. in Ieremiam. Heresy is to be cut off with the sword
of the Spirit; let us strike tho^ow with the arrows of the Spirit, all sons
and disciples of misse-led heretics, that is, with Testimonies of holy
Scripture, the slaughter of Heretics is by the word of God.

Tertul. ad Scapul. It agrees both with humane equi^ie and natural reason,
that every man worship God uncom^ompelled, and believe what he will; for it
neither hurts, nor profits any man, another man's Religion, or Belief:
neither beseems it any Religion to compel another to be of their Religion,
which willingly and freely should be embraced and not by constraint; for as
much as the offerings were required of those that freely, and with a good will
offered, and not from the contrary.

Brentius upon 1. Cor. 3. No man has power to make (or give) laws to
Christians, whereby to bind their consciences; for willingly, freely and
uncompelled, with a ready desire, and cheerful mind, must those that come,
run unto Christ.

Martin Luther, in his book upon the Civil Magistrate. The laws of the
civil Government extends no further then over the body and goods, and to that
which is external, for over the soul, God will not suffer any man to rule,
only he himself will rule there: wherefore, wheresoever the civil Magistrate
does undertake to give laws unto the soul and consciences of men, he usurpeth
that government to himself, which apperteyneth to God, etc.

Martin Luther upon 1. King. 6. In the building of the Temple, there was no
sound of iron heard; to signify, that Christ will have in his Church, a free
and willing people, not compelled and constrained by laws and statutes.

Again, upon Luke 22. It is not the true Catholic Church, which is defended
by the secular arm, or humane power, but the false and fained: which although
it carry the name of a Church, yet denies the power thereof.

And upon Psalm. 17. For the true Church of Christ knows not the worldly arm,
which the Bishops now a days chiefly use.

Again, in Postil. Dom. 1. post. Epiph. Let not Christians be commanded, but
exhorted; for he that will not willingly do that whereunto he is friendly
exhorted, he is no Christian: wherefore those that do compel them that are
not willing, show thereby that they are not Christian Preachers, but worldly
Beedles.

Again, upon 1. Pet. 3. Jf the Civil Magistrate would command me to believe
thus, or thus; J should answer him after this manner, Noble Lord, look you to
your civil, or worldly government: your power extends not so far to command
any thing in Gods Kingdom, therefore herein I may not hear you: For if you
cannot suffer that any man should usurp authority where you have to command?
how do you think that God shall suffer you to thrust him from his seat, and
set your self therein.

Many more might be produced: only we will add the judgment of some that are
subject to troubles for their Religion, as we: the Puritanes, so called, in
their Adm to the Parl. This is a part of their Petition:

That Papists, nor other, neither constrainedly, nor customably, communicate in
the mysteries of salvation: as also their Supplication for Tolleration printed
1609. in Page 21. etc.

And lastly the Papists, who of all other have least cause to speak against
persecution, in that the enact^ng it a law, proceeded from them, and is so
usually practiced by them where they have power: yet thus ^hey write, in a
book full of wickedness, lately set forth, yet allowed by their Superiors.
Moreover the means which Almighty appointed his officers to use in the
^onversion of K^ngdomes and people, was humility, pati^nce, charity, etc
saying Mat. 10.16. Behold, J send you as ^heepe in the midst of wolves; he did
not say, I send you as wolves among sheep, to kill, imprison, spoil, and
devour, those unto whom they were sent: Again he said, ver. 17. ^hey to whom
J send you will deliver you up in Counsels, and in their Synagogues they will
scourge you, and to Presidents and to Kings shall you be led for my sake: he
does not say you whom I send shall deliver the people whom you ought ^o convert
into councels, and put them in prisons, and lead them to Presidents and
tribunal seats, and make their Reli^ion felony and treason. Again he says,
verse. 12. When ^ee enter into a house salute it saying peace be to this house;
He does not say you shall send Pursuivants to ransacke and ^poyle the house.
Again he says Ioh 10. The good Pastor gives his life for his sheep, the
thief comes not but for to steal, kill, and to destroy: he does not say,
the thief gives his life for the sheep, and the good Pastor comes not but
for to steal, kill, and to destroy. Wherefore so much as is lawful for poor
subjects, we humble beseech your Majesty, that converting of us by killing,
imprisonments, confiscation of goods, ransacking and spoiling by Promoters and
Pursuivants etc. laid aside (at which the Christian world is scandalized) it
would please your Majesty, to give order that Disputations, Conferences, and
sweet means may be used, for the discussion of truth, according to the
doctrine of our Savior and his Apostles, which is peaceable, modest, swasible,
consenting to the good, full of mercy: and by those means, if we should he in
error, your Majesty might easily gain us, etc. And if we should forsake our
Religion, for fear of the loss of our temporal goods, imprisonments,
hanging, and not out of information in belief, we should be but Atheists, and
be worthy to be hanged up in deed, for dissembling with men, and violating all
obligation to God, etc. These are their words: whereby we holding our peace,
our Adversaries speak for us.

CHAP. IX. It can be no prejudice to the Commonwealth, but much good, if
freedom of men's consciences be suffered.
We fear (notwithstanding all the manifest Testimonies of God and men) that
the learned will labor to possess your Majesty, and the rest in Authority,
That Tolleration will be hurtful, and dangerous to the State: we will a
little more therefore, most humbly entreat your patience: to hear us discover
by Scripture and experience, that it will not: as also to take out of the way
their objections.

Abraham abode among the Canaanites a long time, yet contrary to them in
Religion, Genesis 13.7. and 16.3. Again he sojourned in Gerar, King Abimelech
bidding him dwell where it pleased him, chap. 20. and chap. 21.33.34. Isaak
also dwelt in the same land, yet contrary to the King and his Subjects in
Religion, chapter 26. Jacob lived 20. years with his uncle Laban in one house, yet
differed in religion, Genesis 31.30.33. The people of Israel continued 430. years
in that famous land of Egypt, Exodus 12.40. afterward were carried into Babylon,
where they remained 70. years, all which times they did differ in Religion, and
yet no danger to the State. Come to the time of Christ, when Israel was again
captive to the Romans, where lived diverse Sects of Religion, Herodians, Scribes
and Pharisees, Sadduces, and Libertines, and Samaritanes, besides the common
Religion of the Jews, Christ, and his Apostles, all of which differed from the
common Religion of the State: which in all likelihood was the worship of Diana,
which all the world (almost) then worshipped, Act. 19.20. yet all these lived
under the government of Caesar, being nothing hurtful to the State and Common
wealth; for they, were all subject to all humane Laws as was meet. And when
some of these Sects began to persecute the truth ((...) usually falsehood does
persecute truth, but never (...) falsehood) then these persecutors did most of
all (...) the State, and cause tumults, as appears, Act. (...) etc. and
14.15. and 19.29. etc. and chapter 21. etc. (...) whereas, if they would as freely
have permitted the Tr^th, as the Truth could have suffered falsehood (lea^^^^ it
to God to punish) there should not have been (...) trouble at all in the State,
and Common wealth.

Again, who is not well acquainted with the flourishing estates of the
neighbor Nations, and that diverse; who tolerate Religion, their Weals,
States and Cities are well and peaceably governed: Many sorts of Religions are
in their Provinces, yet no trouble of State, no treason, no hinderance at all
of any good; they have all one harmony in matters of State, giving unto Caesar
his due; and for Religion, they suffer one another patiently, doing one unto
another, as they would be done unto. And if any object the troubles of France,
or of the Low Countries: it is easily answered, the fountain of them is, that
those that hold persecution lawful, take up arms, or raise tumults: for which
cause it is just in the Princes and States, to punish such severely for the
breach of the Civil peace; not meddling with them for matter of conscience.
None that we know, but Papists and Protestants, do persecute, and therefore
are only lettered, but altogether without the Spirit of God, to persuade that
persecution is profitable for a State: it being so wicked, and unprofitable, as
has been proved.

CHAP. X. Kings are deprived of no power, that God has given them, when they
maintain freedom of Religion in their Dominions.
WE are not ignorant, that the learned do persuade Kings and Princes, that
they have power from God, to maintain Gods worship and service, as well as
civil peace, and so are mainteyners of both Tables, and to punish false
worshippers with imprisonment, death, or otherwise, as other malefactors of the
second Table. Now concerning the latter, we freely acknowledge they have all of
them power from God, to make humane Laws (that be just) for the government of
their Kingdoms, and compel their subjects to observe them, and to punish the
transgressors of them; and we all are to be obedient of conscience for the
Lords sake. But here lies the difficulty, where God has given to all Kings
charge over his worship and spiritual service. For God is a Spirit, and they
that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and Truth, Ioh. 4. If all Kings
have this charge and power, then do all Kings sin in this save one (if one):
for many, do not at all think it is their charge, and so do altogether
neglect it: and some do think it is their charge, and do maintain it; one,
in one manner, and another in another, so that there can be but one, that do
well in it, (if one), for there is but one Truth* all the rest do sin: some
for not maintaining it at all, and some for maintaining it after a false
manner; for a false worship is worse then none. And this one may very well be
doubtful, because he is as subject to err as the others. And if he do err,
and constrain his subjects amiss, they shall perish for their sin, and
their blood shall be required at his hands.

The learned say, that Christian Kings, have the same power that the kings of
Israel had to maintain Mose Law: in which observe, no other kings had power o^
charge, to maintain that Religion, but only the Kings of Israel, and yet the
Commonweals did continue long, and flourish, to them and their seed afte^
them, to many generation: but in these days, diver Kings say they are in the
place of the Kings of Israel and say, they maintain the Religion of Christ's
Gospel; yet differ so much, as they count one another Idolaters and
Heretics, for maintaining his way.

May it please your Majesty to give us leave to ask of your learned, in what
place of the word of Go your charge stands? We often read of your charg in
civil things, and that your power is from God, an he has given you a sword
to punish evil doers, and defend the innocent; but not to support any
Religion, nor suppress any Religion, by your earthly sword, now in the time of
Christ. But we read that Kings have given their power and authority to the
Beast, Revel. 17. to uphold an Antichristian Religion, and their be ten, or
many of them that do it: Therefore it behooveth all Kings, that do by power
and force, uphold any Religion, to suspect themselves, lest they be of those
ten that uphold the Beast, and fight against the Lamb: And also let them
fear, lest seeming to uphold true Religion, they sit in the consciences of
men, where Christ should sit: For Christ is the alone King of Israel, without a
fellow, or substitute, as your Majesty well observes, in your Highness
Apology, Christ is the Churches Monarch, and the Holy Ghost his Deputy.

But we know, that they will answer us; your Charge is in the Law of Moses,
(for in the Gospel they have no color, for Romans 13. makes nothing for this
purpose, Caesar being a Heathen King, to whom God gave no authority, nor
sword, for matter of Religion). They say, the children of Israel were commanded
to destroy all the inhabitants of the Land, Deuteronomy. 7. lest they entice them to
serve their gods, Exodus 23. And false Prophets to be slain, Deuteronomy. 13. These
are their strong holds. For answer unto which: First, the sins of these people
were full, and the Lord would destroy them and give their possessions to
Israel: but the sins of the refusers of Christ are not full until the end.
Secondly, the children of Israel had a special command from the Lord to
destroy them; but the kings of Nations have no command at all to destroy the
bodies of the contrary minded, they are forbidden to pluck up the tares, Mat.
13. Thirdly, the Canaanites would have rebelled against Israel, and have
destroyed them: but the contrary minded will not rebel against their Kings;
all that do let them be cut off: Fourthly, the Heads and Rulers of Israel,
could command and compel the people to observe those carnal Rites and
Ordinances of the Law: but the Heads of the Nations cannot compel their
Subjects to believe the Gospel; for faith is the gift of God, which faith if
they want, all that they do in Gods worship is sin, Romans 14.23. Heb. 11.6.
therefore they cannot compel any to worship, because they cannot give them
faith: for which cause, the Lord in wisdom see it not meet to charge Kings
with a duty which they cannot perform: For to acceptance with God, there must
be a willing mind, 1. Cor. 9. and faith: but seeing it is not in their power to
work either of these, but the work of God alone, as your Majesty says, in
Parl. 1609. God will never require it at their hands: The blood of the
faithless and misbeleeving shall be upon their own heads; for he that will not
believe shall be damned.

Again, seeing they grant the law of Adultery, Theft, and the like, to be
changed, and is not now to be exacted according to that Law: for the Judicials
were but for that time, place, and person, as your Majesty observes in Parl.
1609. why should not this, Deuteronomy. 13. be changed also, for the causes aforesaid?
as also because Christ and his Apostles has expressly forbidden it, as has
been proved; reserving for such a sorer punishment, Heb. 10. For if that Law
should now be exacted, all Kings would be deprived of many their faithful
subjects, and the Cities of their habitation, with all their substance, that is
therein must be burned with fire, and made a heap of stones for ever: which
God forbid.

This we hope your Majesty, and the rest in Authority, may see there is no
comparison, between the Kings of Israel under the Law, and the Kings of Nations
in the time of the Gospel in matters of Religion Many things might be writ, to
prove that Kings are not deprived of that power which God has given them, by
suffering the Freedom in Religion: as also the high impiety of all such as
force the conscience by persecution. But this may suffice, the Almighty
blessing it: which, with your Kingly and Honorable Consultations; we commend
unto the King of Kings, with our uncessant prayers, for such success, as may
tend most to his glory, and the prosperous estate of this Kingdom.

The Kings Majesty loyal subjects in all lawful obedience, unjustly called
Anabaptists.


