MERCVRIVS ACADEMICVS. The tenth Week.
MONDAY. February 16. 1645.
YOu have heard of Mr Richard Brown, a man so called, and but for Civility
could not be so called, having forfeited his Gentility and Christianity, and
exchanged both into Gentilisme, by an Act as horrid as the Devil could tempt
him to, or himself consent to: That of the Moors comes short of it; they but
laugh at the mischiefs they have done, to make themselves merry: but this man
studies mischief, acts mischief* and glories in the act; yet he is a Branch
sprung from that Root; a Chip hewn out of that Block; an Englishman (I blush
at my Country) extracted from a Moore; listen to the Act, and abhor the
Actor: He was the cruel Ga^ler of many Loyal Prisoners; not one but he has
used hardly enough, If burdens of Irons, Beds of Stone, and half meals of
Bread and Water, be usage hard enough: we can name the men he has so served,
and some that by this usage he has starved too; but all this may be borne: and
therefore at last he has outdone himself, by making his Tortures as near to
those of Hell, as possible: For after he had by promise wooed one of his
Prisoners to take the Covenant, and could not by that means win him to his
Lure, and make him as ^ad as himself; he then frights him by Want, by Blows,
by Bol^^ to swallow that Rateb^n^; And the poor man's patience being overcome
by these Extremities, he takes the Covenant, the Covenant; he had no sooner so
done, which left s^ing enough in his Conscience, but instantly says Mr Brown,
so Sirrah, now you may go for a forsworn Rogue, what I could not do to your
Body* I have done to your Soul: now Dye and ^e D^^^ed; But soft Richard, this
was no sin of wilfulness, no sin of malice, no sin of scorn or
contempt^ and therefore may be forgiven upon his Repentance, your Master may
thank you for acting his part so well; yet our Revenge is not so high, but
that we wish you as much Repentance as this man in Oxford testifies, for
committing so great a sin i^ Mr Richard Brown solicited him, scourged him
to, in Abingdon, a little before he left his (...) Command there: and wherein
Colonel R^^^^borough scotn'd to succeed him* least after-Ages should say ^e
^^^ such a Wood^^^gers Deputy, whose ^e^rt was a^ ^^^d as (...) and a great
deal werse:

TUESDAY. Feb. 17.
Since whose departure three or four of our Oxford Cavalty knocked at Abingdon
doors, to know how they did; and near Cullam Bridge, met with two Ca^ts
laden* the one with Cheese, the other with Bread and Oats, driving with such
provision to that Garrison: They seize upon both; but finding the Horses too
weak to draw another* way as fast as their occasions required, they turned
both Teems into one, wherewith they persuaded the ^^aines to drive that Cart
which was laden with Mans-meat and Horse-meat into Oxford; And here you must
take notice of the difference betwixt Loyal Subjects and Rebels: For they have
no sooner unloaden, but they return the Horses* and Cart to their owner, which
that man, who of late told you he did not use to swear, would not have done
upon his Faith* which is not so much his Oath, as his ^doll, because it is
nothing, ^^ nothing worth, being much a Kin to the Public Faith, which has
not yet repayed one Do^^ of those (...) it stand^ engaged for: which, how, or
when those Patriots that love the Commonwealth so well, (and truly I believe
they love it very well, if wealth have his true and proper signification) will
discharge, you may guess at by a (...) Command issued from the New High and
mighty States of England, to the North, persuading all men, Malignants and all,
to stand upon their Guard against the Scots: which gives some probability, that
the German Prophecy may outdoe Mr. Lillyes, when it is fulfilled in Britain;
What Association begun, Diff^ciation will end.

It has commenced well in Scotland; For if you divide it into four parts, you
will find ( Montrosse Master of three, The Perfect Occurrences, Tuesday, Feb.
10. in his 7th N^m^* for the year^ 1646. ^ells us, The Parliament was sitting
at St Andrews, when the lust Letters c^^e from thence, but may be risen since*
(you may speak it indicatively) And that on Thursday last (when was that
Thursday last^) there was a general day of Humiliation throughout all parts of
Scotland, within the Parliaments power there* (it was well remembered) it being
set a part for a solemn First, for the acknowledging of the sins of the
Nations before Almighty God, and begging pardon for the sa^^: and particularly
for that so many of their Nation (so many, pray mark it) do join with* and
assist Montrosse in this Rebellion against the Church and People of God: (No
man; They assist Montrosse and the Church and People of God against this
Rebellion:) but how soever we thank you for so much truth.

WEDNESDAY. Feb. 18.
And shall requite you with as sad a truth; our Oxford horse yesterday returned
safe home, having dispatched the business they went for, and somewhat more: For
meeting with a Party of Colonel Pyle's new raised Regiment, they took eight
and twenty of their Horse, Arms, and men, and lodged them safe at Faringdon;
where they had no sooner taken their leave, but they were faced by some
hundreds of Rebels, who upon the taking of eight of their fellows, prisoners,
thought it their best course to face about, and so away: which eight waited
upon our Horse to this City; and from one of them, we received several
Letters of Intelligence: one of which, Robert Gough by name, seems to give
intelligence to the Moderate Intelligencer; For in one of his Letters he
relates the whole business (but not the whole truth) of Marleborough, as he
has printed it, Jan. 31. Number. 48. where he says, The Oxford Horse returned
with their Plunder, having lost a hundred Horse: whereas the very truth is, (as
we told you Thursday, Jan. 22.) they lost but two Officers; no Common
Soldiers: and as we are since informed, one Mr Johnson a Chi^urgeon: and
therefore we desire the Moderate Intelligencer, not to give too much Credence
to this Robert Gough: who in another of his Letters dated at Verulam* and
directed to London, says Interminis; The Parliament would not grant a Treaty
by Lords, and therefore the King sent again that He would come to London
himself, upon their ^a^e Conduct that He should return again to Oxford, if
they could not agree, whereof the Parliament accepted, but would not consent He
should come into London, but appointed Zion house for Him to come to, to which
place they will send to Him: so they ordained a Committee to bethink them how
He should be entertained, and to bring the Parliaments resolutions to Him;
After this, with a great deal such stuff he concludes, only altering the
Scene from Zion; The King came to St Iame's house last night for certain, and
all the Coaches in the City met Him two miles out -- The Posts brought the
News to Newbury even now to Dalbier, and another Post went to the Kings
Garrison as Dennington with the same News; whereat the Ordinance in both
places answered one another. I need not give any observations upon this Letter,
but we shall go on with truth;

THURSDAY. Feb. 19.
And assure you that three of the Rebels belonging to Gaunt-house, were taken
napping at their Trade (Plunder) by 3 of our Oxford Gentry, and committed
Tuesday night to the Marshalls care; all well clad, well armed, well lyned, yet
had nothing taken from them but their Armor; it was to let them know, they met
with better and honester men then themselves: These three were no good Omen to
the 500 that came to Plunder Wood-stock on Tuseday night last, the manner thus:
Toward the evening, (at day they durst not have been so bold) they came to the
town with White Colors* in their hatt^; but the Centry, knowing full well
that often times the black Devil, transformes himself into an Angel of
light, would not be fooled or frighted from his duty, and therefore gave the
Alarm, but before the Gentlemen in the Garrison could march up, the Rebels got
into the town, and out of several stables took ten Horses, eight of which
being past service were destined to the Dogs, (much good may they do them)
and out of several houses got some Plunder^ but they did not make have enough
away; for by our Muskets and a Drake, they were so well paid, that a
Lieutenant Colonel, and nine others lay in the dirt, and promised upon their
death never to bear Arms again, against a gracious King, five others being
taken prisoners, and five Horses of service exchanged for our two, the rest
took their flight, whether as yet we hear not; it may be to Banbury for as
much more the loyal Governor there, whith his choice and tried Infantry, no
more fearing the Rebels under Colonel Whaley, and all those Additionalls shall
come to him, then they did Colonel Nathaniell Fines the last year; only the
mischief is, he has no Father Lord Say, to send his weeping Letters to, for
Recruites; which in very good time he may need as much as* the Rebels do in
South- Wales, where the Lord Charles (...) goes on successefully, and so will,
with God's blessing, in spite of opposition, until that Country be reduced;
which promises very fair: if you will not believe our report, you will yet
give some credit to an Express, which as it came to our hands this day*

FRIDAY. Febr. 20.
We shall communicate without alteration of word or syllable; it is a
confirmation of our last, and somewhat more: If you please read it.

My Lord,
I Cannot omit to give your Lordship an account of the proceedings in these
parts, and how advantagions it is like to be to His Majesty's Service: the
taking of Carlion with 140 Prisoners, besides those killed and drowned, which
were not few in number, I gave your Lordship knowledge in my Letter by a
Servant of Sir -- But since the Forces engaged themselves upon Newport, Where
600 good men killed near ^00* took 120 Prisoners, with the town, and a^^
Ammunition and Arms, without the loss of one man, only we had some 20 men
searched by firing of three Barrells of Powder, our men falling so violently on
their maine Guard, where their Ammunition (...) And upon this good success the
well affected of Glamo^gan-shire have taken the advantage of the time, Mr -- of
Weany, and Sir -- being their Cheifes to raise an Army of 3000 men, have taken
Swan^ie, and all the Shipping there, with much Ammunition and Arms; are now
before Cardiffe, have cut off their water, blocked it up, and if they have not
relief from Sea, doubt not but to be masters of it within these few days: My
Lords Forces are at Newport and Carlion, and have daily correspondence with
them, and are ready upon all occasions to join: The Country in both Counties
comes into my Lord with a pretty deal of forwardness, and march, and do
duty.


There is somewhat more, and of more concernment in the Express, and will it
may be, becommunicated hereafter: In the mean time, we thought fit to give the
Rebels thus much to chew upon, and our friends as much to cheer themselves
withal. M. Lillye guest very unhappyly in his Februaries Observations* [me
thinks we are sorrowful on a sudden.] And so did his neighbor of the Starry
Region* ^^hn Booker, in his Poetry upon this month.

Venus and Saturn in Conjunction,
Will much displease, who e're it lights upon.
Pray Coelicus tell us, did this Conjunction light upon these in South Wales,
or upon those in the West of England* For you will not deny but those of
Gallantry in Corfe-Castle did light upon those Horse that lie so close before
Corse-Castle, that if other occasions ca^^ them not off* it is hoped they will
take the Castle in short time, says the Perfect Occuryences* Number 7. 1646.
Thursday, Feb. 1^. If he had but added, or in short time the Castle would take
them, he had spoke truth in spite of his teeth; For of one whole Troop
consisting of ^^* but six escaped, the rest both men and horse are killed and
taken^ or did this Conjunction light upon them before Dunstar-Castle, which the
Lord ^oring^ Horse* says the Moderate Intelligenter, (if we had no other
authority, we will acknowledge at this time to be true) have releived and ^^^
therein 25 Cowes, 40 Sheep* and four Barrells of Powder, and spoiled our Mine
in their retreat: Yes, so they did, and in stead of ^^^sing 53 as he says
after, Tuesday* Feb. 10. they have took 35. or did this Conjunction light upon
them at (...) The Moderate Intelligencer, Saturday* Febr. 7* ^ells us* It is
taken by the Lord Loughborough; which we are willing to believe from him, but
do not yet persuade any man to believe it from us; But this we would have you
believe from us, that Captain Dayrell went with a commanded party of (...)
Horse, to Stony-Stratford* and there met with a party of Newport-Pagnell Horse,
took six prisoners, ten Horses, so that four went home on foot, and three
horses laden with very good provisions, but are better disposed of at Borstall
amongst honest men, then elsewhere. Howsoever it lighted upon some of them in
those places before mentioned, and in a smaller, but very fine proportion,
somewhere else, as

SATURDAY. Febr. 21.
We receive it this day; that upon Friday Febr. 20. Captain Masters (who
Commands Colonel Walters Troop) understanding that a party of the Enemies were
abroad plundering the Market folks, took with him a party of fourteen, and
coming too late at the place where they had been, he took eight of his
fourteen and advanced to a place called Balden, where he met with Eleven
Rebels, and their Companions, six plundered Calves, so that in the whole there
were 17 Heads, whom he no sooner charges, but they fly, and put themselves
into two Boats at Sandford, to ferry for Abingdon; the Captain and his men;
loath to go back again with nothing, swomme their Horses, recovered one of their
Boats, and therein took three of the men prisoners with their horses and Arms,
and brought them into Oxford; The Calves indeed were had safe to Abingdon; and
there we leave them. And now desire the world to take notice of the cold zeal
of the reformers at Westminster; before whom was brought one Paul Best, and
accused of some Peccadillo's, Blasphemy and Heresy, denying the Trinity of
Persons, and the Deity of Christ, and of the holy Ghost: The Perfect Diurnall
told us a fortnight since, and more, that they had committed him close
Prisoner, but yet we hear not of any other punishment: we hope they will deal
otherwise with him, then Mr Richard Brown dealt with a Blasphemer at Abingdon,
one Haunch by name, who by this Blasphemy became M. Brownes Favorite; when the
prisoners are called before General Brown, he places some on his right hand
like Sheep, and some on his left hand like Goats; I dare not repeat more of it;
nor do I say more of it then to tell M. Richard, that his great Sire for such
a kind of sin was devoured by Lice: it may be he is destined to another end.

FINIS.

