A wonderful and strange news, which happened in the Countye of Suffolk,
and Essex, the first of February, being Friday, where it rayned Wheat, the
space of vi. or vii. miles compass: a notable example to put us in remembrance
of the judgments of God, and a preparatiue, sent to move us to speedy
repentance. Written by William Auerell, student in Divinity.

Ecclesiasticus. 11. The works of the Lord are wonderful and glorious,
secret and unknown are his works among men.

Jmprinted at London, for Edward White, dwelling at the little North door of
Paul's church, at the sign of the Gunne. 1583.

Strange nevves out of Suffolk.
IT has seemed good in the eyes of our God (Christian Reader, no cause
compelling but his mercy,) always to admonish and warn before hand, by
some extraordinary event, of the punishments and plagues that he will send
for sin, and so great is his love toward mankind, whom he has made, that
when he perceives his image to be defaced in man's soul, he will not yet
strike generally, till he have warned us universally, so that before the stroke
of his judgments, he always sendes the messengers of his mercies, which
bursting out through vehemency of his love, does put us in mind of ye weight
of his wrath, and albeit yt ye hearts of the wicked are hardened, so yt no
judgment will make them quake, no maruailes amaze them, no wonders wine them,
no miracles move them, nor mercyes amend them, for that they are of the
nature of the stone, which albeit it be wet without and seems never so moist,
yet is it within nothing less then hard and dry, therefore the Lord gives
them over to their lusts, so that they are brambles of the desert, tares of
the field, chafe of the Corn, and stubble for the fire, who while they heap
sin upon sin, and draw sin together with cart-ropes, who while they
multiply one mischief on another grieve the spirit of God, tread down the
blood of his Testament, and drink up iniquity like water, who while they eat
up the poor, oppress the needy, defraude the simple, and gnawe in sunder the
hearts of the innocent, treasure up vengeance for themselves against the day
of wrath, to these therefore are the judgments of God sent to make them
without excuse, but to the godly are they given for their better amendment, who
while they behold the works of the Lord wrought only to this end, that
they should cast off the works of darkness, and cloth themselves with the
lovely garments of light, yt they should mortify the deeds of the flesh, and
live again to the liberty of the spirit, that they should put of the old man
with his concupiscences, and put on the new man Christ Jesus with his virtues,
their conversion should tend to his glory and their salvation to his endless
mercy.

Philip Melancthon records in his Latin Chronicle, that before the
deuastation of Italy there were seen many prodigious and wonderful things,
as armed men fighting in the air, blood to flow out of the earth and to
break out of the hard walls, with many other wunders which threatened great
calamities.

Before King Philip invaded Greece the heavens appeared all bloody.

And if we may credit probable Authors, when Marcus Acilius and C. Portius
were Consuls, the Elements rayned milk, with blood, and L. Voluminous and Ser.
Sulpitius being Consuls, of Rome, it rayned flesh. Also in Lucania a Country
belonging to Naples, between Fuel, and Calaber, before Lucicius Crassus was
slain of the Parthians, it rayned corn, L. Paulus and C. Marcellus being
Consuls, it rayned Wool, and at that time also hard burned Tyle stones fell
down from heaven.

Before the Wars in Denmark, were heard the noise and sound of trumpets from
the skies.

The year wherein Vespasian destroyed Jerusalem, a star appeared in heaven
in the figure of a sword, hanging over the City, Wagons appeared wandering and
running through the regions of heaven, and armed men were seen fighting in the
Clouds.

Pope Leo the seventh, being Bishop of Rome, the Sun for certain days
seemed al bloody, after which there followed a grievous pestilence.

In the year of our Lord 1348. Charles the fourth being Emperor, certain
Feasts, fell from heaven, the corruption and stink whereof brought a
sorrowful plague.

In the year of our Lord 1356 Calixtus the 3 being Bishop of Rome, among the
Sabynes, was brought forth a calfe having but two feet, at which time in Rome
over the gate of Venus It rayned blood, and the same time did it rain flesh
in Lyguria.

Henry the first being Emperor, in the fields of Hemilianus and Flaminius
in Italy, It rained blood in the Ides of June.

Innumerable examples, and most strange wonders could I recite which have
happened in times past among our elders, which would ask a large scope, and
open too wide afeelde for me to wander in, which albeit they are reported of
credible Authors, yet for that they would seem rather incredible then probable
to the common sort, I omit them, and will draw to those which we all do
steadfastly believe, and yet in their effects are far more strange.

Do we not read how Arons rod changed into a Serpent, Exodus. 7.
which devoured up all the rods of the charmers of Egypt, and of the 10.
wonderful plagues that God sent upon Pharo and his people.

The Children of Israel murmured against God, Exodus. 16. Nombers. 11
and he fed them with quails from heaven at even, and filled them with bread
of Man in the morning, they grudged for water, and the Lord burst the rocks
to give them drink, so he fed their hunger with flesh., and quenched their
thyrst with water, he divided the red Sea so that they went through as on
dry land, and closed the waters upon their enemies like a wall.

Corah, Dathan and Abiram, murmured against Moses, and the Lord sent a
wonderful miracle upon them, the fast and solid earth opened her bowels, and
swallowed them up, with their families their goods and all the men that were
with Corah, so they went down into the pit alive, the earth covered them, and
they perished from the congregation.

In the days of Iosuah Joshua. 4.
the Lord, showed wonders unto Israel for he led them through the waters of
Jordan as he did in the days of Moses through the red and salt Sea, so that
when ye feet of the Priests that bare the Arc of the covenant stayed in the
waters of Iordane, they wear cut of, and stood still on a heap, and as soon
as the Preests feet wear set on the dry land, the waters of Iordane
returned unto their place, and flowed over all the banckes thereof as they did
before.

Sundry and manifold are the examples of wonders set down or our view in the
holy scriptures, in the same book Joshua. 10
of Iosuah we read that when the five King, Adoni, Zedek, Hoham, Piram, Iapia
and Debir, made war upon Gibeon, the Lord discomfited them and threw down
great stones from heaven, upon them, so that more dyed with the hail stones
then dyed by the swords of the children of Israel, the Sun stood still in
Gibeon, and the moon in the valley of Aialon, till the children of Israel
wear avenged of their enemies, a hole day stood ye son still in the midst
of heaven, and hasted not to go down.

The like we read of, in ye History of Hezekiah, and in brief the whole
book of God is a spectacle of his wonders, a glass of examples, and a mirror
of his miracles, set down by his spirit for our instructiones, look through
the old Testament, and turn over the new, see if they be not both farsed
with wonders, and stored with Miracles, wherefore are they written but for our
learning? Wherefore wear they don but for our comfort, Quaecunque scripta
sunt, ad nostram doctrinam scripta sunt, they wear not only wrought for old
Israel, but also for us the redeemed and chosen people, to teach us to beware
by their dangers, who not regarding the works of the Lord, did harden their
hearts against his judgments: who contemninge the mercies of God in their
deliuerau^ce, were paid home with the terror of his vengaunce, but are there
not some Epicures among us that living at their lust, think these things
to be shadows: are there not some Libertines among us, that persuade
themselves that these things being past, pertain not to them, and are there
not some hard hearted Nullafideans, that: scarsly believe these things, for
that they say they are, Obliterata vetusttate: therefore that they might be
without excuse, behold the arm of the Lord is not shortened, nor his power is
not abated, but being. Semper et vbique idem, he leaves the wonders past, and
pricks us forward with things present, he leaves foreign reports, and
shows his works at home, he comes now to our towns, and knockes at the gates
of our Cities. O happy we, if we take him, O cursed we, if we forsake him:
the Lord has heard the cries of his ministers, soundinge his Gospel, long
time among us, but their voices are not hard, nor his word winnes no
regard: and therefore seeinge our stonye hearts will not wax soft with the
sound of his Gospel, he proves if they will melt with the fire of his
miracles.

It is not long sythence God shaked the earth in his anger, when he was
moved, the earth quaked, and the very foundacions thereof tottered, things
senseless can tremble at Gods judgments, but sinful men fear not his
furies, for a short time has worn out the remembrance of so great a wonder:
and as that, so all others do last with us but nine days.

That Godly exhortation of Master Field, to the observations of the Sabbath,
is almost already forgotten, and that heavy judgment of Parris garden,
beeginnes to flyppe out of remembrance, for men begin to flock theither
again, accounting the special warning of our GOD, to be some sudden
accident, that happened rather by chance then by choice, and because they will
be assured to escape the danger of falling, they make account to set fast
footing on the ground as though the earth were not the Lords and all that is
therein, and as though the Lord can not open the earth to swallowe the
despysers of his word.

We have yet fresh in our remembrance, the grievous punishment of M. Brustar,
but why do I call him master that being old was a filthy slave to his lusts,
and the horrible death of his minio^ lovely Lais, that loathing labor, lived
by luring, but even as Alcibiades the Athenian was slain in the filthy act
of his pleasure with his harlot Tymandra, and as Plutarche and Valerius makes
mention uncertain how: even so the Lord struck this old Lecher with his fine
Flora, that both of them were stubble for the fire, leaving the manner of the
judgment, to judge by the matter that remained, and surely as wonderful a
judgment as ever has happened and as hard to be scanned by the devise of
man's wit, that so small a fire as a little pan of coals half wasted,
should consume almost the one, and also burn the other to death, but sure a
right and just judgment that one fiery element being visible, should consume
another unvisible as the burning fire to consume ye flaming lust, for such is
the nature of lust, and rightly and fitlye may the heart of a lustful lecher
be compared to the stone Albestes, that being once on fire, is never
quenched, nor the lustful heart of an old crooked and consumed adulterer
till death never wasted, but they had their judgment, for our ensample, and
we may by there peril make our present profit. GOD grant we may, least a
speedy threatened punishment come upon us.

This warning was not given when the Lord by a wonderful work, did show his
omnipotency in other places for on Friday the first of this present month of
February, in the county of Suffolk at Ipswich, Storcknayland, Hadley, and
many other places: the Lord showed the power of his hand in this strange and
wonderful effect. Men ryding by the way, as it is credibly reported, felt in
a Snow as it were in a small drizling, a heavier fall of matter then in
snowing is accustomed to be, and feeling the same to pat somewhat hardly upon
them, by better aduisment perceived it to be a contrary matter, and therefore
taking of it up in their hands, they found that it was Wheat, the
strangeness hereof, did amaze many, who doubting it was some deceit and
colored devise, did not greatly believe the same, till coming into the towns
and villages, and bruting ye report thereof, it caused ye townsmen and
dwellers, to make search in their Gardens, for as much as they knew that if
any such thing fell, it would there be presently found, neither could it be
seen in the high ways, forasmuch as it rayned in so thyn and small an order,
yt the moisture and wet, with ye slabbinesse of the way, did take away the
knowledge thereof. But in Gardens and Closes and by Yardes was found great
abundance thereof: there was (at the writing hereof) in Town, one Master
Willyam Geffreies Clothier, acredible man and dwelling in Ipswhich, who found
of the same in his Garden, and brought thereof to London: and liyng at the
George in Lumbardstreate, gave thereof to the Host named Master Ginue, and to
other Gentlemen that desired the same of him, besides diverse other honest and
credible persons dwelling in that County, which lodged at the same place, and
faithfully reported the same. Now, as touching the manner and likeness thereof,
it did rightly resemble our common Wheat, saving that it was of a softer
substance, and looked somewhat greener, otherwise like unto our Wheat in all
respects: There are that did bite and eat thereof, who do affirm that it
has a more mealier inward substance then our Wheat has, and whiter also
with in: and it is reported, that some have baked thereof, but whether that be
so or no, it is not greatly material, only the thing is strange, that any
such substance should rain from the Heavens: but least some should object
that it might be scattered by the hands of some, in some certain places. It
is assuredly said that it rained not only in some one particular Town, but
six or seven miles compass: naie some say that it was found also in Essex
and other places: neither could it be scattered by men, either by negligence or
pretended purpose, for as much as it was found in many men's Gardens and
Backsides, whereas none could come to play any such pageaunt. This gentle
Reader have I heard told of those men them selves inhabityng that Country,
whereof some substanciall and credible have gathered and brought to this town
(for trial thereof) of the grain: Let us not therefore be to curious in
searchyng out the natural cause hereof, for were Arictottle alive with all the
Philosophers of the world, they could not search out the cause thereof,
neither is there any cause to be found, but the infringible, will and power
of our God, who is Causa causarum, and causa sine qua non, he it is that is the
efficient cause thereof, the final cause and end wherefore he sends the
same is our repentance, that we beholding his Omnipotency, might turn from
sin speedily, convert to him hastily, lay hold of his mercy, and by our
godly life set forth his glory: for God, seeing his word daiely preached, his
benefits and graces received: our peace, wealth, and quiett increased, and yet
our lives no whit amended, begins to shoot out the arrows of his anger,
out of the bow of his judgment and displeasure: and seeing we regard not his
word, he will teach us by wonders: Since we despise the invisible grace of his
Sacraments, he will send us the visible signs of his plagues and
punishments: I can not, neither we may not enter into the counselles of the
Lord, to say that this or that will happen or succeed thereof: But surely
Marcellus the Heathen man could say: Prodigia esse deorum iras vel minas: that
strange events are either the anger or threatenings of the Gods. And it has
been approved in all ages, that after such extraordinary and portentuous
tokens, have followed strange and terrible accidents, as is plainly to be
proved by many and sundry Histories: for they have been the forerunners of
plagues, of Wars, of Famines, of the death of Princes, of the alteration of
states, and of innumerable mischeefes, all which let us leave to the Lord at
his pleasure, and seek to prevent them by repentance and prayer: Let us leave
the secret understanding thereof to him, who makes no man of his counsel:
and for so much as we can not comprehend the same, within the compass of our
capacities. As Saint Augustine says: Augustine.
Dicamus deum aliquid posse, quod nos fateamur inuestigare non posse, in rebus
enim mirabilibus tota ratio faciendi, est potentia facientis: Let us grant
that God can do somethyng, which we confess we can not search out: For in
things that are wonderful, the whole manner to do the same, is the power of
the doing thereof. For as Gregory says: Gregory in hom. 1.
Rationem de occulto dei consilio quaerere, nihil aliud est, quam contra eius
co^filium superbire: To seek a reasone of the secret counsel of God, is no
other thing then to resist his counsel: And as the same Father says in the
same book: The miracles of God, they may be considered by study, but not
searched by understanding: And therefore we must say with the Prophett David.
This is the Lords doing and it is wonderful in our eyes. For which cause
Christian Brethren, seeing the Lord has by his great wisdom and power,
declared himself in this wonderful sort unto us, and has as it were, shaken
the sword in his displeasure, to signify unto us the weight of his anger.
Seeing also we know the cause thereof to be our sins, which because they
are outrageous, have therefore incensed the wrath of our GOD: and considering
likewise, that we know the means and ways to prevent the wrath and
indignation of God: namely by our repentance, by a sorrow unfeigned, a faith
assured, with a full purpose of a life amenmended: Let us not slack to turn
to the Lord, while he now turns unto us: let us not be slow to seek him
while he may be found, for if we know our Masters will and do it not, we
shall be beaten with many stripes. Let it not be said of us as it has been
of the Athenians: among whom when a certain old man came in to their Theater,
and none of the Citizens would rise and give him honor, (albeit, the reverence
of age was confirmed among them by law) he came by chance by the Ambassadors
of Lacedemon, who also came thither to behold, who perceiuyng the old man
because of his graie hears, rose up and gave him rome: which when the
Athanians beheld, with a great shoot they praised the deed, to who^ one of
the Lacedaemonians said: Athenienses quid fit rectum sciunt at illud facere ex
toto negligunt: The Athenians know what is meet to do, but they wholly neglect
to do the same. Even so Mutato nomine de nobis fabula naratur: Christians
know what is meet to do, but they wholly neglecte to do the same. Albertus
tells of certain Birds that albeit, they have wings yet they can not fly;
because they want eyes, and therefore they rather creep and hopp upon the earth
then fly any whit at all: and to such may we be compared: For albeit we
have the wings of knowledge, yet we lack the eyes of faith: and therefore
when we should fly with our minds and thoughts to heaven, for want of
faith, our hearts creep upon the earth, and are settled on yearthly
things: But as Hierome says: Hie. ad demetriadem.
Non sufficit mandata dei memoriter scire, and opere obliuisci. It is not
sufficient to know perfectly the Commandments of GOD, and by our works
to show we have forgotten them: which whether we have or not, is manifest by
the woeful spectakle of our sorrowful days: in which sin is so settled, and
grown to such ripeness, that it waits but for the sickell of the Lords
judgments. Look on our pride? are not our men trickt like Monsters, and our
women pricked like Players? Be not the bellies of men like bolsters, and their
buttockes made like Butterflyes? Are not our women changed into the shape of
men? how are their hear curld like Ruffianes, and their garments made like
Maskers? what iettyng and ioggyng, what shoueyng and shouldryng, what niceness
in treading, what iestures in going, what coiyng in countenance, what
trifelyng in talking: and to be short, how are manners corrupted, and all good
orders subverted: Lay this to the touchstone of Gods word, and see how it
agrees: alas it makes the godly to groan, although the ungracious feel no
grief. Leave this and look upon our covetousness, what pity is there of
the poor, and what relief of many needy: how are rentes raised, Incombes
leueyed, Leases corrupted, Bonds and their forfeites sued, poor needy souls
imprisoned, laws wrested, and truth little regarded: may it not be said of
our days as Petronius said of his. Quid faciunt leges vbi sola pecunia regnat,
Aut vbi paupertas viuere nulla potest
Iam non iudicium est, nihil est nisi public amerces
Nullaque iustitia est fraus vbi iura regit,
Venalis populus, venalis curia primum
Ipsaque maiestas aere sepulta iacet.
What good do laws where money rainges alone
Or where the poor can not obtain his right,
Our judgment now to common gain is grown:
No justice is where fraud puts law to flight,
Men set to sale, the judgment seat likewise,
Honor her self in money buried lies.


But omittyng this with our Usury, Blasphemy, Adultery, Envy, Subteltie,
Oppression, Extortion, and Briberie seeing we are all corrupt, even from the
sole of the foot unto the hedde. Seeing there is nothing whole in us, but all
wounds and swellyngs, and sores full of corruption: Let us desire the Lord
to wrappe us up, to bind up our wounds, and to mollify us with the Oil of
his grace, for we are the unfruitful Vineyard, even this little realm of
England which albeit our land has been plentiful, yet have our lives been
barren, and unthankful, the Lord has hedged us in with his graces, he has
gathered out the stones of Popery and errors, he has planted us with the
best plants, namely of sound Religion, and the truth of his Gospel, he
has builte a Tower in the midst of us which is his Church. We have a wine
press the house of prayer, the Lord has looked that we should bring forth
grapes of good life, but we have brought forth the wild grapes of
wickedness, and now our own consciences can be witness, that the lord has
done so much for us, as more he could not do for any Nation: he will
therefore take away our hedge of defense, namely his mercies, and so shall we
be trodden down of our enemies.

The Lord has looued us with an everlasting love, he has chosen us to him
self in mercy, he has fed us with the fatness of the earth, and given
unto us the dew of heaven: he has cast a bancke about us for our defense,
and closed us in with a wall of strength, he has with peace sent us plenty,
and with abundance given us tranquillity. We have a gracious and merciful
Queen to guide us, endued with wisdom; learning and virtue, that labors
daiely the increase of the Gospel. God has given wise and grave Counsailers,
in the midst of trouble to determine our causes, who care and carke for the
defense of our Country, and apply their study for our commonweals
commodity, the Lord has endewed us with learned Bishops, Pastors and
teachers, who ring daiely in our ears, the golden belles of the Law and
Gospel: who sound out of a sweet golden Trompet, the cherefull allarum
against our enemies. They feed us with Manna, being Aungelles food, and give
us clear water out of the pure Fountain: They have stopped up the muddie
puddelles of Popery, and given us to drink of the clear Silver streams of
the Gospel. Let us not be unthankful to GOD for them for they stand in
the gappe, to turn away the wrath of the Lord, it is the prayers of these,
that holds back the angry hand of the Lord. Ovid says, that Arturus is a
Star, placed nere the Pole Artick, which never falls, but rises and
compasses continually about the Pole, if this star should fall, the Pole
would by and by fail, and so the whole frame of the world should perish:
Even so these holy and godly men (as no doubt there are some, though the
number be few in this City) they are those that day and night do compass
the Pole of this world, who continually beat in the ears of the lord with
their prayers, and like this Star, they are continual in risyng, and never
fall, were it not for whom, the frame of this world had long since been
dissolved, but assuredly there being is not long, for these wonderful tokens
and prodigious signs, do manifestly tell us of the worlds consumation, let
us therefore watch, for the time is at hand. Let us be wise Virgins with
our Oil in our Lamps, that we may enter into the weddyng Chamber, when our
spouse Christ Jesus shall come to Judgment, let us continue to the end that we
may eat of the hidden Manna, let us strive valiauntly that we may obtain the
Croune, and gain the kingdom we have long hopes for, and hear the sweet and
comfortable saying: Come ye blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom
prepared for you, from the beginning of the world, and that this may speedely
come. Let us continually cry, Come lord Jesus, come quickly, bring us to the
fruition of thy joys, and shorten these our miserable days, that we may all
with one voice glorify thee in thy heavenly kingdom, and sing that sweet song
holy, holy, holy, Lord God almighty: Grant this O Father for Christ's
sake, to whom with thee and the holy spirit be all honor and praise both now
and for ever. Amen.

Witness hereunto, these men whose names do follow. Master William
Geffreyes, dwelling in Jpswhich. John Bull, servant to Justice Germaye.
Richard Boothe of Jpswhich, dwelling with Olyuer Boothe. Richard Kaye: with
diverse others


FINIS.

