CHRISTOPHER ANGEL, A Grecian, who tasted of many stripes and torments
inflicted by the Turks for the faith which he had in Jesus Christ.

AT OXFORD, Printed by John Lichfield, and James Short, Printers to the famous
University. 1618.

TO THE MOST RENOWNED AND resplendent, most wise, and judicious, most learned
and loving Patrons of the Greek Tongue: most gracious supporters of the
decayed estate of all distressed Grecians and Strangers: Fathers and Brethren
in Christ, Governors and Heads of the two famous and flourishing Universities
of this Island in general, and more in particular to all heads of Colleges
therein, and whatsoever Students under their protection, and to all Divines,
Physicians and Lawyers: Furthermore to all that bear authority in the ample
and well governed Cities; In general to the industrious and studious among the
Commonaltie within the Confines of the ever honored and admired England,
prosperity here, and glory hereafter.
HEretofore gray-eyed Minerua spoke and prophesied in Athens, by the mouths of
learned Grecians: but now, and long before this time, I see her singing in
Brittany by the mouths of the most wise English men, and crowning the sons of
England with all kinds of diverse colored Garlands.

Concerning me, if any man shall enquire what might be the cause, and for what
reason I came into this famous Island, and have traveled so far as this most
illustrious and renowned University of Oxford; may it please him to he are the
cause, (God himself will witness it to be true according to this ensuing
discourse.) Because the Devil perceived that his time was but short, therefore
he came into the Earth full of wrath and was moved against the Church of God,
as a raging and angry Lion; according to that which S. John says in the
Revelation, the 12. Chap. and the 22. Verse; and as the Prophet Danid speaks
in the 80. Psalm and the 13. Verse, The wild Bore out of the Wood has
destroyed it, and the wild beasts of the fields have eaten it: and again in
the 83. Psalm, Verse 5. and 6. They have consulted together in heart, and have
made a league against thee; The Tabernacles of Edom, and the Ismaelites, etc.
Right so the Greek Church at this time suffers, being destitute of all
perfection and knowledge: the cause of this evil, is the great Turk, that is,
the King of the Turks does desire, and is willing to have peace with all that
are under him: but some of his Magistrates are very wicked and proud, and by
those the Greek Church does suffer much misery. For this reason, neither can
there be any School, neither any Master desiring to teach Scholars can
remain in one place. Even as I suffered and know: who have tasted of many
kinds of misery. Now the cause of this my misery was this: I in my youth
desired much to better my understanding and my learning, remembering that saying
of Christ; Search the Scriptures and in them thou shall find everlasting life:
and that of Saint Paul to Timothy, In that thou have known the holy
Scriptures of a child which are able to make thee wise unto salvation. And that
of Solomon; where the Lord says, In that thou askedst wisdom only and nothing
else, I will give thee wisdom and riches therewithal, and a Kingdom greater
then all the Kingdoms of the earth: And that of David in the hundred and
nineteenth Psalm, In thy Laws did I meditate. Yet by reason of the defect of
Teachers I traveled through many places in Greece that I might supply that
want; profiting in some places more, in some less: At length I came to Athens,
studied and preached there; now the Captain of that place, was an Hagarene,
and a deadly enemy to all Christians which dwelt at Athens: besides this, he
was very covetous and cruel, unjust, and did much wrong to the Athenians: by
reason whereof the Athenians went to the great Turk three several times, and
complained of the injuries which he had offered them, whereupon the great Turk
sent certain Noble men to hang him; but by reason of his Riches and Nobility
they could not accomplish that they were sent for. The Captain upon these
complaints was grievously offended with the Athenians: and farther, to satisfy
his own greedy desires, he oppressed many Strangers: amongst the, rest seeing
me also, who was a Stranger and unknown of all: immediately he lays hands
upon me, diligently examined me concerning the name of the Governor of my
Native Country: I answered, that it was now almost twenty years since I left
my Country for study and learning sake; and that I had not as yet returned to
my Country, and therefore I knew not the name of the Governor thereof. Then
he answered me, If you know not your Governor, you must go to Prison;
whither when I came, they clapped a pair of Bolts upon my legs. Not long after
the Governor called many of the Turks, who derive their beginning from
Mahomet: and then he took me out of Prison, and brought me before them, and
said unto them, Behold a Spanish Traitor. They all cried out, It Is true as you
say, he is a traiterous Spaniard, as we know by his Beard, for it is long and
picked, and black, and his clothes are of a Spanish red (for I did wear
apparel of red color, such as the chief of the Greek Monks use also:) and
some of the Christians standing by, made answer for me to the Turks, that
this was the usual apparel of the better fort of the Greek Monks: but the
Turks withstood that, saying, that the Monks Habits were made of courser
cloth, but mine was of finer, and therefore a Spanish garment. This they said,
not that the cloth was indeed finer then that of other Monks, but that they
might unjustly pick a quarrel; and bring some accusation, whereby they might
punish me. After this they began to iutice me saying; Our Easter is near at
hand, and if thou will deny thy Christ, we promise thee (and that we may not
deceive thee as concerning our promise, we swear) that if thou will become a
Turk, thou shall greatly honor our feast day, and for this we will make thee
a Centurion, besides other great honors which wait upon thee. Now it is the
manner of the Turks when they swear, not to falsify their words; and thrice
in this manner they tempted me: but I denied them always, telling them, That
my care was not for honors, but that I desired rather to die in the same
Religion, for which my father and mother died also. Then one of the Governors
came, and plucking me by the Beard, and the hair of the head, buffetted me,
saying; Why, seeing I turned Turk, may not thou also? (for before time he
had been a Christian) I answered him, that I cared not what he had done, I
allow not of it. Then he threw me on the ground, and trampled upon my head
before all the Congregation of Turks, and Christians. And afterward they shut
me up in close ward, meaning after a few hours to bring me out again to
punishment, that for fear of stripes I might turn Turk. And certain
Christian slaves belonging to the Captain, who were of the Western Church,
came to me, saying: Now is the time that thou shall bescourged to death unless
thou turn; and they besought me, saying, It is better to dye then turn Turk.
I answered, God forbid, that I should deny Christ the true God, I will first
die an hundred times in one day before I deny my Savior Christ. Then my
conscience said to me in private: But can I then endure torments even unto
death? Then my reason answered, Christ was a man, and yet he suffered on the
Cross to death, and that not for himself, but others. But then I reasoned
again; Christ was both God and man, therefore he could withstand the terrors
of death: but I am a fleshly man, and perchance I cannot undergo the cruel
pangs of death: but my conscience solued all this doubt, in that the Martyrs
were fleshly men, and sinners, yet by the grace of God were strengthened to
die, therefore by the same grace shall I be sustained. And in this cogitation I
was much comforted, and prevailed in spirit, and wholly gave my self over to
suffer death: and they led me straight ways to the place of execution, and
bound me hand, and foot in manner of a Cross upon the Earth, as appears by
this figure following.



These signify two Turks, beating Christopher Angelo with two Cudgels on each
side of him, one strikes him on the head, and the other on the side. And he
remained one hour dead, as the Athenians told him, after he was revived.

Since here I have no witnesses, that for the present may testify the truth of
these my sufferings, therefore I call the eternal Father, and God of all, both
witness and judge in this manner: The eternal God punish me in this World and
in that to come, if I have not thus suffered from the Turks unjustly, for my
faith in Christ, as is aboue-written. For they laid on the Earth thick pieces
of Timber like the beams of an house, and to them they bound me; and then they
began to beat me with scourges, as appears in the figure. Two men dipping
their Rods in salt Water began to scourge me; and when the one was lifting
up his hand; the other was ready to strike, so that I could take no rest, and
my pain was most grievous: and so they continued beating me, saying, Turn
Turk, and we will free thee: but I answered them, In no case, until they made
me half dead. Then they rested a while, saying, He is surely very constant,
and will not deny his Religion: but we will tell him that we will let him go
if he will say that the Athenian Merchants which are in Venice, sent him to
betray Athens unto the Spaniards: and then they began to beat me on the
feet, saying: Confess that the Athenians which traffic in Venice, sent thee
to betray Athens to the Spaniards, and we will let thee go. Now the Turks
would have me bear false witness against the Athenians, that thereby they
might take them, and slay them for the hatred which was between the Governor,
and the Athenians. I said nothing to this, and till this time I understood what
the Turks said; but from this moment, that is, from that time, in which they
said twice or thrice to me, Confess that the Athenians sent thee to betray
Athens, I answered nothing, I understood nothing, I was perfectly dead, and so
remained for the space of an hour, and again after an hour, by the grace of
God revived. I know not well how long time I remained dead; but the Grecians of
Athens told me that I was dead for an hours space, as they had heard from the
mouth of the Turks that tormented me. Then the Turks took all my substance,
my books, I mean; and riches; and I was much in debt, till by the request of
many Noblemen I was freed from Prison. And after a week, they counseled among
themselves to take me, and in one hour to kill me, or make me turn Turk
by whipping, and other torments: But this laying wait was made known to all
the Christians, both men and women in Athens, and to me also. Then I fled from
Athens, and came unto Peloponnesus into the house of my Brothers, and the
Turks pursued me to their house, to the end they might take me in the same:
who wrought means for my escape, that I was not then taken. And after that I
was fled from thence, they laid hands on my two Brothers, with whom how they
dealt God knows, and not I. And thus wandering abroad, I found expert
Merchants, which knew well both England and many other places: and I inquired
diligently of them where I might keep my Religion, and increase my Learning:
they told me, in England you may have both, for the English men love the
Grecians, and their Learning: and it is a Monarchy, where are found many very
honest, wise, and liberal men. Therefore I came in a straight course to
England, studying these many years. And first I thank God, who sent me such
honest and learned men; and secondly your Worships, who are my most kind
Benefactours, and all good and charitable men: and I beseech God day and night,
that he will restore an hundred fold to you in this life, and in the life to
come a Crown incorruptible; to you I say, and all other good men, for their
great goodness and liberality. Amen.

An Epistle in commendations of England and the Inhabitants thereof.
I am conscious to my self of mine own unworthiness, having not so much as a
taste of that Learning, which might make me bold to present my lines before so
worthy men: yet because (as a Wiseman has it) necessity drives a man to many
a shift; I am therefore thus set on work. Our Savior Christ both God and man;
as God does require spiritual honor from the souls of men, to wit,
goodness, love, carfulness to perform good things, alms deeds, and the
like; according to that of the Prophet David, Let every spirit praise the Lord:
and as S. Paul commands, Glorify GOD in your body, and in your spirit, for
they are Gods. Now as man, our Lord requires such honor, as was due unto that
person in him. For so it appears in that question of his unto the Leper; who,
of ten that were cleansed, alone returned to render our Savior thanks: Are
there not ten cleansed, but where are those nine? Surely as a Wiseman speaks,
he must needs be of a very ungrateful disposition, who in matters of kindness
can suddenly become forgetful. For my own part if there be any such, who for
benefits received, shall not return special acknowledgement always unto his
friends, let him bear that foul note of ingratitude, with disgrace and
infamy amongst men. I my self for some years have been nursed in this
delicious and blisfull English I Will: should I not ever acknowledge this with all
thankfulness both to this Country, and specially to your most reverend
dignity, and to your self my kind Master and Benefactour? I might justly be
accounted one of those. Therefore that I may not seem ungrateful for such
great benefits, as much as in me lies, I will send forth this speech, and so I
begin.

O faire-like man, thou most fertile and pleasant Country of England, which art
the head of the World, endued with those two fair Eyes, the two Universities,
which rainest down most plentifully Milk and Honey. I call thee fairelike
man, and the head beautified with two pleasant Eyes, because heretofore thou
did send forth two horns of the holy Church of Christ. The first is
Constantine the Great, that second Light of the World, who freed such as were
held in captivity for the confession of Christ, who driued away the mist of
Idolatry, who was equal with the Apostles, and first triumphed over the
enemies of Christ. The second horn is holy Helen, who found out that
life-bearing cross, the weapons of all true Christians, the most holy Mother
of the World. But now, and long since thou have been beautified with two
resplendent Eyes, in that thou contaynest the two famous Universities. For I
call the two Universities the two resplendent Eyes, even most renowned, and
most beautiful Oxford, with her Sister the like renowned Cambridge. And if it
be lawful to compare the World to a man's body (for a man, according to
Aristole, is a little World) surely I must account England the head of this
body: for it is even so divided by the Sea from the other parts of the World,
as a man's head from his body by the neck. Thou art also the place of refuge,
even the haven of comfort to poor Grecians oppressed with the tyranny of the
Turks: as David says in the 83. Psalm. Against the Arc of the covenant, the
Tabernacles of Edom, and the Ismaelites have set themselves, etc. Thou bring
forth most Wise men, yea most valiant and heroical Captains, (as heretofore
Grecia did) yea and those lovers of the Greeks, and partakers of their former
virtues. Now the reason of this I will tell you. We read in the Histories of
Eusebius Bishop of Cesarea, that Constantine the Great, and his holy mother
Helen were Britains, the offpring and flowers of Britain: and when
Constantine the Great, ruled over the Grecians, as also the whole World, then
his kinsfolk came out of Britain to Constantinople, and lived in the
presence of Constantine; and like wise the Grecians were sent into England from
Constantine, and so the Grecians and English were mingled in blood. And for
this cause the English love the Grecians, and their Learning, and are beloved
of them more then any other Nation. And they partake one of another in many
things beside: For the English Nation have excelled in Wisdom, and all
Heroical Virtues, as the Grecians of old did. And they do diligently, and
with great understanding search out the truth, (as says Paul, Beware lest any
make a prey of you through philosophy, and vain deceit) as the Grecians also
heretofore are accounted to have done: and they are also given to hospitality,
and pity of poor strangers, as were the Grecians (as S. Paul says to the
Thessalonians, Concerning brotherly love I need not speak: for you are taught
this from above:) and they will also dye for their Religion, but never turn
from their true worship of God to any other, as also the Grecians: yea I my
self was once dead through the cruel scourging of the Turks for the Faith of
Christ, and I never denied Christ the true God. (I thank him that strengthened
me.)

All hail therefore, O most worthy England: for thou art a Virgin, which wast
never brought into thraldom by any King, although thou have bin sometime
humbled, yet thou wast never captiued: and as thou art a Virgin, so the mother
also of many wise men, yea valiant Captains, and heroicke Warriers. Thus much
be spoken of England, which of no other can so truly beverified.

In Commendation of England.


First, the Head, signifies England. Secondly, the Crown, shows the strength
of the Land. Thirdly, the Eyes, signifies the two great Universities of
England. Fourthly, the Mouth, signifies London. Fifthly, the Nose, signifies
the River of Thames. Sixthly, the Hair, signifies the goodness of England.
Seventhly, the little Man, signifies a Grecian that was persecuted by the
Turks, and comne to receive the goodness of England.

THe Bearer hereof, Christopher Angel, a Greek borne in Peloponnesus, having
bin persecuted by the Turks for his Religion, which by his Letters
Testimonial appears, and for that cause was forced to leave his Country,
came to Cambridge about Whitsontide 1608. and finding some relief, has
continued unto the day of the date hereof. During which time, his mauner of
life has bin very honest and studious. Now, because he could not here have his
health, being desirous to travel abroad into the Country, he has requested
these our Letters for a Testimony of his honest behavior, which we have
willingly granted unto him, and set to our hands, this tenth of May. 1610.

Ioha. Duport. Vicecan. Thomas Comber Trinitatis Coll Samuel Brook Trin. Coll.
Geruase Nid. Nath. Tailor. Joshua Blaxton.


To the Clergy and others of the Dioces of Sarum.
WHereas the Bearer hereof, Christopher Angel, a poor Grecian (whom we have
known in the University of Oxford well and honestly to behave himself
toward all men) being in great want, and having not wherewith to supply the
same, requested our Letters to stirvp the hearts of those that shall be ready
to commiserate his case: These are therefore to commend him and his charitable
suite to your Christian benevolence, in sustayning of whom you shall do very
well: and so much the more, because he has bin persecuted for his Religion,
as by his Letters Testimonial plainly appears. Thus fare you well. From our
Palace at Sarum. 15. Die Augusti. 1616.

To. Sarum.

THe Bearer hereof, Christopher Angel, a Greek, borne in Peloponnesus, having
bin persecuted by the Turks for his Religion, as by his Letters Testimonial
appears, and for that cause forced to leave his Country, came to Oxford about
Whitsontide 1610. and finding relief, has continued unto the day of the date
hereof; during which time, his manner of life has bin quiet, honest, and
studious. And because he is weary, and desirous to visit his friends in
England, he has requested these our Letters Testimonial of his honest
behavior amongst us, which we have willingly granted unto him, and thereunto
set our hands, this 20. of March, An. Dom. 1617.

Arthur Bath and Wells, Vicecan. Oxon. R. Kilby. R. Kettell. William Goodwin.
Sebastian Benefield. William Langton. Richard Mocket. John Prideaux. Tho.
Anyan. Theod. Price. Io. Wilkinson. Tho. James. Samuel Radeclif. Ant. Blincowe.
Griffith Powell. Fr. Greuile.


THe Bearer hereof Christopher Angel, a Greek, borne in Peloponnesus, having
been persecuted by the Turks for his Religion, as by his Letters Testimonial
appears, and for that cause forced to leave his Country, came to Oxford about
Whitsontide, 1610. and finding relief has continued unto the day of the date
hereof; during which time his manner of life has been quiet, honest and
studious, greatly differing from the lewd course of some other Greeks, that
wander up and down: and now they have sent Letters from his Country,
certifying him that after he fled thence, the Turks laid hold of his Brethren
and Kinsfolks, as that sent him away; and have taken from them all their
goods, and cast them moreover into great debt, for which debt, and much use
which they are forced to pay, they are in trouble until this day. For which
cause he has desired these our Letters Testimonial of his honest behavior
amongst us, which we have willingly granted unto him, and thereunto set our
hands, this July 3. 1620.

John Prideaux Vicecan. Oxon. Richard Kilbey. R. Kettell. Sebastian Benefield.
Io. Parkhurst. Theo. Price. Tho. James. Io. Wilkinson. Guliel. Piers. Rich.
Astley. To. Pinck. Guil. Smith. Tho. Clayton. Medic. Professor Regius. Matthew
Osborne, Procurator senior.


Eugenius and Rhodius, thy Brethren according to the flesh, and thy Sifters
Gergulina and Asmena, and the rest of thy Kinsfolks and friends, salute thee
our Brother Master Christopher.
WE give you to understand (Brother) that since you fled from Athens, lest thou
should be apprehended again, and forced to deny Christian; and repayring
to us to avoid them that sought thee, we procured thee safe flight; and after
thy flight, the Turks and the Grecians, who paid money for thee in Athens,
having notice that we were thy Brothers, laid hold on us, and imprisoned us,
and sore afflicted us with many punishments. The Turks also that paid money
for thy ransom, took from us all the goods we had, and for the remainder we
yet pay interest. Now all thy debts together with the usury, amount to three
hundred pounds or thereabout. Neither is this all we suffer, but our Children
also are in hold, and attached for thy debt, and are in danger to turn Turks
and deny Christ. We knew not whither thou wast gone, now we have heard thou
art in England. Now we demand of thee, whether it be good that we and our
Children should suffer these evils for thy debts? We entreat therefore for
Gods sake, either to come thy self to pay thy debts, or send them, and free us
and our Children from the hands of Infidels, lest thou give an account to God
for the injuries which for thy sake we suffer.

From Gaston a City in Pelopon. 1618. 5. Ian.

