GOOD CHRISTIAN LOOK TO THY CREED: FOR A TRVE TRIAL OF AN HOLY PROFESSION,
AND OF THE truth of Religion, from all crooked bypath. BY RICHARD BERNARD
RECTOR of Batcombe in Sumersetshire.

AT LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, and are to be sold by Edward
Blackmore, at the Angel in Paul's Churchyard. 1630.

QVESTIONS AND ANSWERS OVT OF THE CREED, AND OTHER GROUNDS of Religion, for
the Assurance of a Christian man's Salvation.
Question. WHat are you by your Profession in Religion?


A. A Christian.


Q. Where is set down the sum of your Christianity?


A. In the Creed.


Q. What does it teach you?


A. To believe in one God, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, and that
this God has a Church holy and Catholic for the Salvation whereof, the Son
of God became man, and has purchased for it an eternal Inheritance in the
highest heavens.


Q. What is then your assured hope of body and soul, if you hold on in this
faith to the end?


A. Life Everlasting.


Q. Does not Death cut off the hope of enjoying thereof?


A. No, for I believe the resurrection of the body at the last Day.


Q. To be sure hereof, what is it which you must believe and labor for before
you die?


A. The forgiveness of sins: for if I be not pardoned, I can never be
saved.


Q. What manner of person then must you be, to be certain of the pardon of
your sins?


A. A Saint: for Saints only inherit heaven.


Q. With whom then must you seek to have fellowship and familiarity here in
this life?


A. With Saints.


Q. What is this your fellowship with them called?


A. The Communion of Saints.


Q. Being in this Communion, of what body are you a member?


A. Of the Catholic Church: out of which is no Salvation.


Q. What does govern and guide both it and you?


A. The holy Ghost: who is in all and every member thereof.


Q. If you be sure of the forgiveness of sins, that you are a Saint in the
Communion of Saints, a member of the holy Catholic Church, and ruled by the
holy Ghost, what is it that now you desire and daily look for?


A. The coming of Jesus Christ from Heaven, to judge both the quick and the
dead.


Q. What is He, that you can so love and long after his appearance?


A. He is the only Son of the Father, our Lord, God and man our Savior.


Q. How came he to be man?


A. He was conceived by the holy Ghost.


Q. Of whom was he borne?


A. Of the Virgin Mary.


Q. What has he done for you?


A. He has perfectly fulfilled the Law, being being obedient to his Father in
all things, He suffered under Pontius Pylate, was crucified, dead and buried,
he descended into hell: and the third day he rose again from the dead.


Q. What then became of him after his abode here a while?


A. He ascended into Heaven.


Q. What does he there now?


A. He sits at the right hand of God the Father Almighty making
Intercession for us.


Q. But may you apply particularly and believe, that he has done all these
things for you, as well as for any other?


A. Yes verily I may say, that he was conceived Gal. 2. 20.
and borne for me, suffered and crucified for me, dead and buried for me, that
he descended into hell for me, that he rose again, and ascended up into
Heaven for me, making request to the Father even as well for me, as for any
other true believer.


Q. How are you able thus to apply him?


A. By the power of Faith and the operation of the holy Ghost.


Q. But may not others say thus much out of a presumptuous imagination?


A. Tes, no doubt through the Spirit of error seducing them.


Q. Then how do you know, that this particular applying of Christ, and his
benefits to you? arises not of such a presumptuous conceit?


A. By my confermitie to him in some sort as he is set out to us in such
Articles of the Creed as do concern him.


Q. Relate if you can the particulars, the better to discover the sure grounds
of this your confidence.


A. I. As I believe Jesus Christ to be the begotten of the Father, and to be
his Son:

So must I be begotten of God. Iam. 1. 18. 1. Cor. 4. 15. Philem. verse 10. and
be Gods Child by adoption. John 1. 12. Gal. 4. 5.

II. As he was conceived, and sanctified by the holy Ghost.

So must I be sanctified by the same Spirit. Romans 15. 16. Act. 26. 18.

III. As he was borne.

So must I be borne anew. Ioh. 1. 13. and 3. 3. 5. 1. Pet. 1. 25.

IV. As he obeyed his Father, and did always John 8. 19.
those things that pleased him.

So must I obey and endeavor to please him in all things. Coll. 1. 10. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 1. Heb. 12. 28. 2. Cor. 5. 9.

V. As he suffered.

So must I suffer with him, Romans 8. 17. 2. Tim. 2. 12. 1. Pet. 2. 21. and for
him, for so we are hereunto called, 1. Pet. 2. 21. Act. 14. 22. 2. Tim. 3. 12.

VI. As he was crucified.

So must I be crucified with him, Gal. 2. 20. even the old man, Romans 6. 6. and
also the flesh, with the affections and lusts thereof, Gal. 5. 24.

VII. As he was dead.

So must I be dead with him unto sin, Romans Romans 6. 14.
6. 2. 8. and dead unto the Law, Gal. 2. 19.

VIII. As he was buried.

So must I be buried with him by Baptism, Romans 6. 4. Coll. 2. 12.

IX. As he descended into Hell.

So must I be humble in mine own eyes, and descend down in my thoughts of my
self, as justly deserving Hell; If I were rewarded according to my own
deserts.

X. As he rose again.

So must I be quickened. Ephesians. 2. 5. and rise with him through the faith of the
operation of God, Coll. 2. 12. and being alive with God, Romans 6. 11. I must
live unto righteousness, 1. Pet. 2. 24. and walk in newness of life. Romans 6.
4.

XI. As he ascended into Heaven.

So must I ascend in my affection after him, striving to be dissolved and to be
with him, Phil. 1. 23. setting in the mean season my mind on things above,
Coll. 3. 1. Having my conversation in Heaven, Phil. 3. 20.

XII. As he sits on the right hand of God in Heaven.

So must I with others sit together in heaunly places in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.
6. upon these grounds do I assure my self to have a right in my blessed
Savior, to apply him particular to my self for my endless comfort.


Q. And indeed so well thus you may do, but now having certainly this right
in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, what does this faith work in you
toward God his Father?


A. To believe in him, and that he is become my Father also, and that he will
do for me above all that I can ask or think, Ioh. 16. 23. and 15. 17. and
14. 13. for his sake.


Q. But what think you of his divine power?


A. That he is exceedingly able abundantly Ephe. 3. 20. to do for me above
all that I can think, because he is Almighty.


Q. Wherein does this appear?


A. Because he made Heaven and Earth.


Q. What do you conclude now out of all these things?


A. That I am safe under his al-sufficiency for the good of body and soul, by
whose power, through faith I am kept unto salvation, and so to enjoy life
everlasting. 1. Pet. 1. 5.


Q. May you then live securely, as it were carelessly upon this confidence.


A. God forbid; for I am commanded to work out my Salvation with fear and
trembling, Phil. 2. 12. And in my Creed I am taught to believe, that there is
as well a Hell for the wicked, as a Heaven for the Godly.


Q. Now besides this your Creed, are there any other helps, to awe a man to
Godward, and to keep him from carnal security?


A. Yes indeed, very easy to be conceived, and to be gathered out of the other
parts of the Common Catechism with settled meditations thereupon.


Q. As how I pray you, upon the Commandments?


A. I. To think seriously whose they be, even the precepts of the God of
Heaven and earth, terrible in wrath and without respect of person in executing
vengeance against transgressors.

II. That they are the rule of righteousness, to every Christian concerning
his duty to God, to man, and to himself.

III. That a curse is upon every one, hat either wilfully or carelessly leads
a life without conscionable respect unto these Commandments.

IV. That by our Church we are taught, and with our mouths we pray, that the
Lord would have mercy upon us, to incline our hearts to keep every Law, and we
beseech him to write all these his Laws in our hearts.

V. That in thus praying in words, and yet without affection of heart, or
conscience of obedience we mock God, and provoke him the more to wrath, by so
dallying with such a dreadful Majesty.

VI. That this Law was given in great terror, making all Israel to fear and
tremble at the delivery thereof: Oh then think what will be that horror in men's
hearts, when God comes to execute his Justice, pouring vyals of wrath upon the
rebellious.

VII. That God has for our encouragement exhorted us to obey them, left
memorable examples of men living in obedience, blesing and rewarding them for
well doing, with promises of his mercies to all others that so do, and to
reward them with everlasting glory in the end.

VIII. And lastly, that God on the contrary has dehorted us from
transgressions, left fearful examples of his wrath upon Offenders, threatening
still to take vengeance upon exery such wicked one, and in the end to cast them
all into Hell, there to be tormented in flaming fire with the Devil and his
Angels for ever.


Q. These eight Meditations may shake the stoutest heart and humble the highest
thoughts of such as make no conscience of sin, and go on in their courses.
But how may a man from the Lords prayer, rouse up his heart from carnal
security.


A. If rightly understanding what he asks, and has also a true desire to
obtain what he craves of God, if I say, he shall demand questions of
himself before he pray, thus meditating.

I. How can I (except I resolve to mock God) say hallowed be thy Name, by me
in an holy conversation, and yet live in all profaneness, lewdly dishonouring
his Name, abusing his mercy and benefits, not regarding his Justice, and living
without all respect of his Glory and praise?

II. How can I say thy Kingdom come, and desire that God may erect up here a
Kingdom of grace in our hearts, by his Spirit, Word, and the Ministry of
faithful Teachers, to prepare us to Glory, and yet resist the motions of the
Spirit, refuse to be ruled by him, hate Gods Ministers, mock at the preaching
of the Word, jest at the reading of Scriptures, and live as if there were
neither Heaven nor Hell, God nor Devil, nor any day of Judgment!

III. How can I beg heartily to do Gods Will here in Earth as it is in
Heaven, and yet live in ignorance of Gods Will, following my own lusts, or
other men's wills; despising the revealed will of God, never doing what God
would have done, as he requires his will to be done, to wit, willingly,
readily, joyfully, faithfully, sincerely, and constantly: But if I do it, it is
too too unwillingly with deferring off, by halfes, with by-respects, and but
only by fits in some sickness, or other cross.

IV. How can I every day say, Give me this day my daily bread, to wit, that
which is mine, honestly and justly come by; and yet live either idly or
distrustfully in excessive care, or fraudulently, getting maintenance by
coozonage and deceit, and riches by oppression, usury and extortion, by
shifting, by gaming, yea by swearing, forswearing, robbery and theft,
distrusting continually Gods providence, in the use of lawful means, as
fearing loss thereby?

V. How can I desire with sorrow, in sight of sin, the pardon of sin, even
as I forgive others trespassing against me, and yet wallow in sin, as the
Swine in mire, in drunkenness, adultery, gluttony, murder, slander, lying,
swearing, forswearing, and greedy coveting, also in malice, envy, grudging,
ill will, with desire of revenge, and in other uncharitable courses?

VI. How can I desire to be delivered from evil, and the power of
temptations, and yet wilfully run into ill company, hearken to ill Counsel,
follow ill examples, avoiding the society of such as be well disposed; but
easily yielding to Satan's suggestions, studying to fulfill the desires and
lusts of the flesh, and conforming to every vain fashion, custom and practice
of this present world?


Q. Surely, if every man would thus ask himself, before he begin to pray,
either it would reform him, or make him most inexcusable at the Bar of Gods
Justice, would it not?


A. Yes, without all peradventure, if a man withal consider:

I. That Prayer is an immediate presenting of a man's self into Gods holy
presence, a Majesty infinite and of great glory, not to be abused with idle
lip-labor.

II. That he presumes to call God Father in Heaven, which cannot be but by
divine grace, and by the spirit of adoption, therefore he being graceless
must needs herein abuse God by claming a Sonne-ship without the spirit of
Regeneration.

III. That his own mouth witnesses against his own ways, while he making
request, for that which he utterly in heart, and yet in life opposes, and so
prepares for himself without all excuse matter of just condemnation, except
he use the means to attain to that which in words he seems daily to
request for himself at Gods hands.


Q. Can you show me how a man may be moved to a holy life, by meditating upon
his baptism?


A. Yes: I. He must know, that by it, he is made a member of Christ, the Child
of God, and an Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven: If he be renewed by the holy
Ghost, reformed in life, and have the stipulation of a good conscience, as all
have that be baptized with the holy Ghost, which is that inward baptism.

II. That he made a great and solemn Covenant then before God and before the
Lords people. 1. To forsake the Devil, the world, and the flesh, and never to
be led by them. 2. To fight under Christ's Banner against all Christ's and his
spiritual Enemies, continuing Christ's faithful Soldier and Servant to his
lives end.

III. That this Covenant thus made, so solemnly, so sealed with Christ's
precious blood, the performance of it will be assuredly required at his hands
one day.


Q. How may a man stir up his soul to the thought of heavenly things, and to
amendment of life from the Lords Supper.


A. By considering what the whole action sets forth unto him,

I. A lively representation unto our eyes, in the signs of the death and
passion of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the blessed propitiation and
sacrifice for our sins.

II. Gods infinite mercy in giving his son, and Christ's unspeakable love in
being willing to die for us miserable sinners.

III. Hereupon to judge of the desperate, and utterly forlorn estate of all
mankind, with loss of Gods favor, and the hope of heaven, being accursed for
ever and damned in Hell, if this had not been a remedy beyond merit of all
men and Angels, and the worth of ten thousand Worlds.

And that therefore we owe to God for this so unspeakable a benefit our
bodies, our souls, our goods, our lives, yea all and every thing, whatsoever
we be, to his glory and praise.


Q. Surely, me thinks, that these things should press the most rebellious
heart that may be, to have remorse for sin, and to leave off all his impious
courses, and to set himself carefully to the holy service of his Maker and
Redeemer: But yet I find by experience every where, that is not so: What
think you may be the cause, that most, for all this, live so securely, without
any fear of Hell, and are so vainly confident of their enjoying of Heaven,
and yet no better prepared for it?


A. The maine reason is the ignorance of their spiritual estate through the
darkness that is in them, and inbred corruption dimming the eyesight of the
Soul, that they cannot see what they are, nor whither they be going.


Q. In how many things do this ignorance of themselves appear?


A. Principally in two things.


Q. Which is the first?


A. That they cannot be persuaded that they be so bad, as they indeed are.
This conceit we may see in Hazael, 2. Kings 8. 13. who would no more believe
what the Prophet spoke of his cruel nature, then he could believe himself of
a man to be turned into a dog: The proud Pharisee denied himself to be an
extortioner or unjust, Luke 18. 11. And yet he was full of Rauin, Luke, 11. 39.
The Priests in Mal. 1. 6. 7. would not be held despisers and polluters of Gods
Name, nor the Jews guilty of blood, Ier. 2. 34. 35. nor the wicked at the last
day to have been unmerciful, but will outface Christ with a flat denial,
Mat. 25. yea Peter was tainted with this conceitednesse for by no words of
Christ, would he believe himself to be such a Coward, as to be brought to
deny Christ, Matthew. 26. and yet he did, the malicious, will not be malicious,
nor the proud, proud, nor the covetous, nor the vain glorious so, nor so.


Q. How comes this conceit to be so strong in them?


A. Through ignorance of their own corrupruptions; the deceitfulness of their
own hearts, and carelessness to try and search out their ways, to know
themselves.


Q. Which is the other thing in which the ignorance of themselves appears?


A. In being conceited that they are far better then indeed they be. The
Jews guilty of blood, said, we are innocent, Ier. 2. 35. The blind guides,
Matthew. 13. will boast that they see, Ioh. 9. 41. Romans 2. 17. 24. They that are
nothing, yet will think themselves something, Gal. 6. 3. Zidkias will suppose
himself to have the Spirit of of God, 1. Kings 22. when it was a lying spirit
of Satan. The Rich young man Matthew. 19. 20. held himself perfect and wanting
nothing, such a conceited fool was the Laodicean Angel, Reu. 3. yea there is
a generation pure in their own eyes, and yet are not cleansed from their
filthiness, Pro. 30. 12.


Q. What makes them to be then conceited of themselves?


A. I. A flattering humor in them, apt to soothe themselves in their own
conceit, Psa. 6. 2. And so to bless themselves against all dangers, Deuteronomy. 29.
18, 19. Amos 9. 10. Esa. 28. 15. Ier. 5. 12, 13. Zeph. 1. 12. Psalm. 10. 6.

II. Gods passing them over with silence, and not afflicting nor punishing
them: whereupon they think God to be like unto themselves, to allow of their
courses, Psalm. 50. 21. Else not to see, or not to regard their ways, or seeing
them, yet that he then forgive them; so do they put Gods Judgments far
away out of their sight. Psalm. 10. 5, 11, 13.

III. By comparing themselves, first with their own selves, looking only upon
that which they like, and that which they think others will like in them, as
the Pharise, who looked upon his fasting, praying, tything, Luke 18.
and what evil he had not done, but not what evil he did. Secondly, By
comparing themselves with other like themselves; doing what they do, the
Pharisees said, do any of the Pharisees and Elders Ioh. 7. 45. 48
believe on him; so the false Apostles did, 2. Cor. 10. 12. Thirdly, By
comparing themselves with such as are in their conceit worse then themselves;
Thus the Pharisee preferred himself before the poor Publican, Luke 18. And
the Elder son before his prodigal brother, Luke 16. 29. Not then discerning
his contempt to his Father, and his unnaturalness to his Brother. Fourthly, By
comparing themselves with the Godly, not in beholding their virtues, but their
falls; from which if they can find themselves clear outwardly, then they lift
up their crests, and crow alowd in their own praises.

IV. By doing sometimes some things which procure them some praises with the
Godly, as Iehu did, who had Ionadab, with him in his zealous prosecution of
Gods Command, against the house of Ahab, and Baals Priests.

V. By having some form of Godliness, though they be without the power
thereof; 2. Tim. 3. 5. By saying some prayers, by coming to Gods House, they
think the evils done is acquitted thereby, Ier. 7. 10. and they for coming to
hear God: Word, to be accepted of Christ, Luke 13. 26.

VI. By their outward prosperity and wealth sometimes, so they do think
themselves wise, Prou. 28. 11. and bless God, because they are rich, though
the manner of getting be naught, Zacha. 11. 5. and having no changes like other
men, they grow secure without fear of evil, Psalm. 10. 6.

VII. By their conscience lying a sleep or dead in them, never troubling them,
which comes to pass either through gross ignorance, or wilful carelessness
going on in sin, and so grow obstinate through custom in sinning: they
conclude peace with God, and so to be in a happy estate, Deuteronomy. 29. 19. when all
this time the strong man keeps house in them, Luke 11. 21.

VIII. Because they live perhaps very ciuilly and quietly walking in moral
honesty with praise of men, abstayning from outward scandalous courses,
whoredom, drunkenness, coozening tricks, and other foul evils, which they
see others to commit, upon which they conciude (making withal a general
profession of Christianity) that they are endued with heavenly graces of Gods
regenerating Spirit, not knowing, or not considering, that this may be but the
restrayning power of God, as in Abimelech. Genesis 20. 6. or fear and shame with
holding, as it did the Enemies of Christ, and of his Apostles; Acts 4. 14. 21.
or some awe and respect unto some man of authority and wisdom, as in Acts 5.
34. 38, 39. or only some policy to abstain for a time; as in Absalon and in
Haman, who forbore a space from outward 2 Samuel 13 22
violence, Ester 5. 10. or it may be a well tempered nature, guided by worldly
wisdom, and not by saving grace.

IX. Because they can and do sometimes commend good things in those that are
worthy praise, do allow of them and desire their company, as Iehu did
Ionadabs, Adoniah Ionathans, 1. Kings 1. 41. Darius Daniels good and liberty.
Dan. 6. or for that they can speak against the evil deeds of others, justly
to be condemned, as did the Scribes and Pharisees Mat. 23. 29, 30, 34. upon
these things they conclude, that they love the Godly, and hate the wicked, and
so think themselves to be in a good case, when yet we see, how the wicked may
do as much.

X. When some afflictions befall them, then if they can say that these are
crosses which God sends them for trials, or for their sins, and can say with
some light sigh, God have mercy on us, and can say, I pray God we may make a
good use thereof, they conclude that they are penitent, that they have made a
good confession, and that they are humble, and are very good Christians,
although they remain altogether the same persons they were before. These and
many other such like reasons do make them to think so well of themselves.


Q. But why do not such labor to find out their deceits, and learn better
to know themselves?


A. The Reasons may be these:

I. Their not giving Credit to their Teachers instructions, concerning these
things, and the need of trying themselves.

II. Their not discerning wherein other either are, or can be in better case
before God, then they themselves: for they perceive not the inward power of
Religion, and lively effectualnesse of grace, they being sensual having not
the holy Spirit, 1. Cor. 2. 9. 10, 11, 14. Jude 9.

III. Their ignorance of the true means to find out themselves, and
carelessness to know them; thinking the labor but a needless curiosity.

IV. Their being busied about the World, following their profits, or pleasures,
or hunting after honors, fulfilling the desires of the flesh and the mind, as
the Apostle speaks, wherewith they are so taken up, as they cannot possible
attend to these things of an higher Nature, and deeper strain;

V. Their presumptuous conceit of mercy, and putting up all on Christ's score,
without any more ado, till they come to their sick bed, and to bid farewell
for ever to the World.

VI. Their liberty which in many things they take to themselves agreeable to
their corrupt nature, to the fashions and customs of the World according to
the present times (which they inwardly effecting, neither can, nor will let
go) suffers them not to come to a more narrow search of their ways; nor to
a more strict examination of their courses.

VII. The liberty which they see most do take: such as be of the wiser sort
(so reputed in the world) learned men, great persons in Church and common
wealth; whom they set before them as patterns and do desire to follow.

VIII. And lastly, their Judgment indifferent in Religions; this or that; they
holding it fit for private persons to profess the Religion of the State, be it
what it will be without dispute, whether right or wrong of God or man. These if
men would examine themselves thoroughly shall be found the reasons, why men make
no straiter steps in their profession of Religion.


Q. Verily it is very likely, but seeing too many make an indifferency of
Religion. Let me question you further in a few things; Tell me whether there
be any other Religion, then the true Religion?


A. True Religion, is the only Religion and is but only one; and all other are
superstitions and Idolatry, and no Religion indeed, but humane or diabolical
inventions, drawing men from the true God and worship of his Name.


Q. What is then true Religion?


A. True Religion and undefiled before God the Father, is the true worship and
right serving of him, according to his own Will in Spirit and in Truth.


Q. Seeing false religions will pretend much, what are the certain marks of
true Religion, differing it from all these false religions?


A. I. It teaches and directs to only one, and that the true and ever
living God: The Trinity in Unity, and the Unity in Trinity.

II It teaches and directs to a true and right worshipping of the same God,
in Spirit and Truth.

III. It teaches and directs to one only true Rule, even his own Will,
made known hy his own Word, how, and according to which, this his worship is
to be done and none otherwise.

IV. It teaches and directs man to the right knowledge of himself, to know
that he was perfect by Creation; but by the fall is wholly corrupted, and
separated from Gods favor, till reconciliation be made.

V. It teaches and directs to one only most sure and certain means of
man's recovery into Gods assured love again, even by Jesus Christ his
sacrifice, mediation and intercession making an atonement and purchasing for
us an eternal inheritance.

VI. It teaches and directs us how to be thankful for so great mercies,
both for matter, manner, and end, thereof in well pleasing obedience to God; in
duties of love and charity to our neighbor, and to keep our selves unspotted
of the world.


Q. This indeed is true Religion, but now in your profession, can you
difference your self rightly by some one maine point or other, from all sorts
of wicked ones; and from their paths of death and damnation?


A. Yes I suppose, if you please to try me.


Q. How difference you your self from the Atheist and his Atheism?


A. By believing a God, and living thereafter.


Q. How from the Gentiles, the Heathen Idolatours, and their Gentilisme?


A. By believing one God the true God, and worshipping him without any Idol or
Image.


Q. How from the mere Naturalist, knowing God by his works, and discourse of
reason only?


A. More clearly and truly from Gods own Word by the illumination of his
Spirit, guiding my Judgment therein.


Q. How from Jews and their Iudaisme?


A. By believing that their yet expected Messiah, is our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, and none other; by whose coming the Ceremonial Law of Moses is
utterly abolished.


Q. How from Turks, and their Turcisme?


A. By believing God to be the Father begetting, the Son begotten, and the
holy Ghost proceeding; and that their Mahomet was a wicked Seducer, his law
forged, and he a damned false Prophet.


Q. How from all Heretics in general?


A. By holding ever the truth in love, and never defending any Error
obstinately.


Q. But seeing their has been, and are many Heretics; how do you difference
your self from every of them?


A. They have been innumerable; and this were an endless work; but if you
please, ask of these which now are most commonly known, and which are often
mentioned and read of.


Q. With a good will; How do you difference your self from Arrians and
Arianisme?


A. By acknowledging that Jesus Christ the second person in Trinity is both God
and man, as God equal with the Father, and the same substance.


Q. How from Montanists, and their Montanisme?


A. By holding that the persons in the Godhead are three, and distinct, that
the second marriages are lawful.


Q. How from Nouatus and his followers, the Catharists, or Puritans, and
Nouatians.


A. By granting that the unfeigned penitent, after their falls (though to the
denying of Christ) are yet upon their repentance, to be received again into
the Church. That we do not affect to be called pure, or Puritans, neither do
appropriate purity to our selves before others.


Q. How from the Donatists?


A. By holding that the wicked pollute not the Godly in receiving the
Sacrament. That baptism is true baptism out of their assemblies; That one
once baptized need not to be baptized again; That the virtue of the Sacrament,
depends not upon the worthiness of the Minister.


Q. How from Pelagians?


A. By holding that man's nature is corrupt by Adams fall, That we all are borne
in Original sin; That we have not power in and of our selves to believe, and
to will and work out our own salvation.


Q. How from Anabaptists?


A. By allowing that children of believing parents are to be baptized; That
children are borne with inbred corruptions, that election is before all time,
that predestination is not of all to life, but of some, and these of his mere
mercy, and not conditionally, if they repent and believe. That the elect
called and justified stand so by the grace and power of God, and not upon their
own will, neither can they fall away totally nor finally; That Magistracy is
allowed of God, and the Ministry is a calling of God, and distinctly assigned
only to some to execute the same.


Q. How from Brownists and Separatists and their Schism.


A. By keeping the unity of the Spirit in the bond of love with other
Churches: disclaiming utterly popular government, and a singularly bold conceit
of interpreting holy Scriptures differing from the general judgment of the
Learned and Godly in the Church of Christ.


Q. How from Libertines?


A. By reverently esteeming of holy Scriptures, making them the Rule of my
life, and not mine own dreams, nor the fantasy of my own spirit, by which
they judge any thing to be lawful, and to be done without check of
Conscience, though the same in other men's judgment be never so wicked, and
also condemned in Scriptures, because say they, it is by natural inclination.


Q. How from the Family of Love?


A. By holding propriety of goods lawful, and not a Community, and that I am
not one person, as I am a Christian, and another as I am a Citizen, outwardly
yielding to any Religion, so be it that secretly I keep mine own Religion
within my self.


Q. How from Opinionists?


A. By avoiding singularity of opinion, comitting humbly my conception of
mind ever to the judgment and common received opinion of the Church.


Q. How from all Sectaries and Nouelists?


A. By keeping my standing in the Ancient Catholic verity.


Q. How from the Vbiquitaries?


A. By denying, consubstantiation and beleiuing that Jesus Christ according to
his humanity is only in Heaven, there remaining until his second coming,
though in the mean space, Christ as God, is every where.


Q. But how from the Papists?


A. By giving to Jesus Christ his full and due glory, communicable to neither
men nor Angels.


Q. Is this then the maine difference between us and them, in their robbing
him of his glory?


A. Yes verily: For if I hold and believe Jesus Christ to be, that which indeed
he is, and that I do not impart his glory to any other, I can never be a
Papist.


Q. In how many things consists this his glory?


A. Infoure things principally.

I. If I do hold and believe, that Jesus Christ is only and alone the
spiritual Head of his Church, sending his holy Spirit to be only his
general Vicar, and not any mortal man: for this cuts off the proud
blasphemous Goliahs head, the Popes usurped supremacy, and all that depends
thereupon.

II. That Jesus Christ is only and alone the Lawgiver to our consciences, and
his written Word the only infallible rule of all his worship and service.

For this cuts off their traditionall word, all the Popes laws, and infinite
humane inventions, burthening the consciences of Papists.

III. That Jesus Christ is the only and alone Mediator of Intercession, as
well as of Redemption between God and us.

For this cuts off their idolatrous praying to the Virgin Mary, Saints and
Angels.

IV. That Jesus Christ is the only and alone Savior, by the means of his
passion pacifying Gods wrath, and purchasing for us in Heaven an eternal
Inheritance.

For this cuts off (not good works done in thankfulness and in obedience) but
the conceit of meriting by them; also the damned idol of the Mass, that
pretended unbloody sacrifice, all satisfactory penance and punishment to God;
this also quenches out the fire of purgatory, and quite marreth the Popes
Market.


Q. How do you difference your self from all will-worshippers?


A. By constantly serving God, only as he prescribes and commands in his
Word, without any additions of men, as part of his worship.


Q. Now because even in the true Church, all that profess the Gospel in
peaceable days, are yet not right, let me demand some Questions, touching
some such: How difference you your self from Hypocrites?


A. By serving God inwardly, as well as outwardly, and performing to my
Neighbor all duties of love, being given to good works readily, and that
without vainglory.


Q. Now how from a Newtralist?


A. By being consciably confident of the truth of my Religion; and not go
halting between Two opinions.


Q. How from Temporizers?


A. By being one and the same constantly at all times.


Q. How from Machiauel-like Politicians?


A. By having my will swayed by good reason, ever ruled by the power of
Religion.


Q. How from Lukewarm Laodiceans?


A. By being a Protestant ever in earnest fervently zealous in my Christians
profession, with sound Judgment.


Q. How from Profane persons?


A. By having always an holy estimation of Religion, of Gods Word, Ministry,
Sacraments, Prayer, and all divine Ordinances.


Q. How from all obstinate Impenitents?


A. By willingly learning, humbly submitting to, and admitting of wholesome
reproves, for my reformation wherein soever I do amiss.


Q. How from presumptuous sinners?


A. By an awefull fear of God, even because he is gracious and merciful.


Q. How from Hopeless desperates?


A. By laying hold fast on the mercies of God in Christ, and believing the
promises of Salvation made to us in him.


Q. How from the carnal Securitans?


A. By daily examining my ways, by loving and longing for the appearing of
Jesus Christ, and by waiting with preparation for death, and the last judgment
Day, which the Lord hasten, and end these our days of sinning, that in glory
we may praise him everlastingly. Amen, Amen.


FINIS.

