God wooing his Church:

Set forth in three godly Sermons.

By William Burton preacher at Reading.

LONDON Printed by V.S. for John Hardy dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the
sign of the Tigers head, 1596

God wooing his Church. The first Sermon.
JEREMY Chap. 3. Verse 14 O ye disobedient children, turn again, says the
Lord, for I am your Lord, and I will take you one of a city, and two of a
tribe, and will bring you to Zion.

Verse 15 And I will give you Pastors according to mine heart, which shall
feed you with knowledge and understanding.


THese words be part of an Exhortation begun in the 12. verse of this chap.
and made to the captive Israelits in Assiria, in the 9. year of Hoshea king of
the ten tribes, as appears in 2. King. 17.6. And it grows upon a complaint
against Judah, because that Judah did not profit by the iugements of God upon
Israel: which complaint being ended, the Lord here commands the prophet to
labor with the ten tribes that were in captivity, that they might profit
better by those afflictions which were upon them, and by timely and hearty
repentance to turn unto God, which if they would yield unto, the Lord does also
promise for his part to forget all their sins past, and to place them in
their former estate of liberty again.

This Scripture has two parts; an Exhortation, and a Promise. In the
Exhortation there are two circumstances to be considered of: the first is of
the persons; the second is of the matter subject. The persons be two-folde,
exhorted, and exhorting: the persons exhorted are the captive Jews described
in the two first words, disobedient children. The persons exhorting are also
double, the Lord by Jeremy, and Jeremy in the name of the Lord; and that
appears in these words [saith the Lord.] The matter subject is two-folde;
first, what it is that they are exhorted unto, in these words, Turn again:
secondly, a reason why, in these words, For I am your Lord.

In the manner of speaking to the persons exhorted, does notably appear the
singular wisdom, and unspeakable mercy of God. Gods wisdom appears in
ripping up of their sins, before he exhorts them to repentance: Yea that
he may bring them to repentance for their sins; he says not simply, O my
children, turn again, lest they should take an action against Jeremy, for
impeaching their credit: but he says, O ye disobedient children, that so he
might convince their consciences, stop their mouths, and take away all
occasion of boasting. From this wise course of wisdom it self, in calling
men to God, both the minister of God, and every christian brother may learn
this profitable lesson; that the readiest way to bring men from their
profaneness to true repentance, is first to convince them of sin, and then
to exhort them to repentance. Many cry repent, and amend, thundering out the
judgments of God against the people: this ought to be done; but if we do not
first show them what is amiss, they will say as the proud Jews said to Malachie,
What have we done? Mal. 3.13, 14
But let Malachie tell them what their words are, and then they will blush for
shame. Then will Felix tremble, Act. 24.26.
when Paul preaches of righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come, all
which do concern him. Then will David confess his sin, 2. Sam. 12.7.
when Nathan shall lay the parable close to his conscience. Then is Nabal
stricken as a stone, 1. Sam. 25.3^
when Abigaile shall wisely watch her time, and tell him of his churlishnes.
Ioh. 4.19.
Then will the Samaritane woman leave her scoffing, when Christ shall come home
to her conscience. Then will the ten tribes return (if ever they will return)
when Jeremy shall summon them before gods judgment seat for disobedience. And
then may the Preacher look to profit by his public doctrine; and the brother
by his private counsel, when first they shall prove to their consciences, that
of this and that sin they are guilty.

Secondly, from this wisdom of God, we learn that it is lawful and
necessary for the minister of god sometime to use sharp words, if he mean to do
any good, specially when he has to deal with men whose faces are of brass,
whose necks are of iron, whose hearts are offlint, and whose consciences are
seared up with an hot iron. And yet he is not always to lay on load, but
sometime (with Paul) to doubt whether he should come with a rod, or with the
spirit of mildness; and as he shall perceive them either obstinate, or
tractable, so to make the edge of his reprehension blunt, or sharp; as he sees
his Still to drop, so to quicken or slake his fire; and so to strain, or let
down the strings, as that neither by too much straining, or too much
loosening, they be brought more out of tune then they were before.

Again he is not to handle all alike, but to remember that as all the strings,
of an instrument are not alike placed, alike natured, alike sounded, nor all
strained alike, nor all out of tune alike, and that according to their place,
quantity, and quality, every one must more or less be strained, so it must
be among men. The magistrate is to be reproved, but with great reverence, and
singular modesty. The minister is to be reproved, 2. Tim. 5.1.
but as an Elder. The elder sort must be reproved, but as fathers. The yoonger
sort must be reproved, but as children. And every one according to his place
and calling must be dealt withal.

Again, if two be fallen into one and the same sin, he is wisely to observe
how they came down, and warily to put a difference between the one and the
other. The one may fall by weakness, the other of wilfulnes, the one of
ignorance, the other of malice: the one therefore with lenity, the other with
severity must be proceeded against, always tempering his speeches according
to the nature and dispositions of persons with whom he has to deal, and
according to the quality and quantity of the sin against which he deals:
examples hereof we have not a few in the scripture. Mat. 12.20. Psa. 2 9.
Christ will not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax, but the
rebellious he will batter in pieces, like a potters vessel. Number. 12.3.
Moses was the meekest man on earth, yet none more angry with Aaron, Deuteronomy. 32.6.
nor more severe against Idolators then he. (...) 26.28.
Paul will persuade Felix to become a christian, (...) 4, 19. (...). 2.11.14.
and will convey himself into the bowels of the Gallatians to win them to
Christ, but he means to take up Peter for halting, (...). 113.10.
and to pronounce Elimas the very child of the devil.

As this doctrine was always profitable, so never more needful then now,
when there be quot homines tot sententiae, how many men, so many minds. Some
would have the preacher speak always alike, and that of nothing but of mercy
and salvation, to prophecy of new wine and strong drink, but in no case to
awake them out of their sins. Some would have him always to be thundering out
the judgments of God, and to minister nothing but bitter purgations, as though
^ll men were sick at once, or of one disease, or of one cause. Some again can
abide neither piping, nor mourning. If the minister reprove their sins, they
call him a busy controlour: If he shall apply the word to the conscience,
then, who made him a judge? If he denounce the judgments of god, then he
fraieth his audience. If he stands above his hour, the^ he is tedious. If he
entreat friendly, then he is glad to curry favor. If he be sparing in reprofe,
the^ he is afraid to displease. If he speak learnedly, then he is too deep.
If plainly, then he is no scholar, but if he will sooth them up with an Omne
been, or a nihil dicit, then he is the best church man that ever they knew.

Thirdly the Prophet tells the Jews of their disobedience, that so he might
make them more fit to return unto God, being first humbled with the sight of
their sins, to teach us, that in all our reprehensions or admonitions, we
must seek the good of our brother, and the glory of God; as John the Baptist
called the Pharisees and Sadduces a generation of vipers, Mat. 3.7
not to make them desperate, but fruitful in the works of repentance. And
surely (good brethren) then is there hope of doing good by sharp censures,
when men may see that they are not censured of malice, or to make them odious,
or for some other sinister respect, but of conscience and love, seeking thereby
the good amendment of our brother, and that we are no whit glad for their
faults, but rather grieved at their falls. And if this rule were always
observed, amongst all those to whom the censures of the church are committed,
I do not doubt but that much more good might be done, then is done; but if men
shall see that their censures (whatsoever they are) proceed not from a hatred
of sin, nor a conscience and care to amend their brethren, but either of
stomach to revenge their own quarrelles, or from a covetous affection, to
maintain their own gains; alas, how should they be regarded as they ought?
Nay, how should the kingdom of Satan be overthrown, when the golden judge
gives sentence? How can the right mark be hit, when a wrong mark is set
up to be shot at? (...) 6.9.
and how can the Church be terrible as an army with banners, when the
leaders of the army shall turn their swords points against their own
soldiers but this may suffice for the wisedone of God in mentioning their
sins, before he calls them to repentance, in this first word disobedient.

As the first word is a most evident testimony of Gods wisdom, so is the
second of his mercy; for lo, he calls them still by the names of children.
Oh love unspeakable, that cannot so forget the workmanship of his own hands,
but albeit they had most shamefully abused his majesty, yet still offers to
be their father. He cease not to try them by afflictions, to call them by his
prophets, to draw them by his spirit, to woo them by his benefits, to pardon
them in his mercy, (...) 103.9.
and to receive them into his wonted favor again. Thus we see that our God
will not always be chiding, neither will he keep his anger for ever, on all
those of whose return there is any hope. Job. 8.7
but forgetting themselves to be laden both with moats, and beams, they do as
dogs do, which (when one is in disgrace) run al together after him with open
mouth and full cry. Now if the Lord should thus hotly pursue us, as we do our
brethren, what should become of us? Fourthly, this gracious example of our
heavenly father, dealing so mercifully with his disobedient children,
condemns the uncharitable practices of three sorts of men: the first sort is
the Papists, whose fingers are dyed of a sanguine color in the blood of those
men, which have but transgressed the dirtie decrees of an Italian priest; and
yet these gnatstrainers, and camel swalowers, bewail the want of love among
us: secondly it meets with an abuse in church governors, who use sometime to
make out exco^munications for fees, for trifles, and matters of small
importance, as though the greatest censure of the church and the greatest
judgment next to the general judgment may be dallied withal, and so far
abused, as thereby to cut off, and cast out members of the church, to satan at
men's pleasures. Our good God casts not off his people, no not for
disobedience, but still admonishes them, and takes them for his children, so
long as there is any hope of returning: thirdly it meets with the rash and
furious dealing of Brownists, who (for some defects and blemishes) cast off the
whole church of God in England for no apparent church of God, which is more
then they ought to do for two causes. First, though disobedience be (as it is
indeed) as the sin of wichcraft, and who is not disobedient in many things? yet
so long as they cannot challenge us, for apostasy, as we may some of them, and
so long as there is any life of the spirit at all in her, she is not to be
laid out upon the cold ground. But soft a while: though she has not all her
ornaments according to the word of God, yet she does not refuse them, if she
might lawfully come by them; but is ready to receive them whenever she may
lawfully obtain them. Ezech. 9.4
In the mean time she mourns for her wantes, and seeks a redress as she
may, and sueth as she ought, and therefore no doubt is marked on the forehead
for the dear spouse of Jesus Christ, so long as she holds the foundation in
him. But suppose that the church of England were proved as the church of Rome,
a very harlot, and were adjudged for her continuance worthy to be put into the
black book of excommunication, (which God forbid) yet for them to be their own
caruers and bailifes, is more then they ought, 1 Cor. 5.4
being but private men: and this is certain, that no particular congregation,
much less a private person may excommunicate a whole church.

Lastly, in joining these two words together, we are taught to censure sin
in all men, but yet to judge charitably of all. And on the other side to judge
charitably of all, but so as we wink not at sin in any, (...). 19.17.
for that were to hate our brother. And this are we taught here, while God
calls them disobedient; yet still children: and children, but yet
disobedient. Many think that we hate them if we tell them of their sins,
taking those for their best friends, which do always sooth them up in their
sins, but these men are much deceived; (...) 7.6.
for the reproof of a friend is better then the kiss of a flatterer; yea, if
Shimei an enemy shall rail upon David, though that be Shimei his sin, yet
it may be and ought to be David's benefit. Again, the sweetest words to the
ear, are not always the wholesomest to the heart: no, the bitter pill is
better to purge, then the sweet perfume. The boisterous wind will make a man
hold his garment fast about him, when the gleaming sun will make him put off
al to his shirt. The thunder and lightning do more purify the air, then the
calmest day in summer. The greenest herb does often cover the foulest toad,
where the water is stillest, there is it deepest; the fairest garment does
often cover the filthiest carkas; when the bait is most in sight, the hook is
least suspected; the friendliest kiss in show, is sometime but treason in
substance; the Be has her honey, so has she a sting, and the one shall wound
more then the other shall heal; when Herodes courtiers shall cry to Herod, Oh
the voice of God, not of man, then must Herod come down with a mischief; when
400. false prophets shall say to Achab, go and prosper, then must Achab look
least to thrive, neither shall he return in peace: and so much for the persons
exhorted, in these words, O ye disobedient children.

The persons exhorting are, God by Jeremy, and the prophet in the name of the
Lord, and this is of force also to enforce the exhortation: as if he should
say, I do not of my self thus reprove you, for then you might think me too
busy, but the Lord set me aworke, whose will I must obey, and therefore you
must hear me with patience. Thus Jeremy pleads his commission, partly for
his own discharge, and partly to make his message of more credit and force
with them. And thus might Jeremy reason. He that is but a servant, must do his
masters message: I am but a servant, therefore I must do my masters message.
And again, he that does but his masters message, ought not therefore to be
blamed; I do that, and no more, and therefore I ought not for that to be
blamed. And again, whatsoever the Lord by his messenger says, that must be
believed: but the Lord (by me his messenger) says that you are disobedient,
and promises that if you will turn again, and obey him, he will be your Lord,
therefore you must believe it. And again, whatsoever the Lord by his
messengers does command, that must be obeyed; but the Lord by me does command
you to turn again, therefore see that you obey his commandment as you will
answer at your utmost peril. Here then we have three things to consider of in
the ministers of God: First their authority, secondly their dignity, thirdly
their duty.

Their authority is very great, (...) their au^^titie.
and their commission is very large; for behold (says the Lord to Jeremy) I
have set thee over nations and kingdoms, (...). 11.10.
to pluck up, and to root out, to destroy, and to throw down to build and to
plant. (...). 2
But how? Exechiel shows how; Thou son of man, fear them not, nor their
words, although thou remain among scorpions, fear not their looks, for they
are a rebellious house; verse 7. Therefore thou shall speak my words unto
them: so that it must be done without fear, and by speaking the word of God
without ceasing. The minister of the word therefore has authority to reprove
princes, (...). 36.15 27.2.
as the prophet says, but not by the sword to remove princes as the pope
says. Job. 20.23.
He has authority in Christ's stead to pronounce forgiveness of sins to the
faithful as the Evangelist says, but not to absolve whom he list as the pope
says. He has authority to reprove things amiss in the church, or the common
weal by doctrine as the word says, but not of himself to re^orme by
practice, as Brownists say, for deposition of Princes belongs to God only:
forgiveness of sins, belongs to God only: reformation of churches and
commonweals belongs to Princes only, but the reproving of sin in prince,
church, or common wealth belongs to ministers also. And this in wisdom and
discretion, they may and ought to do. Nay blood for blood, if they do less
then this, if they do more then this, and if they do not all this; Why then
should Moses be murmured at? why should Michea be smitten? or why should Jeremy
be imprisoned? and al thus troubled for executing their commission? have they
not authority to speak? Nay we say to you, (if you be angry with us for
this) as your servants will say for themselves. We are but servants, it is
nothing to us, agree with our master and we shallbe content, we may speak
what his word speaks, for we have authority, and so much we must speak, for
the refore are we put in authority. And so much briefly for the authority of
Gods ministers.

As their authority is great, so is their calling excellent, and honorable,
in respect of their office, and of his person, whose mouth they are. We can
think as basely of our selves, as any can either think or speak of us, but if
it be an excellent thing to be a kings ambassador, how much more then to be
ambassador to the king of heaven and earth? Therefore are they called in the
scripture by names of great account; (...). 12.1. (...). 2.12. (...). 4.15.18.
(...). 4.12.
as Angels, Stars, Fathers, Horsemen, and Chariots of Israel, whereof some be
old as Heli was, some be young as Timothy was, yet all the messengers of the
Lord Jesus. (...). 22.3. (...). 4.13. (...). 25.15. (...). 20.2. (...). 9.17
Some have ten talents, some have but one, yet all must occupy for their
Lords advantage. Some come at the first hour, some at the last, yet all sent
of God. Some are like James and John the sons of thunder, (...). 4.36. (...).
4.7. Cor. 4.1.
some like Barnabas the son of consolation, yet all the messengers of God.
Some have received a greater measure of g^fts, some a less, yet all according
to the measure of the gift of Christ. And therefore let us esteem of them as of
the ministers of Christ, and the disposers of the secrets of God. Men they are
as we are, that is our benefit, for if God himself should send forth his
voice, we must yield up our lives. Sinful they are as others, (...)
that is, because they are men, mortal they are as others are, and that is
because they are sinful; yet still the messengers of God, and beseech us in
Christ his stead to be reconciled unto God. 2. Cor. 5.2^
If this were regarded, then Gods ministers should be more regarded, and less
despised, more believed, less disgraced, better provided for, less pinched,
and not so shamefully slandered and abused of so many as now they are. But
alas, it is not once thought upon of many, and therefore every churlish Nabal
denies them maintenance, every covetous Achab is sick for their livings, 1.
King. 21.^.
every proud minion, and minsiing damsel longs for their heads in a platter,
Mat. 26.15. 1. King. 22.4
every Judas is ready to betray them Zidkijah the kings claw back will not
stick to take his fist from their cheeks, Act. 24.4, 5.
Tertullus the orator dares call them pestilent fellows, and troublers of
the state, if any man of his courtesy will give the^ the hearing. Festus in
his mad mood, Act. 26.24.
will call them mad men, and lay the fault (if there be any) upon their
learning too. 2. Tim 4.10.
Demas the wordling will give them the slip, 1 King. 17 9.
only the poor widow of Sarepta is found releeuing poor banished Eliah.
And some (thanks be to God) but not many in respect of the multitude, have the
ambassadors of the Lord Jesus, in that good account which they should,
especially for their works sake, for do not many grudge our meat, number our
morsels, and reckon our livings to every farthing? Christ commanded his to
carry neither bread nor money, 1^.
nor to put on two coats: he is a rich man nowadayes that has two coats to
put on, except some that have two or three benefices, for many in the world
are turned out of all, and yet (God be thanked) they are delivered. We may say
as Paul said, we are afflicted on every side, in poverty, (...) 4.8.
yet not overcome of poverty; as dead, yet alive; as sorrowing, yet rejoicing;
as possessing nothing, yet having all things. In the time of popery one
congregation did maintain many mass priests, now many congregations will
hardely maintain one good preacher of the gospel: and no marvel, for then
there were too many foolish Bees that brought all their honny into the popes
hiue, and now we have too many droanes that suck all the honey out of the
churches hiue; yea too many horse-leaches, which always cry, (...) 30.15.
Give, give, but never say, Ho. One cries, give me the college lands, another
cries, and me the lands of cathedral churches; another longs for the
impropriations; the fourth must have an other benefice or two for to buy him
books withal; one is sick for a deanery; and some are sick of a consumption,
and a bishoprike or two would restore them again, or some other thing that
should go to the church, and some will not leave till they have the devil and
all, or till the devil have them. If men take pains, some will reward them
with a thistle the reward of an Ass: others would send away their pastors in
worse case then the basest officer in their kitchen, without either warning or
wages. I blame not all, but all such. Why, say some of these men, can you not
live as the apostles lived? Why, say I again, Act. 4.35. Act. 4.2.
let them lay down their goods at the Apostles feet, and then let them ask
that question. Truly many dee as Ananias did, if they give one groat, they
will brag of two. Many ask, from whence comes the fall of the church?
Indeed it is a question to be moved, though the disease will hardly or never be
removed: It is said that seven ill-favored lean kine devoured seven fat kine,
and this was Pharaoes dream; Genesis 41.10.
but now seventy times seven ill-favored lean kine have devoured seven hundred
fat kine; and this is no dream, but a very troth: but wherefore I pray you
are Gods messengers thus handled? Do they demand their duties? No they dare
not; for the earthen pot dares not strive against the brazen vessel, and
men are now like drunken guests, which having filled their bellies are loath
to pay their reckoning. What is the cause? Any cause will serve the turn in
this point. Facile inuenias baculum, quo canem cedas. It is an easy matter to
find a staff to beat a dog withal. When the Pharisees could not abide the
doctrine of Christ nor his disciples, (...) 24.
they quickly found a just defense of their quarrel. They do that on the
sabbath day which is not lawful. And wot you what that was; they plucked the
ears of corn. Our Pharisees also have taken up the same accusation against us,
for (say they) we do that on the saboth day that is not lawful. And first to
begin withal, they cry, out upon him rebel, he will not wear the surplis
every sunday and holy day. Again, he will not read all service at all times,
and therefore (whether law dispense with him or no for his preaching we have
found sufficient cause to deny him his duty. Again, he will not read divine
service to the walls and the windows: to the stools and the stones, and is
not this cause sufficient to deny him his duty? Again, they preach against
papists, Atheists. usurers, drunkards, swearers, lords of missc-rule, abuse of
apparel, and other profanings of the sabbath day, and such like comendable,
and common excercises of good neighborhood, and is not this a sufficient cause
also? Lastly, if they should pay the minister his duty, the lone of so much
money were lost, which in many years would amount to some round sum, and are
not all these, or any of these sufficient causes think you, to handle Gods
poor ministers and servant as has been showed before? But what has good
queen Elizabeth done, that she can get nothing of some of them, I hope it is
not because she has banished idolatry and brought in the gospel. Some can rob
Peter to pay Paul, (they say) but these men can cunningly rob both Peter and
Paul too, and pay neither of both. Well, we have been all this while but among
the ears of corn: but what? Are we sharp in reproouing their sin? No, we
dare not say to Herod, thou must not have thy brothers wife, we may not say,
that a right papist is a rank traitor, lest we should be told, that when we
are in our priuileged places, we prate what we list, as once I was told.
Nehem. 13.17.
We may not say the magistrates are profaners of the sabbath day, if they
suffer it to be profaned, though the word says so. And to meddle with any
abuses or corruptions in the church, is Auribus canem, to pull a dog by the
ears, and to put our hand into a hornets nest. A learned father (who belike
had experience of such things) said once (if not often) Tutior est discentis,
quam docentis ratio: It is better to ^earne then to teach: but we may say
nowadayes, Tutior est peccantis, quam arguen^is conditio, It is more dangerous
to reprove sin, then to commit sin. And if ever it were true, it is now
true, that Lepores concionantur leonibus, we must preach in fear as poor hates
before proud lions: for if we please them not, (...) 22.8.
they will say as Achab said, He does not prophecy good unto me, but evil,
and therefore my soul does hate him. We read that Pharao cried against the
Israelites as appears in Exodus 5.8. Give them no more straw but let them
gather it themselves, and get it where they can, and yet we will have our whole
tale of brick; And why so? for they be idle and cry, Let us go three days
iourny into the wilderness and offer sacrifice unto God. So play many with us,
for they cry, let our pastors and preachers have no more liberty given them
let them gather their straw themselves, that is, let them preach as much as
they will (for they account of preaching but as offstraw;) but in the meaue
time we will have our whole tale of brick, that is, all our old customs and
ceremonies kept whatsoever they be: and albeit we have no law for them, yet
will we have them to do as we will. And why so? Because for sooth (as they
say) we be idle, and cry, let us go offer sacrifice; that is (say they) they
never leave calling to church, and to the sermon every day, and there we must
be reproved for every fault, and this diet is not for our humors; and they
were as good be idle as thus occupied. And as Pharao urged those things at
Isreal's hands, which he would not touch himself with his least finger: so
these Pharaos would lay heavier burdens upon the ministers backs, then
either prince, or law, or conscience will warrant. Again, because the
Egyptian task was not done, the Israelites, and their officers were beaten.
Even so, because their task (I mean not the task of the law, for that have
we borne, and are ready most willingly to under go it) but the vnstinted task
of men's unbridled affections, whose behavior sauoureth of the discipline of
an alehouse, because their task is not done: we are beaten with the
slanderous tongues of ungodly men, with the reproach of the world, with the
disgrace of our ministry, with the bitings of poverty; and if some might
prevail, with the loss of liberty, living, and life it self; for they cry
Crucifige already, the Lord (if it be his will) turn such Pharaoes hearts.
But, will not the Lord be revenged of his servants wrong and oppression? Yes no
doubt; for if Princes take that contempt to themselves which is offered to
their ambassadors, much more will God. 10.19.4.
If Haman and Ammon stincke in the nostrels of Israel, for their villainy
offered to David's messengers, much more shall these stink before God. And if
God made Jerusalem, yea even famous Jerusalem a heap of stones, and the shame
of the world, for mocking, despising, and misusing of Gods messengers, how
shall God suffer these oppressing Pharaoes, whether they be papists, or
atheists, or libertines, or neuters, or Machiauils, whether in city or country,
whether in village or in cotage, or whersoeuer or who soever they be, how shall
God suffer them at last though he suffer them long to escape his heavy wrath?
Therefore I would wish that this contempt and neglect of Gods ministers might
be banished from amongst us; for although in respect of humane infirmities,
they are but as other men are; although the messenger of Satan be sent to
buffet them; and though there be a law in their members, rebelling against
the law of their minds, whereby many times they are led (against their wills
captives to the law of sin, oh wretched men that we are: yet in respect of
their office which is honorable and excellent in respect of him whose message
they bring; and in respect of the message it self which they bring, they are
to be regarded and reverenced: and so much for the dignity of Gods ministers.

Their authority is great, Of their dueti^^
honorable is their office, and great is their dignity; their duty therefore
must needs be very great, but which is the greatest I know not. They are
messengers of Gods counselles, Act. 20.27. 1. Cor. 4.15.
therefore they must be trusty; they are fathers unto Gods children, therefore
they must be loving and tender; 1. Cor. 3.10. 1. Cor. 4.2.
they are builders of Gods church, stewards of Gods household, shepeheards of
Gods flock, therefore they must be skillful, faithful, and watchful; they
are captains over Gods church, Cant. ^.
which is terrible as an army with banners, therefore they must not be fearful
and faint-hearted; Mat. 5.14.
they are the lights of the world, and the salt of the earth, and therefore
they must neither stand under a bushel, nor be unsavory; they are nurses of
gods tender ones, therefore their breasts should never be without milk; they
are to heal with old and young, with learned and unlearned, with strong and
weak, with wilful and ignorant, and with all sorts, therefore they must be
wise. In the time of peace, and in the time of war, in time of prosperity,
and in time of adversity, in season, and out of season, and at all times;
Ephesians. 6.12.
therefore they must be no time-seruers: Against principallities and powers,
against holds mighty and strong against flesh and blood the world and
worldlings, the devil and hell, presumption and despair, and against all sin
in others and in themselves: before princes and subtects, before angels and
men, before heaven and earth, and before God himself, and therefore their
garners must be stored with all kind of grain, both old and new, their lips must
always preserve knowledge. (...). 13.52. (...) 2.7. (...) 17.12.
Their hands must be holden up, and their arms underset when they faint in
prayer, their eyes should dazzle with waiting for the hope of their prayer,
their cheeks should be watered with tears, when they pray for the sins of the
people, (...) 1.
and when they can pray and preach no longer, let the^ chatter like a swallow,
mourn like a dove und groan in their spirits: for oportet Episcopum mori
concionantem and orantem, says a godly father. A good Bishop must die
preaching, and praying, and must pray and preach till he die. What should I say
more, he is the minister of God, therefore of God he must learn his duty, and
unto God he must perform his duty. He is to speak in the name of god,
therefore he must speak both what, and when, and to whom, and in that manner
that God will. If therefore we speak men's inventions in painted eloquence to
set forth our selves, to some and not to all, faintly and coldly, to Tharsis
for Niniuy, if we condemn the good, and commend the bad, encourage the wicked,
and discourage the godly, if we speak but ance a year, once a quarter, or
when we list, or not at all, and at all times as occasion serves, both
instantly and earnestly, we do not the duty of good messengers. But if we
speak Gods glorious will, without adding or diminishing, in the evidence of
the spirit, to the conscience as well as to the ear, to the courtier and
countrieman, with courage and boldness, with wisdom and discretion, with a
zeal of Gods glory, a love of Gods people, and a desire of their good, and
that continually, constantly, and faithfully, then we do the duty of Gods
ministers, If therefore any man shall send for Gods minister, to school him
before hand, and to teach him either what to speak, as general doctrine
without application, or how to speak, as in fine terms, and filed phrases,
to please all, and to displease none (as the manner of some is, and who is not
cunning in the ministers office, and in every man's office saving his own) we
are to signify thus much unto him, that we are not ministers of men's
unbridled affections, but of the Lords most holy will, and therefore we
must not speak either what they will, or how they list, but all must be both
for matter, and manner as God will; so said Michaiah the true prophet to the kings
eunuch; ^^m. 23.3.
so said Balaam the false prophet to the King himself; and so say we to every
one. And good reason; for if the Lawyer will scorn to learn of the Divine to
plead at the bar, why should the Lawyer take upon him to teach the Divine
how to speak in the pulpit? And if our servants are not to do our business by
other men's directions; if the steward must not dispose of his masters goods at
another man's appointment; if the captain must not fight when the mean soldier
will appoint him; and if the soldier must not fight with such weapons as his
ennemie will appoint him, why then should Gods minister (who is to plead Gods
matters, to do Gods business, to dispose of Gods treasures, and to fight the
Lords battles) become a slave and a servant to men's affections? If he should
(which God forbid) hurt he may do much; but God he shall do none. And yet I deny
not, ^^em. 23.32. ^^^. 4.17.
but that the minister is to receive good counsel of any man. And the
Colossians may say to Archippus, look to thy ministry. And so much for the
authority, dignity, and duty of Gods ministers. And thus much both for the
persons exhorted, and exhorting.

In the second part we are to consider; first of that whereunto they are
exhorted, and then of the reason why. For the first, it is repentance, and is
here called a turning again: alluding to one that is out of his way, and cannot
come into the right way, except he turn again, or else to one that had left
some thing behind him, without which his journey could, not prosper, but most
likely to a wife divorced from her husband, Ierem. 3.1, 8.
for adultery, but he calling to mind the old and sweet love that was wont to
be between them, calls her again, and offers still to be her spouse, upon
condition that she will become a new woman. At all these stays were we all of
our selves, for by nature we are all gone out of the way, we are corrupt, and
become abominable, the ways of peace we have not known. But then did the
Lord call unto us, and said, Adam where art thou? Genesis 3.9.
come into the right way, Christ Jesus the seed of the woman, is the way the
truth and the life, walk thou in this way, and he shall conduct thee directly
unto Chanaan the kingdom of heaven.

Again, when we had found Christ the way, we made no more reckoning but
thought that we had all, when we had the way, but we were denied; for we left
behind us the works of faith, and repentance. We were going to Christ, Matt.
8.11.
not like the wisemen with our presents, but like the foolish virgins without
oil in our lamps; (...) 25.
but behold, the Lord calls unto us, and says. Turn again, and take your
provision with you, we also went a whoring after our own inventions, (...) 106.
we were trudging to hell, with bag, and baggage, we had plighted our troth
to the world, sin, and Satan. Yet lo: God of his infinite mercy and
goodness, sends ambassadors after us, his Prophets, Apostles, and
ministers, to call us back again, and to offer us conditions of peace. Nay
he sent his own son to call us back again, and he cries, (...) 11.
Come unto me, come unto me, etc. ^^c. 18.31
Nay God himself calls unto us, and he cries unto us why will you die, O
house of Jacob, why will you die? when this would not serve, he falls to
entreating of us, that we would be reconciled unto him. ^^or. 5.20.
Oh love without comparison. Thus has our good God, and most gracious father
forbid the banes of matrimony between the devil and us, (...). 8.32. ^^r.
1.2.
and offers us a better match, even his own son, the heir of all things
and king of heaven and earth, and all upon this condition, that we will turn
again, and forsake the devil, with all his works, and embrace Christ Jesus
with all his merits, and serve him in righteousness, and true holyne all the
days of our life, (...) 1.7^
blessed be his name for ever.

Well then, by this time we see what true repentance is, namely a continual
turning again unto God, Pro. 24.16.
by forsaking our old ways of iniquity, and transgression, and walking in the
new ways of holy life, Romans 13.12
by casting off the work of darkness, and putting on the armor of light. This
turning again, Psalm. 119.11
is a hatred of all sin past, with a hearty sorrow for the same, with a care
to prevent sin to come, and a steadfast resolution not to entertain it, when it
is offered again. Act. 10.33.
It is a conquest of our own wills and affections, Psalm. 95.7.
and a subiecting them unto the will of God. The time of this turning again
must be always, even while it is said to day. This turning again must be by
one certain way, Ioh. 14.6.
and that is Jesus Christ. And for the better finding out of our way, and
keeping of it being found, Psalm. 119.5.
we must needs have a lantern to our feet, and a light to our paths, and
that must be the word of God, read, preached, heard, Josh. 1.8.
believed and meditated upon. And because we walk in this world as on a sea of
glass, Apoc. 4.6.
very slipperie, and we very feeble and faint, we must have the staff of
faith to go by. Our guide must be the spirit of wisdom, knowledge,
understanding, of courage, Esa. 11.2.
and strength. And because Christ our way is holy ground, we must therefore
put off the shoes of our beastly affections, which carried us every way
before, and put upon our feet the shoes of preparation to the gospel. (...)
6.15.
In this our turning again, we shall meet with many discouragements, we must
therefore be covered with a helmet of hope, and lest our old enemies the world,
the flesh, and the devil, should make us retire back, we must put upon us the
whole armor of god, (...) 6.13.
be valiant, and quit our selves like men, and so march forward toward our
heavenly Chanaan. And if at any time we chance to loose our way, as being either
benighted, weather beaten, or otherwise beguiled, we must go about the city;
by the streets and open places, (...). 5.7.
and enquire of the watchmen, the ministers that are set to go about the
city, if they did not see him whom our soul loves, ^^at 5.3
and if they shall show us where he is, we must not say, I have put off my
coat, how shall I put it on? but leaving all such dilatory pleaes, turn
again, and meet him with great joy.

If these be the properties and qualities of true repentance, then are many in
the world far from true repentance. ^^apists.
The papists dispense with murder and treson. The price of whordome, incest,
sodomitry, patricide, matricide, fratricide, and of all sin is set down in the
market of Rome where. Omnia venalia, al is for money, and the devil clarke of
the matket, far enough therefore are they from true repentance, neither can
they be saved, except they turn again. Their foolish penance of whipping,
creeping to the cross, going bare foot, and such like, God never required,
and therefore no true conversion, except they leave these toies and turn
again. The Turk follows his Alcaron, Turks.
even darkness it self, leaving the word of God, even light it self, and
therefore so long as he does so he cannot turn again. Jews.
The Jews denied Christ the right way, and therefore they are far from this
turning again. Anabap.
The Anabaptist rejects the written word of God, and relieth upon his
drousie dreams, and night-reuilations, and therfote shall not possibly find the
right way, except he turn again. The Neuter is for any way, Neuters.
and therefore out of the right way, except he turn again. Atheists.
The Atheist says in his heart there is no god. The Machiuel with the Atheist,
will not acknowledge that there is either god or devil, hell or heaven, and in
all their actions they quench the spirit of god, which one day they shall know
to their cost, except they return. The profane worldling, Worldlings
with Esau weepeth not for his sins, but for the loss of some worldly
commodity, Presumptuo^^
but this is no true turning. The presumptuous person drives of al to the last
hour, and therefore is like to be preted, if in time he do not turn again.
The desperate person is in hatred with himself for his sins, ^^ite.
but because he wants Christ the way, and the staff of faith he lays
violent hands upon his own body, and destroieth the good creature of God, and
so turns further from god, then ever before. The turning turner that turns
with the weathercocke in the wind, ^^coatrs.
must also turn again before he can be saved. The churchpapist turns in
show, (...) papist.
but not in truth, and therefore must look for his portion with hypocrites
except he turn again. The Barbarians turned from one opinion to another,
^8.4.6.
but both in extremities; for one while they judged Paul as a murderer,
another while they esteemed him as a God. Our Brownists also once accounted
highly of gods ministers, ^^nists.
but now they account them but murderers, and false prophets; once they
thought our church to be the only church, but now no church; but I hope that
so many of them as belong unto God, shall one day turn again. Some turn from
popery, to Atheism, from one sin to another, but to God they cannot turn,
except by true repentance they turn again. Some turn as dogs do, that is,
either to their vomit again, (...).
or else to snatch at them which bring them meat. I would I could devise a way
to make usurers turn again, but I fear me I shall not, for they which can
cousin al laws, (no doubt) will be too cunning for me. Usury is a deu^^ that
all the disciples of Christ, in England cannot cast out, for it is a kind that
will not be cast out, but by fasting and prayer. Mar. 5.3.4
We read that there was a man possessed with a devil called Legion, he kept
amongst the graves, and no man could pass quietly by him: I think usurers
also are possessed with the same devil, for no man can pass by without his
marks. The father cries, oh my son is undone by the usurer, the son
cries, oh the usurer has eaten up my father, and every one that comes that
way where the usurer keeps, cries, God keep me out of the usurers hands. No
statute, nor laws can tame usury, for he has so many turnings and turn
againes, that a man cannot tell where to find him. He is in money, and wares,
in buying and selling, he deals for ready money, and for time, he borrows
and lends, he deals by himself and his brokers, the devils huntsmen. And
this is certain, that usury is growe^ so strong, that he has sinews and
bones like a man, and walks up and down the streets like a serving man,
like a gentleman, like a merchant man, and like an alderman; yea and that so
stoutly that ^e takes the wall of all honesty and religion. (...) 31
These turners are like the devil, who being driven out of a man, would
needs be in the swine, but wheresoever they be, they will be sure to do no
good. Good brethren, in many things we sin all, and therefore we have need at
all times to be turning again. In every turning again there is terminus a
quo, and terminus ad quem; that is, the thing from which, and the thing unto
which we must turn. Saint Paul shows that we must turn from idols, (...). 1.
to the living God. And Jeremy in the first words of his text, shows that we
must turn from our disobedience to true obedience, for the reproving of the
one is the approving of the other, and the forbidding of the one is the
commanding of the other. And to say the truth, they are truly turned unto God,
who are truly obedient to the word of God, and they are indeed disobedient
persons which disobey the word of God. And therefore let us make what shows of
holiness we can if we obey not the word in all things that concern us, we are
unholy, we are not truly converted. The word of God forbids us to follow the
fashions of the world, (...). 12.2 (...). 11.14. (...). 3.3
it forbids men the wearing of long hair, and women the laying out of their
hair, and both men and women to disguise themselves in strange attire, now if
(all this notwithstanding) we shall practice the contrary, what do we else but
turn from the Lord unto Satan, who is our terminus ad quem. The Lord in his
word forbids all lying, and false dealing to deceive, and all deceit to live;
if any man in his shop, or elsewhere shall use both, they may well be hearers
of the word, but God will note them for monstrous rebels and hypocrites. And
thus we are to examine our selves for every other thing. For the wickedest man
that lives may hear the word of god gladly reverence the preacher, Mar. 6.
and in many things obey the word, as Herod did; but Herod would still have his
brothers wife, and so many will love one sin or other as their dearling. And
surely the devil can draw a man to hell as well with one bait as with a
thousand. Gods children must therefore strive against all sin, and in every
thing labor to obey the word; or else, as God did allow the good things, and
ever had somewhat to say for the evil that he found in the seven Churches of
Asia, Apoc. ^.
so will his majesty reckon with us for all our sins, not only of omission
but commission; although he do find some, yea many good things amongst us.

Many, under pretense of obedience to Princes would give entertainment to any
religion, forgetting that god must be obeyed before men, but such men are most
disobedient to the King of al kings, but truly obedient to none. Many again
cry, obedience, obedience, as though they were compounded of nothing but of
obedience, and yet all is not gold that shines; and flattering Judas is not
the faithfullest disciple; and ex vnguibus leonem, ex fructibus arborem, the
lion shall be known by his claws, and the tree by his fruit. For let a man
look well upon many of them, and he shall see that there are not any generally
to all laws more disobedient, in their lives, none more dissolute and
scandalous in their worshipping of god, none more superstitious, in the
principles of true religion, none more ignorant, in their dealing, none more
unjust, and deceitful where advantage is given them, none more cruel and
merciless, and in all their sports and pastimes none more profane, and filthy,
and blasphemous; which kind of people are not much unlike Caius Gracchus, who
took upon him the defense of the treasury, whereof he himself was the
spoiler. So they cry obedience, when none are more disobedient then they; like
thieves which having done a robbery, can make hew and cry after the true man.
Some can hold one with a tale, while they pick his purse, but these are
cunning thieves, which can hold the world with a tale of obedience, and
conformity, while they in the mean time do deceive both Prince, church, and
common wealth of their duties, and themselves of Gods favor, if in time they
take not a new course. Such hallow hearted Ambo-dexters, have learned to serve
the time, but to serve their own turn, looking when time will turn, that they
may turn with time: but if careful circumspection be had, which the necessity
of these times requires and the subtilties of these enemies crave, it will be
no hard matter to discern the wolves, though they wander in sheep clothing,
by the noise of their howling, and to descrie the ass (though he iet in the
lions skin) by the length of his ears, except by true repentance in time they
turn again, which God grant if it be his will.

But here arises a question, and that is this: Whether a man in turning to
God, must forsake the company of the wicked or no? If yea (as they ought
indeed) why did these Jews continue still among the Assirians which were
idolatours? and why went they not to Zion, the place of gods worship? Of if
they could not, because they were in captivity, to what purpose then served
this exhortation? The answer is not heard? There is a turning in outward action
and affection: In outward action, when a christian does that which he ought to
do, and may lawfully, and conveniently do it. In affection when a christian
would do that which he ought to do, but cannot, being let outwardly, by
imprisonment, sickness, banishment, the law, or such like: or inwardly by some
natural infirmity. Examples we have of both in the scripture. (...) 6.1. (...)
^.8. (...) 19.7. (...) 137.^2.
They turned in outward action, who with David fetched home the arc, so did
the Ninevites which fasted and prayed at the kings commandment; so did
likewise the Jews and Grecians, which burned their books. In affection turned
the Jews in Babylon, which mourned and wept at the remembrance of Zion. In
affection turned David in banishment, when he desired to go to Gods house with
the people, (...) 2.4
but could not. In affection also turned those men which mourned for all the
abominations that were done in the midst of Jerusalem: And in affection also
the Apostle turned, (...) 7.
when he desired to do all that he ought to do, but could not, being led captive
to the law of sin. So we in many things may turn, both in outward action and
affection of heart, as from idolatry to the gospel, from drunke^nes to
sobriety, from pride to humility, and in many things more. Some things are yet
wanting (which the church should have, if she had her right) as a learned
minister through the whole land, and the prefection of that godly, and ancient
discipline, which was in the primitive church, but as yet we cannot have them
in act, yet in affection we embrace them that is, we pray for them, we would
gladly have them if we might lawfully come by them, and this church does allow
in our book of common prayer, where in plain words it is said, Preface before
Commination on Ashwednesday.
That there was a godly discipline in the primitive church, which is to be
wished; and much to be wished, that is might be restored again; and therefore
also when occasion serves it may be taught, and yet with great wisdom and
discretion: for shall it be prayed for, and not be taught also what it is, that
it may be much wished for? yes surely, for Ignoti nulla cupido, there is no
desire of that is not known. And in affecting that which is wanting, we are to
beware that impatient rashness draw out our affections beyond the bond of
christian charity, and godly sobriety, lest we forget to be thankeful for
those singular benefits which we have already received, and so for our
impatience on the one side, and our ingratitude on the other, we are rewarded,
in the end with the loss of al.

Now follows the reason of the exhortation in these words: For I am your
Lord. The word Lord, in the original signifies to command as a Lord, or to
rule as a husband: either is sufficient, so the sense be taken, as if he
should say; it is good reason thou should turn again, for thou have entered
a covenant with me, and married thy self unto me, and therefore I have both
power our you, and interest in you. This being the sense, the doctrine shall
be this; first, that it is never in vain to turn to the Lord, for such is
his love unto those, whose names are once written in his book of election,
that finally he will not forsake them, but most mercifully will embrace them,
whenever they shall faithfully turn unto him: Neither does he show us this
favor because we have deserved it by our turning again, as the papists say,
but because of his free and undeserved love has made us this promise. If any
shall think that of himself he has power or will to turn unto God, he
deceives himself; for by nature we run from God as Adam did, (...) 3.8. (...)
6.5. (...) 51.10.
but it is God that seeks us up again. Naturally our thoughts are evil
continually, our words are vain, our works are filthy; but it is God that
creates in us new hearts, and that makes our words gracious, (...) Cor. 3.5.
and our works acceptable to himself, and that by Jesus Christ for of our
selves we can not so much as think a good thought. ^^ilip. 2.13.
And as God only by his grace preuenteth us, and works in us both the will
and the deed, ^oh. 6.44.
so by the same spirit he draws us to him, or else we never come at him: and
by no other spirit, does he also finish that good work he has begun in us, and
that in Jesus Christ. And as our repentance is of god, so is our faith also;
for S. Paul says, Philip. 1.29.
To you it is given both to believe and suffer. S. John says, Ioh. 6.65.
It is the work of God to believe in Jesus Christ. And what have we that we
have not received? If we have received all the good we have from god, and not
from our selves, and that of his free grace and mercy, without any
consideration of our parts, why should we not attribute al to him again? and
why should any part of our conversion or salvation be ascribed to our selves,
or any creature else in heaven or earth, and not wholly to the merits of Christ
his death and passion? Romans 5.17, 18, 19
for shall the disobedience of one man, Adam, destroy all the world, and shall
not the obedience of one man, Jesus Christ, save all that believe? shall the work
of men, of Saints, of martires, or of Mary (all sinful and imperfect) be
sufficient, and not the works of Christ Jesus which are most perfect, and
perfection it self? Is he the seed of the woman that brake the serpents head,
and could he not do it without us? Is he that brazen serpent that heales all
those that look on him with the eye of a lively faith, and must we now lick
our selves whole. But (say the Papists) there is righteousness in us as the
accident in the subject. To which we answer, first, though this be true in
philosophy, yet it is false in divinity, ^^loss. 2.8.
and therefore Paul says, Take heed lest any man spoil you through
philosophy. Secondly, there is righteousness in us, as there was sin in Christ;
but in Christ there was no sin really, of his own, but of ours by imputation;
neither have we any righteousness of our own, but of Christ's, and that by
imputation also. Thirdly, God by his good spirit begins righteousness in us,
even in this life, but it is imperfect and polluted, so soon as it comes into
the stinking vessels of our corrupted nature, ^^a. 64.6.
but it shall be perfected in the world to come, by Jesus Christ only. But yet
the papists have another shift, as our evil works are available unto
condemnation, so our good works are available to salvation: for (say they)
Contrarierum contraria estratio, of contraries, there is a contrary reason. But
I answer, the comparison is unlike, and holds not; for first, our sins are of
our selves, our righteousness is of God: secondly, our sins are perfectly
evil, our good is imperfect: thirdly, he that is guilty of one commandment
is guilty of all, ^^m. 2.10.
and deserves damnation; shall we therefore conclude, that he which keeps
one, deserves salvation? what more absurd? No, no, both our conversion and
salvation be the free works of God. Ephesians. 1.14. Luke 12.31
Heaven is our inheritance; ergo, no purchase by us: it has pleased the Father
to give us the kingdom; ergo, we get it not by our selves. Saint John says,
Christ is the door by which we must enter. Ioh. 10.7. Act. 10.12.
Peter says, there is no other name under heaven whereby we can be saved, but
only by the name of the Lord Jesus. And therefore to join Christ with us,
and his perfect righteousness, with our broken works, even unholiness it
self, Matt. 9.16, 1^
were but to put new cloth in an old garment, and so to make the rent worse;
and to put new wine into old bottles, and so to spill all; and to build part of
the house upon Christ, and part upon our selves were to set part upon the
foundation, 1. Cor. 3.11.
and part besides the foundation, and so to bring all under foot. And
therefore if we will be wise builders, let us ascribe all wholly, and only to
our good God, who has so loved us in Christ Jesus, that albeit we have been
disobedient to his heavenly majesty, yet if we will come when he calls, and use
the ordinary means when he offreth them, and turn again to him with all our
hearts, he will be still our Lord, and that for his promis sake in Jesus Christ
our Lord, and yet al of his favor vnde served, and love unspeakable, wherwithal
he loved us before the foundation of the world (...)

This doctrine is necessary for two sorts of men; First, for those that are too
much oppressed with the burden of their sin, even to despair: these men are
to know that Christ Jesus spoke unto them, when as he said, (...) 11.28.
Come unto me all you that are heavy laden, and I will ease you. And the
Prophet here speaks unto them, when he says; O you disobedient children
turn again, for I am your Lord. Let them only believe, and pray the Lord to
help their unbelief. (...) 9.24.
And let not this be the question, whether God will be their good Lord or no;
or whether they shall be saved or no; but whether they be surely persuaded of
Gods love in Christ to them or no. (...). 8.38.
The second sort are such as are not at all touched with their sins, but are
drenched in the sea of sin, and feel not the waves; in the midst of the fire
they are, and yet feel not the flame; Gods iugements are present, hell gates
are gaping, and death ready to strike them, yet they no whit abashed: No
threatening, no promise, no example, nothing will make them forgo their sins,
that God may forgive them: God make us to feel our sins, that we may by true
repentance turn again; for this comfort belongs to none but to those that
in obedience turn to God by Jesus Christ our Lord.

The second thing that we learn from this place, is, that the consideration of
gods love toward us, should move us to serve him in true obedience. This
argument did Moses use to the Israelites; Deuteronomy. 30.7, ^
The Lord (says he) will curse thy enemies, and them that hate thee, and
persecute thee; return therefore, and obey the voice of the Lord thy God, and
do all his commandments. The same argument did Joshua use. Ios. 23.^^, ^^
The Lord says he has given you a land wherein you did not labor, cities
which you builded not, and vineyards which you planted not: now therefore fear
the Lord your God, and serve him in vprightnes and truth. The same reason also
does the Lord (by Jeremy) use here. Turn again, and obey, and why? for I am
your Lord. The same reason ought to move every one of us to fear the Lord,
Psalm. 130.4.
for with him is mercy that he may be feared. Apply we this to our selves.
No nation has been longer urged with this argument then our English nation:
but has it persuaded us to obey the Lord? God indeed has made us his
vineyard, and done for us what he possibly could devise, by pla^ting dressing
hedging, watering, and defending us. Yet lo, nothing but sower grapes. Nay have
we not degenerated more then any other nation? I would to god that we had not;
for thus stands the case with us: the more love from God, the less duty
from us; the more mercy in God, the less pity in us; the more peace, the
less quiet; the more knowledge the less practice: let enemies come, and we
will hold together; let enemies go, and we fall out one with another; let
sickness come, and we send for the preacher; let health come, and we scorn
the preacher; let death come, and some vvil give a little to the poor; let
life continue, and they take al from the poor: when David of love sent
ambassadors to visit the king of Ammon, ^^o. 17.4.
they cut away half their beards, and curtoled their garments by the
buttockes: but some seek to cut their throats, which do them most good, and
that even now. Jonathan used his fathers love to David's benefit, (...) ^0.36.
and by shooting of three arrows, gave him warning of his fathers displeasure;
but now many do abuse their fathers love, shooting poisoned arrows at those
that are true of heart, causing displeasure where none was, and that even now:
When God makes men most able to do good, they are least willing, and that even
now in the light of the gospel. In time of dearth the rich hoord up their corn,
looking still for a greater price. In time of war and common calamity, when men
are infinitely charged, then is every man for himself, setting the dice upon
men, taking five shillings for one, and 20. for five; but by the way, these be
no usurers, but devils incarnate. One poor man beggeth of another. Eliah
goes to Sarepta, and from thence to the ravens for comfort. Lazarus goes to
the rich man's gate, but the dogs give him his alms. Nabals song is, I have not
for David, Amos. ^.4^
when Nabal has the devil and all. Now do me^ eat the calves of the stal,
and the lambs of the flock, drink wine out of golden cups, anoint
themselves with costly ointment, wallow upon beds of Iuorie, and sing to the
vial and musical instrument: and even now, but Joseph's affliction is quite
forgotten. When the Lord spares us, we smite our fellow servant, when the
Lord forgiueth us a thousand talents, we take our brethren by the throat
for every farthing. When God gives Achab a kingdom, let Naboth look to his
vineyard. And when Achab is sick for Naboths vineyard, and Iezabell religious
in proclaiming a fast, for Achabs sickness, then let Naboth look unto his
life. There is nothing but joining house to house, and land to land, until
there be no more room, except it be for a plague. The Isralites bestowed
their earerings, Exodus: 32.3.
and iewelles upon a Calfe. The Papists like calves would bestow all upon the
popes bull, and we like profane Esau are content to sell away our heavenly
patrimony for a mess of belly sorrow, and in this sort we deal with the
Lord, as though the Lord did spare us, that we might spare none; as though he
did give us a portion to waste prodigally; as though he gave us our meat to
play withal, and as though his mercy and goodness, should not make us
merciful and loving, and finally as though his long suffering and patience,
were not to draw us to repentance.

The last thing that I observe from this place is this: (...) 2.4.
that seeing the love of God is so free, so continual, so undeserved, and
unspeakable, that therefore we ought to set more by it, then by any love in
the world. Great was the love of Damon and Pithias, when one offered to die for
the other, but it was neither free, perpetual, nor undeserved; but god loved
us when we were his enemies, and hated him: (...) 5.10.
their love ended with their lives, Gods love is eternal, as himself; the
love of Princes is great, but princes may be unconstant, as Saul was to David.
The love of fathers is great, but they may prove unnatural, as they which
offered their sons and daughters to the devil. Many wives be unfaithful as
Dalila, scoffers as Michol. Children may prove unnatural as Absalon was.
Servants are untrusty, as Gehezi. Friends are fained and sickle as Ioab, and
Judas; but the loving kindness of the Lord endures for ever and ever, upon
such as think upon his commandments to do them. Psalm. 103.1
There are many things wanting in the world, which should bring us out of love
with the world. There wants ability in the king of Samaria, willingness in the
wicked judge, there wants judgment in Isaac, so as Jacob may deceive him,
fidelity is wanting in Laban, so that Jacob is deceived, constancy is wanting
in the Jews, which will cry, Crucifige, and Hosanna, and almost all with a
wind, so that Christ is executed: there wanted in Pharaoes butler thankful
remembrance of his friend, so that Joseph is forgotten: mercy in Rehoboam,
wisdom and discretion in his young counselors, and a good name in both is
wanting, so that Quicquid del^rant reges plectuntur Achiui. The whole land
smarted for their folly. In all men wants somewhat, the whole world has not
all things, no the world has no interest in us; for we are chosen out of it,
by that GOD that says here, I am your Lord. There are not wanting the
contrary, which like scorpions should drive us from the world to the Lord, as
the malice of Cain, the hatred of Esau, the villainy of Ioab, the unkindness of
Haman, the treachery of Judas, the cruelty of Iezabell, the sickness of Achab,
the churlishnes of Nabal, the dissembling of Ananias: as the breasts of the
world are not benointed only with sower things, but the very milk that it
yields bitterness it self, for all is but vanity, and vexation of spirit.
There wants not ignorance, weakness, unwillingness, unfaithfulness in all,
imperfections in the best, nothing certain, but al changable as the moon,
fading as the flours of the field, and vanishing as the smoke in the air, al
wax old as a garment, and as a vesture shall we all be changed. What shall I
say? the whole world is set on mischief. But with the Lord our god the case is
otherwise, for he is almighty, and therefore of ability to reward the godly, and
to punish the wicked. He is our father in Jesus Christ, and therefore willing to
receive us when we turn unto him, he is also a just God, and therefore will
plague those which will not turn unto him, he has al knowledge, and knows al
things, and therefore he will know Barrabas from Barnabas, Esau from Jacob,
Bethauen from Bethel. Simon Magus from Simon Peter. Judas Iscariot from Judas
the brother of James, Shibboleth from Sibboleth, (...). 12.^^.23. ^.10.
and who shall deceive the Lord? He is not as the son of man that he should
change his mind, and therefore he must needs be constant, and his counsel
shall stand. Psalm. 135.^.
He cannot be let or his purpose, for he is in heaven, and does whatsoever
he will: Esa. 49.
he cannot forget his children, for he has written them in the palms of his
hands. Psalm. 121.^
He is always watchful over his children, for he that keeps Israel does
neither slumber nor sleep. A second information shall not miscarrie him, for
he that knows all at once needs no information. No orator shall turn his
mind, for he will never alter the decree that is gone out of his mouth, yea his
counsel must needs stand, against who^ no wisdom, no counsel, nor strength can
prevail. Pro. 21.30.
If he has conceived any displeasure against his children he will soon be
entreated upon their repentance: Psa. 103.
he calls us, he persuades us, he entreats us to turn and obey him, and
therefore let us turn again: he claims it as his right, it is for our
benifit, he shall get nothing by our service: if we never serve him, he vvil
loose nothing by us, if we be saved, he shall be glorified, and if we be damned,
he will be glorified also: for no way vvil he loose a jot of his glory, and
therefore let us turn again and obey him, he commands it in his law, when he
says, Thou shall have no other gods but me; we co^fes it in our belief, when
we say, I believe in God the father almighty: we pray for it when we say; our
father hallowed be thy name, etc. and therefore if we do not turn again, we
break his law, we deny our faith, and we mock God himself in our prayers.
His mercies should move us to obedience, his promises should allure us to obey
him. If he correct us, it is that we might obey him; if he plague us, it is
because we obey him not; but if he does bear with us, and forbear us, it is,
to see whether his long suffering and patience will draw us to repentance. The
Lord is our Lord, and still offreth us mercy, we are his children and always
owe him duty: he is our Lord in goodness, power, wisdom, justice, mercy,
providence, and in himself above all, and therefore let us turn unto him. God
for his mercies sake turn our hearts that he may be still our God, and we may
be his people for ever, So be it. Now let us pray.

The second Sermon of God wooing his Church.
JEREMY Chap. 3. Verse 14 O ye disobedient children, turn again, says the
Lord, for I am your Lord, and I will take you one of a city, and two of a
tribe, and will bring you to Zion.

Verse 15 And I will give you Pastors according to mine heart, which shall
feed you with knowledge and understanding.


IN the former part of this text, the Lord has showed what authority and
power he has over his people, by which he might compel them to serve him:
but now he takes another course, whereas he might enforce them, he does
entreat them; and whereas he might press them down with most grievous
judgments, he does now promise to reward them most liberally, and to deal
most bountifully with them, for he promises to endow them with the best, and
greatest blessings which he gives unto any of the sons of men in this life.
For first whereas they were in captivity and bondage amongst Gods enemies, he
promises to set them at liberty, in their own country, and to establish his
true religion and worship amongst them. And further, that they may no more
provoke the wrath of the Lord against them through their ignorance, and
wandering out of the way for want of lights and guides; he promises to
provide for them such pastors as shall watch over them for their good, and not
see them want any instruction; as if he should say unto them, I will bring you
to my own house, and during your whole life I will assure you of the best
things I have for you, and you shall want nothing, if you will obey me, this
shall be your dowry. And thus we see how frankely the Lord deals with them,
and what large offers he makes them, as one which means to win them, if
any thing will woo them.

And further, lest that such as were well affected, and desirous to return
indeed, might be discouraged, thinking it in vain to turn, except al would
turn; and because the promise was made to all the whole company, it would not
avail them to humble themselves. The Lord (to take away that doubt) tells
them, that though but a few of them do return, yet he will be as good as his
word: and if but one of a city, and two of a tribe, that is, very few in
comparison of the whole; yet if so many shall in truth return, they shall not
loose their labor, but the Lord will bless them, and the rest for their
sakes. Thus the Lord shows himself careful to remove all causes of doubting
from his people, and to put in all the prouisoes that may be on their behalf,
al to make the conueiaunce of his blessings as sure as may be unto them, that
they may have nothing to allege for themselves, if they should unkindly reject
or neglect this gracious covenant of the Lord, so mercifully and undeservedly
offered unto them.

The first thing that from hence we may learn, is this, that the sins of
many shall not hinder the course of Gods mercies unto the penitent, though they
be but few. The Sodomites were many, and their sins were as a mighty pile of
wood for the wrath of the Lord to burn upon, the cry of them ascended up
unto the ears of the Lord, and the filthiness of their abominations had
infected the very air; yet all this could not move the Lord to keep back his
mercy and loving kindness from righteous Lot, whose soul was vexed within
him for their wickedness; Genesis 19.29.
neither did the Lord forget his servant Abraham when the fire of his fierce
wrath was flaming upon those wicked cities. In the like gracious manner did he
remember Rahab (who gave entertainment to the spies of Joshua) when Jericho
was utterly destroyed. And this is a point of singular comfort to the godly, to
remember, that God in visiting the sins of the whole world, yet will not
forget to show mercy unto thousands of them that love him and keep his
commandments. Yea, if there be but one of a City, and two of a Tribe that
do truly return to the Lord, the Lord will surely embrace them whatsoever
others do.

Again, we are further to observe here, that the Lord that is the most
righteous Judge of the world, judging all men in equity and truth, will not
condemn all for the wickedness of some, but will take them as he finds
them, if there be but one of a city, or two of a tribe that fear God, they
shall be justified in their uprightness, and not be condemned with the rest
And surely this is a good rule for us to follow, that in censuring and judging
of men we may take heed of rash and hasty judgment, for it is the manner of
the perverse world to co^demn all for some, without any difference, or
exception. If in the ministry they hear of some one or a few that be of lewd
and ungodly behavior, straitwayes their bolt is shot over the heads of all
that are in the ministry, crying out that all be naught, they are al such. In
like sort, if any other man that is a professor of the gospel chance to be
found in any fault, straitwayes profane Atheists cry out with open mouth,
that there are none worse then professors: but they will take heed (I hope)
how they do make such wry mouthed conclusions against al estates, for fear
that their neck should pay the price of their tongue. For if they should look
into the state of Kings and Princes, they should find that some have been
usurpers, some idolaters, some tyrants, and some very vicious and licentious
persons; will they therefore conclude and say of Kings and Princes, as they
do of the poor ministers and other inferior professors of the Gospel, there
are none worse then Kings and Princes, for such and such were idolaters, etc.
they are all naught? No, I trow not, for fear of a worse matter. But do they
think in this sort to deprave and condemn the profession of the gospel, and
the knowledge of the sacred scriptures as the cause of al disorder, and the
professors of the same as the worst persons that live (as the manner of many
is) and to escape the Lords hands for this their horible pride, and
presumptuous rashness: will not the Lord (think we) be revenged of such wicked
ones that shall so maliciously bear false witness against Gods church and
slander the Lord Jesus in his poor members? Is not the Lord as ielous of his
own glory, and of the credit of his people and gospel, as Kings and princes
are of theirs, and their laws? but as Christ said of his disciples, so we may
truly say of such swift judges, they know not what spirit they are of. For
the spirit of God takes an other course, having to deal with the seaue^
churches of Asia, in the Revelation he says thus: Apo^. ^.
I know thy faith, and thy patience, and thy love, and thy zeal, etc. that is,
I commend thee for these good things, and I approve thy works, but yet I have
somewhat to say against thee for such a thing and such a thing; that is, I
neither condemn thy good, because of thy evil, nor commend the evil that is
in thee, because of thy good things: this course he takes with every one of
them, to show what we should do in such cases, if we have the spirit of god;
for we so many in the world fallen into two foul extremities at this day:
first our protestants at large say, that because we have the gospel
plentifully taught in many places of the land, and the sacraments, and many
good things (the Lord make us indeed thankful for them) that therefore all is
well, and nothing is amiss, there are no faults, nor corruptions in the
church, ministers, or people. The Brownists on the other side cry out, that
because that there are some defects and wantes in the church, and every thing
is not ineuerie respect so purely reformed as it ought to be by the word,
therefore (say they) we have no church, no sacraments, no ministers, nor any
thing that is good, but that al our ministers are dum dogs, Baals priests,
and I know not what, playing the frantic man's part, who because some thing
lies in his way, or there is something in the house that is not to his mind,
therefore lays about him at every one that comes in his way; the poor
innocent children are beaten, the servant driven out of doors, the meat on
the table is cast down to the dogs, the fire flung about the house, the
windows are broken in pieces: and not content with this, runs out and
gathers up all the filth and dirt in the street to cast in his mothers face
that bare him, and wipeth his hands upon his fathers face who begat him, and
all to make them odious to all that shall behold them. And having set the
house on a fire, runs away by the light thereof, crying out to all that they
have infected with the like rage. Come out from among them, Come out from among
them, there is no dwelling, there is no house, there is no meat, there is no
body to dress any thing, they are al polluted and defiled, all is naught
amongst them. And having made their Proclamation, away they fling into another
country, till they have done as great an exploite there, until at the last
falling out amongst themselves, and excommunicating one another, many of them
return home again and as men awaked out of their dream, they lay down their
weapon, and go quietly to bed again. And in the like sort do the Papists
deal with us; but their dealing is so gross and palpable, that I will not
vouchsafe to waste any breath about them. But now to the text again.

One of a city and two of a tribe, etc.] Here we are further to observe, that
God is not led by the multitude of the wicked, to mislike of the godly being
but fevv, or to like well of the evil, because they are many, which is also
a rule for us to immitate and follovv, and it may stand us in steed many
ways, (...). 23.2.
for first it teaches us to take heed that we be not drawn away to evil,
with the example of the multitude which like a mighty stream is very
forcible to carry us away, except we row hard against the same. The life of
the multitude is called by our savior Christ the broad way, (...). 7.13.
that is, the common way, wherein many do walk unto their destruction,
which therefore must be avoided of every one that will be saved: secondly
we may learn from hence, not to be discouraged from good things, by reason of
the small number that join with us, for straight is the gate and narrovv is
the way that leads to salvation, and fevv there be that find it. And
thirdly we may see here, that multitude is no certain argument of the truth,
nor of the best things, as Papists and Atheists do imagine, for though evil
men have all the hands and feales in the world to testify in their behalf,
yet are they never the better before God, as Achabs journey was never the more
prosperous (when he went contrary to Gods will against Ramoth Gilead) though
four hundred false prophets said unto him, go and prosper, 1 King ^.
and but one only was against him in it. And though many laugh thee to scorn,
thou art never the worse, if thou have the truth on thy side: as Micaiah was
never the worse though 400. were against him, and the king and all were against
him, yet was the truth still the truth, (though it were justified only in his
mouth) and prevailed at the last. We see for the most part, that those which
turn to God as Hezechias did, are but the smallest number, as it were one or
two in a town (in comparison) that are truly religious, and a few in a great
congregation, that are zealous indeed for the glory of God, and they are also
noted and pointed at of the rest, as the common wonderments of the world: and
yet we must beware, that we make not up the whole reckoning, with those only
which we see, or can yet judge of (as the Brownists do) excluding all the rest,
but to think thus rather, that as there may be fire under the ashes, though I
see it not, yet so there may be religion in the hearts of many though I see it
not yet. And as in the days of Eliah, 1 King. 19.18.
the lord had 7000. in Israel which never bowed their knees to Baal which
Eliah could not see, as sharp sighted as he was, so there may be in our days
seven thousand, which belong unto God and may prove religious, (...) we see
now, and yet we be not so sharp sighted as Eliah was. But howsoever it may be,
this is sure, that the sincere worshippers of God are always the fewest; and
Gods number is always the smallest. And therefore as Jeremy preached to all,
but converted by his doctrine not past one of a City, and two of a tribe,
that is, a very few. So we now must preach to all, but if one of a city, and
two of a tribe, that is, if any at all do reperit at our preaching, we may
think our selves very happy. It may be, that as 70. followed Christ a while,
which bare the name of Christ's discrples, besides thousands that followed him
for their bellies sake, so many may follow us now in the like manner: but as
these seventy disciples came after twelve, so is it now, that as it is read
in one place, of Christ and his seventy, and in another place, of Christ and
his twelve, so now may we see the like again: for at one time you shall see
Christ with a great auditorie, and some time Christ with two or three about
him, from seventy to twelve; and amongst those few will be some hypocrites
and false brethren too, as amongst the twelve there was found one Judas a
traitor. So that the Lords company oftentimes proves like Gideons army
against the Midianites, Judge. 7.4,
which at the first was 32000. amongst which were found 22000. timorous and
fearful, which being dismissed, there remained but 10000. of which ten
thousand there were found but 300. which would take pains to lap water like a
dog, and they were Gedeons army, so from two and thirty thousand they came
down to 300. The same is still to be observed, which has been from the
beginning, and shall continue to the end. Ioh. 6.66.
In going from god many are noted in the gospel. 70. disciples forsake Christ
at one time for one speech which they understood not, and came no more at him
afterward, yea and it was doubtful whether the rest would have forsaken him
too: but in coming unto Christ but few are noted, now and then one alone like
Nicodemus, Ioh. 3.2.
and that by might too for fear of the Jews. Inquiry being made for
prophets, four hundred false, but one true, four hundred against God, but one
for God can be found. In the ninth of Ezechiel, we read of six that were
sent to destroy, and but one to save. In the fifth of Jeremy the Prophet is
willed to search all Jerusalem; to see if he could find but one righteous
man that the Lord might spare the city for his sake. Now, this is hard, and it
goes so hard, (...) 2.32.
that when all are gleaned out and refined, the Lords flock will be but a
little flock as Christ calls it, in respect of the multitude, but it is the
best flock. (...). 2.
Gideons army was but the gleaning of Ephraim, yet those gleanings were better
then the vintage of Abiezer; so the Lords people are but the gleanings of the
world, yet those gleanings are better then the vintage of Satan. And as hard
as it goes, so merciful is the Lord, that if in all Sodom there be found but
one Lot, the Lord will gleane him out, before the devil shall reap his
harvest. If one groat be lost, he will seek it up again; if one sheep be gone
astray, he will fetch him home again with joy; if one sinner repents, (...).
15.7
there shall be joy for him amongst the angels in heaven; if one prodigal
child comes home again, he shall be received; if one leaper amongst ten
that are cleansed, return with his thanks, he shall be accepted; if in a city
one, in a tribe but two, and in a whole world but eight just persons be
found, the Lord will receive them and save them from perishing with the wicked
world. The Lord deals not with his people as men do, that will say, if
there be but one fish in the net, and a little one, cast it in again; if there
come up but a little fruit upon the tree, let the swine eat it, except there
were more; if the hen brings but one chickin, cast it away, because there
are no more; or as the wicked say, if there be but one or two in a
congregation that fear God, what account make you of him, he is one, we are
many against one? but the Lord makes much of one, so it be his own, to teach
us, that we also should make more account of one good man, (if there be but one
among many) then of many bad, as the Lord does, for he deals like a merciful
creditor, who having many desperate debts, will take any thing, and not refuse
part, because he cannot have all. Last of all, from this place we note, that
the Lord uses to spare many wicked ones oftentimes for the small number of his
elect sake which are amongst them, as he spared Sodom and Gomorrha for Lots
sake, the old world for Noah's sake, and Putiphar for Joseph's sake, the thorns
are spared for the Lillies sake that grows amongst them, and the tares for
the wheat sake, are not cut down, and for good Iehoshaphat his sake it was
that the Lords Prophet vouchsafed to go unto wicked Iehoram, or else he
would not so much as have looked toward that wicked man, though he were a
king. 2 King. 3.1


This may teach us to make much of them that fear God, for if their number be
once accomplished, the world is at an end; for as the world was made at the
first for their sakes, so for their sakes it is that it continues and
stands: for how long did Sodom stand free from the fire of Gods wrath after
Lot and his household were removed out of it? or how long did the old world
escape drowning after that Noah and his company were entered the Arc, no
longer shall the world stand, after that the Lord has once gathered his chosen
unto himself. If the wicked did well consider of this point, that when the Lord
has gathered his wheat into his barn (as the Lord Jesus says) that he will
then gather the tares together and cast them into unquenchable fire, they
would not be so hasty to drive away Gods people, and to hunt them out of
their company, and out of their Cities and towns, as they do, like the
Galileans which were not well until Christ were gone out of their coast, but
even in policy they make much of him, as foam do of wards, whose lands
they enjoy but during their minority and the term of their lives, and after
their decease, or when they come to full age, all goes from them again to
another. But now let us come to the text again.

And will bring you to Zion] Zion was a fort in Jerusalem, 2. Sam. 5.7. 2. Sam.
6.16 1. King. 8.1
and kept in possession of the Iebusites til David's time, but it was won by
David when he came to the crown. After he had won it, he brought ^hither the
Arc of Gods covenant; to which place the people resorted to worship the Lord.
So that by Zion is meant the place of Gods worship and religion, so that the
meaning of the Lord in these words is this in respect, I will set you at
liberty from your enemies, and bring you again to your own country, that you
may serve me in holy exercises of religion, as I have appointed. Whence we may
note, that the end of the churches deliverance from any trouble and affliction,
is to become more religious, for to this end has the Lord delivered us out of
the hands of our enemies, that we might serve him without fear, Luke. 1.74.
in righteousness and true holiness always. But some may say: This is a matter of
no great vaiue, for they had it before and made no reckoning of it, and
therefore very like that this would not move them. But if he had told them of
their gorgeous houses, delicate orchards, pleasant fields, and abundance of
worldly wealth and great honors and dignities, it may be they would have
regarded such things, as satan thought to move Christ to worship him that
way, when no way else would prevail, he shows him therefore all the
kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them, and does offer them al unto him
upon condition that he would fall down and worship him, but by no means he
could prevail with his goodly offer, for the Lord Jesus was not of a
worldlings mind, that will do more for gold then for godliness. So it should
seem that if the Lord had told the Jews of such matters, wherewith the heart
of man is more drawn, the^ with spiritual matters, he might have won their
love for ever. But to tell them of Zion, and religion, of pastors, and
preaching, might seem to be the next way to drive them further from his love
then before. Indeed this seems to be a good worldly policy, but the Lord
need not to be taught of the world. The truth is so, that when they had their
fill of religion and religious exercises at Zion, they cared not for them: but
now being well humbled with affliction amongst idolaters and scoffers: and being
kept from it, they account dearly of it. And the truth of this may further
appear by that pitiful complaint and moan which they make in the 137. (...)
137 1, ^
psalm, when they were amongst the Babylonians in captivity, By the rivers of
Babel we sat, and there we wept, when we remembered Zion: they wept not before,
when they were at Zion, but now they weep: yea so great was their grief at the
remembrance of Zion now, that all mirth and music is laid aside: now they
hung up their harpes upon the willow trees, and fall to weeping and sorrowing
for Zion; for Zion, why could not their melody and sweet music make them
merry? Oh no, no, they could take no joy nor comfort in any such outward
things, so long as they were banished from the public exercises of Gods
religion at Zion, which was a sign of Gods love and favor unto them; but now
they were excommunicate and cast out as it were unsavory salt upon the
dunghill (for Babylon was but a dunghill to Zion) oh God had taken his love
tokens and iewelles from them, God showed an angry countenance upon them. How
could they then be merry? what joy could they have in the rivers, or pleasant
walks, or sweet music when they remembered Zion? oh now Zion, Zion, Psalm.
137,
Zion, nothing but Zion would make them weep, and dashed all their joy and
mirth, and laid it in the dust, But, was this all? Oh no, no, besides all
this, they that led us captives required of us songs, and mirth, when we had
hanged up our harpes, saying, sing us one of the songs of Zion. Oh the wicked
Babylonians came scoffingly, and tauntingly, and mocked them by their religion,
and flowted at the very name of God which was praised in their songs, and this
cut the very heart strings of them in twain: as the proud Spaniard would scoff
at us and our religion, if the Lord (as justly he might) should deliver us into
their hands; Come on you Protestants would they say, let us hear now one of
your Geneua psalms, etc. Oh this would go to the heart of us (if we had any
spark of Gods spirit in us) to hear God thus, and his holy religion had in
derision of his wicked enemies.

Here then we may learn, that we never see what a benefit it is to have
religion, and the ministry of the word, until it be taken from us. (...) ^4.3.
Though David always loved religion, yet never so much as when he was in
trouble and banishment, for then he could make his moan unto God, and say,
that the sparrowes and the swallows were at a better pass then he, because
they might come and build their nests near unto the altar of the Lord, and
they could have a place in the Lords house when he was shut out. Then did his
soul long for the presence of the Lord again. (...). 42.1.
As the Heart longs for water when she is chased; then was his meat nothing
but tears, and his drink still mingled with weeping, and then did he pour
out his soul unto God like water, and his bones were as it were cut a sunder,
so great was his grief then, when he remembered how he had gone with the
multitude into the house of the Lord with songs of praise, and thanksgiving as
unto a feast which now he could not do. Amos. 8.14.
And this is that which Amos prophecieth of, when the Lord shall bring a famine
of the word of god upon the land, the^ shall men run up and down from one
place unto another, yea from one sea to another; and from North to South to
seek it, and shall not find it, for he that wants meat, and health, and
liberty, can best tell what they be worth.

And the rather to provoke us to a love of these heavenly things, we are to
note, that religion and liberty go both together: The Kings of Judah never
prospered better then when they embraced most zealously the word of the Lord.
And most true is that saying of the Lord Jesus, that if we first seek (as
many did) the king dome of GOD, and the righteousness thereof, Mat. 6.33.
then liberty, then peace, then health, then riches, and then all other things
shall be cast upon us. It follows.

15 And I will give you Pastors according to my heart.] As if he should say,
whereas before you went into captivity, you had pastors that were either
dumb dogs that could not teach you at all, or false prophets that taught as
it stood with their advantage, so that you could neither have knowledge, nor
conscience to serve me; for which cause I sent you into captivity, (...) 5.13.
now I will not only bring you home again, but I will also give you wise and
godly pastors which may teach you how to serve me rightly, and may also call
upon you to serve me faithfully, that you may go no more into captivity. Here
then we may note first, that a wise and a learned ministry is a most needful
thing, in as much as without it, it is not possible true religion should
continue. And therefore when God began an ordinary religion, he commanded
that Aaron and his sons, and the tribe of Leui should be sanctified to the
office of priesthood, to offer sacrifices for the sins of the people, and to
teach and instruct them in the will of the Lord, showing thereby that religion
could not be vpholden without some special means to teach and direct the people
therein.

According to my heart; that is, such as I shall like and approve, that shall
have their calling from me, and their gifts from me, and their allowance from
me, and shall teach for me, and reprove for me, and shall seek nothing but my
glory, and your good, such as my self shall like of; so is David said to be
a man after Gods own heart, that is, such a one as God takes delight in, and
approoueth, and that is Gods heart indeed: for the Lord has no heart, nor
head, nor body, nor hands, nor feet, nor eyes, nor mouth, nor ears as man
has, and as the gross Papists have set him out in their pictures upon their
windows, etc. But these parts of man are attributed and given to God after
the manner of men, for man's better understanding of the nature of God; for
every man knovveth to what use these parts of man's body serve; the eye to see
by, the ear to hear by, the mouth to speak by, the hand to work by, the
foot to go by. And sometime these parts in man are in the scriptures put for
the qualities and properties that be in them; and sometime for the actions and
deeds that are wrought by them, as appears in the fifth chapter of the
gospel after Saint Matthew, where it is said by our savior Christ; if thy eye
offend thee, pluck it out, or if thy hand offend thee, cut it off: his meaning
is, that men should take heed of such things as are done by the hand, and by
the e^e; and so by the rest, to the offense of God or our neighbor. And it is
an usual thing in our common speaking amongst men, when we see any man's
vvriting, we say, this is such a man's hand, and yet the writing is not his
hand, but his handy work. When we hear one speak, we use to say; that is
such a man's tongue, or, I know him by his tongue, and yet his speech is not
his tongue, but a thing uttered by the means of his tongue. So likewise in God
there are such properties and qualities, which are indeed his very essence and
being, and are described in the Scriptures, for our better understanding what
the Lord is unto us; as knowledge, and wisdom, and understanding, and
might, and strength, and justice, and mercy, and providence, and love, and
hatred, and anger, and liking, and disliking, and many more, which are all set
forth, either under the parts of man's body, or by other creatures whose
natures are very well known unto men. And how could we better come unto the
knowledge of Gods unspeakable nature, so far as is meet for us to know,
but by such things as we are familiarly acquainted vvithall our selves? for do
not al men know, that strength does utter her force by the means of the arm?
and that knowledge and understanding do enter into the heart by the eye and
the ear? ^o not men declare their mind by word and by writing? does not love
and anger lodge in the heart? and does not the countenance bevv^ay the liking
and disliking that is in the heart? and who is so simple that knovvet^ not
these things? Therefore when the simplest shall hear the scriptures call God a
spirit, and tell us withal, that a spirit has no flesh nor bones as men
have, and yet shall hear the same Scriptures to attribute unto God a head, a
heart, together with eyes, and ears, and a mouth, and a face, and a soul, and
feet, and such like, as if he were not a spirit, but a man, must they not
needs conceive that there is something else meant by such kind of speeches,
which they could not so well understand, nay not at all conceive, if God
should utter himself as he is in himself, and not by such things as are
familiar with man's understanding, and not to imagine so grossly as the gross
headed idolatrous Papists do, that God is a man indeed, and has the parts of
man's body indeed? Therefore when we hear of the Lords hand or arm, what
can we understand thereby but his omnipotent power, might, and strength,
whereby he is able to do all things which he will do? Other arm and other
hand the Lord has not, for he is a spirit. When we hear of the Lords eyes
and ears, what can we conceive thereby, but his knowledge and understanding,
which is such that nothing can be hidden from his majesty? but that he sees
and knows all things at one instant? other ears and other eyes, the Lord
has not, for he is a spirit. When we hear of the mouth of the Lord, what
else can we understand thereby but the revelation of his will? other mouth the
Lord has not, for he is a spirit. When we hear the Lords head is as white as
wool, what can we gather thereby but the eternal wisdom of God, (...). 1.14.
because wisdom is commonly attributed to the gray headed? other head and
hair the Lord has not, for he is a spirit. When we hear of the soul or heart
of God, what can we concerue thereby but the Lords liking or disliking of a
thing? otherwise the Lord has neither heart nor soul, for he is a spirit.
When we hear of the light of Gods countenance, (...) 46.
what else can we understand thereby but the tokens of his love and favor?
otherwise the Lord has no countenance, smiling, or frowning as men have, for
he is a spirit. And when we hear that God is a spirit, we must not concerue
thereby, that God is circumscribed within any certain place, as some heretics
have thought, ^^stici.
because a spirit is so; but we are to learn thereby, that he is of a
spiritual substance, and invisible nature, but altogether unspeakable,
infinite, and incomprehensible. And thus we see what is meant by Pastors
according to Gods heart, that is, such as his majesty shall approve and like
of Now let us see what we may learn from hence. The Lord promising and
purposing to do his people good, yea the greatest good that can be if they
turn to him, he says, he will gave them pastors according to his liking, such
as he shall approve and delight in; to teach us that there can come no good
unto Gods people but by such means as God does like of. To build up Gods
church in faith and repentance, and to keep the same in the holy obedience of
Gods laws; there is more required then to have pastors, and dctours, they must
be such as God does like of. These are tokens of Gods love to his people, and
shall do good in their places, and turn many unto righteousness, where others
are tokens of Gods wrath, and are given in his wrath, as Saul was to the
Israelites, to be a plague unto the people. These that are approved of God,
have their gifts from God, and are sent forth with his blessing, that they may
prosper and beget many souls to God. The other are made barren, and accursed
that they can do nothing, but only supply the place of pastors, but the
sheep cannot feed in their pastures it is so sower; or if they feed, they
cannot thrive, because it is not blessed, for as the body lives not by bread
only, so the soul lives not by doctrine only, but by the blessing of God
upon both. Daniels diet was but water and pulse, yet with that did he like
better, then they which had their portion from the kings table, because it was
Gods allowance, and went with a blessing. So they that have pastors according
to the Lords own heart, are many times fed but with plain, yet pure doctrine,
and their souls are better fed with knowledge; their faith is more strong,
their repentance is more sincere, and their life more reformed, then theirs
that are fed after a more stately and princely manner, which ostentation of
humane learning and eloquence, because it it is gods allowance and goes with a
blessing, whereas the other comes and goes like the wind, which only
puffs and blows at men, and so leaves them as it found them. In the twenty
three of Jeremy the Lord does most notably describe such prophets, as are not
according to his heart. In the 23 he calls them liars and dreamers, to show
that there is no credit to be given unto them, more then unto hars, neither is
there in their doctrine any more certainetie then is in a dream. In the six
and twentieth verse he says, they delight in lies, which he calls the
deceit of their own hearts, to show from what fountain they draw all their
licor, even out of the filthy puddles of their own brain. In the twenty seven
verse he shows what is the fruit of these dreams, namely the name of God is
forgottten by their means amongst the people, a most horrible sin to forget
GOD, as if the devil himself should teach. In the thirty verse he calls
them thieves, because they steal the word of GOD away from the people, like
those that are still dissembling and discouraging men from the reading of the
scripitures after the manner of the popish synagogue, for fear that their
wickedness should be descried by the light of the word. They that rob by
the high way, take away but men's money or their worldly goods, but these
rob men's souls of the most precious word of GOD, therefore they are the
greatest thieves. And the better to effect their purpose the Lord says in the
one and thirtieth verse that they have very sweet tongues, and can make the
people believe that the Lord says this, and the Lord says that, when it is
only the deceit of their own heart. In the two and thirtieth verse he says,
they are flatterers, and through their flattery they cause the people to err;
and in a word he says, that the Lord never sent them, neither gave them any
authority, and therefore they bring no profit unto the people, they preach and
study and take pains to no purpose, like the good wife that churmeth, and
churmeth and can make no butter come. As for the people that l^ue under their
ministry, he shows in the 2. verse that they be adulterers and swearers,
full of wickedness and ungodliness, to show that nothing but wilderness can grow
upon the ground that is tilled by such as are not according to the Lords
liking. As for their own behavior he shows in the thirteenth and
fourteenth verses that it is suitable to their teaching: deceitful and filthy;
broken out with all manner of botches and blaines, of foolishness, and
filthynes, and adultery and uncleanness, and walking in the by-pathes of lies
and falsehood, strengthening the hands of the wicked, that none can return for
his wickedness, and in one word more, they are all, both prophets and people
unto me, but as Sodom a sink of sin, and as the inhabitants of Gomorrha
such an other sink: this they are to me says the Lord, thus they are in my
eye whatsoever they seem to be in their own opinion, or in the judgment of
others whom they have blinded and bewitched: Thus we see what ugly creatures
they are which run before the Lord send them, which are ministers after men's
hearts, but not after Gods heart, as a number of blind guides amongst us be;
the Lord takes no pleasure in them, nor in those foolish people that are
contented with them: and therefore sets them alone to do as they list, and
turns them as false children, over whom he has no care, but lets them run
as it were filth and vermin for want of trimming and washing with the water of
his grace and spirit, whereas those that are of his sending forth, and such as
he takes pleasure in, he will set them out in the best manner, and grace them
with good gifts, and holy conversation, he will make their words gracious, and
their ministry to be reverenced in the eyes and hearts of all that fear God,
they shall be mighty and powerful in delivery of their message, they shall
be fruitful in the work of the Lord, and terrible in the consciences of the
wicked, they shall be blessed in the strength of the spirit, to turn many
souls into the ways of righteousness, even so many as GOD has appointed,
yea they and their people shall be a righteous generation, over whom the
Lord will have a watchful eye continually, to renew and to repair them with
his grace and spirit, there shall not so soon any fore seem to arise in their
life, or any corruption in their profession, but the Lord with his favor and
grace shall heal it again, they shall be blessed of God to the good of Gods
church which are pastors according unto Gods heart, and none else; I do not
mean such as are free from all corruption and stain of sin, for such are
not to be looked for in this vale of corruption, but such as the Lord has
sent forth, and furnished with gifts, and sanctified for the work of his
church. And the like may be said of civil magistrates, and church governors,
that if ever the church of God reap any good by any, it is by them that are
not after Antichrists heart and lyking, or according to the worlds
approbation, but according to Gods words liking, for God blesses no ordinance
but his own.

This doctrine may have a good use in respect of those that be Pastors, or
that have any public place of teaching in the church of GOD, it may seem
to admonish them, that they approve themselves both for life and doctrine in
the sight of GOD, to be such as God likes of, if they will do any good in
the work of the ministry, and thereupon reap any comfort to their
conscience in the day of the Lord.

There be two marks that every minister approved of God must principally aim
at, not lucre, nor gain, nor worldly promotion, nor the vain praise of the
world, as the manner of many is, which shoot as rouers do at many marks, and
never a one certain. But the marks that Gods ministers must shoot at, are
the glory of God and the good of Gods church, that they may say as Paul said,
Romans 10.1.
without check of conscience, Our hearts desire and prayer to God is, that
Israel may be saved. And so dear should the glory of God be unto us, and so
great should be our love unto the church of God, that if it may be advanced
in the salvation of our brethren, yea of our enemies more then in their
destruction, we should earnestly crave the same of the Lord, yea so earnestly,
that rather then the Lord should loose any part of his glory therein, we ought
to crave it with the hazard of our own salvation, as the apostle Paul that
singular pattern of zeal and love did, Romans 9.3.
when he desired to be accursed for his brethren sake, the Jews which were
his brethren according to the flesh. Some bend al their endeavor that they may
be well thought of with the Prince, or with the court, or with some noble man,
or with the chief of their congregation, for wealth and authority, and some
desire only to be popular, and approved of the multitude: and to bring this to
pass, they take great pains, they study hard, they read much, they currie
favor with one, and flatter with another; they serve the time, and turn with
the time, watching the tide, that they may row with the same; and if they
meet with any of their brethren laboring against their stream, him they
belabour with their Inuectiues, though therein they do strive against the
stream of Gods eternal truth; but what ^^re they so they may have the
approbation of the world, whose glory they do hunt after like lusty Nimrods?
and if they chance to miss of their purpose, as sometimes they are crossed as
well as others, are they not ready to fall sick of Hamans disease, who was
ready to die for sorrow, because Mordecai did not bow the knee unto him? It is
a good blessing of God to be gracious in the eyes of christian Princes, and
great states, as it was a thing greatly to be rejoiced at when Theodosius the
Emperor of Rome embraced christian bishops which resorted unto him. And the
favor of Gods people in the Lord is a good favor of God, which oftentimes
he gives unto his servants, when they seek not after the same. But yet this
is not the thing that Gods servants must affect, but all their care must be
both at their first entrance into the ministry, and in the whole course of
the same unto the end, that they may be found Pastors according to Gods own
heart. Both credit and maintenance in the world are the good blessings of the
Lord, and it shall be lawful for Gods ministers to enjoy the same so far
forth as God sees good for them; but yet they must take heed that they make
not those things the end of their work; but that at the first, and at the
last, we may be approved in the sight of god. The apostle had matter of
rejoicing in his country, for he was an Israelite, and of his bringing up, for
he was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel a learned man; he could have
stood upon his learning, for he spoke with tongues more then any other; if
others were doctors, he was a doctor of the Gentiles, and many great
privileges he had that others had not. But what, does he stand so much to the
maintenance of those things? No, Philip. 3.8.
he counts them all but dung to win Christ, he forgets them as things
left behind him, so that he may attain unto the mark that is set before him,
even the price of his high calling the Lord Jesus Christ: he cares not a point
for them, so that he may approve himself a faithful workman in the sight of
God. And so should we do; if we be ministers approved of God, we must not
be as many are which make merchandise of the word of God: but as of sincerity;
but as of God in the sight of God, we must speak in Christ. (...). 2-17.
If we be pastors according to Gods heart, we must not praise our selves, nor
stand in need of letters of commendation unto our charge; or of recommendation
from them unto others (as the Apostle says) but our flock must be our
epistle written in our hearts to be read and understood of all men; ^or. 3.1
not with incke, but with the spirit of the living God. If we be ministers
approved of God, we must give no occasion of offense in any thing, ^or. 6.3.
that our ministry may be free from reproof: But in all things (says the
Apostle) we must approve our selves as the ministers of god, nothing and yet
possessing all things. What a notable approbation is this? How many fellows
has the holy Apostle saint Paul in this? This is for saint Paul alone, and
such Puritanes as he was. Here is no mention all this while of Dispensations,
nor of Qualifications; nor of Pluralities, nor of Unions, nor of Totquots, nor
of any such implements, belike they were not allowed of in Saint Paul's time;
for if they had, surely the Apostle would not have left them out, or it may be
that they were not then in use, and the world is grown wiser now then it was
in saint Paul's time: Oh quantum mutatus ab illo!

The world is greatly altered since saint Paul's days; it can no skill of
saint Paul's course. Well yet we must learn to have skill of it, if we will
be approved in the sight of God. And if all the world do commend us, and yet
God condemn us, what shall it advantage us? Most miserable and wretched
caitifes shall we prove our selves to be, and better it had been that we had
never been borne, if the Lord shall say he knows us not. This was Micaiah
well persuaded of, and therefore he stood to the truth when four hundred
false prophets and flatterers stood against him; yea when the king and all was
against him, but yet he was a Prophet according to the Lords heart, and that
was sufficient for him. Many at the first, and a great while have made a good
show of great sincerity, that no man would have taken them but to be men of
God indeed (as good Prophets were called in old time) until they have fallen
by the world as Demas did, or till they have fallen into favor with the court,
or the state, or till they have taken some high degree of schools, or til they
have climed up the ladder of promotion, and then the date of their zeal, and
painfulnes and sincerity has bin expired, and they have turned over their
copy to others, and having made shiprack of faith and a good conscience, they
have gone forth like Thamar out of her brother Ammons chamber when Ammon had
defloured her, she went out with her garment of diverse colors rent and torn; so
they have go^ away with their garment of gods graces rent and torn, ^am. 13.19.
only this difference is between Thamar and them, she wept and mourned for
it, and so do not they, but rather rejoice at their alteration, holding these
things now as most vile, which before the time of their sincerity they
counted most precious: and this is yet a most fearful judgment of God upon
them for their apostacy, for when they begin thus with tongue to persecute the
truth which before they have professed, what do they else but turn into that
hie way which leads unto the sin against the spirit of truth. And being
thus revolted from their first love, they fell to be just of Saul's humor, who
perceiving himself to be forsaken of the Lord for his hypocrisy, and
dissembling in Gods business, desired yet of Samuel, that he might be honored
before the elders of the people, and then he was safe, that was all that he
looked after. So say they, let us be honored before the elders of the people,
and that is sufficient, for that is all that they look after, as having their
reward of men, and not of God.

The third Sermon of God wooing his Church.
JEREMY Chap. 3. Verse 15 And I will give you Pastors according to mine heart,
which shall feed you with knowledge and understanding.


NOw the question grows how we shall know who be pastors and ministers
according to Gods liking, and who be not. The Lord Jesus does best resolve that
doubt in the 7 of John ver. the 18, ^^b. 7.18.
thus; He that speaks of himself seeks his own glory but he that seeks
his glory that sent him, the same is true, and no unrighteousness is in him:
that is, he is a true messenger of God, and no counterfeit. A man is said to
speak of himself two ways, either when he speaks before he be required to
speak, or being required to speak, speaks not the truth truly, but mixeth
some device of his own brain therewith: so did the false prophets, for both
they ran before they were sent, and also spoke the errors of their own heart
in stead of the word of the Lord: So did Vzzah that which he did of himself,
when he put his hand to the ark of the Lord, because he was not called
thereunto of the Lord. Ium. 23.38. ^^d. 11.
So Balaam spoke of himself though he spoke the truth without adding or
diminishing, because his covetous heart which served for the wages of iniquity,
made him go when the Lord bad him to stay When Calphas profecied of Christ's
death, S. John says; This spoke he not of himself, that is, he did not invent
it of his own brain. But what is it for a minister to seek his own glory? Ioh.
11.51.
to be infected with the stain of vainglory? no, for Paul was infected with
that stain, as appears by his own testimony; for therefore he had a
messenger of Satan sent to humble him, 2. Cor. 12.7.
lest he should be lifted up out of measure for those heavenly revelations
which were given unto him. What then? to extol his ministry and calling when
just occasion serves? no neither, for the Apostle having to deal with such as
went about to abuse his ministry. He extolleth his ministry in this manner; 2.
Cor. 11.5.
Verily I suppose that I was not inferior to the very chief apostles. But then
indeed does he seek his own glory, when he preaches man's doctrine to please
men. Gal. 1.10, 11.
For now, preach I man's doctrine or Gods? (says the Apostle) or go I about to
please men? for if I should yet please men, I were not the servant of Christ I
certify you brethren that the Gospel which was preached of me, was not after
man. And the apostle cha. 4. ver. 17. describes the vaineglorious false
apostles by this mark, that they would exclude all others as no body, that the
people might altogether affect them. But what is it to seek Gods glory? 4.17.
that is a very needful question indeed; what is it to say God be praised, or,
thanks be to God? No, for so did the proud Pharisy who was compoun ded of
vaineglory; Luke. 18.
and when he pronounced those words, sought nothing less then the glory of
God, and nothing more then his own glory. What then? is it to say, Let God be
glorified? No neither, for so did the persecutors of gods church when they
excommunicated their brethren, as appears in Esaias 66.5. like the Prelates,
who began all their excommunications and condemnations with In nomine Dei;
and so In nomine Dei burned, and imprisoned, and massacred many of the dear
saints and servant of God. And like unto the former are the papists, who in
all their idolatrous and superstitious services sing, Glory be to the father,
to the Son, and to the Holi-ghost, etc. A^ which do give as much glory to
God, as the Jews did unto Christ, when they spit in his face, and saluted him
with the knee, crying, Hail King of the Jews. What then? to speak Gods will
without adding or diminishing? ^wor^. 23.12. ^^t. 2.16. (...). 11.
No neither; for so much did Balaam, who for all that, sought nothing but his
own commodity and gain, and therefore is said to serve for the wages of
iniquity. How then? To come in outward humility, and shows of holiness, as
to profess wilful poverty, to go barefooted, etc. after the monkish manner
of the Popish friars, and others of that fraternity? Nothing less; for the
apostle does utterly disclaim them, and maruelleth that they which are dead
with Christ from the ordinances of the world, will be burned again with
traditions, (...). 2.20.
as though they lived in the world, and not in Christ; which all perish with
the using, and are after the commandments and doctrines of men: Which things
have a show of wisdom (says the apostle) in voluntary religion and
humbleness of mind, Ioh. 7.18.
he speaks not of himself; for the second, it is said, there is no
unrighteousness in him, that is, he is not a subject to sin and
wickedness. Counterfeit and false apostles are deceitful workers, 2. Cor.
11.13.
(says S. Paul) and can transform themselves into the Apostles of Christ, and
no marvel (says he) for Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of
light. Therefore it is no great thing, though his ministers transform
themselves as though they were the ministers of righteousness. But ex
fructibus, by their fruits, (says the Lord Jesus) you shall know them. Math.
7.2^.
The sorcerers and soothsaiers of Egypt did imitate, or rather counterfeit
Moses and Aaron in many things, so do the ministers of the devil counterfeit
the ministers of God in many things: but as Moses did one thing which the
sorcerers could not do; so Gods messenger does one thing the other cannot do;
that is, they seek the glory of him that sent them. Now when the people saw
Moses do that which all the cunning men of Egypt could not do, they said; this
is the finger of GOD: so when men shall see a man seeking in his whole
ministry nothing but the glory of GOD that sent him, they must needs say,
This is a minister of God.

In the doctrine it will appear two ways; First, by the matter delivered;
secondly, by the manner of delivering. For the matter, it shall be such as God
has put into his mouth, that he may say as the apostle did, That which I have
received of the Lord. ^or. 11, 23.
I have delivered unto you, (...). 1.8.
and if an angel from heaven shall preach otherwise then the apostle preached,
he is to be accursed. And herein he is not to hold himself sufficiently
discharged, if he declares some part of Gods will, and leaves out some part
thereof, but he is to deliver to the church of God, the whole counsel of God,
(...). 20, 20.27.
as time and occasion serves; and yet in such sort as shall be most
profitable for the people, for wisdom and faithfulness must wait one upon
another in the minister of God. And still he is to meet with such things as
obscure the glory of God, as Paul did when he came to Athens, Act. 17.
and perceiving them to be addicted to idolatry and superstition, he aduanceth
the true God, and abaseth al false gods, and that he does 2. ways. First, by
setting forth in God his power, 24, 25, 28, 30.
his goodness and his providence; secondly, by declaring the vanity of idols,
and the ignorance of the Athenians. Again, the manner is to be observed; and
that our doctrine may win glory to him that sent us, two things are required:
First, concealment of humane skil^ secondly, demonstration of the spirit; both
which are evident in the example of the Apostles preaching, who may be a
pattern of true preaching to all the doctors in the world. 1. Cor. 2.^.
When I came unto you brethren (says he) I came not with excellency of
words, or of wisdom, Paul's drift is to reprove certain teachers at Corinth:
but for what? not for heresy, but for the manner of their teaching, and in
that for two things, for humane eloquence, and wisdom, neither are they
simply reproved for these, for they are good in their place, but because they
made a show of them in declaring of Gods message. And in the fourth verse,
humane wisdom is opposed to the evidence of the spirit, to show that they
which study only for humane learning and eloquence, cannot preach in the
evidence and power of the spirit. And this he proves by many arguments.
First, the doctrine that I taught was Gods will and testament, ergo, I must not
utter it in matter and form after men, but it must be showed as he set it
forth. Secondly, in the second verse, I have purposed to know nothing but Jesus
Christ and him crucified; that is, to profess nothing else, for he could not
but know many things more, therefore the profession of all humane wisdom was
to be laid aside. Thirdly, in the third verse, he says, it was in much
weakness, fear, and trembling, because he was to deal with the devil, and
with men of beastly condition, who could not be subdued with gallant shows of
humane strength, nor with flanting and flourishing in humane eloquence and
wisdom. Fourthly, in the 5. verse he shows a notable reason why it was
thus, and why it must be thus; lest your faith should stand upon man's
wisdom, rather then in the power of God, and so man should have the glory
of converting men's souls to the faith, which is proper to God only: therefore,
in the ministry the power of God must only be showed in demonstration of the
spirit, and of power. Fifthly, 2. Cor. 4.
we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of that power,
might be of God, and not of us. The minister is compared to a vessel, and a
homely one, he shows a treasure in it: Whatsoever therefore is in man must
be hidden: that when the treasure works, the virtue which is of God, may be
ascribed unto God, and not to man. But then it will be demanded of some, what
use there is of arts, of doctors, and fathers, and the tougues, if they may not
be showed and alleged in the public ministry of the word. To whom we may
answer, that as those things are the good blessings of god on his church so
there is a private use of them in study, to help the man of God to find out
doctrine and to set it forth, but in public they are not to be showed, by the
testimony of the apostle, except it be in disputations and controversies
against those that rely upon them as the papists do.

As there must be a concealment of humane eloquence and wisdom, so there
must be a demonstration of the spirit, ^^stration spirit.
as the Apostle shows in the fourth verse of the second chapter and the first
epistle to the Corinthians, and that is, when the minister so delivers the
word, that the people may perceive, it is not he that speaks, but the
spirit of God in him. The whole foureteenth chapter of the first epistle to
the Corinthians, (...). 14.
is a commentary of this point, and in the four and twentieth verse he
shows, that if there be propheciing, that is expounding, and applying to the
conscience, (...) 4.
the scripturs in a known tongue: if an idiot, or an unbeliever come in the
mean time he is rebuked, and judged of al, that is, he shall take himself so
to be, for the secrets of his heart shall be made manifest, and so he will fall
down and worship God, and say plainly, that God is in you indeed. And thus
must men prophecy to work this effect, (...) 3.8.
they must be as Michaiah was, full of power, by the spirit of the Lord, and
of judgment and of strength, to declare unto Jacob his transgression, and to
Israel his sin. The Apostles were not permitted to witness of Christ, till
they had received the spirit that must execute it. And i^ the second of the
Acts it is said, that it lighted on them like fiery tongues, to show that the
spirit of GOD makes the speech to burn. Then wheresoever the speech touches,
it burns by the outward sign, the inward work is signified by all which we
may see that there must be no demonstration of the person, but of the power of
the spirit. And further, because explanation is the very soul of the spirit,
therefore that especially must be labored for; for in man is soul, and
body, and spirit. 1. These. 5.2
The soul gives life. The spirit liveliness; and is the moving and
stirring of the affections. The doctrine must also have application, or else it
is dead; now when it is applied by the spirit, it is most lively and effectual.

The liveliness and power of the word thus preached, appears in this
demonstration. Take a thing that is read hot, and lay it to another thing
that is cold, and it shall kindle a heat in that too. So the ministers tongue
is a fiery tongue, Simile.
now when it is brought to man's senses and understanding, it works the like
heat in them, so that the power of the spirit is conveyed unto them. And thus
an impression is made in the hearts of the people. And when the man sees
this, he falls down, he glorifieth GOD, and reuerenceth the minister, and
God in him. And for the better procuring and preserving of this reverence: it
is very requisite also, that his message be delivered with authority and
majesty, as Paul advises Titus; (...) 6.4.
the reason is in the 2. Cor. 3.20. The minister is an ambassador for Christ;
now the ambassador bears his person that sent him, he is his vicegerent to
speak and do that that he himself does; therefore the whole function must be
with authority. (...) 7.28, 29.
It is said that the people were astonished at Christ's doctrine, because he taught
them as one having authority, and not as the Scribes, to show that the minister
shall never move by his doctrine, except it be with authority. He that will
approve himself in the sight of God to be a minister after the Lords liking,
and win glory to him that sent him, must have his life clothed with robes of
holiness and righteousness. I mean not that a holy life is essential to a
minister, so that he is no minister that wants it, but that it is necessary for
a minister, for many shall say at the last day to Christ, (...) 7.22.
We have prophesied in thy name; to whom answer shall be made again, depart
from me ye workers of iniquity I know you not. The necessity of it may
appear by many reasons: first, a minister unless he be sanctified he shall
never soundely, and lively understand the word of GOD; (...) 5, 9.
for the Lord reuealeth his will unto the humble, and his counselles unto them
that fear him, and to none else. Lawyers become cunning by long reading; and
Physicians by experience; yet no man was ever a perfect, found, and judicial
divine without holiness. This knowledge is rather feeling, then learning, in
abundance of beart, rather then extreme study, sent by God to good men: so
that, he that can say with David, Psalm. 119.117
I love thy law, may say, I have more understanding then my teachers. It is
the equity of God, unwilling to obey, unworthy to know; for what should he
do with a talent which will not use it? Therefore he which forbids pearls to
swine, stays his hand from casting knowledge to the wicked, except so much as
shall condemn them. Further, the ignorant people cannot see the ordinance of
God, but they use to judge of a man's ministry by sensible things which they
see in him; therefore a good life is necessary in a minister. For they say,
because he lives according to his teaching we will hear him, as Herod heard
John Baptist, Mar. 6.20.
because he was a good man and a godly. If teachers of humane arts shall tell
general things without examples, it is hard to learn of them: so if teachers
of divine things shall teach only without examples, it will be as hard to learn
of them; therefore the minister must set a copy with his life, which the
Apost^e saint Peter requires when he says, ^et. 5.2, 3
Feed the flock of God, which depends on you, caring for it, not by
constraint, but willingly, not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind, not as
though ye were Lords over Gods heritage, but that ye may be ensamples of the
flock. What manner of examples ministers must be. Saint Paul shows, 1
Timothy. 4.12. when he says, Be unto them that believe an ensample, in
word, in conversation, in love, in spirit, in faith, and in pureness. It is
said unto all men, Be ye holy; but it is enjoined the minister more specially.
to be adorned both with inward and outward holiness. Inward holiness stands
in faith and a good conscience, which the Apostle Paul would have to be in
Timothy, as weapons, Tim. 1.19.
without which he cannot fight a good fight; the first is, a persuasion of the
truth, or true doctrine: the other excuses a man in every action, ^ron. 15.15,
and therefore Solomon calls a good conscience a continual feast. And Paul
labored to keep that above all things; ^ct. 24.16.
for I endeavor my self to have always a clear conscience both toward God,
and toward men. Outward holiness which must be in the minister of God, is set
forth in I. Tim. 3.2. A Bishop must be unreprovable. Again, there be
outward duties required of him, in regard of his person. in regard of his
family, in regard of his calling, and in regard of strangers. First in
regard of his own person, he must be unblameable, so far from outward
crimes, and gross sins, that he must be free from all just cause of
suspicion, because he must reform others; not to be free from sin, for that
is not possible in this life. He must wisely conceal his infirmities from
others, for being once known, they are as a bar cast in the way of the
people to stumble at. And howsoever great and foul faults in an other man
seem to be but small, yet every light infirmity in the minister is accounted
as a plague sore running upon him, the which makes him to be abhorred of the
profane and ignorant sort: therefore if the minister should make his
infirmities known unto them, it were all one as if he should say, I have the
plague about me, and so make them to abhor both his person, and his doctrine.

Secondly, in regard of his own person it is required that he be the
husband of one wife, for in those times men had two wives, and then he might
not be a minister, because that he had broken the holy ordinance of
almighty God in himself, which should see it kept in others. If he had bin
such a one, and now is single, or joined only to one, he may be a christian,
but not a minister. And the like is to be said of him that has been sometime a
Preacher of the gospel, and after that fell to be an idolater or a Popish
priest, and is now a professor of the gospel again; the church may upon his
repentance take him for a christian, but he ought not to serve in the public
ministry of the word, as yet many do, because he is not only blemished
himself worse then a man that wants a member, which in no wise might serve
in the work of the ministry, but also is a foul scarre in the face of the
church, which must be removed, that the church may look with a lovely and
comely countenance, that her friends may be in love with her, and not through
her ugly and deformed visage, be occasioned to loathe her: and this is that
which the Prophet Ezechiel in plain words has recorded in this manner,
^^zech. 44, 10,
Thus says the Lord God, No stranger uncircumcised in heart, nor uncircumcised
in flesh, shall enter into my sanctuary: Neither the Levites that are gone
back from me, when Israel went astray, which went astray from me after their
idolles, but they shall bear their iniquity. And they shall serve in my
sanctuary, and keep the gates of the house, and mi^nister in the house. [But
how shall they minister?] they shall slay the burnt offering and the sacrifice
for the people, and they shall stand before them to serve them: that is, they
shall serve as drudges to do all the servile work that belongs to the
sanctuary, like the Gibeonites, who were appointed by Joshua to carry wood and
draw water; and why? Josh. 9.27.
because they served before, their idolles, and caused the house of Israel to
fall into iniquity; Ezech. 44.12,
Therefore have I lift up mine hand against them (says the Lord) and they shall
bear their iniquity. And they shall not come near unto me, to do the office
of the priest unto me, neither shall they come nere unto any of mine holy things
in the most holy place, but they shall bear their shame, and their
abominations which they have committed. And will make them keepers of the watch
of the house, for all the service thereof, and for all that shall be done
therein.

Now if any man will object against this that has been spoken, that Paul was a
persecuter of the gospel, and yet afterward was caled to be a preacher of the
gospel, he may; but it will not serve his turn; for first, Paul was not a
preacher before he was a persecuter, for then had he been a right apostata,
or backe-slider from the faith, as those men were of whom I spoke before, as
namely, such as were preachers and professors of the gospel in king Edwards
days, and persecuters of the gospel in Queen Mary's days, and then to become
preachers of the gospe^l again in Qu. Elizabeth's days; such Apostataes Imeane
was Paul never, neither are they to be admitted into the ministry now.
Secondly, Paul was extraordinarily called and converted; it does not therefore
follow that any now-adays should look for an extr^^rdinary calling, when the
same Apostle has laid down an ordinary rule, for an ordinary ministry,
and amongst other rules has laid down this for one, that a minister must be
vnrep^ooueable: but it is very evident, that such apostates and runningates
from the f^^rh (which have made also others to fall away with them) are very
instly to be reproved. Thirdly, it is required of a minister of God, that he
be watchful, because the church of God is subject to the temptations of
heretics, and Satan, therefore he must of necessity be resident upon his
charge, that he may be acquainted with the natures, and conditions, and
opinions of his flock continually, and so meet with every inconuenie^ce as it
arises before it grow to a head Cursed is he that does the work of the Lord
negligently; Ierem. 48.10.
If negligence in the Lords work be accursed, Non-residencie.
then what blessing can a Non-resident look for upon his non-residencie? for
there can be no greater negligence in doing of the Lords work, then for a
minister to leave his place and standing, wherein god has set him, and to
commit the care over unto a hireling which was committed to him, like the
unkind nurse which turns over the child to another, whom the parents of the
child never trusted withal. If any will say they can be but taught, and as
good by one as by another, they do but deceive themselves. For if themselves
should commit their own child to a nurse, whom they have made choice of before
another, they would not like it well, nor take it well if that nurse should
take her wages, and post it over to another, and say, it can be but kept, or,
it can be but fed, and as good by one as by another. Besides that, the Lord in
his word expressly condemns such kind of dealing in the priests of Israel,
Ezech. 44.
charging the^ to have broken his covenant; and How? because they had brought
in strangers to pollute the house of God, for ye have not kept the ordinances
of mine holy things, but you your selves have set others to take the charge of
my sanctuary; which makes as directly against Non-residents and their Curates
or substitutes as can be; for if such care was required of the Levites and
priests under the ceremonies of the law, which were but shadows of Christ
and the gospel. How much more ought the ministers of the gospel to have this
care to look unto the work of God themselves, unto whom is committed, not
the shadows, but the substance it self, even the Son of God, who was the end
of those ceremonial figures and shadows, and the dispensation of the gospel
of Christ, wherein is exhibited more clearly unto the church of God even
Christ Jesus himself already come, and crucified, and in heaven glorified,
which fair exceeds al those things which were committed to the priests and
Levites: which did also exhibit Christ unto the church, but more obscurely,
and a far off. Now ^f God would not dispense with them for committing the
charge of his house then, to others, much less will he dispense with us for
committing the charge of his house now, to others. And admit that their
substitutes be honest men, godly, learned, and painful too, which yet is but
seldom (though sometime) seen, if they be not troubled, nor called into
question as others be, yet we must know that God has not promised any
blessing, but to the labors of such as he has ordained and set over his
people, and not over every hireling, for God will bless no ordinance but his
own, what care and intent soever men have.

Fourthly, it is required of a minister, that he be sober, that is, there must
be a moderation of all his affections, and of al his appetites, as in eating
and drinking, in apparel, in recreation, in company keeping, and such like,
unto which must be joined modesty, that in good and seemly order, his
outward behavior must not be offensive, he must be free from all light
speeches, or shows, he must learn to bear his person orderly, in dignity
and gravity, as becomes the minister of God: It is also required, that he
be harborous and full of hospitality, according to his ability, and an
entertainer of the faithful; he must be also apt to teach, and able to
deliver the word, and to apply it aptly and fitly, according to time, place,
persons, and al occasions, as Esaias says, he had a tongue to speak words in
due season, Esa, 50.4;
which as Solomon says) are like aples of gold with pictures of silver, Pro.
25.1^.
most precious and comely, whereof one is worth a thousand of others, and has
more grace then ten thousand. There be three foul vices, which must be removed
from his person. First he must not be given to wine, that is, always to sit
by it, as they that take pleasure in it, like the^ that cannot eat, but still
must have wine. Timothy might d^nke wine, not for pleasure, but for his health,
and for pleasure too, so it be not ordinarily. Secondly, he must be no striker,
if he cannot ouercom his people by exhortation, and instruction in his public
function, he may not strike them. In his family he may strike his servants and
his children when they deserve correction, yet with discretion, for there he is
both minister and master. And in wars also he may strike the enemy, when by
the magistrate he shall be thereunto lawfully called, for he is both a
minister and a subject. Thirdly, he must not be given to filthy lucre, as they
that live of the gain of usury; or of cards and dice, and other gaming, or by
any gains that come by hook or by crook (as the proverb goes) against the
law of God and man. The reasons are taken from the contrary causes, for
strokes come from anger, and he must be a man that can bridle his anger: and
covetousness is ^he cause of filthy lucre, as it is the root of all evil,
which must not be in the man of God.

It is required of Gods minister in respect of his family, ^uries in respect of
his family.
he be such a one that can govern his family well. For the government of a
family is a great stay of a church, and common wealth, that is, when by the
example of the minister others govern well, yet there is sufficient doctrine in
the word to govern by. Then does the minister govern well, when his whole
family is in subjection, and obedience of the magistrate, and willing to suffer
when they offend: now if any look for liberty, it is children; therefore the
apostle puts children for all, and says that they must be in subjection;
therefore much more servants: and that this may not seem a small matter, he says
that it mast be in all honesty, or com^ines, to show that there is decen^ie in
that family, when every child does his duty, and great comelines is in
subjection; the reason is, if a man cannot rule his own family, how can he rule
Gods church? therefore he is not a minister after the Lords heart, that
brings up his children dissolutely: and here by the way we may see, that God
does not require of the minister either a single life, or a monkish life nor a
whorish, and adulterous life, which whosoever leads in popery is better accepted
then he that lives in holy estate of matrimony. In respect of hi^ calling to
the faith.


In regard of his calling to the faith it is required that he be not a young
pla^t or a nouice, gods church is compared to a vineyard those which are
converted are as it were brought out of the field and planted in the vineyard:
now if if these be but as of a years growth or so, they are not fit to be
ministers, lest they being puffed up (as many are) fall into temptation of the A
man newely converted, has not sound knowledge, and so falls by ignorance of
his mind to error, and so to heresy by pride, and so is in the same sin with
the devil: nay, the apostle says, in the condemnation of the devil, that is,
to be without a savior, or not to be saved: therefore we ought to take heed,
for the danger is great, pride and liking of heart, will bring a man to the
diuils sin; if it puff us up, then are we gone; pride keeps out humility,
which must needs receive Christ. He that can ascribe confusion to himself,
keeps out pride, or at the least fights against it.

The last property that is required to be in a minister, ^espect of ^ngers.
is in respect of strangers. He must have a good testimony of the^ that are
without, even of infidels, who are not yet converted. So he must behave
himself, that even from the wicked (if it be possible) he may have a good
report. He must be courteous to all, good, and bad, not courteous to the
faithful, and austere to the wicked, but courteous to al: the reason is, lest he
fall into reproach, and the snare of the devil. The reason of this duty is drawn
from the inconuenie^ce that will follow the contrary; for whom must he convert?
the wicked: then if he come into hatred with them, he shall be able to do them
no good, if they blaspheme God and him. And thus by reproach, he is cast into
the snares of the devil, either to be dissolute, and not to care what he does,
or else desperate of very grief and sorrow of heart: by which we may see what
danger it is to raise up slander of any man: it is as much as a man's soul is
worth, for this gives the devil occasion to work upon a man. And a man may
speak that which may make an other man come to destruction, so much as lies
in him that so speaks. The world is a place where satan has al snares on
each side, therefore we must take heed. They that lie in the snares, it may be,
see nothing of all this, but those who have bin in, and are gone out, do see
them, therefore it is needful to pray, Lead us not into temptation, but
deliver us from evil. And thus much for the duties and qualities of a minister
in respect of his own person, of his family, of his calling to the faith, and
of strangers, by which (together with that which has been said of his
doctrine) it may easily appear who be ministers according to the Lords heart
or liking, and who be not: It follows in the text.

Which shall feed you with knowledge and understanding. Now the Lord shows
what benefit they shall reap by their pastors, namely knowledge and
understanding; they shall not only be to Gods liking, but also for their souls
good: nay, they cannot be pastors to Gods liking, except they be also for the
benefit of Gods people; for God likes well, when his church th^^ueth well, and
the church thriueth well when it grows in knowledge and understanding; for
that is the way to grow strong in faith and repentance, and love, and in zeal,
and in patience and in all the ^auing graces of the spirit of God, to know and
to understand the ways of the Lord. This knowledge is the knowledge of Gods will
revealed in his word, which shows both what his purpose is concerning all
men, both good and bad, wicked and godly, the faithful and unfaithful, the
elect and the reprobate, the salvation of the one, and the damnation of the
other, the assurance of both, the means and the causes of both. It shows
also what is required of al men to be believed, and what to be practiced, for
the advancement of his glory. This is called the knowledge of God in Christ
Jesus, wherein stands eternal life, John chapter seventeen verse 3. This
knowledge of God is the first and chiefest principle in christian religion,
because without it, it is not possible for any man to worship him, as he ought
to be worshipped of us, for the Apostle says, how shall we call on him, on
whom we have not believed? and how can we believe in him, of whom we have not
heard? and how shall we hear without a preacher? (...). 10.14.
as if he should say, we can do none of these things without knowledge; for
knowledge is the end of hearing and of preaching: therefore do we preach and
hear, not to make the scriptures better (as some senseless idiots do
immagine) but to bring men to the knowledge of the truth. Now as the apostle
speaks of faith and prayer, which be two especial parts of Gods worship,
we can neither believe aright, nor pray aright without knowledge, so may it
be said of fear and love, and all other points of the true worship and
service of God, that men can neither fear God aright, nor love God aright, nor
confess him aright, nor acknowledge his government aright, without the knowledge
of those things.

And for the better bringing up of men in this holy knowledge of God, the Lord
has given his statutes unto Jacob, and his ordinances unto Israel, which he
has not vouchsafed upon all nations, for the heathen have not the knoledge of
his ways; Psalm a hundred forty and six. And these statutes of God are
contained in the books of the old and new Testament called the holy
Scriptures, by the way of excellency, which being rightly understood of us
do bring us directly to the true knowledge of God, and of our selves. And
because there are in the scriptures some things that be hard and dark to our
understanding: therefore the Lord has ordained pastors and doctors, whom he
has also furnished with gifts of knowledge and utterance, and learning, and
sanctification, that they may teach the Lords people the true meaning of the
scriptures, and so train them up in the knowledge and obedience of the Lord.

By this then it appears how necessary it is for all Gods children to have
the knowledge of GOD, the understanding of the scriptures, and the preaching of
the word amongst them by a painful, faithful, and learned ministry. And on
the other side, it be wrayeth the pestilent danger of ignorance and ignorant
ministers, and also the barrenness of bare reading, without the tillage of
expounding, of catechizing, of doctrine, of exhortation, and of application,
the which is the life of doctrine; by which holy means, as it were, with the
Lords ploughs the fallow grounds of men's hearts are broken up, (...) 4.4.
whereas otherwise the seed is but cast amongst the thorns, as Jeremy
speaks. When the Queen of Ethiopia her chamberlain was reading the prophet
Esaias in his chariot, ^8.30.
Philip asked him if he understood what he read, to show that a man may read
and read again, and be never the nearer without an interpreter, as that
noble man confessed; for how can I understand (said he) without a guide?
Therefore Ezra (when he had read the scripture,) he also gave the sense, Nehem.
^.8.
and caused the people to understand the reading, to show, that bare reading is
not sufficient to bring men to understanding. And therefore our savior Christ
also, when he had read a place of Esaias that concerned himself, he closed up
the book, Luke 4.20.
and opened the text, making application thereof to his hearers: whereupon it
follows in the same place, that all that heard him bare him witness, and
wondered at the gracious words that proceeded out of his mouth, to show, that
preaching gives grace to reading. And when the word read is opened, and
applied, then men bear witness of the truth, that is, they know what to
hold and believe for truth, and not before. This the apostle Paul knew very
well, and therefore he did not only teach the Ephesians openly, but privately
also in every house, going from house to house, warning, Act. 20.20, 3^
and exhorting every one as he had occasion, to show what course those
sheepeheardes must take that would bring their flocks unto the green pastures
of heavenly comforts, and the living waters of eternal happiness, both
growing and flouring out of the lively fountains of knowledge and
understanding in the holy word of God. And further, for the necessity of
knowledge and understanding, what could the lord say more to show the greatness
thereof, then to call them by the name of food, or meat and drink, for so he
does; I will give you pastors, which shall feed you with knowledge and
understanding; as if knowledge and understanding were food of the soul, and
so they be to teach us; as there is nothing more necessary for the strengthening
of the body, then meat and drink, so there is nothing more necessary for
the saving of the soul then knowledge and understanding. Take away from the
body ordinary sustenance long, and it starueth. And take away knowledge and
understanding from the soul, and it perishes: Therefore as Christ said when
he raised up Iairus daughter, give her meat, so the Lord says, when the
soul is raised up to the life of God; give it meat; but that must be
knowledge and understanding.

Again, as knowledge and understanding are here called food, so pastors are
called feeders, as if they were nurses, and the people as babes and children,
which neither know what is good for them, nor how to dress their meat nor how
to feed themselves. And therefore many do not unfitly compare the bare reading
of the scripture unto a whole loaf set before children, which must be cut
in pieces, and be d^uided before it can profit them. The preachers are also
called feeders, to show that they must be like nurses in ability, in affection
and discretion. Some have wherewith to feed their children, but they are
unkind and unnatural, like cruel harlots that kill their children, that they
may not be troubled with the^. Some bear a good affection to their children,
but their breasts are dry, and they have no meat to give them when they cry
for it; as in the great famine of Samaria. Some have wherewith to feed, but for
want of discretion to observe the childs nature and constitution, as also the
weakness, or strongnes of the stomach, the frowardnes and tenderness of thinfant,
and the causes of al, it happens that much is given, and little digested, and
great pain is taken to little purpose, because the child is either misdieted or
distempred, or handled too tenderly, or too rigorously. Therefore in the
feeders of the soul there ought to be sufficient store of knowledge, there
ought to be a loving and tender affection, tempered with wisdom and
discretion, that every one may have his due portion faithfully distributed unto
him, and that in due time and season. It is a lamenble hearing to hear the
children cry for bread, and it shall be answered again by the Nurse, I have
none for thee, thou must starve, for I have none to give thee. But it is a
thousand times more lamentable to hear the souls moan for want of spiritual
food, oh what account have they to make unto God that take the place of
spiritual nurses, and have no milk in their breasts, that is, know nothing to
any purpose? is it nothing to starve the Lords people? Is the murdering of
men's souls no sin before the Lord? O that the smoky Kemarius of this our age,
as unpreaching ministers and non-residents, and such like did consider well of
this point^ then would they not leave their occupations and trades, as many
have done, and betake them to the ministry, as their last refuge, for living
and maintenance sake, but they would leave the ministry as fast: and betake
themselves to some other trade of life again, and wish that their heads were
fountains of tears, that they might weep day and night for the slaughter and
destruction which they have made of the Lords people. Which they were better
to do now while the Lord does allot them a time of repentance, then
hereafter in hell, from whence there is no redemption. Oh that our Patrons,
and Bishops likewise did enter into the due consideration of this point, then
should not so many symonaicall and unworthy worldlings be presented and
admitted, nor so many godly and painful pastors be dismissed as there are, to
the great woe and sorrow of many poor souls that have received most sweet
comfort from their blessed ministry and painful endeavors in the Lord.

But now it is time to enter combat and encounter with our adversaries the
Papists: nay the adversaries of Christ and his church about this point, who
would bear the world in hand, that Ignorance is the mother of devotion, and
that there is no necessity of the scriptures for the common people, but that
every one must believe as the church believes without any further trial or
examination had of the matter by the word of God. Which bloody doctrine, and
uncomfortable assertion we shall see (by Gods grace) to fall down and break
his neck at the sight of the truth, as Dagon the idol of the Philistimes did
at the presence of the Arc.

Ignorance (say the Papists) is the mother of Devotion. And Ignorance (say the
Protestants) is the mother of damnation. Now there is great odds between
Devotion and Damnation; as much as is between ignorance and knowledge, or
between light and darkness. Indeed of Popish devotion, whose fruits are
idolatry, and superstition, and sacrilege, and blasphemy, and pride, and
ambition, and covetousness, and treason, and all abominations, and in the
end, eternal damnation. Ignorance is the mother, but not of true devotion
which pleases God. Knowledge and Ignorance be contrary one to another; and as
they be contrary causes; so their effects must needs be contrary, and that by
the rule of contraries; for, Contrariorum contraria est ratio. Now if knowledge
be the root of faith, and of love, and of zeal, and of obedience, and of all
virtue and goodness, as it is then is not ignorance the root of faith, but of
unbelief, not of love, but of hatred, not of zeal, but of rashness and
coldness, not of obedience, but of rebellion, not of goodness, but of
mischief; and therefore not of devotion neither, but of damnation.

In the ninety five Psalm the Lord accuses the Jews of hardness of heart,
tempting of God, and continual rebellion against the Lord for the space of
forty years, and adds this withal as a reason of all their wickedness,
that they knew not the ways of the Lord; for which cause, the Lord swear in
his wrath, that they should never enter into his rest, to show us what be the
fruits of ignorance; which if it be the mother of devotion, it is of such
devotion as brings forth all manner of iniquity, and shuts men out of
eternal felicity.

In the fourth Chapter of the Prophet Hosea, in the first, second, third and
fourth verses, the Lord has a controversy with the inhabitants of Israel,
because there was no truth; nor mercy, nor knowledge of God amongst them, but
swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and whoring, and oppression,
for which things the Lord tells them that the land shall mourn, and every
one shall be cut off, to show what is to be looked for where the knowledge of
God is wanting.

When the Prophet Esaias reproved the Israelites idolatry, and hypocrisy, he
said; Know thou nothing? as if he should say; these are the fruits of
ignorance. In Philip. the first chapter and the ninth verse the Apostle prays
God, that the church might abound in knowledge and judgment, which he would
not have done, if ignorance were the mother of devotion. Our Savior Christ
commands his church to search the Scriptures, adding this as a reason, that
they bear witness of him, Ioh. 5.39.
and show the way to eternal life, to show that ignorance is not the mother
of devotion. By this may we see how much we are beholding to the papists for
shutting up the doors of knowledge against the church of God. They are like
the Philistines that put out the eyes of Sampson, (...) 16.21.
that so they might the better make sport with him, and when the Papists had
put out the right eye of knowledge in the church, they might then make them do
what they list themselves. They are like the cruel Nahash the Ammonite that
would make no covenant with the Israelites, (...) 11.2.
but upon condition that every man would put out his right eye. The raven
when he falls upon a sheep, the first thing he does, is to pick out his
eyes, that so he may the more easily devour the body; so when the Papists fall
upon the sheep of Christ, the first thing they labor to effect, is to put out
their eyes of knowledge, that so they may the more easily prey upon their body
and goods too. They tell us forsooth that the searching of the scripture is
the cause of error. And our savior Christ says, therefore you err because
you know not the scriptures, (...) 12.24.
which of these must we believe, the Papists or our Savior Christ? They tell us
that the scriptures are hard to be understood, but the Lord says. All the
words of my mouth are righteous, there is no lewdness, (...) 8, 8, 9.
nor frowardness in them. They are all plain to him that will understand, and
straight, to them that would find knowledge. The papists say, they are hard,
and the Lord says, they are plain and straight; which of these now shall we
believe, the papists, or the Lord? Indeed saint Peter says, that in the
writings of his brother Paul, there are some things hard to be understood, 2.
Pet. 3.1, 6
which ignorant and unstable men do pervert as they do all other scriptures
to their condemnation: now if they be hard, we see to whom they are hard, to
the ignorant and unstable, but not to those that desire knowledge, to them they
are made easy by the Lord. Therefore it must stand us in hand to be well
repaired, and sanctified by faith and prayer, when we deal with the
scriptures, and be truly resolved to be reformed thereby, or else we may
fall into error, as a just recompense of our pride and presumption. Exo. 19.
When the Israelites should come before the Lord, they must be sanctified to
day and to morrow says the Lord: when we come to the handling of the
scriptures, we come before the Lord, and therefore we must be thoroughly
sanctified, and with Moses, we must put off the shoes of our carnal
affections when we come to deal with the book of GOD, for the scriptures are
the mount, from which God does show himself, and the bush out of which goes a
flame of fire. In them the Lord speaks to us, and we hear the words of
everlasting life, we must therefore strip off all our affections, and fall
down before the Lord with fear, and know who it is that speaks. His word
is holy, let us take heed therefore into what hearts we put it; we may not
receive it to puff up our hearts, and to wax proud with knowledge, we may not
use it to maintain debate, and contention, to vaunt our selves, or to make
show of our cunning. His word teaches lowliness of mind to know our selves.
If we learn not humility we learn nothing. The scriptures are Gods
mysteries, therefore be not too curious: they are Gods sea, therefore take
heed that we be not drowned in them. They are Gods fire, therefore take we
heed that we be not burned in them. They are the glorious sun of the Lord,
to give light to them that sit in darkness and shadow of death, but they that
gaze over hardly upon the sun, take blemish in their eye sight. Now if we
come to the word of God with that fear. and reverence, and paier, and faith,
and repentance, and love, and zeal, and humility that should be in us, we
shall easily prove the papists liars, in saying the scriptures are hard, and
above the reach of the people, as Julian the heretic said, whom Saint
Augustine therefore reproves very sharply in writing against him. August.
li. 5. Ca. 1. cont. Iuli^.
And great reason had he for it, for God himself tells us otherwise. In
Deuteronomie chapter 30. 11, 12, 13, 14. verses he says. This commandment
which I give thee this day, is not hidden from thee, neither is it far off.
It is not in heaven, that thou should say, who shall go up for us to
heaven, and bring it us, and cause us to hear it, that woe may do it?
Neither is it beyond the Sea, that thou should say, who shall go over the
sea for us, and bring it us, and cause us to hear it, that we may do it? But
the word is very near unto thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart for to
do it. And in the nineteenth Psalm he says, Psalm. 19 7.
that the law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul, the testimony of
the Lord is sure, and gives wisdom unto the simple, the statutes of the
Lord are right, and rejoice the heart, the commandment of the Lord is pure,
and gives light unto the eyes: David says, The word of the Lord is a
lantern unto his feet, Psalm. 118.108.
and a light unto his paths, and he and we must go all by one light. Now
if the light be dark, then what is clear? or what can he see that cannot
see the light. It is expedient (says a reverend and learned Father,) that
something should be covered to make us more diligent in reading, more desirous
to understand, ^ell.
more fervent in prayer, more willing to ask the judgment of others, and to
presume the lessse upon our own judgment. It causes a man to take that
profit by pains, which he could not take by negligence. And al things (says
he) are plain to him that has sound knowledge, but to fools the most easy
places seem hard; for how can wisdom enter into a fools heart, or a wicked
man's heart, both which are enemies unto wisdom? They are like the Owl that
cannot see the brightness of the sun, not because the sun beams are
dark, but because his eyes are weak, and cannot abide so clear a light.
^^ctio.
But the Papists tell us that they are not for the common people, ^onsio.
as though forsooth the common people were none of gods people, or had no souls
to save. The scriptures be bread and drink which nourishes unto everlasting
life, (says the same father) and great cruelty it is (says he) to starve Gods
people to death; But what, are they unfit to have the scripturs because they
be poor? why Christ says, the poor receive the gospel, (...) 11.5.
and blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven;
(...) 5.3
if the kingdom of heaven be theirs, why should they not have the
scriptures, as their evidence to show for the said inheritance? What then?
Are they unfit to have the scriptures, because they are unlearned? why the
apostle says, 1. Cor. 2.2.
I esteem to know nothing but Christ, and him crucified: and our savior Christ
says, that his father has hid these things from the wise and learned of the
world, and revealed them unto babes, and simple ones. And the Apostles were
sent to all creatures, learned, and unlearned, poor, and rich. There is none
too poor, nor too rich, nor too old, nor too young, but whosoever has ear to
hear has learning enough to be a hearer. The wisest, and the learned men in
matters of this world, have not always proved the readiest to set forth the
glory of God; for who resisted Moses and Aron? not the people, but the king and
the chief of Egypt. Who stood against Elias, but the priests of Baal? who
stoned the prophets, but the wisest in Israel? who crucified Christ, but the
Scribes and Pharisees, not the common people? wherein we may see that
fulfilled which the apostle alleged out of the prophet, speaking in the
person of God, 1. Cor. 1.19,
I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will cast away the understanding
of the prudent; where is the wise? where is the scribe? where is the disputer
of this world? has not God made the wisdom of this world foolishnes? for
seeing that the world by wisdom knew not God in the wisdom of God, it
pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save those that believe,
whether they be poor or rich, learned or unlearned, that is no matter, so they
believe they shall be saved, by the means of preaching, which by the wisdom of
the world is condemned for foolishness. And thus we see the Papists condemned
of most horrible cruelty and murder, for that they would of their chari^ie
starve Gods church, by withholding the food of knowledge and understanding from
them.

It is further to be observed, that those pastors are promised of the Lord to
come as a gift, both to show how unworthy we are of such a blessing, as also
to teach us how tha^kfully we should receive it at the hands of the Lord that
is the giver. I will give you pastors, etc. as if he should say; when you have
them you must not take them as due unto you for your deseruings (for you
deserve no good thing of me) but I will freely bestow them upon my church.
Amongst temporal benefits there is none like a good wife: and amongst
spiritual benefits there is none like a good pastor: And both are sent from
God, to those that fear him with this posie upon them, donum Dei, the gift of
God; that if a man should ask, Who gives this woman to be married to this
man? the Lord does reach his hand as is were from heaven, saying, that do I; so
if any man ask, who gave this pastor to this congregation? and other such to
the rest of his church; the Lord does answer from heaven and says, that do I:
he is my gift. And to those that turn unto me, I will give pastors according
to my heart; for house and riches are the inheritance of the fathers, says
Solomon, but a prudent wife comes of the Lord Pr. 19 14. So a good pastor
comes not as house and land, by inheritance, but as a good wife comes, and that
is of the Lord. Such pastors and teachers are sent as special love tokens to
the godly, whereby they may know how the Lord does love them. But ignorant
ministers, and Non-residents, and time-seruers, and idol shepherds, and such
like are sent of God to the wicked. as Saul was given to Israel in his wrath
to plague them withal, and to strengthen them in their sins, and so to seal
up their condemnation, as Solomon says of a harlot; Proverb. 22
The lips of a strange woman are as a deep pit and he with whom the Lord is
angry shall fall into the same; so may it be said of wicked pastors and
blind guides, they and their people go together into the ditch, and they
whom the Lord is angry with, shall be plagued with such. The Apostle Paul
says, that Christ ascending up on high gave gifts unto men, some to be
apostles, some to be pastors and doctors, etc. and those he gave to his
church, for the gathering together his saints, to teach us that they are not
sent of God like merchandise for our money (as Simen Magus thought of the gifts
of the holieghost) but they are sent as gifts, (...) 20.
and are to be received as the gifts of the Lord. The only way to obtain such
gifts, (...) 9.37, 38.
is by prayer, The harvest is great (says Christ) and the laborers are few,
pray ye therefore to the Lord of the harvest, and he shall send forth
laborers, to show that God will have his gifts drawn from him by prayer,
that is, he vell be known and acknowledged to be the giver of them, as men
will say, if he had asked it of me, I would have given it him; so does the
Lord say; if they had asked such pastors of me, I would have given them such.
This therefore is the cause why there are so few true laborers in the Lords
harvest, and so many wicked loiterers, because the church in general, and
congregations, and christians in particular, are not earnest enough in prayer
unto God for them; for (as Esaias says) We should not give the Lord any rest,
(...) 2.7.
but, as it were, weary him with our prayers, until he repair the decayed
places of Zion, and build up Jerusalem in her perfect beauty, which is the
praise of the world: Neither are good pastors gotten, nor bad ones displaced,
by railing and libelling against Bishops, and the governors of the church, (as
some have thought) nor by factious and seditious drawing of multitudes to
practice against the sword of authority, nor by robbing the church of her
children, nor by scismaticall seperating of our selves from the church, as
heretical schismatikes do think, nor by withdrawing of their livings as
covetous worldlings imagine, but by humble suing to God with prayer and
supplications, for so are his gifts obtained; so that if men would leave their
scurrilous libelling, and their unseemly railing, and their vain talking, and
their scismaticall seperating, and their seditious banding, and their cruel
dealing, and now another while try the Lord by turning unto him, as here he
requires us, and plie him with our humble prayers, as Christ has commanded
us, there is no doubt, but it would go better with the poor church of Christ
then it does; for if we do that which is required of us, most certainly the
Lord will perform that which he has promised. Now where the Lord has
bestowed such pastors, and planted the means of salvation, there is much (no
doubt) required again. What is requi^^ of them that have good pastors.
Two things does the Lord expect and look for at their hands which have
received such gifts of the Lord; namely, love and obedience: for love requires
love again^ and seeing these gifts are sent from the Lord as special tokens of
his love and favor toward us, his majesty looks for great love again of us
toward the gift for his sake that gave it, and toward the giver for his own
goodness sake, which only moved him to give the gift. And since he gives them to
feed us with knowledge and understanding, he laboreth that we should grow and
thrive thereby, that is, to be the better reformed, both in judgments and also
in our manners. But that it may appear the better what love we owe to the Lord
in this respect, we ought to consider the greatness, goodness, and value of the
gift, whereby we shall al see the great love and goodness of him that is the
giver. Every man is friend unto him that gives gifts; ^orerb. 19.6.
then every man should love the Lord, for none gives so many gifts as he does;
yea for the gifts which men give, the Lord is to be loved, because they had
neither what to give, nor will to give, until the Lord give both. All the gifts
of the Lord are either bodily or spiritual, temporal or eternal, general or
special; some are common to man and beast and some are common to good and bad,
to the reprobate and the elect, as meat, and drink and apparel, appetite and
digestion, houses and lands, cattle and corn, gold and silver, health and
wealth, wife and children, beuty and honor, peace and plenty, learning and wit,
wisdom and policy, friends and promotion, and many such like, the least whereof
deserves and requires that we should love and fear the Lord with all our
hearts, with all our strength: but besides these, the daily gifts which the Lord
gives to man, and to the earth, and the sea, and the heavens; yea the whole
world for man's use they are infinite, that to go about to number them, were to
measure the sea with a spoon; for which we return nothing but our sins, which
are mo then his benefits: yet such is his goodness that gives al, and forgiueth
al. But amongst all the Lords gifts, there is none comparable to pastors that
feed men's souls with knoledge and understanding. When David would set out the
greatness of this gift, he reherseth many works of god showed in his church, for
which he is to be praised; Psalm. 147.13, 1
Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem, praise thy God O Zion, for he has made the bars
of thy gates strong and has blessed thy children within thee, he sets peace
in thy borders, and satisfies thee with the flour of wheat. When he
considers the benefit of Gods word, he says; He shows his word unto Jacob,
his statutes and judgments unto Israel: he has not dealt so with every
nation;

When the Apostle saint Paul would set out the greatness of this gift, (...)
1.1^.
he says, that the grace of God which brings salvation has appeared,
meaning the gospel, to show that men cannot be saved without it; so great, so
good, so excellent, and so necessary it is. All other blessings are of the
grace of God; there is an enriching grace, a healthy grace, and a wealthy
grace, and a healing grace, etc. But this is called the saving grace of GOD.
David prefers it before his kingdom, because it did comfort him in his
affliction; if thy word (says he) had not been my comfort in my affliction,
(...) 119.92.
I had perished, to show that the word of God is better then a kingdom. This
may make the children of God the more to love such messengers, as bring such
tidings of peace, and to fear such a God, as gives such gifts unto men; but
as for the wicked whose eyes the god of this world, that is, Satan, has
blinded, to them it is but as a tale of a foolish thing, for they are like the
swine, which find more savor in the mire, then in sweet perfumes; or like the
dunghill cock, that had rather find a grain of corn, then a precious stone.
If sweet flowers be given to him that has his senses, they will smell sweet,
but a dead man feels no sweetness in them, though they be put to his nose; so
the spiritual and regenerate man shall feel the sweetness and goodness of this
gift, but the carnal man, in whom is not the life of the spirit, shall never
make any account of it. Again, the faithful do not only love the giver for
his gift, but also makes much of the gift, for the giuers sake; as men will
say of their friends gifts or tokens, I will not part withal, I will keep it
full daintily (though they have no use for it) for his sake that bestowed it on
me: much more do the faithful reverence the ministers of Christ, and their
pastors which labor amongst them in word and doctrine, and are over them in
the Lord; they make much of them, yea they have them in singular account for
their works sake, and keep them very carefully, both because the Lord gave
them, and they have a marvelous comfortable and heavenly use of them to
eternal salvation. Whereas the wicked who never knew the worth or want of good
Pastors, nor the necessity of knowledge and understanding, do they take them
to be sent of God as tokens of his love, or as the only means of salvation,
or do they fear the Lord ever the more for such gifts? or do they love and
reverence the gifts for the giuers sake? or do they account of them for their
sake? No, no such matter, they know not what these things mean, they take them
rather for their enemies, ^ng. 21.20.
as Achab did Eliah who said, have thou found me O my enemy? they take them as
men sent of the Lord, or rather come out from the devil to plague them, (...)
and to ^^ouble them, as Herod and Jerusalem thought of Christ: and after that
rate do they use them, with all reproaches and mockes that can be devised, with all disdain, with all manner of injuries and slanders, and thus do the wicked
reward their pastors which feed them, which they would not do, if they did
take them as the gifts of God: but all this ought not to discourage pastors and
preachers of the word, because base persons do basely account of them, but
rather confirm them in the saithfull execution of their office, taking the
hatred of the world as a sure token of their ministers effectual working, and
let them learn to play the part of a nurse with their people, who has many
a foul hand with the child before she can bring it to any perfection. And
let them be content to become like torches, which burn out themselves while
they give light unto others, not feareing the faces of men because the Lord is
a brazen wall between them and their adversaries, and though they be ill
rewarded of the world, yet let them be glad, for as much as they look for
their reward from the lord who has set the^ a work.

I will give.] The last thing we have to observe here, is, that the Lord does
not only say you shall have pastors, but I will give you pastors according to
my heart: if his people will repent, he will perform that which is promised
and none other for him; this is greatly for the confirmation of the churches
faith, when the lord himself does promise a thing, and undertake the
performance of it himself. If a man had made such a promise the performance
remains doubtful, because he wantoth power, or skill, or constancy, his mind
may alter, or means may fail, or he may be crossed with some higher power;
but with the Lord is no such thing, for he has both power and skill, and is
always the same and changes not, neither is there any power above him to
cross his majesty. If an angel from heaven had made such a promise, yet the
performance is doutful, because he is but a creature, and is subject to the
check, and controlement of the Lord; but if god say he will, it shall be, as the
Centurion said, Luke. 7.7
Lord do but speak the word and my servant shall be whole; when the power and
will of god do meet, then there wants nothing to let the matter, but our sins,
Lord if thou will (says the leaper) thou can make me eleane. I will (says
Christ) be thou clean, and immediately the leprosy was cleansed.

But this people were in captivity, (...). 8.3.
and their enemies had dominion over them: how will the Lord restore them? very
well; for the lord is able to do it either by force of angels, as he delivered
Peter out of prison, or by men, or by other creatures, as he dealt with Pharao,
or by turning their enemies hearts, as he turned Saules heart, when he followed
David to kill him, ^^ns 24.18.
according to the saying of Solomon. When a man's ways please the Lord, he
will cause his foes to become his friends, (...). 16.7.
or without means, only by that word, whereby he made heaven and earth and
all the world, (...) 1.
when matter was wanting. Hereof we have many examples: God said he would make
Israel a mighty people, (...) 2.10.
could Pharao prevent it? no, though he said, Come and let us work wisely
with them, lest they multiply etc. God said David should be king, could Saul
prevent it? no, though he said, I will give him my eldest daughter upon
condition that he bring me a hundred foreskins of the Philistines, ^am. 18.17,
25.
thinking by this policy to make a riddance of him. God said Elizabeth shall
reign, could any defeat her? no, though first they sifted her for treason, as
conspiring with Wiat, and then Gardener the wolf cried still, stub up the
root, stub up the root: then how many ways have been devised since to
subvert her by papists, and traitors, and ^esuites, and the unholy league, and
all with ^he devil himself, having sworn and vowed ^rdeath; yet she
reigns, thanked be God, and long may she reign O Lord we bseech ^hee for thy
mercies sake, in despite of all ^^y enemies: here we may see that verefied that
is in the Proverbs, There is no counsel, Pro. 21.3^.
^or wisdom, nor strength, against the Lord. Pro. 19.21.
And in another place he says, Many devises ^re in a man's heart, Ier. 5.25.
but the counsel of the Lord ^^all stand. If any thing hinder good things from
us, it is our sin, but no devise of man ^or devil, they shall do no more
then the ^orde has appointed. Our sins are the ^hiefe cause, and the wicked
are instrumen^all causes, and used by the Lord like Ashur, ^who was called the
staff of the Lord) to ^lague his church withal. And therefore ^any take a
wrong course to have the chur^hes estate bettered, they cry out upon the ^^me,
and the state, and the Bishops, and pa^^ons, and the dumb ministers (I speak
not ^ow in defense of any man's fault or corrup^^on) but their own household
are vnrefor^ed, they and their families are ignorant and ^rofane, they abuse
the good gifts of god al^eady bestowed, and yet they find fault they ^aue no
more, like children that cast their ^eate to the dogs and then cry for more:
^hey say, so long as such and such bear sway in the church, never a good
minister shall be long at rest, and I know not what, never looking what hurt
their rashness and preposterous blind zeal does procure: but they are much
deceived, for let those that call upon the name of God depart from evil, and
turn unto the Lord, and then look what his majesty has promised, it shall
surely be performed, though the time be prolonged for the exercise of our
faith, and patience. It is sufficient for us, if the Lord says he will do it,
though he do not tell us when, and how he will do it, he has ways enough to
bring his counsel to pass. With this [I wil] or promise of God let us learn
to arm our selves against all temptations, all fears, all doubts, and all
lets whatsoever, let men take heed how they enterprise any thing against the
will of God, what means soever they have to effect their purpose, for if they
say, they will, and the Lord say, he will not, or if they say, it shall not be,
and the Lord says, it sha^ be, all their murmuring and banding and consulting,
^sac. 36.12. and 37.33.
and practicing will be in vain; Sen^charib said he would come against
Jerusalem with a mighty host, and make them t^ eat their own dunge and
drink their ow^ piss, but the Lord said he should not shoo^ an arrow into
Jerusalem, and it came to pas^ as the Lord said. Esau said he would kill (...)
brother Jacob, but he did not, G^^^^. ^^.
the Jews vowed neither to eat nor drink till they had killed Paul, A^^.
21.1^.
but if they had kept their vow they had starued. Herod though to have killed
Christ, but he could not, and many others have purposed many other things,
but the Lord has disposed of them according to his own will and pleasure; and
all to show how truly Job spoke when he said, The hand of man is not able to
accomplish the devise of his heart. As this is a singular consolation at all
times, so now in this hard time of dearth and scarcity, the Lord does promise
upon the true repentance of his people, to bless the earth, with plenty, and
to satifie the poor with bread, let the wretched cornemongers, and covetous
caterpillars say, the price shall not fall, the Lord that has said the word
will do it manger their beards, and cause them to fall too, with shame enough if
they repent not: let no man say as the noble man of Samaria said, 2. King. 7.^^.
Though the Lord should open the windows of heaven and rain down wheat,
etc. I will not believe the words of the prophet, lest he see it, but enjoy it,
not as he did that was trodden down in the gates of the city. And to
conclude, seeing as we are ready to take a man's word for any thing, if he be
an honest man, and of any credit or ability, and think our selves safe, if the
prince, or a meaner person say; I will give thee this or tha^ how much more
ought we to take the Lord word for any thing that he promises, wh^ is all
sufficient and faithful? yea if we do^ doubt of the matter when he says, I
will, o^ presume when he says, I will not, we offe^ his majesty that
injury, which we our selue^ would hardly let go unrevenged at any man's hand,
if it lay in our power to revenge the same.

FINIS.

