TWO Treatises.

1. The holy exercise of a true Fast, described out of Gods word, Written by T.
C.

Joel. 2.12.13. Turn you unto me (says the Lord) with all your heart, and
with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning: And rent your heart and not
your clothes; and turn unto the Lord your God, for he it gracious, and
merciful slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repents him of the evil.

2. The substance of the Lords Supper. Written by T. W.

Imprinted at London for I. Harison, and T. Man. Anno. 1610.

THE HOLY EXERCISE OF a true Fast, described out of Gods word.
IT IS AN evident declaration, of a marvelous blindness which is in us, to
order our steps toward the kingdom of heaven; that like children new come
into the world, we know not when to eat, and when to forbear eating, no
further then we have our direction out of Gods word: But it is yet more
marvel, that in so small a matter, scarce the hundred person, of those which
profess the name of Christ, know either how to enter into this way, or how to
turn them in it when they are entered, to any glory of GOD, or profit of them
selves. For to let the Papists go, which through a shameful superstition in
it, rather pine away their souls, then take down their bodies: it is a shame
to speak, how few there are of those which bear the name of Gospellers, that
have so much as the knowledge of this exercise; so far are they from any
lawful and right practice of it. For a great number, as a needless thing,
reject it altogether; For shaking off the Popish yoke, from their own necks,
by using, or rather abusing their liberty; they suffer their servants to
remain still under it. Which custom, unless it be through infirmity of
body, or some other weighty cause; it can hardly escape the hot and vehement
suspicion, either of belly-Gods, if thinking it religious in their servants,
they themselves will not observe it: or of a covetous mind, if having no such
opinion of it, they do notwithstanding constrain their servants thereunto.
An other sort there be, which being afraid of the reproach of Belly-gods, and
thinking it fitting to the Christian profession, to keep the flesh in some
bridle; allow (in deed) of the exercise of Fasting; but for want of knowledge
of a better, they stick still in the mire of the Popish fast. For remedy
whereof, there follows a Treatise, whereby the true Fast being understood;
as well the profane opinion of those which reject this exercise, as the
foolish superstition of those, which content them selves with a shadow thereof,
is laid open.

Fasting therefore, is an abstinence commanded of the Lord, thereby to make
solemn profession of our repentance. Wherein, that which is said of the Lord
commanding it, is to be considered against those, which would thrust this
exercise, out of the doors of Christian Churches. For the repressing of which
error, let that be called to remembrance, which the Lord commanded by Moses:
Leuit 16.29, 30, 31, and 23.27 to 33 Number. 29.7.
That every soul once a year should humble it self, in fasting before the
Lord, in one of the great assemblies of his people. For although the ceremony
of the day be taken away by the coming of our Savior Christ; yet the thing it
self is no more taken away, the^ a rest for Gods service is banished, because
the Jews Saboth is abolished. For, when as (no doubt) the consideration of the
Fast was, that the wrath of GOD should not break out against them; or being
broken out, should be caused to return home again: the same cause remaining,
there is good reason the same effect should continue. And when it is an
humbling of a man before his God; was there any degree of casting down,
necessary for that people, which is not necessary for us? Either ought they
to have gone down lower into the conceit of their unworthiness, then we,
into the conscience of our guiltiness; Whose benefits, as they are greater
then theirs; so the abuse of them, should drive us to the lowest humiliation
that can be; so it be lawful and warrantable by the word of God.

But if this holy exercise of Fasting, do not clearly enough appear, to be
no fading or shadowing ceremony, by this set and ordinary Fast, because the
like does not agree with the time of the Gospel: yet by other moveable and
uncertain Fastes, which were holden upon occasion, the same may be more
strongly strengthened. For where we see the like occasion of fast, that was
then; there we may be assured of the same commandment to fast, that was given
them: commandment I say, least any man thinking it to be a will worship,
taken up at the pleasure of men, might think he had as good (or better) right
to lay it down, then they had, to take it up. For proof whereof, that one
place of the Prophet Joel shall suffice; Joel. 2.22.
which, upon occasion of a great dearth in the Land, commands in the Lords
behalf, to sanctify a Fast. By which one commandment, it is evident, that
other Fastes, which were kept, either by the Churches publicly, or by some of
the faithful privately; were done in obedience, and not at the randon of man's
invention. If this be not sufficient, to subdue our sturdie affections, to this
so holy an exercise; yet at the least, let them stoop under so manifest, both
doctrine and examples hereof, by the Churches of God underneath the Gospel.
For when as our Savior Christ, being charged by the Pharisees and John's
Disciples, Luke. 5.33.
that his Disciples fasted not; so answered, that he did not only not condemn
it, but highly also commend it; so it were done seasonably: It is plain, that
the liberty which the Gospel brings, has not removed the ancient bound of
a Christian Fast. And if we look into the practice, whereby the way chalked
out by his doctrine, is trodden and beaten plain unto us by examples; it will
soon be seen, how greatly they deceive them selves, which under the color of
greater perfection attained under the Gospel, cast away the assistance, that
the Lord offers by this exercise. For if we enquire of the Churches and
Apostles fasting, then was it most often, when they were fullest of the graces
of God: that is, after the solemn sending of the holy Ghost.

If we think then, that this exercise of fast, be too ceremonious, because it
was tied to a certain day: the commandment to hold it without any such
restraint, unto a certain time, ought to correct that thought of ours. If we
stand in fear, that it should be too Jewish; the doctrine of the Gospel is
ready to pull us out of that fear. If presumption of greater graces, then
those which should need such a supply, do bring this Fast out of conceit
with us: the practice of it by the holy Apostles, at the highest top of their
perfection in this world, will easily set up the credit thereof again. But if
Fastes, neither standing nor sitting, neither under the Law, nor under the
Gospel, neither of the weaker, nor of the stronger, can draw us into love, and
(in love) into practice thereof; it must needs be confessed, that there is a
marvelous poison of rebellion in our natures, which all this triacle of the
Lords high authority, and of such authorized examples of the children of God,
will not cast forth. Howbeit, the Lord leaves us not here, but unto his
Lordly authority, of commanding this exercise of Fast, has added fatherly
promises, to allure us unto the same: as toward the end of this Treatise,
shall plainly appear.

This exercise therefore of Fasting, being both of such authority, and of so
great weight to pull wrath upon us, if it be neglected; let us now see in what
things (especially) it does consist. And they are in number two. The former is
of the outward, and (as the Apostle calls it, 1. Tim. 4.8.
) of the bodily exercise: the other is of the inward virtues, helped forward by
the bodily exercises. For the outward ceremony, it is an abstinence for a
time, from the commodities and pleasures of this life, thereby to make us the
apter to the inward virtue. And this outward abstinence is therefore
commanded, that we should both feel, and in feeling, profess that we are
unworthy either of life, or of any thing that belongs to the upholding
thereof. And albeit, it may appear but a childish thing to carnal men, and a
thing unworthy the wisdom of the Gospel, to place any thing in this bodily
exercise, seeing that the Lord is a Spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit
and truth; and seeing that they being of their own nature, neither good nor
evil, can not make us either better or worse: yet if we consider that it is
the Lords ordinance, who has so commanded it, we can not be but most
assured, that the Lord who has so instituted it, will give it a blessing, and
cause it to prosper, to that end whereunto he has ordained it; if we undertake
it in his fear, and in a conscience of obeying the Lords commandment. Those
which came either to run, 1. Cor. 9.25.
or to wrestle for the best Game, were wont to abstain from such things as
might hinder their exercise, or make them less able to perform the^ with
praise: And whatsoever, either pith in their arms, or swiftness in their
legs, they had otherwise; yet as they neglected not that abstinence, so they
found that it greatly profited them, to the better breathing and other
inhabling of them, to their exercises. And shall we think, that the diet which
the Lord him self has appointed, to the fitting of us toward the spiritual
wrestling with our fleshly mind, shall not have a singular fruit? And if
there were no other fruit of this Abstinence, but that the enemies mouth
should thus be stopped, which charge the Gospel, to set open a school to all
licentiousnes of eating, and to give (as it were) a sauce to provoke men's
appetites thereunto, which are otherwise too sharp set of them selves: it
should be no small effect of our Abstinence. In deed the Papists charge upon
us, is here the same and no other, Luke. 5 33.
then the Pharisees, against the Disciples of our Savior Christ: But why should
not we, if we desire that the Gospel should be well spoken of, take away the
occasion of such speeches?

But let us see wherein this Abstinence does consist; where first of all
comes to be considered, the Abstinence from Meats and Drinks; whereof (as
the principal of the outward Observations) the whole exercise took the name.
2. Sam. 12.16.17. Ezr. 10.6. Leui 23.32. Judge. 20.26
And the word it self with the practice, declare, that it is not only a sober
use of Meats, which ought to be continual all the life long, or a more
sparing diet then at other times: but an utter Abstinence from evening to
evening, from all kind of meats and drinks. Whereby it appears, that the
Popish Fast is nothing less, then the Fast which the Scripture teaches: for
they break the neck of this Abstinence both by fullness and by delicacie. By
fullness, in that it is lawful (as other days) at Dinner, to fill them selves
with anything, flesh only excepted: at evening and morning, to fill the^ selves
with Bread and Drink. By delicacie for that, where men on that day, should
content themselves with common and course meats, sufficient only for
preservation of health: the Papists in their abstinence, did either not so
much as aim at this mark, or else they shot grossly wide. For in
permitting the use of all things at their Dinner, besides Flesh; it is
evident, that they left greater dainties, and greater stirrers of fleshly
lusts, then they did cut off. And besides, the dainties in meats; Wine, (then
which there is nothing more provoking) was as usual that day, as of others.
And at evening, when they would give the clearest testimony of their
Abstinence, and when they did light their candles (as it were to show their
abstinence by; the greatest part of those that were both able and might find
in their hearts, to bestow it of them selves, had their Tables furnished with
Spice-bread, with Fruits of this side and beyond the Seas, with Marmelet and
Sucket, and such like: then which dealing, what could be more childish? to deny
the tasting only of one morsel of Flesh, and to permit a fullness of bread:
to forbid the courser Meats and Table, which might have bin furnished for two
pence, and to draw in the delicatest Meats, which could not be provided for
twenty shillinges: to restrain the use of things bredde at home, and to
leave the use free, of things fetched out of Barbary: finally to condemn the
eating of a piece of smoakie and reastie Bakon, and to justify the banqueting
and iunqueting Dishes, which are before mentioned. That I speak nothing of
some of the poorer sort, which upon the Thursday at night, and Friday at
dinner, would fill their bellies the fuller, that they might pass over their
abstinence, with less feeling the want of their accustomed diet. All which
things, as we condmne in the Papists; so we must carefully take heed that
they be not found in us: Romans 2.1.
unless we have forgot, that in judging them, we condemn our selves, when as
we do the same things, which we find fault worthy in them.

An other of these corporal exercises is watching, or a cutting short of our
ordinary sleep: which we may apply to the furtherance of this exercise. For
beside that this Abstinence, is a removing of ordinary pleasures and
commodities; it appears, that some thing also should be pared from it. For
beside that, it is meet that there should be a certain conformity and
sutablenesse of our whole behavior, all the time of the Fast. The Prophet Joel
exhorting the Priests to this holy exercise of Fast, Joel. 1.13.
bids them that they should continue in Sackcloth in the night time,
extending this exercise (at the least) to some part of the night. When
notwithstanding it is to be noted, that as well in the former abstinence from
meat as in this withdrawing of some part of sleep; that neither is so
straightly required of the Lord, but that those whose either disease or other
infirmity will not bear this abstinence, without hazard of their health may
use so much liberty, as shall serve for the preservation of their health: so
they take heed they use not this gentle dealing of the Lord, as a cloak to
hide the lusts of their flesh withal* A third kind of abstinence is in the
apparel, that albeit they put not on Sackcloth and Ashes, as the holy Fathers
did in times past; yet that they content the^ selves with a common kind of
attire, avoiding all such costlinesse and curiosity, whereby in tricking and
trimming up them selves,, the flesh may take occasion of being proud. Thus the
Lord, when he would have the children of Israel to humble them selves before
him, spoke to Moses, saying; Exodus 33.5.
Speak unto the children of Israel, that for the present time, they lay aside
their Jewels and Ornaments, that I may know what I shall do with them. And
thus far has it been spoken of the outward Exercises, which are general,
and to be done of al, which make this solemn profession of repentance. There
is one yet which is more special, belonging unto married persons alone, which
is, that they for the time, 1. Cor. 7.5.
should with consent abstain from the mutual fellowship one of an other; which
is so straightly required, Joel. 2.16.
that even the Bridegroom and the Bride, (which of all other, ought to have the
greatest privilege in that point) are bidden at such times, to come out of
their chambers.

Romans 14.17.
But for as much, as the kingdom of heaven stands not in these things; and
the Lord being a Spirit, will be worshipped in spirit and truth: either these
exercises must lead us to some farther thing, or else the same accusation will
lie against us, wherewith the Prophet charged the Israelites, who contenting
them selves with the outward ceremony of abstinence, Esaias. 58.3.
were sent home as empty as they came. And indeed, unless we bring more with
us, then this our abstinencie, our Fastes may be matched with the Beasts Fast
of Niniuie; Jonas. 3.7.
for they also both eat nothing, and were covered with Sackcloth: yea the
Beasts Fast, may be so much better then ours, as there be some kinds of
Beasts, that can longer endure without meat and sleep then we. Where the
Papists fast, which was showed before to be childish, may here be proved to
be beastly and brutish: For if they did only abstain from Meat, they judged
them selves to have holden a good Fast unto the Lord. There follow the inward
virtues helped forward by the bodily exercise; which in the number Ezdra. 6.21.
two. The one is the humbling and casting down of our selves before the high
Majesty of God, with sorrow for our sins: The other, is the assurance that
we have, that with forgiveness of them, we shall obtain the thing that we
stand in need of, and make suite for.

Here therefore, first comes to be considered, our hu^bling and casting
down, which is a vile esteeming of our selves, answering to the outward
exercise. For therefore do we abstain for a time, that we might thereby have a
quicker feeling of our own unworthiness. Therefore we bring down the body,
that the mind may be likewise brought down. Therefore we crucify the flesh,
that the deserved death of the spirit, may be the better known. Therefore we
abstain from our pleasures and commodities, Mark. 2.20. Luke 5.35. Math. 9.15.
that through conscience of sin, and feeling of the wrath of God, either
present, or to come, for the same, we might draw our selves to a greater
sorrow. In which respect, the exercise which the other Evangelists call
Fasting, Saint Matthew calls Mourning. Hereupon it comes, Joel. 2 17. 1.
Sam. 7.6.
that weeping, which is a witness of our sorrow, is annexed unto the Fast;
which the children of God have done so plentifully in this exercise, 2. Sam.
7.6.
that they have bin said, to have drawn whole Buckets of Water; which the
deapth of the sorrow for their sins, and the anger of God against them has
ministered. And as these outward exercises are commanded, to draw us to a
feeling of our unworthiness; so in the feeling thereof, by them we make a
solemn confession of the same. For the children of God in time past, by their
abstinence from meat and drink, confessed them selves unworthy so much as of
a crumme of bread, or drop of water: by putting on Sackcloth, unworthy of the
worst rag to cover their shame with. So that if common honesty and health
would have suffered, they would have stripped them selves stark naked. The same
is to be understood of the benefit of Sleep, and company of Marriage; as
also of all other the commodities of this life: whereof they did not only
confess them selves unworthy, but in that they put Dust and Ashes upon their
heads, they gave to understand, that they were unworthy of the life it
self, and that they deserved to be as far underneath the ground, as they
were above it: yea if there had been any thing, apter to have set forth their
everlasting condemnation in Hell, of that also would they have borne the mark,
thereby to declare their guilt and desert of the same. So that hereby they do
justify the Lord, in that vengeance against the^: whereof by this humbling of
the^ selves, they seek redress. If then we keep a holy Fast unto the Lord,
we must thereby be humbled in our selves before the Lord: but if upon
confidence of our fasting, Luke 5.33. Luke 18.11.
we wax bolder to sin, in a persuasion that through obedience given unto
him, in this one point, we may be bolder to be disobedient in others: or if the
use hereof do make us swell against our brethren, and after the example of the
Pharisees, despise the^ which do not Fast, as we do: then is the Fast,
appointed of the Lord for our medicine, become our bane and poison.

And therefore here now, we give a new charge upon the Popish Fast, a great
deal more hot then the former: For seeing that they with the proud
Pharisee, boast of the merit of their fastes, setting these fastes (as other
works) in the place of the Blood of Christ. It is manifest, that their Fastes
are so far from humbling them, that through the opinion of them, they rise up
against the Lord, and do their best to set them selves, even in the throne of
God: so that unto the childishness and brutishness of their Fast
abouementioned, here they have added an horrible and blasphemous sacrilege.
To the compassing of this true humbling of our sins, is annexed necessarily,
an information and meditation of the filthiness of our sins, and of the just
vengeance of the Lord against them, declared in the threatninges of the Law,
and execution of the judgments of God against the wicked; and namely against
our Savior Christ, who putting upon himself our wickedness, suffered Hell
pains for it: and specially an information and meditation of those, both
sins and punishments, which the present time and persons do give occasion
of. And thus far touching the first part of the inward virtues in Fasting,
standing in the casting down of our selves before the Lord.

There follows the other part, which is a profession of our Faith, that we
shall be lifted up as high, through the grace of the Lord our God in Jesus
Christ, as the conscience of our sins does cast us down: and that we shall
obtain the remoouing of the euilles tending to our destruction, (through the
worthiness of our Savior Christ,) which either presently press us, or hang
over our heads, through our own unworthiness. For as true repentance, casting
us down with one hand, both in sorrow for our sins, and confession of the
same, leaves us not in our downfall, but through faith, reaches us the other
hand, to lift us up again: so this solemn profession of our repentance,
carrying us first to the valley of trouble, afterward brings us back again,
to the gate of hope. In which respect, we always find in the holy
Scriptures, Ezra. 9.5. Nehe. 1.4. Dan. 9 3. Judge. 20.26. Luke 5.33. 1. Cor. 7.7.
that Fasting is joined with prayer; 2. Chron. 20.6. James. 1.6. John. 16.23
which can never be truly made, without hope of obtaining the grace, that is
prayed for. But for as much as prayer is a daily and ordinary exercise of Gods
children; it is manifest, Jonas. 3.8. Esaias. 58.4.
that by the prayer which is coupled with Fasting, there is understood a
special or peerless kind of Prayer, both in zeal and strength of Prayer,
as also in continuance of the same. Whereby appears, that here is an other
use of the outward abstinence, that it might be as it were a wing, wherewith
the Prayer, that otherwise through earthly affections, creeps upon the
ground, might the easier flee up into heaven: and that it might be a
Grindestone, to make a point of it, that it may pierce; and to set an edge,
that it may cut, both the visible and invisible enemies, which we pray
against. And therefore the outward abstinence that pulls down the body,
helps to lift up the mind; and crucifying the flesh, it quickneth the
spirit, and makes it more lively to this exercise. Where yet again the
Popish Fast is found insufficient, which upon the days of their Fastes, had
no extraordinary exercises of prayer; more then other days which were not
fasted. To the better performance also of this part, is annexed an information
and meditation of the gracious promises of God, especially such as may serve
for relief of the present occasions.

Wherein the better to correct our dullness and heaviness to this so holy an
exercise; let us remember, that it is to obtain some special grace at the
hand of the Lord. Whereby it is given us to understand, that upon due holding
of this Fast unto the Lord, there be excellent promises, and a most singular
reward. Joel. 2.13. and 19.20.
Whereof the place of Joel, as it spoke before, for the commandment of all
the Fastes, which the people of God used; so will it undertake for the
promises, which the Lord has made, to all those which submit the^ selves to
the obedience thereof. The truth of which promises is so manifest in the
Scriptures; as the Sun (at noone days) can be no clearer. For let all the
Fastes of the holy Churches, and of godly men laid out in Scripture, both of
the old and new Testament, be Judge 20.23. Ezra. 19.6. Hest. 4.16. 2. Chron.
20.3.
turned over; and it shall be seen, that the end of their Fast (which kept it
in any measure of truth and simplicity) was a Feast, and the issue of their
mourning, great rejoicing. Dan. 9.20. Jonah. 2.10.
For albeit the ordinary Prayers of the faithful, return not empty unto them
again; yet having regard unto these, which are joined with this Exercise,
Act. 12.5. Act. 13.2.
they may worthily seem to be barre^, which are otherwise fruitful; and to be
blasted, which otherwise seem full cared. Yea, the Fast of the wicked king
Achab, 1. Regu^. 21.27.
joined with no true repentance, nor so much as with any true knowledge how to
serve the Lord, but performed in some sort only in keeping of the outward and
bodily ceremony, went not unrewarded from the Lord. For even by the very
shadow of his exercise, the execution of that judgment, which was awarded
against him, touching his utter rasing from the kingdom of Israel: was
deferred until his sons days. Now, if the coming within the shadow of this
exercise, does heal some diseases: what will it do if we come to touch the
body thereof? And if the leaves of it, have some virtue to preserve men from
the vengeance of God; how sovereign is the fruit, to deliver us from the
wrath to come? And if the ordinary obedience of the children of God, goes not
empty, and unrewarded from the presence of God: this extraordinary obedience
and exercise in the worship of God, must needs receive special, and
extraordinary blessings from his hand. 1. Regum 20.29.
When Benhadab the Syrian King, overcome by Achab king of Israel, was out of
hope of any safety; at the length, by the advice of his servants, he put him
self and his company in Sackcloth, 1. Reg. 20.31. to 35.
with Ropes about their necks; thinking by humbling themselves before the
King, to obtain pardon: which came to pass accordingly.

If therefore, men in hope of obtaining pardon, will humble themselves to them
of whom they have no promise, that they shall obtain any thing: how much more
ought we to do it, which have so sure Promises of good success? And if
mercy was obtained of men, in whom there is scant a drop of that pity and
compassion, which is seafull in the Lord; we may be well assured, that we
shall not miss of it at his hand. And if one enemy, can look for it at the
hand of an other; we may with greater assurance, look for it at the hand of
the Lord; to whom we are already reconciled, by the blood of his Son.

Therefore, if the authority of the Lord should not compel us; yet the most
liberal and certain promises, should allure us to this exercise. Which if we
do not, what remains, but that such as will not Fast, with the children of
God, must eat and drink of the furious wrath of God, with the wicked: they
that will not weep with the one, must howl with the other. And finally, they
that will have no part in the obedience of the commandment given hereof, to
both the peoples, under the Law and under the Gospel; must have no part in the
Promises made to any of them: according as the Lord threatens; Leui. 23.29.
Luke 5, 35.
that who so ever shall not afflict or humble his soul with the rest, that he
will destroy them from among his people.

The time of Fasting, is the time of affliction, either for want of some great
benefit needful, or through feeling of some great judgment present, or to
come. Where the Popish Fast must pass an other condemnation, which makes no
difference or choice of time; but appoynteth every Friday, and other set Euens
yearly, whether the time be prosperous or unprosperous; whether it be peace or
war, health or sickness, dearth or plenty: Which is all one, as if the
Physician should now appoint his patient, this day twenty or forty years
hence, to take a Purgation, or to be let blood: In which case, either he must
be a Prophet, rather then a Physician, to know that he shall on that day, have
need, of it: or else he must be a Physician of no value, ignorant, or
unfaithful. As therefore the Physitia^ opens no vain, but with observation
where the sign is; gives no Purgation, without heed taking to the time of
the year, whether it be Spring or Fall; whether it be hot or cold: so it
behooves the spiritual Physician, to have an eye unto the time, when this
Medicine is in season: And so much the more, here, rather then there; as the
danger is greater. For as a new piece of Cloth added to an old Garment, takes
something from the old, Luke. 5.36.
and causes the rent to be worse then before: so Fasting, unfitly applied to
the state of those that are enjoined to keep it, makes them worse then they
were before the Fast. Yea, that which more is, Luke. 5.37.
as the new Wine put into old vessels, does not only make them worse, but
break them all to pieces: So this Fast thrust upon those, which are not,
either for the time, or for some other cause apt for it; does utterly destroy
them. Whereby men may perceive, what cause we have to make a great conscience
of the Popish Fast, as that which is able of it self (if there were no other
corruptions amongst them) to drive a man to eternal destruction.

According also to the greatness of the affliction, Leui. 23.27, 28.
the time of the Fast is taken, by the discretion of those to whom it
belongs; at the least for a whole day. And if the wrath of the Lord be
hotter, then two days or Ester. 4.16
else three, as it appears by the example of the Jews in Hesters time, Act.
9.9.
and of Saint Paul. And this time (what so ever) has the nature of a Saboth.
Leuit. 23.30.31.
For therein men are bound to abstain from their bodily labors, according to
the same straightness, and with the same exceptions, that they are bound to
observe the Saboth. Joel. 2.12. Leui. 23.32.
And therefore the Prophet wills them to sanctify a Fast. And the Lord
threateneth, that who so ever shall do any work on that day, him shall he cut
off from amongst his people. The end whereof is, that men setting them selves
apart from their daily occupations, might be wholly bestowed in the spiritual
exercises above specified. Whereby that we may know, that there was never a
Thread in the old Cloth of the Popish Fast, which was not thoroughly infected
with the spiritual leprosy of disobedience unto the Lord: It is to be noted,
that where they ordained many, both wicked and unnecessary Holy days, this *
one (and besides the Saboth, the only Holy day appointed of the Lord) they
quite rased out of their Calendar. And of the Fast in general, thus far.

The kinds or sorts of Fastes do follow: which are either private or
public.

The private Fast is that, which is undertaken upon some particular calamity,
by the discretion of them against whom the calamity is sent. And it is either
of a particular man, or householde. In the former whereof, it is to be observed,
that for as much as the Fast is joined with a separation from their daily
occupations: that neither Children, nor Scholars, nor Servants, nor any other
which be at the disposition and government of others, can choose any such day
appointed for common occupations, without the consent of those that have
commandment over them. Without which consent, they must be forced to hold
their Fastes upon the Lords day, or other days of rest, established in the
places of their abode. For here the Law of the Lord has place, that if the
Wife, Son, or Daughter, Number. 30.4.
vow a Vow unto the Lord; that the Husband or Father shall have power to break
it.

The public Fast is that, which is undertaken upon some more general
calamity of the Church, at the appointment of them, which (under Christ) have
the government of the places, Joel. 2.15.
where the fast is holden. In this Fast, because a public assembly is
commanded; it follows, that the chief instruction of the foresaid
profession of repentance, is to be fetched from the public preaching of the
word.

Now leaving the causes of the private Fastes, to the examination of every one,
which can best judge of their own estate; let us consider what causes there be
of a general Fast amongst us. Wherein that it may be seen, that the Trumpet
of Fasting is blown rather by the breath of God, then by the mouth of man: let
us take a short view of the causes, of the Fastes mentioned in the Scriptures.

The cause of the Fast, is the wrath of God against the Church: where is to be
considered, that the people of God have not only regarded this wrath against
them selves particularly, but against others also, of the same society and
fellowship in religion that they were of, through a mutual feeling and
compassion which they have one with an other: as in the example of the Church
of Antioch, Acts. 13.2.
whose Fast appears to have been taken in hand, rather for the misery of the
Church of Jerusalem, then for them selves. Now the Churches round about us,
being fallen into great decay, partly by the spiritual miseries, as well of
the heresies of Papists, Arrians, Anabaptists, the Family of love, etc. as
also of the Schism of Lutheranisme, daily preuayling, partly by bodily plagues
of the Pestilence, almost in all places: of the Sword in our neighbor
countries, and of the Famine which waits commonly upon the same: It is
evident that thereby grows one cause of humbling our selves before our God.
And when this wrath is considered, either in that which is already come, or in
that which may be feared shortly to come: to whether so ever of the causes we
look, we shall find, that we have cause to Fast. For what spiritual evil is
in any of al their Churches, which are not altogether in ours? not one of
those detestable Heresies, but are lodged amongst us. And although the Schism
of Lutheranisme be not among us, yet there is almost a great distraction of
minds for the Church government, beside the diversities of judgments in
many other matters. And among bodily punishments, the Plague has
indifferently fed, and yet does feed upon us. The Sword has been shaken at
us both in the North by Traitors, and in the South by disordered wicked
persons. And should it not strike us, that her Majesty was of late in danger of
her life by a Shot? Which that it was not meant toward her, ought not to
abate our care for her majesty, but rather increase it: as that which was more
nearly directed against her of the Lord, to make both her and us, to cry for
his gracious cover and protection over her. And if we consider the wrath that
hangs over our heads, the notes thereof are taken by the example of the
people of God, Ezra. 9.3.
and first of Ezra, who understanding that the people had married strange
women, fasted: where upon we have this note of the wrath to come, that
considering how that sin is committed openly in the land in diverse sorts,
that therefore anger is at hand. Here may be handled with godly and discreet
wisdom the Sins of the Land.

The second note to know the tempest to come, is taken from the Ninevites
Fast. Jonas. 3.5.
Whereupon we gather, that for so much as we are grievously threatened, as
well by the Ministers and Servants of the Lord, that speak in his name unto
us, as also by his late shaking of the Earth: that sharp judgment (without
repentance) must speedily come upon us.

The third is taken from signs of the wrath of God, which may break out
against us: Hester. 4.6.
as in Hester, where it was concluded at the request of Hamon, of the
destruction of the whole Church; wherewith may fitly be compared the Holy
League (as they say) and Decree of the late Council of Trent, against the
whole Church, and against ours particularly.

An other sign, is the preparation made against the Church, or an endeavor to
execute malice: which drove Josaphat and other more, 2 Paral. 20.
to a Fast. Here the lofty countenaunces, and undutiful demeanor of the
Papists, may be considered, with their rebellious attemptes in Ireland; as
also the Spanish Navy, and great preparation made amongst them of the Holy
league, with the troubles in Scotland, and Gun-pouder treason in England; and
like accidents, sufficient to procure the practice of this holy exercise.

A GENERAL CONFESSION OF Sins, to be made at the exercise of Fasting, the
more particular confession being taken according to the estate of the several
Churches, by the good discretion of the minister, upon the knowledge thereof.
O Lord which art glorious in power and holiness, we being but Dust and
Ashes, with the casting of our selves down, at the foot of thy high Majesty:
confess that we are most vile sinners, conceived and borne in sin, and that
we are by nature nothing else, but a lump of all wickedness, whose natural
property is, to grow in sin, as we grow in years, and to wax strong in
wickedness, as the powers of our minds and bodies receive strength. There is
in us, no wholesome nor sound knowledge how to obey: there is no manner of good
will or affection to please thee: finally, there dwells no good thing in our
flesh. And although our cursed estate does herein greatly appear, yet our
sin is made out of measure sinful, through the exceeding grace which thou
offerest by the Gospel of thy dear Son; whereby we are so far from
profiting, that of our selves we should wax worse and worse. For the more
light of knowledge is showed, the blinder would we remain: the greater
obedience is taught, the frowarder and stubberner would we become, if thou by
the mighty working of thy holy spirit, should not cause it to be
fruitful. And although we have this natural corruption in common, with the
whole rotten race of Adam; yet we confess, that in us it has budded, and
shot forth so much more then in others, as we have had more means to kill it,
and to cause it to wither, then others have had. Where first of all, the
gracious offer of the treasure of thy holy Gospel unto us, makes us guilty
many ways. For where passing by many other nations, thou have trusted our
nation withal: yet with a number of us, has it found as small entertainment,
and felt as great resistance, as amongst them, at whose Gates it never knocked.
For a great portion of the land, partly never yielding them selves to the
obedience thereof; and partly falling from it, after they had once yielded;
stand proudly as it were at the staves end with thee. The rest which make
profession of their submittaunce unto it, do it not accordingly. For first,
there be heaps of our people, which either through an yrcksomnesse of the
yron-yoke of the Popish Religion, or through a wicked opinion which they
nourish, of embracing any Religion set forth; so cast aside the former
Popery, as they still abide in an utter ignorance of the truth it self; in
such sort,) that through want of Preaching) they are as raw in the knowledge of
the true service of thee, as they were expert before, in the service of the
Devil. And where knowledge is, to any such sufficiency as is requisite for
the inheritours of the kingdom of Heaven: there is it (for a great part)
joined with such hypocrisy, as makes them more detestable before thee, (which
searchest the very Raines,) then if they had still continued in their
ignorance. Now, for the remnant of us, which through Grace, have truly and
faithfully believed, it is with so great weakness of Faith, and so small
reformation of Manners; that our glorious profession of the Gospel, supported
and borne out with so small show of the fruits, which the excellency thereof
does require, makes not only the enemies to condemn us, but our selves to
suspect one another, whether we belong unto thee or no. Wherein, O Lord, we
acknowledge that to be our great and horrible sin, that being put in trust
with this unspeakable treasure of thy holy Gospel, and preferred to our
neighbors, professors about us; yet we are in thankful obedience unto thee,
behind them all: first, in knowledge; last, in zeal: before them in the
doctrine of thy holy Gospel; behind them in the discipline of the same. The
yoke of the slavery of our bodies, which the Popish Religion laid upon us, we
willingly shake off: but the holy bands of thy Law, whereby our riotous life
and affections, should be brought into bondage, we do hardly, and heavily
admit. The Gospel which brought a freer use of our lawful honors, pleasures
and commodities, was welcome unto us: but the same Gospel, which restrains
the unlawful licentiousness of our ambition, intemperancie and covetousness,
is not so. Finally so much of the Gospel, as does more nearly respect our
salvation, we seem to have some care to retain: but so much of it as does
more directly respect thy glory, and the profit one of an other, (those
especially which are not of the same land with us) we make small account off.
And seeing the naked treasure of the holy Gospel, had been a rich reward of a
most serviceable subjection: it coming unto us not alone, but accompanied with
so long a peace, with so great a wealth, so plentyful abundance of al things,
as this Land has never or seldom used, other Lands about us have long looked
after: makes our guilt a great deal more, because that in thy so great a
largis toward us, we have been so ungracious toward thee again. Here
therefore is an other Stayer, whereby our sin clymeth higher: For that we,
in the commodities of this life, surmounting our ancestors of the same
profession of the Gospel, in King Henry and King Edwardes time; are, for the
fruits that such a liberality asks at our hands, a great deal worse then
they: and going beyond (other lands in these outward blessings, are outrun
of them, even in the very outward testimonies and tokens of our obedience
toward thee. And besides this huge heap, and (as it were) reeke, of our
general and common sins, we have to confess (at the bar of thy judgment
seat) the particular sins that we have kocked up in our several estates.
For our governors, O Lord, for the most part, being more mindful of the
fulfilling of their affections, then either of thy glory, or of their good
estate, which are committed unto them, have not held so steadie a hand as
they ought to have done, either for the stablishing of the Laws, by which
(under thee) they should have ruled us; and we by them, should have bin
governed of thee; or for the thorough execution of so many, and so far forth
as they have been well established. Our Judges and other Ministers of Justice
likewise, have either ignorantly, or corruptly declyned from righteous
judgment: or giving sentence for the truth, they have done it (diverse of
the^) with no conscience of thy true fear, or love of truth; but for respect,
either of vain glory, or of persons. The Ministers, which should have been
Lights unto all estates, have for the most part, no light in themselves: and
their estate, in whose good constitution and sound health, the rest should have
recovered their health, is of all other, the most sick unto death. For if the
whole number be surueyed, scarce the hundred will be found, to be in the lot of
a faithful Ministry. For ah alas, how many are there, which occupying the
place of Ambassadors, ei: there for want of ability, or for that they love
ease and sleep, carry no tolerable Embassage at all: how many which
carrying the light of the Gospel in their mouths, carry also in their hands,
the filthy water of ambition and covetousness to quench it with. And those
which by thy grace, are for their might and will in some good measure
justifiable: notwithstanding, for the most part, bear it with such infirmity,
through slippes, as well in a sound and substantial manner of teaching, as also
in an even life answering thereunto, that if thy blessing were not marvelous
upon their labors, we should not need to fear, the quenching of this fire of
the holy Gospel, kindled among us, by the enemies: as that which having so
small attendance of blowing, would die of it self. Finally, the people bear
so small love unto their Governors of all sorts, in love so small reverence,
and in them both so little willing obedience: that it may be not (vneasely)
seen, that all the practice of the Church and common wealth, have conspired to
provoke thee Lord against them. These our great and ouergrowen sins, albeit
they are gotten above our heads, yet rest they not here. For where thou have
by thy holy Servants, the Ministers of thy blessed word, sharply chidden
with us, and in a severe denouncing of thy judgments due unto them, fearfully
threatened us for them: yet have we not trembled at thy voice; at which the
Mountains do melte, and the Rocks do rent asunder. A strange thing, that
the Lion should roar, and the weak Lambs should not be affraide: that the
Lord of Hoastes should proclaim War against us, and we should not go forth
and meet him, for entreaty of peace. Nay, his wrath (as has been showed)
has been, and yet is kindled amongst us: and yet as senseless men, and as
dead flesh we are not moved. We are pricked, and we feel it not. We are
wounded, and we do not so much as ask, Who has stricken us? The tempest
that is coming toward us, threateneth our utter drowning: and yet as a
drunken man, we lie sleeping in the very top of the Mast. Whereby it is
evident against our selves, that unto the multitude of our sins, we have
added an other degree of wickedness; which is, the continuance in them: unto
our disobedience, we have joined stubbornness, and the Byles and Botches of our
rebellion, being ougly in thy sight, do through the putrefaction and
festrednesse of them, cast out such stincke, as the earth which we tread upon,
the waters which we drink, and the air which we breath, are tainted and
poisoned with the infection of them. Yea Lord, taught by the wonderful justice
of thy righteous Law, we charge upon our heads all the sins of our Fathers
and Graundfathers, to the uttermost of our generations which are past: as those
whereunto we are iuster inheritours, then unto any Lands or Goods that they
have left us. Whereby it falls out against us, that our sins touch the
Clouds; yea, break into the Heavens of thy Majesty's own residence: whose
measure being already (as it seems) filled, there remains nothing, but
that it should be turned upon our heads. whereupon we make against our selves
an other confession, that we are unworthy of all the benefits of this life, or
of the life to come: both those which we either have, or yet hope to enjoy,
from the greatest to the smalest; from the kingdom of heaven, to one only
drop of Water. That we are worthy of all the Plagues, which either have
heretofore ceased, or been yet possessed of us. Yea if thou should ransake
all the hid, and secret treasures of thy fearful judgments, which in thy
Law thou threatnest against the breakers thereof, not only to the rasing and
sweeping us from the face of the earth, but also to the throwing of us headlong
into the bottomless pit of hell: yet would we therein also acknowledge thy
righteous judgments: for unto us belongs shame and confusion of faces, but
unto thee, glory and righteousness. All which both guilt of sin, and desert
of punishment, notwithstanding, (O father of mercies, and God of all comfort)
we trusting unto the Promises which thou have made us in Jesus Christ, are
bold through him, humbly to call for the performaunce of them. And first we
humbly desire thee, to forgive us all our sins. Thou have said, that if we
confess our sins, thou art faithful to forgive us them. We acknowledge the
debt, cancel therefore the Obligation: let not the multitude of them prevail
against us; but where our sin has abounded, let thy grace more abound; and
as we have multiplied our sins, so we pray thee to multiply thy mercies: and
although we have by continuance in them, so soaked our selves, that thereby we
are not only lightly stained, but also have gotten as it were the Scarlet and
Purple die of them: yet let them all (we pray thee,) being washed in the
blood of thy dear Son, be made as white as the Snow in Salmon, and as the
Woolle of the Sheep which come from washing.

And to conclude as our sins have magnified themselves in an infinite length,
breadth, depth, and height, so let thy mercies (which pass all understanding,)
of all sides, and all assaies, out-reach them. Therefore also we most humbly
desire thee, o Lord, that the sin being pardoned, thy wrath, which is
already declared, may be appeased toward all the Churches of our profession,
and especially toward us, that the manifold breaches of the Churches and
Common wealths may be made up, that those being received into the bosom of
the Church, which belong to thy election: the rest of the Papists and
Heretics, may be utterly rooted out; and that the enemies in religion, being
slain, we may to the uttermost think all one thing, in the honest and
peaceable government of the Common wealth. Upon which uniting of us in all
truth and honesty, the curses of the Plague, and barrenness being removed,
a way may be made to thy blessings; which (as the Hills do the Valleys) may
make our land holesomely fruitful. And that not only the wrath which is
already kindled, may be quenched, but that which has been lately threatened,
may be caused to retire. For the grant whereof unto us, we beseech thee to
remember, that how unworthy soever, yet are we thy people, and the Sheep of
thy pasture, who^ thou have redeemed with thy most precious blood, watched over
with a careful eye, defended with a mighty hand: despise not therefore, o
Lord, the works of thy hands. And seeing thou have loved us, when we hated
thee; visited us, when we desired thee not; then acknowledged us, when we knew
not thee: now that there be a number of us, which love thee, desire thine
aboade, and acknowledge thee: hold on thy love still, depart not from us, deny
us not, o thou God of truth, which art the God that changest not. And if thou
would or could forget us, calling upon thee: yet what should become of
thy great name, which is called upon by us? And therefore for thy glories sake,
and for thy blessed names sake, which in our destruction should be rent and
run through; spare us, spare us, good Lord, according to the usual dealing,
which thou have ever kept with those, which in prayer have had recourse unto
thee; and according to the old and unchangeable nature, of a merciful, kind,
sparing, and long suffering God. Which mercy we do not (o Lord) desire, to
the end that we should tumble and wallow our selves in our accustomed neglect,
and contempt of thy holy word: but together with mercy for our sins, and
the reward of them, we most humbly crave upon the knees of our hearts; that
for the time to come, (how long or how short soever) we with denial and
detestation of our selves, and of our wicked lusts, may offer up unto thee in
Jesus Christ, our selves, our bodies and souls, to be servants at thy holy
commandment, in that reasonable service, which the high reason of thy holy
word does prescribe: and to be weapons, or instruments of righteousness and
holiness, as they have been heretofore, of the contrary.

All which things, as whatsoever thou know to be further needful for us,
or for any of the Churches, we pray thee, as our Savior has taught. etc.

A Confession of Sins, with Faith and Repentance.
O Merciful and heavenly Father, we thy servants do humbly prostrate our
selves before thy Majesty, ackowledging here in thy sight, our heinous
offenses committed against thy Majesty, seeing and beholding thy heavy wrath
against them: We feel our selves laden (o Lord our God) with a huge company
of horrible sins, whereof even the very least, (being but conceived in
thought,) is sufficient in judgment, to throw us down to the everlasting
burning lake. Our own consciences (o Lord) do bear witness against us, of
our manifold transgressions of thy blessed Law, of our security and
senseless blindness, running headlong to destruction, committing sin after
sin, although not notorious to the world, yet horrible before thine eye. The
thoughts of our hearts rise up in judgment against us: the vanity of our
talk before thy Majesty, condemns us: the wickedness of our deeds from thy
sight, rejects us: all our wicked thoughts, words, and deeds, with the
inward corruption of our nature, do altogether as it were a whole lump and
load of sin, lie heavy upon us, and with their intolerable weight, do even
press us down to Hell.

We do daily groan under the burden of them, inwardly lame^ting our own
folly, so greedily running into them. In heaven, earth, or hell, we see none
able to sustain the weight of them, but even thy dearly beloved son Jesus
Christ, who in mercy infinite, and compassion endless, has sustained and
overcome that endless punishment due unto them: in him therefore, in him most
merciful Father, and through him, we come to thee, being fully assured
according to thy promise, that thou will accept and take that full recompense,
which he thy dear Son has made for us, as a just ransom for all the
sins of all those, who with a true faith take hold on him. In him therefore
we see thine anger toward us appeased, thy wrath satisfied, and our debts
paid.

Increase in us, (good Lord) we beseech thee, this lively and feeling Faith;
for we feel it oftentimes in us very weak, and troubled with many doubts:
increase it in us (o Lord,) that we may through thy holy spirit be assured,
that the punishment of our sins is fully in thy Son discharged. Make us, o
Lord our God, to feel this same in our souls and consciences, that Jesus
Christ is ours, and all that he has done: that we are grafted into his body,
and made one with him; and therefore fellow heirs with him of everlasting
life. Let us not only have these words in our mouths (good Lord) but through
thy holy spirit, let us feel the comfort of them in our hearts fully sealed,
and settled in us: that we feeling our selves inwardly before thy judgment
seat discharged, and our consciences toward thee appeased; may be swallowed
up with an unfeigned love toward thy heavenly Majesty, and toward our
breathren for thy sake. Make sin to die in us daily more and more, that we
may hate, detest, and utterly abhor all sin and wickedness in all men, but
especially in our selves: that we may strongly (through thy holy spirit) set
our selves in open war and defiance against all sin and wickedness; that we
please not our selves in our sins, but straightly examining sin by the just
rule of thy holy Laws, we may utterly from the bottom of our hearts,
condemn even the least sin in our selves, having our whole joy, comfort, and
consolation upon those things which be agreeable to thy blessed will, always
being afraid to do any thing contrary to the same: that we may even from
the bottom of our hearts, examine and try our thoughts before thy presence,
that they be upright and unfeigned, not hypocritical in outward show only,
and appearaunce, but that even all corners of our hearts being opened and
disclosed before thee, we may even as though it were openly before the face of
the whole World, bring them in show, knowing that a double heart is detestable
in thy sight: and that we may walk always as before thine eyes; not only
before the eyes of man, being more careful to walk circumspectly, in this
respect, that we have thee to be a viewer of our doings, a thousande-folde more
then the eyes of man: that thus we may walk as becomes thy children, not
only in outward show, but also in sincerity of heart, abhorring even the least
sin in our selves; striving, resisting, and fighting against sin, not
delighting our selves in sin, nor nourishing the same in our breast, but
earnestly embracing, and studiously seekeing after those things which be
pleasant in thine eyes: that neither the fear of man, nor loss of goods,
life, lands, possessions, or friends, draw us away from thee, to do any the
least thing contrary to thy will and pleasure: neither the favor or
friendship of man, nor yet the flattering enticement of this world, nor the
vain promotions of the same, do move us any whit from the true and endless
joy, delight, and pleasure which we ought to have in those things which be
agreeable to thy will, and the constant performance of the same: but that
always to the end of our life we may continue in thy paths, growing and
increasing from faith to faith, from strength to strength, till at the length
we shall come to thy everlasting rest. Amen.

A Prayer for the KING.
O Gracious Lord, and most merciful Father, we acknowledge thee the Lord of
Lords, and the King of Kings, creating at the beginning, and ruling all
things evermore in Heaven and Earth, according to thy wonderful wisdom and
power: and our selves to be thy poor servants, the work of thy hands, and
the sheep of thy pasture, subjected to thy Majesty, and depending upon thy
fatherly providence for all things. Nevertheless, seeing thou in thy wisdom
annoyntest Kings and Queens, appointing them to rule over thy people, to sit
as Lieutenants in thy seat, to minister justice, and most of all, as Fathers
and Nurses to maintain and chearish thy Church; commanding us not only to
obey and honor them: but moreover to pray for them, as watching over us for
our good. We therefore beseech thee for thy great mercies sake, and for Jesus
Christ's sake, to show thy mercy to al Kings and princes, that maintain thy
glorious Gospel: but especially we pray thee to bless our gracious King, in
all spiritual blessings in Christ Jesus; and in all temporal blessings,
according to thy good pleasure, that in the great measures of thy effectual
love, he may more and more find great increase of virtue, and wisdom, and
strength in Christ Jesus, to the faithful and happy discharge of his duty,
that his holienesse, and joy, and zeal of thy house, may be multiplied, and
everlasting.

And seeing it has pleased thee, of thy singular mercy, to give him this
special honor, miraculously delivering him out of the hands of his enemies,
to set a double Crown upon his head, and to make him the instrument to
advance thy glory, and Gospel amongst us. As we give thee most hearty
thanks for these singular benefits, so we beseech thee to make him and us
evermore thankful for it, and in thy good pleasure still to preserve him, for
the continuance of these blessings toward us, with all increase from time to
time, to thy glory, the benefit of the Church, and his infinite peace in
Christ Jesus, the prince of peace. And furthermore, we pray thee for him, and
the estate, that such as be enemies of the Gospel, and his enemies also, for
the defense thereof, may not despise the peace offered them to repentance, but
that they may account thy long suffering, and his peaceable and unbloody
government, an occasion of salvation to their souls, and unfeigned love to the
truth, and their merciful sovereign. Otherwise if they still remain
disobedient to the truth, disobedient to his Highness and dangerous to the
State; then (O God of our Salvation) as thou have discovered them, so discover
them still; as thou have prevented them, so prevent them still; and let their
eyes wax weary with looking, and their hearts faint with waiting for the
coming of that, which yet comes not, neither let it come (O Lord) we beseech
thee, but a blessed and a long reign to him, and peace to Sion for evermore.
Also (dear father) so bless, so love, so in thy spirit sanctify and keep
him, that he may in the spirit of counsel and fortitude so rule that other
sister also, namely this common wealth, that they may flourish together, and
grow up together as Palm trees, in beauty, and in strength, giving aid and
help one to an other; that in the Church the glory of God may appear, as the
Sun in his brightness, and that the land may flow with Milk and Honey, and
true peace abound therein, as in the triumphant reign of Solomon.

These garces (O Lord) are great, and we miserable sinners, unworthy of the
least of them: therefore look not to us, but to thy self; not to our
iniquities, but to thy great mercies, accepting the death and passion of thy
Son, as a full ransom for all our offenses: throwing them into the bottom of
the Sea, and making his Cross and Resurrection effectual in us to al
obedience and godliness, as becomes thy Saints: that to all other thy good
blessings toward our gracious Sovereign; this may be added, that he governs
blessedly, over a blessed people, a people blessed of the Lord, and beloved of
the Lord; and that thy graces may abound as the warers of the Sea, in the
King, and in the people; in the Church, and in the Common wealth, from day to
day, till the day of our translation into thy kingdom; where justice
Inhabiteth; where also we shall inhabit and reign with thee, according to thy
promise, for ever. Grant these things (O merciful Father) for thy dear Son
our Lord Jesus Christ his sake: in whose name, we crave them at thy merciful
hand, praying furthermore for them, as he has raught us to pray. Our Father
which art in heaven, etc.

FINIS.
The substance of the Lords Supper. Shortly and soundly set forth; together,
with the principal points in controversy, concerning that question,
sufficiently discussed, for the instruction and comfort of all Christian
readers. Necessary to be read at all times, but especially, before the
administration and receiving of the said Supper.

2. Cor. 13.5. Prove your selves, whether ye are in the faith: examine your
selves. Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except
ye be reprobates?

Imprinted at London for T. Man. and I. Harison, Anno. 1610.

To the right worshipful, and my very good friends, sir William Peliam
Knight, her Majesty's Lieuetenant of the Ordinance; and the Lady Dorothie his
wife, T.VV. wishes in this life, all sound knowledge of Gods truth, with an
assured faith in the truth of his promises: and after the wearisome days of
this pilgrimage shall be ended, eternal bl ssednesse in the life to come,
through Christ.
Amongst many reasons, (needless now to rehearse) inducing me, to offer
this small Treatise unto your Worshippes; this was not the least, to weet, that
thereby, I might testify, as my unfeigned good will toward you in the Lord,
so the care that I have in all holy love, to buyld you up in the sincere
judgment of the points and principles of Christian religion. For, though I
doubt not, but that you are in some good measure endued, with sundry good
gifts and graces form God, which should be continual spurs and prouocations
unto you, to employ your selves to the uttermost of your powers, in the service
of his Majesty, and the obedience of his will: yet, in respect of the
corruption of man's nature, and the stumbling blocks, which Satan our common
adversary casts in our way, to hinder us, in the raze and course of
godliness I know that all Gods children, and therefore you amongst the rest,
have need of continual remembrancers, not only to put you in mind, but also
to provoke you, to pass the days of your pilgrimage in the reverent fear of
Gods great Majesty: and being sound in zeal, sincere in knowledge, and
careful in practice, to finish your course in his faith, that so at the last,
you may be made thorough Christ, partakers of eterrall salvation, which is the
end of our hope a d faith, yea, the very end of our life in this life: and
therefore good reason, that we should employ our whole life thereto, and to
the continual use and practice, of all the means that God has ordained for
our better attayning thereof, and namely that we should be often and earnest
with him in prayer: that we should delight in, and labor to profit by the
daily hearing, reading, meditating, and conference of and in his holy word; and
that we should frequent the reverent and ordinary use of his Sacraments,
appointed for the strengthening of our faith, in the truth of his promises,
growing, even to this narrowness and straightness of onscience, that we
should think every day and every hour of a day ill spent, wherein we have
not profited somewhat toward godliness and honesty.

True is it, that here is handled but only one point of our Religion: yet
notwithstanding, I beseech your Worshippes, by this to gather the ready good
will that is and shall be in me, through Gods goodness: further to write or
speak, in this, or any other ground, whereby your knowledge may be increased,
and your faith strengthened in the truth of Gods eternal Word and Promises:
yea, I do further request you, and in you, all those that shall read this
little Discourse, to consider, not the smalnesse of the Treaty, but the
waightinesse of the matter propounded in the same, which is one of the
principles of our Religion, wherein we cannot be ignorant without our great
hurt: and to which we can not unworthily repair (a fault over common in these
our days,) without judgment and condemnation against our own souls: which
has made me to annex at the end thereof, sundry short meditations, for the
better direction of the ignorant and unskillful in this behalf.

In all this that I write, whatsoever it be, I deal with them (I hope) that
be both charitable and wise enough to conceive my meaning; and therefore shall
not need to use many words to persuade that, whereunto you your selves be in
some measure, thorough Gods goodness, inclined, and to the perfourmaunce
whereof you are bound, by the great grace and excellent calling, that the same
God in mercy has bestowed upon you.

This only I wish, and will pray or, all the days of my life, that this my
poor labor, and whatsoever other thing else it shall please him, by me or any
other to publish, either for your good, or the good of his Saints wheresoever,
may be profitable, not unto you only for your salvation, but unto all his
elect and chosen children, that the number of his faithful being accomplished,
and the days of sin utterly cut off, we may be gathered to those eternal
and heavenly Tabernacles, which Christ our savior has purchased and prepared
for us: and that we might be the better assured thereof, is entered before hand
there into, to take possession thereof in our name: there to reign with him
for ever, and ever. So be it.

Your Worships always ready and humble in Christ, T. VV. the Lords most
unworthy servant.

To the Reader.
AT the motion and request of sundry my dear friends in the Lord, I have
thought good to put down two Prayers at the latter end of this Treatise,
not thereby minding either to tie any person to the use of them only, for they
may according to their several necessi ies conceive some other of their own,
or practice some better form already set down, by men of greater gifts, and
feeling: nor yet, so to busy their minds, and to occupy their heads, as
that they should be employed in these, when the public Prayers and exercises
of the Church, performed by the Ministers are in hand (for be it far from us,
when the Minister Gods mouth speaks from the Lord to us or when he as our
mouth speaks to the Lord for us, to have either our hearts or our mouths
occupied about any other thing, than the reverent hearing and consenting unto,
of such things as he utters) but that ayding the infirmity of our
breathren, such as have not the gift to conceive Prayer, might have a form to
exercise themselves in, both before they repair to the public exercises of
the Church, and after the celebration of those reverent mysteries, shall he
finished.

The substance of the Lords Supper, shorly and soundly set forth, for the
instruction and comfort of all Christian readers.
TO clear, yea, to void all the controversies that from time to time have
crept into the Church, concerning the matter of the Lords supper, these three
circumstances, in the first place are meet to be considered.

1 First, who ordained it; to wit, Jesus Christ our Savior, which is an
evident proof of his eternal Deity or Godhead, because it belongs to God
alone, to institute and ordeine Sacraments in the Church.

2 Secondly, when it was instituted, to wit, before his death and suffering, by
which it is plain, that the bread in the supper, cannot be the same natural
body, that was borne of the Virgin Marie, crucified on the Cross, etc.

3 Thirdly, wherefore it was ordained, to wit, for the strengthening of our
faith in the truth of Gods promises, and to put us in remembrance of Jesus
Christ absent: now a remembrance of a thing it could not be, if the thing it
self were present. And all these three points are proved out of 1. Corinthians.
11. verse. 23.24.

2 In the second place, the consideration of these three circumstaunces
following, will serve much for the clearing of the question also.

1 First, which be the signs in the Sacrament, to wit, Bread and Wine, which
have that nature and force in them, not of themselves, for then all Bread and
Wine should have the like; but in respect of the Lords institution, who alone
has power to ordeine signs or Sacraments, and to give them that effect and
property.

2 Secondly, what be the things signified thereby, to wit, the blessed body of
Christ crucified, and his precious blood shed, for the benefit and good of all
those that by a lively and steadfast faith, do apprehend and take hold of him
and all his merits.

3 Thirdly, the analogy, proportion and agreement, which is between the signs
and the things signified, the Lord no doubt choosing such elements as might
most aptly and fitly express the things signified and sealed by the same.
Which likewise may be brought into three especial heads or points.

1 First, that as verily as that Bread is broken, and the wine defused or
spread abroad, because many be partakers of it: so verily was Christ wounded
for our transgressions, and broken for our iniquities, as Isaiah says, Cap.
53.5. and his body crucified, and his blood shed upon the cross for many, for
the remission of sins. Math. 26.26.22.28. 1. Corinthians. 11.24.25.26.

2 Secondly, that as Bread has his property through Gods blessing given it,
to feed and strengthen our natural bodies in this life: so his body being
represented effectually unto us by that bread; has the selfsame property,
touching our souls, to strengthen and to nourish them spiritually. And even as
the Wine comfort and make man's heart glad, as appears by sundry. Scriptures:
so our full joy and spiritual comfort is, to be found in him alone. And (to
join these two together, of which we have spoken severally) this we must
know and believe further, that as our diet is then full, whole, and perfect, as
it were, when it consists of these two things, Bread and Wine, or Drink: so
we might know, that the fullness and prefection of all spiritual nourishment
is to be found in Christ alone, and no where else, whilst that he is become,
as well the Drink, as the Meat of our soul, not only in this double sign,
helping our infirmity as it were, but also teaching us to seek the heavenly
refection and nourishment of our souls, fully and wholly in him, and no where
else. Whereunto also he him self in some sort alludeth. Math. 11. verse. 28.
etc. Ioh. 6, 35. Ioh. 7. 37.38.

3 Thirdly, that as the Bread is made of many Grains, and the Wine of sundry
and several Grapes, and yet all make but one Bread and one Wine: so all the
faithful should be instructed thereby, that though they be several and
distinct persons one of the^ from an other, as the members in the body are, yet
they all compacted together, make but one body; as the Apostle Paul plainly
proves, Romans 12.4 5. but specially, 1. Corinthians. 10.16, 17.

These three things then, out of all that hitherto has been spoken, I would
have to be observed and noted.

1 First, that though it be true, that even by the ministry of the Gospel,
we receive Christ with all his benefits, of which Saint Paul speaks Galat.
3, 1. that Christ was described in their sight, and crucified among them; yet
that we have this, more plainly and plentifully set forth unto us in the use
of the Supper, whilst that we by faith feeding on him, that is the Bread of
life, which came down from heaven. John 6.51. are by that means become bone of
his bones, and flesh of his flesh, Ephesians. 5.30. and made one in him, even as
the Father and he are one. John. 17.21.22.

2 Secondly, that this holy Sacrament, does not only direct us to the death
and passion of our Savior Christ, which was performed many hundred years
ago, as the one and the only Sacrifice for sin, never to be reiterated;
because that thereby he being the only High priest and eternal Sacrificer,
has consecrated for ever all them that are sanctified: Hebr. 9.28. Heb. 10.14.
but also, yea chiefly and especially, to the gracious fruits and effects,
that we receive thereby: as the forgiveness of sins, the assured pledge of
eternal life, and such like: which are lively set forth, and preached unto us
in the same, to the end that we may be made partakers thereof.

3 Thirdly, that we must know and believe, that though this Sacrament do
specially and chiefly direct us to Christ, his death, merits, obedience, and
the fruits thereof: yet notwithstanding also, it does instruct us of the
special duties of Love, that in Christ, and for Christ, we as the members of
that body, whereof he is the only head, ought unfeignedly to perform, one of
us toward an other, not only as profitable and necessary for the parts, to
whom such duties are performed, but comfortable also to our selves, whilst by
that, as by a badge or cognizaunce, we are known to be Christ's Disciples,
John 13.35. and have sealed up in our hearts, the free pardon and full
forgiveness of all our sins, and an assured pledge of our translation out of
darkness into light: see Luke. 7.47. Also 1. John 3.14.

In the third place for the clearing of this controversy, we must have a
watchful eye to Satan's subtletie, who labors in this point, as in all
other points of Christian religion, by extreamities to draw us into all
corruption. Now the extreamenesses that in time hertofore, have burst forth
and are yet in many places stoutly and stiffely maintained, are specially three.

1 First, that of the Sacramentaries, who hold and defend, that there is
nothing in the Supper left us, save the bare and naked signs of Christ's death
and passion. But the truth is so far off from allowing this, that we fear
not to affirm, that besides the signs, we have the things them selves
signified, truly and effectually exhibited unto us; because it is most certain
that our Savior Christ who is the truth it self and can not lie, does
indeed and assuredly accomplish unto us, all the promises which he made unto
us, and sealed unto us, by the use of the signs in the Sacrament, making us
partakers even of his very substance, that we might also grow up into one life
with him. And though this can not be comprehended by the eye of man's reason and
understanding, yet we know that this is sensibly set forth unto us, by
several means and instruments: some outward, as the Elements in the
Sacrament; and some inward, as the spiritual Grace represented thereby. For
we are not Angels, but men, consisting of body and soul: and therefore the
Lord by the use of his Word and Sacraments, has provided for both parts; as
the Word for our Ears; and our Ears for hearing of the same, that so Faith
might be wrought in our hearts. Romans 10.17. and the Elements in the
Sacraments for our taste, sight, feeling, etc. and yet our souls to be
nourished not with any or all of these outward things (for how can outward and
corruptible things nourish inward and immortal substance?) but only with the
spiritual graces offered unto us therein; and this also to be wrought in us
(though our Savior be in Heaven in respect of his body; and we here as
Pilgrims and Strangers on the Earth) by the wonderful and unsearchable
working of his holy Spirit in us, and by the means of a lively and assured
Faith: both which being knit together, do easily join together things, that
be as far asunder, in respect of distaunce of place, as one end of the earth
is from the other; and as far asunder, as heaven and earth them selves are:
or else how could we either believe the holy Catholic Church, and feel the
communion of Saints, seeing it commonly falls out, that the members of that
holy fellowshippe, are sundered one of them from an other, in respect of great
distance of place? or be assured that Christ's righteousness is become ours,
seeing he is in heaven, and we on the earth, if by Faith we did not take hold
of the same, and apply it unto our selves? Besides, if men should embrace this
sacramentarie opinion, what were it, but to euert, as the truth of Christ's
promises; so the certainty and assuredness of his word, who in plain
terms, calls this holy Sacrament, His body?

2 The second extreamitie is, that of consubstantiation, some affirming, that
there is delivered to the people, and they receive together with the substance
of Bread, the yery substance of Christ's very natural body; so that there is
(as it were) an intermingling of both the substaunces in the action of the
Supper. This opinion is justly to be disliked and reproved, not only because
of the absurdities which it has common, with the heresy of
transubstantiation; whereof we will speak in the next place: but also,
because it is quite and clean contrary to common sense and reason,
confounding and iumbling together, two several and distinct substances and
making the less; to wit, the substance of bread, to comprehend the greater,
that is, Christ's human body; yea, even his very Godhead: which heaven and
earth is not able to contain.

Besides, it does utterly take away an essential property of Christ's body:
for if Christ, in respect of his humanity, be like unto us in all things,
sin only excepted; and we know by the light of reason and understanding that
God has bestowed upon us; yea, by very experience, that our bodies are
circumscriptible and tied to a place: it must needs follow, that Christ in
respect of his Manhood; or Christ, as he is Man, is and must be tied to a
place, and not be in every place; as he must be, if these men's assertions be
true; which is nothing else indeed, but utterly to destroy Christ's body: which
I prove against them thus. Whosoever takes away the essential property of
any thing, takes away the thing it self: this Proposition is proved by this
Maxim in Logike: If the definition of a thing, which chiefly consists of the
essential property of every thing be taken away, then the thing defined it
self, also falls: As for example; If a reasonable living creature, which is
the definition of a man, be taken away, what shall become of man, or where
shall he appear, which is the thing defined? But these men take away the
essential property of a thing, to wit, of a body, which is to be
circumscriptible or tied to a place; which is indeed an essential property of
the body of man, and therefore of Christ's body, as he is man. If any will
deny this, it may easily be proved, both by the definition of a body, which
is a quantity, that may be divided, according to the threefold measuring,
received amongst men, that is, length, breadth, and thickness; and also by the
description of a place, which is defined to be a nighnesse or touching, of the
thing containing, and the thing contained. The conclusion therefore is, that in
taking away place from the body of Christ; which they do, whilst they place
it in every place, whereas in the nature thereof, it can be but in one place
at one time; they do utterly destroy the body or humanity of Christ; or at
the least confound it so with the Godhead, as Eutyches did, that they make a
confusion (whereas in all truth and uprightness, there should remain a
distinction) of the proprieties of either nature in his blessed person. But of
this enough in this place, because it is somewhat philosophical, and because
also in the next ^ection, we shall have occasion to deal with the like.

3. The third extreamitie is, that of transubstantiation, maintained altogether
by the Romish Catholics, which hold that the Bread and Wine, (the substance
thereof vanishing away, and nothing being left but the accidents or qualities
thereof, as roundnes, whiteness, redness, moisture, etc.) are changed, and
that by the power of certain words, spoken by the Priest (as they call him)
over the Elements, they are turned into the very natural body and blood of
our Savior.

Concerning this point, and the branches thereof, I will speak particularly
and, first for the name Transubstantiation, I fear not to affirm, that it is
very new, and never heard of before the days of Pope Innocent the third, who
was about the year of our Lord 1205. much less was it confirmed as an article
of faith before the Council of Constance, a City so named in Germany, in the
days of Pope John the xxiii. which was about the year of our Lord 1415. and
therefore by the Popish reason of rejecting new things, easily enough rejected
for the novelty thereof.

2 That there is a change I do not deny; but this is not in respect of the
nature of the things themselves but in respect of the use and end whereunto
they are applied, because that they are by the Lords institution separated
from the common use, yea, and from common Bread and Wine, and applied not only
to a holy use, but dedicated also to a holy end, that is, to be sure seals
and pledges of holy things, to wit, of Christ's body and blood, and of the
effects, that by his death and passion we receive. But that this change should
be wrought by any words, I am so far off from allowing it as true, that I am
verily persuaded, that it sauoureth very strongly of a Magical incantation:
and I am so much the more confirmed in this, because the Papists rejoicing as
Inchaunters and Sorcerers do, in their odd numbers: have added one word; that
is (enim) to the words of institution, saying: Hoe est enim corpus meum: as
may appear in their Missall or Mass book.

3 The gross and palpable absurdities which follow this opinion of
Transubstantiation, are sufficient and strong enough of them selves, to make it
out of credit, with all persons endued with holy wisdom and understanding,
and to cause them to esteem of it, not only as a thing false and erroneous
but very ungodly and blasphemous also. To reckon up all, or largely to
discourse upon the particulars, it is not my purpose, but only to touch some
shortly, yet so as the vanity and falsehood of this great corruption may
thereby easily appear.

1 First I say, that this does utterly destroy the nature of a Sacrament, which
must ever consist of two parts; to wit, of visible elements, and invisible
graces; which can not be, if so be it that the nature and substance of the
elements, be either changed, or vanish away, and the things represented by
the same, come in their place; because that the one part of the Sacrament (to
wit, the visible sign) is then and there wanting.

2 Secondly, I affirm, that it is injurious to the glorified body of our
Savior, not only while it brings him from heaven, the place of all
blessedness, into earth, the place of all misery and wretchedness; but also
whilst it makes it to be rent and torn in pieces, not only with the teeth
of good men, (a matter which Nature abhors) but with the teeth of the wicked
and ungodly; yea with the teeth of Mise, Dogs, and other unreasonable
creatures: yea, whilst it makes it, which is immortal, in immortal glory,
subject to putrefaction, corruption, and Worms, by reason of the long
reservation thereof, and at the last, to consuming in the fire, (a fact of
horrible cruelty, if it were Christ's flesh) because it may not otherwise be
made away, (as they them selves confess) if it be overtaken with horinesse,
moldinesse, or any such like.

3 Thirdly I say, that by a consequent it does wonderfully confound (if not
utterly destroy) the humanity of our Savior with his Godhead, whilst that
which is proper and peculiar to his eternal Deity, to wit, to be every
where, is attributed and ascribed to his humanity; which as has been before
showed, and shall be more plainly proved hereafter, is, and must of
necessity, since his ascension, be circumscriptible and tied to a place. For
otherwise, if the glorification of Christ's body, have taken away that
property of tying to a place, then the like shall be performed in all the
bodies of the faithful, because he shall change our base and vile bodies, that
they may be fashioned like unto his glorious body. Philip. 3. 21. But to say
that our bodies shall be every where, were a beastly and blasphemous assertion;
because it should ascribe that unto us, which is proper and peculiar only to
God: For unto him alone it pertains, to fill heaven, earth, and all places.
Therefore this assertion concerning Christ's glorified body, must of necessity
be such likewise.

4 Fourthly, it does destroy all the Articles of our Faith, which concern
Christ's ascension in heaven, sitting at the right hand of the Father, and his
coming again, together with all the places of Scripture, that confirm those
most holy, comfortable, and necessary points. For if he be here in respect
of his bodily power and presence, how can he be justly said to have ascended in
respect of his body, into heaven, and to sit there at the right hand of his
Father, making continual intercession for us? Or how can it be affirmed, that
from thence he shall come with great power and glory, to judge the quick and
the dead, seeing he is here on earth already? Let men of the world deem what
they list, this is the truth that God has sanctified unto us in his word, and
do steadfastly believe it in my heart, and will through Gods goodness and
strength, always confess the same with my mouth, that from the time of his
ascension, the heavens must contain Chistes natural body, until the time
that all things be restored, Acts 3.21. that is, even to the worlds end.

5 Fifthly, I say that this opinion does deprive us of all the spiritual
graces and comforts, that God the father in his son Christ, by sending the
holy Ghost the third person in the Deity, has bestowed upon the whole Church
generally, and every particular member thereof. For, does not our Savior
Christ say? John. 16.7. I tell you the truth: It is expedient for you that I
go away; for if I go not away, that Comforter will not come unto you: But if
I depart, I will send him unto you. Either this then must be true, that we
have the holy Ghost by the bodily absence of our Savior Christ given to the
Church, as before is said; or else if Christ be here bodily present, the holy
Ghost is not yet come; which you may see plainly overthrown. Act. 2.1.2.

6 Sixthly, this assertion accuses Christ of manifest lying and untruth. For
he himself has said, Math. 26.11. The poor ye have always with you, but me
ye shall not have always. And yet this people dare affirm, that we have him
continually, not in respect of his spiritual power and presence only, in
which respect he fills all places, both in heaven and in earth, and is said
to be with the believers even unto the end of the world Matthew. 28.20. But in
respect of corporal and bodily presence, then the which nothing can be more
absurd, as has been before showed.

But here arise up three special objections, to be answered: two whereof, are
taken for the words of the text of holy Scripture, and the third from the
omnipotency and almighty power of our Savior Christ: common things indeed,
and might as easily be rejected as objected: but yet both for the strengthening
of them that stand, and for the satisfying and instruction of them that be
weak and ignorant. I will in a word or two, as it were, make a short, yet a
sound, sufficient, and true answer I hope, to every one of them severally and
by them selves.

The first place objected, were these words out of John. 6.13. Except ye eat
the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you.
Whereunto I answer, first, that neither these words, neither the rest of the
Chapter, can properly be understood of the Lords supper; because that was not
at that time instituted and ordained, but rather of our communication or
partaking with Christ, by the means of faith apprehending the word, and
applying particularly unto our selves, all the gracious and sweet promises,
that the Lord has made and offered unto us therein: which may appear, partly
because he persisteth by a a continual thread of speech as it were, in the
metaphor of Bread or Meats, mentioned verse. 26.27 using sundry borrowed
speeches agreeing well to the circumstaunce of the matter, wherein he was to
deal: and partly, because he speaks so often not of eating only, but also
of believing; as verse. 23.40. etc. Which cannot be properly attributed to any
outward or material thing; as may be gathered, Romans 8.24. Also 2. Corinthians.
5.7. But let us grant that it were to be understood of the holy Supper; yet it
does not for all that, establish any gross and carnal eating of the natural
flesh or body of our Savior Christ: for if it were so, then had not our
Savior sufficiently answered the Capernaites, who did grossly dream and
doat of such a carnal manducation or eating, but rather had yielded unto the
same. Besides, if that should be allowed, in what a miserable estate should we
leave the holy Fathers; who were long before the time of Christ's taking our
flesh upon him, and therefore could not eat it? And yet our Savior affirms
Mat. 8.11. that they were in the kingdom of Heaven: and Saint Paul says 1. Corinthians. 10.3.4 that they did all eat the same spiritual meat that we do,
and did all drink the same spiritual drink that we do; there being no
difference at all in respect of substance and effect betwixt their Sacraments
and ours, but only in time, and in outward Elements: yet in what a miserable
estate were Infantes that should die before they could communicate or partake
in that holy Sacrament? One of these two must needs be granted; either that
they must have the Communion ministered unto them; which thing indeed Augustine
did once fantastically imagine: but S. Paul is flatly against it, 1. Corinthians.
11.28. who will have none admitted thereto, but such as can examine and try
themselves, whether they be in the Faith or no; which Infantes can not do: or
else that without it, they are all condemned already: Both which are very
absurd and beastly. So that you see for the avoiding of these absurdities, it
can at no hand be understood, either of the Sacraments, of the gross and
carnal eating of Christ's body in the same, but of the apprehension or laying
hold of him, together with the particular application of him to our selves by
the hand or instrument Faith propounded and set forth unto us, by the
ministry of his Word and Gospel, or (if you will for reasoning sake) offered
unto us in the use of the Supper, because there is in that respect, but one
mean given us to take hold of him by; and that is the great grace and gift of
Faith, which we must use in the Word and Sacraments, as men do in the
opprehending of Christ's righteousness; which though it be not essentially
dwelling in us, yet it is effectually made ours, whilst we apprehend and lay
hold of the same by a sound and sure Faith: And even in like sort is Christ
God and Man together with all his merits, not only offered, but laid hold
of in the Word and Sacraments: For of like things, there is always a like
consideration.

The second place, is that sentence reported by the three Evangelists,
Matthew, Mark, and Luke; and S. Paul himself also, reciting the institution
of the Supper, which our Savior Christ used, saying: This is my body: which
they urge in the letter, after this sort: Has not Christ said it in plain
terms? and shall I not believe it, though that my carnal understanding cannot
conceive the same? To all this I answer: First, that the question is not of
the words, for we as well as they confess the same; but of the sense: of
which we will speak anon. Secondly, that we, are bound to believe all such
things as are comprehended in Gods Word, though indeed our sensual reason,
can not comprehend them; yet in such sort must we believe the same, and to such
ends as the Lord himself has appointed, not yet stretching them further,
then the Lord would have us; nor restraining them to narrow or purposes, then
the Lord has appointed; neither yet failing in the allegation of them, either
in the matter, manner, or end: for if we do, we do nothing else thereby but
heap up just condemnation against our own souls. Concerning the words, and
the plainenes of them; I say that other words are as plain as they, both in
the old and new testament, which must yet notwithstanding, be otherwise
interpreted, then the words themselves seem to import. For example in the 17
of Genesis 10. Circumcision is called the Covenant betwixt GOD and his people,
whereas it was but the sign of the Covenant: For the Covenant it self was,
that he would be the God of Abraham, and in him of all the Faithful, and of
their seed after them. So in the new Testament, Christ says of him self, John
15.5. I am the Vine; whereas we know and believe, that Christ was no Vine, but
that he calls him self so in a certain resemblance; because look what
property the fruit of the Vine has in respect of our bodies, to wit, to
comfort men, and to make them glad hearts: the same has Christ, and the
fruits of his grace received by Fryth, in respect af our souls: and as the
Branches of the Vine have nothing of them selves, but all that they have, they
have it from the Vine it self: so none of his members can bring forth fruit,
but by abiding in him; and being made fruitful through his grace. In like
manner is the Bread of the Lords Supper, called his Body, because, as we have
said before, look what proper and peculiar office the Bread has or yields
to our natural bodies; the self same does Jesus Christ's body broken, taken
hold of by Faith, spiritually communicate unto our souls. And this speech is
usual in the Scriptures, to attribute that to the sign, which is proper and
peculiar to the thing signified, by reason of the stre ght analogy,
proportion, and agreement, which is between the sign, and the thing
signified; and not in any other respect, of consubstantiatio^,
transubstantiation, or any other such like fantastical dotage.

Beside, the very circumstances of time, place, person, and manner of doing,
do sufficiently prove the vanity and untruth of this gross interpretation.
For this Sacrament being instituted by Christ him self a little before his
death, in the presence of the Apostles (who had all their senses satisfied in
the beholding, hearing, and feeling, of the natural body of our Savior
Christ) he him self sitting at the Table with them, and speaking these words
in their presence and hearing; it could not be, that that bread, offered unto
them as the pledge of his body, should be his natural body, or body of
flesh, unless you will say, that Christ had two bodies: one sitting at the
table, instituting the action of the Supper; and an other borne in his hands,
and delivered unto his Apostles: then the which, what can be, not only more
absurd and blasphemous, in respct of our Savior Christ him self; but also
more unprofitable and uncertain to us, as which might provoke us to doubt,
whether of his bodies were crucified for our transgressions? Now, as we do
justly reject this gross sense, so for the instruction of the ignorant, and
strengthening of the weak, we will in a few lines put down the true meaning of
these words. For the better performaunce whereof, I would have this to be
noted.

1 In he first place, which I am sure also no man of sound judgment can well
deny, that all words, and therefore these of the Supper, must be expounded
according to the subject, argument, or matter whereof they entreat: and
therefore their speaking particularly of the Lords Supper, must of necessity
be understood of the Sacrament of the body and blood of our Savior Christ,
exhibited unto us in that Supper.

2 Secondly, I would have this to be remembered, that seeing all confessr these
words to be spoken of the Sacrament, we must not gather, that the word Body,
is otherwise attributed to the Bread, then the nature and quality (as it were)
of Sacraments will bear; for then if we should grant that, we should
easily destroy and overthrow all Sacraments of the Church whatsoever; because
in this behalf, or respect, there is a like proportion to be observed in one,
as in all: And if one be defaced in respect of a wrong sense, the least can
hardly, or not at all stand upright.

3 Thirdly, that this is the nature of all sacraments, that the elements and
rites used in the same, be true and effectual, not signs only, but
testimonies and pledges of these things, for the signifying and subiecting of
which unto our senses they were ordained: and yet when I use the word, Sign, I
would not be taken as though I meant that they are bare, vain, or
unprofitable Signs, such as Painters commonly use to make, but even thus
farre-foorth effectual, that it is no more true and certain, that we see the
same with our eyes, touch them with our hands, receive them with our mouths
and eat them; then that is also as true and certain, that the Lord exhibiteth
and offers unto us, what so ever they represent unto us; that is, the very
body and blood of our Savior Christ. These rules being thus then observed, I
gather and put down this true and holy sense of these words: This is my
body: that is to say, This Bread which Christ took, blessed, brake; and gave
unto his Disciples, and appointed to be the element of this action, is
sacramentally and spiritually, being received and eaten by Faith, a sure sign
and an effectual pledge, that Christ's body is become the spiritual food and
nourishment of our souls. And I use these words, sacramentally and
spiritually, that thereby I might meet with their gross slander, who when
they hear of a sign, and a thing signified, say that we do euacuate and
make of no force the Lords Supper. No, we are so far off from holding any
such conclusion, that we know and believe, that the believers, do beside the
outward signs and elements, truly receive by the mean of faith, after a
spiritual sort, that which is represented by the outward elements; to wit,
whole Christ, with all his gifts and graces. And yet we do not imagine,
either transubstantiation, or any such like devise; but only think upon and
believe, the sacramental coniuction of the sign and the thing signified, For
those things can not stand with the truth of Christ's humanity; as has been
bef re showed: neither indeed are they necessary for salvation. For, that we
may be made partakers of Christ, it is not of necessity required, that his
Body should be really present upon the earth; but it rather behooves us, by
the power of the holy Ghost, and through Faith, to mount up into Heaven, and
there to lay hold of him, that we may sit with him in the heavenly places,
which in this life can not be performed in any other sort, then in a spiritual
manner, and through faith: which faith is begotten and confirmed in us by the
holy Ghost; whereunto he uses as instruments, the preaching of Gods word,
and the administration and use of the Sacraments, by which all our senses are
eue^ as it were provoked and pearsed, wholly to possess Christ him self. So
that you see, I do figuratively expound these words, and not grossly;
whereunto I am drawn partly by these three general Rules heretofore put
down, and partly by the very dealings of the Papists themselves; who do
not, neither in the Wine of the Supper, the other part of this Sacrament:
neither in Baptism, the other Sacrament of the Church (which two alone God
has given unto it) acknowledge any such gross transubstantiation or change;
and yet I am sure, there is as great reason why that alteration should be as
well in the Water of Baptism, and in the Wine of the Supper, as in the Bread
thereof: If there be not, let them show any cause, to the contrary if they can.

There rests now the third objection, taken from the omnipotency or
almighty power of our savior Christ pressed after this manner. Is not Christ
God, and so by that means omnipotent? And can not he perform the truth of
that he has spoken? To this I answer; that though we should grant it as true,
that Christ, as he is God, can do all things, and be every where: yet we know
that as he is Man, he can not, and therefore the question between the
transubstantiators and us, being now not of the presence of Christ's deity in
the Sacrament, but of the presence of his human body, we say, that if we
should grant this, yet could it no whit at all prejudice us; neither could
they gain their cause thereby: for unless they can prove Christ as he is
Man, to be omnipotent, and every where (which thing they shall never be able
to do) they have said as much as if they had said nothing.

But let us for reasoning sake grant, that Christ as he is Man, were
omnipotent, even as God the Father is; does it therefore follow, that because
he can do every thing, he therefore either will do the same, or indeed does
it? I suppose no. For besides, that in Schools it is commonly said, a posse ad
esse, the consequence or reason is not good, which were sufficient answer to
this frivolous and vain objection. Besides this I say, we that are truly
taught of God; do know, that though we believe that the Lord can do what so
ever pleases him both in heaven and in earth; which serves wonderfully to
magnify his almighty power, and greatly to strengthen our weak faith; yet we
believe firmly, that he will not only do nothing, but that he can not do
any thing in regard of us, contrary to that will of his, that he has revealed
for us in his word. And the reason of this is not the abridgement or shortning
of his power (for be it far from mortal men, to presume in any thing, though
never so little, to restrain the eternal power of the immortal God) but
because his will and power in respect of us, be so conjoined and knit together
that look whatsoever he will do, that he can do; and look whatsoever he can
do, that he will do. To make this plain by an example. We all know, that God
in respect both of his self, and that all things are possible with him, can
if he would, save all men: and yet we fear not to say, that in respect of us
he can not save all men, because we know by his revealed will, that he will
not save them all: For some must be the vessels ordained for destruction, as
well as others, vessels of salvation and eternal life. The like may we say for
this matter of the Supper; that though we were persuaded, that Christ as he is
man, might be every where; yet because he has revealed in his Word, that he
will have his body to be circumscriptible and tied to a place, to wit,
Heaven; yea, which is more; to a certain place in Heaven, that therefore it
can be no injury at all to him, neither any debasing of his omnipotent power,
to say that now he cannot be bodily in the Sacrament, much less bodily in so
many sacraments, as be celebrated and ministered, in so sundry and infinite
places at one time. And this I think sufficient to all these Objections, being
willing here, to finish this present short Treatise, saving that I have
thought good in this place, to add (even as a challenge to the adverse party,
and as matter of necessary instruction, to such as already see the truth)
these three points following.

1 FIrst, that I am ready in all holy love, further to answer any thing,
that Christianly shall be further objected concerning this Question: I say
Christianly objected; for if any shall either curiously or captiously propound
any thing, I think it most convenient, rather to leave such in their own
folly, for a season, till it please God at some one time or other, even
extraordinarily as it were, to make them to see the same, if it shall so please
him, then to spend time, and to travail in satisfying of their vain
curiosity.

2 Secondly, that though this point of Transubstantiation brought in by
Papists, be great and gross, concerning the matter of the Supper, yet that
they fail not alone herein, in that behalf, but hold many mo errors
concerning that point, some of them as palpable, if not more gross and
blasphemous then this, and some of them less: A few I will rehearse, desiring
others to consider of the rest.

1 First, in that they make it a sacrifice Propitiatory for the quick and the
dead, utterly euacuating by that means, and making of no force, the eternal
Priesthood of our Savior Christ, which consists in this, that he has once
for all, upon the Alter of the Cross, offered up himself unto God the Father,
a full and sufficient Sacrifice, for the sins of the people, as the Apostle
plainly proves in the 7.8.9. and 10. Chapters of his Epistle to the
Hebrews: But no marvel, that they should annihilate his Offices, which
destroy his person; as these men do, by confounding the proprieties of either
nature, as has been before decreed.

2 Secondly, there is but a little less Leven in that matter, that they hold
of Concountancie, by which they have spoiled the people of the use of the
Cup; which both by Christ's own institution, and by his express
Commandment, saying; Drink ye all of this; does in all truth and
uprightness belong unto them: and all this they have done under this shadow,
that because no body is without blood, and they have before (presupposing, that
the Bread is turned into the Body; as indeed if men will presuppose, either
impossible or untrue things, every thing will follow of it) eaten the body,
therefore must it needs follow, that they have drunk also his blood. But I
know not, whether I should blame them for their beastliness, or reprove them
for their pride, that dare thus presu^ptuously alter the Lords very Ordinance
and Institution.

3 Thirdly, their Adoration is as corrupt and filthy, while they make men to
commit gross and palpable Idolatry, in falling down before a piece of Bread:
(what do I say? I know not whether I may call it by that name or no, for it
may be disputed of whether their Masse-cake be Bread) and worshipping a
Wafer-cake, the work of men's hands. But suppose it were Christ's body as they
say; yet I affirm that they may not adore Christ's body alone, yea, and that
they cannot worship the same of it self, without horrible idolatry, because
it is a creature. For though it be true, that Christ as he is God, is to be
worshipped as his Father; yea, and Christ God and Man in one person is to be
adored, yet we cannot without great sin, and grievous offense against God and
his word, worship the humanity or manhood of our Savior Christ only.

4 To speak of the reservation, circumgestation, or carrying of it about, with
many other odd toys of their own invention, and largely to lay out the
inconveniences thereof, would require some proper and fit discourse for that
purpose; but I will reserve it till another time, making haste now, to that
which shall be, as the last, so in my judgment, not the least profitable part of
this Treaty: And that is, how a man should draw near unto such reverent
mysteries, wherein such excellent graces are offered unto him, and how he may
best come to reap and receive fruit and comfort by the same. All that a man
is to deal in, concerning this last point, may be well reduced into three
short heads or Titles.

1 First, what he is to do before communicating or receiving of this
Sacrament: and this I will call in one term, Preparation.

2 Secondly, what he is to do or think upon in the time, and at the very
instant of receiving: and this I will name, Meditation

3 Thirdly, what he is to do after the time of receiving: and this I will
call, Action or Practice.

1 Preparation, which is the first, respects either God or man: Now, that
which concerns God, is comprehended under true Faith, and unfeigned
Repentance, as that which concerns man, is comprised under sound love. And
I call them sound true, and unfeigned, and yet not perfect, because perfection
properly signifying that, unto which nothing can be added, cannot be found in
man during this life. And this I speak, partly to stop the mouths of such as
dream of a perfection in this life; and partly to teach us that our
imperfections should not hinder us from drawing nigh thereto, (so that we do
not foster and food our selves in them,) seeing that otherwise the Sacrament
should stand us in stead, if we were not imperfect; for it is a help and
succor ordained by God, against our natural infirmity and weakness. By
Faith, I mean not only a general belief, of all the Canonical books of the
old and new Testament; or a grounded knowledge alone of the points and
principles of Christian religion, but an assured persuasion, that whatsoever
the Lord has revealed in his Word, as he has done the same for others, so he
has done it particularly for me. So that this Faith is necessary to him that
shall communicate, both because that otherwise he being on the earth, cannot
take hold of Christ in heaven: for faith is it by which he may apply unto
himself particularly Christ Jesus and all his merits, to the assured feeling
of the free pardone and full forgiveness of all his sins of the one side,
and the imputation of Christ's righteousness on the other side, and also that
thereby he may be assured, that that which he does, either in the
administration or participation of that holy action, is acceptable before God:
for without Faith, it is impossible to please him. Which properties indeed, or
effects rather, if a man only have them, shall make his Faith to differ from
all the vain imaginations of Devils and wicked men whatsoever.

By Repentance, I understand a sincere hatred of all our former sins and
iniquities whatsoever, and a sound love of all righteousness and well doing,
proceeding from the right reverence and loving fear of the majesty of God in
our hearts: which holy affection, does every day by little and little work in
us, the forsaking of our selves, and the subduing of the sinful lusts and
affections of our own flesh, to the end, that we may wholly resign our
selves, to be guided and governed by the spirit of God, in the sincere service,
and worship of his Majesty. So that he which feels himself truly and
unfeignedly sorrowful for his former iniquities, not only loathing his
sins, but even himself for his sins sake, and caryeth with him this holy
purpose, never through Gods assistaunce, to commit the same, or any such like:
may not only be assured of his unfeigned repentance, and so by consequent of
the forgiveness of his sins, but also with boldness, and yet not
withstanding with reverence in respect of God, and with humbleness of mind,
in respect of himself, draw near to the partaking of these holy mysteries.

By Love, which is the thing that concerns men, I do not only understand
the unfeigned pardoning and forgiving of others, that have any manner of way
trespassed against us, which is a sure seal and earnest penny as it were,
that our sins are forgiven us before God: but also sound reconciliation,
after offenses committed, one of us toward another, which is a certain
pledge, that our prayers, and all other good things that come from us, are in
Christ's obedience accepted before God: yea, I mean further by Love, which is
an inward affection of the heart, the sincere and outward testifying of the
same, by words, deeds, countenaunces, and other means, as the Lord shall give
occasion, and our ability will serve to express the same, and that not to our
friends only, or to our enemies also, which is somewhat more; but generally
to all men, though to some in greater measure; as to the Household of faith,
our Wives, Children, and Parents, etc. and to some in less measure, as to
those that be yet without and be somewhat further off by nature and kindred.

Meditation, which is the second thing, and is to be used specially in the time
of the celebration of the Lords Supper, consists chiefly in these points:
the shedding of his blood, etc. and all for our transgressions.

1 God sets before the eyes of our Faith in that holy action, first,
Christ's death and passion, together with the benefits and effects which we
reap thereby; and namely, the remission and forgiveness of our sins.

2 Secondly, the full and spiritual nourishment, that through Christ we have,
both in the outward and inward man, even to the hope of eternal life.

3 Thirdly, the mystical union, that is betwixt Christ and his Church, he
dwelling in our hearts by faith, and we thereby being made members of his
body, of his flesh, and of his bones.

4 Fourthly and lastly, the holy unity and agreement, that is and ought to be
continued amongst all the members of his Church, whatsoever, or wheresoever
they be.

The third and last thing, which I call Action, and is to be performed after
the receiving of the Lords Supper, consists,

1 First, in earnest Prayer unto God not only for the lively feeling of these
graces exhibited, but also for the fructifying of the word of God and his
Sacraments in our hearts; and that not for the time present alone, but even
for the whole raze and course of our life.

Secondly, in humble thanksgiving, for the inestimable riches and treasures
of grace and of goodness, which it pleases him in his Church, and namely by
the use of his Word and Sacraments, not only to offer, but also to bestow
upon his people, the particulars whereof, are before recited. And hereunto we
may be provoked by consideration of this, that the Lord freely and of his own
goodness, gives us those merits, not only when we had not deserved the
least of them, but even then when every one of us, had deserved eternal death
and condemnation to be powered forth upon us and ours.

3 And lastly, in care and conscience of a holy conversation, that seeing
Christ dwells in our hearts by faith, and we have our spiritual life and
being from him, that therefore we should so live, as we may not only
glorify him in this life, but that when the days of our wearisome pilgrimage
shall be ended, we may be glorified with him in eternal blessedness: which
thing, the Lord grant us, even for his crucified Christ's sake: to whom with
the Father and the holy Ghost, three persons and one eternal God, be given all
honor, praise, power, and glory, both of us, and of all people, even now and
at all times, for ever and ever. So be it.

A Prayer to be said before a man repair to the partaking of the Lords Supper.
O Eternal GOD and most merciful Father, I thy poor and unworthy servant,
do must humbly beseech thee, in Jesus Christ thy dear Sons name, and for
his sake, graciously in his death and obedience, to pardone and forgive me all
my sins what so ever, which at any time, or by any manner of mean, I have
committed against thy Majesty, or any other. Seal up in my heart, O Lord,
this great benefit of the free pardon and full forgiveness of all my sins,
by the assured testimony of thy blessed spirit, bearing record unto my spirit,
that I am thy Child, and by unfeigned pardoning and forgiving of others, which
any manner of way have offended against me. Make the death and resurrection of
thy Son so effectual in me, that I may not only feel and find in the
same, the forgiveness of my sins, and the hope of eternal salvation: but
that I may be instructed thereby all the days of my life, more and more to die
unto sin, and daily more and more to live unto righteousness of life and holy
conversation. And for as much as through thy goodness I have purposed this
day, to communicate in the use of thy Word and Sacraments, I beseech thee good
Father, to prepare my heart, and to open the ears of my understanding, that I
may not only reverently and profitably hearken to thy voice, speaking unto me
out of thy word, laboring all the days of my life, to conform my self in
practice to the obedience thereof; but also, that I may fruitfully be partaker
of the fruits and effects of the death and passion of thy dear Son, which
it pleased thee in this Sacrament to offer unto me. To this end and purpose, I
beseech thee to grant, that I be not carried away in the contemplation and
consideration of the earthly and corruptible things objected therein to my
senses, but that my Faith may be set up and raised, to the beholding and
assured feeling of those Graces, which it pleases thee by the same, to offer
unto me. Give me grace, good Lord, to bring with me a steadfast Faith in the
truth of thy promises, that by it as by an eye, I may behold, and by the same,
as by a hand, I may apprehend Jesus Christ thy Son, sitting at thy right
hand, to be my only and continual iustifier, sanctifier, and redeemer. Grant
me grace also, to bring with me, as an earnest, hatred of all my former euilles
whatsoever; so a sincere love of all righteousness and well-doing, that I by
the power of thy spirit, crucifying the Old man with the lusts and
concupiscences thereof, specially such as bear the greatest sway in me, may be
strengthened in the new man; daily to think, speak, and do those things,
which may be acceptable and well pleasing in thy godly presence. And I beseech
thee further, to give me grace to bring with me, sound and sincere love
toward all, yea, even toward mine enemies, that I may not only forget and
forgive all the injuries and wrongs that they have devised, said, or done,
against me: but also pray earnestly unto thy Majesty for them, and purchase
and procure their welfare and good, by all the means I can. Grant, O dear
Father, that I being purged from the filth of sin, may be made a fit
receptacle and dwelling place for thee and thy Son, to come and dwell in; so
that spending my days in reverence of thy Majesty, in the benefiting of my
breathren, and procuring mine own good, I may finish my course in thy faith,
and so be made partaker of eternal glory, through Jesus Christ thy Son, my
Lord and only Savior. So be it.

A prayer to be privately used, after the public exercises of the Church; as
the preaching of the word, and the administration of the Lords Supper shall be
ended.
I Do unfeignedly confess (good Father) that the graces are very great, yea,
most excellent, which thou have vouchsafed this day to bestow upon me,
wretched sinner that I am, by the use and partaking of thy holy Word and
Sacraments: and namely for that it has pleased thee thereby to increase my
knowledge, to confirm my Faith, to assure me that Jesus Christ thy dear
Son, has not only died for me, but also given him self to be my spiritual
nourishment to eternal life and salvation, with innumerable such other
benefits and blessings: For these, and whatsoever other mercies, which thy
Majesty has freely bestowed upon me, I do yield thee the humblest thanks
and heartiest praise, that possibly I can; beseeching thee to accept me, and
this my Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, according to the measure, that
thou mercifully have bestowed upon me. And because I feel my self, thorough
the cursed corruption of mine own nature, woonderfully inclined to the
forgetfulness of thy goodness, I beseech thee to grave these things in my
heart with a claw of Adamant, and to imprint them there, that by the sight
thereof, and meditation therein, I may be provoked, daily more and more to
magnify the multitude of thy mercies, which do not only bestow upon me,
these great and wonderful graces; but even then, when by the means of my
sins, I had deserved eternal condemnation, have graciously given me the
same. And I pray thee further, to give me grace (good Lord) to express this my
thankfulness toward thee, not in words only, but also in the deeds of a
holy conversation, that I daily increasing, and growing in a sound Faith, which
works by love, and brings forth all good works, may order and direct my
whole life, to the advancement of thy glory, the edification of my breathren,
and mine own eternal comfort at the last, through Jesus Christ thy Son, my
Lord and only Savior. Amen.

FINIS.

