THE GODLY AND CHRISTIAN DECEASE of the Illustrious and High-borne PRINCE,
MAVRITIVS of NASSAV, Prince of ORANGE, of happy Memory.

For the comfort and edification of all true CHRISTIANS.

First written in Dutch, by Master JOHN BOGERMAN, Minister of the word of God,
at Leeuwarden: And Now Translated into English.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Nathanael Newbery, and are to be sold at his shop
at the sign of the Star, in Popes head Palace, and under Saint Peter's
Church in Cornehill, 1625.

We here underwritten, professors of Divinity in the University of Leyden,
having read and examined this Relation of the Christian decease of the
Illustrious and Highborn Prince Maurice of Nassau, Prince of Orange; written
by the worshipful Doctor, John Bogerman, being the very words which his
Princely Excel: being deadly sick, spoke; do declare by these presents, that
we do hold this Relation to be very necessary to be published in Print; not
doubting but it will be very acceptable unto all impartial Readers, and will
be read with great edification of all persons, both high and low, and will not
only serve them for a pattern, but also as a motive to stir them up unto
hearty Repentance and true faith in Jesus Christ, to the glory of God, and the
salvation of their own souls.

Datum 26. Maij 1625. IOH. POLIANDER. ANT. WALaeVS. ANDREAS RIVERTVS. ANTONIUS
THYSIVS.


To the High and Mighty Lords THE ESTATES GENERAL of the united Provinces. AND
To the High-borne Prince, FREDERICK HENRY, Prince of Orange. And also To the
Illustrious Lord, ERNEST CASIMIR, Count of Nassau, Catzenelnbogen, etc.
MOst High and mighty, and most gracious Lords, I do present unto your Excel:
and by you unto all faithful Inhabitants of these united Provinces, the
description of the Christian decease of the Illustrious and High-borne Prince,
Maurice of Nassau, Prince of Orange, etc. Both, whose life and death, shall be
of immortal memory. This is a small matter in regard of my self and my
labor, but very great in respect of that great Prince, who does here speak
his last words, in a matter of greatest moment, and who does here fight the
greatest fight that can befall, and so does finish the greatest work that can
be done on earth, and after his labor is ended, we see him go from misery
into joy and rest, leaving the whole world in a tumult of unrest. It has been
always held a commendable custom to make known the last words and actions of
great personages, that it might serve for an example unto others: therefore all
impartial people shall understand, that it is more then reason, to publish and
make known unto the world, the last words and deeds of the High-renowned Lord,
the Prince of Orange; especially since it is both of high and low so much
desired and longed for, that all true-hearted people (who have received the
spirit of impartiality, may judge, whether among all the words of his Excel:
any be to be found, that are not very religiously spoken, and ought of every of
us to be followed. We may well say, the Lord has loved this Prince vniill the
end. In his life he has made him a pattern of all heroicke and Military
actions, and Politic wisdom: in his death he has in an extraordinary
manner made him an object of his mercy, and an example of Christian Piety and
Godliness. In his life time he gave him the victory over his bodily and
outward enemies, and at his death he made him extraordinarily victorious,
triumphing over his spiritual enemies. So guiding him by his holy spirit, that
with an extraordinary resolute courage, he did despise all earthly things,
saying many times: I will not be troubled with any worldly matters.

So that leaving the world, and the heavy burden of his weighty affairs
together, he did wholly apply himself to fight this spiritual fight: as
wisely and courageously as ever he did in temporal combats. For in all his
spiritual actions he did most look at that, whereat we most stumble, when we
have to do with the Lord, Our Sins, which being put quite from us, we
obtain free access unto the Lord, yea, we become familiar with him, as the
child with the father. Blessed is he that gets the practice of this; In this
work his P. Excel: has followed the steps of the most Valiantest Champions
which have been among the people of God. As, David, Daniel, Esaias, Jeremy, and
others, Whereof we have special examples in the Psalms, where we see that
Gods children having to do with God, do so often look upon their sins, and
so humble themselves therewith, that thereby afterward they come to receive in
their hearts a filial faith, fear, and obedience. His P. Excel: did know
that our spiritual enemy, which we bear about us, was overcome, and that
death had lost her sting, and hell her victory. This enemy, Sin, we do
overcome: First, by true repentance, and do hate him as our deadlyest enemy;
Secondly, when we by true faith, cast them upon the shoulders of that unspotted
Lamb Jesus Christ, who can only bear them, and carry them away; and thirdly,
when on the contrary we become lovers of righteousness, and whatsoever is
acceptable unto the Lord. These three perticulars may every one find that is
any thing experienced in holiness, that the Holy Ghost has in aspeciall
manner wrought in this Prince. His Excel: knowing that there is but one way to
heaven for the greatest potentate, and the meanest subject, has not flattered
himself, nor sought to justify his sins, but has, as one of the least of
Gods servants, with an humble heart and unfeigned repentance, confessed them
before the Lord, and has, in true faith taken his refuge only to Jesus
Christ, in whom his soul found rest. And thereunto he so often declared his
hearty desire, to serve the Lord better then he confessed to have done, as the
Lords great benefits unto him did require.

And this is the special mercy of God, which all good christians may boast of,
that the Lord (who knew the good desire of his Excel:) having freed him from
all worldly hindrances, for a crown unto all his laudable deeds, has
suffered his Excel: to use such a solemn and holy action as this is, not
only for the rest and salvation of his own soul, but also for the
edification of all good christians. And therefore I do not without cause say
once more that the Lord has loved this Prince unto the end. For I do from my
heart confess that in all the times I visited his Excel: His Excel: did so
behave himself, that I did not once go from him, without being edified, not
doubting but it will do the like to all good christians that shall happen to
read it. Wherefore I do comfort my self, and do praise the Lord, that
within this my weakness of body, wherewith I did not think to have done any
more public service, he has so strengthened me, to do this spiritual
service unto this famous Prince, and through him unto all good people in
general, who I trust in their sorrow, which without doubt they have for the
loss of this Valiant Champion, will find themselves comforted, when they
shall hear from his Excel: mouth so many Christian speeches, and shall see
him dye the death of the Righteous. Whereby I hope, (that we may so say) he
shall have left and pronounced a blessing over the church of God, and this
state. As also in particular unto his Excel: Illustrious successor, which we
with true repentance (according to the example of his Excel:) will expect from
the merciful God, beseeehing him in the mean time, for Christ Jesus sake,
mercifully to pardon our crying sins, and plentifully to power into our
hearts the grace of repentance, and not yet leave his Heritage, nor to let the
Rod of his affliction to lie too long upon our backs.

This may comfort all good Christians in their affliction, who at this present
live in grief and persecution, that this famous Prince did bear such
affection unto them, saying, when he heard any good news from abroad: That
will be good for gods children.

Which his Excel: declared likewise to bear unto the church of God, and to
the preservation of the true religion, (which he has sufficiently shown unto
the whole world by many actions) agreing with that which the Lord Ambassador of
his Majesty of Great Britain, Sir Dudley Carleton was pleased in his speech
to relate unto your H. Dignities from the very mouth of his P. Excel: which
his Excel: also was pleased to communicate unto me, which words were these.
These be two great Maximies, the preservation of the reformed Religion, and the
wars against Spain.

Upon which two heads his Excel: did mean that the welfare of the countries
depended, I have in this relation exactly set down the very words of his
Excel: as he spoke them, which when I came home I set down upon a piece of
paper, and have conferred them with those that were present when his Excel:
spoke them.

That which I spoke, I have set down as I thought best for edification, at the
first visitation I did not intend to have troubled his Excel: so much, as
having experience of the disability of a sick person, but his Excel: detained
me, partly with extraodinary attention he had to here the word of God, and
partly with his questions which he propounded. The other visitations were not
so long in regard his Excel: grew every day more weaker and weaker, and
therefore when he could not speak any longer, we betook our selves unto
prayers, expecting a blessed end.

I thought good to direct this work unto your High and Mighty Dignities, with
whom his Excel: during the time of his government has conuersed, who are
witnesses of his laudable actions, and partakers of his immortal praises: and
who his Excel: has instituted Executors of his Princely will and testament,
so that of right it does belong unto your honors: and without doubt, not
only this, but also the perticulars of the religious decease of this most
excellent Prince will be pleasing unto your honors, with whom your Highnesses
have ever lived in such a near correspondencie, and have yet by your honnors
Committies, (namely by the Honorable Lords, Henric of Essen, from Gelderland,
Nicholas van-Bouckhorst, Lord of Nortwich, from Holland, Rienck van-Burmania,
from Freesland, Assueer van-Harsolte, from Ouer-Isse) visited and remained with
his Excel: until his end. Concerning your P. Excel: Gracious Lord, who has
a special interest in this labor, as being the only brother unto the
deceased Prince, whom he has loved with a brotherly love, (as is manifest)
and besides, heir of his Princely dignity, and his successor in that great and
weighty calling, being a little before his Excel: death, to the comfort and
joy of his Excel: and unto all true christians, united in matrimony with the
Illustrious Princess Amelia, Princess of Orange, Countess of Solms, who,
with her Excel: the Princess of Portugal were both together with his Excel:
the day before he dyed, and were witnesses of his Princely and christian
carriage. Wherein her Excel: did take such pleasure, that she did joyfully
glory therein unto the other Lords, saying, That it was a blessed thing for
every Christian, to dispose himself so well at the time of his death. The like
did her Excel: the Princess of Portugal your Excel: sister, That such a
christian carriage came from God, and was his gift, which the Lord Agathius,
Lord of Dhona, rehearsed unto me from the mouth of her Excel: Your Excel:
shall not only find in this relation the christian and religious decease of
this worthy Prince, but also that which may serve your P. Excel: and other
Lords, for an example of imitation, and comfort, in the matter of salvation,
being of more value then all the transitory goods of this world.

Therefore I do humbly beseech your high and mighty P. Excel: graciously to
accept of this my mean labor, and I will pray unto the Almighty God, to
preserve your High and Mighty P. Excel: in union together, to govern you with
his Holy Spirit, and so to bless and prosper you, in this time of trouble of
the whole christian world, that you may happily and courageously preserve the
free liberty of the Gospel in these countries, and so to supply the places of
the deceased Prince, and Count William, etc. who are now both at rest with the
Lord, and herewith I turn my self to the relation of that which happened
before and at the death of his Excel: Remaining ever more

Your high and mighty P. Excel: most obedient servant in the Lord, Ioannes
Bogermanus.
At the Hage, the 16. of May, 1625.
A TRVE RELATION OF The Godly and Christian decease of the Illustrious and
High-borne Prince, MAVRITIVS of NASSAV, late Prince of Orange, of happy Memory.
A Relation Of that which happened at the first visitation of the Illustrious
Prince of Orange, on Monday the 14. of April, Anno 1625. in the afternoon,
about four of the clock.
WHereas diverse persons of quality, did often times request me, to visit the
Illustrious Prince of Orange, in the time of his sickness, which I feared to
do, in regard of my weakness; yet, not to incommodate my self, and
specially his Excel: I thought (the more, because I very well knew his Excel:
did yet sometimes read Letters, and because I had understood by the
Worshipful Doctor Walleus, professor of Divinity in the University at Leyden,
that his Worship coming from thence, at the request of some of the Lords of
the Council, had visited his Princely Excel: whom after many religious and
godly speeches he had left very well prepared) with a brief and short Letter
of exhortation and comfort, in stead of a parley in presence, to have taken my
leave of his Excel: But as I was busy herewith, Master Secretary Iunius sent
for me to come unto his Excel: who was very desirous to have me come unto him.
Considering that it was Gods will, and knowing it to be my bounden duty, in
regard his Excel: has obliged us so much unto him, I omitted that which I had
in hand, and presently I went with the same messenger that came for me:
Beseeching the Lord to strengthen me, and to grant his blessing, that it might
be for his honor and glory, for the comfort of his Excel: and for the
edification of all good men.

Being come to the Court, and having somewhat rested my self, I was by the
aforesaid Lord Secretary, and the Chamberlain brought into the Chamber where
his Excel: lay, who very kindly entertained me, putting forth his hand and
bid me welcome, and made me to sit down at his Beds side. Whereupon the people
dismissed the Chamber, except the aforesaid Secretary, Doctor Rumpf, and the
Chamberlain, who remained at the Beds-side, to hear and take notice of, all
the speeches that happened, although unseen of his Excel: his P. Excel:
demanded of me, how I did, what sickness I was troubled withal, and whether
I amended, as also of my appetite, meat, drink, and sleep: Of which when I
had satisfied him, his Excel: begun to speak of his own sickness;
demanding of me what Doctor Rumpf thought of it: Which when I had told him, his
Excel: answered, I am of that opinion also. Complaining of his Ague and hot
Fever, which did much trouble him; and it seemed, his Excel: bewailed them
that were constrained to use much Physic. Whereupon I said; we must look
unto God, without whose pleasure there cannot one hair fall from our heads,
and in regard of his divine decree, our time cannot be shortened. Whereupon his
Excel: answered, I hold it to be so also, and I am resolved: Hereby I took
occasion, His Excel: faith of Gods providence.
to show unto his Excel: the misery which man is subject unto in this life,
and how happy we are, that we have that sure comfort which the Lord has so
abundantly revealed unto us in his Gospel. Whereupon his Excel: said, It is
true. Then I said further, You may please to consider, the great mercy God
showed unto your Excel: all the time of your government, making you an
incomparable Prince of your time, whose actions the whole world admires, and
specially in regard the Lord has freed you from so many eminent perils and
dangers, and does now so mercifully show this great favor and mercy unto you,
in visiting you with so Fatherly a chastisement; leading you, as it were with
his hand unto a blessed end, giving you so long and moderate a sickness,
wherein he does continue your understanding and perfect speech, not only to
serve the Country, as your Excel: yet does, but also to practice that which
is for your everlasting salvation: where to the contrary, that good Lord, of
happy memory, Count William Lodwicke of Nassau, at the beginning of his
sickness did loose his speech, his strength, and his understanding: whose
last words were upon the comfort which I spoke unto him, Count Williams last
words in his sickness
LORD be merciful unto me for thy beloved Sons sake; which we miserable
wretches do not in due time consider. Now I do not doubt but your Excel:
does make a good use of this affliction, that you may enjoy the perfect fruits
of the Christian Religion which your Excel: has so long maintained and
propagated; and this fruit is a comfort both in life and death unto our
consciences, consisting herein, that we wretched sinners, may have a reconciled
and merciful God. If the favorable countenance of a King be the life of the
Subjects (as Solomon says) how much the more (said I) is the merciful favor
of God? Then I said further, (considering his Excellency did hearken so
attentively unto me) Gracious Lord, the reformed Religion does most clearly
and profoundly set forth unto us, our misery, and does give us the only and
sovereign remedy against the same, with the only way for our reconciliation
with God, through Jesus Christ his only beloved Son our Savior, who does
bestow all his benefits on them that lay hold upon him in true faith and
repentance, of whom God does testify in the holy Scriptures: Matthew. 13.17.
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; John 14.6.
He is the way, the truth, and the life; No man comes to the Father, but
through him, neither is there salvation in any other: Acts 4.11.
for there is no other name given under heaven whereby we must be saved; 1
Cor. 1.30.
Who of God is made unto us Wisdom and righteousness, 1 Cor. 3.11.
Sanctification and Redemption; For, other foundation can no man lay, then that
which is laid, which is JESUS CHRIST; Acts 13.39. Romans 3 24. Ephesians. 1.7. Col
1.14. John 5.11.
By him every one that believes is justified; By whom we have Redemption and
reconciliation with God through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins:
whereof John witnesses, He that has the Son, has life. And therefore we
can have no other communion with God, then through him; and this is the only,
ancient, true, and everlasting Gospel, which God himself has revealed unto
our Forefathers in Paradise, and afterward by his Patriarchs and Prophets
has published unto his people, by all the ceremonies in the old Testament, and
has sithence in the new Testament so gloriously revealed it unto us Gentiles,
which in fore times were not of the people of God, and do now through his
infinite mercy so abundantly enjoy it.

Hereupon I rehearsed unto his Excel. that the Memorable late Count William
Lodowicke of Nassau, in his sickness received tidings that the Archduke
Albertus, being very sick, went unto the shrine of our Lady, at a place so
called, whereto many go in pilgrimage; Scherpenheuvel, there to receive
according to the Popish custom, remission of his sins, whereat the Noble Count
heartily laughed, rejoicing and praising God (although in faint words) that he
had laid a better foundation in his heart, and had received a better light.
Whereupon his Excel: Notable words of his Excel:
said, Count William had Scherpenheuvel continually with him; His Excel:
thinking that I did not understand him, rehearsed them again more plainer. I
say (said he) beating two or three times upon his breast, Count William had
Scherpenheuvel continually with him: Just said I, Noble Lord, Count William had
no need to go to Scherpenheuvel for comfort, for he had his only comfort
Jesus Christ in his heart: so do I mean too, said his Excel. After these
speeches I showed unto his Excel: the example of Hezekiah, 2 Kings 20. Esaias 38.
whom God by his Prophet caused to be told, That he should put his house in
order, for he should dye and not live. The King was deadly sick, but yet did
not dye, for that was hidden in Gods divine decree, whereupon when the king had
humbled himself before the Lord, the Lord added fifteen years more unto his
life. So (said I) if the Lord should tell your Excel: so, in this sickness,
which is a messenger of God, and a forerunner of death, and death will follow,
but the Lord in his mercy has hidden from us the time when.

Whereupon when his Excellence had given me to understand that he felt he
should dye of this sickness, His Excel: is of opinion that he should dye of
this sickness, and does desire to be prepared for it.
I exhorted him to reconcile himself with God, with whom at this present he
had to do, that he might then with a quiet Conscience, expect whatsoever the
Lord should dispose of his person. Whereupon his P. Excel: answered, So I do,
then I said further, it is requisite that above all things we do humble our
selves before the Lord by reason of our sins which are contrary unto the most
holy commandments of God. And in their nature are abominable in the sight of
the Lord, who are the occasion of Gods wrath, and of all plagues temporal and
Eternal, for which the son of God suffered so much on the Cross. We must
have an upright hatred of them, condemn them and be ashamed of them, and
according to the example of the Saints confess them before the Lord. And the
strickter we are in this particular, and the more we power out our hearts
before the Lord, the more capable we shall be with joy and thankfulness to
receive the riches of Gods mercy.

And when I had showed unto his Excel: some parts of Scripture wherein is
promised mercy and forgiveness of sins unto them that shall truly repent,
his Excel: opened his mouth and said, I have Sinned, and presently after with
a more vehemence, that the very tears stood in his eyes, he said, I have
Sinned grossly: Whereby I was much moved, declaring unto him that this was an
acceptable offering unto the Lord, Psalm. 51.
Such a broken heart will the Lord not despise: Showing him the abundant joy
and comfort all repentant sinners have in the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the
only and perfect atonement for our sins: He is our Righteousness, who can
only stand before the Lord, and he is our life, which I had a little before
more largely insisted upon: but having showed a few more, as, Esaias, 53.1. 1
John 2.1. 2 Hebrews 10. I demanded of his Excel: if in his heart, he did not
comfort himself with them. Whereupon his Excel: with his hands closed,
confessed his faith, saying, I take my refuge unto the great mercy of God: His
Ex: does confess his faith and confidence in Christ Jesus. Phil. 1.6.
And I believe that Jesus Christ died for me on the cross, in whom I put all
my trust: and these words he said twice together. Whereupon I said, this is a
true christian faith, the Lord, from whom all good gifts comes be praised,
that he has given unto your Excel: so great a gift as this faith is, and
grant to fulfill this work in you. Then I said further, in such a heart as
this is, does the Holy Ghost work all desire and love unto righteousness: His
Ex: earnest desire to serve the Lord better then he confessed to have done.
Psalm. 130.
Whereupon his P. Excel: said. It repents me that I have not served the
Lord better then I have done: I confess I have not served him enough: I will
pray him to strengthen me. This (said I) is most Christianly spoken, and so
must all faithful Christians do: If thou O Lord (says David) mark mine
iniquities, O Lord who shall stand? But, mercy is with thee that thou may be
feared.

If there were no mercy with God, no man were able to serve him, but now the
forgiveness of sins is an Article of our christian Faith, we are all
miserable sinners before the Lord, and do all stand in need of his mercy: It
is true said his Excellency. Then I spoke unto his Excel: comforts from the
word of God, that his Excel: might patiently take this cross upon him, not
doubting but that it would be for the comfort and salvation of his soul,
saying, that his Excel: would do well to delight himself in the meditating
upon that great work of God which he did for us, in suffering his Son not
to be an Angel, for Angels, but to be man, for to redeem many, whose manhood,
doctrine, miracles, obedience, bloodshedding death, resurrection, and assention
to heaven is all for our good, only in faith constantly believing them as if
they had here happened before our eyes, and as if we with the Apostles had
seen the word of life with our corporal eyes, 1 John 1.13.
whereof John speaks 1 John 1.1.3. The self same JESUS does now sit at the
right hand of God, desiring and expecting that all those that believe in him,
to be with him, and to behold his glory, of which glory in regard of our souls
after death, as also in regard both of soul and body at the day of judgment,
John 17.24.
I rehearsed unto his Excel: certain places of Scripture: Whereupon when his
Excel: had spoken these words, His Ex: words of the joys of heaven.
We cannot conceive this, it is above apprehension, I said, the Angels
themselves cannot conceive this great wonderful work of God, but do delight
in the contemplation thereof: We must believe and admire it, giving thanks
unto the Lord that he has revealed so much unto us as does (against the misery
which we have in this life) in some measure give us a taste of the joys of
the life to come: and thereupon I rehearsed unto his Excel: what joy and
gladness the Apostles had upon the Mount, when they did but only see a
glympse of the heavenly glory; and so I alluded also that many times in my
sickness I was therewith so rejoiced and comforted, that I felt a taste of
the heavenly joys within me.

Whereupon his Excel: enquired for some places of Scripture which I had
mentioned unto him, especially of those that spoke of the Prayer of Christ, and
of the joys of the life to come, which I repeated unto him, telling him, that
he should not disturb himself too much, and if he could not endure much
speech, to employ his mind with good thoughts, or if he could to let some body
read by him that which should fall into his Excel: mind, for the word of God
is fruitful: and so here with I thought to have taken my leave, excusing my
self, fearing least I should have been ouer-trouble-some unto his Excel: but
his Excel: detained me longer with these questions, There be some, said he,
that have much in their mouths, but they have no deeds, their words and their
deeds do not agree, and such there be many.

Whereunto I answered that those kind of people were of two sorts, some are
but hipocrites which do not mean with their hearts what they say, but do
only seek to please men: those be but like painted tombs, of whom Christ
speaks. The Gospel is like unto a net which catches both good and bad
fishes. In the Lords field grows both wheat and tares, and therefore we must
not be offended at it, for such there has been in the Apostles times, and
ever will be. Verywwell (said his Excel:) those have it not in their hearts,
but when they repent they shall be saved. These people are dead in their sins
(said I) they have no spiritual life, and are not yet borne again, and if
they will be saved they must be made alive by the spirit of God, and be borne
again. But it is otherwise with them that have a good resolution in their
hearts and thereupon vow to perform it, although the deed do fail them,
they may stumble and fall, but the one more then the other, yea they may fall
heavily, whereof we have examples in the word of God these have the spirit of
God and are borne anew, but they are feeble and weak, like unto a weakly man,
he has a good will to go, but he cannot so fully perform it, and they are
grieved for these imperfections and are sorry for them. The Apostle himself,
shows us the inward combats between the flesh and the Spirit; for, what I
would, that do I not, but what I hate that do I. Romans 7.


The spirit of God is not always a like, for as the wind does sometimes blow
harder then other, so it is with the spirit of God, and God does deal thus
with his children, to humble them and make them know that it is not in their
strength, but that it is a special gift of his grace. The seed that falls
into the ground does bring forth a several quantity of fruit, in some a
hundred, in some sixty, and in some but thirty. Christ will not break a
bruised reed, neither will he quench smoking flax, and therefore the Lord
does not despise such. We are all weak, and are to strive with flesh and blood
all the days of our life, but this fight does not happen always alike,
sometimes when we trust too much to our own power, and do neglect the means
which the Lord has ordained to preserve us, the Lord does give the Devil
leave to tempt us, and this the Lord does do, that we (being lifted up again)
might confess our weakness, and be the more careful of our ways, as we
may see by the examples of David and Peter, and in the mean time they that
turn unto the Lord and believe in him, have eternal life.

Hereupon his P. Excel: said, So do I understand it also, but, there be some
that think they can have faith and repentance when they please, they think it
is in their power, but I know it must all come from God, and it is he that must
give it. It is true, said I, your Excel: says very well, and he unto whom
the Lord does give it, does feel it, and does show it according to the measure
as he has received it: but they that let themselves be persuaded they can have
it at their pleasure, are deceived; for who is he that has a spark of Gods
grace in his heart, that would not be willing to be released from his sins, and
to do good continually, if he could do it at his pleasure? The daily
experience teaches all good Christians that do thoroughly examine their lives,
that many times they cannot do as they would do. I have a little before
showed unto your Excel: the example of the Apostle Paul upon this subject, who
complains, that he cannot do what he would do. It is the Lord that works
in us both the will and the deed; for we have not one good thought of our
selves, Christ says. Without me you can do nothing, we have not so much as
the power over our natural body, much less over our spiritual.

Then his Excel: said, There be some that would feign have Repentance, but
they cannot obtain it; whereupon I answered, they that have a true and hearty
desire unto repentance, that is, the spirit of newness of life, those have it
already, and shall have their desire; such hungry and thirsty souls the Lord
will satisfy, says Christ, partly here in this life, and perfectly in the
life to come. And to this purpose tends that sweet call of Christ, Matthew. 11.
Come all unto me, ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you.
Hereby I took occasion to relate unto his Excel: the examples of two men, the
one a Minister, who in his sickness, could not in his heart be persuaded to rely
upon the mercy of God, which he would so feign have done; the other, of a man
who in his sickness complained of a hard and stony heart, not being able to
repent of his sins which formerly he had often done. His Excel: demanded
how it went with them: the first (said I) was of a Minister demanded, if he
could not remember whether in former times he had rejoiced in the mercies of
God, (he said) yes, many times, then said the Minister unto him, Be of good
comfort, when that dark cloud and hour of trial shall be past, it will come
again, and you shall have your desire, at which words the man so rejoiced, and
presently praised the Lord, and thanked the Minister who spoke this comfort
unto him; saying, this comfort could not come into my mind. The other man had
a Minister to come unto him, and entreated him to pray unto the Lord for him,
and he himself would pray also as much as he could, which he having diverse
times done, found himself to be altered, wherefore he praised God, this said
his Excel: was well done. Then his Excel: demanded for some Chapters which
treated of the Lords Prayer, and of the joys of heaven; whereof having
satisfied his Excel: I took my leave of him, wishing him ease in this
affliction, and a blessed success from the same: wherefore his Excel: did
thank me, saying, that he could very well endure to have me come oftener unto
him.

This action lasted above an hour, he being yet reasonable strong and able to
speak, and was very desirous to hear the word of God.

Between the first and the second visitation on the fasting day, being the 6.
of April, I understood of Doctor Rumpf, Doctor unto the King of Bohemia, that
his Excel: had his Bible lying open before him, of which I was very glad, and
considering that when I was with his Excel: he was twice desirous to have
some places of Scripture read unto him; not knowing if ever I should see his
Excel: any more, I thought good to send unto him a note of certain Chapters
for him to read, in regard he found himself to be reasonable well, that so
he might employ his time in this exercise: and whereas the said Doctor at that
time was to go unto his Excel: I requested his worship to take this note
along with him, and deliver it unto his Excel: entreating him to take notice
of his Excel: disposition, and accordingly, either to deliver, or detain it.

A note for his Excel:
Examples of comfort for repentant sinners, Luke chap. 15. and chap. 7. from
the 36. verse to the end, Psalm. 51. and 130.

To comfort us in the love of Jesus Christ, and to stir up our hearts unto
holy meditations, John 17. Romans 5.

To withdraw our hearts from earthly things, and to move us to the desire of
the joys of heaven, the two last Chapters of the Revelation.

The next day the said Doctor told me that he had delivered it unto his
Excel: himself, who presently laid it in his Bible.

The second Visitation.
ON the 12. of April, being Tuesday, in the forenoone about ten of the
clock, her Excel: the Princess of Portugal, requested me by a Messenger,
to come unto the Prince: In regard it was not likely that I should stay there
long, I went, and was presently brought unto his Excel: where I found not
only the said Princess of Portugal, but the Princess of Orange that now is,
with a great company of Lords, Nobles, Officers, the Lord Vosbergen, and others
unknown unto me, being come to his Excel: and being set down at his beds
side, I demanded of him how he felt himself; whereupon he answered, I am well
resolved: thrusting up his Cap from his eyes, he settled himself to talk with
me, and presently spoke these words. I have read those Chapters which you sent
unto me, they were very excellent Chapters, I do thank you for them, but I
cannot remember them all: I cannot repeat any particulars, but I have
remembered the substance, is not that well? Yes, gracious Lord (said I) but your
Excel: has troubled your self too much, and that was not my intent, for
which I sent them; for if your Excel: remember, I told you, you should have a
verse or two read unto you, of that which should come into your Excel: mind,
that so you might employ your mind in meditating on good thoughts, and not to
read whole Chapters, which were too tedious: But sithence your Highness has
pleased so to do, the time is very well bestowed, and I am sure it will do
your Excel: good, for it is the holy word of God, written for our comfort.
Your Excel: does very well to keep the substance in your mind, which is the
point of true Repentance, and the comfort thereof, and therein consists all?

Repentance has these three branches, 1 A true and unfeigned sorrow for sin.
2 Faith in Christ Jesus. 3 A holy resolution to amend our lives.


Whereupon his Excel: said, His Excel: does confess his sins, and
bewaileth that his repentance is not so well as it ought to be.
you do very well sometimes to come and visit me: And then his Excel: spoke
with a special earnestness: This is all that troubles me, whether my
repentance be sufficient enough for my sins, for I have offended the Lord
grievously, and I constantly believe if I have true repentance, that al my
sins are forgiven; for Christ his sake I will pray the Lord to give me true
repentance, more then I have yet had: Hereupon I said, your Excel: must not
presume upon your Repentance, but with an humble and lowly heart, confess and
bewail your sins, as your Excel: also without doubt not fainedly, but from
your heart, as it appears, and GOD knows it; and therefore your Excel:
repentance is conformable to the repentance of al true repentant sinners, which
are set down unto us in the word of God. Whereupon I did rehearse unto his
Excel: the very words which the children of God had used at the time of their
repentance, Esaias 6.4.6. Ierem. 14.20. of David, Psalm 32.5.38.5.19.51. of the
Publicane, Luke 18.13. of the Prodigal Son, Luke 15.18.19. etc. And so I put
his Excel: also in mind of that which he had read in the aforesaid Chapters.
I said further, it is a great matter to trouble ones self in the perfection of
our repentance: the man in the Gospel said, Lord, I believe, Mark 9.24.
help thou mine unbelief.

Your Excel: knows, that here in this world we can have no perfection,
neither of repentance, nor of faith: The godly lament their imperfections, and
so does your Excel: The most of our perfection in this life (says an ancient
Father) consists in the acknowledgement and the bewayling of our
imperfections. Therefore the more you are, (according to the example of all the
faithful servants of God) troubled with your sins, (as appears by the
trouble your Excel: has of the sufficiency of your Repentance) so much the
more may you assure your self, that your repentance is upright and acceptable
unto the Lord: David says, I confess my sins; Psalm 38.
for there is no rest in my bones, because of my sins: for mine iniquities
are gone over my head, and as a weighty burden they are too heavy for me. Your
Excel: must also consider the subtilty of the devil, who as an enemy of our
salvation, commonly toward our latter end does most of al strive with us; Esaias
1 18. 1 John 1.7.
but your Excel: must likewise know, that although our sins were as Crimson,
they shall be made as white as Snow, even through the precious blood of Jesus
Christ, which cleanses us from all our sins: and therefore consequently that
our Faith and Repentance is imperfect. Upon such repentance as this your
Excel: repentance is, the Lord will without doubt work in your heart a
special joy and comfort, and so I showed unto his Excel: from the Psalms of
David, that his repentance was true repentance: and when I had rehearsed some
places of Scripture to confirm it, and to comfort his Excel: he answered, I
will pray the Lord to strengthen me: His Ex: is well contented, and is
resolved.
I am now at rest, and am resolved. Whereupon I committed him to the Lord and
took my leave of him, and before I went away, her Excel: the Princess of
Portugal requested me to come in the afternoon again. I said, I was loath to
be over trouble-some unto his Excel: but I was the more emboldned, because
doctor Roseus, Minister of the word of God at the Hage, told me that he had
been with his Excel: and found him very well at rest.

The third visitation.
THe same day about three of the clock in the afternoon their Excellencies
the Princess of Portugal and Orange did let me understand that they were with
the Prince, and that they did expect me there, Whereupon I went, and coming
thither, I found the Prince very weak of body but of good comfort; His Ex: is
of good comfort.
for when I asked his Excel: whether he was well at rest, He answered, yes as
well as ever he was. Then I said, the Lord be praised for it; upon such
repentance and faith as I have found in your Excel: I did expect this mercy
from the Lord, and that according to the promise of Christ, to ease them that
are weary and heavy laden that come unto him; and to give the victory to them
that do fight so well: Such a quiet peace and rest is the life of our souls,
yea, it is the Kingdom of God within us. And here I exhorted his Excel: to
continue so unto the end, rehearsing certain promises, wherein the Lord does
promise the help and continuation of his mercy until the end. We poor
sinners are bound to use the means which the Lord has ordained, but without
the holy Ghost this work cannot be undertaken nor continued. His Excel: said,
So do I hold it to be also; It must all come from God, and I will pray him to
strengthen me. His Ex: christian declaration of Gods mercy.
Hereby I took courrage to speak thus unto his Excel: Gracious Lord, your
Excel: has spoken very religiously, saying, that it must all come from the
Lord, and that you will pray unto the Lord to strengthen you; The Lord will be
prayed or his mercies, and that honor does only belong unto him, and we
ought to do it with a willing mind, and with all cheerfulness, and that in
regard he does so graciously promise to hear us. The Apostle James does also
exhort us to this duty, If any be sick among you (says he) let him call for
thee elders of the church, James 5.14.
and let them pray for him. May it therefore please your Excel: that we do al
loyntly call upon the name of the Lord, and you to pray with us, as much as is
in your power. His Excel: answered, when you please. His Ex: is desirous to
have payers said at his beds side.
Whereupon we all fell upon our knees before the Lord, and prayed with tears.
Prayer being ended, I set my self down again to comfort his Excel: as the
Lord should put it into my mind, amongst other things speaking of the pleasant
fruits of affliction, and of the difference between the death of the Saints
and the wicked, and of the profitable change which they do make, who in true
faith end their pilgrimage, out of this vale of misery, leaving these earthly
tabernacles, and go to dwell with the Lord, and how happy and how precious
death is unto them, because it ends their misery, and does transport them
unto the desired haven of rest, even the Kingdom of glory. At these speeches
his Excellency harkened with an extraordinary attention, turning himself unto
me, and looking very steadfastly upon me, which made me to admire it; at
length with great rejoicing, he approved my words, saying, So do I believe
also, I am resolved; then I said unto his Excel: It pleased GOD to let me
administer his holy word unto his Excel: of happy memory, Count William of
Nassau, in the time of his sickness, and so God has ordained, that I should
do unto your Highness, although in great weakness, I do therefore in all
humility beseech your Highness, graciously to ponder this my mean service
unto you, trusting that it will not go without a blessing from the LORD, for I
know with what heart I have done it; whereupon his Excel: said, I thank you
for troubling your self so much with my person; and presently after, because I
did not well understand his Excel: he said, You have done me very good
service. And when I thought herewith to have taken my leave of his Excel: his
Excel: kissed his hand and reached it forth unto me, so that it made the
tears to run down my eyes, saying; your Excel: may please to be of good
comfort, and and without doubt the LORD will give you a happy issue from this
affliction. And so I withdrew my self, having taken my leave of the said
Princesses.

In this action, although I was very weary of body, yet I rejoiced in GOD, and
so did both the said Princesses, Praising the Lord, in the midst of their
sorrow, for the Religious and Christian behavior of his Excellency.

The fourth Visitation. Being on Wednesday the 13. of April in the forenoone,
about 10. of the clock, which was his Excel: dying-day.
AT this time was I fetched again to come unto his Excel: whom I found to be
much altered, and be was not likely to live long; although, when I asked his
Excel: how he felt himself, he said, It is much alike as it was yesterday.
And whereas I perceived his Excel: to be very weak, I comforted him with
these places of Scripture, 1 Cor. 10.13. Heb. 4.15.16. Romans 8.28.38.39.
Whereupon his Excel: answered, I am resolved, and there is nothing in the
world that troubles me, Very religious words of his Excel: before his death.
only this; whether my Repentance be as sufficient for my sins, as it ought
to be; I am sorry that I cannot serve the Lord as I would do; The Lord
strengthen me; I am at rest. With these words his Excel: gave sufficiently to
understand, that he was at rest in his mind. Wherefore with all my power and
ability, I sought more and more to strengthen his Excel: in this particular,
whereunto I found my self much addicted: and to this end I put his Excel: in
mind of all the speeches which he had spoken; and first, I put him in mind
of his repentance for his sins; secondly, of his faith in Jesus Christ; and
thirdly, of his religious purpose to amend his life: all which speeches I
approved with the word of God, and thereupon I told his Excel: that we were
commanded, to them that were thus prepared, to lay open unto them the whole
treasure of Gods mercy, and his faithful promises in Christ Jesus: Wherefore
your Excel: must make a good use of this affliction, and by the fruits
thereof, show and acknowledge the love of God, according to his word, for he
corrects him whom he loves: Pro. 3.12.
And your Excel: shall find that death is life, according to Gods promise, He
that believes in me, Heb. 12.6.
it passed from death unto life. I desire, says Paul, to be loosed, and to be
with Christ; for death unto me is advantage; Psalm. 1.23.21. 1 Cor. 5.1.
If our earthly tabernacles be destroyed we have a building given us of God in
the heavens. And thus I exhorted his Excel: to set himself at peace,
rejoicing in his Savior Jesus Christ, in whose name, I (as a servant of
Christ) did pronounce unto his Excel: forgiveness of all his sins, which he
did from his heart repent of; which the Lord himself does promise to ratify
and approve: Your Excel: Matthew. 18 18.
said I, has ever been a sincere Prince, hating all falsehood and lies, and
your Excel: has also meant it with your heart, whatsoever you have said in
the premises; for your Excel: knows, that this is not a time to flatter any
body in so weighty a matter as this is, whereon your Excel: salvation
depends: Therefore your Excel: may please to be steadfast in the only
comfort we have both in life and death; and wherein your Excel: has been so
long resolved to live and dye in, with the children of God, without whom I do
here protest before the Lord, to know no other salvation for my self, His
Excel: last words. Of his contentedness in the true comfort of the children
of God.
nor for any other Christian: whereupon I demanded his Excel, of this comfort,
out of the first question of the high dutch Catechism; His Excel: answered,
This is my only comfort: I know none other, and this is my only refuge,
whereby I purpose to remain: which sweet words of his Excel: were as a Crown
to this holy work, and a certain sign that the spirit of God had thoroughly
wrought in his heart. Then I said unto his Excel: your Excel: may now expect
(over and above the Laurel wreath wherewith the Lord has crowned you here in
this life) to be crowned (with all those Kings and Princes, that with true
faith have kissed the Son of God) (as your Excel: has done) with an
immortal and everlasting Crown of glory in the world to come. After these
words were ended, his Excel: said, (though with great trouble) I cannot well
speak any more: whereupon I left his Excel: wishing him a happy end, which I
saw to draw near. At this Visitation were present the chiefest Officers of his
Excellency.

The last Visitation. When his Excellency lay a dying, and departed this world.
IN the afternoon about four of the clock, I was by two Sergeants requested
to come up unto his Excel: Being come into the Chamber, I found his Excel:
His Excel: cannot speak any more, but has his perfect understanding.
to be toward his last end, his speech having left him, and was not able once
to cast up his eyes. I spoke at his Excel: ear, Being your Excel: speech
does now fail you, think now in your heart (which the Lord does behold and
search through) upon your Savior Jesus Christ, who is now the only life and
comfort of your Excel: And when I did perceive his Excel: gave sufficient
signs that he understood me, I did, at the request of the Princess of
Portugal (who stood by me, and with weeping eyes beheld his Excel:) say
prayers, Prayers is said.
there being likewise present, the Comitties of the High and Mighty, the Lords
Estates general, the Lord Vosbergen, and other Lords to me unknown, also the
chiefest servants of his Highness, with two Doctors, Doctor Rumpf, and Doctor
Valentius, who did all fall upon their knees before the Lord, and prayed with
bitter tears for his Excel. After prayer was ended, I spoke again at his
Excel: ear; saying, If your Excel: has understood me, and that you are yet
comforted in the Lord, His Excel. gave a sign to show that he did understand
it, and that he was well contented.
I pray let me know by touching my hand; whereupon his Ex: presently hold me so
fast by my hand, that I could scarce get it out, until such time as the
strength of his life went from him; and then I spoke once more these words unto
him, Lord Jesus receive my spirit, Lord Jesus have mercy upon me. His Excel: did
yet sufficiently show that he understood it; whereupon we once again went
unto prayers, and prayed with such feruency, as any Christian might imagine.
Prayer is said once more.
And afterward between 5. and 6. of the clock, this noble Prince rested in
the Lord, in the prayers of the beholders, so sweetly, as ever I saw man dye,
without the least motion of his body, and without any interruption of his
breath. His Excel: pleasant death.
And thus dyed this famous Champion, Prince Maurice, etc. in the 58. year of
his age, having Governed little less then 40. years. He was held of all
true-hearted Patriots, a precious and chosen Instrument of Gods glory,
specially for Gods Church, and these Countries. He will be by some more
lamented after his death, An Exhortation unto all the Inhabitants of this Land.
then he was beloved of them in his life. But I pray and exhort all faithful
Inhabitants of this Land, to take to heart these few ensuing admonitions
wherewith I will conclude this my Narration.

The Lord has within these few years taken from us that faithful Prince
Count William Lodowicke of Nassau, etc. and has sithence visited this Land
with heavy plagues, famine, high-waters, strong-warres, as is yet at this time,
besides the extraordinary besieging of the City of Breda, and now moreover
smites us for our sins with this deep wound; and that in such a time, when
all the world would judge we stood in most need of this great Prince. Will the
Lord then utterly forsake us and go from us? It seems so: and certainly
this is no vain imagination, but the King of all Kings, and the Lord of all
Lords, whose judgments are just, and whose ways are unsearchable, can and
will (according to his infinite mercy who has so many times miraculously saved
these Countries, for his holy name, and well-beloved Sons sake) keep us, if
we, (as well Rulers as Subjects) do hate our sins, betimes turn unto him,
and do uprightly walk before him, in his holy laws which are not unknown
unto us.

And this is that which we must do, if we will make a good use of Gods
judgments, that he may turn them from us, and if we desire to have the Lord
to bless this Country and State; otherwise we all see, if we are not blind
in heart, how the LORD does threaten us, and which certainly once will come
upon us, if we remain snorting in our carnal security, and then we shall
not find any mercy with the LORD. It is not any inward nor outward means will
be able to save us, if the LORD turn from us: And therefore those are the
best people, who above all things seek to appease the wrath of the most
Highest, who rules the hearts of all Kings, and so labor to obtain his
favor, that with a good conscience they may both live and dye in his fear,
and thereunto they use all possible means, according to their vocation, to
employ it for the service of the common good; and this confirms a State, and
brings the blessing of God over the whole Country; but here I take leave
with the Prophet Jeremy, to say; O earth, earth, earth, Ier. 22.29.
hear the word of the LORD: What word? the word of the Son of GOD: Remember
from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do thy first works, or else I
will come against thee shortly, and will remove your Candlestick out of his
place, except thou amend. I pray the Lord this may be well practiced. That all
higher powers, and those of meaner sort would take example of the Religious and
godly decease of this Noble Prince of Orange, whose soul undoubtedly is now in
glory with the Lord Jesus Christ, waiting for the blessed resurrection of the
dead, which the Lord of his mercy grant unto us. Unto whom, as most due is, be
all honor, praise, and glory, for evermore, Amen.

For as much as concerns those that harden themselves in their sins, by the
abusing of Gods mercy, and by example of those Saints that have fallen, and are
risen up again, (for such there ever has been, and yet are) must know if
they have not a desire of their condemnation, Quod non sint exempla cadendi,
nec in peccatis iacendi, sed cauendi and si cecideris, resurgendi; that is to
say, that those be no examples to fall, nor yet to lie still, but take heed we
do not fall or if we be fallen, that we rise up again. Who is so foolish
that will go break his own shinnes, because he sees his fellow by a fall
has broken his, and is whole again, Romans 6.12.
shall we continue still in sin, that grace may abound? God forbid; they
that are led by the spirit of GOD, are afraid of such thoughts, for so much as
concerns the devil, with all his wicked accomplices, and unclean spirits, who
cannot endure, and do nothing but scorn and deride the children of God, in
whom the Angels do rejoice. We must not stumble at these, for Christ himself
says in the Gospel, that their judgment will be hard enough for them to
bear; and therefore it is needless here to speak any more of them, and
therefore I end: Beseeching the Lord to restrain the devil, and mercifully to
save his people in this great tempest, wherein the whole Christian world do so
fearfully strive with one another.

So be it.
FINIS.

