blazon or coat of arms of the British royal family DIEV ET MON DROIT
HONI SOIT QVI MAY Y PENSE



THE GREAT PLANTAGENET. OR A CONTINVED SVCCESsion of that Royal Name, from
HENRY the Second, to our Sacred Sovereign King CHARLES. BY GEO. BVCK, Gent.

Quod maximum et optimum esse dicitur, oportet esse unum. Ex Arist. Top. lib.
7. LONDON: Printed by Nicholas and John Oaks. Anno Domini 1635.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir JOHN FINCH, Lord Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, etc.
SIR
AS You draw your Eye from the Title, I must crave pardon to meet your
Lordships Expectation; and confess, in these Papers I have but practiced like
a young Limbner, wipt away the dust from some Antiquities, and by them drawn
these proportions; which are done (too) but imagine luscae, and not to the full
portraicture of that Imperial greatness: Nor have I strained my Fancy in high
shadows, for (in things of this Nature) I would be industrious, not affected.
There wants nothing in the Subject to make an Historian and a Poet. And had
these Intentions met anabler Pen, they might (with some desert of Pardon) have
been admitted the intermission of your Lordships more serious Hours: I have
nothing to excuse me but my Zeal, which in the throng of those that Honor
and admire You, presses thus near the influence of your great Virtue, humbly
prostrating these poor endeavors, and the duty of

Your most humble and unfeigned honorer, George Buck.

To his noble Friend Master GEORGE BVCK upon his Poesy.
Noble Friend,
THou need'st no attributes unto thy Muse,
He that shall be thy Reader, and peruse
Thy learned Endeavors, must with me confess,
That thy own Pen does best thy self express:
Thou art above the vulgar hight, or hate,
That thus, the Acts of Kings can vindicate.
O. ROVRKE.

To his honored Friend George Buck on this his Revivall of the Royall-Name of
the PLANTAGENETS.
KIngs are above their Fates, and glorious live,
Though laid in Dust, by the prerogative
They have over Fame: but this Religious debt
Due to the Name of Great Plantagenet,
So long uncancel'd lay, we did distrust
Their Names would be more buried then their Dust:
Till some rich Mercy thy learned Quill did woo,
To pay this Debt which none but it could do.
And now so clear discharged, again their Name
Is borne in Triumph on the wings of Fame,
And to the deeds to which their life did climb,
They now in Dust have learned to conquer Time:
For this their Royal gratitude returns
To thee the Laurells which now crown their Vrnes.
Who would not wish this Wreath his own, which springs
Jointly bequeathed thee from so many Kings?
Robert Codrington.

To his deserving Friend Master George Buc.
GEorge, in thy dear name (methinkes) I apprehend,
That Virtue, which did swear me first thy friend;
And did not still thy constant soul retain
That worth entire, I would e'n here restrain
My Pen; for it is not as some may think (perchance
That knows not thee) my doting Ignorance.
But so much truth as tells me, He that can
But imitate thee, is a happy man:
And did the World but know thee half so well
As I, it would be thought no flattery to tell,
How high and nobly, Wit and Judgment flows
In thy clear Soul, without vain glorious shows!
Let others boast how much their sportive wit
Does please this Madam, or with that commit,
When femall hands interrs their withered Bays,
Thy Genest shall grow green, and crown thy praise.
George Bradley.

The Preface, or Argument of this POESY.
DAmaetas having long been a Wood-man, and observed the Natures and Properties
of many Trees, apprehended some Mystery and peculiar matter in the Genest, more
then he could attain to, and meeting with Silenus, a man of great Learning
and Authority, (for he was held a Prophet) exposes to him his Conceit:
Silenus by means of a late accident, was well able to instruct and resolve
him: For there had been a complaint made lately to Apollo, against certain
unworthy fellows, which presumptuously took Garlands off his ancient Tree the
Laurel. He forthwith calling the Muses to Council in Helicon, established
Ordinances for the due wearing of that, and all other Garlands: And because the
ancient Garlands were abused and prophained with common and unworthy use, he
made choice of a new Tree, (viz.) the Genest; and instituted Garlands thereof,
giving them prerogatives above the rest, and appropriated them to one imperial
Family, seated in Britania or Albion rather; vide Stanz. 13, and is taken out
of Orpheus in his Argonaunt, where Master Camden rather reads (...), then
(...). Albion, or Alba, rather then Pinaria.
Leuceessa; with express defense, that none else should wear them; that not
all the Princes of this Family should wear Garlands hereof: but some a
Chappelet, and some only a branch, or Plant; the complete Garland reserved
for his favorite Sub Daphnis quod nomen in hac Ecloga datus S.R. Carolo, sicut
Julio Caesari olim in Ecloga 5. Virg. a Pastoribus.
Daphnis. After Silenus declares more particularly, who, and what these royal
Worthies were.

Beginning with the great Henry, son of the Empress Matilda, (the first King
of this Island, surnamed Plantagenet from Planta-Genistae, so called (as some
say) for wearing a slip or stalk of broom in his cap or hat, who write that
toward his latter days in penance and contrition for his past sins, he
undertook to go to the Holy Sepulcher, in the poor and despised habit of a
Broomeman, and to signify himself so, bore a broom-stalk in his cap: as I
have read of other Princes, who in great penitece and humblenes for their sins,
and for their better privacy and security, have travailed thither like
Carpe^ters Joyners, and other poor mechanicke Tradesmen, wearing in the same
kind somebadge of the trade they seemed to profess. Others say, it was because
he scourged himself with the stalks of broom, which grew upon the Plains
where once the holy City stood: But I shall express this occasion more amply in
another place. He was also surnamed Courtmantle.
Plantagenet) and so deducing a Geneologie from him, through his Royal
posterity, to our present Sacred Sovereign Charles, his now Heir, whom he
Crowns with this Polyanthine Garland, etc. In whose Sacred Person are jointly
met and coalesced, the Royal bloods, Titles, and Interests not only of great
Britain, but also of France, and Ireland. For Scotland, the Crown and Scepter
thereof, (missa per innumeros avos) all men acknowledge his ancient right
therein. And his Majesty's Title to Ireland, will be manifest in the Genealogy
herein deduced from the Great Plantagenet King Henry the second, the first
English Prince of Lyonell Planta Duke of Clarence, 3 Son of K. Edw. 3. married
Eliz. Daughter and Heir of Will. Mure-Burk. Earl of Vlster, Lord of Conacht,
from whom the Dukes of York are descended. Camden in Hiber.
Ireland, and from his Heroical posterity, (as well Marches as others) who
have been continually seized thereof until this day. His Majesty's Title to
France, see it more at large in the Argument.
So likewise his title to the crown of France, shows it self clearly, in
the ancient possessions of these royal Plantagenets here presented. His
Majesty's Progenitors first Dukes of Normandy, then of Aquitaine; Earls of
Poictou, of Aniou, of Maine, of Touraine, and of Britain; and after Angolesme,
and lastly Kings of all France, in the right of Vide John Froissard Tom. 3.
Isabell, or Elizabeth, sole Daughter, and Heir of Philip le bell, King of
France, Mother of King Edward the third, who made a most renowned and happy
entry upon that his Royal inheritance: And he, his great Heirs were not only
Titular Lords, but also Actual possessors of France many years; and yet to
this day (in token of that ancient right) have seisin of a Gersey, Gernesey,
Alderney, etc. are parcels of Normandy, and so consequently of France; yet
possessed by the King of England.
part of that Kingdom, notwithstanding that counterfeit-heathnish law Salica,
maintained by all the power of France many ages against them.

His Majesty's title and descent from the ancient Kings of Great Britain, (and
which is least known) may thus readily be derived. His Majesty's Title from
the British Kings.
The Welsh Bardes, as also our best Heralds, Record that (1) Ruffin.
Rhese-ap-Gruffith (surnamed Argluid) Prince of South Wales, about the year of
our Lord 1196, (and issued from Cadwallader, the last British King) had a
Daughter named (2) Fair Julian.
Gwenlhiam, married to (3) Edmund.
Edneuet Vachan, Lord of Bransencle, and chief Justice of Wales, and bare to
him a son called (4) Gerion, or Jeronim.
Grono, this Grono had (5) Theodore.
Tedor, Tedor had Grono, Grono had Tedor, Tedor had (6) Veridik.
Meredith, Meredith had Owen; which Owen married Katherine, (Widow of King
Henry 5, and Daughter of the French King Charles the sixth) by whom he had
Edmond, created Earl of Richmont, by King Hen. 6. his Brother Vterine: And
this Edmond was father of King Hen. 7, who was Father of Queen Margaret his
Majesty's great Grandmother.

And lastly, to finish his Majesty's Titles to all those Diadems mentioned in
this Poesy, His Majesty's title from the Saxon Kings.
I have inserted a Genealogy of the Saxon Kings, drawn from the first uniter
of the Heptarchy, and the Godfather of Anglia King Egbert, unto Matilda the
Empress, Daughter and Heir of King Hen. 2. Ancestour of all the English Kings
until this day, from whom this Poesy is a continued Pedigree unto his
Majesty, and his most excellent Son, etc.

But it may be objected, why I derive not his Title and Genealogy from some of
the ancient Monarchs of this Isle Britons, or Saxons, or at the least from K.
William the Conqueror, I must answer, that to have chosen any of the most
ancient Kings, I must have looked so far back as I should not only have
been too tedious, but also lost my self in obscure ways, (as they know,
which know what our ancient Stories be. But as for William the Conqueror,
there be many reasons why I should not begin with him; (although I go as
near him as his Sons Daughter) for first he was a Bastard, Vide Lib. 5.
Stephani Cadomensis de Gulielmo Conquestore editum, An. Dom. 1603.
and yet not that of the blood Royal of England) his chief Title to the
Crown, being but violence, and his Sword, as he confessed with remorse of
conscience, at his Death. Secondly, he was never possessed of one half of
Britain; for he had neither Scotland, nor Wales, and in Ireland not one
foot. Furthermore Girard Du. Haillan, and other French Antiquaries according
to their Salike Heraldry, say that his line ended in his Son King Hen. 1.
Philosalicus.
for all they hold as a Maxim (La famille se continue es masles, et se finist
aux filles) and yet Du. Haillan (notwithstanding or forgetting this) affirms
in another place: that the race of the Kings of England, issued out of the
house of Aniow, (viz.) from our great Henry, and his ancestors, continues
until this day; from whom there be many reasons on the other side, why I
should deduce the Genealogies of our Kings passed, K. Henry 2. the greatest
King, etc.
and of our present Sovereign Lord King Charles: for this great Henry was not
only rightful Heir and King of England, but also the greatest King (of whom
there is any credible Story extant) which has been in this Isle of Britain,
since the time of the Roman Emperors, (who were reputed Lords of all the
World) which thus I demonstrate briefly. He was King of England in the right of
his Mother Matilda, King Malcolm Knighted this King Henry 2. at 15. years of
age. Neubrig who writes much in the honor of this K. Malcolm, lib. 2. Cap. 20.
the Empress, Daughter and Heir to King Henry the first by Matilda Bona,
Daughter of King Malcolm Canmoir, and of Margaret his wife, who was the
Daughter of Edward Exul, the Saxon Prince, the Son of Edmund Ironside, King
of England, Anno Dom. 1016. This Edmund was Son and Heir to King Etheldred,
who in ancient Charters is written Totius Britanniae Rex, (quod nota) because
an Anonymus in a little book dedicated to King James, affirms that never any
Prince was King of this whole Isle until then; but he is deceived; (for
besides Constantius Chlorus and his Son our Countryman, Constantine the
great, Constans, Aurelius Ambrosius, Vter, and others; (which were Lords of all
great Britain) Edgar also, the Father of this King Etheldred, was absolute
Monarch of this Island, and so puissant in forces both by Land and Sea, as he
was surnamed the Great, and was styled Totius Albionis Basileus, and Anglici
Orbis Basileus, (as G. Malmsburiensis and Florentius Wigorniensis witness:
Britaria ab adventu Saxonum in insulam appellatur Anglica, Joan. Salisb. in
Policratico.
Whereupon (to note also by the way) some think that the word Anglia was
sometimes used for the whole Isle, and which Ion Lidgate disertly assevereth in
King Arthurs complaint, in these words: Great Britain now called England; and
so likewise does Geoffry Chaucer in the Franklins tale, viz. Ranulfus Higeden
in Polichronic.
in England, that Clepid was Britain, and Ranulphus Cestrensis, a graver
Author, peremptorily affirms, that King Egbert after his Conquests ordained,
and commanded that the Saxons and Iutes should be called Angles, and this
Britain should be called England; but I leave this to be discussed by
Antiquaries.

And to return to the ancient Saxon Kings Progenitors of this Henry, and also
possessors of the whole Isle, it is to be showed (for the better confirmation
of that, which has been said against the opinion of the Anonymus) in diverse
ancient Records, and Charters of Donations of these Kings to Monasteries, and
to Cathedral Churches, Ex archiv is Ciscestrensis Ecclesiae.
and in other ancient Monuments in these styles: Ephoca.
Ego Athelstanus Rex Anglorum Dominicae Incarnationis, DCCCCXXX. Regni vero
mihi gratis Commissi vj. Indictione iij. Ephoca.
Epacta xviij. Concurrente iiij. Nonis Mensis Aprilis iij. Lunae rotigerae
vagationis, i. per ejusdem omni-patrantis dextram totius Britanniae regium
solio sublimatus, etc. Ego Edmundus Rex Anglorum, caeterarumquegentium in
circuitu persistentium Gubernator and Rector Anno Domini 945. Ego Edredus, King
Edred was Uncle to Edgar Ingulf,
Rex terrenus sub Imperiali potentia Regis saeculorum, aeternique Principis,
magnae Britaniae, temporale gerens imperium, etc. Anno Domini 148. Ego Edgarus
totius Albionis Monarcha, etc. An. Dom. 966. and in another; Ego Edgarus totius
Albionis, finiti-morumque regnum Basileus, An. Domini 974. These three last
styles has Ingulfus Abbot of Croyland transcribed by him, from the Charters of
the Monastery: and the other two before going, are copied out of the Records of
Chichester Cathedral Church, as also these three next following.

Ego Eadwis Basileon totius Albionis, If (...), sub. Rex. This Edwis, or Edwin
was eldest Brother to the great K. Eadger. Asser in Histo. de Gestis Ealfridi.
etc. Anno Domini Dcccc. Lvj. Imperij antem i. And in another place; Ego Edwin
Rex gentium Albionis, etc. And in the date of a Charter of Bishop Brighthelmus
Anno secundo imperij Edwin totius Albionis Insulae imperantis; there is also
(in Asser Meneuensis) Aelured, or Aelfred a more ancient Saxon King then these
written: Omnium Britanium Insulae Christianorum Rector, An. Dom. 872.

And Edward (surnamed Pius and Confessor) was from the year of our Lord 1050.
King of this whole I Will, (if there be any credit to be given to our Stories) and
was styled Rex Albionis, Io. Twinus in Albionicis.
as John Twin avoweth out of his Charters given to the Abbey of Abington; and
that same King Etheldred before cited, was styled in the Charters of
Glastonbury, Etheldred Anglicae nationis, caeterarumque gentium triniatim intra
ambitum Britan. Insulae degentium, etc. Basileus, and another King in old
inscription Britinniae Anax; and many such more which were too long to recite.
And some Kings of the Norman race, (which is more rare) have been so styled:
For the Lord Bishop of Bristow voucheth a Coin of King John, wherein is
stamped Ioannes, In his Treatise about the Union.
Rex Britonum: But his Grandchild K. Edward 1. and after him K. Edw. 3, Vide
Th. Walsingham in K. Edw. 1. and in Ed. 3.
were greater Monarchs here then he. But this great Henry Plantagenets Empire
extended beyond the bounds of the Britanish world; and his greatness so far
exceeded all other Kings his Ancestors, that he was styled Maximus Britaniae
Regum, as I will show by and by, and by good right, Jo. Praesul Carnotensis in
Policratico.
for besides this his great Britain and Ireland, he was possessed of a great
part of France by these Titles: He was Duke of Normandy, by right of
Inheritance from his Grandfather King Henry 1, K. Edw. 3. erected Aquitaine
into a Princedome for his eldest son Ed.
Duke of Normandy, etc. He was Duke of Aquitain, (that is) Gascoine, and Guien,
(sometimes a iKngdome) and Earl of Poictou by the marriage of Queen Elinor,
Daughter and Heir of William Duke of Aquitaine, Jean de la Hay.
and Earl of Poictou, (whose wife Ieanne was daughter of David, King of Scots.
He was Earl of Aniou, (Seminary of Kings) of Touraine and Maine, (his native
Country) by right of inheritance from his Father Geoffry le Bell, Earl of them
all: He swayed in little Britain, which authority he acquired partly by the
Marriage of Constable. daughter and heir of Conan, Earl of Brita. with his third
son Geoffry, Earl of Richmond, but chiefly by his Sword; as it appears by
Gu. Lib. 11. Cap. 18.
Neuburgensis, who then lived, and thus writes; Cum a potentioribus in
Britania inferiores premerentur, Regis Anglorum auxilium expetentes, ejus se
ditioni spontane subdiderunt, etc. ipsosque potentes viribus subegit, sicque in
brevi tot a Britania potitus est. He also conquered Auuergne. For Ireland, he
twice invaded that kingdom, and by Arms seconded with Letters of favor of
his good Friend Pope Adrian, (an Englishman) he brought the discording Princes
there, Girald Cambr. in Hibern. expugnata, and G. Canden.
to submit their differences and their Titles to him, and so obtained the
possession of the Isle.

As for those parts and parties in this our Great Britain, viz. of England,
Scotland, and Wales, which did not acknowledge his Sovereignty) he reduced them
in good time, to the ancient subjection and obedience which they owed to the
British and Saxon Kings, his Progenitors. The Welch-men in their Stories
acknowledge this; but for the other, (if any doubt be made) G. Neuburgensis (
veridicus Author, as Polidore Virgill observes him) will thus satisfy him,
speaking of this King Henry, and of David K. of Scots, his prisoner, being then
both at York, Occurrit ei Rex Scotorum cum universis Regni nobilibus, qui
omnes in Ecclesia beatissimi Apostolorum Principis, Regi Angliae, tanquam
principal Domino hominum cum Ligeantia, (id est) solemni cautione standi cum
eo, and pro eo contra omnes homines (Rege proprio praecipiente) fecerunt; ipse
quoque Rex Scotorum coram universa multitudine nobilium utriusque regni Regem
Anglorem modis solemnibus Dominum suum, seque hominem and fidelem eius
declaravit, eique tria praecipua regni sui munimina (scilicet) Rokesburke,
Berwick, and Castellum puellarum loco obsidum tradidit, etc. But John Bishop of
Chartres, makes his Empire yet much greater, Jo Bish. Carnotensis in
Policratico.
for he boundeth it to the Southward with Spain, and to the Northward with the
Isle of Orkney, and might as well (if it had pleased him) with the North Pole
(as Giraldus Cambrensis did) and then styleth him maximum Britaniae Regum, and
goes further, and compares him to Alexander, and ascribes (as some
interpret) the first discovery of the West Indies, (which was made by Madok a
younger son of Owin Gwineth, D. Powell.
Prince of North Wales, An. Dom. 1170.) to this King, because it was done by
his auspices: as we may as well also attribute to him the redeeming of our
great Arthur from the injurious imputation of a fabulous Heroes, because he
caused his Monument to be sought out, (which was sunk deep into the ground in
the Isle of Aualon) by the occasion of a Bardes song, D. Powell in the Hist. of
the Princes of Wales.
which he heard in Pembrooke: but I will set down Gyraldus his own words,
written in manner of a Panegyric, to this King elegant enough for those times:
Sil. Giraldus in Tepographia Hiberniae, Cap. 47. and 48. distinct. 3.
Certant cum orb terrarum victoriae vestrae; a Pyrenaeis enim montibus usque
in occiduos, and extremos Borealis Oceani fines Alexander noster occidentalis
brachium extendisti. Quantum igitur his in partibus natura terras, tantum and
victorias extulisti, si excursuum tuorum metae quaerantur, prius deerit Orbis
quam aderit finis. Animoso enim pectori cessare possunt terrae, cessare
nesciunt victoriae, non deessse poterunt triumphi, sed materia triumphandi.
Qualiter titulis vestris and triumphis Hibernicus accesserit Orbis? Quanta and
quam laudabili virtute Oceani secreta, and occulta Naturae deposita
transpenetraveris, etc. Qualiter fulguranti adventus vestri lumine attoniti
occidentales reguli tanquam ad lucubrum aviculae ad vestrum statim imperiu^
couvolaverunt. And much more, Jo. Salisbur. in Policratico. lib. 8. cap. 24.
which for brevity I omit: That which the Bishop of Chartres writes of him
before mentioned, and promised, is this; Rex illustris Anglorum Hen. secundus
Regum Britaniae maximus, etc. circa Garumnam fulminat, and Tolosam faelici
(cingens obsidione, non modo provinciales, usque ad Rhodanum, and Alps
territat, sed munitionibus dirutis populisque Profligatis.
subactis, (quasi universis praesens immineat) timore Principes concussit
Hispanos and Gallos. And to these add only William Neuburoughs Elogie for a
Corollary. G. Neubourgh Lib. 11.


Regis supra omnes, qui unquam hactenus in Anglia regnasse noscebantur, latius
dominantis, (hoc est) ab ultimis Scotiae finibus ad montes usque Pyrenaeos,
nomen in cunctis Regionibus celebre habebatur, etc. hunc finem habuit inclytus
ille Rex Henricus 2. inter Reges terrarum nominatissimus, and nulli eorum, vel
amplitudine opum, vel faelicitate successuum secundus. Thus much for the
testimony of the greatness of his conquests, and of his Empire: as for his
other greatness, his Wisdom, Justice, Magnanimity, Bounty, and other
Heroical Virtues, I shall not need to produce any proof; for his wise and
politic administration of his great affairs and estate, his Victories and
high atchivements secretly intimate them at the full. Gyral. Cambr.
He was also well learned, as Giraldus affirms, and which was his best
praise, he was very charitable and pious (incomparabilis Eleemosynarum
largitor, et praecipuus terrae Palestinae sustentator) And Radulph de Diceto
writes, that in the time of an extreme dearth in Aniou and Maine, he
relieved with bread, An. Domini 1176.
ten thousand people daily, from April till harvest: And William of
Newburrough adds, that he received with great devotion the Character of the
sacred Militia for the recovery of the holy land. And afterward (because he was
not able to go by reason of infirmities, and for the great dangers wherein his
estate should stand in his absence, which Giraldus shows, he gave toward the
expedition the sum of 47. Jo. Stoan annal.
M. l. or thereabouts. Iean de la Hay also writes that he built S. Andrews
in Bourdeaux, and St. Peter's in Poitiers, and founded a Bishops sea there, and
enlarged the Town by the one half; Fabian.
he reedified the Abbey at Waltham in Essex, and the Charter house of Witham in
Wiltshire; He loved hunting and hawking exceedingly. Giral. he first kept Lions
and made of the arms of Normandy viz. the 2 Leopards, and of the single Lion
of Aquitaine one Coat of arms for England: as it is yet borne: Nic. Vpton.
John Carnoten: Lib. 16. Cap. 18.
he repaired and much beautified the Monastery of Font Everard (or Fronteaux)
near Ogle in Normandy and founded the Priories of Staneley, and of Dover: He
also began the stone work of London bridge, which was finished by his son
King John, (or caused to be finished) for it is all one to a common wealth;
and he instituted the circuit of the judges, and not to be tedious in the
enumeration of such particulars, in a word, he was as John Carnotensis who knew
him well: testifies, Rex optimus apud Britanias, Normanorum et Aquitanorum Dux
faelicissimus, et primus tam amplitudine rerum, quam splendore virtutum, quam
strenuus quam magnificus, quam prudens, et modestus quam pius ab ipsa, (ut ita
dicam) infantia fuerit, nec ipse livor silere, nec dissimulare potest: cum oper
a recentia, et manifesta sint, etc. And after these his great works, his high
Achievements, his victories, Trophies of his Heroical and Christian virtues,
a long and happy Reign, he departed at Chinon in Touraine, the 35 year of his
reign, and the 61 year of his age, An. Dom. 1189. and was with all due
funeral Enterred at Fronteuaux, and upon his Tomb had this inscription
engraven.

Sufficit hic tumulus cui non suffecerat orbis,
Res brevis ampla satis, cui fuit ampla brevis.
Rex invictus eram, mihi plurima regna subegi,
Multiplicique modo duxque, comesque fui.
Cui satis ad votum fuerant haud omnia terra
Climata, terra modo sufficit octo pedum.
Qui legis haec, pensa discrimina mortis, et in me
Humanae speculum conditionis habe;
Quod potes instanter operare bonum, quia mundus
Transit, and incautos Mors inopinarapit.
Thus this great Henry left his great name, and his glory to the world, and his
Kingdoms and his Dominions to his posterity, the Princes aranged in this
following Poesy.

AN ECLOG BETWEEN DAMAETAS a Woodman, and SILENUS a Prophet of the Shepherds.

Written by Geo. Buck Gent.

Published by Authority.

LONDON: Printed by Nicholas and Io. Oaks. Anno Dom. 1635.

AN ECLOG BETWEEN DAMAETAS and SILENVS.
STANZ. 1.
OF all the Trees in heavenly Silvans guard, The ancient wise men of Britain
were called Bardi, Diodor. Sic.

(Wherewith the worthiest brows were crowned of yore)
There is but one, or few, (oh reverend Barde)
In whose peculiar Virtues my desire
Has studied much, and observed more:
But chiefly I the Genest do admire,
Whose humble Highness makes me often surmise
That lowly steps be ladders to the Skies. Humilitas scala coeli, Bernard.

2.
Her gentle nature does not climb to dwell
In proudest soil, nor tops of mountains hie,
By that she shows, that she fore-seeth well
The perils which do all extremes impend: Flexit Pinum ferox astris
minantem, and de nube media vocat: Seneca.

The Aspiring Pine (whose top dos threat the sky)
Divine revenge does headlong often down send,
When this is safe upon her humble hill,
Not thrall to any proud superiors will.
3.
The Cedars tremble when th'enrag'd winds blow,
Which shake not her: such peace and safety lies
In sweet Humility: yet she will gently bow
To pliant hands, which shows some hid effects
And parts of man, Genuum doloribus medetur; hinc Genista dicta Fuchsius.
that duty only ties
To bow to Kings, and pay their due respects.
Oh just Deserts, who can so well deserve
For to command, as one that knows to serve.
4.
Besides, the Genest does by nature hold
A special honor of eternal Green:
Her verdant boughs being charged with flowers of gold,
And many secret gifts and graces more,
Which vulgar observation has not feene,
In which your skill and knowledge I emplore;
And what those flowers be, the God of light
Has made a Wreath of for his Favorite.
Silenus. 5.
What I do know I will impart to thee,
And happily perhaps, thou have referred
The satisfaction of thy thoughts to me:
For why, this thing was argued long agone
In Helicon, and I my self it heard,
Where Phaebus' midst the Muses on his throne
Established by those sacred maids advice,
What Garlands should be each atchievments price.
6.
The question grew because Apollo, he
Preferred complaint against such as presumed
To wear a The Italian, French, and Spaniard write the first syllable of
garland with an I. and that is nearest to the Etymology of Guir and Dalen i.
green leaves in British.
garland of his holy tree,
Without desert, or special grace divine:
Apollo was much moved, and chaft and fumed,
And so did call a council with the Nine,
And when he had a leaf of Laurel eat, Hinc vates (...) olim dicti Lycophro^
ap. Caelium Rodig.

With Delphick brows thus did his mind-repeat.
7.
The Laurel crown was given and shall be still
To peerles men, to Clerks and Emperors, The Laurel garl. Plin. L. 15

And such as by their learned Art, and skill,
Could of my favors make their vants at large:
And then this long enduring Palm of yours
Was due my sisters (and my sacred charge)
To such as worthily to gain the price, The Palm garl. A. Gell. Lib. 3.

Had suffered watching, famine, fire and Ice.
8.
And he which had with valiant hand preserved
A Citizen, received a crown of Oak:
But he a wreath of Olive leaves deserved The Oken garl. Gell. Lib. 5. The
Olive garl. Gell. et Textor.

Who had with Art, and pleas of peace beguiled
The bitter times, which discord had forespoke,
Or else some dangerous foe had reconciled:
And he who long had flamed in true loves fire, The Myrtle garl. Virgill et
Ovid

Received a crown of Myrtle for his hire.
9.
I mean whose amorous flame is fed by grace
And love of her, who does his love persever:
He whose firm vows and service takes no place
Where he affects, must bitter Willow wear: The Willowe garland authorized by
Homer and Virgill: Homer ealleth this tree (...), i. Frugi perdam Odyss. and
Virg. places the forlorn lovers Inter salices Eclog 10. The grass garland
Plin. Lib. 12.

For as that Tree by buds does promise ever
A hope of fruit; yet fruit does never bear,
So vain and fruitles is his hope and love
Who an inconstant woman's faith does prove.
10.
Of all, the most authentic is of Grass,
For that before I had my Bays was used;
And with those words his color altered was: Daphne versa in laurum: O vid.
Met. and hereupon Lucian says Apollo was unfortunate. (...).

Whilst a deep sigh expressed his agony,
So much his guilty conscience him accused,
Whose rape to fly a maid was made a tree:
And so his amorous passion did prevail,
That he had much ado to end his tale.
11.
Ashamed to pause so? then he shak'd his tresses
And at the length collects his fires divine,
Yet vents on sigh more, e're he more expresses
The ghirland of the grass did serve (quoth he)
For some such politic, The Cypress Garl. Apud Plin. Li. 16.
or Paladine,
Who froma siege should set a City free.
And then the hood of Cypress leaves was worn
Of such as had (as I have) cause to mourn.
12.
For safe convoy is borne the Vervaine wreath
Of Faecialls and Mars his Orators. The Vervaine Garl. Virg. Plin. Ivy
garland, Plin. li. 16. The Garl. of Lylies, Roses and Thistles. De his vide
Pierium in hyeroglyphic: The Pine gar. Propertius Lib. Eleg. 1.

To Tuiscons race the Ivy we bequeath,
Lillyes, Chardons and sweets of Erycine,
Of several Empires be the signal flowers,
Symbols of beauty, power and grace divine;
The Pine is Pans, and he to Herds gives that
Which tune an Oate and make their cattle fat.
13.
But there is an Island Luceessa called, Orpheus calls Britain (...) in
Argonautic.

Within whose fertile bounds there grows a Tree,
Whose boughs be all of carved Emerald,
Her flowers far more golden then my beams,
For her abode she lists not to be
Where she must suffer heat, or colds extremes,
To whom the Be (of homages most true)
Comes often to yield his suit and service due.
14.
Now thou fair Genest art my dearest Tree;
Thy Garlands now of all shall be most rare:
None shall presume to wear a branch of thee^,
Or with thy sacred wreaths begirt their browe,
But such as of immortal lineage are,
And more then earthly favors do endowe.
So crowned by thee, their names shall never die,
But fix them Comets in bright Honors sky.
15.
And let your hallowing hands adorn this Crown,
Which I have destined only unto one, The Genest Garland.

And such an one, as Merit and Renown,
Has recommended to the supreme good:
Who for his Virtues does deserve alone
To wear a Wreath of all sweets in the wood;
Whose Virtues Christian and Heroical
Crowns him the greatest and the best of all.
16.
To him his neighbor Potentates shall bend,
The Poplare Princes shall his vassals be:
Affricke and Inde to him shall Presents fend:
The Turk shall sheath his raging Semiter,
And prostrate stoop unto his Amity:
Esteeming them the happiest, which prefer
A League with him, and so his name grow great,
As far as Neptunes wandering surges beat.
17.
Thus said the King, the Prophet and the God,
To which (with adoration) thrice he bowed,
And so he made his parting period:
When with prophetic hymns Parnassus rings,
And Altars smoakd with many holy cloud:
But that thou may the better note those things,
I will declare what all those Worthies be,
Which have worn branches of this gentle Gentle has diverse significations,
sometimes it signifies supremo gradu de perfectione per natura, per costumi
and per valor, etc. Russell 1. sometime it signifies of, or belonging to the
same stock, or nation, as gentilis Clypeus, gentile sacrum, and gentile huemo
in Italian: and as it is used here, sometime it betokens mild, or pliant.
tree.
18.
You see Damaetas, that the Gods decree
Admits but one to wear the complete ghirland,
But some whose fame has scaled a high degree,
May wear a branch, and some a Chappelet.
The empress Matildas son who conquered Ireland
The greatest Britain King which has bin yet, K. Henry. 2. Vide Preface.

Must by good right, lead the triumphant band
Of the great Royal worthies of this land.
19.
A Prince formed of the true material mould,
He was as valorous as politic,
He could well win, and what he wan could hold;
And fortune follows such men in their train;
Normandy, not Neustria, Pithaeus.
Westria was his, he ruled in Little Britain.
Armoricke,
And raignd in Albion and Aquitaine,
In brief a Sov'raigne he did reign and rule
From Pyraene Mount ains to the frozen Terrarum ultima Thule, Seneca, Island or
Thy-leusell, that is, Shetland, secundum Gasp. Peucerum apud G. Camdenum.
Thule.
20.
His glorious enfigne next he does display
Whose valiant zeal, and Chivalry divine. K. Richard 1. surnamed Caeur de
Lion, married Berengaria, daughter of Garcia, King of Navarre.

Made in the Pagan Kingdoms such a way,
As all the Christian Hosts might enter in:
He took Acon, and Ioppa in Palestine,
And did besides the Realm of Cyprus win;
He ward with Men, and slew the Austriak Lion
Then made a peace with God, and went to Syon.
21.
Next rides King John, to whom stout Calidoun
Took solemn oath to be a true Leig-man
To him the King, and the heirs of his Crown, K. John brother to Rich. 1
surnamed Sans terrae. He got Angolesme by marrying with Isabell, daughter and
heir of Almery, Earl of Angolesme, and the Isle of Man by conquest. Walter
Buck brought 700 men out of Brabant, wan Ely and diverse Castles for this K.
John: Vide Camdenu^ in Occadini, et Holinsh.

And by his auspices the Brabant Knight
From Rebel Lords their Isle of refuge wan.
By him great Thamsis bridge so exquisite,
Which lay in wooden modells, was begun,
A braver work in Europ never was done.
22.
Then comes his Son with other Architects, Hen. 3. surnamed Winchester,
married Elianor daughter of Raymond, Ear. of Provence.

(Not to build Babells, and Castles in the Air)
But he a holy house for God projects,
The which he does at Westminster perform:
A Temple high, magnificent, and fair,
A glorious pile for sacred use and form,
And shall remain to all posterity,
The hallowed Monument of his Piety.
23.
Now add the foremost two which bore his name, K. Edward 1. surnamed Longshank,
married first Elianor daughter of the K. of Castile: she was heir of Ponthieu,
and Mother of K. Edward 2. by his second Wife Margaret, Da. of the French K. He
had Tho. of Brotherton, from whom by Segrave and Moubray the Howards are
descended.

(Who of the Saint disguised a Ring received)
To the one some give a Hammer, for surname,
Because he bruised Gaiothell in his rage,
And him of Jacobs Stone and Chair bereaved:
But Jacob repossess'd them (by praesage.)
The other Edward the Templars did expel,
Of whom I can no more say, to say well.
24.
Behold him next who in his doom supreme,
Pouuoire above an Estre did advance:
For he was offered Caesar's Diadem, (2) Vide Tho. Walsingham in Ed. 1. K. Ed.
2. surnamed of Carmarvon, married Isabell, daughter and heir of Phil. le Bell,
K. of France. K. Edw. 3. surnamed de Windesore, married Philip, daughter of
William, Earl of Henalt, etc. He took Calais, and wan many victories of the
French: as at Crecy and Sluys, etc. refused to be Emperor. Paralipom. ad Abb.
Vrspergens.

But followed boones forbod, and down anon
Cuts with his Mothers sword the flowers of France,
And plants them in his field of Albion,
And puts them in his royal Lions guard:
For so (quoth he) Dieu et mon droyt award.
25.
Phillip the famous Macedonian, Ed. de Woodstock, P. of Wales and of Aquitainc
married Joan Da. and heir of Edm. Plantagenest Earl of Kent. First he
overthrew 60000 Spaniards and French in Spain betwixt Naveret and Naiara.

Had not a son of higher worth then he,
For where the Prince, black Edward went, he wan:
This honors comet first did fair appear
At Cressy field, which Navaret did see
After, more bright then Mavors in his Sphere,
But Poiters chiefly where hetooke King Iean,
For there a double victory he wan.
26.
Two Richards more succeed, the one a Prince K. R. 2 his son surnamed de
Bordeaux married Anne of Lexeinbourg Da. of the Emperor Wenceslaus. K. R. 3
surnamed de Fotheringay Du. of Gloucester etc. married Anne Nevill Da. of Ric. the
great Earl of Warwick.

Whose goodly presence men to wonder moved
And was as bountiful as any since;
Fame has bin sharp to the other, yet because
All accusations of him are not proved,
And he built Churches, and did make good laws,
And all men held him wise, and valiant,
Who may deny him then his Genest Plant.
27.
But Henry Bullingbrook me thinks does frown, King Henry 4. surnamed de
Bolenbrock, married Mary Daughter and heir of Humphery, Bohun Earl of
Hereford etc. He was Duke of Lancaster in the right of his Mother Blanch Da. of
Hen. Duke of Lancaster etc.

That Gloucester here should next to Bourdeaux com
Because he from his Cozen took the Crown:
Mistake not Henry, for by right for neither
Of ye, in these triumphall Carrs is room;
But best of all you may be matched together.
Yet I must grant thou were a Princely knight,
And Patron of the bloody Rose by right.
28.
But to thy son the Dolphins strange repair King Henry 5. surnamed de
Munmouth, married Kath. Da. to Charles the 6 the French King. Of this Dolphine
vid. Tho. Walsingham in An. Do. 1392. He conquered France for the most part. He
dyed at Blois de Vinciennes near Paris.

Swimming in post up to the royal Port,
Foretold that he was borne the Lillies heir,
This sign was soon by sequels verified:
Dolphin he was by right, or swords effort:
And he in France victorious lived and dyed;
whom Agincourt so nobly did receive,
At Vinciene Park of all he takes his leave.
29.
Henry his son surnamed of Windlesore K. H. 6 surnamed the Saint, built a
Colle dge at Eaton and the Kings College in Camb. married Marg. Da. of Rene.
K. of Sicil. Du. of Aniou.

(Who was in London and in Paris crowned)
Most worthily a Plant of Genest bore
But not by Scepters sole his praise began: K. H. 7. solicited the Pope to
Canonize. K. H. 6 who refused.

His christian virtues made him most renowned
For he was deemed a very holy man,
And had bin made a Saint, and long since shrin'd,
But that the vice-Saint maker was unkind.
30.
I must omit that proud Plantagenet, R. Du. of York, heir general of the
Crown, Regent of France, Married Cecely Nevill Da. of Ralph Earl of
Westmerland.

Who in high Parliament the King defide,
But I may not his gallant son forget,
Who twice did win the royal Gole by arms,
And was the father of the happiest bride
That ever Camber compast in his arms, K. H. 4. married Wydevile Da. of Ant.
Earl Rivers, extinguished Lancaster. Q. Eliz. 1. King Ed. 5.

She made the loss the lighter of that son,
Whose reign then ended, as it was begun.
31.
She and her Richmond (on'd by sacrament) K.H. 7. Earl of Richmond, married
Eliz. Plant. Da. and heir of K. Ed. 4. for them Christopher Columb. offered
todiscover the Indies Ric. Hacklet 3.

Refused the golden offer of Colone,
Foreseeing that the riches and the rent
Would hardly countervaile the keepers care;
And had beside a secret reed that one,
(Who should hereafter sit in Arthurs Chair,
Should fetch the fleece, when he occasion saw,
And hold the golden Monarke in his awe. H. Earl of Richmond got both the
field and Crown at Bosworth. Marga. his mother was an heir of the house of
Somerset! he extinguished the heir Male of the house of York

32.
This Richmond was a very prudent Prince.
And therefore was surnamed Solomon:
The world has seen great works accomplished since^,
Which were projected by his active brain,
This man of Fate did happily atone
The civil feud which long before did reign
Betwixt the Rose which first grew in the wood,
And that which Venus colored in her blood, Vid. Ovid in Metam. these Roses
were the devises of York and Lancaster.

33.
These happy plants have overspread this Isle
By Henry and more fruitful Margaret. Marg. their da. was married to Iam. 4.
K. of Scotland, by whom he had K. Iam. 5. who married Mary Da. to Claud. Du. of
Guise, who bare to him Mary Qu. of Scotland and France heir apparent of Eng.
and grandmother to our Sovereign Lord K. Charles.

But Henryes branches flourished but a while,
She is the root of this immortal seed:
Whence James the wise and new Plantagenet
Did spring, and was her father, who did breed here.
The great Polistiphan, as shall appear,
When they are past which come triumphant
34.
This is that Henry whose great soul did first
Give a check-mate unto the pride of Rome; K. H. 8 married Katherne Da. of
Ferdinand K. of Castile, by whom he had Queen Mary he had Q. Eliz. by Anne of
Bolein Da. of the Earl of Wiltshire he had K. Ed. by Jane sister of the Du. of
Somer.

A stirring work, which else no Monarch durst;
What he avowes, he executes indeed,
And is not startled with their Churches doom:
And see how duly virtue has her meed
For the Pope himself ( Doctor Coop. By. of Linc. in Chronici.
as the Bishop says)
First styled him defendor of the Faith.
35.
His hopeful son brought happily to pass, K. Ed. 6.

What was attempted by that hardy King;
For he abolished the Romish Mass; Qnem Dij diligunt, moritur Iuvenis Menander.

Timely resolved to maintain Christian truth.
And as his years, so did his virtues spring,
But envious fates untimely nipt his youth;
Then let this serve, to make complete his praise;
Whom Gods do love, he dies in tender days.
36.
This is King Henry's eldest daughters place
A Queen endued with heavenly virtues many
Devout sans dout, a Mary full of grace,
Just of her word as any prince has been,
Her liberal hand was never closed to any
whose need required or where a want was seen,
And whatsoever piously is given, Q. Mary married Phillip 2. K. of Spain.

Is with great usury restored in heaven.
37.
Her younger Sister next to her does set, Q. Eliz. 2 adds Virginia to her
Empire.

Who was in acts and age the happier much;
And therefore wears the braver Chappelet.
A Queen whose state so happily did stand,
That men did say, seeing her greatness such,
This Lady leads Fortune in her hand;
A virgin that her sexes Fame excelled,
And for her rareness was a Phoenix held,
38.
For weigh her peace, established at home,
And next her victories atchive'd abroad,
As well in Indies as in Christendom;
Then her safe guarding her confederates:
Her zeal to the true worshipping of God,
Her wisely moderating her three estates,
Those spok her name, with wonder, love, and fear
Which all the world did with amazement hear,
39.
Add more which joined strange Scepters to their plants, Ri. Earl of
Cornwall, Brother to K. Hen. 3. elected King of Almaine, or Romans. Jo. of
Gant, Du. of Lancast. K. of Castile and Lion by Q Consta^ce his wife.

As Cornwall did the Scepter of Almaine:
And that of Castile, royal Ion of Gant,
Progenitor by sons, and either daughter,
Of all the Kings of Britain, and of Spain,
Without Sir K. Hen. 4. ut supra.
Bolenbrook, who for the slaughter
Of a King inunct, ashamed hid his eyes
In the dark bosom of a strange disguise.
40.
But Bedford shall his Fathers place supply, Jo. Duke of Bedford, 3 son of K.
Hen. 4. Regent of France, where he took the great Champion of France, Jeane
la Pucille: overthrew the Vicount of Narbone at Sea, wan the battle at
Vervell, which as Ceres says, Fasoit porter dueil a toute la France.

Who though no King, yet was a great Viceroy,
And in his place behaved him royally:
Th'arm'd sorceresse committed to the flame,
Narbone, Alanson, and their K. Charles 7. was called in scorn le petit Roy de
bourges.
petty roy
Vanquaish'd at Vernveil, witness well the same.
And while he lived; preserved the inheritance
Of his dread Liege, and kept in aw all France.
41.
Some more great Genesters recount I may,
Whose fro^ts should with this crown have circled been
But they were abse^t at the sacring day;
As Arthur, heir unto the greatest King. Artur Plantag. Earl of Britain, son
of Geffrey, 3 son of K. Hen. 2. Heir apparent proclaimed by K. Ri. 1. Ma.
Da. and heir of James 5. K. of Scotland, by Mary de Louraine, Da. of the Duke
of Guise ut supra 38. St. Peter calls the crown of immortal glory (...) 1
Epist. Cap. 5.

And she that was of France and Scotland Queen,
Whose virtues praises all the Muses sing,
And wears instead a Chappelet of Plants,
In Heaven a Diadem of Amarants.
42.
And diverse others set on Fortunes knee,
Highly advanced for Virtues just respects,
Have worn a branch of this Imperial Tree.
Farther, they neither did presume, nor might,
For they were men, and had some light defects:
But yet they past as far each other wight,
As he that follows here, eclipseth them,
Who in his Cradle wore the Diadem.
43.
This is that Olive bearer of this Isle, Sic Minerva dicta Olivifera ab Ovidio.
K. James high Senescall of England, Scotland, and France, by private heritages,
viz. by Leicester, ab. and Aniou: He married Anne, daughter of Frederick the
second King of Denmark.

Who did by high preordinance, divine,
That great intestine quarrel reconcile,
Which so unnaturally so long had been
Betwixt Brutes sons Albanact and Locrine:
As Theodore did that which was between
The bloody brothers Lancaster and York,
And was a figure of this greater work.
44.
To this his reunited Albion,
Let us annexe the Crown of Pharamound,
And fair Hibernias (joining three in one) Tria juncta in uno: it is the Motto
of his Majesty's device for the Knights of the Bath.

Whilst bright renown builds trophies of his fame
Unto the Southern and the Northern bound,
And all the Muses consecrate his Name:
Whose Wisdom, Justice, and Piety has given
His acts a monument, shall endure with Heaven.
45.
And Britain had no sooner faith and force
Combined, but her Dolphin in tender age Henry Prince of great Britain. K.
Henry 2. buried in Fro^tenalx. King Charles has so many, so ancient, and so
lawful Titles to this Empire, as never any Prince Heir general of this
Kingdom had. He married Mary, Daughter to Henry 4. of France.

Vows to redeem from Gallike bonds the Cors
Of his Grandsire, the Great Plantagenet,
And seize upon his southern heritage:
And bounds and trophies in the Pyrens set.
Stay Muse, here drop a tear, for deaths black cloud
Too soon his glory and our hopes did shroud.
46.
But turn our eyes now from the clouded west,
And see the new Sun rising in the East,
With what auspicious brows the heavens expressed
Their glad praesages, the Celestial signs
With holy Auguries shined: Saturn did feast
With sprit'ly Icve, whilst Apollo divines
In Delphicke raptures: the Age renu'd again,
And took new influence from bright Charles his waine.
47.
The Stars of all yet were not absolute,
And Fates conspired to keep the^ in their wants:
But Gods and Fates, desert and public brute,
Have all pronounced him sole the worthy one,
To wear the Garland made of many plants,
And add eternal Scepters to his Throne:
Of whom Apollo in his sacred rage,
Did as you heard, such wondrous things praesage.
48.
And to accomplish full his happiness,
Heavens have to him a royal Spouse decreed:
All those frail Saints and flattered Goddesses
Shall kneel to her, so wise, so fair, so loyal,
So great, yet meek; as does her sex exceed,
And both thrice blessed in their issue royal.
For he and they which shall from them descend,
Shall reign in Britain till the world have end. Charles Prince of great
Bricaine.

49.
Away profane, sink to the lowest Hells,
With your detracting murmurrs and hoarse
Envy will yield, that fame not paralels spleens,
The fate of this great pair, which does out shine
The luster of all former Kings and Queens
Strengthened with all the powers and hands divine:
And in so just a scope their souls are spheard,
None ever lived more loved, admired and feared.
50
And every Nymph and Goddess of the plains
Shall wear rich favors of Genesta's plants.
And that no common injury prophanes
The sacred privilege of her blessed abode:
The Muses there shall keep their solemn hants
And in her shades sing many learned Ode:
Whilst Poets make her garlands more divine,
Then that which does for Ariadne shine.

Damaetas. 51.
Thanks blessed Prophet, praised be thy art,
Which has so much resolved my travailed mind:
My wish is satisfied in every part
My thoughts and doubts, are ridled every one;
And I confess his name thou have divined
To whose high worth, this garlands due alone,
For whose immortal reign and happy fate
Let all our vows and prayers be consecrate.

UPON KING HENRY THE SECOND the first Plantagenet of ENGLAND, etc.
WHen Warlike HENRY by his Puissance
Had set his Foot upon the breast of France,
Sceptered Hibernia, without Blood, or sweat,
And by his Conquests made his Name so great,
That it found way to Victory and Fame,
And burft the gall of War, where ere he came.
To Crown his fate, and make him greater yet,
There was no Title but PLANTAGENET:
To whose immortal lineage Fame could add
No greater glories; then from him they had
A Name so Great in Destiny and Fate,
Rome would have envied, or have trimbled at,
And her proud Tryumphs, too, look pale; set
By the brighter honors of PLANTAGENET,
whilst their imperial bays, as checked with thu^der
Dropped from their swelling temples, even with wonder,
To see their Fate so far out shined by odds,
And Pedigree of all their Demy-gods;
And to be heir unto great Henry's fame,
Would not be Rome, but change her fate and name.
FINIS.

