GABRIELS SALVTATION TO MARIE.

MADE BY JAMES COCKBVRNE.

Ingressus igitur Angelus ad eam, dixit, Aue gratis dilecta, dominus tecum est,
benedicta tu inter mulieres.

Luc. 1.28. printer's device of Henry Charteris being used by Robert Charteris
(McKerrow 307), representing the embodiment of Justice and Religion IVSTITIA.
RELIGIO.
SVVM CVIQVE DEVM COLE HIS SVFFVLTA DVRANT. HC


EDINBVRGH PRINTED BY ROBERT CHARTERIS Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. An. Dom. MDCV.

TO THE AVTHOR.
GO prosecute that sacred course of thine,
And use the subject that is vnusde too long.
The fruitful treasures of a rich Ingyne,
That Is spent approving right disprouing vvrong,
May make divinity seem more divine:
Whilst by a rauishde soul diuinelie song:
This in all minds does great delight infuse,
To hear things heavenly of an heavenly muse.
W. A. of Menstrie.

TO THE HONORABLE LADY OF HIGHEST HOPE MISTRESS Ieane Hammiltone, Lady
Skirling.
Honorable Lady, having nothing of vvorth to present your Ladishippe, I have
presumde to offer to the Schryne of your gracious clemency the humble
sacrifice of my deuote sincerity: whereby I have bevvrayed rather a will to
obey, then any skill to deserve your Ladyships protection. For (well I vvotte)
these fevv disordered lines are too vveake a prop to bear the burthene of your
al-fleing fame. Yet calling to mind your Ladyships vvorthie disposition, I am
persuaded my attempts will rather be buried in silence, nor smyled at with
disdain, and the rather be bucaus I am obligate your Ladieships in all
devvties ever and ever.

From Cambusnethane the xxv of December. James Cockburne.

INVOCATION.
WHat time the Cock with vvyde displayed vving
Did beat his breast, and then proclaim the day:
His peirsing note unto my thoughts did bring
My devvties all, and first how I should pray.
Then on my knees I turnde me where I lay,
With mourning speech even thus I did begin:
O Lord, I thee beseech thy justice stay:
Call not to mind the life I lived in.
Grant me thy spirit that I may rightly rin
Unto that Lamb that did thine regor mease,
To off^r thee by him for highest sin
A broken heart for burning sacrifyce:
Then I besought that all the three in one,
The work would bless my pen had undergone.
TO THE HONORED LADY OF HIGHEST HOPE MISTRESS IEANE HAMmiltone Lady
Skirling.
NOT to the vvorldling vvaltring in his wealth,
Nor to the usurer recounts his gain:
Not to the sick, whose thought is on his health,
Nor to the insolent of life profane:
Not to the ignorant of brutish brain,
Nor to the stupide Stoic will I send thee:
Not to the learnde, whose knowledge with disdain
Will scorn the Poet that so lovvrdlie pende thee:
Not unto babes, whose age cannot defend thee,
Nor siluer-seeking Minstrels for to sing:
Not unto careless men, who when they end thee,
Vnclosde will thee within some vvindovv sling:
But to a Lady svveet I will thee offer,
Who having read thee, closlie will thee coffer.
THEN fairest fair, whose matchles manners mylde,
And hautie thoughts dimerites high affection:
Who might have been the mother of that Child,
If any Gentile had been in election.
But since it is (I speak it with correction)
Thou art no Jew, but in the Jew indented
By grace, love, mercy and by free adoption
Of that great God our misery prevented:
Then praise his Name the way so well invented,
Praise thou the spirit that sanctified the birth,
Praise Jesus Christ so freely that consented
To cloth his god-hoode with the filthy earth:
Praise all the three, they only crave Peccaui,
Changde hopeles Eua in an happy Aue.
GABRIELL HIS SALVTATION TO MARIE.
1.
OVT from the orders of the Angels all
Sings holy hymns about the throne of grace,
The Lord commands to come unto his call
The winged Gabriell, straight to embrace
An happy charge for Eues unhappy race:
Who since her husbands fall had lain within
The foul alluring baytes of filthy sin.
2.
Swiftly he came, sweetly the Lord did say,
Thou that hes often my message borne in ire
Kings to destroy, and countries did deny
My god-hoode great, with hot consuming fire:
Go now in peace, let all thy rich attire
Be Azure hew, bright stars therein thou fix,
I will my justice with my mercy mix.
3.
I will redeem, recall, I will reclame,
Not by desert, but by adoption;
Not for their merits but my glories Name,
No not compelde, but at my option
The house of Jacob by my only Son,
Borne of a Maid, and the believers all
That breathes beneath my euer-mouing Ball.
4.
I will perfect my promise made indeed
To the first man through facilnes that fell:
That his begot should bruise the serpents head,
Whose birth in beauty should the rest excel,
Then where that Virgin rests I will thee tell,
Of all the Tribes that I have taine for chose,
The famous Nazareth does her enclose.
5.
Pure are her thoughts, chaste are her actions all
Firm is her faith, and fervently does pray:
Divine in Spirit, deuote on me to call:
Resolved in heart, at every hour to pay
The death her dew, or yet content to stay:
So are her virtues known, so flies her fame,
Betrothde she is, blessed Marie heght her name.
6.
Salute the maid with humble duties dew,
Discharge my charge with reverence and fear:
Seen shall it be (although it seem untrue)
That of my Son she is the mother dear:
For when with glory great thou draws near
And warbles forth thy voice, thou shall perceive
The holy Spirit the Savior conceive.
7.
Thus said the Lord, when Eoles windy Fan
The weeping dew from tender trees had rent,
And when the horned-Moone with visage wanne
Her borrowed light had back to Tytan sent,
That all the night before he had her lent:
And this he said, while all the host of heaven
Proclaimde his glore for such commission given.
8.
And having said, his arms abroad he threw,
And blessed the messinger before him lay:
Then silent sat, away the Angel flew,
And in the Air his wings did wide display:
He claue the clouds and cut the vapors gray,
He made the heavens admire, the waters wonder,
To see his glore, and hear his thuds of thunder.
9.
With holy Canticles and hymns he sings
The joyful news of man's salvation,
In flames of fire were graven between his wings
The Birth, the Burial, and the Passion
The Death, the Rising and Conception,
Of Jesus Christ, yea and the total sum
Of all his wondrous works that were to come.
10.
Drunk with delights, sweet Nazareth he soght,
That place he compast thryfe aroud and over,
In Mary's presence shortly is he brought,
Grave was his grace, while he on wing did houer,
At last his heauen-borne sight he did uncover:
And with a shudder all the house he spangled,
With twinkling dew unto his plumes were tangled.
11.
Amazde at first, but not greatly aghast,
To see his glory great, she changed hew:
A blushing rednes swiftly came and past
And dayntilie her whitenes did subdew
The lightning rays that from her eyelids flew,
When sudden joy made tumbling tears ouerflow,
Would soon have set an heap of hearts on low.
12.
The first seen sign of her true chastity
Round fleeting flew, and cannopyed her skin,
Two frothie globes of equal quantity
Playde on her breast, with veins blew, blushing, thin:
Her tempting mouth above her dimpled chin,
Her ranks of pearl, her half vp-spreading Roses
Still other kissed, while still each other closes.
13.
Between the branches of her body lay
Great Egypts wonders in the holy Print:
Whereon she read, and having read would stay
To meditate, how Moses meek was sent
To that proud Prince, who never would repent,
Till all his Chariotes, wheels and Assle trees
Indented were with sands amidst the seyes.
14.
Whiles would she turn and ouer-turne the leaf,
Whiles gravely gather up some sentence dark:
Whiles sadly sit twixt doubting and belief,
How the first age was closde within an Arc:
Whiles with her foremest joint she would remarke
The trimbling sacrifice that Abram old
Made of his tender Son with courage bold.
15.
At last her heart did kindle up her spirit:
Her spirit commanded both her knees to bow.
On yielding knees the Lord she did entreat,
Her pithie prayers pure he would allow,
Which in his presence there she did avow:
Desyring that in heart he would resolve
The apprehensions high she did reuolue.
16.
What means the brough so round about her hang,
Whose glancing rays ^ew Opall changing hewes?
What means the winged spirit so sweetly sang,
The second Ad^ (...) with joyful news?
What boy it is my ^ped spirit (...)?
With Angels eyes, what (...) these words of mirth
Glory to God, and peace to (...)
17.
At these her words her (...), her (...)
His beauties blaze forbade her to admire
For lo the sanct, his message to ^fold
Proclamde these ^ggied words with ^yling cheer,
Hayle Virgin pure, (...) David's daughter dear,
Hayle well of (...)
The Lamb (...)
18.
Hayle Marie mylde replenished with grace,
Beloved of God, (...) of all the (...)
That of the bleeting Eues of Adams race,
This only blessing great ^ngs to thee:
Then to discharge thy message given to me,
I bless thy actions all, I bless thy name,
I bless that blessed babe springs of thy wambe.
19.
The holy, happy salutation given,
New admirations through her fenses ran,
With thoughts confusde and stented eyes to heuaen
Unto the winged Spirit she thus began
Am I a mother never knew a man?
Or with the scornful maids shall I be loathed,
Whose only fault is this, I was betrothed.
20.
Free flees my thoughts, unspotted is my fame,
I loath all company that may allure,
I balance not my pleasures with my shame:
With Iepthes girl I live a Virgin pure,
I scorn to be enrold as Sichems hure:
Therefore the Lord in his appointed day
Will grant salvation to this tent of clay.
21.
I never went to see nor to be seen,
To Tymbrell sound I never caroll song:
I never danced in Cabinet nor green,
Short passages, nor moving Measures long,
Earings of gold in treasse never hang
Like twinkling stars, I never learnde to smyle
With rolling eyes, nor ^rging ^earde style.
22.
I never show my snow-white swelling globes,
To give the insolent the more ^yte
I never walked in silken shyning robes,
The feeders: of our fa^ill appetyte:
Dittayes of love I never did indyte,
I never used perfumde nor painted face,
Nor ^ted Courtly beck with minsing pace.
23.
No Marie, no, thy spotles thoughts are known,
Thy faith is seen to the al-seeing eye:
Through all the earth thy blessings shall be shown,
Then fear thou not reproachful in fa^ie,
The Spirit in God shall ouer-shadow thee:
By him thou shall conceive that Holy one,
That sit for ever shall on David's throne.
24.
Great shall he be, his Kingdom shall not move,
Over all the house of lacob shall he sway:
All power shall be granted him above,
The corners of the earth shall him obey,
The Gentile Kings to him shall tribute pay
Upon their knees in honor of his birth,
At Bethlem, with gold, incense and mirth.
25.
Heavens soldiers shall scumme the toplesse skies,
And sound the phamphere of his fame on hie:
Priests, Propheits, Patriarks with holy cries,
That night about poor sheepherds heads shall fly:
The Angels and Archangels in degrie,
And winged Cherebins with warbling voice,
Round in a ring shall mightelie rejoice.
26.
With all the blessed troops Hyerarchies,
As powers, thrones and dominations:
Blessed Serphins and Principalities,
Victorious Martyrs with immortal Crowns,
Young innocents pure virgin whose renownes
Against all assaults have keept their chastity,
As mid-wyue skild that office shall supply.
27.
Now while these melodies shall mountains move,
And every Angel shall another lead:
This wonder wondrous for to approve,
Each sheepherd shall tune on an oaten read,
With lylting loud fast home-ward shall they speed:
And cause the country people all conueene,
To praise the Lord, for wonders by them seen.
28.
Then shall the Ocean tumble up her sand,
And prease her bounds to break, thy Son to see:
The wandering stars shall twinkling over him stand,
Which was the guide to Herodes Princes three:
The fyrie lamp of heavens blew Cannopie
Lest he be last his service to advance,
Shall give thy babe good morrow with a glance.
29.
All flesh shall fold, all Nations shall have peace,
Sybillaes prophesies no faith shall have.
By him the Delphin Oracle shall cease,
The Gentiles gods no longer shall deceive:
And if thou would of me this question crave,
What name he heght these errors shall expel?
Many they are, but first Immanuell.
30.
The Gentiles hope, and Jacobs morning star,
The rock of rain, and the corner stone:
The flower of Iesse, that does sent so far,
The trew-Messias and that holy one:
The Prince of peace, the Resurrection
A Christ, a Jesus and a Savior,
A Lamb, a Silo and a great Pastor.
31.
The furnisher of faith, the mercy sait,
The Sanctuary great of man's refuge,
The Lords anointed and his rewler great
The word, the way, the Prophet and the Judge:
The Ruther of the Arc in the deludge:
The bread of life, the Alpha and the end,
The Dove that Noe in his Embassage send.
32.
The well of life the bread sent down from heaven,
His Fathers Image bewtifull and fair,
Brightness it self, to whom all glore is given:
The first begotten and his Fathers Air:
The serpent strong the helles all-spuilzier
The bishop of our souls and brother dear,
Blessed be thy belly such a babe does bear.
33.
Now while this winged Spirit had told this tale,
The sweet alluring looks and comely grace,
The maid that at his entry seemed pale
Shynde like the birneist beams of Tytans face,
Dread left her thoghts, fear gave high joy the place,
Her eyes, ears, heart, and tongue were all content
Unto his happy charge to give consent.
34.
Thou the Creator of all creature:
That formed the globe, the morning and the nights,
That set the seyes, and made the air so pure,
That spangled all the heavens with fyrie lights,
Confirm thy promise made in all our sights:
And let thy hand-mayde find that happy blessing
Which Isreal's Dames could not obtain by wishing.
35.
With hyssope purge and purify my heart,
Direct thy Spirit to cloth me with his wings:
Thy graces great on me, pure me impart,
Mount up my earthly thoghts to heavenly things:
And since that I even of the King of Kings,
The mother am, Lord lift my voice on hie,
With some sweet song thy name to magnify.
36.
As this he said, the sweet renewing Ghost
Cled with a cloud begouth to do his dew,
With glory great he filled the house almost,
Like to a Turtle white his Image grew:
Between the Angel and the maid he flew
With soft, sweet, sober course, and then did light
Between her lips, then vanished out of sight:
37.
O far-fetcht fainting breath, o chiuering chin,
O flightring heart, and eyes entombe in tears,
O hollow warbling throat, now now begin
With never tyring tune to fill the ears
Of every creature my blessing hears:
O happy soul, see thou these verses warpe,
Like these sometimes were sung to David's Harp.
MARY'S SONG.
THE Heavens eternal al-foreseeing King,
Our thoughts deep searcher, Natures father great
The worlds strong Mouer, founder of all thing
Within the round and the infernal pit:
Strange graces hes he granted unto me,
That without sin I should sing lullabie.
From high he hes beheld my pure estate,
And made my flightring Spirit his praise proclaim.
His kindness hes no periode nor date,
To all him loves, all holy be his name,
The proud he hes despised for love of me,
And bids me sing on high sweet lullabie.
He hes deiect the mighty from their thrones,
And mounted humble hearts of poorest spirit:
Refresht he hes the hunger-steruing bones
Of simple souls lay begging by the street,
He hes sent down his Angel unto me,
And bids me rock the babe with lullabie.
That happy promise now he will fulfill,
Made in sweet Edens glauncing gardene gay
To Abram on the sacrificing hill.
To him whose Harp drove Saules evil spirit away:
He hes resolude the mother I should be
To his dear dear, and sing sweet lullabie.
For which sweet song the gwerdone shall be given,
When hopeless age hes poynted out my end,
The fourth place in the Diamantiue heaven,
Where troops of winged spirits shall me attend:
And on the earth each age shall speak of me,
For singing their sweet Saviors lullabie.
FINIS.

