A description of new Jerushalem Being The substance of two Sermons delivered
at Paul's Cross.

Containing, A brief Discovery and Conviction of certain Doctrines held of
Romanists and Brownists against the Catholic and Apostolic faith.

By Henoch Clapham.

Dan. 12.10. None of the wicked shall have understanding, but the wise shall
understand.

Printed at London by Valentine Simmes. 1601.

To the Right Honorable Sir William Ryder knight, Lord Major of the Ho. City
of London.
BEing (Right Honorable) to send this little Description of New Ierushalem unto
print, (though far from being done in print) I pondred to whom I might with
expediencie dedicate the same. At last, I set down my rest on Him, who was in
the public place where I preached, then preeminent: Who also heard both the
Sermons, and therewithal did both times with Ho. courtesy receive the Preacher
home to Table. All this to your Ho. self.

And in very troth, I know not well to whom rather it appertains: seeing,
besides the former respects, the Lord has made you (next under her Majesty)
chief Ouerseer in our Ho. City, for cherishing virtuous acts, and for pruning
and cutting off all transgressions from the same.

Transgression is two fold: either th^^ whereby Religion is abused, or that
which transcendeth Humain equity. God and Man are made one in Christ, nor
should Religion and Righteousness be sundred, though distinguished. The first is
by God his Ministers to be preached: The second by Maiestrates to be
proclaimed: and the breach of both, by their Sword to be punished.

What need of a sharp sword and of a two edged word there is, let the rank
growth and impudent carriage of Impiety and Iniquity testify that. Easy
salues are for easy sores, but Fistulaes must be bitten, and Gangrenes be
pared off. I need not signify to your Lo. so much what unrighteousness
ouerflowes (every Court and Session rings that Alarm) as what false coin in
Religion daily is dispersed by Romanists, Brownists, Anabaptists, Arrians,
Familists, and such like factions. These that counterfeit the Q. coin, are
punished accordingly: But for adulterating, clipping, and flat changing of
Christ's coin (the precious written-word, stamped with Gods image) how little
this is looked unto, and how seldom, and then also how slenderly corrected, it
is able to make the heart of Gods subject to bleed.

As the sword and word are for procuring subjection unto Maiestrates: so much
more be they ordained for causing obedience unto God, Duty to earthly powers,
it should lead us (as by the hand) to that duty which we owe unto the Prince
of Princes. Else, while we live to Man, whose breath is in his nosthrils, we
dye to God, whose breath does kindle the fire of Tophet.

In lighting Ierushalems torch, I therewith disclose false lights and sleights
whereby Babels merchants would utter their painted wares. Look how I drew it at
first for helping mine own memory, so I sent it to the examination, and so it
was returned authorized to the press. And that falls out to be the same that
was preached for substance, howsoever some other Accidents drew in some other
particular discourses, not so necessary the press.

Besides the two Sermons, I have adjoined a Brief of that I purposed then also
to have delivered. All I present, and yet all that nothing to the sacred Texts
desert. As I could, I have done, and so in all holy duty I remain,

Your Ho. obliged, Henoch Clapham.

To all that wish Ierushalems prosperity, the grace of God be multiplied.
Beloved, if ever, now fasting and prayer is highly necessary: as for the whole
catholic Church, so (of our parts) more specially for our own particular
Church, a member of the universal. As I am not a little acquainted with
foreign Churches their corruptions (but the less contagious, because they be
in further part of the catholic body removed from us) so, not to dissemble our
own (alas, alas) how is our Sauiors speech fulfilled upon us? Faith
(faithfully professed) hard to be found, when under color of Reformation,
people fear not to complot Deformation: every fantastic spirit attempting
what is good in his own eyes and private judgment, as though there were no
King in Israel, no God in heaven. For Charity, the most of us have exiled her.
Faith justifies alone, say we: it is true: but add with the Apostle, That faith
which works by Love: even by Love termed the Bond of Perfection, and the
Fulfilling of the Law: for never shall that Tree be approved which brings
not forth good fruit. Trees are not planted for living to themselves, but for
benefiting others also. The devil once sought to lead us so to gaze on the
merit of works, as nothing at all we should examine how we stood in the
faith: now he labors to cause us so to admire Faith, as we should forget (I
had almost said, forswear) good works. Thus Satan is ever in extremities: but
the people of God must know, that as GOD has blessedly joined true faith and
good works together: so, none can but by the instinct of Satan attempt to put
them asunder. If we so believe, and so walk, then God shall not be weary of
doing us good, nor we have occasion to fear the threats of Belial.

As all euilles are contagion, so falsehood in doctrine is Leaven for infecting
many: and a Canker for corroding like a viper. For, from whence proceed evil
works, but from evil Belief, false persuasion of God and his proceedings?
The late Romanistes will that their Pope may err in Fact, but not in Faith. A
blind assertion: for no erroneous fact, but it proceeds from erroneous Faith.
As for example: Peter denies his master, a foul Fact. From whence proceeded
this, but from a persuasion, that it should be good for him then to do so? The
like may be said of any fact. So that we may conclude rather, A man may err in
faith, yet not in fact (for he may stay to act his error) but never err in
fact, but first the devil has sown error in his faith. And hereof it
comes that Romanists on the one hand; and Brownists, Anabaptists, Arrians,
etc. on the other hand, they besiege our Church with spiritual artillery:
every Sect thinking they therein do God very good service, and their Fact
passing commendable: whereas (alas) such proceeding is but the fruit (to
think the best) of error in Faith, corruption in judgment.

It is then a duty of Gods Ministers, specially owing to the people, namely, to
hold out the word of truth for enlightening the senses. And because
Illumination without Sanctification does make a man but a Balaam, an Iscariot,
a devil: herewith they are to pray much, that GOD would sanctify such light
and knowledge to true obedience.

Amongst the residue of Gods Ministers, I (the least of many) do labor in
this work daily. Though I have no particular flock to attend on by peculiar
calling: yet am I called to the work of Christ, for ministration of word and
Sacrament to God his sheep, in this catholic sheepfold. A calling had at
home, and not vnsubscribed unto by foreign Churches. Before thine eyes I have
here lighted a candle, describing new Ierushalem, the praise of the whole
earth. This is not done so particularly as might be wished, but as the time
could affoorde. Moses (from mount Neboes top termed Pisgah) he sees Canaan
and Isreal's distinct lotts: but Ioshuah (the diuident of these mansions) he
saw it more thoroughly. If that I have done may occasion any other to do better,
my lot is good. Mean time accept of this Description of Ierushalem, as of a
light, directing to a Description of Babel: that (if God think good) I may
hereafter publish. Which if, some things here omitted, may there be
fruitfully observed.

Southwark by London, 1601
A DESCRIPTION of new Jerushalem
EZEKIEL. last chap. last verse, and last clause. And the Name of that City from
a Day (shall be) Iehouah-shammah.


TO the end this vpshot of Ezekiels Prophecye may be the cleerer too our
senses, Let us summarily consider the whole body of this Priest-like
Prophecy, In this visionarie volume we may observe two sorts of Visions: the
first, general, the second, special. That is general, it is that one stately
sight which the Prophet has in the first chap. containing a treasury of
comfort to the whole Catholic body of Israel: seeing therein the Church may
behold, how Jehovah Aelohim the great God, is mounted upon the stately Chariot
of the world, having the raynes in his hand, governing by the mighty outgoings
and returnings of his eternal spirit: whereby he also sees clearly into all
things. Come heaven and earth together, run all upon wheels, not Fortune, but
the mighty Jehovah, he turns all the frame of Nature unto his own most
worthy glory, and the common utility of his believing Israel.

In the other visions we more specially observe, first, the Prophets calling:
secondly, a particular discovery of the Jewish typical matters. In his
calling (contained in the second and third chap:) we clearly may see, how
together with his Nomination unto this stately kind of ministry the provident
God gives unto him a Roll of wisdom to eat: Because he sends no prophet
in mercy to his church, whom first he enricheth not with the hid treasure of
his burning spirit, for consuming up the spiritual oppositions, that stand as
hindrances in the way of his kingdoms passage.

In these visions that concern the body of the Jews more particularly, we may
consider: first Jehovah casting them out for their sins, specially for
filling the Temple with pictured Beasts (beastly affections in them, who
should have bin themselves a Temple for the holy ghost) auerting and turning
their backs upon the Lord: for the which Jehovah leaves the Temple, drawing his
glory to the Mountain, forsaking them and their City; that so the Chaldeans
with unbridled cruelty might ouerturne all, destroy a multitude, and carry a
remnant into captivity. This their eiection laid down in sundry visions, in
the second place is uttered, God his free acception of this castaway people.
And this is don, first by destroying his peoples adversaries: secondly by
pouring a bounteous blessing upon this people: first by reuniting Judah and
Israel (the two and ten tribes) into one, for the glorious overthrow of Gog and
Magog: secondly by measuring unto his people Canaan and Jerusalem for new. That
I say, for new, it is because all in this restoration is new. For in respect
of the letter fully, when were the ten Trybes (who schismed in Rehoboams time,
and in Hosheahs time were transported by Assure,) when were they reunited to
Judah and Benjamin? When did these 12. Trybes of Israel make such hauock of Gog
and Magogs huge army? When was Canaan so remeasured, and these new lots
(diverse unto Iehoshuahs) when were the Trybes replanted in them? Other things
touching the City and Temple might come into a Quaere: but that is said unto
the learned is sufficient, for manifesting that the fullness and spirit of this
prophecy was to be expected of a new Israel, coming out of a new Babylon,
unto a new Canaan, endowed with a new City and Temple. Insomuch as this
New-church might well say with the Apostle, 2. Cor. 5.17.
Old things are passed away, behold all things are become new. As Ezekiel saw
them in the spirit, so must we consider them in the spirit. For (as a certain
Ancient well says of Moses fed in the mount etc. Macarius in homil. 12.
((...)) What soever was done, (or, fell out) it was a figure: and (as
the apostle speaks, Heb. 10.1.
a shadow of good things to come. Now to the Text.

And the Name of that City, etc.

What City speaks he of? The whole history before considered, we easily
understand of what City he treats according to the letter and open narration,
(namely of Ierushalem in Palestina) which according to this Prophecy was to be
turned into a new City: and therewith to be invested with a new name. First to
this old City, the shadow; then afterward to the new City, the soul and
substance of the former shadow.

Ierushalem in Ioshuahs 18. chap. and last verse, is termed Iebusi, (of the
uncircumcised Iebusits that inhabited the same) and is there seated in the lot
of Benjamin: specially the superior part, Zion (2. Sam. 5.) together with the
sacred Temple seated upon the Mountains, termed by Moses, the shoulders of
Benjamin. But else, from Ioshuahs 15. chap. and last verse, it should also fall
within the lot of Regal Judah. This do some reconcile thus: it was Beniamins
Per sortem.
by lot, but Iudahs by Beniamins Per concessionem.
concession or grant: or else, it was by reason that God (for after purpose)
had intermingled Benjamin with Judah.

Touching the Name (Ierushalem) diverse are diversely minded. Some have taken it
to arise from the greek word (...) (signifying or Sacrificer.
a Priest) and the ancient hebrew term Shalem, in English, Peace, Heb. 7.2.
as if it were termed, Sacrifice or Sacrificers-peace, or Peaceable-sacrifice.
But such composition should have been to the Jews, but as a Lynsywoolsy
garment, or the matching of an Ox and an Ass together, or the sowing of their
ground with Miscellaine, inhibited by the law. For what had Hebers people to do
with Iauans tongue? Or when did the spirit of prophecy abhor Hebers language
and the Dialects following out of it, that so he should to the old Synagogue
add the Grecians language? The continual practice of the old testament does
ever witness the contrary.

Others more rightly deduce the former part of the word also from the Hebrew,
and hereof be two judgments. Some take it to be compounded of Iireh (Genesis
22.14.) a term which Abraham put upon the mount 1. Chro. 3.1.
Moriah, whereon the Temple was built: and of Shalem the ancient name of this
city ( Genesis 14.) what time ( Melchi-zedek did inhabit there. Which two terms
( Iireh and Shalem) contracted into one, do make Ierushalem. And so in this one
word; the Jews are put in mind of God his provident sight in Abraham's offering
up his Isaac: and of Melchi-zedeks blessing powered upon Abraham, after his
return from slaughter of the Kings.

Others compound it of Iebus and Shalem. And very certain it is, that this
City at several times enjoyed these several names. But these two terms
drawn into one, should so yield, not Ierushalem, but Iebushalem. Answer is
made, that B. is turned into R. for mystery sake, (as Saul was turned into
Paul, Sarai into Sarah, Abram into Abraham,) the change of letter being a
sacramental sign of the Cities change from sin to Sanctity: no longer to
remain a cage of such unclean and hateful byrds, as were the Iebushits: but a
City for the Saints, an habitation for the mighty God of Iaakob. And this
mystical sense, the B. turned into R. will further imply, if so they be
considered in Hebers language: where B. is termed Beth, (in English an House)
R. is termed Resh, (in English an Head) as if one would say, that unclean House
became the Head or Metropolitan city. And in very truth, every one of us in
our first creation was Shalem, at peace with God: but by Apostacy and
miscreation, we became in the second place Iebus, a receptacle of unclean
spirits: but by recreation, and the new gift of God, we are made Ierushalem, a
City for the great king.

The truth resting between these two last repeated judgments, you may
demand, whether of them vtters the truth? I answer, both speak probably, for
any thing yet unto me revealed. If of Iireh and Shalem, it signifies vision of
peace: if of Iebus and Shalem (B. turned to R.) it also comes to be (as
before) Iirehshalem, by contraction, Ierushalem: the vision of peace, or the
place of such vision as brings True peace. For all false vision does effect
but a false peace; compared by Ezech. chap. 13.11. etc. to untempered mortar,
that will not hold out a storm, when the wrath of God comes out against
sinners. Whereas that vision which issues from God and his Ministry, it
offreth (and to the Believer gives) a Peace, which the Receiver shall never
need to repent of. This touching the Judicial and typical Ierushalem
premised: Let us now examine the remoouall of this shadow for establishing the
substance.

And the Name of that City from a Day (shall be) Iehouah-shammah. As if he
should say, From the day of this new Cities building, a term shall be put upon
this City, which shall be unto it as a sacrament of Iehouahs presence there
for ever. So that, herein we are to observe, First, the remooual of an old
City, 2. for building of a new: with the remoouall of an old name, for
baptizing this City into a new.

First, touching the remoouall of the old, Haggai (including City, Hag. 2.7.
Temple, Land,) does term the policy ecclestiasticall and civil, an
heavens and an earth which God would shake after a while, even then shake the
same, what time the expectation of the Nations (that is Messiah) should come.
And because we should not doubt what he means by shaking, mark how the
Author to the Hebrews descants thereon: Yet once more will I shake, Heb.
12.27.28.
not the earth only, but also the heavens. And this (word) Yet once more,
signifies a remoouing of those things which are made, that the things which
are not shaken may remain. Wherefore seeing we receive a kingdom which cannot
be shaken, etc. In all which is plainly concluded, that the old policy of the
Jews, together with their whole kingdom, it was to be shaken, and by the
Messiah removed: that so we might receive the new kingdom of Messiah, that
never was to be shaken or removed. The Prophets are plentiful in this point,
and the Author to the Hebrews makes this doctrine as the main argument and
subject of his Epistle. And what does Iaakob in his prophecy upon Iudahs tribe
infer principally, if not this, that Iudahs tribe should continue till Shiloh
come, Genesis 49.10.
but Shiloh once come he should gather the people to himself: and so
consequently dissolve Iudahs tribe and annihil their City and policy? The
tribe shall not depart Judah (that is, Iudahs tribe shall not be dissolved and
confounded) till Shiloh come, and the people shall be gathered unto him. And
how apparent this is, let Iudahs present dispersion, the loss of their Canaan,
the subversion of their city, the overthrow of their priesthood and sacrifice
(and that for these 1500. years, and upward) let that their tragike experience
be as ten thousand subscriptions to this doctrine.

Nor were these heavenly Mosaicall heavens and earth shaken and removed for a
season, but for ever. For from the day of that shaking, we received a kingdom
that was never to be removed. Now, if with our immovable kingdom (the
kingdom of Christ) we should after a season expect the Jewish kingdoms
restoration unto their Mosaicall policy, this were to confound Christ and
Moses, shadow and substance. I do not define whether ever the Jews shall be
gathered into some form of government, but I conclude that their figuring
kingdom was (as a shadow) ever to be abolished, that so the figured and
substantial kingdom of Messiah might be planted for ever.

The Synagogues kingdom was notably shaken, when (Messiah hanging upon the
cross) the earth quaked, the veil rent, the stones cloue a sunder. Yea, they
might take knowledge of a new world, when as the graves (together with the Lord
of resurrection) did send out their dead, Matthew. 27.51 etc.
who walked into the City and showed themselves to many: putting them in mind
of Daniels Dan. 12.2.
resurrection of many. About 40. years after, their Temple was fired, their
city by the Romans rased to the ground, and their whole commonwealth vanished
as a scrowle folded together. Eusebius. them. Euan. l. 1. c. 6.
This caused Eusebius to say (Soluta est confestim omnis Mosi constitutio etc.)
The whole constitution of Moses forthwith was dissolved, and all things of the
old Testament whatsoever till then reserved, they then were taken away. From
this day, Ezekiels new city was to be builded. The low Jerusalem was to give
place unto that new one, which the apostle terms Gala 4.26 so understood of
Luther, Calvin, Mariorat, Hemin gius. Hyperius, and others. See Hebr. 12.22.
heavenly and free, yea the mother of us all: and by John defined to be the
Concilium Senosense in primo decreto, understands so of Revel. 21.
Tabernacle of God resiant with men. Of the old city excellent things were
spoken, but greater and more marvelous things are recorded of this city, the
substantial city of God. And no maruayle, seeing this is compacted in such
durable manner of such durable matter, as one with God it must continue for
ever. The Other was but Leah, that is, Rahel, the beuty of the nations: and
better then the Egyptian Queen may be called In Dan. 11 17. she is termed
Bath-Nasim.
Cleopatra, the glory of a country: for the King of kings has united her to
himself for ever. Hereof a certain Ancient he thus writes: The city of
our Savior is builded. And the Name of that City shall not be (as was the
first) Ierushalem (interpreted Vision of Peace, Ierom here on: Vrbs Saluatoris
extructa est. etc.
) but Adonaj-sama (Ierom uses Adonaj for Jehovah, according to the manner of
the Hebrews) which in latin speech is turned Dominus ibidem: who will never
depart from it, as from the first people he did, saying to his disciples (
John 14. vlt.) Arise, let us go hence: and unto the Jews ( Math. 23.38.) your
house shall be left desert. But this shall have an eternal possession, and he
himself will be the possession unto it, promising so to the same disciples,
saying: Behold, I am with you unto the end of the world. Ludouic. Lauater.
hereon
And a later Writer speaks thus: The City was foure-square, whereby is
signified the firmitude of the Church, because it cannot be euerted. Howsoever
assailed, it ever rises up against all assaults. Jehovah there. Out of this
city the Lord will not depart. He will not leave it as he did the synagogue:
but in all ages he will be There, according to that in Math. 28. I will be with
you unto the end of the world. Briefly then I infer, 1 First, established, it
never after can be totally removed. These two doctrines how they be receued of
Romanists, Anabaptists, Brownists, etc. I shall briefly examine.

The Romanists command in their Church the use of sundry creatures (as
garments, oil, water, salt, belles, etc.) and, as their Provincial Moguntine
synod affirms, Mogunt. council held Anno 1549
Ecclesiam exorcizandi potestatem accepisse, etc. that the Church has power of
coniuring, salt, and other creatures, for auerting the diuelles trains, and
noisome pestilences: so (as they write) their Pope Alexander of old urges his
holy water from Leuies ceremonial water: and they from the Aaronicall
priesthood do urge garments and other ceremonial creatures. What must their
arguments now be?

1 The Church has receued power no less than the Synagogue, to exorcize
creatures for driving away Diuelles: or,

2 Moses commanded to the Synagogue, holy water, holy oil, holy garments, etc.
therefore the church of Christ may, or ought also so to consecrate and use them.

First, I pass by their misconstruing of the Leuiticall ceremonies, who
neither were by the Priests exorcised or coniured: nor yet after their
consecration set aparte for such ridiculous purposes, as to fear away the
devil, drive away pestilences, preserve corn from thunder, etc. Secondly I
answer, it follows not, that what ceremonies God by Moses did prescribe unto
the synagogue, that these must of God by Christ Jesus be continued in the new
Testaments church: for then it should follow, that not only some ceremonies,
but all should be translated into the Church. But as the Apostle says, that
Leuiticall or Ceremonial meats, drinks, Coloss. 2.16, 17.
and holydaies, they were but a shadow of things to come, the body (or
substance) whereof was Christ, (and therefore had their sacramental end in
Christ) so, the same Apostle terms the observance of Judicial ceremonies, A
yoke, from which Christ has made us free. And in deed, to retain these
Ceremonies, what is it else but the rearing again of the particion wall which
stood between Jew and Gentile, and so consequently to deny that Messiah is come
in the flesh: seeing his appearance in our nature, it was for the abolishment
of that particion wall of ceremonies? Whereupon a certain Ancient could well
conclude, August. de doctr. christ. l. 3. c. 9.
that after Christ by his resurrection manifested himself to be the freer of
us from the burden of legal ceremonies, he himself and th'apostolicall
discipline delivered unto us (quaedam pauca pro multis) a certain Few for
Many, (sicuti est Baptismi sacramentum and celebratio corporis and sanguinis
Domini) as namely the sacrament of Baptism, and the celebration of our Lord
his body and blood. As for Ordination by presbyterall imposition of hands,
mentioned by him elsewhere for a kind of Aug. contr. Parmen. li. 2 c. 12. and
alibi So Bucer expressly, in l. de vi and vsu ministerii. Calvin in Instit. l 4.
c. 3. sect 16 and ch 14. sect 20. and ca. 19. sect. 28 and 31 So has Apologia
Augustanae confess. granted by Chemnitius in exam. Trident. Council. So has
our doctor Bilson in his perpetual government, ca. 9. and 10.
sacrament (and in the new church practiced precisely and plentifully by the
Apostles and Presbyters) he in this place passes by it, because, neither it
was a ceremony to the whole Church, nor now instituted: but an ancient sacred
sign continued, whose signification had no end in Christ's manifestation. For
Christians to revive the legal shadows, it is but to cast again a veil upon
Moses, and to hinder us (as the Jews are yet hindered) from seeing into the
end of things which by Messiah are abolished. But in very troth, the
Romanists, their coniuring of creatures for driving away Diuelles, it is so
far from being Mosaicall (much less Christian) as it rather is borrowed from
Ethniks, who so hoped to pacify their Daemones: or else from Tobits
Apocryphal Angel, who taught the fugation of a devil (by Archangeli expos.
in Conclus. Mirandula.
Cabalistes termed Asmodeus, the proud devil) and that by virtue of a fume
made upon a fishes heart and liver. The Romanistes coniured creatures tending
thus (not to so reasonable a work, as to rear up the partition wall again,
but) to a reviving of Gentiles idolatrous worship: or at best, a putting of
spirit into Rabbinicall blasphemous figments, to the violation of Messiahs
kingdom.

Nor does this doctrine any jot help them which contend against certain
garments in our church. And why? because such garments are not with us urged
for Ceremonial or Sacramental garments: but only (as is open in our law)
for decency and comeliness. Christ's appearance did put an end, not to the
using of the creature, but to the using of it So: that is, from using it
sacramentally, figuratively, typically. Touching which free use of all his
creatures, I shall have occasion to speak more hereafter.

Touching the Brownists and Anabaptists, they would not be thought to bring us
back again to Iudaisme, but judge of them by this their argument: The
Israelites in Deuteronomy. 12.2. are commanded to destroy all the places wherein the
nations served their Gods: therefore all the Temples or churches wherein the
Romanists have served their Images, they are to be destroyed. Or thus: It was
simply unlawful for the Israelites to sacrifice in the high places: therefore
simply unlawful for christians to preach or pray in the Temples of Romish or
Idolatrous christians. By this argument they conclude, a nullitie of all divine
woorship in our churches: and by the former, a ruinating of them to the earth.
And the one and the other is drawn from a ceremonial commandment in the
law.

(Shemo Sham) his name there. And for this cause, Moses precisely (having
spoken of such vastation) he commands his people to repair unto this one
place wherein he put his name. So that between this one place and the other,
there was a flat opposition, the one falling, the other standing. And therefore
the people no longer commanded to destroy the one, then the other stood. But
this was not to stand for ever, therefore the commandment of destroying the
other, not moral, nor continuing for ever.

2. Pet. 2. Romans 12.1. 1. Cor. 3.16. and 6.19.
as living stones to become a spiritual house, to offer up our selves for a
quick and living sacrifice: and plainly told, that we be the Temple of the
holy ghost. Now, will they and every one grant the Tabernacle and Temple to be
figures of the new church? Then by proportion it must follow, that the former
material Idol houses, they (as was Babylon, Sodom, Aegipt) were figures of
the many false assemblies schismatic and heretical, that would be opposite
unto the catholic body. All which spiritual synagogues (or assemblies of
false woorshippers) were by the spiritual Israel of god (and specially by
their spiritual weapons) to be overthrown and dissipated: that happily so
they may return to the unity of the Catholic Church. And to this purpose,
where the twelve Trybes were armed with carnal weapons, the twelve Apostles
were armed with spiritual weapons, whereby they did not cast down material
synagogues, but hawtie imaginations of men, and every thing that was
spiritually exalted against God.

Thirdly, admit (which they would have) that all our Churches had bin reared up
by Antichrists limbs, and dedicated unto Idol-worship, should it follow, that
these houses should be as deep in pollution as these that served the Gentiles?
The uncircumcised Nations in Canaan had nothing in their woorship, but their
own inventions, altogether ignorant and unbelieving the Covenant of Grace. As
for our predecessors subjected to Romes government, the written word of God
(for the substance thereof, specially at time of Churches building) it was
preached amongst them: and no doubt a seed of God ever amongst them. Nor was
there other place where God had put his Name, for our predecessors to repair
unto, then within the limits of the Romish jurisdiction, in the midst of which
part of the Temple of God, that blasphemous horn of Rome was after mounted. If
the commandment in Deuteronomy. 12.2. were moral and perpetual touching destruction
of Pagans houses, it yet follows not, that the Idolatrized houses of
Christians, they were as well to be torn up. There is a great difference: first
between the woorshippers, secondly between their woorships: thirdly, between
the end they referred their houses unto. Except with the Stoiks we held (Omnia
peccata paria) that all sins were alike and of equal weight in the balance;
we otherwise cannot argumentate thus: The Pagans Idolatry (which is an
Idolatry in the highest degree) it was to suffer this judgment: therefore
Christians in any kind of Idolatry are to suffer the same. The Hebrew that
stole another Hebrew, Deuteronomy. 24.7. compared with Exodus 22.1. and chapter 22.22.28.
etc.
and afterward sold him, or made merchandise of him, he was to die the death:
but he that stole an ox or sheep, and sold it, was only to restore it with
some advantage. So Adultrie was death; fornication not: and yet both sin and
abuse of the body. Where the adversary replyeth, these Churches may be spared
from the rasing down, and applied to civil usage, as for Barnes, Stables,
etc. Herein they overthrow themselves: for the law of Deuteronomy. 12.2. admitted no
such civil use, but without all exception they were to be battred down. And
thus these fellows will take away our liberty, and give us liberty, not
according to settled Scripture, but their own unsettled fancy.

Kings 3. chap. and also the 13. chap. (Wherewith may also be considered
Isreal's sacrificing, and Samuels benediction thereof also in the hie-places. 1.
Samuel 9.12, 13, 14.) In the third chap. it is said that Solomon sacrificed and
prayed in Gibeon the chief hie-place. The fact seems excusable, because to
that day, no house was built unto the name of the Lord. The Tabernacle through
age was far spent, and therefore the Ark of God his presence sometimes placed
in Roumes that might have been bettred: and yet at this time seated in
Jerusalem. And as in such respect, the holy ghost seems to excuse the
matter; so in the second place he plainly protests, that God in Gibeon appeared
to Solomon, and highly accepted of his prayer for wisdom. Touching preaching
in those places, the 13. chap. manifests how A man of God, (that is, a
Prophet or Preacher of God) he comes to Bethel: and there entering into the
Idol temple dedicated by Jeroboam unto a Caluish worship, he there by the
Alter-side stands and pronounces the will of God, against that Idol-worship
and Priesthood: and this in the face of Ieroboams presence. By all which it
seems unto me, that God, and the people of god, did put a great difference
between the houses which Canaanits reared up for their Religion substancially
and wholly evil, and these places which Idolatrous Israelites did rear up for
their linsy-woolsie medley religion. Who (notwithstanding their Idolatry) were
ever interessed with Circumcision, the seal of the Covenant, whereby they stood
a separate people from the Heathen: and still amongst prophetical menaces,
they had this Euangelical speech from the mouth of God, Israel my people. Which
(if the former law in Deuteronomy. 12.2. were moral) should teach us a great different
use between Pagans temples, and Idolatrized Churches: yea, though the
Christians were so deep in Schism and Idolatry, as it should be unlawful for
Judah in such their estate, to join fully in spiritual communion with Israel.

Fifthly, where they teach that we can have no spiritual use of the houses
which Antichrist or Romanists have Idolatrized, they forget how the Temple was
used for God his worship, sundry times after it had been horribly profaned.
If they reply, we except not against such houses simply for having been
profaned, but for having been dedicated from the very foundation to Idolatry:
I demand of them, first how it does appear in Deuteronomy. 12 that the Israelites
were tied to examine, whether all such places had been so dedicated from the
very foundation? Secondly, I would know of them, how they know that all our
Churches were founded by Romes Apostacy to that Idolatrous woorship? Here they
must make a religion of it, to search after the ages of Churches: and whether
they were builded since Antichrist was mounted. Here I will help the Nouices.
Dioclesian destroyed the Temples, Eusebius. l. 8. cap. 2.
as Eusebius records (very aged were these Churches) and then the Gentiles
vpbraided the Christians (says Orig. ad Celsum l. 4. and Arnob. l. 2.
Origin) with their lack of Temples: as now they might well laugh us to
scorn, if we would pull down our Churches for satisfaction of Brownists, who
never are like to build a Church: destroyers (so much as in them is) both of
Churches material and spiritual. The former loss by Dioclesian was recovered
by the edict of Galerius Maximinus, after the hand of God had been sharp upon
him: as Eusebius. l. 8. c. 16. and 9. chapter 10. Niceph. l. 7. c. 3.
Eusebius and Nicephorus witness. After this, how bountiful Constantinus
Magnus was this way, th'ecclesiasticall hystories sufficiently utter. Nor was
this of Constantine effected so late as 340. years from our Saviors
incarnation. Now let our Church-ruinors teach us, First, when Antichrist had
subdued our Western parts unto him, so that thence-forth all stood subjects to
that Beast? Secondly, let them prove unto us that our Churches in such and such
times of Antichrist, they were builded at his commandment, and by his members,
unto his apostaticall woorship.

Sixthly, admit that Antichrist, and whosoever had reared up and dedicated our
Temples to idols, yet the creature recovered out of their hands, it cease
not to be the good creature of God. 1. Tim. 4.4, 5
For the Apostle teaches me, that every creature of God is good, and nothing
ought to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving: and reason hereof
he thus renders, Because it is sanctified by the word and prayer. If no meat
entering into me (though once unclean by the Law) can now pollute the
believer; much less can garments and houses that are creatures external and
outward. The Apostle indeed says, that in not touching, tasting, handling
such things as the Law once counted unclean, Coloss. 2
it has a show of wisdom, but in truth no substance of wisdom. And for
that cause he calls it no better then Ethelo-threskeia, A will worship:
whereas (if we be risen with Christ) then we will use our Christian liberty in
the free use of God his creatures; and not bring our selves back into a
Judicial bondage. John 4.20 21. etc.
Hereof the woman of Samaria could not be ignorant, who by our Savior
himself was taught, that not in Iaakobs mountain, nor yet in Beniamins
hills, was Gods worship or sacrifice to be longer seated: but the hour was
coming, and even then was (begun) for abolishing that form of sacrifice, as
also the Place. And hitherto Saint Paul had relation, when he writes thus
unto Timothy, 1. Tim. 2.8
I will therefore that the men pray every where, lifting up pure hands without
wrath or doubting. Because foolish man has dedicated Creatures to the
patronage of this or that true or false Saint, I must therefore abhor the
creature, specially in ecclesiastical or spiritual usage. By this crooked
rule, I may not preach nor pray in England, because it was dedicated to Saint
George: nor in Wales, because David is there made patron: nor in Ireland, by
reason of Saint Patricke: nor in Scotland, because of Saint Andrew: nor in
France, because of S. Denis: nor in any country where Rome has domineerd,
because all is dedicated to somewhat. Nay, I must in no one day of the year
preach or pray: because they have to every day given a Saint. Thus, if a man
desire to run himself into a labyrinth and endless Maze, let him but leap
into the Brownists and Anabaptists faction. This shall suffice for manifestation
of the former Doctrine: namely, That Christians are not to retain the whole,
or any part of Moses Ceremonial kingdom, in the nature of Ceremony.

THE Second Sermon.
THe second general doctrine [That the new Testaments kingdom once
established, it can never be totally remooued] that remains in the next
place to be further cleared. And that by the grace of God shall be done; first,
by observing the difference betwixt us and the Romanists (we both hold the
Church ever visible: but they in one form, we in another:) secondly, by
examining the Arrians, Anabaptists, and Brownists allegations: whereby they
would have the Church for very many years, to have no Face, or visibilitie at
all.

Touching the discrepance twixt Romanists and us, it lies herein: they hold,
that the new Testaments church once generally planted, the face thereof
continues evermore gloriously visible. And to this end they allege diverse
places (specially out of the prophets) which do infer a large and glorious
face of Christ and his kingdom here. We of the other side, do teach, that
this new church (howsoever in her first plantation by the Apostles, it was both
passing large and glorious) yet in succeeding times, it wained with the Moon,
she lost much of her glory, and of her outstretched visibilitie. And to this
purpose we allege, first, the state of Isreal's church as a tipe and figure
thereof: secondly, very many scriptures (old and new) which can admit no other
collection: lastly, we urge experience it self.

First, I. Type.
touching the Type or Figure, we see the church of Israel going out with
banners in the wilderness, and finally seated in glorious Canaan by Ioshuah.
After his death al ran out of order, the uncircumcised had them long in
subjection, there was no king in Israel, and every man did what was good in
his own eyes. Then in Saul, David, and Solomon's times, we see the church by
sundry steps mounted and enlarged: but in Rehoboams days we see ten tribes
schism from the two (that is, from Judah and Benjamin) and that which was
worse, did rear up and woorshippe; first, calves in Dan and Bethel:
secondly, Baalim with his abominations. Nor was the body of these ten
tribes at any time recovered, but finally, in Hosheahs reign, carried away by
the Assyrian army: Colonies of strangers being in their rowme transported
unto their Metropolitan City Samaria and them parts.

In the mean time, the little kingdom of Judah (containing also Benjamin) it
did not ever retain the face of her orderly government: for sundry of the
Kings brought Idolatry in: but by others again in some good sort purged.
Yet finally (such was the height of their sin) GOD left them to the boiling
pot of the North (even to Nebuchadnetzar) who spoiled their City and
Temple, and departed the chief of the Royal seed unto Babel. Then for
seventy years did orderly sacrifice cease, their Judicial policy (given by
God at mount Sinai, so well as the ecclesiastical) it was subjected to the
pleasure of strangers, then where was their beauteous Constitution? And at the
end of seauenty years, Babels Monarch was subjected to the Medes and Persians,
who licenced Judah to return for building their City and Temple: which after
some nine and forty years were reedified, but where was the sacramental Ark of God his presence? Where was Moses original copy? Where was Vrim and
Thummim for decision of extraordinary scruples? What was become of Aarons rod
and the sacramental Manna? And that which was not least, what became of their
Judicial policy, from that time unto Christ Jesus? Somewhat I know there
was, but far from the first pattern. Curtailed they were of their Mosaicall
constitutions: First by Babels monarch: secondly, by that of Medes and
Persians: thirdly, by the Greeks Alexander: fourthly, by the two legged
government of Egypt and Syria, springing out of the third Monarch: and
lastly, by that last Monarch Rome (swallowing up the former together with
Messiahs appearance) who had so manacled Judah, that they could not condemn
Jesus, but by the policy of wicked Rome. This being the condition of the
typical church, it follows (say we) that the New-testaments-church be in some
measure thereto analogized. And then only it is so, when we find after her
fullness of grace, a declining thereof: running into schisms and desperate
apostacies: whereby God is provoked to lessen her light, to diminish her glory,
to ouer-turne her constitution, to abbreuiate her policy.

Scripture. II.
Secondly, the scriptures which infer such lamentable ruin of the church,
they be many: whereof a few, and to this purpose pregnant. That 89. psalm is a
typical prophecy of Christ and his kingdom, who grants not? wherein we
first see a glorious large kingdom given to Christ for his possession, but
anon, behold (as grieved at his Messiah or vncted, who has sin considered as
upon him, but in his members) he casts his crown on the ground, he breaks
down his walls, ruinates his fortresses, and leaves him to be spoiled and
rebuked of the multitude. Whereof the learned monk Folengius thus writes:
These things may be applied to the Christians times, and perchance to our
present times. Presently whereupon he plainly says, that Religion is
conculcate and trod underfoot. And Aben-ezra cites a certain Spanish Jew so
amazd at this psalm (for the Jews dream, Io. Baptista Fol. in psa. 89 40. Ad
christianorum tempora (forsanque praesentia) aptari possunt.
that Messiahs kingdom should be according to the worlds glory, and so
perpetual) as he refused to read it: even as the Romanists at this day can
not abide to hear, or read any thing that crosses their Judicial opinion
touching the outward face of Messiahs kingdom.

Aetham (brought in by the holy Ghost, expostulating the cause of such
downfall) we are taught how hardely our nature brooketh the cast-down estate
of Messiahs outward glory. Another Scripture we have in the four and
twentieth of Matthew, whereas our Savior evidently foretells the notable
intricate estate of the faithful in after times: namely, that many false
christ's, false apostles, false prophets, should arise in the church, to the
seduction of many; charity growing cold, and iniquity having the upper
hand. Yea, heerewithall, that seduction and delusion (as in the second Epistle
of Paul to the Thessalonians and the second chapter) should be so strong, that
if it were possible, the very elect of God should be seduced.

This generality of false prophecy, of horrible iniquity, and mighty
delusion, it can not stand with a notable and glorious visibilitie of the
Church: nor yet can be considered where the constitution and policy is (as at
first) sound and unshaken. Nay it argues (according to that of Saint Paul in
1. Tim. 4.1, 2, 3. and 2. Timoth. 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. and that of Saint Peter
1. epistle 2.1, etc.) that all shall lie in horrible confusion and disorder, do
the holy men of GOD what they can. Which also is denoted by the This I have
manifested largely in my Antidoton. Hieron. in Zeph. 1.12 Recte aeutem
Ierushalem. etc.
parable of tares, Math 13.24, etc Touching which first and latter estate of
the Church, hearken what Jerome writes on Zephaniah, 1. Chronic. verse 12. I
will search Ierushalem with candles] Rightly Ierushalem, that is, the church
which first was called Iebus, that is, trod under foot. Because it was
conculcate of the Gentiles, and was a laughing stock to the Devils, it was
called Iebus. And after the peace of the Lord began to dwell in it, and his
place made in peace, it was called Ierushalem. But because in the last-times
(as I have often said) Charity shall freeze, and Iniquity shall be multiplied,
(yea the light of the Sun shall withdraw from Ierushalem, and the vastation
shall be so great, that the very elect of God shall hardly be saved) the Lord
therefore then with the Lantern of his word and Reason will search all the
vices in Ierushalem, and bring them into sight. Revel. 6. where after our
Solomon has rid forth upon the clear word of Truth, Ps. 45.4.
and Meeknes, and Justice, and by the bow of his right hand has subdued a
people unto him: We presently after see bloody persecution, scarsitie, death,
slaughter, together with a fearful darkning of the Sun, blood stayning the
Moon, accompanied with a general Apostacy of the Church-starres from the
kingdom of heaven unto earthly conversation, effecting therewith a general
dissolution of all good order. All which things can be but mystically
understood according to the nature of prophecy, and so a plain declaration of
the Church turned vpside down, with a loss of her large visibilitie and
glory. Other Scriptures may of Romanistes be held more litigious, these shall
here suffice.

Besides the type and plain evidence of Scripture, III Experience.
I will add the argument of experience signed by Antiquity. For the first
300. years and better after Christ's incarnation, we are not ignorant of a
reasonable glorious estate of the Church, for the which some have (not
altogether unfitly) urged that of the Apocryphal Esdras, 2. Esd. 7.28.29.
(a thing that he might guess at by comparison of Scripture) where in the
person of the Lord he says: My son Jesus shall appear (with these that be
with him) and they that remain shall rejoice with him 400. years. After these
years shall my son Christ dye, and all men that have life: as if he should
say, Christ shall live in his Church 400. years, then shall he dye, and the
Church be darkened. And indeed, for so long we find the writers giving in a more
excellent testimony, then for the 200. years after. But after 600. years (or
there abouts) I trow that by one little horn starting up at Rome, and an other
in the East (universal Pope and Machomet, both affirming they have the kaies
of Paradise, and speaking well of Jesus in general terms) a foul beast was
mounted, that opened a bottomless pit of humane inventions that darkened all.
Sozomen. eccl. hist. l. 6. c. 5.
Anthony the Heremite (about the beginning of Constantines reign, he is said
to see in a dream certain Mules [Altare insultantes calcibus etc.] leaping
upon the Altar with their feet, and ouerturning the sacred table: whereupon
he should say, that by mixed and adulterate doctrine, and by rebellion of
Schismatikes the Church should be harmed. And indeed (not long after) Arriani
potiti sunt Ecclesiarum gubernaculis, the abominable Arrians got the Churches
reins in their hands. Yea (says venerable Beda Bedae eccl. hist. de gent^
Angl. l. 1. c. 9.
) Peace was in the Church until the times of Arrius his frenzy, which
(corrupto orb toto) the whole world being therewith corrupted, did also with
the venom of his error, infect this Island of Britain so far removed out of
the world. And this (as again he after urges) notwithstanding it was
condemned in the Synod of Nice. If Arrianisme so quickly got such an
universal head, what did also Pelagius, Macedonius, Nestorius, Martian, and
all other heretics their doctrine? All of them marching in battle array
against the Church; all of them termed by Chrysostoms Rival on Mat. 24.
Incertus anther on Mat. 84.
the army abominable in the midst of the Temple, preparing a seat for
Antichrist. Each of these won disciples, did draw apart, and tear the
unseamed coat of Jesus in a thousand pieces. Not long after we find a man of
sin mounted in the midst of Gods temple, advancing himself as a god,
exalting himself above the things of God, treading christian kings under
foot, and subduing all to his lusts, as the apostle S. Paul, and S. John
evidently fore-prophecied. Clem. Alexandr. in stro. lib. 1. fol. 2.
If Clemens could say of the churches next succeeding the Apostles, (...)
(...), Few children like the Fathers (for few conuaied the doctrine
uncorrupted) what may we say of the doctrine and churches estate in times long
after? even that which Jerome long since said: -- Inter Nitentia culta,
Lappaeque et tribuli et steriles domina^tur Auenae Jerome against the
Luciserians.

Burres, thistles, and wilde-oates,
Domineere in midst of the wheat field


To spare the repetition of odious particulars, Experience has taught us, how
the wheat field (after some sleepiness of Ministers) it became so pestred
with visible and incurable tares, that hardely any wheat could be seen. The
Lord his vineyard became so clogged with thorns and briars, that hardly any
Vine could be discerned. The Barn floor was so full of chafe, that the
Grain was almost invisible. The holy man Job was scabs from the crown of the
head unto the soul of the foot, he sat upon ashes scraping himself with a
potshard, his breath was corrupt, his friends could hardly know him: but yet
not destitute of motion of spirit, of a good conscience. The Church indeed was
in Babylon, subjected unto Babels external government: but with Daniel, and
the three young gentlemen of Judah, it preserved a good conscience. The years
of captivity expyred, it coms forth of Babel in a great measure, but without
expectation of the former Apostolical glory. Yong-men will think the last
Temple superexcellent, but Aged spirited-ones will weep, at the inferioritie
thereof, in comparison of the first. Diverse yet with Daniel bide behind in
Babel, which sometimes come to their grave in peace: sometimes do buckle with
Lions, and depart to heaven in a fiery chariot with Elijah. So far are we
(whatsoever the Romanistes bark) from condemning all our predecessors, or yet
adiudging to Hell, all such as live and dye amongst them. For as there be in
our Church, who are not verily of it; so we believe there be many in their
idolatrous Israel, who notwithstanding are not verily of it. Thus briefly I
have cleared, that notwithstanding the Church has been ever visible, yet she
has sometimes (as also her Figure) been spoiled of her glory, darkened in her
members, captiued of her adversary, destitute of her constitution. Now
remains it I examine the reasons of such adversaries as deny the Church
always to have been visible.

The Arrians, Anabaptists, and Brownists, gone out of the Catholic communion,
they oppose to the Church her ever visibilitie thus: First testify that the
new-Church should not be ever visible.

Elias his time: and to that purpose they allege the Prophets complaint
against Israel, Romans 9.2, 1. Kings 19. Whereto I answer: Elias saw no Church,
therefore no church was any where visible: Elias saw no church in Israel,
therefore there was no church visible there, nor yet in Judah. It is a
sophistication of this nature, Thomas sees not, therefore Peter sees not:
There is no light here, therefore no where. Secondly, I answer: Elias did not
so reason: for his complaint was not against Judah (wherein he knew that the
Church then flourished under good Iehosophat) but against Israel the ten
schismatic Trybes, where then he feared that bloody Ahab and Iesabell had
slaughtred all, from whose fury he then fled. But the Prophets assertion is
corrected of the Lord saying, that he had reserved 7000 souls which bowed no
knee (that is, did not outward substantial homage) to Baal. And indeed, if we
consider (besides these Prophets which Obadiah hid in caves) the sundry schools
of Prophets at Elias his time of being rapt up, we may easily believe that God
had a notable people in that schismatic Israel: seeing he sends not forth
many prophets, but when he is minded to gather in some large Harvest. Thirdly,
Adam, unto Christ the second Adam. In the houses of 1 Adam 2 Sheth 3 Enosh 4
Kainan 5 Mahalaleel 6 Iered 7 Henoch, These 10. see in Genesis 1.3. etc.
8 Methushelah 9 Lamech 10 Noach,
The Church was visible in them till the flood. After the flood, the Church
stretched it self thorough the houses of Noach, 1 Shem 2 Arphaxad These ten
see in Genesis 11.10. etc.
3 Selah 4 Heber 5 Peleg 6 Reu 7 Serug 8 Nachor 9 Thara 10 Abram


From Abram to the captivity of Babel, and from thence unto Jesus, Saint
Matthew draws a direct line in three times fourteen Generations, that is,
two and forty, according to the number of Isreal's stations or pitching places
mentioned in the book of Numbers chapt. 33. As for Saint Luke, he in his
third chapt does point out the first fruits of God, from the first Adam unto
the second. Saint Matthew from David does, unto the captivity, pass through
the house of Solomon his eldest son, finishing this man's seed in Iehoiachin:
from the front of whose name Jehovah remoueth Compare 2. King. 24.6. with Ier.
22.24.28. etc. according to Greek for me Ieconias in Math. 1.11.
Iah, (as a signet from his finger, terming him Coniah) pulling heerewith
Nathan (the other son of David) his family into the line by adoption:
beginning with Salathiel, and so to Zerubbabel: and then down by his eldest
son Abiud, unto Christ. S. Luke beginning with Joseph (the supposed father of
Jesus) he steppeth upward to Zerubbabel, by the line of his second son
Rhesa: and so from him directly upward to David: not by Solomon's house, which
ended with the captivity, but by Nathans line, the line of adoption. This
pains have the two Evangelists taken, for manifesting the church her
visibilitie, from the beginning of the world, unto Messiahs coming. The
Typical church so ouerturneth our adversaries doctrine: for that was always
visible.

Secondly, they allege certain scriptures against the new churches
visibilitie: the seeming strongest whereof be these: first, Reuelat. 12. where,
by the woman, they truly understand the church (whereof the virgin Mary was an
arch-member) and from her lodging in the wilderness for a time, two times, and
half a time, they understand some long time, wherein the church should be hid
from the sight of al, be invisible. I answer, scripture must be expounded from
scripture, not by unreasonable fancies: for, where have they any one scripture,
which By being in the wilderness does understand Inuisibilitie? Rather let
them understand, that the holy ghost puttes us hereby in mind of the ancient
church of Israel, fed in the wilderness, and (as Moses says Exodus 19.4. Deuteronomy.
32.11.) carried as upon the wings of an Eagle: a figure of the worlds state,
through which the Church here is to pass, in her pilgrimage spiritual.

Now, who will say, that Israel was invisible in the wilderness? Or that they
could be considered, but only according to secret Election? The flat contrary
follows. Such ill hap have these men in their allegation of scripture.
Another scripture is that before alleged in Reu. 6. whence they would
conclude an apostacy of the whole church. I answer again, scripture must
expound scripture. Compare this with Isaiahs prophecy chapt. 24. last verse:
as also with 34. chap and 4. verse, and with other like places, and it only
implies, a dark desolation of all church beauty, and orderly constitution:
whereby God testifies his anger against rich and poor, one and an other. The
Moon therefore is seen colored like blood, whereby each means a general
persecution and blodshed in the church: which cannot be, if the church were
invisible. And to this purpose, mark how in the twelfth chapter, when the red
dragon assailed the Church with all his might, he yet drew down but a third
part of the stars, some were reserved to shine in the Church: God ever in that
revelation showing mercy to a remnant, when otherwise the viols of his wrath
were powered out upon the malignant multitude. This their wind shakes therefore
no hauer. Another scripture is, Reu. 13. where (say they) all do take the
beasts mark. It Is untrue, for the holy ghost thus says: All that dwell upon
the earth shall worship him (mark the exception) whose names are not written
in the Book of the life of the Lamb, etc. And because such there shall be, he
afterward concludes, Here is the patience of the Saints. So that Saints
there shall be, who with patience shall conquer. And that is more plainly
declared in the 11. chapter, where all the tyrannous reign of the beast
(choose whether that beast be the body of cruel Emperors, or the son of
perdition) GOD also has his Prophets, by whose ministry, the oil of God,
his saving grace is conveyed unto his people.

Thus these men talk (no men so much) of the book of Revelation, before any
one of the Seals be unclasped unto them. They should now at last learn to
meddle less with this book, seeing the holy ghost leaves so fearful a curse
upon these that add their own idle fancies thereto, Reu. 22.19. An other
scripture they allege, namely, 2 Thessalonians. 2. whence they affirm the Churches
whole departure from the Faith. I answer: First the ancient writers did
ordinarily understand Ierom ad Algasiam. Tertull. de resurrect. ca. 24. August.
de ciuitat. l. 20.
it of a general Revolt from Romes Empire, which then had ruledome over the
Nations of the earth. And that indeed is very plainly foretold by S. John in
Revel. 17.16. Later writers (in respect of some after circumstances) do take it
to be an Apostacy general from Faith: but none that stink not of heresy, do
from thence conclude a flat Nullitie of the Church. A general desolation there
should be (as before in the Revel.) but not a falling away in every particular
member. For this is an absurd form of argumentation: Many (or, the most) shall
fall away: therefore every one shall fall away. The man of sin with his army
abominable should enter into this new City and Temple of God (yea, rather
rise up in the midst thereof) sowing his perfidious doctrine, and planting his
Idolatrous bottomless pit-inuentions, but yet never essentially subdue those
souls unto him, whose names were written in the Lambs book. Spot them he
might with many superstitions, but never subvert them in the Substance of their
Faith and Obedience: as In my Antid. as also in my Visible Christian.
else where I have in writing plainly euinced. If during Antichrists reign
there should be no visible people of God, then Antichrist should be no more
Antichrist, seeing Christ had none in opposition against him. Antichrist must
ever have some to war against: and there must ever be some to wage battle
against Antichrist. Otherwise fire would drop from Heaven, and the world
thereupon be presently consumed: seeing there were none in the earth who had
the word of Covenant in their mouths. Such Nouices are ignorant of the promise
sealed by the Father unto Messiah the Churches Redeemer. Isa. 59.21.
My spirit (says he) that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy
mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor
out of thy seedes-seed, says Jehovah, from henceforth even for EVER. And to
this purpose (when the sacred Reu. 7.1. etc.
winds of God breathed by the four Evangelists were to be held back in an
unknown tongue) the Lord takes order for many Jews, and more Gentiles: that
they should notwithstanding carry (not only in their heart, but also in their
foreheads) the visible mark of true Christianity. Bulling part. 2. in annot.
tabulae 5.
Bullinger in his Epitome of times (having spoken of the most accursed times
wherein Pharisees, Saduces, Esseni, crept into the Jewish Church) he adds:
Interim non dubium est etc. Mean time it is not to be doubted, that true
doctrine continued uncorrupted amongst the little remnant of Gods people. For
Simon Iustus (called also Hillels son or disciple) and Zecharie John Baptists
father, as also the Elders of our Savior (so well as others whose names are
unknown) they conserved (doubtless) the Substance of religion: not bowing their
knees to the traditionary and sectarie Baal. The last times of Iudahs church is
a type of our times.
For in all times the Lord reserved to himself a Church: yea, in the midst of
heresies, schisms and corruptions. And them times were a type of these our
last times, wherein at this day we live. In which pad of Bullinger, Calvin,
Peter Martyr, and al of any note in these latter times do uniformly walk.
This point I will (to the shame of heretical Christians) shut up with
Sybillaes prophecy.

Sed postquam Roma Sybil. l. 2.

Aegyptum reget, imperioque
Froenabit, summi
tum summa potentia Regni
Regis inextincti
mortalibus exorietur.
Rex etenim sanctus
veniet, quitotius Orbis
Omnia seclorum
per tempora sceptra tenebit.
Wherein she plainly affirms, that after Rome shall rule over Egypt (and
that it did presently after Herod's creation of King for Iudaea) a most high
King (namely Messiah) should set up a kingdom over the whole world, whose
kingdom shall have no end. In the second place, so this second doctrine is
clered, namely, That the New-testaments Kingdom once established, it never
after can be totally removed.

Now it remains we consider more particularly this same City: and that is
done by searching out;

Apostles and Prophets. That Jesus Christ is the foundation, harken to Paul (1.
Cor. 3.11.) Other foundation can no man lay (than that which is laid (which is
Jesus Christ. That the Apostles and Prophets are also termed Foundation, harken
to the same Apostle ( Ephesians chapter 2. verse 20.) And ye are built upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief
corner stone. Nor is the word foundation expressed in both these places,
otherwise then by one and the same word ((...), Themelton) in the original.
Aquinas Tho. Aquin. super 1. Cori. 3.
remembers both these, thus: Vnum habet per se soliditatem etc. The first of
them has the soliditie of it self (like as some Rock whereon some edifice is
builded, and unto this foundation Christ Jesus is resembled) for he is the Rock
spoken of in Math. 7.24.25. The Other foundation, it has the soliditie (not of
it self, but) of the other solid subject (like as stones which first are
placed upon a solid Rock, and in this sense the Apostles are called the
foundation of the Church, Ephesians. 2.20. So far the Schoolman.

Touching the foundation Real, it is only the Faith or Gospel of Christ
Jesus, whereon the Church or faithful are said (often of diverse) to build. And
this Gospel is sometimes called Simply, the gospel of God and Christ Jesus (as
in Romans 1.1, 9, 16, and 15, 16, 19, 29, etc.) Sometimes Respectively the
Apostles gospel, as in Romans 2.16, and 16.25. The Gospel of God and Christ
Jesus it is, as they are the Authors thereof: but the Apostles gospel, as they
are the Preachers thereof. Both these senses of foundation remembered, let us
come to examine the Romanistes on the one hand: and then the Brownists on the
other hand.

The Romanists from these words in Matthew. 16.18. Thou art Peter, and upon this
Rock I will build my church, they with tooth and nail labor to enforce,
that Saint Peter is the Churches foundation, that upon him (as on a Rock) it
is builded: as if these words, on this rock were spoken of Peter's person, and
(which more is) of al Romish Pops succeeding in that Sea. Let us examine the
Text. Our Savior demanding of the Apostles, whom they did say him to be? Peter
(in the name of all the rest) answers: Thou art the Christ, the son of the
living God. Then Jesus said unto him, Blessed art thou Simon the son of
Jonas, for flesh and blood has not revealed it to thee, but my Father which is
in heaven. And I say unto thee, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will
build my Church. Upon which Rock? upon Peter? Then he would have said, Thou
art Peter, and upon thee: not upon this rock) I will build. The change of
speech, from The to This, from (...) thou Peter, to (...) upon This very
Rock, it argues, that Jesus would have Peter to look from himself to some
other person or thing. If to some other person, then only to him self, whom
Peter had confessed to be the very Messiah. Which Christ is only said to be
the Rock, 1. Corin 10.4. The word Foundation is communicated also with the
Apostles and Prophets, but the term Rock is never given unto any mere
creature: For he that is God, can only be the rock of our salvation. And to
keep people from applying the term Rock unto Peter, the Holy Ghost
presently after recordateth, how (because of his evil counsel soon after)
our Savior says unto him Matthew. 16.23
Get thee behind me Satan, thou art an offense unto me, etc. And not long
after he three times forsweareth his Master. Yea, after he had received (in
the day of Pentecost) a fullness of the Holy Ghost, he halteth in his
ministry, and draws Barnabas into the same dissimulation ( Galathians chap
2. verse 11. etc.) for which the holy apostle Paul resists him to the face,
and blames him. And that this was Saint Peter the Apostle (and not some other
Cephas, as some malicious Romanists have lately urged, but indeed an ancient
error) first observe how they oppose to Paul, who says it was Peter (whom in
the Syriacke term he before calls Elias in Thisbi affirms, that Simon
(Jesus of Nazareth his disciple) he was called Cepha, which signifies
Strength.
Cephas) but also unto the ancient Fathers, as Tertullian, (in
praescriptionibus aduersus haeret.) Ambrose (in ep. Gala cap. 2.) Chrysostom
on the Galat. chap. 2.) Augustine contra mendac. ad Consentium cap. 12.) Jerome
on Galat. 2. Cyrill (contra Julian. li. 9. in fine.) Collecting it out of
Austines epistle to Jerome, as also out of other his writings. So does Aquinas
on the same place.
Baeda on Galath. 2. etc. Yea herein they oppose unto Gregorius Magnus their
Pope, co^futing the same fond fancy in his eighteenth homily upon Ezekiel,
post B. Thus the Romanists propound unto us weak foundation, Peter for Christ,
the creature for the Creator.

To shut up this point briefly, hearken to Augustines testimony: August. in
Ioh. ttact. 124.
The Church is founded upon the Rock whereon Peter took his name. Non enim a
Petro Petra, sed Petrus a Petra, etc.
For the Rock was not derived of Peter, but Peter of the Rock: even as Christ
is not so termed, of Christian, but Christian of Christ. Upon this Rock
therefore (says he) whom thou have confessed, I will build my Church: for
the Rock was CHRIST, upon which foundation also Peter himself is builded.
Whereunto join that of Isidore: Isid. hisp. lib. 7. etymologiarum c. 9
Peter took his name of the Rock, that is, of Christ: upon whom the church
is founded: For Christ was the Rock, upon which foundation, Peter himself was
also builded. If they will that Peter should be, in some sense, a foundation,
then they must admit all the residue of the Apostles in the same respect to
be foundations. And that is it which Saint John in his Apocal. 22.14. speaks
of, when he sees this Ierushalem to have twelve foundations, and in them, the
names of the twelve Apostles.

Objection.
But Peter only had the keys given to him.

Answer.
First, that is nothing to this: Secondly, it is false: for the keys (namely,
the power of binding and loosing) is afterward given to many others, even to
the whole Church, so well as unto him, John 20.22, 23. And this Origin
precisely (from the same place of John) does prove in his Homily on Matthew 16.
not to speak of other Ancients, (as Cyprian de simplicit. praelat. Aug. super
Ioh. 124. Tertull. scorp. aduers. Gnostio. c. 10. Rabanus c. 8. de poenit.
Ansbert. li. 3. c. 5 in Apoc. etc.) who grant, that in Peter was considered the
church, to whom the power is given of binding and loosing spiritually.

If we consider Faith, that is, the Gospel to be the foundation of the Church,
then that is it which diverse have well understood: seeing Faith is the hand
which coupleth Christ and his church together. Hence it is that Chrysostom. Chrysostom.
sermon. de Pentecoste, Super hanc petram, non dixit super Petrum etc.
thus writes: Upon this Rock, not upon Peter: for not upon man, but upon the
Faith Christ buildes his church. And what was that Faith? (namely) Thou art
Christ the son of the living God. Nyssenu (in testim. delect. ex vet. testa.)
vtters the same. So do Theophil (in Mat. 16.) Smarag. on the same place: and
Vict. Antiochenus says, that from this faith and sound doctrine, Peter
received his name, on Mar. 3. not to mention any others. Thus, respect we
scripture, or hear we the Ancients their testimony, the Romanists still are
found loosers.

For the Brownists, what foundation do they by their necessary consecution
propound to us? This forsooth, The outward Constitution of the Church, that is,
The form of plantation and church-gouernement, and this is their Puppis and
Prora, the load-star of their Course. Insomuch as they deny to have communion
in prayer, in preaching, in sacrament with any such Church whatsoever, which
has not bin so planted, and is not so governed, as they conceive of the
Primitive churches their plantation and government. And as they deny
spiritual communion with England and Scotland as failing in both: so let it be
such of the Dutch and French churches as have planted their chur. rightly in
their own judgment: yet because of some few things in government
ecclesiastical, which they dislike, they, not only deny communion with them
(yea for very hearing the word) but also excommunicate such of their people So
Master Pe. Al. Master M. Sl. etc came to be excommunicate.
as shall but join with them in prayer or in preaching. Whereby it comes to
pass, that this people (maintaining that that their father Brown dare not)
they conceive of themselves, for the only true visible church of God which can
be throwly communicated with.

Briefly to return answer: first, Augustine August. in ep. 48.
indeed was once of opinion, that no compulsion herin was to be used, but (by
his fellow ministers) being put in mind, how his own city was wholly Donatists,
til fear of imperial laws brought them from that schism, to catholic
unity, the good man changes his mind, alleging such Scripture, Proverb. 9
9. and 29.19. etc. And I would gladly know of these men, to what end a
Christian has the sword put into his hand, if not (with Nehemiah, Josiah,
Hezekiah, Iosaphat, Asa, etc.) to drive the subjects unto outward conformity
of holiness and righteousness? Take away this use of the sword, and then so
well with Anabaptists remove Magistrate and his sword out of the church.

Objection.
But it was prophesied, that the Church should be a voluntary people, Psalm.
110.3. and Christ gathered and planted his Church by the word only.

Answer.
The Anabaptists do apply these things as well to their purpose, adding
further, The Primitive churches had no Kings in them etc. therefore Kings (as
Kings) not of a true established Church. And thus Brownisme leads to
Anabaptisme. But least the cry of these Lapwings draw me from my purpose, I
leave the Brownist to answer the Anabaptist; and this shall be my answer to
the scripture and our Saviors practice. It is true, people were and did
voluntarily give up their names to Christ upon the Gospels preaching. Christ
herein would not use the sword: not because it had been unlawful (for he in
himself used a whip in the Temple, and forcibly overthrew their changing
tables) but because (for the first plantation of the Gospel) he saw it not to
be expedient. The weakest and foolishest means (in man's judgment, 1. Cor. 1,
27, 28, 29,) he now did use, that so no flesh should rejoice in his presence.
As he used only his word, so he chose unlearned men for the publication
thereof. And because none should say, that it was no marvel, though simple
subjects became Christians, seeing some of their Kings were first Christians,
the Apostle therefore before said, Not many Mighty* not many Noble are called.
To conclude now, That the Sword has not his use in churches plantation etc.
they may as well conclude, That Noble men, wise and learned men, they have
nothing to do in Church plantation. Indeed, when there comes a New-Christ,
and new Apostles, we will either grant they conclude well: or else we will hold
them and the new Christ accursed.

[That the sword planted first the Faith here] which we deny. First, it cannot
be but the first plantation of the Faith wheresoever, it must be by the
Gospel preached. The sword may make a noise together with the Words voice, but
none can by the sword alone take any knowledge of the Gospel. Besides, it
appears by ancient record, that the Gospel came into this land in the
Apostles times, according to that in Romans 10.18. Tertullian Tertull. aduers.
Iud. ca. 7.
says, Britannorum inaccessa Romany loca, Christo vero subdita etc. That the
Britans (even in such places as Romans had not access unto) they were
subdued to Christ. That S. Paul (after his first captivity at Rome) should
come into these parts, Theodoret writes, Theod. l. 9. de cur. Graec. affect.
Niceph. l. 2. ca. 4.
Nicephorus affirms that Simon Zelotes came into Britain. And John Bale
(from ancient Gildas our writer, and from others) affirms, that Joseph of
Arimathia was sent into Britain by Philip the Apostle, after the dispersion
from the Galls, and this to be about the year of our Lord 63. Yea, that James
with some others did repair to, and preach in Ireland, Vincentius Vinc. 8. c.
7.
writes. But more of this I have written in my Antidoton. Who came first
hither with the Gospel, it skilleth not: sure we are it came here, for we find
it here, and the Brownists against his own soul must confess it: except they
will tell us that them selves have received the Gospel upon Sea, or in some
foraigne country. Objection: But this proves no way an orderly plantation of
the Church to have bin here. Ans. Yes forsooth, except you will have a company
of believers dwelling together in the Faith (as the Church first did lodge in a
miles compass by Wells, now termed Glascon-bury) to live without rule,
without form of true government. If they lived at first like Libertines (which
no sober spirit can think) then we must greatly lament that none of the
Brownists were then with them for instructing them in discipline. Objection:
Let it be what soever it was, yet we find not true discipline now. Ans. Some of
you have also said, that neither we have the Gospel: but if some of you upon
better advise do grant we have the Gospel for the substance, I think ye had
best grant also discipline for the substance: that is, such external
government as (for the substance at least) does stand for the Gospel, for
Christ. And that the Gospel shall so soundly be preached, and government so
faithfully executed of any Churches in these last times, as was at first, none
of wit can believe, because our Savior and the Apostles do foretell the
contrary ( Math. 24, 37, 38, 39, Luke 17, 22, 23. Math. My Antidoton opens
that point at large.
13, 24, etc. 1. Tim. 4, 1, etc. 2. Tim. 3, 1, etc. Revel. 13, 11, etc. 2 Thessalonians 2, 3, etc.) and yet no reason nor warrant of running out of the Catholic
wheatfield or Church, under a pretext of Replantation: but rather to keep
within, and as we can, and may, to labor for Reformation.

But where they say, You want Christ's government, and in the room thereof you
have Antichrists, and therefore we separate, I more particularly answer. Peter's
confession in Math. 16) our Savior does not promise that outward
Church-gouernment shall prevail for ever against Hell-gates (and themselves
grant it has not) but only A true being of the Church, by reason of the Rock
whereon it should be builded. Peter makes no confession of Church discipline
(for as yet he had not learned that) but of Christ Jesus to be as verily the
Son of God (unseen of flesh and blood) as he was man, well seen of flesh and
blood. Who being the Christ or Messiah, did verily carry with it that there
was no other by whom Salvation was wholly or in part to be effected. And the
knowledge, belief, and apprehension of this (not exterior discipline) is the
essential foundation of the Church: Which who so holds in the unity of the
Catholic Church, they are to be held of this Catholic City, and not because
of imperfections to be severed from: because Jehovah is Shammah, There. Iesabel
with her spiritual children, Balaams sectaries, the faction of beastly
Nicolaitans etc. ( Revel. 2. and 3.) they were in the Asian Churches, rightly
established and possessed of right government, (but yet bearing the badge of
Antichrist) so neither is humane regiment a mark ever of false Christians. For
if Christ his government external, it can not cause all under it to be (unto
us) true visible Christians: much less can humane regiment, or Antichrists
outward government, cause all under it to be (of us) reputed Antichrists.
Seeing Anti-christes government can not have more vice in it, then there is
virtue in Christ's. Fourthly, they know not what Antichrists mark is: for if
every good thing be not the mark of a true Christian (for Arrius, Nestorius,
yea, every Heretic holds some good things) so neither can every bad thing
be the badge of Antichrist: for then every man should be Antichristian, seeing
every man (at least sometimes) has some bad thing visible in him. As Antichrist
is opposed to Christ, so in nothing so much, as in the very foundation of
Religion; ^^r which the Apostle S. Paul terms him Anti-keimenos, 2 Thessalonians.
2.4.
the Layer of an opposite foundation. And in very troth, as it is the very
essential truth of the Gospel, which is the mark of a true Christian: so, it
is the very fundamental falsehood of Antichrist, for the which he is entitled
Antichrist, and his members Antichrists. The foundation false (not hay,
stubble, etc. upon a true foundation, 1. Cor. 3.10. etc.) is the beasts mark
differencing his people essentially from Christ's. Object. But the Apostle
saying, Let every man take heed (...) how he builds, not (...), what he builds;
it argues he there speaks of the manner of teaching, not of the matter
taught. I answer: He intends both manner and matter. And that may be seen;
First, by comparing the 2. chap. and the 1. verse with that which follows
there, and in this chapter: for he compares not only his plain manner of
teaching with humane Eloquence, but also, the plain matter of the Gospel with
the worlds wisdom, which elsewhere he terms Coloss. 2.8.
Philosophy. Secondly, gold, silver, etc. hay, stubble, etc. they cannot in
any propriety so much resemble manner, as matter: specially compared with Fire
which is not appointed so much to try the manner, as the matter or thing it
self. Thirdly, seeing Eloquence may stand with Christ the foundation: first,
for that it is the gift of God: 2. is sanctified to his people, Exodus 4.10.11,
Eccles. 12.9.10, Act. 18.24, 1. Cor. 1.5. Lastly, an hundred scholars may be
called together for defining fully what is the Primitive form of
Church-regiment, and 3. of them (though otherwise goodmen) not be found in one
judgment for all things. How unwise therefore are these people, that about the
form of discipline, do rend themselves from the Catholic City of god! Our
Savior foretold that there should be such schismatical spirits, who in these
confused times would cry, Come into the desert, come into the secret places,
Christ is here: but therewith he says to his sheep, Go not thither, nor
follow them, Luke 17.23. Thus much briefly touching the foundation of this new
City Iehouah-Shammah.

This that follows was not uttered, as being prevented by the time.
THe foundation considered, it now remains I speak of the Citizens, and that
so briefly as I can.

The Citizens are as the City is considered. This City being the Church
extended from the East to the West, it must be considered, either as existing
of all Christians good and bad (and so Heretics, Scismatikes, Pharisaicall
professors etc. are all Citizens, though bad Citizens:) Or else, as it existeth
only of such as are sanctified (according to the end of their Election, Ephesians.
1.4.) who are very deed the lively members of Christ Jesus. Cor. 5.4.5. As for
the second excommunication (termed Maran-atha, 1. Cor. 16.22,) it is seldom
inflicted on any by the Church, because such is their Apostacy from Christ, as
for the which the Church denies afterward to sacrifice or pray for them, Heb.
6.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, compared with Heb. 10.26, and 1. Ioh. 5.6, and easily the
Church dare not so judge and leave any soul unto the Lord his coming to
judgment, as the Syriake phrase (Maran-atha) imports. (...) Marea Dominus,
Dan. 2.47. (...) Atha, Venit, vt in Ezra. 5.3.
And that the Church is considered in such sense (namely to consist of good and
bad) it is to be heeded first in her types (as in Noah's Arc, and Isreal's
congregation, as also in such of the New testaments scriptures, Math. 3.12, and
13.24. etc. and there in verse. 47. etc. and 24.40, 41. 2. Tim. 2.20, with many
of like nature. And so are ordinarily understood of our Ancients.

seed of God his word, and the inward operation of his spirit, it may appear:
first from the end of Election and vocation, which is, unto sanctification of
the Spirit, whereupon they are called Saints, or Holy-ones, Romans 1.7, and
16.2.15, 1. Cor. 1.2, and 6.1, and 16.1.15. and alibi saepe, compared with,
Ephesians. 1.4. John 15.3, and 17.17: Secondly, by such express testimony, Ephesians.
5.25, 26, 27, Heb. 12.14, 1. Cor. 6.19, 1. Pet. 1.9. And of this sort of
Citizens is that Ierushalem from heaven, and that Tabernacle of God with men,
which S. John sees in Revel. 21.2.3. understood so Rabanus ca. 8. de modo
poenitentiae. Bale hereon. Beza in ser. 20. of Chr. passion. Tho. Aquin. on
Galat. 4.26.
of Ancient and modern writers: though sometime of the triumphant Church also.

Objection.
Here is a city wherein no unclean thing enters, but the best of God his
people here have unclean things in them: therefore here they cannot be the
Citizens of this new Ierushalem.

Answer,
The Antecedent is true, but the illation (or consequent) is false. For they
are said to be Clean, not simply, but respectively: that is, in respect that
they are already in the Lauer of regeneration cleansed so in part, as in Christ
their head it is considered Absolute and perfect. And that in S. John cittizeas
there be imperfections, it may appear in 22. chap. verse 2. where he says,
that the leaves of this cities wood (the Tree of life, Christ Jesus in his
word and spirit) they were to heal the Nations with. Whereas the healing of us
(in regard of our spiritual sores) it appertains in propriety to this
life, besides that the Lord terms things that are not, as if they were:
because his Velle is Esse, his present Will, is present Work: but unto us
revealed in time. This holy people (for if the first fruits be holy, so is the
whole lump; and if the root be holy, so are the branches, To. 11.16) for their
sakes the wicked tares are spared, Math. 13.29. yea the Sodomiticall world
(were it not for this righteous Lot) should soon be consumed with fire and
brimston. Wicked within, wicked without, they al fare the better for this
little Cities sake: and yet they can entreat it no better, than Laban
entreated Iaakob, Sodom entreated Lot and his good angels, no better than Saul
unto David.

While Iudahs Ierushalem stood with her Temple and ceremonies, then these
Citizens (for one gentle swallow makes not a summer) were the seed of Iaakob
or Israel, pent up within the typical Canaan: but now this new cities people
are stretched from Sea to Sea, from one end of the world to an other;
consisting of all nations and kinreds, and people, and tongues, Revel. 7.9.
Said I of all tongues? Yea: not only all sorts of people, but all sorts of
tongues are to stand before the Throne of Christ, and praise him. Not only the
Hebrew, the Greek, and Latin tongues (wherein our Saviors Inscription was
written) but all the tongues that were given unto the apostles in Acts 2. chapter
whereby they were enabled to preach the doctrine of faith unto all sorts of
people. Which were a sufficient confutation of the Romanists service in sole
Latin (compared with 1. Corin. 14.16.) But because no instrument shall be
lacking, for cutting off that evil, themselves now at last have turned the new
testament into English, for every Lay man to look into: as also have made
English Manuels of prayer, besides their turning of Jesus his Psalter
(blasphemously so called) into our language: So great is the Truth, and
prevails.

Secondly, these are that Ierushalem which is here termed Jehovah Shammah. The
Lord is there: Where? in this City, in this people, for they are the
Habitation and Temple of the mighty God of Iaakob. God rises up in them, and
they grow up in God: and so (oh depth of wisdom and mercy) God and Man
becomes One. The devil at first said to Euah, that in eating the forbidden
fruit, they should become AS GODS. He meant As Devils, Black gods: and yet he
spoke truer than he was aware. For as the creature cannot become the Creator,
so we are not become really Gods, but we (through his free favor that called
Light out of Darkness) are become really As Gods: not (...) Elohim, but Genesis 3
5.
(...) Kelohim. Unto this City and people appertain the privileges of grace in
this life, and the exhibition of glory in the other life. In a word, all the
things of God, are for these people, called to be As gods: for in his presence
is the fullness of joy, and at his right hand are pleasures for evermore, Psalm.
16.11.

Much contention (about our Lords year 666) was between Rome and
Constantinople for supremacy universal. Rome would be chief, because it
had been the ancient seat of the Emperors. Constantinoples, Bishop would
have it, because Constantine (the first christian Emperor) had of Bizantium
made it Constantino-polis, and so invested it with his own name, making it
also an emperors seat. Mark, that neither of them could allege then any
Donation from Constantine. If there had been then such a Donation as now they
tell us of, how greatly would it have helped Romes plea? But as never of these
Auntients it is once mentioned, viz. Eusebius, Entropius, Ruffinus, Socrates,
Theodoret, Euagrius, Paulus Diaconus, Beda, Orosius, Zonaras, Nicephorus: Nor
of Jerome, Damasus, Athanasius, Basil, Ambrose, Optatus Mileuitanus, Gregorius
Nissenus, Gregorius Nazianzenus, Augustine, Chrysostom: nor of the Roman
Bishops in the Counsels, which then had been of much moment) so, See
Auentinus lib 2 de rebus Boiorum.
Pius secundus Pope (a man very expert in Antiquities) he laughed this toy to
scorn, accounting it fabulam inanem, a vain fable. Naucl. in generat. 11 suae
cronograph.
Nauclerus fathers it on Isidore, but in his ancient Books no such thing found.
And no sooner start up this Fict-donation but the learned opposed. This did
Marsilius Patauinus in his Defender of Peace. So does Laurentius Valla in his
Declamation. So did Antoninus Archiepiscopus Florentinus, 1. Part. tit. 8. c.
2.. 8.
in his history. So does cardinal Cusanus in his Catholic Concordance l. 3.
c. 2. sent unto Basils Council. So does Aeneas Siluius (afterward Pope) in
his dialog. So does Raphael Volateran in the life of Constantine: Hierony.
Paulus Cattalanus doctor of both laws, and chamberlain to Pope Alexander the
sixth, in his book entitled, Practica cancellariae Apostolicae.

Vltrich Hutten writing to Pope Leo the tenth, upon Valla his book, he
says plainly, that the Donation was forged per pseudopontifices Orientis, by
the Eastern false-popes: not to speak of Luther and others. But to finish
that point; what time Bizantiums Bishop begun to labor for such universal
headship, Gregorius Magnus bishop of Rome, he that in humiliation first took
the title Seruus seruorum, he is bold hereupon to Li. 4 c. 34.
write thus: Ego fidenter dico, etc. I constantly affirm, whosoever calls
himself universal priest (or desires so to be called) in that his puffed up
estate, he fore-runneth Antichrist: and in his 39. Epistle he terms it
Nomen blasphemiae) a title of blasphemy, which title soon after Gregory's
time was by bloody Phocas given to the Pope of the seven hilled city. And
thus, where on Rome before was written Roma aeterna, censured by Hieron. in
epist. ad Algasiam.
Jerome for a name of blasphemy: now by their own Popes censure, that Cities
Archpriest has to himself assumed no better. Thus their clay and iron will
not be joined together: no baulme will cure this Babel.

But will the faithful know what City is Eterne? That is this new Jerusalem,
the City of the Saints. Hellish power may oppress it, but never suppress it.
Will thou know what City is supreme? That is this Ierushalem from Heaven
heavenly. Will thou know to what Bishop al supremacy universal is due? That
is, to Christ Jesus, who himself is Jehovah, and has obtained a name above
all Names, and he is the head of the Churches body, [ Coloss. 1.18.] he is the
beginning and first borne of the dead, that in ALL THINGS he might have the
preeminence. And this universal supremacy was figured darkly under the
Hie-priest of Ierushalems Temple, who had such dignity over that shadowing
Church, as none but he might enter the most holy place: only to him in the last
place were difficult matters brought for decision: and by his death were such
set free, as before for unawares bloodshed had taken sanctuary. All which
being shadows of good things to come, the body whereof was Christ [ Heb.
10.1, and 9.11.12, Coloss. 2.17.] now we are to consider al anew, as beseems
that which is substantial, not ceremonial.

Thus the City and the Citizens are the same: and Jehovah is There one with
the same, though not the same. In this City he dwells governing the Citizens,
subduing all their senses, all their affections, the whole man to himself. And
round about this City he causes his Angels to pitch their tents of defense.
Nay, which more is, Ps. 125.2. Zech. 2.5.
as the mountains were round about the typical Ierushalem, so is Jehovah
himself (as a consuming fire) round about his people henceforth and for ever.
To the Citizens a comfort, but to their adversaries a terror.

Jehovah is There. He that touches these Citizens, he touches the apple of
his eye, he dasheth himself against a wall of consuming fire. Revel. ^0.^ 7,
8.9.
Against this City does Gog (the cloked adversary) and Magog (the Open
enemy) together with their innumerable army convene in One: but after they
have compassed the tents of the Saints and the beloved City round about,
behold fire shall come down from heaven and devour them. It is no bourding
with Saints. Against God his City in her Majesty's dominions, how have covered
and vn-couered enemies risen up (at home and abroad, by land and by Sea) but
what was their end? The Egyptian Pharaoh of Spain, his Chariot-armadoes slunke
into the Seas channels, the winds of God fought against them, and dashed their
huge rigged fleet asunder. I allude to Judge. 5.28. etc.
Rome (the mother of Spaines Sisera.) she looked out at a window and cried
thorough the lattise, why is the Chariot so long a coming? why tarry the
wheels of his chariots? Romes wise Ladies answered her: yea, she answered her
self with her own words, thus: have they not gotten and they divide the
spoil, the Crown, Earledomes, and Church revenues of England? Every man has
a maid or two. Sisera has a pray of diverse colors, a pray of sundry colors
made of needle work: of diverse colors of needle work on both sides, for the
chief of the spoil. But sorry fools, through God his goodness, a woman (a
Virgin Queen) she triumphed over Sisera. For domestic adversaries, who have
banded together I allude to 1. King. 1.
for anointing Adonijah, but poor souls they have consumed themselves as wax
before the Sun. Deborahs prayer in Judge. 5.31.
So let all thine enemies perish o Lord: but they that love him shall be as the
Sun when he rises in his fortitude.

But here some will object: Either Jehovah dwells not in and about his
Church, or else he has promised no such protection, for we see many of his
people to fall by the sword etc. I answer, there is no contradiction in all
this: for as he dwells in, and round about them for protection, so he denies
them not the thing he promises, but performs it with advantage. He lets Abels
blood to be spilt, he suffers Stephen to be stoned etc. but what then? Has he
not protected them to the death? It is appointed that all men shall die (for
death is gone over all) and then comes judgment. Abell did but die, Stephen
did but die, and all must die. But mark, those that die in the Lord are
blessed, for they thenceforth rest from their labors, Revel. 14.13. This life
is but a vallie of tears, a prison, a purgatory: when his people remove
hence, tears are taken away, no more prisoners, free from necessity of
purgation, no more labors, for they rest in the Lord: yea, they enter into
Abraham's bosom of bliss, as did Lazarus: they are with Christ Jesus in the
kingdom of glory, even the very hour of Consider that in John 19.31.32. and
it cannot be easily judged but at the very vpshot of the day he dyed, and that
day he was to be with Christ. Luke 23.43.
their death, as was promised to the penitent thief on the Cross: At the
eleanenth hour he entered into the vineyarde, the Church: and in thend of the
twelfth hour (for the day has but twelve hours) he received the penny.
Matthew. 20.9
and as saint Paul believed when he concluded, that it was best for him to
die, that so he might go to the Lord: and no marvel, for precious (says
the Psalmist) in the eyes of the Lord, is the death of his Saints. If it be
good for them to stay here, they shall with Iudahs three young gentlemen be
vnsinged in the furnace, unharmed with Daniel of the greedy Lions, for the
Lord knows how to deliver His in the day of trouble. If it be not good in
some respect for them here to stay, then he remoues them from an inconstant
estate to a constant, from sadness to gladness, from a temporary life, to an
eternal: in a word, from hell, to heaven. longer it should not be good for
them to be here.

Lazarus for conveying the soul into eternal bliss.

Besides, neither is the body (in truth, howsoever in show) vnprotected in
death and grave: for as not an hair shall fall, but by the heavenly Fathers
appointment, so neither is the body unguarded of his good Spirit, seeing that
the flesh does rest in hope.

sanctified to the Churches increase: Sanguis Martyrum, semen Ecclesiae. And
warriors never say they are conquered, (notwithstanding the loss of many men)
when so the day is theirs in the end of the day. And ever in the end, the
Church is found the conqueror: her enemies dying for ever, but her members
raized up to glory, as not ever slain, but having been in a sleep or slumber.

Iehouah-Shammah, the Lord is with his Church; and if the Lord be (...) with
us, then (...), who can be against us? Nor devil, nor man, much less
inferior creature. Though Romans 8.36.37. etc.
we be killed all the day long, accounted as sheep for the slaughter:
nevertheless in all these things we are more than Conquerours, through him
that loved us. For I am persuaded (says S. Paul to the Romans) that neither
death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come: nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature
shall be able to seperat us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord.

What shall we return unto the Lord, who of [ So is the Hebrew.
lo gnammi] Not-my-people, has made and pronounced us [gnammi] my people: that
where before we were many Nations now he has made us One people, one nation.
Beda in 1. Cor. 12. ex Aug. ps. 85.
Vna gens, vna patria, etc. We now are (says a holy Father of this City)
One Nation, One Country. Our country is heavenly, our country is Ierushalem.
Whosoever is not thereof a Citizen, he pertains not to this people. But
whosoever is thereof a Citizen, he is of this people of God. And this people
is stretched forth from the East to the West, from the North, and the sea, it
is stretched through the four parts of the whole world. For all his exceeding
favors irradiating this City, this Church, this People, it rests, that we
all walk more worthy our holy calling: more worthy such a Governor as is
Jehovah. Shall I with the Psalmist say unto all our souls, * Lift up your
heads ye gates, and lift ye up ye everlasting doors, and the King of Glory
shall come in? Yea I say so: and I moreover say, Take heed you fetch not in
the Lord of life, with spreading branches, garments, and crying to day
Hosanna, and then to morrow betray him, and cry, Cruci-fige. It beseems
Princes to cut traitors from their City, and it shall never vnbeseeme God to
execute speedy vengeance on the wicked. This Cities gates Saint John sees
ever open to the Elect (such as cleanse themselves by unfeigned repentance)
come they from what coast soever. Upon every coast open three gates, and every
gate an entire pearl: by sacred Trinity in unity, even by their sweet love,
of more worth than any pearl, al must enter. For Porters there stand Angels
(even the twelve great Angels of the particular Churches) who by God his word
inuit the repentant. If David accounted it such an happiness to stand on this
Cities thresholde, what glory must it be, to walk in the streets of pure
gold, to have the face of Jehovah for their Sunshine, to have the Lord God
almighty, and the Lamb for their Temple, and to have for fellow Citizens,
Adam, Habel, Sheth, Henoch, Noah, Shem, Heber, Abraham, Isaac, Iaakob, Joseph,
Moses, Aaron, Ioshuah, Samson, Samuel, David, Solomon, Hezekiah, Josiah,
Daniel, Zerubbabel, Ezra, Nehemiah, in a word, all the Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, true Martyrs and Confessors of all ages? As all waters return into
the Sea, so all happinesses return into this Cities unity, gathered by the
Holy Ghost, founded on Jesus Christ, governed by God almighty.

But without this Cities unity, Revel. 21.8.
are dogs and inchaunters and whoremongers, and murderers and Idolaters, and
whosoever loves or makes lies. The holy enlightened as Israel in Goshen, but
the vn-holie darkened as the Egyptians in the land of Mizraim. God within, the
Devil without: for as there is no third governor, so there is no third Place.
These that are not of Michaels side, all these are of the Dragons side: who
shall fight, but not prevail, neither shall they have any place in heaven.

As the Prophet Ezekiel with reverent admiration shuts up his Prophecy with
this, The name of that City (that is, of the New-testaments Church) from a
Day, (even from the time of typical Ierushalems end) shall be Iehouah-Shamma,
The Eternal is there: so I with S. John's speech will finish my Sermon: Revel.
22.14
Blessed be they that do his commandments, that their right may be in the
Tree of life, and may enter in through the Gates [(...)] into That City.

FINIS.
Errata in this Book correct thus.
Page 16. line 8. for that read this

Page 40 line 19. read departed.

Page 45. li. 22. for Chron. read chap.


