Some helps for young Scholars in Christianity, as they are in use and
taught; Partly, At the Examination before the Communion: And partly, In the
ordinary Catechism every Sabbath day, in the new Kirk of Salt-Preston.

2. COR. 12.19. Now we do al these things dearly beloved, for your edifying.
PHILIP. 3.3. And rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh.
Multa cauillari promptius est, quam aemulari. It is more easy faults to pike,
In many things then do the like.
EDINBVRGH Printed by Robert VValde-graue, Printer to the Kings Majesty. 1602.

Cum Privilegio Regio.

To the Reader.
IF the often repetitions following, to any man seem tedious and superfluous,
let him consider that here we have to do but with rude beginners, that are
wained from the milk (as it were) and drawn from the breasts, to whom as to
children beginning to learn, precept must be upon precept, precept upon
precept, line unto line, line unto line, etc. whilk craves painful labor of
the teachers, with great plainness, (which is not so common perhaps in this
our Church and country as need were) and therefore the Apostle Peter says,
wherefore, I will not be negligent to put you always in remembrance of these
things, though that ye have knowledge, and be established in the present
truth, etc. 2. Pet. 1.12. much more then, is repetition needful to such as are
young in knowledge, or rather ignorant, as the gentiles wisely acknowledge who
besought Paul and Barnabas, that they would preach these words, that is, the
same words they hard that Sabbath day, to them the next Sabbath day. Act.
13.4^.

TO HIS LOVING flock of Salt-prestoun who by the preaching of the Gospel,
believe and turn to the Lord. JOHN DAVIDSON, wishes increase of Faith and
Repentance, with constancy therein, to the end and in the end, Amen.
WHat has been the drifte of my doctrine sen god placed me among you,
well-beloved in Christ Jesus, ye cannot be ignorant, seeing with out excellency
of words and all curiosity, in most plain sort ofter my familiar manner, I
show you the Testimony of God, esteeming, not to know any thing among you,
as the Apostle says, save Jesus Christ and him crucified. For the whilk
purpose this day seven year, to wit; the 16. day of November 1595. the
first time I spoke among you, I made choice of this place of Scripture
following, to be as a ground of that doctrine whilk thereafter I minded to
build thereupon, during our continuance together at gods pleasure. The place
was this, as ye remember. The people that sat in darkness, saw great light.
etc. Mat. 4.16. First, I opened the true meaning of the place, observing some
pertinent notes thereupon. Thereafter I made some use thereof by applycation to
you for that present, as a people by the sea-coaste, long sitting in no less
darkness, then did they of Galile, that dwelt by the lake of Genazareth, whilk
was to them as a sea: showing therewithal the great mercy of God toward
you, in offering to you that day the light of his gospel after sik a rare
manner, so that rightly it might be said over again of new, A people that
sat in darkness, has seen great light. Last, after all this, I gathered
some general grounds of Christian religion out of that place, as first. The
miserable blind estate of man by nature, without Christ. Secondly, the most
comfortable light of salvation in Christ. Thirdly, that men receive Christ his
light by faith wrought by the holy Spirit in the preaching of the gospel.
Fourthly, the end, that walking in that light of Christ, we may glorify him
that hes transtated us out of darkness into his wonderful light.

Hereunto in the afternoon the same day, I added these words of Christ:
Behold, I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice and open the
door, I will come in to him, and suppe with him and he with me. Revel. 3.20.
To serve as a spur to exhort you to the cheerful embraceing of so
comfortable a ghuest, whilk moved the whole parish present, so at that time
and long thereafter, that as the Apostle speaks of the Galathians, I bear
you record that if it had been possible, ye would have plucked out your eyes
and have given them to me. Though now and then to some I be-come an enemy for
speaking of the truth. God grant them amendment that offend of simplicity
and not of malice. But we must not be offended, though one part only, of the
four parts of ground that the seed of Gods word lights on, (and seem for
the most part to receive it,) be fruitful, for Satan is a busy Bishop; and
persecution and cares of the world with fleshly pleasures, are not soon
overcome. But with this sort of people at this present I have not to do, but
only with you who obey from the heart unto that form of doctrine, whereunto ye
were delivered. Whilk ye know hes ever been according to the foresaid
grounds. For the better keeping in memory whereof, I have thought good to put
them in writ in diverse forms, and set them to printing for your use as ye see,
that nothing be wanting that may further the sound grounding of you,
according to your mean capacity, in the true Christian religion, so far as
in me lies. Wherefore it rests, that ye be not slouthful in exercising your
selves, and your families, in reading, learning, and practicing hereof.
Farewell in Christ. 16. November. 1602.

ANd the Lord said, Genes. 18.17.18.19
Sal I hyde from Abraham that whilk I do, etc. for I know him that he will
command his sons, and his houshald after him, that they keip the way of the
Lord, to do righteousness and judgment, etc. And the words that I command
thee this day, salbe in thy heart, Deuteronomy. 6.^ 7.
and thou sall rehearse them continuallye unto thy children, and sall talk of
them when thou tarriest in thine house, and as thou walk by the way, and
when thou lies down, and when thou ryses up. And they red the book of the law
distinctly, and gave the sense, Nehom. 8.8.
and caused them to understand the reading. The Lord established a testimony in
Jacob, and ordained a law in Israel, Psalm. 78 4 5.6.7.
whilk he commanded our fathers that they should teich their children, that the
posterity might know it, and the children whilk should be borne, should stand up
and declare it to their children, that they might set their hope on god and not
to forget the works of God, but keip his commandenents. Whom sall he teich
knawledge, Esai. 28.9 ^8.
and whom sall he make to understand the things that he hears? the^ that are
wained from the milk, and drawn from the breasts: for precept must be upon
precept, precept upon precept, line unto line, line unto line, there a little,
and there a little. For when as concerning the time, H^b. 5.12
ye aucht to be teachers, yet have ye neid again, that we teach you what are
the first principles of the word of God, and are becum sik as have neid of
milk, and not of strong drink. Some helps for young Scholars in
Christianity
The Form of familiar instruction and examination of rude people, entering to
be disciples in the school of Christ: practiced in the new erected Kirk of
Salt-Prestoun, and parish thereof before the Communion, not without experience
of some profit and edification of Gods people. Praised be God blissed for ever
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.
AFter that the writer has taken up the names in writ, of sa money as for the
time are present of them, that were warned to that diet, according to our
visitation pasting before: and has demanded of every ane, whether they can say
the x. commands, the Belief, and the Lords Prayer, and has tried some maiste
suspected of ignorance in that caise, (thocht otherwise they affirm, as the
manner is, they can say them) and exhortation given to learn with diligence
where they want any thing: we proceid to prayer, after this, or the like manner
following.

The Prayer before the Catechyzing, at the Examination.
Bliss us good Lord, and this familiar exercise, that presently we are to have
(by thy grace) in catechizing and instructing thy people familiarly in the way
of truth: that thereby our own misery by nature, and happy estate by grace in
Christ, being the better knawin to every ane of us, and this grace in Christ
truly believed, we may learn to deny al confidence in our selves, and all
other creatures, and putting our hail traist in our allane Savior Jesus
Christ, may study to earnest and vnfenzeit repentance, and amendment of life
al our days, through Jesus Christ our Lord. To whom with the Father, and the
haly Gaist, be praise and glory, now and ever. Amen.

THE DOCTRINE AND teaching before the Examinatioun.
FOr your better instruction, well-beloued in Jesus Christ) before I demand any
thing of you, I will familiarly set down the sowme of the matter, whereof I
mind particularly to examine you: that teaching going always before
examination, tho better ye may know, what, and how to answer. Now, as ye hear
at the preaching from time to time, the sowme and chief drift of all our
doctrine to be, that all wha wald have rest to their saules, and life eternal,
must only cum to Christ Jesus, the son of God, and to nane other. Because
there is salvation in nane other as the Scripture says. (For his awin self
(allane) bare our sins in his body on the Tree. Act. 4.12 Isa. 53.45 63. 3.
Pet. 2.24.
So it is neidfull that we know whereof it comes, that we are sa sinful, that
by nature we are subject to condemnation, and whereof our salvation in Christ
comes, and how we are made partakers thereof: and what is craved of us, being
assured of our salvation in Christ. And therefore we shall bring the sowme of
all whereof we are to speak of, unto these four points.

The first salbe of our miserable estate by nature, and the cause thereof. The
second, of our redemption, and the cause thereof. The third, of our assurance
of this redemption and salvation, with the cause and meinis thereof. And the
fourth and last, of our duty being saved or assured of salvation.

But before we proceed farther, ye are to be admonished, that as all this
matter belangs to every ane of you in particular: so this form of doctrine
especially, craves sik particular atte^dance, of every ane of you (nane of any
estate, sex, or degree excepted) that ye be ready to answer to any question
that shall be moved: for it is uncertain to you what question may be demanded of
any of you. Whairof seeing heir we have better occasion to try your attendance,
then at the ordinary preaching, and general catechizing before the haill
Parochin, every Sabbath afternoon: where na sik several demanding is of
every ane: ye are not to miss the hearing of ane word that salbe spoken, but
to mark diligently for your instruction, the haill discourse and every part
thereof, that the better ye may answer by your awin understanding to every
point, and not upon the whispering and rounding in the ear by others next
you, whilk on na ways we will permit. For I had rather haif ane sentence, yea
never so small, spoken of your awin understanding, then ane thousand spoken by
suggestion and tickling of vthers. And as for me, I sall labor to be so
plain, that the maiste rude heir may be able to conceive what salbe proponed,
gif attendance salbe given as becomes. Now then to the first.

THE FIRST PART OF our Christian doctrine, touching man's miserable estate by
nature.
THen as concerning our condition by nature, we are the children of
disobedience, that is, altogether given to rebellion against God, and his word,
and sa are plain rebels to God. Whilk must not seem strange unto you, (as I
perceive sum of you to be whispering, and saying, Jesus keip us, as though it
were ane abomination sa to think, or speak: that we are plain rebels to God
by nature) For except ye be surely persuaded of this point, and acknawledge it
to be may true: all our teaching, and all your hearing is but in vain. For
what account makes any man of a Physician or Medicinar, that perceaueth and
feels no sickness? And what account can we make of the doctrine of
salvation, that misknawis our condemnation, and the cause thairof. Thairfore,
let us acknawledge in our hearts, and confess with our mouths, that by
nature we are rebels to God, as even in our common speech we grant with our
tongue, though unwittingly and without feeling, and consenting of the heart, in
the may part, whill as we say, We are all sinners. That is, altogidder
transgressors, and breakers of the Law of God (for sin is the transgression of
Gods Law) whilk seems to be spoken of many, 1. Ioh. 3.4
rather to cloak and make light of sin then truly to acknaweldge the misery of
our nature, whilk is imported thairby howsoever we dissemble the matter. For
the Scripture hes concluded us all under sin, and pronounced that we are sauld
under sin, and sa being altogidder sla^ts to sin, there remains not sa
meikle in us, as any free will at all in us to do good, for we are d^a^^ in
trespasses and sins. And very experience it self teaches euery^ Christian,
Eph^s. 2.1
and sik as wilfully will not be blinds and senseless, that all the
imaginations and thoughts of the heart of man, Genesis 6.5.
or the unregenerate part are only evil continually. Whairof it follows, that
being the children of disobedience, not only sik as cannot think ane good
thocht, or any wayis perform the least jot that God commands us, and sa
offends in defectio^ and omission of our duty: but also sik as are given to
commit all kind of sin with greediness. Ephesians. 4.10
Being sik, I say, it follows that we are the children o^ wrath, through the
justice of the wrathful God against sin, and sa are gylty of everlasting
death and condemnation, for the reward of sin, Romans 6, 23
is death. Now the Law, or the ten commands of God, serves as ane glass to let
us see our sins, for the knawledge of sin comes by the Law. Romans 7.^
And thairfoir it is, that we same^kle urge, that every ane have the ten
commands, and the true understanding thairof in some measure, that knowing
thairby what duty is craved of us toward God, in the four commandments of
the first Table, and toward our nichthour, in the sex commandments in the
second Table: and how unable we are to perform any of them: yea how reddy and
bent we are to brek every ane, and al of them, and sa to fall under the curse
and condemnation of the Law: we may be driven to seek for the Gospel of grace
and free remission of our sins in Christ, who is the end of the Law, Romans
10, 4.
for righte^usnes unto every ane that believes, whairof mair heirafter shall
be spoken in the awin place Godwilling. It rests then, that w^e know whairof,
and how we have this bentnes by nature to sin and breaking of Gods
commandments, to our eternal condemnation. By creation we have it not, and
(...) God is not the author of it: for it is said, And God saw all that he had
made, Gen, ^.31.
and lo it was good. Yea, to his awin image God created man at the beginning,
that amang all other creatures may percttely, he might represent ye
s^ueraign^ wisdom, righteousness, and gudenesse of God the Creator: sa that
in him, as it were, was set up a little world. We have this bentnesse to sin
then, of the corruption of that good nature that God made at the beginning,
whilk came to pass after the manner following.

Adam and Eve our first parents, being made of the dust of the ground, and
having received the breath of life by the saull joined to the body, and made to
the Image of God, good, haly, and righteous, and placed by him in the gardine,
or pleasant orcharde called Paradise, to bresse and labor it: and having
received commandment to eat of every tree of the garuen, except of the tree
of knawledge of good and evil (whairof God forbade them to eat under the
pain of death and condemnation: saying, for in the day thou eatest thairof,
thou sall die the death) it came to pass^ through the subtelty of the Serpent,
or rather the Devil, abusing the subtelty of the Serpent, (wha thairfor^ is
called that auld Serpent the Devil, and Satan) that they were begyled, and
brought to break the plain command of God foresaid, in eating of the fruit of
the forbidden tree: Whairthrow they falling from their former good estate, into
sinful disobedience, and consequently under condemnation: so defaced the Image
of God in themselves, by corrupting and infecting their haill nature, that they
and their haill posterity were innolued under sin and death. For as touching
themselves, it is plain that they became sinners, and so incurred the sentence
of death and damnation according to the truth of Gods word fore^auld them, and
thereupon were thrust out of Paradise. And as for v^ their post^rity, we cannot
be bette^ nor they whom of we come, and stock ^ut of the whilk we are hewin.
For wha can bring ane clean thing out of filthiness? Job. 14.4.
and sa, as we say, we have sin by kind we co^t it not. And David sai^th,
Psalm. 51.^5.
Behald, I was born in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me. And
this is that original sin whairwith the hail raze of mankind is infected,
the reward whereof is death: as the power that very natural death has over
infants that sin not after the manner of Adam and others, wha sins with
knawledge) is a sur^ argument, because being included in sinning with Adam,
they are sinners: and m^^kle mair are they and all we gyity of condemnation,
when actual sin falloweth thairupon. Then, as by an^ man sin entered into
the world, and death by sin: so death went over al men, forasmuch as all men
have sinned.

Heir I enlarge the dialogue between the Serpent and Eve, and the several
judgments of God pronounced against every pairtie offending, in this first
part touching our misery: and thairafter shortly repeats the former discourse,
and then says after this manner following.

THE FORM OF Demanding and asking, touching the first part of the familiar
instruction.
Q. When I sall ask yo^ then, what are ye by nature? Every ane of you sal^
answer,

A. I am the child of wraith, and sa subject to eternal condemnation.

Q. When the question sal follow, what is the cause of this miserabill estate?
Ye sall answer,

A. My sin is the cause.

Q. When it salbe demanded what is sin? Ye sall answer,

A. The transgression of the Law of God, contained in the ten commandments.

Q. When the sowme of the ten Commandments sall be craved? Ye sall say,

A. The sum thairof is the entire and perfect love of God, and the lou^ of my
neighbor as my self. The first Tabill containing four commandments
concerning God: and the second containing sex concerning my neigbour.

Q. When the question salbe moved, Can thou not obey and fulfill these
commandementes of thy awin nature? ye sall say,

A. I am sa far from obeying and fulfilling of thom, that I ca^ do nathing but
transgress and break them.

Q. Whairof comes this thy bent disposition to sin, and breking of Gods
commandments? Ye sall say

A. Of the gyltinesse and corruption of nature in my first parents, Adam and
Eve.

Q. How were they corrupted, seeing God made them good at the beginning? Ye are
to say,

A. By the deceat of Satan in the Serpent, intysing them to break Gods
command.

Q. What was the command they brake? Ye sall answer,

A. They ate of the fruit of the tree of knawledge of good and evil in
Paradise, whairof God forbad the^ to eat, under the pain of death and
damnation.

Q. How can thou be partaker of the sin of our first parents, and
consequently of condemnation? Ye sall answer,

A. As they, and we in them became sinners, for wha can bring an^ clean thing
out of ^ithines: sa the sentence of death and condemnation fell upon us, their
posterity^ for ever.

THE SECOND PART of the Catechism.
Now we are to see, gif there be any remedy or safety for us from this
^earefull condemnation. And in ^erry deeds, if there were na remedy for us, man
and woman were mair miserabill then the brute beast, yea, then the very Load:
for when the brains or harns o^ it are dashed out, there is na mair of it: bot
miserabill man by nature is subject to unspeakable pains eternally, whilk is
set down in these words, Thou sal die ye death: that is, thou salbe subject to
ye first and secund death, in body and saul, with all tha miseries that may
acco^panie the same. Whilk must be sameikle the mair painful to man and woman,
because they are endued with reason and understanding above the beast: whairby
they may discourse and confer between the happy estate from the whilk by sin
they fell, and that endless misery whereinto they are fallen. Then seeing their
is relief for miserabill and lost men, we are to see, from whence it comes.
From damned man it cannot come, from the Devil our readly enemy it cannot
come, Angels who are diverse in nature from us, cannot satisfy for us. Our
help and safety their, is only from the Lord our God, who has made both the
heaven and the earth: Psalm. 124.8. Isa. 4^.21
who said, I am the Lord, and beside me their is no Savior. For our salvation
comes not of nature, but of grace And even as when a condemned maiefactor
being freely pardoned by the Prince, is said to get grace: even sa it fares
with us, and our merci^ul God. Then of his a win good will and free favor,
moved of tender mercy and compassion toward sik of the race of mankind, as
his good will hes predestinate and elected to salvation, before the beginning
of the world, that as well his justice might be satisfied, as his mercy have
place: ordained our salvation to be wrought by his a win deir and weilbeloued
Son, verry God, and verry man in ane person: wha being the second person of
the Trinity, took to him the nature of man, in the fullness of time, of the
Virgin Marie, and so was called the seed of the Woman that sall tread down
the head of the Serpent, and God manifested in the flesh, our Immanuel and
Ithiel, and Lord Jesus Christ. This is that only Mediator between God and
man, even the man Christ Jesus, wha was delivered to death for our sins, and
raise again for our righteousness. Romans 4.25.
Neither is there salvation in any other: For amongst men there is given nane
other name under heaven whereby we must be saved. Act. 4.^^
Now, as for the price whairwith he redeemed us, It was not corruptible
things, as silver and gold, but his awin precious blude, 1. P^^. 1.^8.19
as of an lamb undefiled, and without spot, when he suffered under Pontius
Pilate, redeeming us thairby from everlasting death and damnation. Romans 1.4.
And by his powerful resurrection from the dead the third day, restoring us to
righteousness and life eternal: so he was crucified, and died that cursed
death of the Croce, 2. Cor. 1^ 4.
concerning his infirmity (or manhood) and lives through the power of God,
(that is his Godhead) to the whilk aggreeth Peter's saying, he was put to death
concerning the flesh, but was quickened in the Spirit. 1. Pet. 1^ 18
For performing of whilk two parts of a perfect Savior, in suffering and
ouercomming, it behooued him to be God and man in one person.

THE FORM OF DEmanding and answering, touching the second part of this
familier instruction.
Q. When I sall ask thairfore touching the second principle of our Religion,
whether there be any salvation for lost man? Ye sall answer,

A. Yes: or else our estate were more miserable thou the estate of brute
beasts.

Q. From whence comes this salvation? Ye sall answer,

A. From the tender mercy and grace of God, who loving us when we were his
enemies, provided our salvation to be wrought onley by his weilbeloued Son
Jesus Christ, made man of the Virgin Marie without sin. Romans 5, 8.


Q. What is Christ in person, and office? Ye sall answer,

A. In person he is God and man, the son of God, and the son of the Virgin
Marie, very God and very man without co^fusio^ of the two nature

Q. Why was it neidfull that he should be God and man in ane person?

A. He was man to suffer for mankind to tho uttermost punishments due for man's
sins: and God to ^ear^ up the manhood in suffering and ouercomming to the
full.

Q. What is he in office?

A. He is our King, Priest, and Prophet: our Mediatez, Redeemer, ruler,
preserver, teacher: and finally, he is all in all things ne^rssarie for our
perfect salvation without any help, merit, or work of ours, first or last.

Q. How redeemed he you?

A. By his bludshed, death, and passion, and by rising again from the dead the
third day.

Q. Then the salvation of man is so fully wrought and perfitelie accomplished
by Christ in his awin person, that nothing is lef^ to be done or wrought by
us in our persons, to be onie cause of the least part thereof?

A. That is most certain. For as his blude purges us from al sin and his
perfect rigteousnesse becommes cures, so in him we an^ compleit: and so sure
is that s^ntence, For by ane oblation h^^^ he made perfect for ever, them (...)
are sanctified. Heb. 10.14.

Q Can we have no salvation except we have participation, and be conjoined
with Christ: so that we must be his, and he ours?

A. Nane at all: for seeing the cause of our salvation is in the person of
Christ only, and never in our selves, but by participation of him: we can
never be partakers of salvation but by our conjunction and union with him:
whairby he becoming ane with us, and we ane with him, we get through him the
full right of salvation and life everlasting.

THE THIRD PART OF our familiar Examination, before the Lords Supper.
NOw seeing our reconciliation to God and eternal salvation, ^^nds in our union
and true coniun^^^n with Christ: we are to learn in the third part, by what
means this strait communion is made between him and us. Means is their nane
that properly joins us with Christ but only Faith, whilk is ane hearty
receiving of Christ crucified and risen again: our alone and sufficient
Savior, as he is offered to us in the gospel: whilk is wrought by the holy
Spirit through the preaching of Gods word, heard and received of us: Whereby
we are made assured of reconciliation to God, and life everlasting through him
alone: yea, we are made ane with him, and he becomes ours, and we his: in sik
sort, that every ane that has this faith, may say, neither death nor life,
Romans 8.38.39. Phil. 3.8. Gal. 2.20.
things present nor things to come, etc. falbe able to separate me from the
love of God, whilk is in Christ Jesus my Lord, who has loved me and given
himself for me. Now we say, that faith only receives Christ, whereby he
dwells in our hearts. Because neither hope nor love, nor any other heuinly gift
hes that office but only faith. ^. P^^. 2.9
Hope as a watchman luiks for the end or our faith, whilk is the salvation of
our souls. And love is faiths handmaid and steward, disposing the graces and
gudes of faith, by evident demonstration, as it were, witnesses and declares
to our selves and to vthers, that we possess Christ by faith, and have sure
hope of enjoying salvation by him. Ioh. 1.11.12.5.38.^3
And heirfore it is, that to believe in Christ, and to receive Christ, is all
one thing. So that when we say, faith only makes us partakers of Christ and
his righteousness, we separate not Hope and Charity from Faith, but
distinguishing them, gives every ane of them their own proper office, and
namely, to faith her proper office: whilk is, to make a true and present
conjunction with Christ crucified, and risen again to our assured
reconciliatioun with God. As when we say, the Son only and not the Father, nor
the holy Ghost, was incarnat for the redemption of man. We separate not the
Son from the Father, and the holy Spreit: but gives unto him his awin
distinct and proper office. So The Papists sophistry serves for nothing:
saying, Faith only justifies not, because Faith is not allone when it
justifies, but has Hope and Charity joined with it: but they make little of
hope, sa they may have some cloak of charity, whilk seems to make something
for their stinking merits: for the whilks they make mair ado, then for Christ
himself. We are said then to be saved or justified by Faith only: because
Faith is the only instrument that receaueth Christ, wha saved us by those
things whilk he did for us in his awin person, and not by any thing whilk he
works in or by us, in our awin persons, or the person of any other. And so
the merits of men and Angels, are excluded from being any cause of the least
part of our salvation. For God willing to make the salvation of his elect sure,
in the person of his Son Jesus Christ, wald not commit the credit thereof to
our selves, or to any other: for it is not meet that we should have the
credit of our owin salvation in our awin keeping any mair, seeing when we had
free will and power of the keeping of our first good estate in Paradise, sa
sodanely, and upon sa small occasion we lost it. For a remembrance and
castigation whairof, and for humbling of man, God will have a remanent of sin
to remains during this life, even in his chosen children, whilk may ever keep
them under scare of condemnation in themselves, and make them seek salvation
in him only, in whom only it is to be found, that is, Christ Jesus his only
Son, our Lord, of whom truly we are made partakers by Faith only: whilk
is that beginning, as the scripture says, ^eb. 3.14
whereby we are made partakers of Christ and are vphaldin sa, that no doubting
that arriseth through our awin infirmity, can deface the assurance of our
salvation in Christ, possessed by true Faith, whilk finds ever in Christ ^he
full satisfaction for our sins, and full restoring to righteousness and Gods
favor, and never any of either of them, nor of any part thereof, in our
selves, nor in our warks, nor in any creature else. And this conjunction with
Christ by Faith is mosts sure and certain, thought it be not natural, civil,
nor artificial: but mere spiritual, mystic, and secreit: and sa altogidder
unknown to the natural warldly, and carnal man, wha perceaueth not the
things of the spirit of God, whom the warlde cannot receive. 1, Cor. ^.14.
John. 1^.17.
And certain it is, that both ye enlightening of the mind to acknawledge the
truth of the promise of salvation to us in Christ: and the sealing up of the
certainty thairof in our hearts and mynds (of the whilk two parts, as it were,
faith consists) are the works and effects of the Spirit of God, and neither of
nature, nor art: the preaching of the word, and administration of the
Sacraments interueening, Ephesians. 1.1^ 17.
as means and instruments whereby the haly Spirit begets and confirms
Faith in our hearts. Now as this says is ordinarily wrought by the halye
Spirit through the preaching of the word, and by the Sacraments increased and
confirmed: so it is certain, where no preaching is, their, ordinarily can be no
faith, and where there is no faith, there is no Christ, and where there is no
Christ, there is no salvation. And ^owheit Faith cannot be wrought (we speak
ay ordinarily) without hearing of the word, yet the preching and hearing of the
word may be without Faith in many. For all men have not Faith, and without
the mixture of Faith, 2. These. 3 2. Rom, 10, 16. Hob. 4.12.
the preaching and hearing is unprofitable. Heir of it is plain, that neither
Turks, Jews, Pagans, nor they that hear not the word at all, as also
neither Papists (who are enemies to true Faith, not knawing, but abolishing the
lively nature thereof, and preferring the dumb guyse of their Mass, whilk is
neither ministration of any sacrament, nor preaching of the word, but
contumelious to both, before the preaching of the word) neither Atheists,
nullifidians, bare and idle hearers, nor temporary believers, and wha hear
not with ane honest and good heart, wanting the gift of true Faith, can be
partakers of salvation in anywise. And therefore we are earnestly to pray to
the Lord of the Harvest, that he would thrust out faithful laborers into his
Harvest, ye is, true Ministers and teachers in his Kirk. and that he would give
us honest and reverent hearts, to be profitable and faithful hearers of them by
true faith. Now, we have sik a coniunctio^ with Christ, by virtue of our union
with him by justifying Faith only: that as our sins only are the ch^se of
his death, and that condemnation whereunto he was subject: so his death and
righteousness only is the cause of our salvation. And so the cause of our
salvation is only in him, and the effect whilk is our salvation, comes to us
through him only, possessed by Faith: whairby he beco^ming ane with us, and
taking our cause upon him, he delivered us from all sin and condemnation, and
presents us faultlesse and righteous before God. Neither aucht this to seem
strange to us, as though hereby we were not made free, and truly holy in Gods
presence, and meet to be made partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in
light: or as though we could not get the effect in us, whereof he is the cause
seeing the payment of ane man for another, where there is no sik vnio^ nor
conjunction, but the mere right of souerty-ship, does make the pairty indebted
for payment, free, and able to enjoy his freedom, as law, practice, and daily
experience teaches us. But we by virtue of our marriage, and conjunction with
Christ by Faith, have just title and right to him, and so to all that is his.
As concerning the sowme of our faith, contained in the articles of the Belief,
whilk is continually rehearsed amongst us, we are to understand, that it sets
down to us, that there is one God, and three persons in the Godhead, the
Father, the Son, and the haly Gaist: the Father the maker and preserver of
all creatures, and fountain of grace and gudenesse. The Son, made man, the
Redeemer and ransom for man. The holy Spirit, the sanctifier and worker of
the conjunction betwixt Christ and the Faithful. The sowm of all is, that
every Christian is sure and certain, that his salvation is soundly and
thoroughly wrought and performed by Christ crucified and risen again. So that
nothing rests for man or any other creature to do, for purchasing or meriting
his salvation, or any of the least part thereof, for here Christ received by
faith, is all and in all things. For the greater confirmation of us in this
Faith, beside the word preached, are added two holy actions, with outward
signs and ceremonies sealing up the same salvation and faith in Christ, to
them that believe, called the Sacraments: that is, holy signs ordained by
Christ in the new Testament, to seal up salvation in him, who is signified,
represented, and really, though sacramentally, exhibited to them that believe.
Shortly, they may be called the seals of the righteousness of Faith. Romans 4,
11
These Sacraments are two in number: to wit, Baptism, and the Lords Supper.
Baptism, importing wasching, and cleansing: and the Supper feeding and
nourishment in Christ. For the whilk cause the outward sign in Baptism is
water, representing the blud-shed of Christ, for drowning, washing away, and
remission of our sins, and planting us in Christ, to grow up with him in
newness of life. In the Supper are the twofolde signs of bread and wine,
setting out Christ crucified to be the only true fude of our saules to life
everlasting. Our entres into Christ and his Kirk is set down by Baptism, and
so to be ministered but once to every one: the supper imports our nourishment
and continuance in the family and kirk of Christ, and so is to be reiterata,
and often celebrate, for keeping us in fresh memory of Christ his Passion, as
the continual fude of ane Christian saul, all the days of this our life. And
so both the Sacraments (as does the word preached) lead us to Christ crucified
only, for our full redemption wrought in his awin person, as that only cause
of our salvation, and seal up the same more sensibly to all that believe.

THE FORM OF DEmanding and answering, touching the third part of this
familier instruction.
Q. How are ye joined with Christ, and sa made partaker of him and of his
righteousness?

A. By Faith only.

Q. What is Faith?

A. It is ane hearty assurance, that our sins are freely forgiven us in
Christ. Or after this manner: It is the hearty receiving of Christ offered in
the preaching of the word and Sacraments, by the working of the haly Spirit,
for the remission of sins, whereby he becummes ane with us, and we ane with
him, he our head, and we his members.

Q. When it sall be said, Hes every man this Faith? Ye sall answer

A. No: for as all men have not Faith, sa natte can believe in him of whom
they have not heard by preaching: and none hears by preaching but they that
have ears to hear, and are ordained to life everlasting. For many are called
but few chosen.

Q. When it sall be asked, Can this be ane dead Faith that receaueth Christ?
Ye sall answer,

A. How can it be dead that receaueth the Lord of life, and very life it self.

Heir I demand some few questions touching the articles of the Belief: and
whether they feil any comfort in their hearts through this Belief, and whether
they find this sure belief wrought in their hearts by the preaching of the
word: and so finds the preaching necessary, profitable, and comfortable to
them. To the whilk I receive many sensible, cheerful, and pertinent answers,
whilk is the fruit and joy of my labors that I crave. And therefore I chiefly
labor this point of feeling knawledge of Christ in the people.

Q. What is joined with the preaching of the word in the Ministry, for your
farther strengthening in this Faith? Ye sall answer,

A. The two sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper.

Q. What are these Sacraments? Ye sall say,

A. They are actions co^monded by Christ to be ministered in the Kirk, in ye
ministratio^ of visible signs, joined with the preaching of the word, offering
Christ Jesus crucified only for salvation to the rest of the senses, that the
word preached does to the ears and hearing.

Q. When I sall ask what is the sign in Baptism, and what are the signs of
the Lords Supper? Ye sall answer,

A. Water in Baptism, and bread and wine in the Lords Supper.

Q. What signifies the signs? Ye sall say.

A. They both signify and truly offer Christ crucified to the receauers for
salvation. The water applied, setting out the washing away of our sins by the
bludeshed of Christ: and the bread and the wine the continual feeding and
nurishment of our saules by his death to life everlasting.

Q. When ye salbe asked, Do the Sacraments mair really and power fully
communicate Christ crucified unto us, then the word preached? Ye sall say,

A. Not, but more sensibly.

Q. Last, when I shall demand, Does any Sacrament more effectually communicate
Christ crucified unto us, then another, or any sign more then another? Ye sall
say,

A. No: and therefore the bread in the Lords Supper, is no more transubstantiat
into Christ his body, the^ is the water in Baptism, and the Cupe or the wine
in the Supper into the new testament, or blood of Christ. Finally, all this
communication of Christ by Faith into the Sacraments, is mere spiritual, and
supernatural. Sa that thereby Christ is not corporally and locally brought out
of heaven (whilk must needs contain him, and his bodily presence to the last
day) to be in the place of the elements, or to be included within them. But
contrariwise, by the use of the elements, our hearts are conuoyed and carried,
to the liuelye consideration of his death and resurrection, and from thence to
heaven, (where he sits at the right hand of God) to feed upon him by Faith, to
life everlasting, whilk is the very washing of our sins, and true eating of
his body, and drinking of his blude.

THE FOVRT PART OF our familiar Examination, before the Communion.
NOw being made truly and really partakers of Christ, and his righteousness by
Faith only, and so justified, saved, and counted truly righteous in the sight
of God, to whom we are reconciled: We are to see, what God craves of us in
our awin part, to witness our thankfulness for so great and unspeakable a
benefit. We may not think that we are redeemed from sin, to live still in
sin, and take our pleasure therein as we did before we were called or
believed: or that faith destroys good works, and takes away the use of
charity: No, no: for that were but to deceive our selves, with that dead
faith, whereof James speaks chap. ^. and not to have that affectual faith
whereby the just man lives, Abac. 2.4. and whilk purifieth the hearts Acts
15.9. and that works by love Galath. 5.6. For being bought for so great a
price, we are Gods, and so must glorify him in body and spirit. 1. Corinthians.
6.20. And as he is God all-sufficient to us: so must we walk before him, and be
upright. Genesis 17.1 that is, we must serve him in holiness and righteousness all
the days of our life. Luke 1.74.75. according to the ten commandments
contained in the first and second Table, whilks every Christian aught to have
by heart perfitely: First, to let him se his awin iniquity and condemnation in
himself: and next, to lead him to Christ who is the end of the Law for
righteousness, unto every ane that believes, Romans 10.4. And thirdly, to be
as a rule whereby to lead his life, James 1.25. To be short, being in Christ,
we must be new creatures, not in substance, but in qualities and disposition
of our minds, and change of the actions of our lives: so that we must hate and
flee that whilk before we loved and embraced: and we must love and follow
that whilk before we hated and abhorred: that is, we must deny ungodliness,
and warldly lusts, and must live soberly and righteously, and godly in this
present world, Tit. 2.12. Al whilk, is impossible to them that have no Faith,
and have but a dead faith, and are enemies to the justifying faith that is in
Christ Jesus, brag foolishly vtherwayes of good works as meikle as they list.
For as it is impossible to please God without faith, Heb. 11.6. so it is
impossible to please him by any other means then by faith only, because that
in none other is he ever pleased, but in his only Son, who is made ours by
faith only, as before is clearly proved. And so the person of the worker, must
be in the favor of God, and acceptabill unto him, before ever his works can
be accepted and please him: whilk cannot be but by Faith only, whilk makes us
one with Christ his Son, in whom he is well pleased, Matthew. 15.5. and sa
being in the favor of God, by virtue of our union with Christ, and
justification in him before we work, our works cannot be a preceiding cause
of our reconciliation to God, nor the procurers of Gods favor to us: na mair
then breathing, feeling, seeing, hearing, and the haill actions of our natural
life, are causes thereof, but the effects only: So good warkes follow as
effects of Christ in us, possessed by faith, who by the hid and secret power
of the haly Spreit, begins to work in us regeneration, and a renewing of the
haill parts and powers of saul and body. Whilk begun sanctification and
holiness, he never cease to accomplish unto the day of the Lord Jesus
Christ, at what time being grown to the fullness of our age in Christ, he will
present us faultlesse to his heavenly Father, as meet to be partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in light, in that life everlasting, when God fall be
all in all things, blissed for ever, Amen.

Now this begun regeneration or new birth in us, stands in the mortifying of
our aulde corrupted and sinful nature, whilk is called the auld man: and in
quickening and renewing the Image of God, whilk we lost in Adam: of
righteousness and true, holiness, called the new man: whairby their grows an
hatred, lothing, and lawing of sin in us: and a love, following, and
embracing of godliness, and a good life, whilk is commonly called repentance,
or a turning and change of the mind and deed, from satan and sin, to God and
godliness, whilk indures all the days of this life, with a great strife and
battle between the flesh and the spirit: that is, the auld man and the new:
that every Christian sa becoming two, (as it were in ane) the ane whairof is
ever contrary to the other, is ever occupied in a continual warrefare, though
some in a greater, and some in a lesser measure: of whilke battle and strife,
the unregenerate and unfaithful, have neither knowledge nor any feiling,
because they remain on after the auld manner, in Satan's bondage: altogidder
walking after their lusts, in fornication, uncleanness, wrath, anger,
maliciousness, cursed speaking, leeing, and so forth. Colos. 3.5.8. Whilk, as
the Apostle says, being past feeling, have given themselves unto wa^tonnes,
to work all uncleanness, even with greedines. Ephesians. 4.19. Yea, they make a
pastime of sin, Proverb. 10.23. and have their delight so therein, that to
twin and part them and sin, it is to part them, as it were, and their life.
But in the person that is borne again of God, this auld corruption of nature
called the aulde man, howheit it strive mightily, and by all means, through
the working of Satan that works in the children of unbelief, to recover his
kingdom of sin: yet by the power of the Spirit of Christ, renewing the
spirit of our mind: he gets sik a deads wound, that although he make us
meikle cumber, yet is he never able to overcome, but in Jesus Christ we are
mair nor victors. The assurance whairof is our singular comfort in this
fearful battle between the Flesh and the Spirit: and therefore the grace of
God is sufficient for us, who will have his power perfited in infirmity. And
so with the scripture we say, that as the world is altogidder set upon sin,
and can do nathing but sin: so they that are borne of God sin not: not
that their sins of themselves are not deadly, but because their persons are
so lively in Christ, that the deadliness of sin cannot prevail against them:
for it is our faith that ouercommes the world, because Christ possessed by
faith has overcome the world. And so howheit the condemnation of sin be
removed from the faithful altogidder: yet the battle with sin remains
during this life. To this domestic inward battle, for the farther trial of
our faith, as our God sees it needfall, is the croce of persecution external
added: for the better bearing out of al without desperate fainting, we have
need of that worthy gift of patience, Philip. 1.29. whilk is a constancy
given of God, to sustain and bear out all kind of afflictions for the name
of Christ, and therefore is called the patience of God, and not our awin. Romans
15.5. Revel. 3.10. for the better fighting asweill of this domestique battle,
as pacient sustayning afflictions for Christ, both in our selfs, and the rest
of Christ's members, and haill Kirk of God in this earth, continual and hearty
prayer to God is commanded to all Christians, as the chief fruit and exercise
of faith and hope, Ephesians. 6.18. James 1 3.4.5. Whilk prayer is a confident and
a familiar begging and craving of God, only at his commandment, publicly,
and privately, in the name of his Son only, and in the name of no Saint, nor
Angel, sik things as be needful and requisite for Gods glory and the comfort
of our selves, and our neighbors: the sum whereof, is set down by Christ
himself in the Lords Prayer. Wherein are sex patitions, touching the glory of
God, and our awin weilfare and our neighbors (answering to the two Tables of
the Law) The first three concerns the glory of God directlye, whilk of all
things should be most dear, and so most needful unto us: and the other three the
well of our selves and our neighbors, in saul and body heir, and always to
the end, and in the end, Amen. In the whilk Prayer, as we are taught to be
most humble in our selves, in respect of our manifold and unspeakable wants:
sa we are taught to be most consident in our God through christ, by whom al
our wants are repaired and supplied in saules and bodies. Amen. And so whether
we look to our justification or sanctification, they are wholly wrought and
perfited by Christ, in whom we are compleit, howheit after a diverse sort: For
our justification is only wroght by him in himself, without us, sa that how
soon we truly believe, we are justified, counted righteous, and gets the
right of life everlasting, through the death and resurrection of Christ. And as
for our sanctification, he works it in our selves by little and little, so
that in this life it is never perfect in our selves, howbeit before the
enjoying of life everlasting he prese^ts us faultles before his heavenly
Father, to possess that kingdom prepared for us before the beginning of the
world. Whairby the difference clearly appears betwixt the ane and the other,
faith and works, justification and sanctification: the ane as the cause gives
the right of salvation: the other as effect truly declares our meitnesse for
possession of our right.

THE FORM OF DEmanding and answering, touching the fourth part of this
familier instruction.
Q. When I sall ask you then, What is craved of us after that we are joined
to Christ by Faith, and made truly righteous in him? Ye sall answer,

A. We must repent and becum new persons, that we may show forth the
virtues of him that has called us out of darkness into his meruellous light.
^. Pet. 2.9


Q. When I sall ask, What is Repentance? Ye sall answer,

A. It is ane sorrow and displeasure for sin, and hatred thereof, and a love
to righteousness, preceding of the knawlodge of the truth: whilk by the working
of the haly Spirit of regeneration, changes and renueth the mind of man and
woman.

Q. When I sall ask, Whairin chiefly stands Repentance? Ye sall answer,

A. In departing from evil, and doing good, as outward fruits before men of
our inward regeneration before God, whilk ever accompanies true faith in
Christ.

Q. When it sall be demanded, Are we wholly and thoroughly made new by our new
birth, so that there remains no more sin in us? Ye sall say,

A. Though the condemnation of sin be taken away, yet the battle with sin
remains sa lang as we live in this life.

Q. When the question salbe moved, wha are the parties in this battle? Ye sall
say,

A. The auld man, and the new man.

Q. What is the auld man, and what is the new man? Ye sall answer,

A. The remanent of sin according to our conversation in time past, after our
corruption through the deceiuable lusts, is the auld man: and the renewing of
the spirit of the mind, wha after God is created in righteousness and true
halinesse, is the new man. Or shortly ye may say, the unregenerate part is the
auld man and the regenerate part the new man

Q. When I sall demand, Has every Christian these two parts, or two men in
him, and consequently this battle? Ye sall answer,

A. Yes in some sort, though al not in like measure of feeling and fighting.

Q. Gif I sal ask any of you touching your awin feeling and experience in this
caise? Ye sall answer as ye find the truth in your selves, but certain it
is, ye may truly answer,

A. As our knawledge is small, our feeling is less: and namely, touching the
true hatred of sin in our selves and vthers, and the true love of
righteousness every way: but yet in Christ who is our true holiness, we are
mair then victors.

Q. When I sall say, What is the chief armor of a Christian in this battle,
beside faith and repentance? Ye sall say,

A. Hearty and continual Prayer unto God only, in the name of his Son
only, for all things neidful to our saul and body: as summarly is contained
in the Lords Prayer.

Q. The last question will be this, How many petitions are in the Lords
prayer? Ye sall answer,

A. Sex: of the whilk the first three concerns the glory of God directlye: and
the other three, his glory in our selves, and our neighbors weilfare: whilk
Prayer, no man can make without Faith. For how sall they call upon him in
whom they have not believed. Romans 10.14. Amen.

After the Doctrine delivered in effect foresaid, and a short and summar
repetition made thereof again, we proceed to the Examination accordingly.

The ordinary Catechism, as it is taught in the new erected Kirk of
Salt-Preston every Saboth day.
Jesus said to her (to wit, Ioh. 11.25.26.27.
to Martha) I am the Resurrection, and the life, he that believes in me,
though he were dead, yet sall he live, etc. Believes thou this? Sche said unto
him, yea Lord, I believe that thou art that Christ the son of God, whilk should
cum into the world.

He that believes in the Son has everlasting lyse, and he that obeys not
the Son, sall not se life, but the wrath of God abides on him.

For other foundation can no man lay, i. Cor. 3.11.
then that whilk is laid, whilk is Jesus Christ.

And ye are compleit in him, etc. Colos. 2.10. wha is Alpha and Omega, the
beginning and the ending Revel. 1.8. the author and finisher of our Faith,
Heb. 12.2. and obtained eternal redemption for us, Heb. 9.12. who in the end
of the world has appeared once to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself,
Heb. 9.26. For with one offering has he consecrate for ever, them that are
sanctified. So there is no more offering for sin. Heb. 10.14.18.

For amongst men there is given nane other name under heaven whereby we must be
saved, Act. 4.12
neither is there salvation in any other.

Follows our ordinarye Catechism according to the former grounds, whilk we
teach before the people on the Sabbath days, taking every Sabbath a part
thereof: and so every Month once we go through the principles of Religion,
as they are contained therein: the children of the schole, as by turn they are
appointed, by cuples, demanding and answering ane another before the people, as
by the Catechism they are led, after that I have read and opened a fit and
convenient place of Scripture, according to the part for the day. After al
whilk, I sometimes demand the children, and sometimes as it seems meet for
edification, any man of the Congregation, how he can answer to some principal
things, after sik easy manner as I think his capacity is able to understand:
whairof (praised be God) both I, and the party answering, many times receaues
comfort, and the Kirk edification.

This is not to prejudge the labors of any godly learned brethren, nor to
make any prescriptio^ unto them who follow the learned Catechismes made either
by them selves, or any other godly learned man: but only for the edification
of our own people, whomewe have trained up after this manner, as may meit in
our judgment for their capacity, according to the approbation of our
Provincial asse^bly of Lowthiane, by their act made thairanent. The tenor
whereof is heirafter setdowne. And as we in the mean time are to use the
godly Catechismes of vthers, as we may profit thereby, and to reject and
contemn none: so gif any Christian can reap any profit by this, we offer it
to their discretion: Beseiking Gods haly Majesty, to bless the godly labors
of all his seruands, to his awin glory, the edification of his Kirk, and
comfort of the laborers, through Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior. Amen.

At Edinburgh the 7. of November. 1599.
THe Prouincial assembly of Lothiane and Tweddale, having red and considered
the form of Examination, and Catechism, written by our brother Master John
Dauidson, approues the same, and aggrees that it sall be imprented. Extract
forth of the books of the provincial assembly of Lothiane and Tweddale, by
me Richard Thomesone Clerk thereto.

Richard Thomesone.

The first part of the Catechism, touching the sinful and damnable estate
of man by nature.
Teacher. What does thou chieflye hear and learn at the hearing of Gods word?


Disciple. That my salvation is in Jesus Christ, the Son of God only, Rom,
11.3 and 3.24, 25. etc. Acts 4.12 1. Cor. 15 3.4. etc.
and in nane other.


Teacher. How art thou under condemnation, that thou have need of salvation by
Christ?


Disciple. By sin, whilk is the breaking of Gods Law, Romans 5.12 16.18. 1.
John. 3.4.
or ten Commandments.


Teacher. Rehearse the ten Commandments, as they are set down in the first
and second Table?


Disciple. Hearken and take heed Israel, I am the Lord thy God, Exodus 19.
and sa forth.


Teacher. What is summarly contained in these ten Commandments?


Disciple. That I sulde love God entirely, with all my heart, Matthew. 22
with all my saul, and with my haill mind, and my neighbor as myself.


Teacher. Can thou not do sa by nature, bot contrariwise hate both God and thy
neighbor?


Disciple. All the imaginations of the thoghts of my heart, Genesis 6.5, Romans 7.14
15.
are only evil continually, and so are bent to all actual sin.


Teacher. Whereof comes this thy bentnesse to actual sin, and breaking of
Gods Commandments?


Disciple. Of the corruption of nature, from my first Parents Adam and Eua,
Job. 15.14 15.16. Rom, 5, 1^
called original sin.


Teacher. How were they corrupted, seeing they were made good at the beginning?


Disciple. By the deceit of Satan in the Serpent, Genes. 3.2. Cor. ^^ 3.
making them break Gods commandment.


Teacher. What was the Commandment they brake?


Disciple. They ate of the fruit of the tree in Paradise, Genesis 3.6.13.17 1.
Tim. 2.14.
whairof God forbad them to cate.


Teacher. Brought this their fault comdemnation on them and their hail
posterity?


Disciple. Yes: for in them we all sinned, Romans ^.12.19. Job. 14.4. Romans
5.16.18. and 6.2^.
and who can bring ane clean thing out of filthiness: sa having sin from
them, we have also death and damnation, the reward of sin, through the^.


Teacher. Then all being sinners by nature, we are all by nature the children
of wrath and condemnation? ^phes, 2, 2



Disciple. It is so: for as by ane man sin entered into the world, Romans 5.12
and death by sin: sa death went over all men, because all men have sinned.


THE SECOND PART touching our salvation by the death and passion of Christ.
Teacher. Seeing then we are justly condemned by Gods Law, ^. Cor. 3.9
as well for original as actual sin, whilk is the doctrine of the Law:
whairof comes our salvation?


Disciple. Of the tender mercy and love of our God in Jesus Christ his Son,
Lue. 1.78 Ephesians. 2.4. and 1.13. Act. 14.3. (...) 20.32.
and second person of the Trinity, whilk is the doctrine of the Gospel, or
word of grace.


Teacher. Why say ye in Jesus Christ his Son?


Disciple. Because he only is made unto us of God, redemption, Romans 3.24.25. 1.
Cor. 1.30 A^t, 4, 1^
and righteousness, neither is there salvation in any other.


Teacher. Seeing then all our felicity stands in the true knawledge and
acknawledging of Jesus Christ to be our only Savior, declare what he is in
person and office?


Disciple. In person he is God and man: Esa. 7.14. Heb. 2.1^ 1. Tim 2.^ Tit.
2.14. Act. 10.3^.
and in office he is Mediator betwixt God and man, and our only Redeemer.


Teacher. Was it neidfull to our salvation that he should be both God and man
in one person?


Disciple. Yes: Prove. 30.14. Esai. 7, 14. Ihon 3* 13. Romans 1.3.^.
for none could duly su^fer for man, 2. Cor. 13 4. 1. Pet. 3.18. Revel.
19.1^.12.13 15.16.
but man with God: and none could overcome for man, but God with man in one
person.


Teacher. Why is he called Jesus, that is to say, that Savior?


Disciple. Because he saves his people from their sins. Mat. 1.21



Teacher. Why is he called Christ, that is to say, he that is anointed?


Disciple. Because he only is anointed, Mat. 1.26 Psalm. 40.7 Heb. 10.5. etc.
Reu. 5.9. Esa. 61.1. and 63.1. Act. 10.38
that is, endued of God with all gifts meit for a perfect Savior: as he that
is our King, Priest, and Prophet.


Teacher. How saved he us?


Disciple. By suffering all our deserved punishments in saul and body, Psalm.
22.1. Matthew, 27.26. Luc. 22.24. Romans 4 35.1. Pet. 2.24.
in shedding his blude on the Croce: and sa dying for our sins, and rising
again for our righteousness.


Teacher. Why died he that cursed kind of death on the Croce, rather then any
other?


Disciple. That thereby taking our curse in saul and body plainly upon
himself, Deuteronomy. 21.23. Gal. 3.13. Mat. 3.7.1. These. 1.10.
he might fully deliver us from the wrath to come.


Teacher. Does Christ his blude clenge us from all sin, and his
righteousness imputed unto us, truly justify us in Gods sight?


Disciple. Yes: for as our sins imputed unto him, 2. Cor, ^.21. Isa. 5^ 9.11.
1. Ioh. 1.7.
made him truly gilty of death and condemnation: sa his righteousness imputed
unto us, makes us truly righteous in Gods sight.


Teacher. Whereof comes this Communion and mutual fellowship between Christ
crucified and us?


Disciple. Of the union and strait coniunctio^ between us: ^. Cor. 6.15.17.
Ephesians. 1.21 23. Colos. 1.18. Ioh. 17.21. The song of S^l 2.16
as of the head with the body. For we are one with him, and he is ours, and we
are his.


THE THIRD PART OF the Catcchisme.
Teacher. Whereby is this union and strait conjunction made between Christ
crucified and us?


Disciple. By Faith only: Asa. 28.16 Act. 16.31 Ioh. 17.8.25. and 6.69. and
1.11, 12. etc 5.38.43. and 3.36. Romans 3.28 2. Cor. 5.^3. Gal. 2 18. Col. 2.6.7.
Heb. 3 ^4. 1. Ioh. ^.12.
as the only instrument whereby we receive him to dwell in our hearts. And sa
by Faith only we are said to be saved, because Faith only receaueth our only
Savior.


Teacher. Then there is no part of our righteousness left, without the
apprehension or grip of Faith, seeing it is all wholy in the person of
Christ apprehended by Faith?


Disciple. It is so: ^sa. 63.3.5. Ephesians. 2 ^.9.10. Phil. 2.9. Tit. 3.5. Heb.
9.9.12.26.1. Pet. 2.24.25. and 3.18. Heir is the maine point and ground of o^r
disagrement with the Papists
and sa we are perfitely saved by the warkes whilk Christ did for us in his
awin person, and na ways by the good warkes whilk he works in us with, and
after Faith.


Teacher. What is this Faith that is the only instrument of this strait
conjunction between Christ crucified and us?


Disciple. It is the sure persuasion of the heart, Romans 4.24.25. and 5.12. and
8 38. and 10.10.2. Cor 5.3.4.7.18.29.
that Christ by his death and resurrection has taken away our sins, and
clothing us with his awin righteousness, hes throughlye restored us to the
favor of God.


Teacher. How is this sure persvvasion ordinarily wrought and kept in the
heart?


Disciple. By the haly Spirit working with the hearing of Gods word preached,
and the right ministry of the Sacraments, according to the due administration
of Christ's kingdom in the discipline of the kirk, established by him in his
word.


Teacher. Does every ane that hears the word preached believe, and get this
sure persvvasion?


Disciple. No: Mat. 13.58.2. these. ^.2. Act. ^3.48,
for all men have not Faith* and they only believe that are ordained to life
everlasting, and have ears to hear, wha only are the true Kirk of Christ,
and his sheep, because they hear his voice.


Teacher. Hes thou gotten this sure persvvasion of forgiveness of thy sins,
and full redemption in Christ?


Disciple. Yes praised be God: Acts 8.38. Ioh. 1 26.27. hab^c. 2.4. Romans 5.1
for I live by my awin Faith, and thereby have peace toward God, through
Christ.


Teacher. Rehearse the sovvme of thy Belief?


Disciple. I believe in God the Father almighty, Genes. 1. etc. and 17. ^.
Esa. 45.^2.18. Ie^ ^0.11.12 Dan. 4.32 and 5.18.19,
and so forth.


Teacher Thou believes then that there is ane God, and three persons in the
Godhead, the Father, the Son, Genesis 1.16 Exodus 20.23. Esa. 45 21.22.
and the halie Gaist?


Disciple. Yes: the Father the maker of all creatures: the Son made man,
Matthew. 3.16, 17. and 28.19. Luc, 1, 35. Act, 4, 24.27. 1. Tim 2, 5.1, Pet, 1, 2,
redeemer of his people: and the halye Gaist the sanctifyer.


Teacher. What helps beside the word preached, hes God ordained for the
confirmation of thy Faith?


Disciple. The signs or two seals, Mat, 16, 16 Luc. 22.19.20. Act, 2, 38,
Rom, 4, 1^ 1, Cor, 11 24.25.26. Ephesians, 5, 26
called the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper.


Teacher. What does the Sacraments signify and seal up to thee, that believes
in Christ?


Disciple. Remission of my sins in the passion of Christ, Mat, 26, 26.27.28
Act. 2, 38, Ephesians, 5, 26, 27 Matthew. 28.
whilk is exhibited by water in Baptism, and bread and wine in the Supper. For
the mair sinceare administration and observation of all, is ordained by Christ
the discipline of the Kirk.


THE FOVRTH PART of the Catechism.
Teacher. REsts there any thing for us to do, after that we are perfitlie
justified in Gods sight, by Faith in Christ?


Disciple. Yes, Genesis 17, 1 Exodus 19.5.6. Ierem. 4.1.4.14. Dan. 9.18 19. Ephesians.
2.10. Tit. 3 8.
very meikle, albeit na ways to merit salvation: but only to witness by the
effects of thankfulness, that we are truly saved.


Teacher. Whilk are their effects, whereby we are to witness that we are truly
saved? Deuteronomy. 8.10.11. Esa 60.21. and 61.3. Zach 14.20. Mat. 5.16 Ephesians. 1.14.
and 4.29. Col. 3.16.17. 1. These, 5.11 1^,



Disciple. The glorifying of God, and the edifying of our selves and our
neighbors, by showing forth the fruits of our new birth in sanctification.


Teacher. Whilk are the haly fruits of our regeneration and new birth?


Disciple. Mortification of the aulde man, Ezekiel. 36.26, Ephesians. 4.23.24.25. Col.
3 5.9.10.
and quickening of the new man, whilk is called repentance, inherent justice, or
our begun halinesse.


Teacher. What call ye the auld man, and what call ye the new man?


Disciple. The corruption of nature that we have from Satan by our first
Parents, is the auld man: Romans 6.16 and 7, 24. 2 Cor. 5.17 Ephesians. 4.7 22.23.24
Col. 2.5.9 10.11.
and the measure of Christ's begun holiness inherent in us, is the new man.


Teacher. Then every Christian becumes two, as it were in ane: the auld man and
the new: the ane ever contrarious to the other, and the ane fighting against
the other?


Disciple. It is so: and this battle is that ^oake and Croce of Christ that
we must take on, Mat. 11.29. and 7.13 14 Gal. 5.16.17.
and that strait way that we must pass, whilks never ^uffers our
sanctification in our selves to be perfect in this life.


Teacher. Is the new man able to fight against our sinful corruption, and get
the victory in the end?


Disciple. This Battle is sore: but the victory is sure through faith in him
that loved us, Romans 7.24 Gal, 2.20. Romans 8, 37 Phil. 16. and 4.3.1. these 2.24.
1. Ioh. 5.4.
and gave himself for us, in whom we are mair then victors.


Teacher. What is our chief armor in this Christian Battle, beside Faith and
Repentance.


Disciple. Hearty and continual Prayer to God only, 2. Kings 8 39. Ioh, 14 14.
Ephesians. 6.18, These. 5.17 1. John. 5.14.
for all things serving to his glory and our comforts, for Christ's sake: as he
has taught us in the sex petitions of the Lords Prayer, whilk is as follows,
Our Father whilk art in heaven, and so forth.


Teacher. How are these sex petitions divided?


Disciple. Into two parts, Man. 6.9.10. etc.
answering to the two Tables of the Law: the first three, Luc. 11.2.3. etc.
concerns the glory of God directly: and the other three his glory in our
awin weilfare, and our neighbors.


Teacher. What stirs up and sharpens us to earnest prayer?


Disciple. The Spirit of God, Psalm. 50.15. Romans 8.26.27. and 5.3.4. Act. 13.3.
and 14.23. Gal. 6.12, 14. Heb. 10.36. Iam. 1.4.5
by means of sobriety, fasting, and diverse afflictions, called the Croce of
Christ, for the bearing whereof we have need of patience.


Teacher. Then the begun halines of Christ in us, whereby at last we sall be
thoroughly sanctified, is no cause of our salvation, though it must go before
our full enjoying thairof in heaven?


Disciple. Ye say true: for if when we were enemies, 2. Cor. 7.1. 1. These.
5.23. Romans 5.10 Col. 2.10
we were reconciled to God by the death of his son, much more being
reconciled, we sall be saved by his life, in whom we are compleit.


FINIS.
N. to the Author, touching the short Catechism immediately going before
I Thank God for your precious pearl little in quantity, but infinite in
weight. I allow and approues the perspicuitie, ordour, and substantious
comprising of so great mysteries in little bounds.

The judgment of another learned man. N.

There is not an idle word heir.

If any thing be wrang heir, it is of weakness, and not of wilfulnes: and
therefore is humbly submitted to the loving and advised correction of the godly
learned, by Gods word.

THese forms of Prayer, and thanksgiving following, are only for thankful
persons to God for his benefits, and not for profane abusers, and graceless
deuourers thereof: wha the mair wealth they have by Gods gift, and the better
cheer they make, the more forgetful of God they are, and swell in pride and
disdain against all true thankfulness, swasshing down to the table like
svvyne, and starting up like Dogs when they are filled: thinking the true
praising of God (namely at Table) to be but Monkish hypocrisy, a Popish
ceremony, or lost time.

Neither is any man bound to these forms but at his pleasure, so the matter
and substance be not omitted; but reverently observed at every meal, not
only by children, but also by the best and most able in the house: for the
chiefest is unworthy enough to praise Gods halie Majesty. And the posting
over of this vvorthie service, only to profane boys and seruing-men
becomes not Christian families.

A Prayer to be said before meat.
Bless us good Lord, and these thy creatures whilk of thy gudenesse thou
give us, for the nourishment of this our natural life, and give us grace to
use them reverently, and soberly, with a good conscience in thy fear, to thy
glory, and our comforts. Sa that whether we eat or drink, or whatsoever we
do, we do all to the glory of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord, and only
Savior, Amen.

A thanksgiving after meat.
WE praise thy holy name, O heavenly Father, for all thy gracious benefits
spiritual and corporal, bestowed upon us to this hour: namely, for the long
liberty of the true preaching of the gospel (whereof alace, we have been most
unworthy) as also, we praise thy heavenly Majesty for this present benefit
of food and gladness, wherewith now thou haste filled our hearts: give us
grace that so long as we may walk in the strength of this meat and drink,
that we be ever reddy to gloryfie thy holy name, in thought, word, and deed,
by true faith and repentance. Lord bless thy Kirk, the King, Queen, and
Prince, with the rest of their Majesty's children, and give all the good
subjects of this Realm, and earnest care to pray heartily for their
presernation, in soul and body, and for their long, happy, and prosperous
government, in thy fear over this poor Realm: that we may lead a quiet
and peaceable life under them, in all godliness and honesty, without al change
or alteration, of the present true Religion, and ministry of the the gospel,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

THE TEN Commandments of Almighty God.
HEarken and take heed Israel, I am the Lord thy God, whilk have brought thee
out of the land of Egypt, and from the house of bondage:

1. Thou sal have nane other Gods before my face. 2. Thou sal not make to thy
self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any thing that is in Heaven above,
nor in the Earth beneath, nor in the water under the earth: thou sall not bow
down to them, nor worship the^ For I the Lord thy God, am a jealous God, and
visits the sins of the fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth
generation of them that hate me, and shows mercy unto thousands of them that
loves me, and keeps my Commandments. 3. Thou sall not take the Name of the
Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord will not hald him guiltless that takes his
Name in vain. 4. Remember that thou keep haly the Sabbath day: sex days sall
thou labor and do all that thou have to do, but the seventh day is the Sabbath
of the Lord thy God: in it thou sal do na na manner of wark, thou, nor thy son,
nor thy daughter, thy ma^seruant, nor thy maidseruant, thy cattle, nor the
stranger that is within thy gates. For in sex days the Lord made heaven and
earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day. Wherefore
the Lord blessed the seventh day and hallowed it. 5. Honor thy Father and thy
Mother, that thy days may be lang in the Land whilk the Lord thy God gives
thee. 6. Thou sall do na murder. 7. Thou sal not commit adultery. 8. Thou sall
not steal. 9. Thou sal not bear false witness against thy Neighbor. 10. Thou
sall not covet thy neighbors house: Thou sall not covet thy neighbors wife,
nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his ore, nor his ass, nor any thing that
is his.
ALTVS.
^
LOrd in great grief I call to thee,
^
and say, Lord hear my cry:
^
unto the voice of my request,
^
thine ears with speed apply.
CONTRATENOR.
^
LOrd in great grief I call to thee,
^
and say, Lord hear my cry.
^
unto the voice of my request,
^
thine ears with speed apply.
TENOR.
^
LOrd in great grief I call to thee,
^
and say, Lord hear my cry:
^
unto the voice of my request,
^
thine ears with speed apply.
BASSVS.
^
LOrd in great grief I call to thee,
^
and say, Lord hear my cry:
^
unto the voice of my request,
^
thine ears with speed apply.
Our sins Lord, if thou mark straightly
Lord, then wha can endure:
For free forgiveness is with thee,
thy worship to procure.
Wherefore I wait upon the Lord,
my verry saul does wait:
Yea my haill hope is in his word,
as stay in all my strait.
My saul does to the Lord aspire,
mair earnestly then they:
That watching all the night desire,
to see the break of day.
Let Israel Gods people, thus,
wait still the Lord upon:
For with the Lord much mercy is,
and great redemption.
Wha will redeem true Israel,
that wayteth on his will:
From al their sins both great and small,
and save them from all ill.
Psalm Cxvij.
^
O all ye Nations of the warlde,
^
Praise ye the Lord always:
^
And all his people every where,
^
Set forth his noble praise.
For great his kindness is to us,
his truth indures for ay:
wherefore praise ye the lord our god
praise ye the Lord, I say.
Thy people and thine heritage,
Lord bless, etc.
Gloir to the Father, etc.
FINIS.

