A WINDING SHEET.

Wrapped up in a Letter from an only living Brother, sent to his few suruiuing
Sisters.

DENOVNCING Unto them the sad Sentence of Death and directing them how to be
prepared for the happy Entertainment of it.

JOB. 17.13, 14. Though I hope, yet the Grave shall be mine house; and I shall
make my bed in the dark. I shall say to Corruption, Thou art my Father, and to
the Worms, Thou art my Mother and my Sister.

PHILIP. 1.23. To be loosed and to be with CHRIST is best of all.

MAT. 24.46. Blessed is that Servant whom his Master when he comes shall
find so doing.

LONDON. Printed by B. A. and T. F. for F. C. and are to be sold at his Shop
on new Fishstreet-Hill. 1626.

A

TO MY DEAREST AND MOST Loving Sisters, M.W. D.B. and E.G. an holy Life and a
blessed Death in CHRIST JESUS.
SISTERS, unto
your Brother all as dear,
As Sisters ought to be
unto a Brother;
A token of my love
I send you here.
(True love will flame
or at the least will smother.)
Though it be but
a slender paper-scrowle,
It further may
the safety of your Soul.
Should J wish to you
Coffers packt with Gold;
Or wish you noble
Ladies at the Court;
Should I you wish
more days then can be told;
And with long days
all meriment and sport:
What would these great,
these glorious wishes prove,
But the vain breath,
of a mere carnal love?
Could J you make
all these things which I write;
Nay, should I you advance
to state of Queens,
With Beauties graced
procure you all delight,
With length of days
the richest Judian Mines;
And yet the care
of your poor souls omit,
This were nor love,
nor honesty, nor wit.
Life ends in Death,
and death will quite undo
The goodliest frame
of earthly happiness.
What then would all
this glory come unto?
What come of us
and of our outward bliss?
All vanish would,
and in that woeful hour
If we prevent not,
Hell might us devour.
From which most dreadful,
doleful, dismal place,
GOD of his mercy dear
your souls deliver:
And you vouchsafe
his rich and saving Grace,
Jnto this gulf
that you do tumble never.
Oh therefore while
this gracious time does last,
Make your salvation sure
and hold it fast.
Make sure, make fast,
and in your health prepare
Against the hour
of your most certain Death;
Thrice happy you
if you prepared are,
When you must render
up your fatal breath.
This I do pray for,
this J do contend:
For this to you,
this little Scrowle I send.
A Winding-Sheete it is called,
which you I send:
Refuse it not;
let it as welcome be,
As ever was
from your best loved Friend,
Your Wedding-gowne
your Ring or better fee:
The Wedding-gowne,
you must be hind you leave,
The Winding-sheete
your body must receive.
The Wedding-gowne,
in time away does wear,
And often with it
the wedding comforts fade:
Fresh springing comforts
fall unto their share,
Which in their Winding Sheet
in peace are laid.
And there in peace
who do desire to lie,
Let them often put
it on before they dye.
Do so with this,
use it, and on it muse,
Read it, and to
your reading practice add;
So Death shall never
bring you heavy news,
But be a welcome guest,
a message glad;
A day wherein
to CHRIST you shall be wed,
Your Sheet a Gown,
your Grave the Marriage bed.
Your Brother, in the flesh and in CHRIST: J. E.

A WINDING SHEET.
DEAR Sisters, we have all been a good while upon our journey to our long
home and there is none of us which is not past, or at least come to the middle
way of this journey, though we were certain that we should fulfill the Age
prescribed unto Mankind. ( Psalm. 90.10.) But of this it were folly for any of
us to promise or presume any thing: The term of this our mortal life is
uncertain and unknown. Whosoever is most backward upon this way by reason of
years, may by the sudden stroke of Death get the start of his or her fellows.
We have seen both of our near Friends, as our Brother W. E. and Sister D. C.
some good while since; more lately, our Sister A. E. and these younger then our
selves go before on this way, whose staff stands next the door we know
not. And certainly, Death has given loud bounces at some of our doors, who
have been brought so near unto it that our recovery was beyond our own and
others hope: You will say, wherefore do you write these things which we all
so well know? Why, but to tell you all and my self that we must make better
use of these things then I fear we yet have done. It stands us upon to
labor our hearts, that we may be touched with some deep and serious sense of
our mortal case, and not slightly to examine our selves how we are fitted for
that hour. It is an ordinary fashion for us upon the death of Friends or
others, to breath out a sigh or two with some such words or wishes. Thus we
see what we are, and whereto we must, or God make us ready for him: But I
doubt our care to make trial of our fitness and to make our selves fit does
vanish with our words, and is nothing but the smoke of a sudden passion. But
good Sisters, we must know, that there is no trifling in a business of this
nature. Death is an adversary with whom perforce we must grapple; and a thing
which first or last we must undergo. And as once we shall dye and that but
once, so upon that once dying does depend our everlasting weal or woe.
Marriage, is said to be a mighty thing; which, we are with much aduisement to
think of ere we attempt. For, often our Wedding Day does prove the first or
last of all the good and pleasant days of our life; but much more is it so
with the day of our Death. For, have we been unhappy in our match? If
nothing else, at length Death will untie the knot and release us of that
misery: but after Death no change or alteration of our estate can be expected.
Dye we well? we are for ever (as we say) made men; nay, for ever blessed and
glorious Saints in Heaven. Dye we ill? woe be unto us, that ever we were
borne. We shall for ever be out casts from the Blessed presence of GOD and
companions with all Damned wretches and Devils of Hell. Alas then! that we
should make so light account of this hour: that we should spend so few
thoughts about it, and cast away so much of our precious time on other things
of no moment. Would we not hold him a very sot and idle fellow, who having
some great business in hand whereon his whole Estate or his Life did depend;
neglecting that, should spend his time and money in walking London streets,
seeing the Lions, Bears, Exchange, and other Monuments of the City. Lo, what
is this but our own case? There does lie upon us the most weighty business
that can be; and whereon does stand our eternal Bliss or Misery; namely, to
be ready for Death and to dye in the LORD. How do we forget our selves then,
that letting this lie by the walls we pass away our lives as a Dream, and
employ the most and best of our time and strength in walking the Streets, on
the gaudy Toys of the world, and hunting after the profits and pleasures of
it, which at the last cast, when we shall most need comfort, will stand us in
no stead, but rather add, to our grief and misery.

This is an error which holy DAVID does blame in men's courses, Psalm. 39.7.
Doubtless, Man walks in a shadow, (or amidst shadows) and does disquite
himself in vain; he heapeth up riches and cannot tell who shall gather them.
They are but fleeting shadows and empty shows of good things rather then
things truly good, with which men are deluded, pursuing them with much sweat
and toil, and vexing their souls with many fears and cares about them, but
alas! all in vain. For, as they have only shadows when they have got them,
so they cannot hold them, nor yet leave and bestow them to whom they would.

But there is a Wisdom which MOSES the man of GOD does desire, that he might
set his heart upon, Psalm. 90.12. LORD teach me so to number my days that I
may apply my heart unto Wisdom. And wherein stands this, but in preparing
our selves for Death? And to say truth, this is the only true Wisdom; one
dram whereof is more worth then all the carnal Providence and worldly Wit that
is of such account with men, though it fill our Coffers with Gold and bring in
worldly wealth above our hearts wish. The more that we apply our hearts to
this wisdom, and employ our time about it, the more wise and provident shall
we prove to have been for our best good; and the sooner we do see about it,
so much the safer work shall we make for our Souls. Our Life is here
assigned us to make ready for Death; which if it were much longer and more
certain then it is, were yet at the shortest for such a business; how much
more in this shortness and uncertainty thereof? This work, then cannot be
too early begun nor earnestly followed, which is of that great importance for
our Eternal good or ill; and for which, so short a time and that uncertain is
allotted us. Here then I desire you to go along with me, and we will
consider what is the best course to fit our selves for Death, and gather out of
GODS Word (which only can instruct us with this wisdom) some Observations
which by GODS assistance, may give us all some help and furtherance in this
matter.

First, then it is a good step of preparation unto Death thoroughly to
understand, that we are frail and mortal Creatures, with the cause from
whence it springs, that is Sin, and the consequent thereof, namely,
Eternal happiness or misery. MOSES does take his rise here and fetches
this wisdom of making ready for Death from a serious apprehension of our
Mortality. LORD, teach me (says he) so to number my days, etc. Psalm. 90.
What is this numbering of our days, but to have a right understanding, and to
take a serious notice of our life how short and frail it is? Let us know this
and ponder upon it with the circumstances thereof, and it will excite us to an
industrious and constant care of Dying in the LORD; whereof while we have
little right knowledge and less thought, we are both unready, and careless
to make ready for Death. It is a special part of that waking which our SAVIOVR
does pronounce Blessed, Luke 12.37. Blessed are those Servants, whom the LORD
when he comes shall find waking. A man that is fallen into a sound sleep
does not for the time know what his estate and case is, much less scanne and
ponder it with himself. It is the waking man only, who can and does
understand the condition of his health, credit, and ability, and employ his
thoughts about them to maintain or amend the same. We may be sure then that
we have well shaken off that drowsy sleep, wherein by Nature we lie knowing
little and minding less our mortal state, sinful condition, GOD and the
future Life, when we begin duly to understand, deeply apprehend and
earnestly mind, among other Spiritual things, our frail and mortal Nature,
our sin which has brought us under the dominion of Death, and the issue of
it, which is (as I said) Eternal woe or happiness. It is not a common thing
thus to awake; and rare is the man, that is endued with this understanding of
his Mortality. It is a mystery not learned but in GODS School, and that by
the teaching of GOD himself only. Wherefore else does MOSES crave it of GOD,
but that he was the only teacher of it? LORD, teach me to number my days,
etc. Psalm. 90. And DAVID likewise, LORD, let me know mine end and the measure
of my days what it is, Psalm. 39.4. By human Arithmeticke men attain to rare
skill in numbering; they learn to divide, multiply, add and substract, they
are able to cast up great sums and even account infinite numbers: Geometry
do teach men to measure Lands, to take the distance of Places, the height of
Hills, and Towers; yea by Art, men adventure to define the Compass of the
Earth; the breadth of Heaven; the height and magnitude of Stars and Spheres.
But there is no Art or skill that can teach us aright to number our Days or
measure our Life, but the Heavenly arithmeticke taught us in Gods word; no
Master has any faculty to instruct us hereunto, but GOD himself, who must
open this mystery unto us and give us wisdom to apply our heart unto it.
Nature and Reason can give us but a slender view and shallow understanding of
this thing. What therefore is more common with us, then to take a false measure
of our life? who of us truly does number his days? We imagine all our life to
be of many else length which is but of an hand breadth. We conceive not
perhaps that we shall live ever; nor do we duly consider that we may
shortly and suddenly; that we must certainly Dye, and that to our everlasting
torment if we prevent it not. Children for want of discretion understand
nothing of their Mortality; Young men who are in the flower and prime of their
years, think that Death cannot yet be near them, and that it were but lost
labor for them to think on it; Men of more mature age encumbred with
multitude of worldly business have not leisure to consider of it.

And of Old men, none is so aged who is not persuaded, that he shall or may
live yet a Year, a Month, a Week, or at least a Day longer. It will here
be said, that Heathen men have worthily discoursed of our Mortality. And who
does not acknowledge that he is Mortal? I grant it, and cannot but admire the
speeches which I find in Heathen men, wanting the knowledge of GOD and of his
Word touching this subject. But how speak they hereof? Much as a Grammar
scholar, writing or declaiming on a Theme which he does not well understand,
utters many things wittily and pretily to the purpose; but they are such
things, as he has gathered out of some Authors or have suggested unto him by
others, or fell from him at unawares, more by hap (as we say) then by cunning.
Amongst many shafts shot by a blind man, it chancheth that some fly toward the
mark. We have read of some ignorant man who in a trance or sleep have spoken
Latin and Greek, made Verses, and talked of wonders, which for the present
they mind not; nor when they awake, are they able to call to mind. Such like
is the Discourse of learned Heathen men concerning Mortality, which they
learned rather by Ocular observation then Divine instruction; and of which they
let fall some true and grave speeches, but without thorough apprehension or
full understanding of the point. For they had but a dark glimpse of that
future state which ensues Death; and knew nothing of the true cause of this
our vanity and frailty, which they pored after in the war and contrariety
of the Elements, whereof our Body is framed; but was truly in sin that has
put emnitie between GOD and us, and cut us off from GOD which was our Life.
And for the vulgar knowledge of our Mortality, what is it, but a fleeting
fancy and swimming conceit, that makes no deep impression nor constant
apprehension of Death and the issue of it in our hearts. It is with us, as with
a man viewing himself in a Glass (as Saint JAMES speaks in another case)
who for the present does see what his face and figure is, but upon the turning
of his back does forget it: Even so, if some spectacle or speech of our
mortality be offered, we entertain some slight thought of it, of the nature
and sequel thereof; but in a moment it does vanish and is shlipped out of
memory ere it can take any firm footing in us. Finally, there is a natural
knowledge of our Mortality gotten from experience of what we see daily from
the principles of nature, and literal instruction of the word. A carnal man
does attain to this, but with no benefit while it does show to him only the
outside of this mystery and give him but a slight view thereof that does
never enter his heart, nor enlarge it to a serious meditation of his fickle
state. And there is a spiritual knowledge also of this thing, which does lay
open our Mortality with the circumstances of it to the full, and does present
to our minds with such a clear and constant view thereof, that we cannot but
think upon it and lay it to our heart. An Image of it does still stand before
our eyes, and a silent voice ever whispereth in our ears, that we dwell in
houses of Clay, have our foundation in the dust, and perish from the Morning
unto the Evening, Job. 4.16.19, 20. Whosoever has gotten this understanding,
he has learned it of GOD, who awaking him out of the spiritual sleep that
oppresses carnal men, has given him eyes and senses to see beyond them and
pry more exactly into the mystery of Mortality, then they can do, who do but
superficially know and more slightly lay to heart their mortal case with the
cause and issue of it. This then we may resolve for certain, that we are in
a good way of readiness for Death, if once we be come to a thorough
understanding of these things and do deeply ponder them. There is none of
common sense, that does know and take special notice of the coming of a
friend or foe, and their intent therein that it is for his singular good or
utter undoing, but will look about him to be in some readiness to receive
the one and resist the other; Even so, if the LORD have once well informed our
minds of these things (I mean the certain coming of Death, the uncertain
time thereof, together with the blessed issue of a good end and miserable of a
bad) it will at once in some degree make us ready for Death, and awake us to a
special care more and more, to prepare our selves. See touching this, a worthy
passage in CALVIN'S Institutions, Lib. 3. cap. 9. sect. 2.

A second thing which will further us in this work, is to watch for, and
against this hour of Death. If we will not have the day of the LORD come on
us as a Thief in the night, (says blessed PAVL. These. 5.8.) let us not sleep
as others do, but let us watch and be sober. And blessed is he that
watches, (says the Holy Ghost, Revel. 16.15.) Watching is a word of larger
sense in these and such places of Scripture. But by Watching I here mean
(which sense is also in them included) an expectation of Death, and such a one,
as that we look for it every moment, and make account that we may, nay, that
we shall meet therewith wheresoever we be. The flock is quickly wearied of
the Woolfe, and the House is soon broken up and spoiled of the Thief, if the
Shepherd and Good Man of the house keep not good watch against them. The
Watch not well kept has often given an opportunity to the Enemy to enter and
sack a Town, to surprise an Army, and cut the throats of the Soldiers
sleeping: but, the Enemy which is well Watched, does much the less hurt. Thus
we must make sure reckoning, that Death will take us at some advantage, and
overtake us at unawares to our unspeakable hurt, if we set not a good and
continual spiritual Watch against him. As then the careful Sentinel does
expect the Enemy all the night long, suspecting that if he come not at one
hour he may come at another; if not one way, yet another, and dares not let
sleep to seize on his eyes no not for a moment; so are we to be in a like
watchful expectation of our Death at all times and places. Make we account,
that if he have us not by the back in our Childhood, he will in our Youth;
if he baulke us in youth, that we shall hear of him in our riper Age; if not
then, yet surely in our Aged years. Does he spare you at home? expect him
abroad; Are you laid in your bed? look for him there to disease you; Feed you
at your board? look for him there to be a guest with you; Be it day or
night; be you alone or in company, in the field or in the Town, at your sport
or about business, let this be your thought, here may Death come and arrest
me.

This has been the ruin of many men, that as sometime careless Soldiers
straggling abroad without order or armor, presuming not to meet with any
Enemy, have been caught in an ambush and cut off when they least expected; so
they not looking for Death then and there, have been set upon at unawares and
taken away unprepared as they were. It is then extreme folly for us in any
place or time to promise to our selves security from the stroke of Death; an
Enemy, that (like the Jews against PAVL) has vowed our destruction; that will
make no league or take no truce with us; that no brazen Tower can exclude, no
Gifts win, no Prayer entreat; an Enemy that does chase us continually,
sometime in visible form, of open danger and sickness, sometime in an
invisible figure of secret perils and diseases; that has a thousand ways to
assault; and as many weapons to kill us, being never far from us, and often
nearer then we think of; whose mortal stroke no fence can ward off, nor
armor resist. What then can we do other (if we will do wisely) but ever
meditate of our Death and expect it always? Even as well in the Prime of our
years as the Winter of our age; in Health as Sickness; at a Banquet and in
the midst of our mirth, as in a Battle and amongst the carcasses of dead,
and cries of dying men.

Yea, but (you will say) this will mar all our mirth. For who can laugh and
be merry, if his heart be ever taken up with the sad memory of Death; and
such a ghastly Image be still before his eyes. It may be that this meditation
will indeed quell and cool our Carnal mirth, which we take in laughing,
gaming, dancing, and such outward things: And if it do so, farewell such
mirth. Some affirm of Oxymel a syrup pleasantly tart, compounded of Water,
Honey, and wine Vinegar boiled together, that where Phlegm does abound, it
avails prettily to extenuate and cleanse it away; but if that be wanting, it
preyeth on the substance and strength it self of Nature; and the frequent use
of it rotteth the Teeth, dulleth the Sight, hurts not seldom the Stomach,
always the Sinews: It may be then wholesome as a medicine, to them that are
circumspect in the use of it; but it is ineuitably hurtful to them, that turn
it into a usual food: Even so this worldly mirth is highly prized, and praised
as a sovereign medicine to preserve our bodily health, and to put over
sorrows and qualmes off the heart, wherein also perhaps it may do somewhat,
wisely and warily used; but it is perilous, yea pernicious, to the sound state
of our better part, our Soul, I mean; chiefly, if it be followed as a Trade
and taken up as a daily Diet. For what does it but steal our hearts from GOD,
our time from his service, make the Devil a fair way to ensnare us, and give
Death an opportunity to seize upon us at unawares. And then what comes of
all our merriment and sport, but everlasting woe and lamentation? As CHRIST
has it in Luke, 6.25. Woe be unto you that laugh; for you shall mourn and
lament. No good seed does prosper in ground that is too rank and rich; Nor is
there any place in an heart disposed only to this Carnal mirth, for godly
sorrow, true repentance, fervent and frequent prayer, serious meditation of
GODS Word, nor finally, for this serious Spiritual wisdom, in making ready
for Death; of which the heart carnally merry, cannot endure the sight or
thought. Anger or grief (says SOLOMON Eccles. 7.5.) is better then laughter;
for by a sad Countenance the heart is made better. Our Children learn not most
where they laugh most, and have most sport and play. The best School for
learning is a place of sober and moderate Discipline, to restrain Children
from wanton liberty and sometime to make them smart for it, and other faults.
So the school of CHRIST, where we are to learn true wisdom, is not the
House of mirth and feasting, but of godly sorrow and mourning. We shall then
sustain no loss, if by this meditation of Death we leese and abate any thing
of this worldly mirth, which is the bane of our souls health. But for our true
spiritual Joy in GOD it will further that, making us so much the more to mind
and seek heavenly things to solace our hearts in the hope of them, to hasten
our repentance, and labor for the assurance of a life more stable and
certain, by how much the more we mind the uncertainty and end of this our
Mortal life, and all the comforts of it. And as for lawful and Christian
solace in outward blessings, it will not hinder that, but direct and keep it
within compass, that it bring not an oblivion of GOD and better things on us,
and a security in the neglect of our salvation and the means thereof. It is
not briefly the Christian expectation of Death, that will mar our good and
honest mirth, but a servile fear thereof, and unreadiness for it. The more
that we shall in a Christian sort expect Death, the more ready shall we be
for it, and the less shall we stand in fear of it. As a man forewarned, is
thereby also well forearmed; so a godly expectation of Death, is a good degree
of preparation thereunto.

In the third place, this we must take heed of, that we be not far engaged
into the world, nor deeply plunged into the affairs of it, if we will be in
a readiness for Death. The approach of the Enemy and the alarm unto the
Battle, is unwelcome and heavy news unto a Soldier, who is turned Merchant,
that has great Trade by Land and Sea, has got his houses full of Merchandise
and Coffers of money; or is become a jolly Farmer, having about him a great
stock of Corn or Cattle; And so will Death be unto us, if we keep our
hands full of worldly business, and have our hearts set on the cares and
pleasures thereof. No man (says PAVL, 2. Timoth. 2.4.) that goes on
Warre-fare is entangled with the businesses of this Life, that he may please
him which has chosen him for a Soldier. It is a special point of a good
Soldier, to be always ready at his Captains call, be it never so sudden.
Such a one will therefore keep himself free from other employments, that all
times he may attend his Captains pleasure in going whether he shall send
him, and doing what he shall Command. What are we, but GODS Soldiers under
JESUS CHRIST our General? whom to please ought to be our special care; and
to that end must we keep our hearts and hands free from the intanglements of
this worlds affairs and delights, that we may at all times be ready for
whatsoever service he shall put us to, be it to hazard our liberty, credit,
or wealth, for his names sake; or at his call though very sudden, to lay
down and give up our lives. Surely, to meddle far with worldly matters and
hamper our selves, with them, must needs be a maine impediment to this
readiness. For these cares and pleasures, if once they insinuate into us, will
so entrench themselves in our heart, that it will not be easy to expel them:
Nay, they will justle out of place or much hinder this most special and
greatest care to make ready for Death, drowning all thought thereof by their
continual buzzing in our hearts and ears; and taking away our time by worldly
employments, which they will one after another without rest put upon us.
Good-fellowes (as they are misnamed) and Ruffians, cannot brook the presence
of sober and civil men; nor will they admit of such into their Chamber where
they intend to be frolike and merry; or at least will not rest till they have
thrust them out of doors, if by chance they be amongst them. As ill can
worldly cares and pleasures consist and agree with spiritual and religious,
which they will either greatly disturb, or utterly, put out of place, as whose
fellowship is unpleasing to them. Nay, to say truth, godly thoughts and
purposes cannot thrive and grow up to their maturitie, among worldly cares and
pleasures, Which as Thorns and Briars ouershadow and choke up the good seed
of GODS Word, sown in the Hearts of men. Luke 8.14. Besides, this unspeakable
mischief, how unwilling do they make us to depart this Life, when our time
approaches. O Death (says one) how bitter is thy remembrance, to a man that
has pleasure in his Riches? But how much more terrible is the presence it
self of Death to such a one? Did not the backwardness of the Guests which
were invited to the Kings wedding Feast come from hence, even from their
worldly cares, pleasures, and business? One, had a Farm which he must needs
go out and see; Another, had a yoke of Oxen to prove; A third, had married a
Wife, whom he must Wait on and a Family growing on him which he must care
for. Luke 14.18. etc. Thus, for one thing or other, none could find leisure or
get their goodwils to come unto the Feast; that is, to embrace the Gospel of
JESUS CHRIST. From the sound profession whereof, if worldly profits and
pleasures, do keep us, when yet it does permit us soberly to use and enjoy
the same; much more will they make us unwilling to dye, when we must leave all
such things, and appear before our Judge Almighty GOD, to give account how
we have gotten and used them. Is it not an ordinary complaint of men, that
Death does come too soon upon them? And whence grows it, but hereof, that
they are too much ensnared and entangled with the World? For, what does the
Young Man complain of, but that he is taken away in the flower of his years,
before he does know the world, and have thoroughly tasted the pleasures of it?
And what does the Elder allege, but that he dies in the midst of much
business, and hottest pursuit of his game? The one could be content (he
thinks) to dye, if he had well satisfied himself with the delights and
pleasures of the world: and the other, if he had brought about the world to
his mind, for his Wife and Children. It is then a great let unto our
readiness, to remove hence when we step too far into the world, and hamper
our selves with the affairs thereof. Wherein also we are deceived by a vain
confidence, that we can at our pleasure and on short warning, unwind our
selves from these intanglements, and rid our hands of them.

But how, alas! was poor SAMPSON beguiled with this conceit? When suffering
DALILAH to shave off his locks against his vow, and to fetter him, he
thought, as at other times; the Philistims assailing him, to break all and
free himself, but the Lord, beside his expectation, being gone from him, he
was not able so to do, but was taken prisoner by them, and his eyes being put
out, he became a drudge to grind in prison, and a May Game unto his enemies.
No less fear is there that they who suffer themselves to be entangled and
fettered with worldly occasions shall find it much harder to clear themselves
then they imagined. For earthly cares and pleasures are very heavy stuff and
press down, yea, oppress such souls as undertake them, Luk 21.34. And they
do further beside their weight, beset us with such cunning, and hang so fast
upon us as it is, Heb. 12.1. that we cannot escape from them and shake them
off at pleasure. If we have made them our familiars in our health, they will
not in sickness be cast off, but like importunate companions, will then hang
about us, press upon us, hinder our best consultations about our last passage,
distract our thoughts to think and dispose of them, and dull our spirits that
we shall not be able to pray, to receive, and apprehend any spiritual
instructions and comforts, or constantly and cheerfully to meditate on the
future life. As a poor bird caught in a snare at unawares feeds securely,
not mistrusting her own freedom; until upon the sight of the Fowler she
assailing to fly away, finds her self to hang fast, and that the more she
struggleth and fluttereth to get loose, the more she does entangle her self,
and so beating her self to extreme weariness, she at length falls into the
Fowlers hands: Even so our souls being entangled with cares and pleasures, as
it were snares, we all the time of our health nothing doubt, but that we are
free enough, until that upon the approach of Death when we would get loose,
we find our souls so fast hung and fettered, that with all their struggling
and contention they cannot escape, but, unless God of singular mercy set them
free, they become a prey to death, and to him that has the power of death;
that is, the Devil. The Lord therefore give us wisdom to keep our hearts
free from these snares, to have our conversation without covetousness, and to
be content with things present: The Lord teach us to keep within compass,
that we do not ouerload our hearts and heads with worldly cares, nor out of
an inordinate love of the world, thrust and engage our selves further thereinto
then that with ease and at the first call, we may retire. It were an happy
thing for us (I am sure) if we would embrace that good advise of St. Paul, 1
Cor. 7. that is, having wife and children, to be as if we had none: Having
bought or otherwise gotten large revenues, to be as if we possessed no such
thing, and to use the world as those that did not use it, or would not abuse
it. Whatsoever comforts, as wife, children, wealth, credit, dignity, GOD shall
beslow upon us, there is no doubt but that he does allow us to use them as
some solace to us in this land of our Pilgrimage; occasions of honest labor
and travail: and furtherances of doing good and our better serving him. But
such a loose affection ought we always to carry toward them, that the
inordinate love of them do neither cause us to make any breach in our
Conscience to get or keep them, nor to encumber our selves with worldly
business while we here sojourne; nor at GODS summons to be unwilling either
to hazard them all for the Truths sake, or by Death to go away from them all.
Nay, such ought to be the disposition of our heart toward these earthly
Comforts, that when Death does warn us it should be all one with us as if we
had none of them; and no less ready should we be to leave our best
contentments and fairest hopes, to go unto the LORD, then if our life were
wholly void and destitute of them; yea, were full of troubles and afflictions.

The fourth thing which will specially prepare us for Death, is, to look
hereunto, that we be always in a Spiritual manner well clothed and armed
from top to toe. The armed Soldier is ready for the skirmish upon short
warning, and the better he is appointed, with the more courage does he enter
the Field. If a man be ready girt and fully clothed, you may dispatch him
away on a sudden journey; which, a naked man or halfe-apparelled cannot
undertake, but upon greater leisure.

So here, if we have our Spiritual clothing and armor ever well girt and
closely buckled unto us, we shall never be unready for this battle, nor
unfit to take our journey hence upon the shortest warning.

To speak somewhat of them in several. Behold, J come as a Thief, says our
Savior CHRIST, Revel. 16.15. And what then? Why? Blessed is he that watches
and keeps his garments, that he walk not naked and men see not his
filthiness. Be CHRIST'S coming; be our Death never so sudden, there is no
fear of our well doing, if we keep our garments about us to cover our
nakedness, and hide our filth from GODS eyes.

Now, what these Garments be we are told Revel. 19.7, 8. The marriage of the
Lamb is come and the Bride has made her ready; And it is given her that she
should be clothed with Linen pure and shining. And what is this pure and
shining Linen? It is as there follows, The righteousness of the Saints.
Righteousnesses (says the Scripture) not Righteousness only. For it is a
double garment wherewith we must be clad. One is an inner garment, so to call
it, that is the righteousness of Faith; namely, CHRIST'S righteousness,
Obedience, and Merits, reckoned ours by GOD, and apprehended by Faith. The
other is an outer garment, that is, The righteousness of a good Life through
the sanctification of the Spirit, that does renew us to the love, knowledge,
and fear of GOD, and engender in us a general and constant care and purpose
to walk in the ways of GOD.

These are the Wedding garments, these the pure and shining rayments of the
Christian soul; with the which, who so is apparelled, as a Bride being richly
decked in her Wedding habit, is ready to consummate the marriage with her
dearest Bridegroom; for is he always in readiness to go hence and appear
before the LORD in the Heavens. For, there is no good use, which our garments
perform unto our Body, which this spiritual raiment does not richly perform
unto our Soul. Our garments, first, are couers for our nakedness to hide our
unseemly parts and secret deformities, from the view of men; secondly, they
keep us warm, and defend us from Winters cold, sharp blasts, and other
annoyances of the weather; thirdly, they distinguish and put a difference
between Nations, Sexes, and Degrees of men. So one is the habit of the French,
another of the Dutch; one of the Woman, another of the Man; one of the
Gentleman, another of the Yeoman. Lastly, they do serve to deck and adorn
our persons by their comely show, procuring us acceptance, and adding to our
respect before men.

Thus, if we be clothed with the fine shining Linen of the Bride, this
Righteousness of the Saints, our spiritual nakedness is thereby covered, and
all our secret filth and deformity hid from Gods eye, that it appear not to
our confusion; we shall also feel our Souls to be filled with much
spiritual Peace and Comfort, and well guarded against all chilling fears, and
killing horrors of GODS wrath, that gripe and sting the hearts of wicked
wretches; then, we shall thereby be made known both to GOD and Men, from
profane and ungodly persons. Hereby are manifest the sons of GOD, and the
sons of the Devil: Whosoever does not Righteousness, is not of GOD. 1.
John, 3.10. Lastly, we shall hereby be commended unto GOD, and presented
before him, holy, pure, innocent and glorious, and find favor in his eyes to
be accepted as his sons and daughters, to be reputed meet Brides for JESUS
CHRIST, and to be made Glorious and for ever Blessed among the Saints. It is a
folly, to trick and trim our selves with any other garments against that day.
A silken coat, though spangled with Gold and glittering with Pearls as
stars, will not do us any service at that hour: Nothing will here serve
our turns but a good Conscience purged by Faith in the Blood of CHRIST. For,
all external ornaments though most gorgeous, have no Iustre in GODS eyes; and
if they had, yet at this time they would nothing avail us. For Death, will
strip us of them; and pulling us out of our false and borrowed habit, will lay
us and all our filthiness naked to the view of God, and his holy Angels. But
for these robes of Righteousness, if we have gotten them, death cannot rob us
of them, nor pluck them from us; but maugre death, we shall carry them with us
to present us holy and spotless before God.

And in truth which is it that does make us shrink at Death, and so unready
for it, but a conscience of our spiritual nakedness? Death we know will
draw us before the glorious presence, and set us in the view of Almighty God,
whose eyes are purer then light, brighter then the Sun; whose Majesty does
dazzle the eyes of the Cherubins, and makes them to cover their faces before
it. Now with man is there so destitute of shamefaced bashfulnesse, that being
naked and besides misshapen, filthy and deformed, would not be much ashamed to
come forth in public view, and much more to show himself in a full assembly
before the Prince and his Nobles. Sure it is, that King DAVID'S servants whom
HANVN King of Ammon had used with that reproach, as to shave off half their
beards, and cut off their garments by their buttockes, poor men, were
exceedingly ashamed of themselves, and loath to be seen, 2. Sam. 10. And how
then can we but be ashamed and confounded to appear before so excellent and
glorious a presence, as is the God of glory, all his Saints and Angels, while
our consciences tell us that we be spiritually naked; yea, very filthy and
deformed, and then also want this pure linen of Christ's Spouse to cover and
hide our filthiness and nakedness from Gods eyes. When ADAM and EVE saw
themselves to be naked, they were afraid of Gods voice, and out of shame hid
themselves from his presence, Genesis 3.8.10. But what nakedness made them thus
to fear and be ashamed? That of the body? No surely, that was a lying excuse.
For before their finne they were so naked, and yet did boldly and without
blushing converse with God, Genesis 2.25. It was their spiritual nakedness, the
loss of that glorious clothing of righteousness and holiness wherewith God
had adorned them, which made them thus ashamed of themselves, and thus to
tremble at Gods voice and presence. What was it but the want of this spiritual
wedding garment, that did strike the guest dumb and speechless, Mat. 22.12.
which had thrust himself into the Wedding feast without it? For outward habit,
it is like, he was as handsome as any other guest; yea, it may be for
external appearance of holiness not inferior to them: but being destitute of
the true spiritual wedding garment, viz. righteousness in Christ, a good
conscience, and faith unfeigned, when the King came in to take a survey of his
guests, and fell to examine him, with Friend how came thou in hither, and
have not on a wedding garment, he could not abide the trial, nor sustain his
presence, whereas the other guests that were therewith decked, were nothing
appalled at the Kings presence, but stood boldly before him, and feasted
cheerfully at his table. Till then we can get this spiritual clothing, and
be decked with these spiritual robes of righteousness by faith, and an holy
conversation, we shall not be able with true confidence to appear before our
God. But if we be clothed therewith as becomes Saints, then as SALOMONS
Queen, being clad in a garment of the gold of Ophir, stood boldly at the right
hand of her King, Psalm. 45. and as a man blusheth not to come forth before any
presence, being apparelled in some comely sort for his calling and degree, so
shall we ever be able with confidence to come before the King of heaven, and
the peers of that heavenly court, neither shall we be afraid when death as
Gods Sergeant shall cite and summon us thereunto.

But now we must not only be fairly clothed to undergo this service with
success, but also thoroughly armed. Touching which, PAVL a worthy Captain in
the Lords army, and of great experience in the spiritual warfare does thus
advise, Ephesians. 6.11.13. Put ye on and take unto you the whole armor of God,
that ye may be able to resist in the evil day, and having finished all things
stand fast. Of all the evil days where with we shall be tried as there is
none more certain, so none is more perilous and pernicious then the day of
our death, wherein if we overcome, we are for ever safe, if we be foiled;
eternally undone. In the which day we have no way to stand fast and go away
conquerours, but by putting on Gods complete armor which will ward all blows,
and warrant us the victory. Do you desire to know what this armor is, and the
parts of it? There is first (as they are reckoned up, verses 14.15. etc.)
Verity, that is truth in our inward parts, and sincerity in serving God, doing
all things with singleness of heart, and not in hypocrisy following that
which is good for its own sake, as pleasing to God, and commanded by him, not
to purchase the good will and applause of men, to gain honor, profit, etc.
And this must be as a belt and girdle to gird up the loins of our minds unto
every good work. It is an old saying, that a man ungirt is unblessed; here it is
most true, that he is a man void of all grace, and so far from GODS
blessing that wants this girdle of Truth about his loins. Next, for a breast
plate to defend the heart, the seat as of Natural, so of Spiritual life,
there is added righteousness. And what is that, but an unfeigned and constant
purpose and endeavor to keep a good Conscience before GOD and Men, desiring
to live honestly in all things, to walk in all the ways of GOD, and shun
every wicked way and work of darkness. Thirdly, for shows PAVL does commend,
say some patience; but as I rather take it, the knowledge of the Gospel, which
does publish to us our peace and reconciliation with GOD; wherewith we must
furnish and prepare our selves, that we may the better hold on our course
thorough the most rough and thorny ways, and the thickest troops of our
Enemies toward GOD, and that cheerily, knowing that we walk toward him that
is at peace with us in CHRIST, and will at length send us peace and give us
rest from all our troubles. Fourthly, for a shield we must take unto our
selves, and that above all things Faith, viz. A true justifying Faith, that
does diue and plunge it self ouer-head and ears (so to speak) into the
wounds and blood of CHRIST, does cast it self and wholly rest on him for
Righteousness and Pardon of sin, assuring us of CHRIST his dwelling in us,
and his being ours for Righteousness, Wisdom, Holiness and Redemption,
with the unchangeableness of GODS love and goodwill toward us. For this is the
only piece of armor that can repulse, or if they do fasten upon us, quench
the fiery darts of Satan, that is, pacify and quiet all hellish fears and
horrors wherewith he does terrify our Consciences, thorough the remorse of
our sins and apprehension of Gods wrath, and silence all those woeful doubts
which he does raise in our hearts about our election and salvation. Fifthly, a
blessed hope and expectation of Eternal life, for CHRIST'S sake promised to us,
must serve for our helmet which we must put on, that we may be able at all
times and especially at our Death, to hold up our head in a cheerful manner,
as knowing that then the day of our Redemption does approach. Sixthly, the Word
of GOD, that is, the Sword which we are to gird unto our thighs, making use
of all the parts thereof, as hiding up in our heart the precious promises
thereof to succor our faith, and uphold our fainting hope; the threats and
judgments to repress our rebellious flesh, and oppose against the sweet and
fraudulent inticements of sin: the commandments to direct our paths, and
spur on our diligence in doing good; the prohibitions as bits to restrain
our wandering appetites and wanton lusts; the truths to establish us against
all erroneous and false doctrine of such as lie in wait to seduce us. Lastly
prayer even in all kind, and that fervent and continual must not be
neglected, by which we are to beg of Almighty God skill to use this
spiritual armor, and a good issue in this fight. Which is a man armed at all
points, and unskillful in the use of it, but a Porter heavily laden, or a
Prisoner shackled in his fetters? All the succor that we have from our
spiritual armor, stands in the good use we make thereof; which we cannot
otherwise obtain, but by prayer from God, who alone teaches our fingers to
fight his battles, traineth us up in this warfare, gives us courage, makes
us strong in him, and in the power of his might. Neglect this and it is all
one, as if we were unarmed: Neither can we be sound and sincere of heart, nor
follow righteousness to the full, nor have the whole comfort of our knowledge,
hope and faith; nor well manage the sword of the spirit, that is GODS word to
quell our spiritual foes, if we do not join to these, much and often
prayer. For Prayer is as a whetstone to sharpen the edge of this sword, to make
it cut unto the quick, and go home; and the furnace wherein the other pieces
of this armor must be wrought to their right temper, that they may be of
proof and impenetrable. And if then we be thus armed, Death can at no time
set on us to our hurt; And what need he fear the approach of death? that being
conscious to himself that his heart is void of guile, and upright toward GOD,
and being daily employed in doing Gods will, and exercising himself to all
righteousness, does understand by the Gospel as a message sent from heaven,
that God is at peace with him; is by faith persuaded of his interest in JESUS
CHRIST and all his merits, for the pardon of his sins, and to set him free
from Gods vengeance and hell fire; has an assured hope after death to enjoy
that incorruptible Crown of glory, which is reserved for him in the heavens;
and while he waits for it, does walk under the safeguard, and in the light
of Gods word, trembling at the judgments, taking direction from the precepts,
rejoicing in the divine mysteries, and receiving comfort from the promises
thereof; and can pray with sighs and groans unutterable unto GOD, even in the
agony of death for his mercy and aid, which at no time shall fail to succor
him, and much less in that last conflict and bickering. The hills may sooner
fall, and the pillars of the Earth be shaken, then the estate of this man can
be overthrown, even by death it self.

It is so indeed, that until we be thus armed, we shall not be hardy enough
to encounter Death; We cannot but tremble at the thought, much more at the
presence of that grimme King of fear; For we are in death to grapple with
most ghastly enemies much to strong for us, and breathing nothing but blood and
destruction; namely sin, Satan, all the powers of Hell, and the curse of
GOD. It would daunt the stoutest heart to be thrown into the midst of many
ravening Bears, and roaring Lions all naked without any weapon to defend
himself, or offend them. And where is he that has the courage to encounter
sin accusing him, Satan and Hell gaping for him, and GODS wrath like
Lightning flashing at him; if he be not well provided of this spiritual
armor, which only can secure him in this conflict, and keep him that he be
not swallowed up of them. But as a faint heart would dare to enter the field
against most furious foes, that were furnished with such armor of proof, as
no blow or shot could pierce; So get we on this armor of GOD, and we shall
have heart enough to look Death in the face; nor shall at that time, our
sins, Satan's fury, or GODS wrath appall us, being so thoroughly fenced and
armed, that none of these can hurt us, who understands that GOD is become our
friend, our sins are pardoned, and that Satan is as a Lion chained up,
stamping and roaring at us, but not able to hurt us.

With what a constant and magnanimous spirit does holy DAVID expect the approach
of Death? I will not (says he Psalm. 23.) fear any evil, though J should
walk through the valley of the shadow of death. And whence does this his courage
grow; but from faith, which made him see God present with him, to conduct him
safe through that dark and gloomy valley (for thou art with me, says he;)
Nay, whom he felt to be present with him in restoring his soul, and leading
him in the paths of righteousness.

How cheerfully was blessed PAVL also affected toward death? When he saw it
to draw nigh, 2 Timothy 4, 6. etc. I am even now ready to be offered, and the
time of my departing is at hand, etc. And what is it that makes him thus
cheerful and confident in this case? First, a good conscience that did bear
him witness of his sincerity in serving God in all his course, and then his
faith which he had kept sure and inviolable, as Verse 7. I have fought a good
fight; I have finished my course, I have kept the faith. Next, an assured hope
of salvation which did spring from these: From henceforth is laid up for me
the Crown of righteousness, which in that day the Lord, that righteous Judge
shall give me, Verse 8. And in like sort, whosoever he be that is thus armed,
he shall be able with equal confidence to stand against Death, yea, to bid
defiance thereto with the same, PAVL, saying as in 1 Cor. 15.55. etc. Death
where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? It is (believe me) only
sin and unbelief that does strip us naked, and makes our souls penetrable
by the venomous sting of Death. Procure we to our selves faith and a good
conscience, to take away the guilt of sin, and quell the power of it, we
shall be so solid and firm, that Death may hiss at us, but not sting us;
nibble us but not bite us; and as it was told the Viper gnawing at a File, that
she should sooner wear and break her own teeth then fret the File; So shall
Death blunt her venomous sting, and break her viperous teeth, but not fasten
them upon us to do us any hurt.

The last thing that I would advise unto in this business, is ever to keep an
even and just reckoning with GOD. What was it that made the unjust Steward,
Luke 16. to hear of giving up an account with so ill a will, but because it
was not even, nor could he render a good reckoning? If a debtor be far
behind hand with his Creditor, and be much on the score, he does hang back
from coming to an account; but if matters stand even between them, the one is
not more forward to call for a reckoning, then the other is to give one. And
what is it that does more daunt and appall us at our death, then that we see
that our account with GOD does not stand even, and that we are infinitely
indebted and run behind hand with him, through our extreme carelessness and
ill husbandry. It is a common proverb among us, that even reckoning does make
long friends: and we dare walk openly, and show our face boldly before men,
when we are clear with them and owe them nothing. It is then a singular
course to make and continue friendship between the LORD and our selves, to
keep even with him, whereby we shall also obtain a spiritual boldness to
come, and at any time show our selves before him.

To this end we are to imitate good husbands of this world, who in their
generation are wiser then the children of light; and to keep a book and
record of our thoughts, words, and deeds, briefly of all businesses between
GOD and us; then often to survey and examine it, and what upon this survey we
find amiss, out of hand to set to rights. It is the course of good husbands
to keep a book of all their takings, borrowings, and layings out, that they
may know what they owe, and what is owing unto them; and such as keep no
record of their doings, have little care of their own state, or how they deal
with other men. This must we do, if we will be good husbands for our souls;
in which respect they are surely bad husbands, that keep no register of
matters between God and them, but let all things pass without remembrance and
observation. Such persons can never be thankful unto God for his mercies, nor
penitent for their sins, no nor have any certain knowledge of their state
and case, what it is toward GOD. If they imagine that the less they take
notice of it, the more quiet they shall have in their minds, and have the
less to answer for, they are much deceived. For although we be careless, the
LORD will not neglect the business, but writes up all in his Book, which in
time he will unfold, and set all our debts and sins in order before our
faces to our great amazement. Now Satan that cut-throate will not let the
matter slip so; but as a cruel and griping Usurer, who has to do with an
unthrifty Gallant, that cares only to borrow money and spend it, will be
sure to keep together all the Bills and bonds that are owing him, and at
length if he do not timely provide to discharge them, will clap an Execution
on his back, and lay him up for them: So the Devil will score up all our
wicked and ungodly pranckes, wherewith we make our selves merry, and will be
sure with all rigor to charge us with them, and exact them at our hands.

What shall we then get by this sloth, that we keep no record of any
matters between GOD and us, but that we shall be infinitely indebted not
knowing of it, and lie secure without fear, when we are even in the hands and
under the execution of the Devil, that unmerciful broker and murderer of
men's Souls?

As therefore, we care any thing for our souls good, let us not fail to
keep a precise record, and therein to set down GODS benefits, as so many
receipts which we are to answer for; then our whole carriage toward the LORD,
that by a view of these we may be furthered in our repentance and
thankfulness, and know whether we go back or forward with the LORD. And
this we shall know by so much the better, by how much the more often we do
survey and search this book.

No man shall be much the better for his reckoning book, if he do not
peruse it: and he that will be well acquainted with his estate, must often
examine that book and cast up his account.

The like must we do, ouerlooking the book of our Conscience and summing up
matters between GOD and us. This was holy DAVID'S exercise. I considered my
ways and turned my feet unto thy testimonies, Psalm. 119.59. This
consideration of his ways, what was it but a survey of all his courses, that
he held an examining of them to find out his errors, to repent of and amend
them, and so to set all to rights between GOD and him.

The oftener that we thus cast up our account with GOD the better. It is a
great benefit that we shall thereby more exactly know our estate with GOD; and
it will be a good course, that we run not far behind with him. Besides
often reckonings are the lighter, and the more easy made: but reckonings that
are long let run, grow the more heavy in the end and troublesome to
discharge.

Who finds this more, then they that neglect this duty their whole life long,
and so at their Death have a reckoning to make for all matters? It does bring
them then to their wits end, and ouerwhelme them with despair, to consider
what a long and huge scrowle of debts they are to answer for. We shall
therefore do wisely to reckon with GOD, and to make all even between him and
our selves every day.

Our blessed SAVIOVR in the Prayer which he has left us, does send us every
day to our heavenly Father, no less for the forgiveness of our sins, then
our daily Bread.

And how can we obtain the pardon of our sins, unless we find them out
and acknowledge them, which is a special part of this reckoning whereof we
speak? If then CHRIST would have us every day beg of GOD the pardon of our
sins, he would have us every day sum up the Book between GOD and our
selves, to find out our sins and debts what they be.

And this, good DAVID did advise his enemies unto, Psalm. 4.4. that so they
might come to the knowledge and acknowledgement of their wickedness, in
opposing him whom GOD had appointed to the Kingdom. Examine your heart (says
he) upon your bed and be still. Lie not down any night upon your bed, but
ere you sleep search your hearts, examine and call to mind all your ways,
and set all things to right between GOD and you.

The profit of this course is so notable, and the necessity of it so clear,
that even Heathen men have seen it, and so have both used and commended this
practice. Pythagoras charged his Scholars always before they slept, to call
themselves to reckoning for all the business of the day past, according to
certain Latin verses, which are thus in English: Suffer not gentle sleep
before
thine eyes to seize upon:
That thou have called all to mind
which in the day was done.


Thus we read of others also: But yet this is not all we are to do: For, by
this daily reckoning, if we proceed no further, we shall only find out our
sins and see what our debts be; which when we shall see to be much more
then we are able to pay, will make us grow desperate and careless which end
go forward, or ouerwhelme us with fear and horror. To this then, we must
further labor to get our debts crossed and sins pardoned. And here what
course SOLOMON does advise a man, unto him that is surety and in great bonds
for another, that course must we take every day with the LORD.

Let us hear then what SOLOMON says in such a case, Proverbs 6.1.2. etc. My
son, if thou be surety for thy neighbor, and have stricken hands with the
stranger, thou art snared with the words of thy mouth, thou art taken with the
words of thine own mouth. Do this now my son deliver thy self, seeing thou
art come into the hand of thy neighbor, go and humble thy self, and
solicit thy friends. Give no sleep to thine eyes nor slumber to thine
eyelids; Deliver thy self as a Do from the Hunter, and as a Bird from the
hand of the Fowler. If a man be indebted to another, and have not to satisfy,
or be loath to pay another man's debt, his way is to humble himself unto his
Creditour, to beg his favor; to solicit his Friends, that they would pay
or at least entreat for him. And this business he must follow, not coldly,
but earnestly, not giving rest unto himself nor his friends till he be free;
and then for afterward he must play the good husband looking to it, that by
unthrifty courses or rash surety he fall not again into the like case.

Now it is certain, that we shall not any day or time of the day, look over
matters between GOD and us, but we shall find our selves further in
arrerages with GOD, then we are able to satisfy.

It is not then safe or wisdom for us, carelessly to pass it over, but ere
we sleep or take our rest, let us get the book crossed and our debts
cancelled. For which intent we must humble our selves to GOD, confess our
sins, accuse our selves unto him, acknowledge our insufficiency, to satisfy,
bewail our woeful case, into which we have brought our selves, implore and be
earnest with the LORD for his mercy to pardon and forgive our sins, and to give
us Grace, that we may be more wary and better husbands for our Souls in time
to come. We must try our friends, of whom in this case we have only one who
can do us good; that is, Jesus Christ, whom we must by Prayers solicit, and
beseech to undertake the matter, and intercede for us with his Father; nay,
whom by Faith in Prayer, we must take and present to Almighty GOD, desiring
him to take CHRIST surety for us, and to accept in our behalf, of that full
payment and satisfaction which he has made in his Death and Sufferings.

And this being done, we must renew our Covenant with GOD; and take new and
unfeigned purposes, to leave all our unthrifty courses, to be good husbands for
our Souls, to keep out of debt; at least, not wilfully and carelessly to run
behind hand with GOD, strongly crying for his Grace, without which we can do
nothing to work in us a faithful performance of these our purposes and
desires. If we shall thus do day by day, it cannot be said what peace we
shall have in our souls; with what boldness and confidence we shall walk
before GOD, and with what comfortable resolutions expect Death. As a man out of
debt walks boldly before men, and is not afraid of a Bailiff though he see
him come toward him; but if a man be greatly in debt he walks by night, and
whenever he goes abroad, he goes in great fear; and if he see a
Bayliffe come toward him, takes him to his heels, mistrusting that he comes
to arrest him, and have him to Prison; Nay, fears almost every stranger, I
may say, every bush to be a Bayliffe, that watches to catch him: So is it
here. If we thus keep even with the LORD, we shall have great boldness, and
not shrink at the approach of Death, as if it should do us any hurt.

But if we neglect this course, and abide securely in the LORDS debt, as we
shall have little quietness all our life, so the thought and approach of Death
will be most ghastly, whom we cannot otherwise apprehend of, but as a Purseuant
to carry us away to Hell. I will conclude all this with that of ZOPHAR, Job
11.13, 14.15 If thou prepare thine heart, and stretch out thine hands toward
him; If iniquity be found in thine hand, put it far away, and let no
wickedness dwell in thy tabernacle. Then truly shall thou lift up thy face
without spot, and shall be stable, and shall not fear.

Your affectionately loving brother, and most careful of your eternal
welfares, I. E.

IN CONCLUSION OF THIS Work.
A Winding Sheet,
is here sent from a Friend,
To warn, three Sisters
for their latter end:
Showing them how,
to be prepared for death,
Before he come,
to stop their vital breath.
A work so great,
that who so finds this,
Shall have great glory,
with eternal bliss;
That tongues of Angels,
nor of men can tell,
The Joys, so great,
the freedom is, from Hell.
This Winding-sheete,
was only sent to Three,
Never intending,
it should Printed be;
But, that which then,
was pointed but for them,
Must now perused be,
of many men.
Now God, grant grace
to them and many more
That, in reading this,
they may have such store,
Of faith, repentance,
and a sound conversion
To withstand sin,
and all hellish temptation.
Then they may say,
to Death, where is thy sting?
And to the Grave,
which is a cruel thing,
We conquered have, you all,
through Christ our head,
And so our Grau's become,
the sweetest bed.
There shall we rest,
and lie without all pain,
Till the last Trumpe does sound;
Then rise again,
And then shall meet,
our Savior, in the Air,
And so sit down with him,
as in a Chair.
Judging, the Twelve tribes,
with all other men.
And after that, ascend,
with Christ in heaven,
And there behold,
the glory which he had
With God the Father,
e're the world was made.
D. W.

FINIS.

