An Exhortatyon or Warning, to beware of greater plagues and troubles, then
are yet come upon this Realm, for the sins and wyckednes that has been,
and is yet daily committed there in.

M.D.LI.

Ieremye. xx.b. All the day long am I despised and laughed to scorn of
every man, because I have now preached long against malycyous tyranny, and
showed them of destruction, for the which cause they cast the word of thee
Lord in my teeth, and take me ever to the worste.

Abacuc. i.
O Lord how long shall I cry, and thou will not hear, how long shall I
compain unto thee, sufferynge wrong, and thou will not help, why let
thou me se werynes and labor, tyranny and violence ar before me, power
ouergoeth right, for the law is toarne in pieces, and there can no right
judgment go forth, and why? the ungodly is more set by then the righteous,
this is thee cause that wrong judgment proceeds.

The Prologue Gylis Coucheman to all Christian Readers unto who^ this book shall
come, Wysheth grace, mercy and peace from God the father of our Lord Jesus
christ, with encreace of repentance and amendeme^t of life through our Lord
and only Savior, and by the workyng of the holy spyryte. Amen.
Like as ye almighty eternal god of his te^dre mercy and love, not only
created man at the begi^ning after his own similitude and likeness, but also
when he was lost, most graciously redeemed hi^, and brought him out of
bondage. Eue^ so when man (neither regarding his wonderful creation, nether his
most dear redemption) gropethe in darckenesse, in vice and blyndnes, lies in
the devils prison, and goes in the way of da^pnacion, God always sets up
his light before him, sendethe thee message of his word unto him, shows him
what case he is in, gives him warning, opens the prison door, calls him
out of the deuyls service, tells him what danger it is to be his bondsman,
or servant unto sin. This does God always before he punish and plague the
world. This (I say) has ever ben ye work of god se^ce the beginning, as the
stories and Prophets of all the holy Bible does testyfye.

And though we had no writings of gods acts in times past, yet has he
practysed and used this same his wonderful work of mercy upon us now in
our days, so yt like as we must needs confess that we are created of god,
and redeemed by his only mercy in his dear son Jesus christ. So can we not
deny, but yt we have heard his holy message, had no less preachinges and
warninges of dangers to come, then other have had before our days. Yea eue^
ye same merciful god that sent Noe to preach righteousness unto thee wicked
world, and converted the Niniuytes by his word in ye preaching of the prophet
Jonas, has done eue^ so with us in every condition, and some (thanks be to hi^
therefore) has he brought out of darkness into his wonderful light and out of
the deuyls service into the ki^gdo^ of his most dear son.

But alas and woe to this unthankful world, for like as a great number that be
in pryso^ of satan will not come forth wha^ they ar called and the door set
open, but go on still sto^blinge in darkness when the lantern of light is offered
them.

Even so, if any man play a wise ma^s part, and do as he is warned by gods
word, he shall have a great sort, They that forsake ye law praise thee
ungodly, but soche as keep ye law abborrethe them, prou xxviii
yea a number of scornful mockers (the which because the man will not dance
in the devils morys with them, nor keep their company in the bondage of sin
and vice, neither ro^ne with them unto like co^fusyon) that will laughe him to
scorn and mock him eue^ to his face, and like as when a true poor man comes
out of pryso^, he shall have mo to stand gasing and gaping upon him the^ to do
him good, or to help hi^ to his fees, eue^ so now, that god of his mercy has
called some of us out of Satha^s pryso^ and from the worldly wicked doers, my
lords fool with his companions stands staring upon us and mocked us, because
we sit not still with other prisoners in si^ne and vice, there goes an apostle
(says one) there goes one of ye new brethren, Fowls abhors the^ that
eschueth evil. prou. xiii, c
says another, there goes, a iustifier of hi^ self, says another, there goes
one that will live without sin, says another, and thus is it come to pass that
who so ever will follow Christ and his doctrine, and forsake evil in his life
and conversation, he is despised and hated of the world, and also mocked and
iested upon. But the disciple is not above his master, nether the servant
above his lord, for if they have called the good man of the household
Belzabub, how much more shall they call the^ of his household so. If I were a
fleshelye fellow and a preacher of lies and told them that they might sit
bybbing and bollynge and be dronke^, o that were a Prophet for this people.
Mich. ii. c
O Lord why do men so much mock us, and scorn us, for well doing, surely I
can not tell, except it be for this cause, that they be nothing minded to
follow christ the^ selves, for if they were, they would not do so.

O Lord where to is this world come, for like as we had neade in times paste to
have soch an Apostle as holy S. Paul was, to rebuke the vain co^fydence that
me^ did put in their worckes, and to tell us that no work of our doing, but
faith of gods workinge, does justify us in his sight.

Even so now, we had no less need of soch an Apostle as was holy S. James, to
rebuke this horrible vntha^kefulnes of men, that professinge them selves to be
christians, and to hold of Christ's old faith, and are yet dead unto al good
worckes, receive not the word of god in mekenes, cast not away al uncleanness
and maliciousnes, but are swyft to speak, to talcke, to iangle, and to take
displeasure, and are forgetful hearers of thee word and not lyuers there after
boastynge them selves to be of gods pure and undefiled relygyon, They say
that they know god, but with their deeds they do deny him. Titu. ii. c
and yet refrain not their tongues from evil, viset not the poor, the
friendless and thee desolate in their trouble, nether keep them selves
undefiled from this world.

What an occasyon might soche an apostle (as holy S. James was) have to write
another, yea a more sharper Epistle, seeing so many pretendynge to be of Jesus
christ's old faith and relygyon, and are yet so parcyall, and have soche a
carnal respect of persons, are not rich in faith, but despise thee poor,
practyse not thee law of godly love, talcke and Iangle of faith not having
the worckes thereof, cloth not thee naked, help not the poor too their right,
nor regard not their necessyte, have but a dead faith, declare not by good
and Godly worckes the true and old faith of Christ, and are but vain
beleuers, have not the effections workyng and living faith that Abraham had.

How would holy Saint James reprove these bryngers up of strange doctrynes and
false opynyons, these blasphemers, backbyters, belyers of good men, false
teachers of gods truth, dyssemblers with the same, carye fire (as they say)
with one hand, and water in the other, prete^ding to be learned and yet bring
not forth the worckes of good conuers^cion in mekenes out of god wisdom, but
in frowardness, and out of carnal doctrine, are churlysshe an^ uneasy to be
entreated.

Wherefore most dear^ Readers, who so ever of yo^ has been slack to follow
thee good life and Godly conuersatyon that Sayncte James (and all thee holy
scripture besides) requires to be in them which profess thee holy
relygyon of our sauyoure Christ, let him now take better hold, turn
again to thee truth, And follow that loving exhortacyon which holy S. James
makethe in thee latter end of his Epistle, Iame. v. b
and let us that have recey^ed thee holy relygyon of Christ in deed (not
only be content too abide any storm or trouble for it, or to be mocked,
scorned, and persecuted, yea and put to death therefore, if it so please god)
but also every one of us to his power, in his heart by fervent prayer, in his
mouth by good words, and in all his body by virtuous conuersacyo^ and good
Christyan works, help and labor that thee blessed word of god, may have
thee due honor belonging thereunto, and that the same which it has lost
through the ungodly behavior of so me, may through thee grace and goodness of
God be won again in our goo^ living, that god may hau^ of us better
servants, ou^ Prince true subjects, and ou^ neighbors more unfeigned lovers,
then many have be^ before us.

AMEN.
The Prologue to the Ministers.
ANd now to al you tha^ have taken the name o^ Pastors, shepeherdes and
leaders of thee flocks (as ye would be called) as fa^ forth as I can judge of
you, ye are the greateste cause of the unthankful receauinge of the word of
God, and that thee people walcke so carnallye and so lasciuiously as they do,
for ye your selves walcke so broad and so far wide from the truth of the
gospel, that the very babes can spy it in you, yea and thee very papystes
that be enemies to thee Gospel also. For they say: Behold their lyuynges and
how they goo them selves that should be thee show token too all their
flocks (say they) marcke their wives also (say they) how trimmelye they be
decked of the new fasshyon, with their hair laid abroad, having on
gorgyouse apparel, as mynyuere cappes, french hoodes, Frockes, and Cassockes
guarded, stytched, and brodered with lace, yea and rings upon their fyngers
more like ladies and gentyl women, then thee wives of mynisters (say they) yea
clean contrary and against the doctrine of S. peter and S. Paul also, i, pet.
iii a i, tim ii. b
as ye full well know by their Epystles. But surely I maruayle how ye dare take
upon you to teach the Congregatio^s, seeing that ye can not (or will not)
teach nor rule your own selves and your wives.

But it is little maruayle in deed considering what ye seek in your teaching
and the state that ye walcke in and the port that ye bear, O ye pryestes ye
teach for lucre, o ye prophets ye prophecye for money. much. iii. c
for it will not be mayntayned with a little, and therefore ye had need of
that ye seek (which is I fear) great rewards and great lyuynges for your
doings too maintain your pride wythall, or else it will not hold long,
and than al your glory is lost in this world. But ye ought to seek gods
honor and glory only and not your own.

And because ye do not so. Therefore thus sayethe thee Lord. Ezechiel
xxxiiii, a
Woe be unto you shepheardes, that feed your selves. Should not thee
shepheardes feed their flocks (sayethe thee Lord) but ye have eaten up thee
fat, ye have clothed your selves, with the wol, thee best fed have ye
slain, but thee flocks have ye not noryshed, the weke have ye not holden up,
thee sick have ye not healed, thee broken have ye not bound together, thee
out castes have ye not brought again, thee lost have ye not sought, but
churlysshelye and cruellye have ye ruled them (sayethe thee Lord) yea, ye
have eaten up thee sins of thee people (as thee Prophet sayethe) and have
coraged them in their wickedness and thus all ye Pryestes are become like unto
thee people (or rather worse I fear), Ose. ii^i, b
for where shall ye have a pryeste in any parysshe but he is given too one
vain thing or other, They take the most shameful men by the hand flattering
the^ so that they ca^ not return from their sins. Ier xxiii b
either to shotyng bowlynge, hawkynge, huntyng, cardynge, dycesynge,
quayttynge, loggettynge, penyprycke, tables, or one vain pastyme or other, ye
or else a tavern haunter or a good companyon (as they call them) which is
clean contrary to the rule of Saint Paul, which says that thee mynysters
must be honest, i. tim. iii. b
and not double tonged, not given too much wine, neither too filthy lucre,
but having the mysterye of faith in pure conscience, and let them first
be proved and then let them mynyster (says he) if they be found
blameless, even so must their wives be honest, not evil speakers, but
sober and faithful in all things.

O Lord, if we should have no mynysters with in this Realm except we
should first prove them and find them faultles according too thee rule of
S. Paul, I doubt we should find very few that is mete for thee office, thee
more is thee pytye that it is not better looked unto, by thee Bysshoppes, who
has the auctoryte given unto them of thee higher power, of thee choosing and
proving of them before they come too thee office, for thee pryestes lyppes
should be sure of knowledge (says the lord) than men may seek thee law
at his mouth, Malac. ii,
for he is a messenger of the Lord of hosts. etc.

necessary to the body. So that on both parties love shall be sought, and the
congregations wylbe edifyed and increased, and god through you shall be
praised. And that it may thus come to pass let us all pray with one heart
and one mind that we may there to agree to say.

AMEN.
An Exhortacio^ or warning, to bewa^ of greater plagues and troubles, then are
yet come upon this Realm, for the synne^ and wickedness that has been and is
yet daily commytte^ therein.
GRace, mercy and peace from Go^ the father of our Lord Jesus christ, with
increase of knowledge in his holy and everlasting word, be with all those that
profess Christ and take him to be their only savior and redemer (the which
knowledge in his holy word, I pray too God that it may change and alter
their lives so, that where as they we^e wont to talk and speak of Christ in
words) that they nay now preach him in their ^yues and conversation. He that
commits sin, is of the devil i. Io, iii. b
For what a great shame is it to us, that take christ to be our ^auiour and
master (whereof we take our names and are called christians) and profess him
in words (as S. paul says) and will deny him in our deeds. Titum. i. c
For what soever our words and talks be, it is our lives and worckes that
declares whose disciples we are, and therefore says S. John, i. Io. iii. b
by this ar the children of god known, and the children of the devil. Therefore
dear and well beloved brethren in our savior Christ, remember what ye have
professed in your baptyme (you, and your parents for you) remember I say how
that you have promised to^ forsake the devil and al his works and to cleue
unto christ and do his will and worckes, (...) to become a christian in christ
and to fight manfully with him against the devil the^ world and the flesh,
and to follow him in life and conversation. Now my brethren ye know what a
promise that is made between man and man, and how that promise that is made with
man ought to be kept and not broken, and if it fortune too be broken by
negligence, ye know what a danger to the world there lies on it. Now if the
promise made with man ought to be kept upon pain of a danger. Know ye
therefore my brethren that the promyses which is made with God, ought much more to
be kept and not broken under the danger of eternal condempnation. Ye have
promised also ^o fight against the world and your own flesh. Now if ye give
over your selves to serve both the world and your own lusts and affections
also, how do ye fight (think you), know ye not (says S. paul) that to who^
soever ye give over your selves to serve, Rom vi. b Ioh, viii, c ii pet ii. ^
his servants ye are to whom soever ye do obey, whether it be of sin unto
death, or of obedience unto righteousness. Therefore dearlye beloved be sure yt
ye enemy do not deceive you as he deceived Eua, making you believe that you
may do what you will, and yet please god. Be not deceived with him, For if ye do
that which (...) sin, tha^ ar ye the serua^te^ of sin, and ye know that
the reward of sin is death^ condempnatio^. But if ye d^ that which is good
in ye ligh^ of god, tha^ at ye sure that y^ be the children of God. Bu^ ye
must be sure that the enemy make ye not believe that to be good which is
evil, therefore try your worckes with gods word, psa. cxviii
as David says. Lord thy word is a la^terne unto my fete, and a light unto my
paths, therefore what soever work it be trie^ it by gods word, and if ye word
will allow it to be good, do it, if not, then do it not how holy or good soever
it seem to be in your own self.

For it makes me lamente in my heart to see how the world is deceived by the
sutteltye of the enemy, in carrying them away so, in the vanyte of vain
things of this world, for a great many there be that profess christ and
his relygyon, and yet do walcke so carnalli and so laciuiously at large, as
though there were no law nether yet god, yea verily they be enemies unto the
gospel of god, whose end, be ye sure, is dampnacion, and their glory shall be
to their own shame they are so carnally minded and will not strive against it,
yea and yet who soever should be so bold to say unto them yt they were not of
god, they would surely deny it and say, yes, for I am christened and therefore am
I of god as well as you (as though al lay in receyuyng of baptyme only)

Titum, i, c
And these be they that S Paul speaks of, saying they confess with their
mouths that they know god (...) to be his servants, Thee folysshe bodies
say in their hearts ^ushe there is no god. psalm. xiii, a
but with their deeds they do deny him and be none of his, for so much as they
are abhomynable i^ their doings and unto all good works disco^me^dable.

And there is another sort also which walkethe not so broad outwardly, but
has a show like unto holiness, but they are (as christ says) like unto a
painted supulcre which shows fair and bewtyfull outward, math, xxiii d,
but within they are full of dead men's bones and all fylthynes. Even so are
they, for they will show them selves very holy at thee church and else where,
but when ye shall have any thing to do with them, ye shall find them full of
malice and al kind of wyckednes with in, prove them when ye will and ye shall
find them even soche people as it would lamente any christen heart to se it.
For if they goo to the church and there say and number a certain prayers
after their own ymagynacion, and there to hea^e and se certain ceremonies
mynystred, they think to be safe all that day and may do what they list, or
to bie and sell and begyle and deceive the poor and simple people, yea and to
sit and spend the time at tables and cards or some other vain pastime all the
day after, and there to sit and swear and talk vain and idle words, and do
not remember that christian says that they shall give accomptes of every idle
word that they speak at the day of Judgment, mat. xii. d
and yet besides that if ye do ange^ them, or speak against their doings ye
shall find that they will not be pleased (no not scarce with blood), and is
not this a miserable blyndnes cast upon them of the enemy, thyncke you,
that they shall seem to them selves to be so holy and so well for using this
trade of life outward, when there is nothing well within, for if they would try
them selves by gods word (as is said before) they should find them selves
far from the life of a chrystyan of Christ, bu^ the serpent has so deceived
them that they be at peace with them selves and need nothing to do more, but
to keep this outewarde trade of life.

Also they think to win heaven by the following of the old law, and in
keeping of the outward sacraments and ^eremonies thereof. But if ye axe them the
sygnyficatio^ of a sacrament and thee promyses annyxed to them, How can they
have understanding that are workers of wickedness, psalm lii. a.
or of a ceremonye, they can not tell what it meanethe, but say, has no god
left them for us too keep and observe, what need we any more promyses or
sygnyfycatyons.

O thou suttyll enemy full well know thou that thee outward work without
the promys as little profits them as does the sign at the tauernes door to
the^ tha^ be a thyrste, when there is n^ wine wtin to be had. And ye will they
seek their iustificatyon in the outward work^ thereof only.

ii, ii, iii, a,
And this is the cause (a^ the apostle says) every on^ is become a pryuate
lover o^ them selves, and not of they^ neighbors. And how do^ they love them
selves (thyn^ you), After this manner does thee worldinges love the^ selves
verily they are become covetous, bosters, proud, cu^sed speakers, disobedye^t
unto fathers and mothers unthankful, unholy, churlyshe, stubborn, false
accusers, riatours, fearse, dispisers of the^ which are good, traitoures,
heddie, hie mi^ded, gredy upon voluptuousnes more tha^ the lovers of god,
having a similitude of godly living, but have denied ye power thereof, but
soche abhor says S. paul, O lord what a miserable world is this, when the
people be in this case that they have no fear of god before their eyes, but
think that ^hey be in good state of liui^g wha^ they live thus far wide from
the truth of ye doctrine of the gospel and does not remember yt we ought to
love our neyghbors as our own self and seek their wealth and edyfyinge to their
comfort. We are bound to love god with all our hearts and powers and our
neighbors as our self, and so is all ye law and the prophets fulfilled. mat,
xxii. d


But the wicked worldlinges ar in this mind now (the lord give them grace to
repent and amend it) that if they may have all things at their will and
pleasure, they care not although the poor nedy neighbor sterue and be in lack
or peryshe in the mean while, for they say, if I be well clothed and warm,
what care I who goethe naked and suffer cold, if I be well fed with the best
and finest meat and lack none, what care I who is an hungered and perysh for
lack of the worst meat, if I be well covered with a fair house gorgeouslye
decte and in all points trymmed with the best, what care I who dwells in a
house uncovered rainynge in, in every corner, spyllyng and destroying all that
he has, and the house like to fall down upon his head, if I may sit warm and
at ease and at rest, taking no pain, having money enough and all thing
brought home too me, what care I who is cold, taking pa^ne and have no rest
nor ease, night nor day, lacking money and al thing that should do the^ good,
if I may have my rentes and farm brought home to me without any study, what
care I though the farmers care and study night and day, having nether coat nor
cloak to cover him, his wife or his children withal, no nor yet eat a good
meals meat in a year. Thus far is the love of the world gone from the love
of god, that they care not one for another, nether do they consider that we al
should be members of one body. If they did remember that we were al members of
one body, I think verelye that natural love would compel them indifferently
one to care for another, and one to love another, al though the^ were no
commandment of love spoken of, nether in the old testament nor yet in the new.

For this we al know yt the me^bres of one body be so united and knyt in love
together to the body, The righteous will consider the cause of ye poor, but the
ungodly regards no understanding Prou, xxix
that if one member fortune to take hurt or harm all the rest suffer pain and
grief with him, or if one member be had in honor, al ye rest is glad and rejoice
with him also, soch is the love that partayneth to the members of the body.
Therefore for his sake yt dyed to redeem us al (consider I say) and remember
that we al be members (or should be) to one head, which is christ, and that we
do now awake out of sin and cast away from us the clokes of dishonestie and
become lovers of god in his members, and know that what soever ye do to one
of thee least of these my brethren (says Christ) ye do it unto me. Remember
this that our Savior Christ says thus his own self also, that who soever
gives to one of these little ones a cup of cold water in my name, I tell you
says he, he shall not lose his reward Now if this little love showed unto one
of his creatures shall not be unrewarded, be ye sure ye much more shall the
wrong and injuries done unto the^ be rewarded unto condempnation.

Yet once again, therefore I say, remember this unfeigned love that thee
eternal God had unto the whole world. Yea his love was so great toward
ma^kynd (being yet his enemy) that he gave his only and dearly beloved son
to the death, to redeem the^ from the bondage and thraldo^ of the devil. O
what could he do more for us, the^ to give this imaculate and unspotted lamb
for us, and to us, that who so ever now will repent of the life that is past,
and believe and trust only in him, he shall be sure to be saved for his sake, so
he continue to the end. And he requires nothing so much of us as to love one
another, yea by this love (says he) shall al men know that ye are my
disciples. Now to the contrary, if we love not one another, then is it a plain
case that we be none of his, say what we will, for the kingdom of god stands
not in words, but in power, for love is the fulfylling of ye hole law. Yea he
has not only given unto us this Jesus alone, but he has given us also al
things with him, yea he has given us his eternal and everlasting word to be
our comfort, to rule and to govern our lives by, and to show us all the good
will of our heavenly father toward us, in and for Jesus christ's sake. Yea
what more could he have done, that he has not done for us.

But now, if he look amo^geste us for equity, he shall find instead of equity,
wrong. And if he look for righteousness, he shall have us full of mysery and
wretchedness (as the Prophet says) for the more good he does unto us Esaias, ^
and thee more he increases us with his gifts and benefytes, the more we go
astray wantonly from him and provoke him unto wrath with our own idle, vain and
mad inventions for as it is written, when vanity and ydlenes gets the
ouerhand among the children of men, Psalm, xl,
al are full of the ungodly. Notwithsta^dinge the more we receive of him, the
more we ought to be thankful unto him for it, and ye more we should be
studious and careful to bestow the^ to his honor and glory, seking always his
honor and praise. And not to bestow them to fulfill our own fylthy and carnal
desire. Saying to our selves and to other, that they be ours and may do with
them what we will, and so deceive our own selves, and bestow them about vain
vanity. Yea, and sometime about that which is wicked and dampnable in the
sight of God. As to bestow them about harlottes, cards, dyce, tables, bowls
and soche like wicked abhominacyon, for the which we do not only offend the
eternal God for so bestowynge of them, but also greatly provoke him unto wrath
against us, for so mysusynge and consumynge thee time that is spente about
them, also if we bestow them about sumtuousnes in buildinges, gorgiousnes in
raiment, and also in delicious fare, more then need requires, we do greatly
offend therein. And therefore for the love of god consider with your selves and
know for a suerty, that all ye riches and goods that any man receaueth at the
hand of god, they are but delivered unto you and lent you for a while, and ye
made stewardes of them to bestow them according to the will of our heavenly
father, and not to our own will, except our will be al together let to prefar
and set forth gods will, for if we bestow the^ as is before said, we shall surely
render a stray^ accomptes for the vtmooste jot of them. And not only for
these temporal gifts, but also we shall render a strayte accomptes for all
the spiritual gifts that we have received of god, as wysdom^ knowledge, faith,
healyng, prophecyinge, judgments of spirits. etc. If we bestow them not to
gods honor and glory and to our neighbors wealth and comfort.

Well beloved in our savior Christ I would ye should not think that I have said
al this as a teacher, but as a poor little membre of the same body that ye ar
of, exhorting you and putting you in remembrance not only of the manyfold
gifts and goodness of our eternal father to us ward in times past, but also
now in this time especially, knowing and seeing the world so full of all kind
of wyckednes and misery, and so unthankful as they be, ye eue^ as though
there were no god. Wherefore I pray you consider with your selves, and note well
the sins of Sodo^ and Gomora and way the^ well in your co^scie^ces and compare
the^ with the sins of this Realm and ye shall find the^ I fear me (not only
mo) but also a great deal wors. And wherefore do I count the^ wors, think you,
verily, eue^ because tha^ god has given unto us his only son Jesus Christ,
when by and in whom we are called Christyans, and yet we live so Heathen like
that it will be double dampnacyo^ unto us, yea and with him he has given us al
things ple^teouslye, and also has left unto us his holy and sacred word
among us for our comfort (yea and not a^ this only) but also he has not
ceased night nor day to cry unto us by his servants the prophets and
mynisters of his gospel, that we should every one of us turn from his sins
repent and become the folowers of him in love, but we will not, but are become
like unto the defe adder that stoppethe her ears that she should not hear the
voice of thee charmers although he charm never so wisely. Even soch ar we, As
for the warni^ges of the prophet^s they take it but for wind, Iere, v, b,
for we will not hear, nor do after the preachers of gods word although they
preach and teach never so well or so wise ^i, yea, preach they what they will or
what they can, it will not serve, no nor yet help. We are content to allow it in
words and to say well by it, but to follow it in life and conuersatyon (in
respect of the multitude) there is none that will do it, or very few, for I
think verily yt, if Sodom and Gomorra had, had Gods word so plenteously among
them as we have had and so long, and so much preaching against sin, they
would surely a repented in sackcloth and ashes. And for this cause I compare
the^ worse the^ the sins of Sodom and Gomorra For the si^nes of Sodom and
Gomorra were these, pride, fulness of meat, The sins of Sodoma and Gomorra.
Eze. xvi. e
abou^daunce and ydlenes, besides that they reched not their hand to the poor
and nedy, and which of these lackethe here in this Realm think you, I trow
none of them al, besides the overplus of other. For who saw ever so much
pride in me^ women and children as there is now, so much superfluyte in meats
and drinks, so much abou^daunce of al things up on earth among men as there
is now, for there is nothing i^ men can desire but they may have it for money.
And who did ever se so many given to ^yue ydelye as they be now, and I think
verily yt there was never so little charity showed unto thee poor as there is
now. And this is the cause yt ^uery one runs forth in his sins as a wild
horse in a battle (as the prophet says) not ^oking be hynd him, Ier. viii. b
nor fea^ing ye wrath of god which is like to come upon them for this
miserable state of life that we now live in.

For who is he amongst us that now will make his life and conversation to agree
with this word of life, nay, rather a great number will make ye word a cloak for
their sin and wickedness, Brethren ye are called unto liberty, only let not
your liberty be an occatio^ to the flesh but by love serve one another. Gal.
v.a, Rom, viii
and to search dilligent for soch places in scripture (as they suppose) as shall
maintain them in all kind of lybertye of the flesh, and do not remember that
S. Paul faith to be fleshly minded is death, but to be spirituallye minded is
life and peace, for the fleshely or carnal man can not please god (says he)
but is thee enemy of God, seeing that the flesh is not subdued unto the law
of god.

For is not this a lamentable thing to think and remember how long we have
had this word and gospel of life amongst us, and how little i^ has prevailed
among us, and how few it has wo^ne unto ye life of christ. O lord wha^ stony
heart would not morn and lamente in his heart to thyncke upon this: Remembering
that wha^ the lord sha^ call us to acco^ptes, how little we have won with this
our talente having it so long as we have had it in use and occupying. I pray
to god it be not said unto us, as it was said unto the evil and sloth full
servant that S. Matthew speaks of, mat. xxv, ^
(saying) thou evil and slouthful servant knew thou that I reaped where I
sowed not, and gathered where I strowed not, thou should therefore have put my
money to exchau^ge and the^ at my coming should I have received mine own with
vantage. Therefore take ye talent from him and give it unto him that has.x.
tale^tes (said the lord) for who to has, to him shall be given and he shall
have abundance, but who so has not from him shall be taken away eue^ that he
has, and cast thee unprofitable servant into utter darckenes, This will be
our reward except we repent.
there shall be waylynge and gnashyng of teeth.

For this I say and know it to be true that there is none wtin this Realm of
England (thanks be to god therefore) that ca^ justly say and approve it to be
true, but that he has and may both hear and read the word of life (if he
ca^ either hear or read) and therefore ar we al without excuse to god ward.
Yea if he do now punish us and take from us this word of life and give it unto
another nacyon which was not worthy of it, and leave us clean void and
emptye. Yea and of al his promises and al so of his good gifts and benefits
besides: We ca^ not say nay, but that we have right well deserved it. Yea and
for because that ye shall believe me thee better in this behalf, I will aledge
the words of ye profit that S. Paul brings in against the Romans for ye
same purpose (saying) have they not heard (says he) yes, ps. xviii, a Roma.
x. c
no doubt their sound went out into all lands, and their words into the ends
of the world. How think ye now, who can excuse him self unguilty in thee
knowledge of gods words and promyses. If he now punish us as we have well
deserved. Who ca^ or is able to lay any thing to his charge or to abide his
wrath. Wherefore I wyshe and desire in my heart, that every one of us may yet
now repent betimes and call for mercy of him that had pytie of the Ninevites
wha^ they repented at the short warning of one poor Prophet. Iona, iii b
Now ye do know that we have had many mo than one to give us warninge (if yt
would help) since the gospel came i^to this realm of Ingland. For do ye not
know yt it is the nature and property of god, yea, and his old wont manner to
give warninge or he punish or plague the people. For he says by his Prophet
Amos, amos, iii b
now does the Lord god no manner of thing but he tells his secret before
unto his servants ye prophets, The Lord god is full of compassion and merci,
long sufferyng great in goodness and truth ps, lxxx v. c
wha^ a lyo^ roareth who will not be afraid (says he) seeing the^ yt the lord
god hi^ self speaks who will not prophecy. As who should say, if ye lord bid
any man give warning and show the people of their sins, how dare he hold his
tongue but tell the^ of their si^nes and wickedness. Now truly I ca^ not
remember me, of any people that ever has been sense ye beginning yt the lord
did plague, punish or destroy but he first gave the^ warni^g before

For, Gene, vi, a i. Pet, iii e
before he destroyed all the hole earth by the great flood, he said: my spyryt
shall not always strive with man for he is but flesh also, I will give him
respyt an hundredth and twentye years. But after that wha^ the lord saw that
the wickedness of man was increased upon the earth and that all the thought and
ymagination of their heart was but only evil continually, it repented him that
he had made man upon the earth, and he sorowed in his heart, and said: I will
destroy ma^kynd which I have made from ye earth, both man, beast, worm and
foul under the heaven, for it repe^teth me that I made the^. O note this well
I pray you, Note this
how the lord sorowed in his heart (says the text) think you that he was not
loath to destroy yt he had made. Yes verily. But when he had looked down upon
the earth and saw that it was corrupt, for all flesh had corrupt his way upon
earth, says the text, it gave him occasion for to destroy it. Then said he
unto Noe his righteous servant, the end of all flesh is come before me, for
the earth is full of mischefe before the^, and lo, I will destroy the^ with the
earth, wherefore make the an Arc wherein thou and thy children may save your
selves, for lo, I will bring a floude of water upon the earth to destroy all
flesh, wherein the breath of life is, but with the, will I make a couenaunte
and thou shall go into the Arcke with thy sons, with thy wife and with thy
sons wives. etc Lo, here does the lord make a covenant with the righteous,
Genesis xix, c Gene. v. d
for Noe was a ryghteous and perfect man, and led a godly life in his time. And
all those that live righteouslye and godly as he did, the lord does make also
a couenau^te with them to preserve the^ for Jesus christ's sake (not only from
destruction of the earth) but also preserve the^ into everlasting life. Leu,
xviii^ a psa, xxxiii. and.xxxv^ i. tim, iiii b Ezec, xx. b Gal. ^^i. b


Here in is the difference between the righteous and the unrighteous. For the
righteouse Noe was warned by god, and he took it for a warning and did make
preparation according to the words of God and was preserved. But the ungodly
did not so, and therefore was destroyed, wherefore my dear and well-beloved in our
savior christ I beseech you be warned in time, least the lord destroy you
likewise from the earth.

Ge. xviii, c
Also when the lord was minded to destroy Sodoma and Gomorra, and was going
thetherwarde for ye purpose, he said, how can I hyd from Abraham the thing
that I will do, seeing he shall be a great and mighty people, and all the
people upon the earth shall be blessed in him, for I know (said the lord) that
he will command his children and his household after him to keep the way of the
lord, Note this well all ye that have children and keep household.
and to do after right and conscience that thee Lord may bring upon Abraham
what he has promised him. And the Lord said: there is a cry at Sodoma and
Gomorra which is great, and their sins are exceading grievous, Eze. xvi. ^
therefore will I go down and see whether they have done all together
according to that cry which is come before me, or not, that I may know. Ge.
xviii, d
But Abraham reasoned with the lord concerning that matter in so much that ye
lord promised him, if there were fyftye ryghteous wtin ye city, he would save
al ye rest for those fyftyes sakes, but he left him not so, saying he was so
merciful a Lord to grant him his request, he asked him if there were but
xlv. in that place, if he would destroy the hole city for lack of those five,
he said: if I find but.xlv. therein I will not destroy them, but he left him
not so nether, but reasoned further in that behalf, and said, if there be
but.xl. and so from.xl. to thyrtie, and to.xx. and so to ten, but there could
not ten be found therein, wherefore all the rest perished, Gene. xix.
save just lot and his wife and his two daughters. For the messengers yt were
sent for to destroy the city, said unto lot, have thou yet here any son in
law, or sons or daughters, whosoever belongs unto the (said they) bring
them out of this place, for we must destroy this place, because thee cry of
them is great before the lord, which has sent us to destroy the^, then went
Lot forth and spoke to his sons in law (which should have married his
daughters) and gave the^ warning, and said, O stand up and get you out of this
place, for the lord will destroy this city. Nevertheless they took it but for a
sport and would not believe his saying, wherefore they peryshed with the rest,
as I fear me, we of this Realm are like to do if we will not be warned in
time, for thus is it written by the Prophet as follows after, but it may well
be said unto us now in this Realm the more is the pity.

Iere, vii, c
Thus says the lord of hosts the god of Israel, ye heap up your burnt
offringes with your sacrifices and eat the flesh, but when I brought your
fathers out of Egypt, I spoke no words unto the^ of burnt offrynges and
sacrifyces, but this I commanded the^, saying, herke^ and obey my voice and I
will be your god and ye shall be my people, so yt ye walk in all the ways which
I have commanded you yt ye may prosper. Exodus, ix. a

But they were not o^edient, no more ar we, they inclined not their ears
thereunto, no more do we, but went after their own ymaginacio^ and after ye
nacyons of their own wicked heart. And even so do we or rather wors and if it
be possible. And so they turned the^ selves away and converted not unto me
(says ye lord) and eue^ so do we turn our selves away from ye lord with our
own ymaginacio^s, We are like the deef adder that scoppeth her ears yt she
should not hear the voice of the charmer, charm he never so wisely, Psalm.
lvii, a, and Actu. vii, ^
some with one thing and some with another, some with cards, some with dice,
some with tables, some with bowls, some with shoting, some with dau^syng, some with
hu^ting, some with hawking, some with hoore hu^ting and some with gay clothing of
this fashion and of yt fashion, al becut and be pou^sed more like Heathen
people or players, tha^ those that does profess the holy religion of christ,
for we will not convert unto the lord withal our heart. And this have they done
from the time that your fathers came out of Egipte unto this day (says ye
lord) and eue^ so have we done ever since the time that we were first brought
out of ye bondage of the Bishop of Rome by ye light of the gospel. Ierem. vii
and.xxv. and, xxix
Nevertheless I sent unto the^ my servants all the prophets (says the lord)
and even so has he done unto us, I rose up early (says the lord) and set
the^ word, eue^ so has he done unto us, yet would they not harken, no more
will we, nor offer me their ears, no more will we, but were obstynate and worse
tha^ their fathers (says the lord) and even so be we, and thou shalt now
speak all these words unto them, as they are now spoken unto us, but they will
not hear the (says the lord) no more will we. Thou shall cry upon them for
to turn from their sins (as some there be that cry unto us) but they will
not answer the (says the Lord) no more will not we. Therefore shalt thou
say unto them, as it may be now said unto us. This is the people that neither
hears ye voice of the lord their god, nor receives his correction,
faithfulness and truth is clean roted out of their mouths, as it is clean
gone from us. For we be all aduouterers and a shrynkyng sort, Ierem, ix,
we bend our tongues like bows to shote out lies, as for the truth we may not
away with all to follow it, for we go from one wickedness to another, yea one
must keep hi^ self from another, no man may safely trust his own brother, for
one brother under minethe another, Mich, vii a,
and one neighbor begylethe another, yea one dyssembleth with another, and we
deal with no truth, yea our tongues are like sharp arowes to speak
disceipte. For although we hear and read and can say also that the lord
lives and is a rewarder of soch evil and wickedness, yet will we swear to
deceive. The plagues for sins
Although we do confess that god has scourged and plaged us with wars,
pestelence, derth, and hunger for our sins, yet will we not repent, we will
confess also that the lord does send all these for our correction and
amendeme^t of life, but yet we will not receive it. Neither yet amend: And thee
cause why is this, that we are so pufte up with pride and overwhelmed with
crueltye and unrighteousness, that we will neither hear nor se nor yet
amend, for as it is written when vanyte and ydlenes gets the over hand
among the children of men, Psalm, ^i.
al ar full of the ungodly, Ierem. v. ^
for like as a net is full of birds, eue^ so ar their houses full of that,
which they have gotten with falshed and dysceypte. And hereof comes their
great substance and riches, hereof ar they so fat and so welthy and ar run
away from the lord with shameful blasphemies, for they mynyster not the
law, they make no end of the fatherles cause, O ye Judges ye give sentence
for g^ites. Mic. iii, ^.
they judge not the poor according to equite and right, should not I punish
these things (says the lord) should not I be avenged of al soch people as
these be,
horrible and grievous things ar done in the land, ye prophets teach falsely
and the priests follow them and my people has pleasure therein, what will
come thereof at the last, verelye destructyon if we do not repent, for there is
nothing now to turn the wrath of god from us but only repentance and
amendment of life, for the lord has blessed us with soch a plenteous blessing
and so long time (not only with ye fruits of the earth) but also with his
knowledge of his holy and sacred word of life by his preachers and we do not
amend, that it semethe unto me yt the time is at hand that the lord will
punysshe so sore that we shall not be able to abide it. ^i. Cor. i, c
For all the promises of god are yet in him, and ar Amen in him, to the praise
of God.

And surely the promise of God is to send and give his people al things
necessary and plentuously. If than, when they have it, they be vntha^ke full
for it, and become vain and wicked in their ymaginations, as we are now in
this Realm. Even like unto the children of Israel, Nume, xi psa lxxvi^ i,
Corin, x,
what must follow, verily even as it did unto the^, read the places, for what
should the lord do that he has not done for us. He has given us a land that
is so plenteous that we lack nothing that we can desire or ask, yea not only
that, but also he has put almoost all realms and nations in fear and dread
of us, the which should be a great cause that we should be thankeful unto him
only for it. But it is so come to pass now (the more is the pytie) that every
one will say that my wysdom, deu. viii, d
my strength my forecaste and polycye have done it and brought it to pass, and
as it were, rejoice in the^ selves, and not praise God for it which only is
worthy of all praise for all things. Wherefore if we will not take heed in time,
The ungodly flies no man chassinge him, but ye righteouse stands styf as a
Lion. pro, xxviii. a Le, xxvi, b, pro, xxviii ^.
it will come to pass, that as all Realms and nations have stand in awe and
fled before us, even so will the lord make us afraid and flee before al nations
and to turn our backs toward the^ and not our faces wha^ need is.

Now if it come thus to pass, surely it is our sins and wickedness that is
the cause thereof, for it is thus written also by the prophet Job, for the
wickedness and sin of the people god makes an y^

Hereby do I prove and think that it is so like to come to pass as I have
said, for thus is it written by the wysdom of god. Ecclesia. ^ Iere. xxvii
Danie. iiii
Because of unrighteous dealinge, wrong blasphemies, and diverse deceytes, a
realm shall be translated from one people to another. Now truly here be the
causes that I do fear and suspect in us very much, for surely in my judgment
there was never more wrong among men tha^ is now in these our days, never
more blaspheming of gods holy name tha^ now, never more deceyptes than is now,
yea I think and believe verily that there was nothing so much in the time of
ignorance (before the gospel was known) as there is now, for the^ the people
had some fear of GOD before their eyes, but now there is no fear of god
before the^ at all, iiii, Esdr^. viii. t.
but as it is written, they have taken liberty, despised the highest, thought
scorn of his law, and forsaken his ways, moreover they have trode^ down his
righteous and said in their hearts that there is no god, yea, and that
wittingly. O Lord who will give my head water enough and a well of teare^ for
mine eyes, yt I might weep night and day for the slaughter of my people. etc.
Iere. ix. a
O lord who would not lament to hear and see this, that thee people do so
clean contrary to their knowledge, yea, and also clean contrary to that they
have promised by profession in their Baptysme to their only savior and
redemer, who is so mercyefull a God that he is ready too forgive every one that
turns unto him unfeignedly with al their heart. Wherefore turn you, turn you
unto the Lord, O wherefore will you perish in your sins, O turn you and take
now the cou^sayl of the lord which says by his prophet Esaye. Wasshe you,
Esay^. i. c.
make you clean, put away your evil thoughts from you, cease from doing
evil and vyolence, and learn to do right, and apply your selves wholly to
equytie and right, deliver thee oppressed, help the fatherles to his right,
let the wydowes complaynt come before you, and see that ye now walk in the
ways and statutes of the lord god of Israel, for he is a righteous god, and
rewards every one according to his worckes. Psalm v^^
For god is a righteous Judge (says the Prophet) and he is ever threatening if
men will not turn, he has whet his swerd, he has bent his bow and made it
ready, he has prepared him the weapons of death and ordained his arowes to
destroy.

O take these warninges of the Lords own mouth (I beseech you) seeing that ye
will not take none of his servants, As for the warning of the prophets they
take it but for wind Ierem. v. b
remember Lots two sons in law, that should have married his two daughters,
when Lot gave them warninge to flee the wrath of god (which came upon the
City and thee people therein) they took it but for a sport, Genesis xix, c
and would not. Wherefore they were destroyed with thee wicked: Even so you if ye
take the words of god but for a sport and will not be warned of your sins
and wyckednes in time, ye shall sureli perish in deed. Although god do reserve
you here in this world (to what end or purpose I can not tell) yet shall you
be sure of eternal conde^pnacyon in the world to come by his promys.

But lord who believes our preachinges or geuethe any credence unto our
sayings, Esa. liii. a John. xi, ^ Roma.x. e
Wha^ they saw thee boldness of Peter and John and understood yt they were
unlearned and lay men they maruayled, Actu. iiii b
for we are dyspised among al people, because we be unlearned (as they call
learning) of the vnyuersytes, for they do not consider, neither yet know (or
else they will not) what is learning, neither what is understanding as thee
holy ghost does defyne it in the holy scriptures, for thus does the wysdom
of god prove learning and understanding in the scriptures of God, first thus
says Job, Job xxviii c.
to fear the lord is wisdom, and to forsake evil is understanding. Lo, here
the prophets does approve and acknowledge learning which is good and
accepted in thee sight of god, is to be a feared to offend god. And to depart
from evil is right understanding (says he), also David in the Psalms does
say, Psalm, cx, c
the fear of the lord is the beginning of wysdo^, and a good understanding
have al they that do thereafter, yea the praise of it endures for ever says
he, lo here does David praise well doing and not well saying only. Prou, ix, v
Also Salomo^ says in the book of the proverbs the fear of the lord is the
begi^ning of wisdom, and the knowledge of holy things is understanding. And
thus do I approve by these scriptures yt the chief lerning which before god is
accepted and allowed, is, to know ye holy scriptures of god, and tha^ by this
knowledge to fear him and to depart from al evil, and so to walk in his way
al our life long unto you end. But the world does allow him to be learned that
ca^ say many words, and set it out with many painted scole terms, flattering
and deceiving ye poor innoce^tes, and although the life be as far from a
christian life, as white from black, and light from darcknes. But I say (and
the holy ghost does also affirm it to be true) yt whosoever has all the
learning that is contained in all ye books yt is wtin the universities (if it
were possible for one man to have it) he has no promise of god to understand
the scriptures of god a right and to be saved, Wicked me^ decerne not the
thing that is right, but they that seek after the Lord, discuss al things,
Pro, xxviii
except he depart from evil and co^tynew with well doing unto the end.

I have not said this to dispraise learning, but to put al me^ in remembrance
that they should not trust so much in learning that they should leave well doing
and to think learning sufficient into salvation. For learning is good and the
gift of the holy ghost, given to the glory of god and profyt and comfort of
the congregacyo^s if it be accompanied with virtue and godly living. But if it
be accompanied with pride, vain glory, covetousness, envy, hatred, malice,
and gorgeous apparel vain pastymes and all things that pertayne to a worldly
and carnal life not seeking no mortyfycation of the flesh. What does it
profit, verelye nothing but procure gods wrath too that person that has
it, for so much as he does abuse thee good gifts of god given unto him to
set forth his glory and praise in the congregacio^s, and does seek but his
own pryuate welthe praise and vain glory only. And this is the spyrytuall
wyckednes in heavenly things that Saint Paul speakethe of to thee
Ephesyans, thee.vi. Ephesians. vi, b
Chapter.

But as it is said before, thee world doethe not allow our sayings, nor
believe it, neither will they follow it, because we do not set it forth with
sclole learning and painted eloquence. Yet notwythstanding we speak the truth
and tell the people of their sins, because we would not have them peryshe with
the condemned, and because we do so and walk not with them in the same excess
of riote as they do, in eating and drynckyng, in sportyng and playing, in the
lusts of thee flesh, We are reuyled and yet we bless, we are persecuted and
suffer it, we are evil spoken of, and yet we pray.i. cor. iiii, b.
in wa^to^nes and in all manner of ryatous living. Therefore speak they evil of
us and care not what they say of us, but as S. Peter says, they shall give
acco^ptes unto him (for it) that is ready to Judge both quycke and the dead.

But Saint Paul was not ashamed to confess and say: my brethren, when I came
unto you, i, Cor, ii, a.
I came not in gloriousnes of words or of wysdom, showing unto you the
testimony of god, neither showed I my self that I knew any thing among you save
Jesus christ, eue^ the same that was crucified, and I was among you in
weakness and in fear and in much trymblynge. And my words and my preachynges
were not with intysynge words of man's wisdom, but in showing of thee
spyryte and power that your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but
in the power of god, says he.

Even so I my brethren, do not show you the words of god with the wisdom of
me^, but in the power and with the spyryte of the Lord, as my conscience is
wytnes before god, to thee helynge of you, too thee knowledge of god and
salvation of your souls. Nether do I seek the praise of me^, but of god (who
ought only to have al praise) neither do I seek youres, but you, neither would
I have your faith stand in him yt has much learning and his life nothing
agreyng to the same, but let your faith stand only upon god and his word, and
let him that fearethe god and departs from evil be your show token to follow
after. For it is written. Mat. vii b
Not al they that say master master, or lord lord shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven, but all those that do the will of him that is in heaven
(says christ) many shall say unto me, Lord Lord have we not prophesied in
thy name, have we not cast out deuyls in thy name, have we not done many great
miracles in thy name. And then will I acknowledge unto the^ (says christ) that
I never knew the^, wherefore depart from me ye workers of iniquity.

Lo, note here I pray you what will be said to the evil and wicked doers, all
though they have never so much learning, never so much wysdo^, never so much
eloquence, yea, and though they have never so many spiritual gifts of grace,
if they be evil and wicked doers, it will be said unto the^, depart from me
ye workers of iniquity, Therefore if any man will be of christ, he must be a
new creature, as for old things he must cast them away, and as the prophet
says, Ez^^. xviii ^
cast away all ungodliness that ye have done and make you a new heart and a
new spyrite, nevertheless al things are of God which has reconcyled us unto
him self by Jesus christ, and has given me this mind to tell unto you this
attonemente, that God was in Christ and made agreemente between the world and
him self, and imputed not their sins unto them, when soever they repent and
turn from them, and therefore has bound me now in conscience to testifye
thee same unto you in wrytinge.

We are not as many ar why the chop and ^hau^ge with the word^ of god, but eue^
out of pureness and out of god in ye sight of God so speak we in Christ. ii.
Cor, i. d
Now the^ am I a messe^ger in the rowme of christ, eue^ as though god did beseech
you through me, so pray I you in Christ's stead that ye be at one with God, for
he has made him to be sin for us, which knew no sin, that we by that
means should be that ryghteousnes which before god is allowed. I as an helper
therefore do exhort you yt ye receive not the graces of God in vain, Esa.
xlix b
for he says I have heard the in the time excepted, and in the day of
salvation have I succored the, behold (says he) now is thee excepted time,
now is the day of salvation (wha^ is thee day and time of saluatyon?)
verelye even when soever god offreth to any man repentance, by thee opening
of his word unto him, that he may see his own Sins, and the great mercy of
God offered unto him in Christ Jesus, than I say, is the day and time of
salvation to that person offered, if he be tha^ wylling to receive it and
inbrace it with tears for his sins.

Wherefore my well-beloved brethren, be it known unto you that the lord is not
slack to fulfill his promise, as some men counts him and says, tushe, seeing
that the days of punishment are so slack in coming, all the prophecies ar of
none effect. I tell you therefore thus says the Lord god. The days are even at
hand that every thing which has been prophesied shall be fulfilled. Ezec. xii. d
There shall no vysyo^ be in vain, neither any prophecye fail among the
children of Israel, for it is I the Lord that spoke it, and what soever I the
Lord spoke, it shall be performed in his time and not be slack in coming.
Wherefore, for the love and tender mercy of God, if ye believe this to be true
(or have any sparckle of love or fear in you) be ye warned in time, and be
diligente that ye may be found before him in peace without spot and undefiled,
and count the long suffering of the Lord your salvation. And now to all you
that will be warned of these sayings and writing in deed, and do know it
before hand, beware, least ye be also plucked away through the error of the
wicked, and fall from your own stedfastnes, but grow in grace and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. And take the counsel of the
holy ghost, which says: Esaias. iii. b
Away away, get you out from thence and touch no unclean thing. God out from
among soch, and be clean all ye that bear thee vessels of the Lord. And again
S. Paul says: Come out from among them and separate your selves (says the
Lord) and touch no unclean thing and so will I receive you (says the Lord)
and be your father and ye shall be my sons and daughters, says the almighty
Lord, unto whom with the son and the holy ghost be all honor and glory.
AMEN.

The Lord of all mercy send us Preachers with power (that is to say) true
expoundes of the word of God, and speakers to thee hearts of men, and deliver
us from Scrybes, Phariseis, Hypocrytes, and all false Prophets and teachers.

AMEN.
Give al praises unto God only, for he is worthy, and none but he, G.C.
Imprinted at London in Paul's Church yearde, at the sign of the star, By
Thomas Raynalde.


