1603. THE VVONderfull year.

Wherein is showed the picture of London, lying sick of the Plague.

At the end of all (like a merry Epilogue to a dull Play) certain Tales are
cut out in sundry fashions, of purpose to shorten the lives of long winters
nights, that lie watching in the dark for us.

Et me rigidi legant Catones. LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed, and are to be
sold in Saint Donstones Church-yarde in Fleet-streete. 16^^

TO HIS WEL-RESPECTED GOOD friend, M. Cuthbert Thuresby, Water-Bailiffe of
London.
Books are but poor gifts, yet Kings receive them: upon which, I presume, you
will not turn This out of doors. You cannot for shame, but bid it welcome,
because it bringes to you a great quantity of my love, which, if it be worth
little, (and no marvel if Love be sold underfoot, when the God of Love
himself, goes naked) yet I hope you will not say you have a hard bargain,
Sithe^ce you may take as much of it as you please for nothing. I have clapped the
Cognizance of your name, on these scribled papers, it is their livery: So that
now they are yours; being free from any vile imputation, save only, that they
thrust themselves into your acquaintance. But general errors, have general
pardons: for the title of other men's names, is the common Heraldry which all
those lay claim too, whose crest is a Pen-and Inckhorne. If you read, you may
happily laugh; it is my desire you should, because mirth is both Physical, and
wholesome against the Plague, with which sickness, (to tell truth) this book
is, (though not sorely) yet somewhat infected. I pray, drive it not out of your
company for all that; for (assure your soul) I am so jealous of your health,
that if you did but once imagine, there were gall in mine Incke, I would cast
away the Standish, and forswear meddling with any more Muses.

To the Reader.
AND why to the Reader? Oh good Sir! there is as found law to make you give good
words to the Reader, as to a Constable when he caryes his watch about him to
tell how the night goes, tho (perhaps) the one (oftentimes) may be served in
for a Goose, and the other very fitly furnish the same mess: Yet to maintain
the scuruy fashion, and to keep Custom in reparations, he must be honyed, and
come-ouer with Gentle Reader, Courteous Reader, and Learned Reader, though he
have no more Gentilitie in him than Adam had (that was but a gardner) no more
Ciuility than a Tartar, and no more Learning than the most errand Stinkard,
that (except his own name) could never find any thing in the Horne-booke.

How notoriously therefore do good wits dishonor not only their Calling, but
even their Creation, that worship Glow-wormes (in stead of the Sun) because of
a little false glistering? In the name of Phoebus what madness leads them unto
it? For he that dares hazard a pressing to death (that's to say, To be a man in
print) must make account that he shall stand (like the old Wethercock over
Powles Steeple) to be beaten with all storms. Neither the stinking
Tobacco-breath of a Sattingull, the Aconited sting of a narrow-eyd Critic, the
faces of a fantastic Stage-monkey, nor the Indeede-la of a Puritanicall
Citizen, must once shake him. No, but desperately resolve (like a french Post)
to ride through thick and thin: endure to see his lines torn pitifully on the
rack: suffer his Muse to take the Bastoone, yea the very stab, and himself
like a new stake to be a mark for every Hagler, and therefore (setting up all
these rests) why should he regard what fools bolt is shot at him? Besides, if
that which he presents upon the Stage of the world be Good, why should he
basely cry out (with that old poetical mad-cap in his Amphitruo) Iouis summi
causa clare plaudite, beg a Plaudite for God-sake! If Bad, who (but an Ass)
would entreat (as Players do in a cogging Epilogue at the end of a filthy
Comedy) that, be it never such wicked stuff, they would forbear to hiss, or
to dam it perpetually to lie on a Stationers stall. For he that can so cosen
himself, as to pocket up praise in that silly sort, makes his brains fat with
his own folly.

But Hinc Pudor! or rather Hinc Dolor, heeres the Devil! It is not the rattling
of all this former haile-shot, that can terrify our Band of Castalian Penmen
from entering into the field: no, no, the murdring Artillery indeed lies in the
roaring mouths of a company that look big as if they were the sole and
singular Commanders over the maine Army of Poesy, yet (if Hermes muster-booke
were searched over) they will be found to be most pitiful pure fresh water
soldiers: they give out, that they are heires-apparent to Helicon, but an easy
Herald may make them mere younger brothers, or (to say troth) not so much.
Bear witness all you whose wits make you able to be witnesses in this case,
that here I meddle not with your good Poets, Nam tales, nusquam sunt hic
amplius, If you should rake hell, or (as Aristophanes in his Frog says) in any
Celler deeper than hell, it is hard to find Spirits of that Fashion. But those
Goblins whom I now am coniuring up, have bladder-cheekes puffed out like a
Swizzers breeches (yet being pricked, there comes out nothing but wind)
thin-headed fellows that live upon the scraps of invention, and travel with
such vagrant souls, and so like Ghosts in white sheets of paper, that the
Statute of Rogues may worthily be sued upon them, because their wits have no
abiding place, and yet wander without a passe-port. Alas, poor wenches (the
nine Muses!) how much are you wronged, to have such a number of Bastards lying
upon your hands? But turn them out a begging; or if you can not be rid of
their Riming-company (as I think it will be very hard) then lay your heavy
and immortal curse upon them, that whatsoever they weaue (in the motley-loome
of their rusty pates) may like a beggars cloak, be full of stolen patches, and
yet never a patch like one another, that it may be such true lamentable stuff,
that any honest Christian may be sorry to see it. Banish these Word-pirates (you
sacred mistresses of learning) into the gulf of Barbarism: doom them
everlastingly to live among dunces: let them not once lick their lips at the
Thespian bowl, but only be glad (and thank Apollo for it too) if hereafter
(as hitherto they have always) they may quench their poetical thirst with
small beer. Or if they will needs be stealing your Heliconian Nectar, let
them (like the dogs of Nylus) only lap and away. For this Goatish swarm are
those (that where for these many thousand years you went for pure maids) have
taken away your good names, these are they that deflowre your beauties. These
are those ranck-riders of Art, that have so spur-gald your lusty wingd
Pegasus, that now he begins to be out of flesh, and (even only for
prouander-sake) is glad to show tricks like Bancks his Curtall. O you
Booke-sellers (that are Factors to the Liberal Sciences) over whose Stalls
these Drones do daily fly, humming; let Homer, Hesiod, Euripides, and some
other mad Greeks with a band of the Latins, lie like musket shot in their
way, when these Goths and Getes set upon you in your paper fortifications; it
is the only Canon, upon whose mouth they dare not venture, none but the English
will take their parts, therefore fear them not, for such a strong breath have
these cheese-eaters, that if they do but blow upon a book, they imagine
straight it is blasted, Quod supra nos, Nihil ad nos, (they say) that which is
above our capacity, shall not pass under our commendation. Yet would I have
these Zoilists (of all other) to read me, if ever I should write any thing
worthily, for the blame that knowne-fooles heap upon a deserving labor does
not discredit the same, but makes wise men more perfectly in love with it. Into
such a ones hands therefore if I fortune to fall, I will not shrink an inch,
but even when his teeth are sharpest, and most ready to bite, I will stop his
mouth only with this, Haec mala sunt, sed tu, non meliora facis.

Reader.
WHereas there stands in the Rere-ward of this Book a certain mingled Troop
of strange Discourses, fashioned into Tales, Know, that the intelligence which
first brought them to light, was only flying Report: whose tongue (as it often
does) if in spredding them it have tript in any material point, and either
slipped too far, or fallen too short, bear with the error, and the rather,
because it is not wilfully committed. Neither let any one (whom those Reports
shall seem to touch) cavil, or complain of injury, sithence nothing is set
down by a malicious hand.

Farewell.
THE Wonderful year.
VErtumnus being attired in his accustomed habit of changeable silk, Vertumnus
God of the year.
had newly passed through the first and principal Court-gate of heaven: to
whom for a farewell, Description of the Spring.
and to show how dutiful he was in his office, Ianus (that bears two faces
under one hood) made a very mannerly low leg, and (because he was the only
Porter at that gate) presented unto this King of the months, all the
New-yeares gifts, which were more in number, and more worth then those that are
given to the great Turk, or the Emperor of Persia: on went Vertumnus in his
lusty progress, Priapus, Flora, the Dryades, and Hamadryades, with all the
wooden rabble of those that dressed Orchards and Gardens, perfuming all the
ways that he went, with the sweet Odours that breathed from flowers, herbs
and trees, which now began to peep out of prison: by virtue of which excellent
aires, the sky got a most clear complexion, looked smug and smoothe, and had
not so much as a wart sticking on her face: the Sun likewise was freshly and
very richly apparelled in cloth of gold like a bridegroom; and in stead of
gilded Rosemary, the horns of the Ram, Upon the 23 of March the Spring
begins, by reason of the Suns entrance into Aries.
(being the sign of that celestial bride-house where he lay, to be married
to the Spring) were not like your common horns parcell-gilt, but double
double-gilt, with the liquid gold that melted from his beams: for joy whereof
the Lark sung at his window every morning, the Nightingale every night: the
Cuckooe (like a single-sole Fiddler, that reeles from Tavern to Tavern) plide
it all the day long: Lambs friskte up and down in the valleys, Kids and
Goats leapt too and fro on the Mountains: Shepherds sat piping, country
wenches singing: Lovers made Sonnets for their Lasses, whilst they made
Garlands for their Lovers: And as the Country was frolic, so was the City
merry: Olive Trees (which grow no where but in the Garden of peace) stood (as
common as Beech does at Midsomer,) at every man's door, branches of Palm were
in every man's hand: Streets were full of people, people full of joy: every
house seemde to have a Lord of misrule in it, in every house there was so much
iollity: no Scritch-Owle frighted the silly Countryman at midnight, nor any
Drum the Citizen at noonday; but all was more calm than a still water, all
hushed, as if the Spheres had been playing in Consort: In conclusion, heaven
looked like a Palace, and the great hall of the earth, like a Paradise. But O
the short-liu'de Felicity of man! O world of what slight and thin stuff is
thy happiness! Just in the midst of this iocund Hollday, a storm rises in the
West: The Queens sickness.
Westward (from the top of a Ritch-mount) descended a hidious tempest, that
shook Cedars, terrified the tallest Pines, and cleft in sunder even the
hardest hearts of Oak: And if such great trees were shaken, what think you
became of the tender Eglantine, and humble Hawthorne? they could not
(doubtless) but droope, they could not choose but die with the terror. The
Element (taking the Destinies part, who indeed set abroach this mischief)
scowled on the earth, and filling her hie forehead full of black wrinckles,
tumbling long up and down, (like a great bellyed wife) her sighs being
whirlewindes, and her groans thunder, at length she fell in labor, and was
delivered of a pale, meagre, weak child, named Sickness, whom Death (with a
pestilence) would needs take upon him to nurse, and did so. This starueling
being come to his full growth, had an office given him for nothing (and that's a
wonder in this age) Death made him his Herald: attirde him like a Courtier,
and (in his name) chargde him to go into the Privy Chamber of the English
Queen, to sommon her to appear in the Star Chamber of heaven.

The sommons made her start, but (having an invincible spirit) did not amaze
her: yet whom would not the certain news of parting from a Kingdom amaze!
But she knew where to find a richer, Her death.
and therefore lightly regarded the loss of this, and thereupon made ready
for that heavenly Coronation, being (which was most strange) most dutiful to
obey, that had so many years so powrefully commanded. She obayed deaths
messenger, and yielded her body to the hands of death himself. She dyed,
resigning her Scepter to posterity, and her Soul to immortality.

The report of her death (like a thunderclap) was able to kill thousands, it
took away hearts from millions: for having brought up (even under her wing) a
nation that was almost begotten and borne under her; that never shouted any
other Aue than for her name, never saw the face of any Prince but her self,
never understood what that strange out landish word Change signified, how was
it possible, but that her sickness should throw abroad an universal fear, The
general terror that her death bred.
and her death an astonishment? She was the Courtiers treasure, therefore he
had cause to mourn: the Lawyers sword of justice, he might well faint: the
Merchants patroness, he had reason to look pale: the Citizens mother, he
might best lament: the Shepherds Goddess, and should not he droope? Only the
Soldier, who had walked a long time upon wodden legs, and was not able to give
Arms, though he were a Gentleman, had brisseld up the quilts of his stiff
Porcupine mustachio, and swore by no beggars that now was the hour come for
him to bestirre his stumps: Usurers and Brokers (that are the Devils Ingles,
and dwell in the long-lane of hell) quakt like aspen leaves at his oaths:
those that before were the only cut-throates in London, now stood in fear of
no other death: but my Signior Soldado was deceived, the Tragedy went not
forward.

Never did the English Nation behold so much black worn as there was at her
Funeral: It was then but put on, to try if it were fit, for the great day of
mourning was set down (in the book of heaven) to be held afterward: that was
but the dumb show, the Tragical Act has bin playing ever since. Her Hearse (as
it was borne) seemed to be an Island swimming in water, for round about it there
rayned showers of tears, about her deathbed none: for her departure was so
sudden and so strange, that men knew not how to weep, because they had never
bin taught to shed tears of that making. They that durst not speak their
sorrows, whisperd them: they that durst not whisper, sent them forth in
sighs. Oh what an Earth quake is the alteration of a State! Look from the
Chamber of Presence, to the Farmers cottage, and you shall find nothing but
distraction: the whole Kingdom seems a wilderness, and the people in it are
transformed to wild men. The Map of a Country so pitifully distracted by the
horror of a change, if you desire perfectly to behold, cast your eyes then on
this that follows, which being heretofore in private presented to the King, I
think may very worthily show it self before you: And because you shall see
them attirde in the same fashion that they wore before his Majesty, let these
few lines (which stood then as Prologue to the rest) enter first into your
ears.

NOt for applauses, shallow fools adventure,
I plunge my verse into a sea of censure,
But with a liver dressed in gall, to see
So many Rookes, catch-polls of poesy,
That feed upon the fallings of hye wit,
And put on cast inventions, most unfit,
For such am I pressed forth in shops and stalls,
Pasted in Powles, and on the Lawyers walls,
For every Basilisk-eyde Critics bait,
To kill my verse, or poison my conceit,
Or some smoakt gallant, who at wit repines,
To dry Tobacco with my wholesome lines,
And in one paper sacrifice more brain,
Than all his ignorant scull could ere contain:
But merit dreads no martyrdom, nor stroke,
My lines shall live, when he shall be all smoke.
Thus far the Prologue, who leaving the Stage clear, the fears that are
bred in the womb of this altring kingdom do next step up, acting thus: THe
great impostume of the realm was drawn
Even to a head: the multitudinous spawne
Was the corruption, which did make it swell
With hoped sedition (the burnt seed of hell.)
Who did expect but ruin, blood, and death,
To share our kingdom, and divide our breath?
Religions without religion,
To let each other blood, confusion
To be next Queen of England, and this year
The civil wars of France to be played here
By Englishmen, ruffians, and pandaring slaves,
That feign would dig up gowty usurers graves,
At such a time, villains their hopes do honey,
And rich men look as pale as their white money.
Now they remove, and make their silver sweat,
Casting themselves into a covetous heat,
And then (unseen) in the confederate dark,
Bury their gold without or Priest or Clarke,
And say no prayers over that dead pelf,
True: gold's no Christian, but an Indian elfe.
Did not the very kingdom seem to shake,
Her precious massy limbs? did she not make
All english cities (like her pulses) beat
With people in their veins? the fear so great,
That had it not bin phisickt with rare peace,
Our populous bower had lessend her increase.
The springtime that was dry, had sprung in blood,
A greater dearth of men, than e're of food:
In such a panting time, and gasping year,
Victuals are cheapest, only men are dear.
Now each wise-acred Landlord did despair,
Fearing some villain should become his heir,
Or that his son and heir before his time,
Should now turn villain, and with violence clime
Up to his life, saying, father you have seen
King Henry, Edward, Mary, and the Queen,
I wonder you will live longer! then he tells him
He Is loath to see him killed, therefore he kills him.
And each vast Landlord dies like a poor slave,
Their thousand acres make them but a grave,
At such a time, great men convey their treasure
Into the trusty City: wayt the leisure
Of blood and insurrection, which war clips,
When every gate shutts up her Iron lips;
Imagine now a mighty man of dust,
Stands in a doubt, what servant he may trust,
With plate worth thousands: Jewels worth far more,
If he prove false, then his rich Lord proves poor
He calls forth one by one, to note their graces,
Whilst they make legs, he copies out their faces,
Examines their eye-browe, consters their beard
Singles their Nose out, still he rests afeard,
The first that comes, by no means heel allow,
Has spyed three Hares starting between his brow,
Quite turns the word, names it Celeritie,
For Hares do run away, and so may he,
A second shown: him he will scarce behold,
His beard's too red, the color of his gold,
A third may please him, but it is hard to say,
A rich man's pleased, when his goods part away.
And now do cherrup by, fine golden nests
Of well hatched bowls: such as do breed in feasts,
For war and death cupboords of plate down pulls,
Then Bacchus drinks not in gilt-bowles, but sculls.
Let me descend and stoop my verse a while,
To make the Comicke cheek of Poesy smile;
Rank peny-fathers scud (with their half hammes,
Shadowing their calves) to save their silver dammes,
At every gun they start, tilt from the ground,
One drum can make a thousand Usurers sownd.
In unsought Allies and unwholesome places,
Back-wayes and by-lanes, where appear few faces,
In shamble-smelling rooms, loathsome prospects,
And penny-lattice-windowes, which reiects
All popularitie: there the rich Cubs lurk,
When in great houses ruffians are at work,
Not dreaming that such glorious booties lie
Under those nasty roofes: such they pass by
Without a search, crying there is naught for us,
And wealthy men deceive poor villains thus.
Tongue-trauelling Lawyers faint at such a day,
Lie speechless, for they have no words to say.
Physicians turn to patients, their Arts dry,
For then our fat men without physic dye.
And to conclude, against all Art and good,
War taints the Doctor, lets the Surgion blood.


Such was the fashion of this Land, when the great Land-Lady thereof left it:
She came in with the fall of the leaf, and went away in the Spring: her life
(which was dedicated to Virginity, both beginning and closing up a miraculous
Maiden circle: for she was borne upon a Lady Eve, and died upon a Lady Eve: her
Nativity and death being memorable by this wonder: the first and last years
of her Reign by this, that a Lee was Lord Mayor when she came to the Crown,
and a Lee Lord Mayor when she departed from it. Three places are made famous
by her for three things, Greenwich for her birth, Richmount for her death,
White Hall for her Funeral: upon her removing from whence, (to lend our tiring
prose a breathing time) stay, and look upon these Epigrams, being composed.

1. Upon the Queens last Remove being dead.
THe Queene's remou'de in solemn sort,
Yet this was strange, and seldom seen,
The Queen used to remove the Court,
But now the Court remou'de the Queen.
2. Upon her bringing by water to White Hall.
THe Queen was brought by water to White Hall,
At every stroke the owers tears let fall.
More clung about the Barge: Fish under water
Wept out their eyes of pearl, and swom blind after.
I think the Barge-men might with easier thyes
Have rowde her thither in her peoples eyes.
For howsoever, thus much my thoughts have skand,
S'had come by water, had she come by land.
3. Upon her lying dead at White Hall.
THe Queen lies now at White Hall dead,
And now at White Hall living,
To make this rough objection even,
Dead at White Hall in Westminster,
But living at White Hall in Heaven.
Thus you see that both in her life and her death she was appointed to be the
mirror of her time: And surely, if since the first stone that was laid for the
foundation of this great house of the world, there was ever a year ordained to
be wondered at, it is only this: 1603. A more wonderful year than 88.
the Sibils, Octogesimus, Octauus Annus, that same terrible 88. which came
sailing hither in the Spanish Armada, and made men's hearts colder then the
frozen Zone, when they heard but an inckling of it: that 88. by whose horrible
predictions, Almanack-makers stood in bodily fear, their trade would be
utterly overthrown, and poor Erra Pater was threatened (because he was a Jew)
to be put to baser offices, than the stopping of mustard-pots, that same 88.
which had more prophecies waiting at his heels, than ever Merlin the Magitian
had in his head, was a year of Iubile to this. Platoes Mirabilis Annus,
(whither it be past already, or to come within these four years) may throw
Platoes cap at Mirabilis, for that title of wonderful is bestowed upon 1603.
If that sacred Aromatically-perfumed fire of wit (out of whose flames Phoenix
poesy does arise) were burning in any breast, I would feed it with no other
stuff for a tweluemoneth and a day than with kindling papers full of lines,
that should tell only of the chances, changes, and strange shapes that this
Protean Climactericall year has metamorphosed himself into. It is able to
find ten Chroniclers a competent living, and to set twenty Printers at work.
You shall perceive I lie not, if (with Peter Bales) you will take the pains to
draw the whole volume of it into the compass of a penny. As first, to begin
with the Queens death, then the Kingdoms falling into an Ague upon that.
Next, follows the curing of that fever by the wholesome receipt of a
proclaimed King. That wonder begat more, for in an hour, two mighty Nations
were made one: wild Ireland became tame on the sudden, and some English great
ones that before seemed tame, on the sudden turned wild: The same Park which
great Julius Caesar inclosd, to hold in that Dear whom they before hunted,
being now circled (by a second Caesar) with stronger pales to keep them from
leaping over. And last of all (if that wonder be the last and shut up the
year) a most dreadful plague. This is the Abstract, and yet (like Stowes
Chronicle in Decimo sexto to huge Hollinshead) these small pricks in this
Sea-card of ours, represent mighty Countries; whilst I have the quill in my
hand, let me blow them bigger.

The Queen being honored with a Diadem of Stars, France, Spain, and
Belgia, lift up their heads, preparing to do as much for England by giving aim,
whilst she shot arrows at her own breast (as they imagined) as she had done
(many a year together) for them: and her own Nation betted on their sides,
looking with distracted countenance for no better guests than Civil Sedition,
Vprores, Rapes, Murders, and Massacres. But the wheel of Fate turned, a better
Lottery was drawn, Pro Troia stabat Apollo, God stuck valiantly to us, For
behold, up rises a comfortable Sun out of the North, whose glorious beams
(like a fan) dispersed all thick and contagious clouds. The loss of a Queen,
was paid with the double interest of a King and Queen. The Cedar of her
government which stood alone and bare no fruit, is changed now to an Olive,
upon whose spreading branches grow both Kings and Queens. Oh it were able to
fill a hundred pair of writing tables with notes, but to see the parts played
in the compass of one hour on the stage of this newfound world! Upon
Thurseday it was treason to cry God save king James king of England, King James
proclaimed.
and upon Friday hye treason not to cry so. In the morning no voice heard but
murmures and lamentation, at noone nothing but shoutes of gladness and triumph.
S. George and S. Andrew that many hundred years had defied one another, were
now sworn brothers: England and Scotland (being parted only with a narrow
River, and the people of both Empires speaking a language less differing than
english within it self, as tho providence had enacted, that one day those two
Nations should marry one another) are now made sure together, and king James
his Coronation, is the solemn wedding day. Happiest of all thy Ancestors (thou
mirror of all Princes that ever were or are) that at seven of the clock were a
king but over a piece of a little Island, and before eleven the greatest Monarch
in Christendom. Now -- Silver Crowds
Of blisfull Angels and tried Martirs tread
On the Star-seeling over Englands head:
Now heaven broke into a wonder, and brought forth
Our omne bonum from the wholesome North
(Our fruitful sovereign) James, at whose dread name
Rebellion swounded, and (ere since) became
Groueling and nerue-lesse, wanting blood to nourish,
For Ruin gnawes her self when kingdoms flourish.
Now are our hopes planted in regal springs,
Never to wither, for our air breeds kings:
And in all ages (from this sovereign time)
England shall still be called the royal clime.
Most blisfull Monarch of all earthen powers,
Served with a mess of kingdoms, four such bowers
(For prosperous hiues, and rare industrious swarms)
The world conteines not in her solid arms.
O thou that art the Meeter of our days,
Poets Apollo! deal thy Daphnean bays
To those whose wits are bay-trees, ever green,
Upon whose hye tops, Poesy chirps unseen:
Such are most fit, t'apparell Kings in rimes,
Whose silver numbers are the Muses chimes,
Whose spritely caracters (being once wrought on)
Out-liue the marble they are insculpt upon:
Let such men chant thy virtues, then they fly
On Learnings wings up to Eternity.
As for the rest, that limp (in cold desert)
Having small wit, less judgment, and least Art:
Their verse! it is almost heresy to hear,
Banish their lines some furlong, from thine ear:
For it is held dangerous (by Apolloes sign)
To be infected with a leaprous line.
O make some Adamant Act (never to be worn)
That none may write but those that are true-borne:
So when the worlds old cheeks shall race and peele,
Thy Acts shall breath in Epitaphs of Steel.


By these Comments it appears that by this time king James is proclaimed: The
joys that followed upon his proclayming.
now dooes fresh blood leap into the cheeks of the Courtier: the Soldier now
hangs up his armor and is glad that he shall feed upon the blessed fruits of
peace: the Scholar sings Hymns in honor of the Muses, assuring himself now
that Helicon will be kept pure, because Apollo himself drinks of it. Now the
thriftie Citizen casts beyond the Moon, and seeing the golden age returned
into the world again, resolves to worship no Saint but money. Trades that lay
dead and rotten, and were in all men's opinion utterly dambd, started out of
their trance, as though they had drunk of Aqua Caelestis, or Unicorns horn,
and swore to fall to their old occupation. Tailors meant no more to be called
Merchant-taylors, but Merchants, for their shops were all lead forth in leases,
to be turned into ships, and with their sheares (in stead of a Rudder) would
they have cut the Seas (like Leuant Taffaty) and sayld to the West Indies for
no worse stuff to make hose and doublets of, than beaten gold: Or if the
necessity of the time (which was likely to stand altogether upon bravery)
should press them to serve with their iron and Spanish weapons upon their
stalls, then was there a sharp law made amongst them, that no workman should
handle any needle but that which had a pearl in his eye, nor any copper
thimble, unless it were linde quite through, or bumbasted with silver. What
Mechanical hardhanded Vulcanist (seeing the dice of Fortune run so sweetly,
and resolving to strike whilst the iron was hot) but persuaded himself to be
Master or head Warden of his Company ere half a year went about? The worst
players boy stood upon his good parts, swearing tragical and buskind oaths,
that how villainously soever he randed, or what bad and unlawful action soever
he entered into, he would in despite of his honest audience, be half a sharer
(at least) at home, or else strowle (that's to say travel) with some notorious
wicked floundring company abroad. And good reason had these time-catchers to
be led into this fools paradise, for they saw mirth in every man's face, the
streets were plumed with gallants, Tobacconists filled up whole Tauernes:
Vintners hung out spick and span new Iuy-bushes (because they wanted good wine)
and their old raine-beaten lattices marched under other colors, having lost
both company and colors before. London was never in the high way to preferment
till now; now she resolved to stand upon her pantoffles: now (and never till
now) did she laugh to scorn that worme-eaten proverb of Lincoln was, London
is, and York shall be, for she saw her self in better state then Jerusalem,
she went more gallant then ever did Antwerp, was more courted by amorous and
lusty suitors then Venice (the minion of Italy) more lofty towers stood (like
a Coronet, or a spangled head-tire) about her Temples, then ever did about the
beawtifull forehead of Rome: Tyrus and Sydon to her were like two thatcht
houses, to Theobals: the grand Cayr but a hogsty. Hinc illae lachrimae, She
wept her belly full for all this. Whilst Troy was swilling sack and sugar, and
mowsing fat venison, the mad Greeks made bonefires of their houses: Old Priam
was drinking a health to the wodden horse, and before it could be pledgd had
his throat cut. Corn is no sooner ripe, but for all the pricking up of his
ears he is pard off by the shins, and made to go upon stumps. Flowers no
sooner budded, but they are plucked and dye. Night walks at the heels of the
day, and sorrow enters (like a tauerne-bill) at the tail of our pleasures: for
in the Appenine height of this immoderate joy and security (that like Powles
Steeple ouer-lookt the whole City) Behold, that miracle-worker, who in one
minute turned our general mourning to a general mirth, does now again in a
moment alter that gladness to shrikes and lamentation.

Here would I feign make a full point, The Plague.
because posterity should not be frighted with those miserable tragedies,
which now my muse (as Chorus) stands ready to present. Time would thou had
never bin made wretched by bringing them forth, Oblivion would in all the
graves and sepulchers, whose rank jaws thou have already closd up or shall
yet hereafter burst open, thou could likewise bury them for ever.

A stiff and freezing horror sucks up the rivers of my blood: my hair stands
an end with the panting of my brains: mine eye balls are ready to start out,
being beaten with the billows of my tears: out of my weeping pen does the
inck mournefullie and more bitterly than gall drop on the pale-faced paper,
even when I do but think how the bowels of my sick country have bin torn.
Apollo therefore and you bewitching silver tongd Muses get you gone, Invoke
none of your names: Sorrow and Truth, sit you on each side of me, whilst I am
delivered of this deadly burden: prompt me that I may utter ruthful and
passionate condolement: arm my trembling hand, that it may boldly rip up and
Anatomize the vlcerous body of this Anthropophagized plague: Anthropophagi are
Scithians that feed on men's flesh.
lend me Art (without any counterfeit shadowing) to paint and delineate to the
life the whole story of this mortal and pestiferous battle, and you the
ghosts of those more (by many) then 40000. that with the virulent poison of
infection have bin driven out of your earthly dwellings: you desolate
hand-wringing widows, that beat your bosoms over your departing husbands:
you woefully distracted mothers that with disheueld hair fallen into swounds,
whilst you lie kissing the insensible cold lips of your breathless Infants:
you outcast and downe-troden Orphans, that shall many a year hence remember
more freshly to mourn, when your mourning garments shall look old and be
forgotten; And you the Genij of all those emptyed families, whose habitations
are now among the Antipodes: Join all your hands together, and with your
bodies cast a ring about me: let me behold your ghastly vizages, that my paper
may receive their true pictures: Echo forth your groans through the hollow
truncke of my pen, and rain down your gummy tears into mine Incke, that even
marble bosoms may be shaken with terror, and hearts of Adamant melt into
compassion.

What an unmatchable torment were it for a man to be bard up every night in a
vast silent Charnell-house? hung (to make it more hideous) with lamps dimly and
slowly burning, in hollow and glimmering corners: where all the pauement should
in stead of green rushes, be strewde with blasted Rosemary, withered
Hyacinthes, fatal Cipresse and Ewe, thickly mingled with heaps of dead men's
bones: the bare ribs of a father that begat him, lying there: here the
Chaples hollow scull of a mother that bore him: round about him a thousand
Coarses, some standing bolt upright in their knotted winding sheets: others
half mouldred in rotten Goffins, that should suddenly yawne wide open, filling
his nosthrils with noisome stench, and his eyes with the sight of nothing but
crawling worms. And to keep such a poor wretch waking, he should hear no
noise but of Toads croaking, Screech-Owles howling, Mandrakes shriking: were
not this an infernal prison? would not the strongest-harted man (beset with
such a ghastly horror) look wild? and run mad? and die? And even such a
formidable shape did the diseased City appear in: For he that durst (in the
dead hour of gloomy midnight) have been so valiant, as to have walkte through
the still and melancholy streets, what think you should have been his music?
Surely the loud groans of rauing sick men: the struggling panges of souls
departing: In every house grief striking up an Allarum: Servants crying out
for masters: wives for husbands, parents for children, children for their
mothers: here he should have met some frantickly running to knock up Sextons;
there, others fearfully sweating with Coffins, to steal forth dead bodies,
least the fatal handwriting of death should seal up their doors. And to
make this dismal consort more full, round about him Bells heavily tolling in
one place, and ringing out in another: The dreadfulnesse of such an hour, is
in-vtterable: let us go further.

If some poor man, suddeinly starting out of a sweet and golden slumber,
should behold his house flaming about his ears, all his family destroyed in
their sleeps by the merciless fire; himself in the very midst of it,
woefully and like a mad man calling for help: would not the misery of such a
distressed soul, appear the greater, if the rich Usurer dwelling next door
to him, should not stir, (though he felt part of the danger) but suffer him
to perish, when the thrusting out of an arm might have saved him! O how many
thousands of wretched people have acted this poor man's part? how often has
the amazed husband waking, found the comfort of his bed lying breathless by
his side! his children at the same instant gasping for life! and his servant
mortally wounded at the heart by sickness! the distracted creature, beats at
deaths doors, exclaimes at windows, his cries are sharp enough to pierce
heaven, but on earth no ear is opend to receive them.

And in this manner do the tedious minutes of the night stretch out the sorrows
of ten thousand: It is now day, let us look forth and try what Consolation
rizes with the Sun: not any, not any: for before the Jewel of the morning be
fully set in silver, a hundred hungry graves stand gaping, and every one of
them (as at a breakfast) has swallowed down ten or eleven liueles carcases:
before dinner, in the same gulf are twice so many more devoured: and before
the sun takes his rest, those numbers are doubled: Threescore that not many
hours before had every one several lodgings very delicately furnished, are now
thrust altogether into one close room: a little little noisome room: not fully
ten foot square. Does not this strike coldly to ye heart of a worldly mizer? To
some, the very sound of deaths name, is in stead of a passing bell: what shall
become of such a coward, being told that the selfsame body of his, which now
is so pampered with superfluous fare, so perfumed and bathed in odoriferous
waters, and so gaily apparelled in variety of fashio^s, must one day be
thrown (like stinking carrion) into a rank and rotten grave; where his goodly
eyes, yt did once shoot forth such amorous glances, must be eaten out of his
head: his locks that hang wantonly dangling, trodden in dirt under foot: this
doubtless (like thunder) must needs strike him into the earth. But (wretched
man!) when thou shall see, and be assured (by tokens sent thee from heaven)
that to morrow thou must be fumbled into a Mucke-pit, and suffer thy body to be
bruisde and pressed with threescore dead men, lying slouenly upon thee, and thou
to be undermost of all! yea and perhaps half of that number were thine
enemies! (and see how they may be revenged, for the worms that breed out of
their putrefying carcasses, shall crawle in huge swarms from them, and quite
devour thee) what agonies will this strange news drive thee into? If thou art
in love with thy self, this cannot choose but possess thee with frenzy. But
thou art gotten safe (out of the civil city Calamity) to thy Parkes and
Palaces in the Country: lading thy Asses and thy Mules with thy gold, (thy
god), thy plate, and thy Jewels: and the fruits of thy womb thriftily growing
up but in one only son, (the young Landlord of all thy careful labors) him
also have thou rescued from the arrows of infection; Now is thy soul iocund,
and thy senses merry. But open thine eyes thou Fool! and behold that darling
of thine eye, (thy son) turnde suddeinly into a lump of clay; the hand of
pestilence has smote him even under thy wing: Now do thou rent thine hair,
blaspheme thy Creator, cursest thy creation, and basely descendest into
brutish and unmanly passions, threatening in despite of death and his Plague,
to maintain the memory of thy child, in the everlasting breast of Marble: a
tomb must now defend him from tempests: And for that purpose, the swetty hind
(that digs the rent he paies thee out of the entrails of the earth) he is sent
for, to convey forth that burden of thy sorrow: But note how thy pride is
disdained: that weather-beaten sunburned drudge, that not a month since fawnde
upon thy worship like a Spaniell, and like a bond-slaue, would have stoopt
lower than thy feet, does now stop his nose at thy presence, and is ready
to set his Mastiue as hye as thy throat, to drive thee from his door: all thy
gold and silver cannot hire one of those (whom before thou did scorn) to
carry the dead body to his last home: the Country round about thee, shun thee
as a Basiliske, and therefore to London (from whose arms thou cowardly fledst
away) poast upon poast must be galloping, to fetch from thence those that may
perform that Funeral office: But there are they so full of graue-matters of
their own, that they have no leisure to attend thine: does not this cut thy
very heart strings in sunder? If that do not, the shutting up of this Tragical
Act, I am sure will: for thou must be enforced with thine own hands, to wind
up (that blasted flower of youth) in the last linen, that ever he shall wear:
upon thine own shoulders, must thou bear part of him, thy amazed servant the
other: with thine own hands must thou dig his grave, (not in the Church, or
common place of burial, (thou have not favor (for all thy riches) to be so
happy,) but in thine Orcharde, or in the proud walks of thy Garden, wringing
thy palsie-shaken hands in stead of belles, (most miserable father) must thou
search him out a sepulcher.

My spirit grows faint with rowing in this Stygian Ferry, it can no longer
endure the transportation of souls in this doleful manner: let us therefore
shift a point of our Compass, and (since there is no remedy, but that we must
still be tossed up and down in this Mare mortuum,) hoist up all our sails, and
on the merry wings of a lustier wind seek to arrive on some prosperous
shore.

Imagine then that all this while, Death (like a Spanish Leagar, or rather like
stalking Tamberlaine) has pitched his tents, (being nothing but a heap of
winding sheets tackt together) in the sinfully-polluted Suburbs: the Plague
is Muster-maister and Marshall of the field: Burning Feauers, Boyles, Blaines,
and Carbuncles, the Leaders, Lieutenants, Serieants, and Corporalls: the maine
Army consisting (like Dunkirke) of a mingle-mangle, viz. dumpish Mourners,
merry Sextons, hungry Coffin-sellers, scrubbing Bearers, and nastie
Graue-makers: but indeed they are the Pioners of the Camp, that are employed
only (like Moles) in casting up of earth and digging of trenches; Fear and
Trembling (the two Catch-polles of Death) arrest every one: No parley will be
granted, no composition stood upon, But the Allarum is struck up, the Toxin
ringes out for life, and no voice heard but Tue, Tue, Kill, Kill; the little
Belles only (like small shot) do yet go off, and make no great work for
worms, a hundred or two lost in every skirmish, or so: but alas that's nothing:
yet by these desperate sallies, what by open setting upon them by day, and
secret Ambuscadoes by night, the skirts of London were pitifully pared off, by
little and little: which they within the gates perceiving, it was no boot to bid
them take their heels, for away they trudge thick and threefolde, some
riding, some on foot, some without boots, some in their slippers, by water,
by land, In shoales swom they westward, mary to Grauesend none went unless
they were driven, for whosoever landed there never came back again: Hacknies,
watermen and Wagons, were not so terribly employed many a year; so yt within a
short time, there was not a good horse in Smithfield, nor a Coach to be set eye
on. For after the world had once run upon the wheels of the Pest-cart, neither
coach nor caroach durst appear in his likeness.

Let us pursue these runnawaies no longer, but leave them in the unmerciful
hands of the Country-hard-harted Hobbinolls, (who are ordaind to be their
Tormentors,) and return back to the siege of the City; for the enemy taking
advantage by their flight, planted his ordinance against the walls; here the
Canons (like their great Bells) roard: the Plague took sore pains for a
breach, he laid about him cruelly, ere he could get it, but at length he and
his tiranous band entered: his purple colors were presently (with the sound of
Bow-bell in stead of a trompet) advanced, and joined to the Standard of the
City; he marched even through Cheapside, and the capital streets of Troynouant:
the only blot of dishonor that stuck upon this Inuader, being this, that he
plaide the tyrant, not the conqueror, making hauock of all, when he had all
lying at the foot of his mercy. Men, women and children dropped down before
him: houses were rifled, streets ransackt, beautiful maidens thrown on their
beds, and ravished by sickness, rich-mens Cofers broken open, and shared
amongst prodigal heirs and unthrifty servants, poor men used poorly, but
not pitifully: he did very much hurt, yet some say he did very much good.
Howsoever he behaved himself, this intelligence runs current, that every house
lookte like S. Bartholmewes. Hospital, and every street like Bucklersbury,
for poor Mithridatum and Dragon-water (being both of them in all the world,
scarce worth threepence) were boxt in every corner, and yet were both drunk
every hour at other men's cost. Lazarus lay groaning at every man's door, mary
no Dives was within to send him a crum, (for all your Gold-finches were fled to
the woods) nor a dog left to lick up his sores, for they (like Curres) were
knocked down, like Oxen, and fell thicker then Acornes.

I am amazed to remember what dead Marches were made of three thousand trooping
together; husbands, wives and children, being lead as ordinarily to one grave,
as if they had gone to one bed. And those that could shift for a time, and
shrink their heads out of the collar (as many did) yet went they (most
bitterly) miching and muffled up and down with Rue and Wormwood stuffed into
their ears and nosthrils, looking like so many Bores heads stuck with branches
of Rosemary, to be served in for Brawne at Christmas.

This was a rare world for the Church, who had wont to complain for want of
living, and now had more living thrust upon her, than she knew how to bestow:
to have been Clarke now to a parish Clarke, was better than to serve some
foolish Justice of Peace, or than the year before to have had a Benefice.
Sextons gave out, if they might (as they hoped) continue these doings but a
tweluemoneth longer, they and their posterity would all ride upon
footecloathes to the end of the world. Amongst which worme-eaten generation,
the three bald Sextons of limping Saint Gyles, Saint Sepulchers, and Saint
Olaues, ruled the roaste more hotly, than ever did the Triumuiri of Rome.
Iehochanan, Symeon, and Eleazar, never kept such a plaguey coil in Jerusalem
among the hunger-starued Jews, as these three Sharkers did in their Parishes
among naked Christians. Cursed they were I am sure by some to the pit of
hell, for tearing money out of their throats, that had not a cross in their
purses. But alas! they must have it, it is their fee, and therefore give the
devil his due: Only Hearbe-wiues and Gardeners (that never prayed before,
unless it were for rain or fair weather) were now day and night upon their
maribones, that God would bless the labors of these molecatchers, because they
suck sweetness by this; for the price of flowers, herbs and garlands, rose
wonderfully, in so much that Rosemary which had wont to be sold for 12. pence
an armefull, went now for six shillings a handful.

A fourth sharer likewise (of these winding-sheete weauers) deserves to have my
pen give his lips a Jews Letter, but because he worships the Bakers good
Lord and Master, charitable S. Clement (whereas none of the other three ever
had to do with any Saint) he shall escape the better: only let him take heed,
that having all this year buried his prayers in the bellies of Fat-ones, and
plump Capon-eaters, (for no worse meat would down this Sly-foxes stomach) let
him I say take heed, least (his flesh now falling away) his carcas be not
plagude with lean ones, of who^ (whilst the bill of Lord have mercy upon us,
was to be denied in no place) it was death for him to hear.

In this pitiful (or rather pitiless) perplexity stood London, forsaken
like a Lover, forlorn like a widow, and disarmde of all comfort: disarmde I
may well say, for five Rapiers were not stirring all this time, and those that
were worn had never bin seen, if any money could have been lent upon them, so
hungry is this Estridge disease, that it will devour even Iron: let us
therefore with bag and baggage march away from this dangerous sore City, and
visit those that are fled into the Country. But alas! Decidis in Scyllam, you
are pepperd if you visit them, for they are visited already: the broad Arrow
of Death, flies there up and down, as swiftly as it does here: they that rode
on the lustiest geldings could not out-gallop the Plague, It ouer-tooke them,
and ouerturnd them too, horse and foot.

You whom the arrows of pestilence have reached at eighteen and twenty score
(tho you stood far enough as you thought from the mark) you that sickning in
the hie way, would have been glad of a bed in an Hospital, and dying in the
open fields, have been buried like dogs, how much better had it bin for you,
to have lain fuller of byles and plague-sores than ever did Job, so you might
in that extremity have received both bodily and spiritual comfort, which there
was denied you? For those misbeleeuing Pagans, the plough-driuers, those worse
then Infidels, that (like their Swine never look up so high as heaven: when
Citizens boorded them they wrung their hands, and wished rather they had fallen
into the hands of Spaniards: for the sight of a flat-cap was more dreadful to
a Lob, than the discharging of a Caliuer: a treble-ruffe (being but once namd
the Merchants set) had power to cast a whole household into a cold sweat. If
one new suite of Sackcloth had bin but known to have come out of Burchin-lane
(being the common Wardrope for all their Clowneships) it had bin enough to make
a Market town give up the ghost. A Crow that had bin seen in a sunshine
day, standing on the top of Powles would have bin better than a Beacon on fire,
to have raizd all the towns within ten miles of London, for the keeping her
out.

Never let any man ask me what became of our Physicians in this Massacre, they
hid their Synodicall heads as well as the prowdest: and I cannot blame them, for
their Phlebotomies, Losinges, and Electuaries, with their Diacatholicons,
Diacodions, Amulets, and Antidotes, had not so much strength to hold life and
soul together, as a pot of Pinders Ale and a Nutmeg: their drugs turned to
dirt, their simples were simple things: Galen could do no more good, than Sir
Giles Goosecap: Hipocrates, Auicen, Paracelsus, Rasis, Fernelius, with all
their succeeding rabble of Doctors and Water-casters, were at their wits end,
or I think rather at the worlds end, for not one of them durst peep abroad;
or if any one did take upon him to play the ventrous Knight, the Plague put him
to his Nonplus; in such strange, and such changeable shapes did this
Cameleon-like sickness appear, that they could not (with all the cunning in
their budgets) make pursenets to take him napping.

Only a band of Desper-vewes, some few Empiricall mad-caps (for they could
never be worth velvet caps) turned themselves into Bees (or more properly into
Drones) and went humming up and down, with hony-brags in their mouths,
sucking the sweetenes of Silver, (and now and then of Aurum Potabile) out of
the poison of Blaines and Carbuncles: and these jolly Mountibanks clapped up
their bills upon every post (like a Fencers Challenge) threatening to canuas the
Plague, and to fight with him at all his own several weapons: I know not how
they sped, but some they sped I am sure, for I have heard them band for the
heavens, because they sent those thither, that were wished to tarry longer upon
earth.

I could in this place make your cheeks look pale, and your hearts shake,
with telling how some have had 18. sores at one time running upon them, others
10. and 12. many 4. and 5. and how those that have bin four times wounded by
this years infection, have dyed of the last wound, whilst others (that were
hurt as often) go up and down now with sounder limbs, then many that come
out of France, and the Netherlands. And descending from these, I could draw
forth a Catalogue of many poor wretches, that in fields, in ditches, in common
Cages, and under stalls (being either thrust by cruel masters out of doors,
or wanting all worldly succor but the common benefit of earth and air) have
most miserably perished. But to Chronicle these would weary a second Fabian.

We will therefore play the Soldiers, who at the end of any notable battle,
with a kind of sad delight rehearse the memorable acts of their friends that
lie mangled before them: some showing how bravely they gave the onset: some,
how politickly they retirde: others, how manfully they gave and received
wounds: a fourth steps up and glories how valiantly he lost an arm: all of
them making (by this means) the remembrance even of tragical and mischievous
events very delectable. Let us strive to do so, discoursing (as it were at the
end of this mortal siege of the Plague) of the several most worthy
accidents, and strange birthes which this pestiferous year has brought forth:
some of them yielding Comicall and ridiculous stuff, others lamentable: a
third kind upholding rather admiration, then laughter or pity.

As first, to relish the pallat of lickerish expectation, and withal to give
an Item how sudden a stabber this ruffianly swaggerer (Death) is, You must
believe, that amongst all the weary number of those that (on their bare-feete)
have trauaild (in this long and heavy vacation) to the Holy Land, one (whose
name I could for need bestow upon you) but that I know you have no need of it,
the many want a good name) lying in that common Inn of sickmen, his bed, and
seeing the black and blew stripes of the plague sticking on his flesh, which he
received as tokens (from heaven) that he was presently to go dwell in the
upper world, most earnestly requested, and in a manner coniured his friend
(who came to enterchange a last farewell) that he would see him go handsomely
attirde into the wild Irish country of worms, and for that purpose to bestow
a Coffin upon him: his friend loving him (not because he was poor (yet he was
poor) but because he was a scholar: Alack that the West Indies stand so far
from Universities! and that a mind richly apparelled should have a threadbare
body!) made faithful promise to him, that he should be naild up, he would
board him, and for that purpose went instantly to one of the newfound trade
of Coffin-cutters, bespake one, and (like the Surueyor of deaths buildings)
gave direction how this little Tenement should be framed, paying all the rent
for it before hand. But note upon what slippery ground life goes! little did he
think to dwell in that room himself which he had taken for his friend: yet
it seemed the common law of mortality had so decreede, for he was called into
the cold company of his grave neighbors an hour before his infected friend,
and had a long lease (even till doomes day) in the same lodging, which in the
strength of health he went to prepare for the other. What credit therefore is
to be given to breath, which like a harlot will run away with every minute.
How nimble is Sickness, and what skill has he in all the weapons he plays
withal? The greatest cutter that takes up the Mediterranean I Will in Powles for
his Gallery to walk in, cannot ward off his blows. He Is the best Fencer in
the world: Vincentio Sauiolo is no body to him: He has his Mandrittaes,
Imbrocataes, Stramazones, and Stoccataes at's fingers ends: heel make you give
him ground, tho you were never worth foot of land, and beat you out of breath,
though Aeolus himself played upon your windpipe.

To witness which, I will call forth a Dutchman (yet now he is past calling for,
h'as lost his hearing, for his ears by this time are eaten off with worms)
who (though he dwelt in Bedlem) was not mad, yet the very looks of the Plague
(which indeed are terrible) put him almost out of his wits, for when the
snares of this cunning hunter (the Pestilence) were but newly laid, and yet
laid (as my Dutchman smelt it out well enough) to entrap poor men's lives that
meant him no hurt, away sneakes my clipper of the kings english, and (because
Musket Shot should not reach him) to the Low Countries (that are built upon
butter-firkins, and holland cheese) sails this plaguie fugitive, but death,
(who has more authority there than all the seven Electors, and to show him
that there were other Low Countries besides his own) takes a little Frokin
(one of my Dutch runnawayes children) and sends her packing, into those
Netherlands she departed: O how pitifully looked my Burgomaister, when he
understood that the sickness could swim! It was an easy matter to escape the
Dunkirks, but Deaths Gallyes made out after him swifter than the great Turks.
Which he perceiving, made no more adoo, but drunk to the States five or six
healths (because he would be sure to live well) and back again comes he, to
try the strength of English Beer: his old Randeuous of madmen was the place
of meeting, where he was no sooner arrived, but the Plague had him by the back,
and arrested him upon an Exeat Regnum, for running to the enemy, so that for
the mad tricks he played to cosen our english worms of his Dutch carcas (which
had bin fatted here) sickness and death clapped him up in Bedlem the second time,
and there he lies, and there he shall lie till he rot before i will meble any more
with him.

But being gotten out of Bedlem, let us make a journey to Bristow, taking an
honest known Citizen along with us, who with other company travailing thither
(only for fear the air of London should conspire to poison him) and setting
up his rest not to hear the sound of Bow-bell till next Christmas, was
notwithstanding in the hye way singled out from his company, and set upon by
the Plague, who bid him stand, and deliver his life. The rest at that word
shifted for themselves, and went on, he (amazed to see his friends fly, and
being not able to defend himself, for who can defend himself meeting such an
enemy?) yielded, and being but about forty miles from London, used all the
slights he could to get loose out of the hands of death, and so to hide
himself in his own house, whereupon, he called for help at the same Inn, where
not long before he and his fellow-pilgrimes obtained for their money (mary yet
with more prayers then a beggar makes in three Terms) to stand and drink
some thirty foot from the door. To this house of tippling Iniquity he
repaires again, coniuring the Lares or walking Sprites in it, if they were
Christians (that if was well put in) and in the name of God, to succor and
rescue him to their power out of the hands of infection, which now assaulted
his body: the Devil would have bin afraid of this coniuration, but they were
not, yet afraid they were it seemde, for presently the doors had their wodden
ribs crushed in pieces, by being beaten together: the casements were shut more
close then an Usurers greasy velvet pouch: the drawing windows were hanged
drawn and quartered: not a creuis but was stopped, not a mouse-hole left open,
for all the holes in the house were most wickedlie dambd up: mine Host and
Hostess ran over one another into the backside, the maids into the Orchard,
quiuering and quaking, and ready to hang themselves on the innocent Plomtrees,
(for hanging to them would not be so sore a death as the Plague, and to dye
maids too! Oh horible!) As for the Tapster, he fled into the Celler, rapping
out five or six plain Country oaths that he would drown himself in a most
villainous Stand of Ale, if the sick Londoner stood at the door any longer. But
stand there he must, for to go away (well) he cannot, but continues knocking
and calling in a faint voice, which in their ears sounded as if some staring
ghost in a Tragedy had exclaimd upon Rhadamanth: he might knock till his hands
akt, and call till his heart akt, for they were in a worse pickle within, than
he was without: he being in a good way to go to heaven, they being so frighted,
that they scarce knew whereabout heaven stood, only they all cried out, Lord
have mercy upon us, yet Lord have mercy upon us was the only thing they
feared. The doleful Catastrophe of all is, a bed could not be had for all
Babylon: not a cup of drink, no, nor cold water be gotten, though it had bin
for Alexander the great: if a draught of Aqua vitae might have saved his soul,
the town denied to do God that good service.

What misery continues ever? The poor man standing thus at deaths door, and
looking every minute when he should be let in, behold, another Londoner, that
had likewise bin in the Frigida Zona of the country, and was returning (like
Aeneas out of hell) to the heaven of his own home, makes a stand at this
sight, to play the Physician, and seeing by the complexion of his patient that
he was sick at heart, applies to his soul the best medicines that his
comforting speech could make, for there dwelt no Poticary near enough to help
his body. Being therefore driven out of all other shifts, he leads him into a
field (a bundle of Straw, which with much ado he bought for money, serving in
stead of a pillow.) But the destinies hearing the diseased party complain and
take on, because he lay upon a field-bed, when before he would have bin glad of
a mattris, for very spite cut the thread of his life, the cruelty of which
deed, made the other (that played Charities part) at his wits end, because he
knew not where to purchase ten foot of ground for his grave: the Church nor
Churchyard would let none of their lands: Master Vicar was struck dumb, and
could not give the dead a good word, neither Clarke nor Sexton could be hirde
to execute their office; no, they themselves would first be executed: so that
he that never handled Shouell before, got his implements about him, ripd up
the belly of the earth, and made it like a grave, stripped the cold carcas, bound
his shirt about his feet, pulled a linen nightcap over his eyes, and so laid
him in the rotten bed of the earth, covering him with clothes cut out of the
same piece; and learning by his last words his name and habitation, this sad
trauailer arriues at London, delivering to the amazed widow and children in
stead of a father and a husband, only the outside of him, his apparel. But by
the way note one thing, the bringer of these heavy tidings (as if he had lived
long enough when so excellent a work of piety and pity was by him finished)
the very next day after his coming home, departed out of this world, to
receive his reward in the Spiritual court of heaven.

It is plain therefore by the evidence of these two witnesses, that death like
a thief sets upon men in the hye way, dogs them into their own houses,
breaks into their bed-chambers by night, assaults them by day, and yet no law
can take hold of him: he deuoures man and wife: offers violence to their fair
daughters: kills their youthful sons, and deceiues them of their servants:
yea, so full of treachery is he grown (since this Plague took his part) that
no Lovers dare trust him, nor by their good wills would come near him, for he
works their downfall, even when their delights are at the highest.

Too ripe a proof have we of this, in a pair of Lovers; the maid was in the
pride of fresh blood and bewty: she was that which to be now is a wonder, young
and yet chaste: the gifts of her mind were great, yet those which fortune
bestowed upon her (as being well descended) were not much inferior: On this
lovely creature did a young man so steadfastly fix his eye, that her looks
kindled in his bosom a desire, whose flames burnt the more brightlie, because
they were fed with sweet and modest thoughts: Hymen was the God to whom he
prayed day and night that he might mary her: his prayers were receiud, and at
length (after many te^pests of her denial and the frowns of kinsfolk) the
element grew clear, and he saw the happy landing-place, where he had long
sought to ariue: the prize of her youth was made his own, and the solemn day
appointed when it should be delivered to him. Glad of which blessedness (for to
a lover it is a blessedness) he wrought by all the possible art he could use to
shorten the expected hour, and bring it nearer: for whether he feared the
interception of parents, or that his own soul (with excess of joy) was
drowned in strange passions, he would often, with sighs mingled with kisses,
and kisses half sinking in tears, propheticallie tell her, that sure he
should never live to enjoy her: To discredit which opinion of his, behold, the
Sun has made have and wakened the bridal morning. Now does he call his heart
traitor, that did so falsely conspire against him: lively blood leapes into his
cheeks: he is got up, and gaily attirde to play the Bridegroom; She likewise
does as cunningly turn her self into a Bride; kindred and friends are met
together; Sops and Muscadine run sweating up and down till they drop again,
to comfort their hearts, and because so many Coffins pestred London-Churches,
that there was no room left for weddings, Coaches are provided, and away rides
all the train into the Country. On a Monday morning are these lusty lovers
on their journey, and before noone are they alighted, entering (in stead of an
Inn) for more State into a Church, where they no sooner appeared, but the
Priest fell to his business, the holy knot was a tying, but he that should
fasten it, coming to this, In sickness and in health, there he stopped, for
suddenly the bride took hold of, in sickness, for in health all that stood by
were in fear she should never be kept. The mayden-blush into which her cheeks
were lately dyed, now began to loose color: her voice (like a coward) would
have shrunk away, but that her Lover reaching her a hand, which he brought
thither to give her, (for he was not yet made a full Husband) did with that
touch somewhat revive her: on went they again so far, till they met with For
better, for worse, there was she worse then before, and had not the holy
Officer made haste, the ground on which she stood to be married might easily
have bin broken up for her burial. All Ceremonies being finished, she was lead
between two, not like a Bride, but like a Coarse, to her bed: That; must now
be the table, on which the wedding dinner is to be served up (being at this
time nothing, but tears and sighs and lamentation) and Death is chief
waiter, yet at length her weak heart wrestling with the pangs, gave them a
fall, so that up she stood again, and in the fatal funeral Coach that
carried her forth, was she brought back (as upon a Beer) to the City: but see
the malice of her enemy that had her in chase, upon the Wedsday following being
overtaken, was her life overcome, Death rudely lay with her, and spoild her of
a maydenhead in spite of her husband. Oh the sorrow that did round beset him!
now was his divination true, she was a wife, yet continued a maid: he was a
husband and a widower, yet never knew his wife: she was his own, yet he had
her not: she had him, yet never enjoyed him: here is a strange alteration, for
the Rosemary that was washed in sweet water to set out the Bridal, is now wet
in tears to furnish her burial: the Music that was heard to sound forth
dances cannot now be heard for the ringing of bells: all the comfort that
happened to either side being this, that he lost her, before she had time to be
an ill wife, and she let him, ere he was able to be a bad husband.

Better fortune had this Bride to fall into the hands of the Plague, then one
other of that frail female sex, (whose picture is next to be drawn) had to
escape out of them. An honest Cobbler (if at least Cobblers can be honest, that
live altogether amongst wicked soales) had a wife, who in the time of health
treading her shoe often awry, determined in the agony of a sickness (which
this year had a saying to her) to fall to mending as well as her husband did.
The bed that she lay upon (being as she thought, or rather feared) the last
bed that ever should bear her, (for many other beds had borne her you must
remember) and ye worm of sin tickling her conscience, up she calls her
very innocent and simple husband, out of his virtuous shop, where like Justice
he sat distributing among the poor, to some, halfe-penny pieces, penny-pieces
to some, and two-penny pieces to others, so long as they would last; his
provident care being always, that every man and woman should go upright. To
the beds side of his plaguey wife approaches Mounsieur Cobbler, to understand
what deadly news she had to tell him, and the rest of his kind neighbors
that there were assembled: Such thick tears, standing in both the gutters of
his eyes, to see his beloved lie in such a pickle, that in their salt water,
all his utterance was drownde: which she perceiving, wept as fast as he: But by
the warm counsel which sat about the bed, the shewer ceast; she wiping her
cheeks with the corner of one of the sheets, and he, his sullyed face, with
his lothren Apron. At last, two or three sighs (like a Chorus to the Tragedy
ensuing) stepping out first, wringing her hands (which gave the better Action)
she told the pitiful Actaeon her husband, that she had often done him wrong:
he only shook his head at this, and cried humh! which humh, she taking as
the watchword of his true patience, vnraueld the bottom of her frailty at
length, and concluded, that with such a man (and named him, but I hope you
would not have me follow her steps and name him too) she practiced the
universal and common Art of grafting, and that upon her good man's head, they
two had planted a monstrous pair of invisible horns: At the sound of the
Horns, my Cobbler started up like a march Hare, and began to look wild: his
Awle never ran through the sides of a boot, as that word did through his
heart: but being a polliticke Cobbler, and remembering what piece of work he was
to vnder-laie, stroking his beard (like some grave Head-borough of the Parish)
and giving a nod, as who should say go on, bad her go on indeed, clapping to
her sore soul, this general salve, that All are sinners, and we must forgive,
etc. For he hoped by such wholesome Physic, (as Shoe-makers wax being laid
to a Byle) to draw out all the corruption of her secret villainies. She good
heart being tickled under the gilles, with the finger of these kind speeches,
turns up the white of her eye, and fetches out an other. Another (O thou that
art trained up in nothing but to handle pieces) Another has dischargde his
Artillery against thy Castle of Fortification: here was passion predominant:
Vulcan struck the Cobblers ghost (for he was now no Cobbler) so hard upon his
breast, that he cried oh! his neighbors taking pity to see what terrible
stitches pulde him, rubde his swelling temples with the juice of patience,
which (by virtue of the blackish sweat that stood reeking on his brows, and
had made them supple) entered very easily into his now-parlous-vnderstanding
scull: So that he left winching, and sat quiet as a Lamb, falling to his old
vomit of council, which he had cast up before, and swearing (because he was in
strong hope, this shoe, should wring him no more) to seal her a general
acquittance, pricked forward with this gentle spur, her tongue mends his pace,
so that in her confession she ouertooke others, whose boots had been set all
night on the Cobblers Last, bestowing upon him the Poesy of their names, the
time, and place, to the intent it might be put into his next wives
wedding-ring. And although she had made all these blots in his tables, yet the
bearing of one man false (whom she had not yet discovered) stuck more in her
stomach than all the rest. O valiant Cobbler (cries out one of the Auditors) how
art thou set upon? how art thou tempted? happy art thou, that thou art not in
thy shop, for in stead of cutting out pieces of leather, thou would doubtless
now pare away thy heart: for I see, and so do all thy neighbors hear (thy
wives ghostly fathers) see that a small matter would now make thee turn Turk, and
to meddle with no more patches: but to live within the compass of thy wit: lift
not up thy collar: be not horn mad: thank heaven yt the murder is reueald:
Study thou Baltazars part in Ieronimo, for thou have more cause (tho less
reason) than he, to be glad and sad.

Well, I see thou art worthy to have patient Griseld to thy wife, for thou
bear more than she: thou shewst thy self to be a right Cobbler and no
Sowter, that can thus cleanly clout up ye broken and seamerent sides of thy
affection. With this learned oration the Cobbler was tutord: laid his finger on
his mouth, and cried Paueos palabros: he had sealed her pardon, and therefore
bid her not fear: hereupon she named the malefactor (I could name him too, but
that he shall live to give more Cobblers heads the bastinado.) And told, that on
such a night when he supt there (for a Lord may sup with a Cobbler, that has a
pretty wench to his wife) when the cloth (O treacherous linen!) was taken up,
and Menelaus had for a parting blow, given the other his fist; down she
lights (this half-sharer) opening the wicket, but not shutting him out of the
wicket; but conueys him into a by-roome (being the wardrob of old shoes and
leather) from whence (the Vnicorne-cobler (that dreamed of no such spirits)
being ouer-head and ears in sleep; his snorting giving the sign that he was
cock-sure) softly out-steales Sir Paris, and to Hellenaes teeth proved himself
a true Trojan.

This was the cream of her confession, which being skimd off from the stomach
of her conscience, she looked every minute to go thither, where she should
be far enough out of the Cobblers reach. But the Fates laying their heads
together, sent a Repriue, the Plague that before meant to pepper her, by little
and little left her company: which news being blown abroad, Oh lamentable!
never did the old buskind Tragedy begin till now: for the wives of those
husbands, with whom she had plaide at fast and loose, came with nails sharpened
for the nonce like cattes, and tongues forkedly cut like the stings of Addars,
first to scratch out false Cressidaes eyes, and then (which was worse) to
woorry her to death with scolding.

But the matter was took up in a Tavern; the case was altered, and brought to
a new reckoning (marry the blood of the Burdeux Grape was first shead about it)
but in the end, all anger on every side was powered into a pottle-pot, and there
burnt to death. Now whether this Recantation was true, or whether the steeme of
infection, fuming up (like wine) into her brains, made her talk thus idly,
I leave it to the Jury.

And whilst they are canuasing her case, let us see what doings the Sexton of
Stepny has: whose warehouses being all full of dead commodities, saving one:
that one he left open a whole night (yet was it half full too) knowing yt
thieves this year were too honest to break into such Cellers. Besides those
that were left there, had such plaguy-pates, that none durst meddle with them
for their lives. About twelve of the clock at midnight, when spirits walk,
and not a Mouse dare stir, because Cattes go a Catter-walling: Sin, that
all day durst not show his head, came reeling out of an Alehouse in the shape
of a drunkard: who no sooner smelt the wind, but he thought the ground under
him danced the Canaries: houses seemed to turn on the toe, and all things went
round: in so much that his legs drew a pair of Indentures, between his
body and the earth, the principal covenant being, that he for his part would
stand to nothing what ever he saw: every tree that came in his way, did he
iustle, and yet challendge it the next day to fight with him. If he had clipped
but a quarter so much of the Kings silver, as he did of the Kings English, his
carkas had long ere this, been carrion for Crows. But he lived by gaming, and
had excellent casting, yet seldom won, for he drew reasonable good hands, but
had very bad feet, that were not able to carry it away. This setter up of
malt-men, being troubled with the staggers, fell into the self-same grave,
which stood gaping wide open for a breakfast next morning, and imagining (when
he was in) that he had stumbled into his own house, and that all his
bedfellowes (as they were indeed) were in their dead sleep, he, (never
complaining of cold, nor calling for more sheet) soundly takes a nap till he
snorts again: In the morning, the Sexton comes plodding along, and casting
upon his fingers ends what he hopes the dead pay of that day will come too, by
that that which he received the day before, (for Sextons now had better doings
than either Tauernes or bawdy-houses,): In that silver contemplation, shrugging
his shoulders together, he steps ere he be aware on the brimmes of that pit,
into which this worshipper of Bacchus was fallen, where finding some dead men's
bones, and a scull or two, that lay scattered here and there; before he lookte
into this Coffer of worms, those he takes up, and flinges them in: one of the
sculls battered the sconce of the sleeper, whilst the bones plaide with his
nose; whose blows waking his mustie worship, the first word that he cast up,
was an oath, and thinking the Cannes had flyen about, cried zoundes, what do
you mean to crack my mazer? the Sexton smelling a voice, (fear being
stronger than his heart) believed verily, some of the coarses spoke to him,
upon which, feeling himself in a cold sweat, took his heels, whilst the
Goblin scrambled up and ran after him: But it appears the Sexton had the
lighter foot, for he ran so fast, that he ran out of his wits, which
being left behind him, he dyed in a short time after, because he was not able
to live without them.

A meryer bargain than the poor Sextons did a Tincker meet with all in a
Country Town; through which a Citizen of London being driven (to keep
himself under the leeshore in this tempestuous contagion) and casting up his
eye for some harbor, spied a bush at the end of a poole, (the ancient badge
of a Country Alehouse:) Into which as good luck was, (without any resistance
of the Barbarians, that all this year used to keep such landing places)
veiling his Bonnet, he strucks in. The Host had been a mad Greek, (mary he
could now speak nothing but English,) a goodly fat Burger he was, with a belly
Arching out like a Beere-barrell, which made his legs (that were thick and
short like two piles driven under London Bridge) to stradle half as wide as
the top of Powles, which upon my knowledge has been burnt twice or thrice. A
leatherne pouche hung at his side, that opened and shut with a Snap hance, and
was indeed a flaske for gunpowder when King Henry went to Bulloigne. An
Antiquary might have picked rare matter out of his Nose, but that it was
worme-eaten (yet that proved it to be an an ancient Nose:) In some corners of
it, there were bluish holes, that shonne like shelles of mother of Pearl, and
to do his Nose right, Pearls had been gathered out of them: other were richly
garnisht with Rubies, Chrisolites and Carbunckles, which glistered so oriently
that the Hamburgers, offered I know not how many Dollars, for his company in
an East-Indian voyage, to have stood a nights in the Poope of their Admiral,
only to save the charges of candles. In conclusion, he was an Host to be led
before an Emperor, and though he were one of the greatest men in all the
shire, his bigness made him not proud, but he humbled himself to speak the
base language of a Tapster, and upon the Londoners first arrival, cried
welcome, a cloth for this Gentleman: the Linen was spread and furnished
presently with a new Cake and a Can, the Room voided, and the Guest left
(like a French Lord) attended by no body: who drinking half a Can (in
conceit) to the health of his best friend the City, which lay extreme sick,
and had never more need of health, I know not what qualmes came over his
stomach, but immediately he fell down without uttering any more words, and
never rose again.

Anon (as it was his fashion) enters my puffing Host, to relieve with a fresh
supply out of his Celler,) the shrinking Can, if he perceived it stood in
danger to be overthrown. But seeing the chief Leader dropped at his feet, and
imagining at first he was but wounded a little in the head, held up his gowty
golles and blessed himself, that a Londoner (who had wont to be the most valiant
rob pottes) should now be struck down only with two hoopes: and thereupon
iogd him, fombling out these comfortable words of a soldier, If thou art a man
stand a thy legs: he stird not for all this: whereupon the Maids being
raisde (as it had been with a hue and cry) came hobling into the Room, like a
flock of Geese, and having upon search of the body given up this verdict,
that the man was dead, and murdered by the Plague; Oh daggers to all their
hearts that heard it! Away trudge the wenches, and one of them having had a
freckled face all her life time, was persuaded presently that now they were the
tokens, and had liked to have turned up her heels upon it: My gorbelly Host,
that in many a year could not without grunting, crawle over a threshold but
two foot broad, leapte half a yard from the coarse (It was measured by a
Carpenters rule) as nimbly, as if his guts had been taken out by the hangman:
out of the house he wallowed presently, being followed with two or three
doozen of napkins to dry up the larde, that ran so fast down his heels,
that all the way he went, was more greazie than a kitchin-stuffe-wifes basket:
you would have sworn, it had been a barrel of Pitch on fire, if you had
looked upon him, for such a smoakie cloud (by reason of his own fattie hot
steeme) compassed him round, that but for his voice, he had quite been lost in
that stinking mist: hanged himself he had without all question (in this
pitiful taking) but that he feared the weight of his intolerable paunch,
would have burst the Roape, and so he should be put to a double death. At
length the Town was raised, the Country came down upon him, and yet not
upon him neither, for after they understood the Tragedy, every man gave
ground, knowing my pursie Ale-cunner could not follow them: what is to be done
in this strange Allarum? The whole Village is in danger to lie at the mercy
of God, and shall be bound to curse none, but him for it: they should do well
therefore, to set fire on his house, before the Plague escape out of it, least
it forage higher into the Country, and knock them down, man, woman, and
child, like Oxen, whose blood (they all swear) shall be required at his
hands. At these speeches my tenderhearted Host, fell down on his maribones,
meaning indeed to entreat his audience to be good to him; but they fearing he
had been pepperd too, as well as the Londoner, tumbled one over another, and
were ready to break their necks for haste to be gone: yet some of them
(being more valiant then the rest, because they heard him roar out for some
help) very desperately stepped back, and with rakes and pitch-forkes lifted
the gulch from the ground. Co^cluding (after they had laid their hogsheads
together, to draw out some holesom counsel) that whosoever would venture upon
the dead man and bury him, should have forty shillings (out of the common
towne-purse, though it would be a great cut to it) with the love of the
Churchwardens and Sidemen, during the term of life. This was proclaimd, but
none durst appear to undertake the dreadful execution: they loved money well,
mary the plague hanging over any man's head that should meddle with it in that
sort, they all vowde to dye beggars before it should be Chronicled they killed
themselves for forty shillings: and in that brave resolution, every one with
bag and baggage marched home, barricadoing their doors and windows with
firbushes, fern, and bundles of straw to keep out the pestilence at the
staves end.

At last a Tinker came sounding through the town, mine Hosts house being the
ancient watring place where he did use to cast Anchor. You must understand he
was none of those base rascally Tinkers, that with a bandog and a drab at their
tails, and a pike-staffe on their necks, will take a purse sooner then stop a
kettle: No, this was a devout Tinker, he did honor God Pan: a Musical Tinker,
that upon his kettle-drum could play any country dance you called for, and upon
Hollidayes had earnd money by it, when no Fiddler could be heard of. He was
only feared when he stalkt through some towns where Bees were, for he struck
so sweetly on the bottom of his copper instrument, that he would empty whole
Hiues, and lead the swarms after him only by the sound.

This excellent egregious Tinker calls for his draught (being a double Iug) it
was filled for him, but before it came to his nose, the lamentable tale of the
Londoner was told, the Chamber-dore (where he lay) being thrust open with a
long pole, (because none durst touch it with their hands) and the Tinker bidden
(if he had the heart) to go in and see if he knew him. The Tinker being not to
learn what virtue the medicine had which he held at his lips, powered it
down his throat merrily, and crying trillill, he feared no plagues. In he
stepped, tossing the dead body too and fro, and was sorry he knew him not: Mine
Host that with grief began to fall away villanously, looking very rufully on
the Tinker, and thinking him a fit instrument to be played upon, offered a crown
out of his own purse, if he would bury the party. A crown was a shrewd
temptation to a Tinker; many a hole might he stop, before he could pick a
crown of it, yet being a subtle Tinker (and to make all Sextons pray for him,
because he would raise their fees) an Angel he wanted to be his guide, and
under ten shillings (by his ten bones) he would not put his finger in the fire.
The whole parish had warning of this presently, thirty shillings was saved by
the bargain, and the town likely to be saved too, therefore ten shillings was
leuyed out of hand, put into a rag, which was tied to the end of a long pole
and delivered (in sight of all the parish, who stood aloof stopping their
noses) by the Headboroughs own self in proper person, to the Tinker, who with
one hand received the money, and with the other struck the board, crying hey, a
fresh double pot. Which armor of proof being fitted to his body, up he hoists
the Londoner on his back (like a Schoole-boy) a Shouell and Pick-axe standing
ready for him: And thus furnished, into a field some good distance from the
town he bears his deadly load, and there throws it down, falling roundly
to his tools, upon which the strong beer having set an edge, they quickly cut
out a lodging in the earth for the Citizen. But the Tinker knowing that worms
needed no apparel, saving only sheets, stripped him stark naked, but first
diu'de nimbly into his pocket, to see what linings they had, assuring himself,
that a Londoner would not wander so far without silver: his hopes were of the
right stamp, for from one of his pockets he drew a letherne bag, with seven
pounds in it: this music made the Tinkers heart dance, he quickly tumbled his
man into the grave, hid him over head and ears in dust, bound up his clothes
in a bundle, and carrying that at the end of his staff on his shoulder, with
the purse of seven pounds in his hand, back again comes he through the town,
crying alowd, Have ye any more Londoners to bury, hey down a down dery, have
ye any more Londoners to bury: the Hobbinolls running away from him, as if he
had bin the dead citizens ghost, and he marching away from them in all the have
he could, with that song still in his mouth.

You see therefore how dreadful a fellow Death is, making fools even of
wisemen, and cowards of the most valiant; yea, in such a base slavery has it
bound men's senses, that they have no power to look higher than their own
roofes, but seem by their turkish and barbarous actions to believe that there
is no felicity after this life, and that (like beasts) their souls shall
perish with their bodies. How many upon sight only of a Letter (sent from
London) have started back, and durst have laid their salvation upon it, that
the plague might be folded in that empty paper, believing verily, that the
arm of Omnipotence could never reach them, unless it were with some weapon
drawn out of the infected City: in so much that even the Western Pugs
receiving money here, have tied it in a bag at the end of their barge, and so
trailed it through the Thames, least pleague sores sticking upon shillings,
they should be naild up for counterfets when they were brought home.

More ventrous than those block-heads was a certain Justice of peace, to whose
gate being shot (for you must know that now there is no open house kept) a
company of wild fellows being lead for robbing an orchyard, the
stout-hearted Constable rapt most courageously, and would have about with none,
but the Justice himself, who at last appeard in his likeness above at a window,
inquiring why they summond a parlee. It was delivered why: the case was opened
to his examining wisdom, and that the evil doers were only Londoners: at the
name of Londoners, the Justice clapping his hand on his breast (as who should
say, Lord have mercy upon us) started back, and being wise enough to save one,
held his nose hard between his forefinger and his thumb, and speaking in that
wise (like the fellow that described the villainous motion of Julius Caesar and
the Duke of Guize, who (as he gave it out) fought a combat together) pulling
the casement close to him, cried out in that quaile-pipe voice, that if they
were Londoners, away with them to Limbo: take only their names: they were sore
fellows, and he would deal with them when time should serve: meaning, when
the plague and they should not be so great together, and so they departed; the
very name of Londoners being worse then ten whetstones to sharpen the sword of
Justice against them.

I could fill a large volume, and call it the second part of the hundred merry
tales, only with such ridiculous stuff as this of the Justice, but Dii
meliora, I have better matters to set my wits about: neither shall you wring
out of my pen (though you lay it on the rack) the villainies of that damnd
Keeper, who killed all she kept; if had bin good to have made her keeper of the
common Iayle, and the holes of both Counters, for a number lie there, that wish
to be rid out of this motley world, she would have tickled them, and turned
them over the thumbs. I will likewise let the Churchwarden in Thames street
sleep (for he is now past waking) who being requested by one of his neighbors
to suffer his wife or child (that was then dead) to lie in the Churchyard,
answered in a mocking sort, he kept that lodging for himself and his household,
and within three days after was driven to hide his head in a hole himself.
Neither will I speak a word of a poor boy (servant to a Chandler) dwelling
thereabouts, who being struck to the heart by sickness, was first carried away by
water, to be left any where, but landing being denied by an army of brown
bill-men that kept the shore, back again was he brought, and left in an
out-celler, where lying groueling and groaning on his face (amongst fagots, but
not one of them set on fire to comfort him) there continued all night, and dyed
miserably for want of succor. Nor of another poor wretch in the Parish of
Saint Mary Oueryes, who being in the morning thrown (as the fashion is) into a
grave upon a heap of carcases, that stayed for their complement, was found in
the afternoon, gasping and gaping for life: but by these tricks, imagining
that many a thousand have bin turned wrongfully off the ladder of life, and
praying that Derick or his executors may live to do those a good turn, that
have done so to others: Hic finis Priami, heeres an end of an old Song.

Et iam tempus Equum fumantia soluere colla. FINIS.

