allegorical depiction of usury and userers. Note: text boxes has been captured
in order: top left, top right, bottom, then the poem along the bottom border
OPERA (...)
Ie croyois en Estra exc^pt
Et nay pas cruquun ho^me de monrang
Eut este menasce deses tourments.
Apres avoir ete ensuretesy tongtems.
sy Democritcel Heraclite estorient au jourdhuy
Que tun pleureroit et lautre rirou des figures que lon fait icy.
Ie rend tout de moymesme
Depeur die etre force
Que chacum fassede mesme
Car ce neste pas dubien amasse
Il ne faui pas memettre a la gesne
Chez Gailliard rue de Gesure A'aris
Monsieur point de Compliment
rendezvous notre Argent


Souffle Souffle


Enroze les faites les
cuire Et les mangera
qui voudra ils sontdure


Ferme Purge Purge
Cest un gros fermier


Quel Diable d'Opera
Et quels acteurs sont ce la
Aton jamais declame par la
Pour fair to uttes ces figures la
Faut estre Soustraitant
Maltotier ou Partisan
Pour avoir dans ce temos
Dans le derriere tant d'Argent
Fameuse Uzuriere
Que l'on fait tant boire
Esce la Crainte de l'Enfer
Ou la Question ordinaire
Qui fait color de votre derriere
Un inetail qui finy nos miscres.


THE DEATH OF VSVRY, OR, THE DISGRACE OF VSVRERS.

COMPILED MORE PITHILY THEN HITHERTO HAS been published in English.

Wherein Usury is most lively unfolded, defined, and confuted by Divines,
Civilians, Canonists, Statutes, Schoolmen, old and new Writers.

With an Explanation of the Statutes now in force concerning Usury, very
profitable for this present Age.

Ambrosius in 1. Thessal. 4. Chap. Hi petunt inferos, vt discant verum esse in
morte quod in vita credere noluerunt.

LONDON, Printed by I. L. for Robert Allott, and are to be sold by John
Stafford, dwelling in Black-Herse-Alley near Fleet Street. 1634.

AUTHORS AND Writers used in this book beSIDES THE AVTHORITY of the holy
Scriptures.
A
S. Augustine. S. Ambrose. T. Aquinas. Aretius. Alphonsus. Aristotle.
B
S. Barnard. S. Basil. Bullinger. Brentius. Bucer. Theo. Beza. Gabr. Biel.
Brunnion. Balaus
C
S. Chrysostom. M. Calvin. Camisius. 12. Centuries. Consilium Agathense.
Consilium Nicen. Consil. Ma. papa. Coa. de Vsuris. Cato.
D
Danaeus.
E
D. Aepinus. Erasmus.
G
Gualter. Gerson. Graftons Chronicle.
H
S. Hierome. Hemingeus. Hermenopolus. Hesiodus.
I
B. Iuell. Julius. Iustinius.
K
D. Kimhus.
L
Luther. Labother Lactantius.
M
D. P. Martyr. Melancthon Musculus Menander
P
Pagne. Pomerianus. Plutarch. Plato.
R
Rodulphus.
S
Bart. Sepolitanus. Septuaginta.
T
Tremellius. Tullius.
W
theol. Wittenberge. D. Wilson.
Z
Zwinglius.
VSVRA.
IT is so called because it does Constare dear.

The word Vsura is taken in two senses or significations: properly. improperly.


Properly it signifies the use of a thing, as Erasmus has well observed, that
the name of Usury is taken from using, and is to be applied not only to this
but to all other things: the very Etymology of the word shows it; the
Latins have these terms, Vsura Solis, Vsura Lunae, Vsura Terrae, etc. Hereof
M. Bullinger said well, The name of usury is not evil, but the abusing of it
in applying it to ill trades and actions.

Improperly the name of Usury is so taken Causa pro effectu when we take
usury for the increase and augmentation that arise of it, it is called vsurae
of the Latinistes, because there is received a certain recompense for the use
of the money, the Graecians call it (...), as it were a certain thing bred of
the principal, the Haebricians call it (...) of biting.

There be three kinds of Vsuries, 1. Foenus natural. 2. Foenus spirituale. 3.
Foenus politicum.


1. Foenus natural, is that which come and increase by tillage of the ground.
This usury is lawful, because it is the ordinance of God in the beginning.
Cain is called a tiller of the ground, many of our forefathers have grown
rich by this usury as Abraham, Lot, and others. It is so necessary that no
common wealth can stand without it; Menander does call the land-iust, because
in yielding fruit it does the duty of a good ground and therefore we were
unjust if we should not reap it.

2. Foenus spirituale, whereof be two sorts, 1. Giving of Alms. 2. Employing
of Gods gifts.


Giving of Alms, is generally commended in the Scriptures, and he that gives
is as it were foenerator Domini and shall be well rewarded: for Solomon says,
he that gives to the poor shall not lack.

The employing of the gifts and graces of God does yield in the end a
spiritual increase, and that is meant by the Talent in Matthew.

3. Foenus politicum, whereof there be also two sorts, Foenus actuale. Foenus
mentale.


Foenus actuale, is committed when one does any act for gain or increase,
whereof there be two kinds Foenus liberale. Foenus ex pacto.


Foenus liberale, is, when he that borrows, desires to make some recompense,
the same which is received above the principal is Usury, and is not to be
condemned in two respects. 1. because it is a duty of thankfulness to make
amends for a benefit received. Tully could say, Ingratus est qui gratia^ been
merenti no^ reponit: the Scriptures in many places condemn unthankfulness. 2.
because it proceeds of the givers free will: and volenti non fit iniuria,
says Tho. Aquinas: for what is more free then gift.

Foenus ex pacto, whereof there be two sorts vsura explicata. vsura palliata.


Vsura explicata, is such as it is indeed as when one does covenant to take
10. in the hundredth for a year.

Vsura palliata, is a close and cloked usury, as when one lends money and
shroudeth it under some other bargain.

Foenus mentale is when one lends and does not compact but hops for
increase or gain. Sole hope makes a man an usurer says one of the
Canonistes; he that lends (says Camisius) under the hope of gain is an
Usurer: S. Augustine upon one of the Psalms says, If thou do but expect to
reciue more then thy own thou art an Usurer.

What Usury is.
THe civil Laws in the Code de Vsuris do call that Usury which is received
above the principal.

Aretius says, whatsoever is taken above the principal is Usury.

Rodulphus says whatsoever in lending is taken above the principal is usury.

D. Kimhus writing upon the 18. of Ezekiel. does say that usury is expressed by
this addition of the prophet, and receive no increase. This definition may
stand so far forth as it does not condemn foenus liberale or gratuitum.

In the Decrees cap. vsur. 14 cause. and 3. quaest. that is Usury when more is
required then was delivered or given.

Melancthon says, usury is a gain demanded above the principal only for
the pleasure or benefit showed in lending.

Consilium Agathense say, when there is more required then is lent, that is
usury.

This definition differ from the former, here gain is required, there but
offered or taken. And this definition does cut off Interest, which Melancthon
says is a debt one owe to another by the law of nature, and it is due by the
opinion of Hemingeus two manner of ways: 1. ex damno habito, 2. ex lucro
cessante.

Ex damno habito, as when I borrow money for another and enter my bond for it,
and take the like of him that receive the money. I may lawfully recover that I
loose by the means of that money. Bishop Iuel is of this mind also.

Ex lucro cessante, as if a shopkeeper lend money freely to his neighbor till
such a day, having then occasion to use it at some fair to lay it out in
wares, if he break touch the shop keeper may lawfully take so much as he
sustained loss for want of his money to lay out.

Brentius says, when men require a gain of the office of lending it is
Usury. This definition is imperfect: for Hemingeus gives an instance, If I
lend a merchant 100. pound under these conditions; if he gain, I will have the
moiety of the gains: if he loose, if it be not ex culpa larga, I am content to
bear half the loss: here is gain required of office but this contract is
not offensive.

The Divines of Wittenberge say, when a man require but an half penny or a
drop of water for the money he lends it is usury.

S. Ambrose says, that a dish of meat, a garment, or whatsoever comes above
the principal is usury.

From the opinions and judgments of most writers Actual usury is thus
defined.

It is a lending for gain by compact.

So that there does concur necessarily 3. things in this kind of described
usury.

There must be a lending. a lending for gain. a compacting for gain.


That the truth of this may pregnantly appear, every several point must of
necessity be prooved.

1. Usury is a lending.
THat Usury is in lending it appears in the 22. of Exodus If thou lend money
to my people, etc. and in Deuteronomy. 23. unto a stranger thou may lend upon
usury. Bullinger entreating of this argument says, that usury is committed
only in lending. Brentius upon Lev. 25. says as much. D. Wilson says, there
can be no Usury where there is no Lending. I had thought to have alleged that
saying in the 6. of Luke, Lend looking for nothing again: but that M. Bucer
and M. Calvin say it is not meant of usury at all.

What Lending is.
HEmingeus in his treatise upon usury defines lending thus. Mutatio est
contractus, etc. Lending is a contract which transfer the right and dominion of
a thing to another without interposito praetio, but with promise to have the
same thing delivered in specie. As if I end a man 100. pound for a year, I do
not only yield the use but the property of it, only to have that I lend in the
same kind without gain, or if I lend oil or wine or any thing subject to
lending (which be such things as consist in Weight, Number, and Measure) I must
observe the like course; yet Hesiodus speaking hereof wills the borrower to
deliver just measure and amplius siquidem possis that he may find his
neighbor ready to pleasure him again si alias indigeas, or as Heming. says,
pertinebit ad gratitudinem. The Latins make a difference between Mutatio and
Accommodatio, when any does mutuum dare he looks but for his own in eadem
specie, but when he does Accommodare he looks to receive it in individuo, as
if he lends his horse to have the same again and not an other, or if he lets
his house, to have the same, and none other.

2. Usury is a lending for gain.
THat usury is a lending for Gain it appears by the prophets repetition:
Thou have taken usury and the increase, Ezekiel. 22.12. this word increase, is
as much as gain? as when a man lends 10. pound and take 11. pound: or 20
combs barley and take 22. for a year, he has not incrementum ex vsu. S.
Ambrose commends him to be a good man that does lend and take no increase.
Nehemiah did lend corn, and money to his brethren without looking for gain.

What it is to lend for gain.
GAbriel Biel says, that gain is the increase of money, or the value of any
thing that may be prized and measured for money. Whosoever lends his money,
corn, wine, oil, and receive any thing for the use of it, is an Usurer. S.
Ambrose and Hierome say there are many that will not take money, but certain
other gifts, this is Usury: whatsoever it be they receive more then they lend,
it is Usury, Musc. 579. Most writers condemn him which take money or moneys
worth for lending. Hemingeus gives some instances; one man borrowes a hundredth
pounds and offers use for it, the lender refuse to take it, but tells him if
he will bestow a gowne-cloth of his wife, or the pasturing of a horse, or some
of S. Austens works, or such like, he will let him have his money, this is
Usury though it be cloaked.

3. Usury is a lending for gain by Compact.
THat there is a compacting for Gain, it appears Exodus 22. the Lord says,
Non impone vsuram, etc. thou shall not impose usury upon thy brother, by which
appear to be a kind of compact. M. Beza terms him to be foenerator pacti,
which take or exact any thing by lending, hereof the Statute made in anno 11.
Henr. 7. chap. 8. did forbid usury of contract or covenant.

What it is to Compact.
THe Civilians term that a Compact, when as two men or more, do confer and
consent together of a matter.

The Lawyers say there are two kind of Compacts: Pactum tacitum. Pactu^
expressum.


Pactum tacitum is this, when as consent or agreement is intended; an instance
hereof appears in Numb. 30. as when the parents of two children do debate of
a marriage between their children, the children stand by and hear all, but say
nothing, by silence in the children intenditur consensus. Silence is many times
to be taken as an answer between the Usurer and the borower: as for example,
if a man comes to an Usurer to borrowe money, and tells him he will allow him
after ten in the 100. although the usurer says nothing, this is a kind of
compact: or if one comes to borrowe money, and the usurer says he will take
after ten in the 100, albeit the borrower says nothing, but takes the money,
it is a kind of Compact: and it is so usual, that M. Bucer says, he is
counted an impudent man that does not offer usury.

Pactum expressum is either Nudum. Vestitum.


Nudum, the bare compact is, when one comes to borrowe money, the usurer asks
him if he will give use for it, the borrower says he will, this is so called,
because the usurer depends upon the borrower what he will give.

Vestitum, the certain or shrouded compact, is either in Verbis. Scriptis.


In verbis, when the borrower passes his promise for the payment of use.

In scriptis, when the usurer takes specialty for the use of his money.

How far Usury extends.
Usury is not only cloked, but also committed as well in many other things as
in money, and therefore the Lord does not only condemn usury of money, but
also usury of meat, usury of any thing is put to usury, Deuteronomy. 23.19.

S. Hierome says, some suppose there is no usury but in money. This did the
holy Scriptures foresee, which take away increase in all other things. M.
Bullinger says, that usury is committed in the use of cattle, house and
ground.

Hemingeus says, that usury is committed in lending of all things, and does
hide it self under diverse kind of contracts, as buying, selling, lending,
letting, exchanging, giving to paune, etc.

By the opinion of the Schoolmen, usury is taken so largely that it
comprehends buying and selling.

M. Calvin says, Multi contractus ab hominibus vafris excogitati sunt, quibus
inopes expilarent, sine ignominia vel dedecore, atque hodie nulla crudelior
estir apacitas quam vbi ab sque mentione foenoris vectigal debitoribns
imponitur. Calvin. in Harmo.

So that this generally touches Merchants, Shopkeepers, Corne-mongers, and
all others that have any trading and traffic in the commonweal. Yet we must
take heed that we do not condemn all profitable and lawful contracts, as
Hemingeus says, praetextu vsurae propter similitudinem: for that in no wise is
just; no contract is to be condemned qui charitati proximi non aduersatur.

Sithence usury is committed in so many things, it wear necessary to know
some of the greatest vsuries that the worse might have his appearance.

Which is the greatest Usury.
IF our Usury in money were all one with that of the Jews, the question were
soon answered: for they took after 60.70.80. in the 100. It appears in
Graftons Chronicle that about the year of our Lord 1264. and in the 47. year
of the reign of Henry the 3. King of England, five hundredth Jews were slain
by the Citizens of London, because one Jew would have forced a Christian man
to pay more then two pence for the usury of twenty shillings the week: as
for our usury in money after the rate of 10. in the 100. it comes not to an
halfe-penny a week for twenty shillings: and therefore I take it to be the
least usury that is used this day in the land.

1. Wares and Merchandise.
HE that puts forth money dare not exceed the rate of 10. in the 100. but he
that utters ware does make his rate to his own contentment. In money they
rest upon the conscience of the borrower what he will bestow (for our laws
allow nothing for use:) In ware they use their own discretions in taking what
they can get.

In money there may not be taken after 10. in the hundred, but within the time
without trebble loss in ware they care not what they gain, nor how soon
they make sale, so they may take money.

In money, the allowance is seen and known to others after 10. in the 100. In
wares, the gaynes that are got be secret and concealed to them selves. One will
not let to boast he has saved above 30. in the 100. when the other durst not
say he has taken above 10. in the 100. for money.

It is ordinary with occupyers to proportion the price of their wares
according to the time of payment as well as usurers.

Many occupyers will often use these shifts whereof they have no use in money.

They will mix their wares if they be ill with better, if good with worse, and
so by chopping both away together deceive the buyer.

They will give bad measure, and use false waights, whereof the Prophet Micah
complains, Are yet the treasures of wickedness in the house of the wicked and
the scant measure that is abominable, shall I justify the wicked balances
and the bag of deceitful waights, Micah 6.10, 11.

To set a fair gloss for gain of their counterfeit ware, they will use Lying
and Swearing, they are so carried with the savor of gain, that they make no
conscience of a lie, but as the Prophet says, They have taught their mouths
to lie. Ier. 9.5. and that they may be the better believed when they lie, they
will use swearing; for custom has made it so common that they think perjury
no impiety but worldly policy, and therefore it is true the same Prophet
says, As a cage is full of birds, so are there houses full of deceit, thereby
they are become great and waxen rich, Ier. 5.27.

2. Corn or Grain.
HE that puts out an 100. pound for a year, may not take above 10. pound for
the lone, albeit the borrower may peradventure gain above 30. or 40. pound
with the money, but he that lays out 100. pound in Corn does sometime gain
above 50. yea sometime 100. in the 100. for not long since the price of Corn
so increased, that necessity willed many rather to pay the penalty of their
bonds, then to make delivery of their bargains; hereupon some unreasonable
Corn-mongers, Malstars, and such like were grieved because they took no bills,
as discontent of double gains by their bonds.

It is a common practice in this country, if a poor man come to borrow money
of a Malster, he will not lend any, but tells him if he will sell some barley he
will give him after the order of fore-hand buyers, the man being driven to
distress, sels his corn far under foot, that when it comes to be delivered
he loses half in half, oftentimes double the value.

I have heard many of these fore-hand sellers say, that they had rather allow
after 20. pound in the 100. for money, then to sell these fore-hand bargains
of corn.

These are most extreme Vsuries, and they have no color to excuse it, but a
reason of Gabriell Byel: for that the price of Corn is casual in rising and
falling: this is soon answered, howsoever it may seem casual at the buying,
the commodity being delivered, it is certain at the receipt, and therefore this
can be no excuse to warrant excessive gain.

Malsters and Cornemongers may use more deceit then Mony-masters.
IF money be not put forth there come no increase by keeping of it, that
appears in the idle servant by the Talent, but they cannot be content to make
present sale of their corn for a reasonable price, but many do hoard and
keep their corn of purpose to inhaunce the price, and so oppress the poor,
as the Prophet (speaking in their person) says, That we may buy the poor for
silver, and the needy for shoes, Amos 8.8. and by keeping of it they do not
only raise the price, but impair the corn, making it unsavory at the sale:
therefore in the same place it follows, Yea and sell the refuse of wheat.

In money they cannot be deceived of their just some, if they have their sight,
but in Corn they will abridge the measure many ways by deceit, when one least
suspects, or can best see, which the Prophet well perceived: for he says that
they make the Ephah small, and the shekell great, and falsify the waights by
deceit, Amos 8.5.

In money they may not exceed the rate of 10. in the 100. In corn they gain
by buying, and by giving day in the sale to others they will gain by the time.

Aristotle says well, foenus est quasi foetus: for I take this to be one of
the most extreme Vsuries in the land. Therefore M. Calvin says, Vsura nihilo
deterior erit quam emptio. in 8. praec. 375.

3. Lands and Tenements.
THere are some that hire house and land after 20. pound the year, and are
good gayners by it, and yet they let the same to others and make after 60.
pound the year, this case is too common.

I have known others that have laid out some 800. pound in purchase, and in
less space then a year have sold the same again for 1100. to another and
ready payment.

I note these but by the way, but indeed if we would know the reason why
Corn, Cattle, and such other commodities are so dear at this day, more then
in other times before passed, we shall find this to be the cause; the racking
and unreasonable rents of house and land: for it is now come to this pass,
that Farmars can not afford their commodities at indifferent prizes, for if
they should, their extreme rents would enforce them to run away.

The Rents of house and land are almost come to the rates of money, which is
very unreasonable if but in this respect, because Lands are immooueable and
certain, but money is subject to many casualties and adventures, as shall
appear upon the handling hereafter of the Statute 13. Elizabeth.

To speak generally of all kinds of usury were too tedious, but these may
give a light to the rest, notwithstanding this is to be noted as an universal
observation, that he which has but 100. pound, and puts it forth, shall hardly
maintain his family with the lone of 10. pound, and yet many an one
maintains him self and his charge with less then 40. pound by employing the
same in trading and traffic in other things.

If the Lord will not permit any Usury in money, much less will he suffer
others in their several callings to exact unreasonable gain: for he does not
only forbid one but the other. Deuteronomy. 23.

How and in what sort Usury is condemned by the word of God.
THere be many places of proof for this purpose, some whereof follow. Exodus.
22. Levitic. 25. Deuter. 23.
and Psalm. 15. Prove. 28. Ezekiel. 18. and 22.
Some add these Psalm. 55. Psalm. 72


The whole Law is divided into three parts Moral. Judicial. Ceremonial.


It is much disputable among writers which of these three should apprehend
Usury; it were in vain here to express their variable opinions: but I will
briefly deliver the judgments of the learneder sort.

The matter of usury is Political or Judicial.

So say M. Calvin in Octav. praeceptum. 375. Harmon. in Exodus Levit. etc.
Philip. Melancthon in Epitom. Philosophiae moralis. Danaeus Aethic. super
praecep. octav. and many others.


That we are not tied to the Jews Policies or Judicial laws,

Appears by M Calvin. in Institut. lib. 4. cap. 20. sect. 15.16. D. Pet.
Martyr. sup. 1. lib. Samu. cap. 25. sect. 42. M. Beza. in decima Epistola, and
many others.


So that from hence is to be observed, that the approbation, disprobation,
tolleration, and moderation of Usury, depend upon the Magistrate. Hereof
says M. Calvin, The Usurer must take heed that he exceed not that rate of
the Country where he lives. Bullinger says, The Magistrate must keep the
Usurer in with good laws. Labother is of that opinion. Zwinglius de dupl.
Justice. says, I think of Usury thus, when the laws of a Magistrate do
permit it, it may be used, but if the Magistrate forbid it, it must of all
sorts be obeyed. Hemingeus is of that mind.

Laws made aginst Usury.
THe Emperor Leo did make a Law against usury that whatsoever any man did
take, should be received into the principal. Hermenopol. lib. 3. tit. 7.

Pope Martin in the counsel he called did forbid Usury, and centesimam vsuram,
and that gain which was got by any filthy trade. Ex council. Ma. Papa.

Pope Leo did likewise forbid the same as sorry any Christian man should be an
usurer.

In the Synod of Nicen, wherein were assembled three hundred and eighteen
fathers, in a Canon they made did condemn all usury. in Decret. 47.

There were many decrees to forbid usury in the Clargie.

If he did put out money to usury he should be none of the Clargie. 33. d.
Martis d. 46. seditio.

If he took 12. in the 100. more or less he should be degraded and made
irreguler. Council. Nicen. 18.

There were Canons made for the Laiety, being an usurer he was suspended from
the Communion. excommunicated out of the church. not capable to make a will of
his goods. not to be admitted to Christian burial.


Yea, the Canon Law says, No man need to care what become of an usurer.

Laws made to moderate Usury.
SOlon made a law among the Athenians and he did allow de centum aureis
singulis mensibus aureus vnus. Heming.

The Roman Emperor Iustinius ordained a law in his time for the tollerating
of 4.6.8.12. in the 100. according to the degrees of men. Heming.

Tully makes mention in his time of another Law, how at the first there was
granted 1. in the 100. afterward 4. in the 100.

The Civil laws in the Code de vsuris do permit the hundred and half
hundred part.

By the law of Pandect and Constantine, Usury is tolerated in some sort.

Statutes and Laws made by Kings and Governors within this land concerning
Usury.
IN and before the Rain of King Henry 3. the Laws for Usury did consist in
the holy Canons of the Church and were punishable by them. I read of Iustinius
the Emperor how in his Constitution he did ordain that the holy Canons of the
Church should have power and authority against the Laws of Usury.

These Laws being so straight and general, the said King Henry in the 20.
year of his reign cap. 5. did make this proviso for the benefit of Orphans
only.

IT is provided and granted by the King that from henceforth vsuries shall not
turn against any being within age from the time of the death of his Auncestour
(whose heir he is) unto his lawful age. So nevertheless that the payment of
the principal debt with the usury that was before the death of his auncestour
(whose heir he is) shall not remain.

Musculus says, that our predecessors used the order of pupils and orphans
before the pestilent plague of Usury had profaned and defiled the Church, and
were contented to permit that in them, and in none else.

It appears by this branch that all Usury is condemned save in orphans.

14. Edward. 3. Chap. 5.
KIng Edward made this Law. The King and his heirs shall have the Conusance
of Usurers dead, and the ordinaries of holy Church shall have the Conusance of
usurers on liefe as to them appertains to make compulsion by the Censures of
the holy Church for the sin to make restitution of the vsuries taken against
the laws of holy Church.

This is the first law at large that I can find for Usury in the Statutes
since Magnacarta, wherein all usury is generally condemned.

3. Henry. 7. Chap. 5.6.
THis King made a strict law, especially for these damnable bargains of usury
colored by the name of new chenisance, such as dealt corruptly in it were to
pay an hundred pound. Also if any man did lend 100. pound and took 120. more
or less in money or merchandise etc. was to loose his principal. Here he
condemned all usury, but in the 11. year of his reign chap. 8. he repealed
the former act and inacted an other to this effect.

All manner of person or persons lending money to and for a time, taking for the
same lone, any thing more besides or above the money lent by way of contract
or covenant at the time of the same lone (saving lawful penalties for default
of payment) was to forfeit the moiety or one half of the principal there be
other branches therein concerning corruption by way of chenisance, etc.

I observe from this how no usury is condemned but that which is imposed upon
the borrower by way of contract or covenant at the time of the lending, if
there were no contracting for gain there was no breach of the Law, so that
the borrower was not barred by this, but that he might gratify the lender at
his own election.

37. Henry. 8. Chap. 9.
KIng Henry repealed all the Laws and statutes made concerning usury before,
and does enact, that if any man take above 10. in the 100. for a year or more
or less money after that rate, he should loose treble the value of the sum
lent, it is so likewise in chenisance and wares, diverse other clauses and
branches be therein.

This Statute is entitled an act against usury, it does not persuade any to
take Usury, but restrain him to certain orders, the husbandman suffers many
weeds to grow in his ground he likes not, so this law does tolerate that it
allows not, it remits men of punishment that take but 10. in the 100. but it
does not warrant them to take any at all. Therefore M. Beza well noted, that
the civil laws of Princes by reason of the impiety of the people are often
times tolerated when they cannot be taken away.

5. and 6. Edward. 6.
KIng Edward repealed the former act of King Henry 8. and forbids generally
all usury. He that took any should not only loose the principal with the
use, but also be punished with imprisonment and make fine and ransom at the
Kings pleasure.

The common saying is, some will take an ell where is given an inch: that
liberty which that man of famous memory, King Henry 8. gave was abused,
therefore his son to avoid an inconvenience did cut off the occasion: but as
water being pent does strive more upward, so the usurer being restrained he
waxed worse, and therefore this Statute of King Edward continued not long.

Of all these Statutes before mentioned none remain in force, but some of the
branches of the Statute of K. Henry 8. now I think it very necessary to handle
more copiously some of those particular and special clauses which be included
in the last act against usury as a matter very expedient to be published, that
many which know not how far it extend may thereby avoid many extremities.

13. Elizabeth Reg. Chap. 8.
Our gracious Queen Elizabeth repealed the former act of her brother K. Edw.
6. and does revive the Statute of K. Henry 8. in this sort, that (whereas it is
the honor of English laws to be favorable) the act of K. Henry should be
most largely and strongly construed to the repressing of usury and punishing
offenders therein.

In the rest of that Statute which is now in most force there be 4. clauses or
branches most specially and necessarily to be noted and explaned.

1. Branch.
All bonds and contractes etc. for money or other things whereupon shall be
reserved or taken above 10. in the 100, shall be void, etc.
This is a dangerous clause in two respects, and may happen to a man 1. by his
own fault. 2. by the negligence of others.


If a man for gripplenesse will reserve more then 10. in the 100. although he
never takes it his principal is lost. And this I deem his own fault.

If the writer deceive a man in the making or dating of a bond, without the
lenders privitie, his money is lost although he had no such meaning. And this
may happen to many a simple man through the negligence of others.

2. Branch.
He that takes above 10. in the 100. for money, wares, etc. shall forfeit thrice
as much, besides imprisonment, fine, and Ecclesiastical correction.
There is difference between reserving and taking Usury, he that reserues it,
need not take it unless he will, but if he take it, he is sure of that he
reserved: it is a lesser sin to promise, then perform ill, and a less hurt
to reserve, then to take Usury: therefore this clause is more straight then the
former. A man may hazard himself and his goods herein many ways.

1. If a man takes above 10. pound in the 100. directly, he is convicted by
this branch.

2. If a man takes above 10. pound in the 100. indirectly, he is in great
danger.

Indirect taking, is many ways to be taken: but I will note 2. especially.

The taking of money but a day less then a year, may endanger one, etc.

There was one indebted to an Usurer in a great some of money, the borrower
dwelling far off, came a day or two before his day of payment, and (with a
friend of his) requested the Usurer to take his money, saying that he came
far, and was at charges, and therefore would gladly give him his whole
allowance; after many entreaties the Usurer took his money, but the borrower
procured him a trebble mischief afterward.

He that takes but 10. pound in the 100. in money, and the borower bestows some
other gift of him, I cannot see how safely the Usurer may take it without
offense to the Law, if the borrower be not the better man. I heard it credibly
reported of one that lent 200. pound to two men for a year; the day being
expired, and they unprovided to pay the money, brought not only the
consideration, but to persuade the lender to let them have the money an other
year, they would needs enforce upon him as a free gift a gown-cloath which he
refused, nevertheless using apt persuasions, that they had gained greatly by
the money, at length by their importunity, he took it, but how he was used
afterward by the means of these men which gave the gift, it were too odious to
open. It were pity that the oath of a borrower should be any way beneficial
to himself about the thing he borrowes, there are many will not stick to
bestow an oath if their creditours do but cross them, or call for their own.

3. One mistaken word of a writer, or false oath of a borrower, may hazard a
man herein.

3. Branch.
He that takes above 10. in the 100. for money or wares, shall forfeit so much
as shall be reserved by way of usury, etc.
THis branch is more favorable then the former for two causes.

1. Because the Usurer shall be punished but with the loss of that he receive
without peril of the principal.

2. Because he shall have no temporal or ecclesiastical correction, though he
loose that which he takes above the principal, so it be but, or under 10. in
the 100.

When K. Henry 8. did tolerate 10. pound in the 100. many abused that liberty
under the color of the Law, and when K. Edward 6. had utterly taken away all
usury, this inconvenience came, few or none would lend because they might
have no allowance, whereupon her Majesty to avoid this evil, made this
remissiue clause.

This Branch does allow no Usury at all, but does leave it after a sort to
the courtesy and conscience of the borrower: for as the Law does convict no
man without proof, or take knowledge of this offense without information, so
it is to be presumed, that none can so fitly be an approouer as he that finds
himself grieved, which of necessity must be the borrower because he pays
the usury.

The borrower has this liberty by this branch for his own benefit.

1. If he promise usury, he need not to pay it unless he will. 2. If he pay
usury, he may recover it again if he be grieved. 3. If he be willing to pay
usury, he is at his own choice to complain.
Most of these common, or rather cunning Usurers, are come to this pass,
because the law allows no usury, they will put in no use in their bonds, but
leave it to the courtesy of the borrower, if he gives use they will take it,
if none, they will note him another time when he stands in need, and for this
cause, because they are doubtful of men's dealings, they will not put forth
their money above 3. months, that the borower can hardly make any profitable
return of it in so short time.

4. Branch.
This Statute does not extend nor shall be expounded to extend unto any
allowances or payments for the finding of Orphans according to the ancient
rates or customs of London, etc.
IT is a godly act, that those should be provided for that cannot provide for
themselves; the Scripture wills that the fatherless should be provided for.
K. Hen. 3. K. Hen. 8. and our gracious Queen Elizabeth, have for good causes
granted and continued this allowance: their allowance is 5. in the 100. which
Hemingeus proves to be lawful, because it does not fall into the contract of
Usury: his reason is this, Nam nec tutores de alieno obligantur mutuare, nec
qui mutuum accipiunt, vbi nulla, nec diuina, nec naturalis praecessit obligatio
seu debitum, just gratitudinem pro accepto beneficio recusare possunt.

There is great reason why allowance may be granted to orphans, and not to
men.

Men have wit and discretion to employ their money in many things, though they
lend not upon Usury. With their money they may buy house and land, and save by
a reasonable rent, or wares, and make a reasonable gain, or come or cattle,
or other commodities, and reap a reasonable commodity.

The orphan as he is young in years, so he is in discretion, and wants that
foresight in trading and traffic in the world, which experience of more
years may bring at man's estate.

But it may be objected, that the orphans money may be employed by an other,
some other way then by allowance, so it may be alleged, unless the tutor or
governor be an honest man, it will never be improoued, but he may impair it
under color of many losses without just cause, and so defeat the pore orphan
of his portion, therefore very convenient is this proviso; for whatsoever gain
is got by the orphans money by others, yet the orphan shall be sure to have
some allowance toward his education during his noneage, and his stock to be
safe at man's estate for his maintenance.

I have dilated this whole Statute for two causes: 1. The knowledge of the
ignorant. 2. The benefit of the Usurer.


There be many simple men which having no insight into this Statute, are not
ashamed to say that it allows 10. in the 100. which indeed is a mere
scandal and slander: for it inflicteth a kind of punishment, by the loss of
the least Usury that is taken: therefore such as be ignorant of this Statute
may now know it.

The Usurer may see by this Statute, how many adventures he is subject to by
lending his money to Usury; although he does not quoad eventum like the
husbandman that sows his seed, or the merchant that cross the seas,
adventure: yet for all he does quoad media use all the best means to save his
own, he may be intercepted, and therefore he may learn to employ his money
otherwise to his benefit as well as others, and albeit his gaynes be greater
many ways therein then after 10. in the 100. it will be less noted, and
himself better esteemed.

The chief end I aimed at in the distribution of this Statute is, to draw an
argument from the same to this effect,

Those which write and speak most for Usury, say it depends upon the positive
Law of the land.

But the positive Law of our land admits no Usury, but allowance for orphans.

Therefore no Usury may be taken of any but allowance for orphans.

Whether Usury may be taken of Rich-men.
MAny are of the opinion that Usury may be taken of the Rich without offense
to the word of God, by permission of the Magistrate.

M. Calvin writing upon that place in the 22. of Exodus If thou lend money to my
people, that is, to the porre with thee, thou shall not be as an Usurer to him,
makes this exposition: Non nisi de pauperibus haberi sermonem, ideoque si cum
diuitibus negotium sit, liberum ius foenerandi permitti: his reason is this,
Quia legislator rem vnam notando, alter am de qua subticet, videtur non
damnari, he says by all necessary consequence, the express and special
prohibition of the poor by name, does give an intended and intellectual
permission to others: insomuch as he flatly affirms in another place vsuras
quaslibet absque exceptione damnare nulla patitur ratio. octa. prae. 375.

M. Bucer gives many instances to this effect, which for brevitie I will omit.

Hemingeus approoues this kind of usury even from the very law of lending:
for he says, Indigentibus solis gratuita mutuatio debetur: and non auaritiae
insatiabili servire debet.

Every contract which in his kind or by circumstances ought to be free, if
there be a compact to receive any thing besides the principal est Vsurarius
contractus, and properly this is called Usury. Gersonis regula. From hence
Hemingeus says, non esse vsurarium co^tractum, which by circumstances ought to
be free. The free contract of lending concerns the poor, but if the Rich
borrow, he says, dico Vsuram hic proprie non committi propterea quod
beneficium istud fuit liberum ad quod nec diuino nec nature ali iure eras
obligatus: and in another place he says, Quid enim peccat qui pro beneficio
expectat gratitudinem, and affirms that it is natural equity, that for a
good turn quod non iure debemus another be done, that there may be equality.

That the liberty may appear to be lawful for usury of the Rich, you shall
hear the learned opinions of some upon the 15. Psalm. Lord, who shall dwell
in thy Tabernacle? He that has not given forth upon Usury.

M. Calvin says, that the name of Neseck which David uses, being derived of
biting, declares sufficiently that usurers are condemned so far forth as
they draw with them a liberty to pill and poll. In another place he says, Si
obijciant foeneratores a Davide and Ezech. in totum damnari, sententias illas
ad normam charitatis exigi debere arbitror: ideoque non damnari nisi improbas
exactiones, quibus creditor, posthabita aequitate, debitorem suum oner at, ac
premit.

D. AEpinus writing upon the 15. Psalm. does name 3. kinds of men,
Mendicantium, Indigentium, and eorum qui sunt Locupletes, and after he has
learnedly and largely handled the matter, he concludes thus, in tertio or dine
non committi vsuram.

Hemingeus upon the 15. Psalm. says, that it is manifest that the Psalmist does
there speak of biting usury, because he does use this word Neseck. quod a mor
su nomen habet: further he says, that in this Psalm is forbidden but that
usury quae ante in Mose fuit interdicta, and this is his reason, Prophetae
enim nullam nouam doctrinam afferunt sed tantum Mosis sunt Interpretes. fol.
958.

S. Augustine has a sensible saying, where things are more plainly uttered in
the Scripture, there must we learn how they are to be understood in obscure
and dark places. August. lib. 83. quaest. from hence some frame a reason thus;

If all parts of the Scripture expound one an other (as they do by the opinion
of Chrysostom 2. Genesis homil. 13.) then ye must consider, that as all rivers
run they never so crooked, have recourse from the fountain as the head, so
all future places of proof concerning usury, seem they never so obscure,
have reference and do rely upon the former, which M. Calvin and Hemingeus have
expounded before to concern the poor.

These learned men are to be reverenced for their opinions, because they
reconcile themselves after a sort in their own sayings: for whatsoever they
approve in particular and respectively for usury, they condemn generally by
their conclusion.

M. Calvin says, Praeceptum mutuandi absque foenore, politicum est, and does
no further allow of usury then the law of the Magistrate permits.

Hemingeus proves some usury lawful, but how? si servatur aequalit as quam
Magistratus statuit.

D. AEpinus though he says in tertio ordine non committi vsuram, yet he adds
this, modo alioqui ab aequalitate non decedatur, which is to be appointed by
the Magistrate.

These men do no further defend usury then they refer their judgments to
the law of the Magistrate, we having no law to approve it, their opinions are
satisfied.

Certain reasons why some rich men ought not to borrow upon Usury.
What should move a Rich man to borow money, has he not corn to make money of,
yet he perceives that markets are little worth, and therefore he does reserve it
to that end the Jews did at Jerusalem, Amos 8. to make a dearth, and not as
Joseph did in Egypt to relieve the famished.

Another has great store of cattle, and may sell some of them for money, but
it may be, that cattle bear no price, or his grounds be vnderstored.

Many have diverse other things which they may well forbear and sell in respect
of any want which they do spare and retain upon some covetous fore-casts: for
they presume they shall loose less by allowing after ten in the 100. for
money, then by present sale of any of their commodities at those ordinary
prices.

Rich-men I confess may sometime want money and borrow for good and necessary
considerations, but most commonly what cause does constrain most of them to
borrow? alas, it is lamentable to express.

One sees an house and ground of his neighbors that were fit to be laid to
his own, he will use all the means that may be to have it, (as Ahab did by
Naboth he would needs have his piece of ground to make him a garden, because
it was near his house 1. King. 21.2.) if he wants money to purchase it, he will
take it up at Vsans.

Another has entered into a great purchase which has a common appendant to it
for the benefit of the poor, which he means to aprone to his own use (a
thing too common in these days:) the Prophet could see this in his time: for
he says, They covet fields, and take them by violence: and houses, and take
them away, so they oppress a man and his house. Micah. 2.2. If he wants money
to wade through withal, he will non stick to visit the usurer

There be others which be the cormorants of a Commonweal that borrow money of
purpose to buy corn, to hoord it up to inhaunce the price, to ship it away to
make it scarce, using all policy against Gods providence to make a famine and
thereby procure the curses of the poor, Prove. 28.

There be others that borrow money to consume in prodigal manner, in bravery,
banketting, voluptuous living, and such like: they consume that in wast which
many poor does want, the costly apparel on their backs do so stick in the
mercers books, and the dainty cates for their bellies, does so soake their
purses, and the riotous company they keep is such a moath to their money that
they are enforced through folly to resort to the usurer as their best friend,
and very glad are they if they may get money: though they obtain it by pawning
their jewels, plate, or lands.

If any of these or others like these do borrow money for these or the like
purposes. He that does lend them any does procure a great mischief, or if he
has any foreknowledge of it or suspicion of such a pretense, he is partaker of
the sin and curse whereof the borrower is culpable. Heming. says, we ought
not to lend to such neither by divine, natural, or humane law, which do abuse
money to theirs and others destructions, his reasons follows. Nam qui
occasionem damni dedit, damnum dedisse videtur, quamobrem fit reus alieni
peccati ac sisiuum proprium onus sibi non satis esset. And it appears in the
Roman. 1.31. that not only the followers but such as were favorers and
furtherers of evil were reprooved and punished.

This inconvenience has grown by reason of lending to the Rich, since they
began to borow the law of free-lendidg to the poor has bin laid aside: for it
is now come to this pass that the poor man shall sooner beg then borrow,
because the Usurer think all lost that is lent to him, or little to be got by
lending unto him. He that will lend to the rich to serve his sinister
commodity, when he ought to lend to the poor to satisfy his necessity, such
thrift is a branch of theft by the opinion of D. P. Martyr upon the 2. Romans
and all his money will but turn to his own misery.

The Usurer is taught generally in the word to lend, most especially to his
neighbor in the time of his necessity Syrac. 29. Hemingeus writing upon this
place, says. Hic aperte sapiens restringit mutuationis debitum ad necessitatis
tempus. It is commanded by Moses, Thou shall lend him sufficient for his need
which he has. Deuteronomy. 15.8. It is commended by David, The righteous is merciful
and lends Psalm. 112.5. It is imitated of the godly; I my breethren and
servants (says Nehemiah) do lend them money and corn. Nehem. 5.10.

Since we ought especially to lend to the poor, even from the very nature of
the law of lending it self, it were very necessary to distinguish the estates
of men, that the poor man may be the better known, thereby to take away all
color of excuse from the Usurer.

A description of some such poor men as WE ARE COMMAVNDED TO lend unto
without Usury.
THe beggar that lives of Alms, such an one as is blind, lame, or having
other defectes of nature, to this man we are precisely enjoined to give and not
properly said to lend, unless it be to the Lord. He that has mercy on the
poor, lends to the Lord, Prove. 19. for he cannot restore that which he
receive. Hereof says the Preacher, Cast thy bread upon the waters. Eccl. 11.1.
as a thing lost, this is none of those poore-men properly to whom the scripture
wills any great sum of money to be lent, but otherwise to be relieved.

These are to be noted Artificers Laborers Husbandmen Young mariedmen
in the number of the poor.

Artificers.
THe Artificer which has nothing but his bare fingers and tools to get his
living respecting his charge is to be deemed a poor man: for as cunning
without tools can do nothing, so tools without wherewith can not be set on
work, and without work the man shall soon beg, yet having work he may live
in want. To this man we must not only lend without usury, but (if we mistrust
him) we must take such a pledge as he may well spare: it appears so in
Deuter. 24.10. Thou shall not go into his house to fetch his pledge, but thou
shall stand without, and the man that borrowed it of thee, shall bring the
pledge out of the doors to thee. And this stands with great reason: for if a
man should take his tools to pledge, he shall not save so much by borrowing as
he shall loose by his work for want of his tools.

Laborers.
THe Labouring-man that has neither house or home of his own to hold his head
in but lives only of his bare and bodily labor is to be accounted a poor
man, whose necessity is such sometime as he must needs borrow, and upon such a
pledge as he cannot well forbear, as his garment or such like, therefore we
must neither take usury of him nor deteine his pledge; for it is written, If
it be a poor body thou shall not sleep with his pledge, but shall restore it
when the Sun go down that he may sleep in his raiment. Deuteronomy. 24.12. Exodus
22.26. and it is an horrible thing to withold it, it is this that make the
Prophet cry out against the Rich, They lie down upon clothes laid to pledge,
Amos 2.8. and Job describing the impiety of the wicked says, They take the
pledge of the poor. Job 24.9.

Husbandmen.
THe Husbandman that has but a simple cottage of his own and keeps a beast
or two upon the common to maintain his charge, is to be esteemed a poor man,
whose estate is such as ministers occasion to borow; to whom we ought to lend
without usury, and yet we must not take his cattle for a pledge: for it is
reprooved, You take the widovves Ox to pledge. Job. 24.23. lest in so doing we
sooner impoverish then pleasure him: and it is no more tolerable then to take
the nether or the upper millstone to pledge. Deuteronomy. 24.6. for this gage is his
living.

Young married men.
THe Young married man that is bare to begin the world and wants wherewith to
furnish and follow his trade, is to be esteemed a poor man: the original of
the custom of money-mariages was made as a mean for the benefit of new
beginners, to the end they might gather some stock to set up withal, (which
offerings are now commonly abused amongst the better sort.) For this cause many
godly men have given great sums of money to remain as a stock for ever in the
cities and towns where they dwelt, that it might be freely lent to benefit
such poor beginners, therefore Hemingeus notes this to be one, to whom we
ought to lend without usury.

Generally He is to be deemed a poore-man which has need to borrow and has
nothing that he may conveniently forbear to make money of. He is a rich-man
(in respect of the other) that borrows when he has somewhat which he might
very well spare to make money of.


To take Usury of these men or such like whose poverty appears either in our
conscience or acquaintance, it is a most odious act: for not only the word of
God but all Writers do especially condemn this. The places of Scripture are
before expressed, the opinion of some ancient writers follow.

An crudelior est, says S. Augustine: Is he more cruel that takes any thing
by force from the rich, then he which does crucify the poor with usury.

Nihil vsuris turpius. S. Chrysostom says, there is no usury more filthy then
that which is taken of the poor.

Vsuras quaerere, says S. Jerome. To take Usury of such it is all one to
deceive or draw away by violence.

Sine ferro dimicat. S. Ambrose to that effect says he does revenge him self
without a sword that takes usury.

A praemonition for poor men.
AS you are desirous to borrowe when you need, so you must be careful to pay
when you borrow, although you ought to pay no usury at all, yet I cannot find
in all the scriptures but that you ought to pay your debts. The Psalmist says,
The wicked borrovveth and pays not again. Psalm. 37.21. the poor widow made
a conscience to pay her debts that had but a pitcher of oil, for this cause
the Prophet did increase her oil, and willed her first to go sell some of it
to pay her debts, and she and her children to live of the rest. 2. King. 1.2.
there is now no fruition of the 7. year of freedom unless the Creditours of
their conscience will release their debts.

The opinion of Writers concerning VSVRIE.
S. Barnard calls usury, venenum patrimonij, the poison of a man's
inheritance, he says in another place, Quid est vsura legalis? latro
praedicens quod intendit scilicet rapere. S. Chrysostom says, that usury in
his time was accounted an extreme impudency. hom. 57.

S. Hierome says, usury is a special cry of sedition.

S. Basil upon the 14. Psalm. says that usury have been the means to bring
many an one to the halter, his meaning is by paying usury they have grown
poor, and so fall astealing, and at last come to hanging.

Iustinius the Emperor in the civil law says, that to take usury is to rob
by order and sufferance of law.

M. Beza says, Christian charity forbids a man to put forth money to usury.

Bish. Iuell says, that usury hardens the heart: it is the curse of God and
the people.

S. Ambrose upon the 22. of Ezekiel. says, See how the Prophet has coupled
Idolatry and Usury together that one might counterpoise the other in evil.

Pomerianus says, that usury is the present poison of the Church and
commonwealth.

Musculus says, grant usury and then take away the law of love: he terms it
in another place, the fire of Usury as a thing that consumes.

Lactantius says, let a Christian take this course, that in lending he take no
usury, for that is against the law of lending. lib. 6. cap. 18.

Vnaprincipalis ratio Bartholomei Sepolitani. against usury, if a man should
pay for that he borrow, he should give increase for his own, for he that
lends does transfer the dominion and the use together.

Melancthon does allege the like reason, lending to Usury fights with
aequalitie: for the rule of aequality says it is not lawful to make again of
another man's goods.

Luther complained in his time that Usury had overthrowen whole countries.

The ancient Romans for a time abhorred Usury as a special enormitie, but
after they gave entertainment to it, it turned to to their destruction. Hem.

Egypt was overwhelmed with usury, and so were the Iarmyns.

The Persians abstain it as a practice of lying and deceit.

The Indians can not abide it, nor the Frenchmen.

The Englishmen have loathed it as Chronicles record before the Danes and
Saxons.

Most countries have contemned usury, as a thing very odious and against
nature, therefore many which were led but by the light of nature have inveyed
against it.

Aristotle says, that usury is against nature: his reason is this, Pecunia
natura non potest parere ergo vsuram expecunia capere pugnat cum natura.

Plutarcke says, that it is against nature to take usury, for this cause Ex
nihilo nihil fit.

Alphon sus says, that usury is the very death of nature.

Cato being demanded what it was to take usury, answered, Quid hominem
occidere?

Plato made a law, that he which took usury, he should lose both the
principal and the usury. And for that it was so execrable, he did expel all
usury out of his commonwealth. in quinto de legibus.

I could repeat many others to this effect, but we may perceive how usury
has been esteemed by these; although it be a principle in reason, that the
practice being ill reputed of, the practitioner can have no better, yet it
shall not be amiss to set forth the discredible account has been made of
Usurers in most ages and times.

How Usurers have been accounted of.
HEmingeus being a boy, says he could not remember above 2. known Usurers in
the land he lived in, they flourished a while, but their children after them
came to poverty and reproach, so true is that verse,

Ex male quaesitis non gaudet tertius haeres. In the 12. Centuries 4 chap. it
is reported by those that wrote that ecclesiastical Story, that there was not
an Usurer to be found in all the country, and if an usurer came to be known,
his houses were called the devils houses, his fields the devils croppe, etc.

Brunnion preaching upon a time to his people in the presence of some usurers;
he demanded if any usurer were present, not an usurer would speak: insomuch as
he asked if any Scavinger were there: a Scavinger made answer he was one:
hereupon the preacher said, the scauinger was of better account then the
usurer: for the Scavinger was not ashamed to hear and answer to his name and
title when he was called, but the usurer was.

The Usurers are ashamed at this day of their title, more then other men: some
write themselves gentlemen, merchants: others, grocers, mercers, but they will
not write themselves Usurers: for indeed they are ashamed of the name and word
of usury, and therefore they have got these fine terms: they will not say,
let their money to usury; but to interest, or put it to vsans, or they take
consideration, rent, or an honorable reward. If they did think well of
usury, they would never cloak it under other contracts.

David praying against his enemies, Psalm. 99. wishes them this plague, Let the
extortioner take all his goods. The Septuaginta, Pagne, Tremellius and Iunius
translate this word extortioner, Usurer.

Musculus commenting upon the same place says, see how David prays that his
enemies might light in the usurers hands; noting thereby what a curse it was to
go to an usurer, and how the usurer was the means to convey the same curse
to others.

The Prophet Amos chap. 8. cries out against such as sold the poor for old
shoes. Gualter writing upon that place says, it is common to all, but
specially to the usurers.

S. Ambrose complained in his time, that by the means of usurers, parents were
enforced to set forth their children to sale, or bind them to captivity, for
the payment of their debts, and yet never came to possess their inheritance.

Luther reports that Caesar commanded that an usurer should not be counted and
judged by law an honest person.

M. Calvin says, it is rare to see an honest man and an usurer.

Baldus says, an usurer is a defamed person, and shall not enjoy such goods as
are given him.

Hemingeus says, the usurer might not make an offering at the altar, neither
was he preferred to dignity or called to offices.

Those which travel the low Countries say the usurer is so basely accounted
of, that no man will be in his company, and you shall sooner get one to go to
a brothel-house then to an usurers house.

The celebration of a mass would never suffer the usurer to kiss the paxe;
none would fetch fire at an usurers house; the boys wondered and all men hist
at an usurer.

A thief was better esteemed then an usurer: for a thief was to make but
double restitution, the usurer quadruple. Heming. Iac. 5.

Licurgus would not suffer an usurer to dwell in Sparta, nor Plato any to dwell
in Graecia.

If the Scripture wills us to shun things of ill report, what account shall
we make of an usurer that has so bad a report.

Epiphonema.
WHether we are to regard in these Writers, the time, because it is many years
since some of them wrote; or the place, because most are foreign writers, where
the generation of the Jews are hardly rooted out; or any such like
circumstances. Certes I would not wish the Usurer to stand upon such cauils,
but seeing not only the word of God, but all ages, nations, laws, and sects
of persons do condemn usury as a sin most odious and opprobrious, I would
have him observe that same fast in Esaias 58.6. to loose the bonds of wickedness.
S. Hierome writing upon that place, understands by it the extreme bonds that
Usurers wrappe others in, So getting his goods in the fear of God, they will
be to his comfort while he lives, and without prick to his conscience when he
dies.

FINIS.

