A litell dialogue off the Consolator co^fortynge the Church in her
afflictions, taken out off the 129. psalm. Composed in french by. M. Peter du
Val. And translated into English by Robart Pownoll. Anno 1556. Men's. Iunij.

Comfort them that are feable minded, lift up the weak, and be patient
toward all men. 1. Thessa. 5.

Our Lord Jesus Christ him self, and God our father (which has loved us,
and has gyven everlasting consolation, and good hope through grace) comfort
your hertes, and stablyshe you in all good saying and doing. 2. Thessalo. 2.

Anno. 1556. Men's. Iunij. 14.

To the fayghtfull.
FOR as myche as in all ages, the Lord God (and that by his secret and just
judgment, and for certain causes expressed unto us in his holy Scriptures)
has always exposed and gyven over his people, to the ragynge rygoure, and
violent affliction off the wicked: so that wordly wysdom blinded, does esteem
the condition and state of the fayghtful most unfortunate. Being subject to
so many myseres, contemned of men, destituted off riches, afflicted by
pouertye, assauted off tyrrantes, banyshed out off their own cou^tryes,
their goods confysked, some time imprisoned, oftentimes mordered, drowned,
buried quycke, hedded, bornte, hanged, and extemed no more then the fylthynes
off the world, and the ofcowrynge off al things. And on the other side seeing
the wicked (given over to all ungodliness) prosper in felicite, abound in
wealth, increace in riches, continewe in health, lusty in body, mighty in
power, having the world at their will, in shuche sort that their condition
in respect off the other, is to be desired: so that this temptation does not a
little troble the simple minded, who consider no thing but that which they see
presently before their eyes. Wherefore to preve^t shuche a mased bashfulnes as
now occupyethe the minds off a great many of simple well dyspoced people: and
some what to elivate and styre up their declyned spiretes. I have thought good
to remedy the same by some little consolation: the which amongst the offices
off charity does not pocesse the last place, and ought never to be far
dystant from the feloshipe off the fayghtfull. For as callamites and troubles
shall never fail them this world: even so behouethe it them to haall ways in
their hand, in their mouth, and in their heart, godly co^solatio^ and
comfort, which at this present is most necessary unto the chyldryne off God,
yff ever it were requysite: seeing that tribulations do now abou^de with out
measure more then in times paste. For in thesse days whether so ever the
fayghtfull go, or torn them selves: either the fyres are ready kendled to
consume them, or the prisons and dongions are open to ressayve the^, or else
their howses and goods are sealed up by the feales off unjust justices to
impoueryshe them, or else they fleinge hither and thither as poor slaves and
vacabondes, destitute both off money and fryndds do suffer infinite miseres and
pouertyes, and are compelled to supporte a thousand opprobres and iniures, as
people forsaken and utterly unworthy off all goodness. With out omittynge, that
they are compassed about with an innumerable multitude off adversaries:
amongst whom on the one side are thosse great and ferefull giantes with their
rabble of grevous greshoppers, to wytt, the Pope, his Lardenales, Archebishopes,
Bishops, Myters, Crosses, Croissyers, thounderynge and rorynge with their
titeles, Sa^ctissimi, Cole^dissimi, Reuerendissimi, Obseruandissimi: and about
the^ are their Prothenotares Archedeacons, Chanones, Curates and Prestes, with
an infinite number of monks and friars: all to gyther animated and enflambed
to war against the humble herted, and ferynge God. On the other side are
armed the Ceasars inuictissimi, the Rings illustrissimi, the Princes
fortissimi, with all their nobilitey: under who^ the earth tremblethe, and the
world quakethe. On the other side are the grave Presedentes, the prudent
Counsaylors, the facounde Advocates, and eloque^t Lawyers, with their cruel
bands: amongst whom, some do set up the galowes, some other do prepare the
fagotes, other some have in their hands, Gyvers, Fetters, Manacles, and all
other kind of tortures ready to put them in practysse.

On the other side, are the worshupfull master Doctore, the reuere^de
Bachelors, the venerable Rectors, the learned Regentes, the wysse Masters, and
all shuche others, ready fornyshed with their weapons. What ca^ preuaylle
against so mighty an arm? Ca^ thosse that take part with Jesus Christ, which
seem to be so feable? Seeing that the most part off them are people poor off
spirete, simple as doves, sheep affocision, with out riches, void off fryndes,
extemed apostates, dyspyced craftesmen, handy laborers, unarmed, exposed to all
dangers, condemned as unprofitable, expelled, whypped, banyshed scaffolded,
weryed, travayled, nypped, dejected, imprisoned, stocked, fettered, and
destituted off all defense, except off that tow edged sword, which is the
word off God: Against whom, in the mean time, the adversaries do conventicle,
consulte conspire, conjure: do weapon them selfs, battle them selfs,
fortyfye them selfs, do imagen, enterpryce, atte^pte, do sow abrod lyinge
letters, sklanderous reports, untrue tales, imagenynge vain things, they
thounder, they tempeste, they roar, and attempt al possible means, to ruinate
and dystroye them: They on the other side, weeping, fasting, praynge
blyshynge, dissembling their sorrow, coverynge their heavynes, sacreficynge
unto God their tears, abiding in this world no thing but blows, strypes,
contumeles, torments, pains, greffes, molestations and miseryes. Yff then
shuche be not consolated and comforted by the holy scryptures, wherein only is
all refuge, Joy and delectation: how can they co^tinewe without loss of
corrage? What man off war is there be he never so valiante, whosse enymes
semynge invisible, and seeing him self suddenly enclosed with them, that is not
forth with abashed and dismayed, unless he be boldened with a sure persuasion
of notable and honorable victory? And co^trarywysse what is he so feable and
faynte herted that seeing before his eyes his victorious captain skyrmyshynge
with his enymes, brekynge their array, beatynge down the mightiest,
ouertrowynge the valienteste and, and levynge the rest effeminated,
discorraged, weryed, and all most dyscomfited, that will not pull up his
stomach and boldly thruste him self into the battayll, and specially having a
sure promys off his Captain to be crowned with triumph after the fight. And
does not this fruit off perseuera^ce prosede from the pleasant tree off
consolation? who all ways promyseth, a joyful issewe after sorrow, calmnes
after tempeste, light after darkness, swetnes after sowrnes, perpetual peace
after a moment off unquietness, infinite glory after a little pain? The father
off all mercy and God off all consolation, 2. Cor. 1.
which comfort the us in all our tribulatio^s, grant that we may be able to
comfort them that are in any manner off trouble, with the same comfort where
with we our selves are conforted off him: and as the afflictions off Christ
are plentious in us, and in all that are his, that even so every one off us may
be plentious in consolation by Christ. For this cause then, as the most lest
warryoure, I have wyllyngly accomodated my self, to incorrage to the uttermost
off my power my follow soldioures that now do sustain the wayght and bronte
off the battle. And as in a battayll all are not appointed to fight and
strycke, but some to sound the trompet, some the drome and some to play upon
the phiffe, thereby to encorrage the soldioures: even so I can do no les, and
all other that there unto are called with me, but to noise the phiffe, to use
the pen, to play with my fyngers upon the Davideicall harp, to sound the
prophetical trompet and to stryke up the Evangelical drome, thereby to anymate
and corrag to the battayll the hertes off the worthy warryors and valiante
soldiers off Jesus Christ: exteminge on my part to have much profyted, yff
with the sound off this little phiffe, I may any thing confort the fainte
herted, anymate the weak corraged, and strenghten thosse that by feablenes do
either halte with the time, or straye a side, to the end they may be restored
unto their former vigoure and boldness again: for even for them chefly do I
presently sound it: trusting to ressayve double Joy there by, yff in any
thing it may profit them: Knowing the most valiant and strongest soldiers,
at the sondrye noyses off trompetes and dromes sounded vplo^ge ago to have all
ready wonderfully put their enymes to the foil: off who^, As off, Cra^mer,
Latemer Ridlye, Hopper, Bradforthe, Sanders, PhilPot, Tailor, Farrer,
Cardmaker, Rogers, with many other worthy vvarriours.
some having trauarsed the batail, by fire, by watter, by sword and diverse
other torments which they have suffered in passing through: have now preuaylled
over their enymes, and do were the triu^phant crown off glory. The other as
yet being in the greatest thronge off the battle, do most valia^tly and
corragiously sustain the violent assautes of thosse Elephantes, Lions, Bears,
Tigers, Bores, Wolfes, Dogs, Bulls, and all other shuch cruel kind off
beasts, in whosse assautes they are sufficiently anymated to penetrate the
breach of their adversaries. To the end then that I do not rone at an
uncertain thing, 1. Cor. 9.
nor fight as one that beatethe the air? I have put my felfe into the arraye
with the fayghtfull Champions off Jesus Christ, for to sou^de the alarom
against his enymyes: And all though this my phiffe do make no great noise, for
that it is but little: yet never the les he that will gyve atte^tyve ear unto
the same (in mine opinion) shall find the same replete with sufficient
harmonye, and not ill agreynge with the tro^petes, clarious and dromes that
has been sounded all ready, all thought his tune be not so high. I am right
well assured that it shall play no thing out off the tune off Gods word,
which thing causethe me to judge that it shall be the better hard. Besides
that, the tow persons set forth in this dialogue are right worthy that we
should gyve them audience: For the one is the Church or Congregation off
Christ, and the other is the Consolator or the comfortor. I say notablye the
Church off Christ, the Congregation off the fayghtfull where so ever they be,
Elect to God eternal lyffe: and not the Iudeicall Synagoge, nor the
Mahometical broude, nor all the papisticall Rabble, nor yet none off the
heretical Sectaryes: all the which have no part in this church, founded upon
the doctrine off the Apostles and Prophets: The which Church is introduced in
this dialogue, as sorrowful, morning, troubled, and disco^forted, by cause
off the oppressions, persecutions, calamites, afflictions and torments
wherewith the wicked ungodly tyra^tes and persecutors do moleste her: and that
only by cause that she sustaynethe, defendethe, mayntaynethe and supportethe
the quarrel off her God: off whom she fear the to be forsaken, abandoned and
contemned, as some time it semethe that she is, by cause of her sins. And
therefore most aptly is there also introduced a Consolator for the other
Collocutor, who according to his name does consolate, comfort, and fortifye
her: allegynge unto her many worthy sentences and notable places off the holy
scriptures, which do assure her off the assistance and healpe off her God, off
his good will, and divine providence toward her: promising a most short and
perfyte delyurance off her Cross, the revyne off her enymee, and a croune off
in credible glory: where with finally she contentethe her felfe, and dependethe
upon the same with great confidence. I doubt not that any will say, they are
tow personages ill appropriated: for in mine opinion it is not possible to
accomodate and copell to gyther for this present time, tow persons more apt
and proper. What thing is there in the world more afflicted, then the Church
off Christ? And what thing is more worthy all consolation the^ she? Truly
there is not one off all thosse that notte them selfs to be her fryndes, that
does comfort her: But rather thosse that wont to boste themselves to be her
cheffe fryndes and familiers have utterly contemned and dispyced her. where are
the goodly consolations that, that gentle galla^t the Pope (who bostethe him
self to be her hedde) with all his Clargye, (who preach the^ selves to be her
pillars) that they do minister unto her? Are not thesse theye that ffyrst off
all cry out against her, and upon her, to the fire, to the fire? What
supporte fyndethe she off the kings and prices of this world, that so much
afflicte her on every side (exsepte off a very few) who not withstandinge
ought to be her ^orses? But how should they comfort this so poor afflic
Church, which they esteem as the of courynge off the world, when as by most
cruel wars and blouddy battailles they do so miserablye devour their own
proper subjects? We must then search some other Consolator and comfortor,
the^ thesse before named. But in searchynge we shall not find the true
Consolator any where else, but where as she is, to wit, prou. 30.
in God only, who all ways does co^solate the humble and afflicted, in
gyvynge them eternal consolation by his word, the which is asure defense and
buckler, unto all thosse that trust in the same: from the^s the^ we must
ressayve her. For which cause I have helped my self with the.129 psalm off
David, which semethe unto me very fytt for the purpose. For in the same, the
state off the Church, of her persecutions and afflictions, and off her
perpersecutors, with the Issew and end as well off her that is persecuted, as
off her persecutors, is so fully dystrybed. that with mythe a do there can be
found any one place more fytt for this purpose, all though that through out
all the Psaulter this song be often repeted. And I would to God that all
thosse that sing the psalms taking pleasure in the voice may in shuche sort
taste the words and sense off the same, that they may ressayve as much
consolation in their souls by the deep consyderation theroff as they gyve
melodye to their ears by their voice, the which with out the sense is all
together unprofitable. I will confess freely, that I have more serched in this
Psalm, that which seruethe to the purpose off the dialogue, to comfort the
fayghtfull and weak, then any exquysyte or subtle interpretation, that may be
gathered and borrowed out off the books off shuche as have written upon the
Psaulter. But me thynkes that I here al ready some that say with Nathanaell?
Can there come any good thing out off Nazarethe? To whom I will answer: Come
and se. A little vessel sometime contaynethe good lyquoure. And it is not so
myche to be passed on, what the vessel is, nor whens it comethe, so the
lyquoure be good that is drawn out off it. Finally, this little, being
ressayved and accepted in good part, and that it does engender some good
appetyte in the heart off thosse that with saffe to taste the same: It shall
occasion me to take pleasure to prepare some other dishe no less delectable to
the taste then this is: But the vometyng up off this, will cause me to cease
from the rest, for it were but lost labor and exspe^ces ill employed to
prepare meat, and no man to have any appetyte to eat it. And yet this myche
will I say, that he is very ill co^plexioned, and has utterly lost his
stomach and taste, that cannot digeste and savor this little morsel off meat,
seeing that it is all to gyther composed and prepared off heavenly co^fections,
in the which chefly co^sistethe the lyffe off man, who lyvethe not by bread
only, but by every word that prosedethe out off the mouth off God, off the
which it is said that it is like the rain and snow which comes down from
heaven, and retornethe not thither again, Esa. 55.
but waters the eat the and makethe it frutfull and grene, that it may gyve
corn unto the sower, and bread unto him that eats: Even so the word of God
does not return to him in vain, but does acco^plyshe his will, and prosper
in the things where unto he sendethe it. Those the^ are to much simple, that
followynge the hou^grey fools, do imploye their money in that which is no
bread, and their labor about the thing that does not satisfye and will not
gyve ear unto the lord to eat the thing that is good, Sapi. 7.
to the end their soul may have pleasure in his plentiousnes. The lord gyve us
his wisdom, in the which is the spiret off understanding, which is holy,
intere, plentyfull, subtle, courtoys, discrete, quycke, undefiled, plain,
sweet, lovynge the thing that is good, sharp, which forbyddeth not to do
well, gentle, kind, steadfast, sure, fre, having all virtues, syrcomspecte
in all things, which comprehendethe all spiretes off understanding, being
pure and sharp.

So be it.
FINIS.
A most comfortable dialogue betwyne the Consolator / and the Church.
The Consolator. WHen as I do behold and consider the Church, the Spouce off
Jesus Christ, the Elect and chosen off God, by the malice off men, to be so
evell handeled, and unworthily entreated: bendynge under the cross, fatigated
with stripes, buffited with blows, seasoned with sorrow, travelynge in
travail as a woman ready to be delyvered: being moved with compassion, I
desire ernestly to comonicate with her, and to comfort her to the utter most
off my power: to the end I may some what assuage her sorrow and induce her to a
vertious and constant perseverance.


The Church. Lament. 3.
How long O God infinitely good, wilt thou abandon and leave me to the crualtye
off intractable tyra^tes? Gene. 3.
It semethe properly, O my lord, that thou have set me as a butt against thine
arrowe: Lament. 3
For I do most bitterly feale the sharp stynge of the serpent against my
hele: Not witstandyng thou know right well the wrong that is done unto me,
and how mine enymes do sharpy pursewe me, and hou^t me out as a bird: Yea and
that with out a cause. And yet all this whyll O eternal God thou doeste
dissimule and hold thy peace, and semeste that thou haste forgotten me.


The Consolator. Joy be with the, grace, peace, and mercy from God the father
and from the Lord Jesus Christ, O thou best beloved amongst all other.


The Church. What joy is that thou gretest me with all, that am assauted with
so many enymes? Tobi. 5. Judge. 5. psalm. 65.
And yff I be so myche beloved as thou sayeste, where for then are all thesse
things happyned unto me? Where are all the marvayles off the lord that are
expressed unto me in his holy scriptures? He has with drawn his hand, psalm.
89.
his right arm is hyd in his besome. His wrathful displeasures are gone over
me, and his ferefulnes has oppressed me: They do daily compass me about like
water, and they have enclosed me on every side. My Lovers and fryndes has he
put away from me, and shuche as are off mine acquayntance, psalm. 90.
are in darkness and hyd out off my syghte. Where are now his first mercyes
become, that he swear to perform unto me before, by his fayghte?


The Consolator. In herynge the moon and complain thou shall possible cause
thosse that have not known the, to be abashed and astoyned. I do not as yet
persayve the cause off thy lamentation: onles it be, by cause thou warest aged,
which naturally lovethe rest: parauenture it greuethe the to endure pain.


The Church. I do not deny but that I am old, and off a great Age, yea
lovynge rest: But I am not as yet so feeble, neither has strenght so utterly
forsaken me, but that (by the grace off my God) I purpose fyrmely to resyste
thosse stryffes and battaylles that are erected against me. And whereas thou
calleste me aged, It ought not to abashe the for that I moan my self: for as
much as it is commonly said, every aged co^playnethe his sorrow. And forther
more, it is no dishonor unto me to complain and cast forth my sobbing
syghtes before my spouce, thereby to provoke him to inclyne to help me.


The Consolator. Against whom?


The Church. Do thou make inquisition of a thing so apparent? do thou
not se how I am daily compassed about with most cruel bestes, as Lions,
Bears, Tigres, Leopardes, Wolves, Foxes, psalm. 79.
that seek no thing else but to devour me? They have given for meat unto the
birds off the ayere, the dead bodies of my chyldrin: And the flesh off my
holy ones unto the bestes off the land: Theye shede their blood like water:
They are become an open shame unto their enymes, and a very scorn and
derysion unto them that are round about them: And yet thou askeste, agai^ste
whom? Behold France, Italye, Spain, Flanders, and now also England, and
all other shuche contryes, and thou shall see their prisons full off my
chylderin, the ashes off some fleing in the ayere, the blood off others
trodde^ under fotte, some trembling in their howses a bydynge an unjust
justice, other some al sorrowful fleing away, leave wyffe and childrin: some
levynge their goods, are as slaves in strange lands: other some in tears
and sorrow do end their days in the high ways, void off all honest
buryall: And yet thou askeste what I ayle? Is not this a sufficient cause for
me to morn and complain?


The Consolator. It is so. But what more have they done unto the?


The Church. Text.
They have vexed me, they have made a thowsande assautes against me.


The Consolator. This is not only then happyned off late unto the: How long is
it syns?


The Church. Text.
Even from my birth hitherto, even from the tender age off my youth.


The Consolator. Thou art then very strong, seeing thou haste been able so
long time to resist the grevous assautes off so many enymes.


The Church. psalm. 18.
They had long a gone spoiled and dystroyed me, yff the lord God (who is my
stony rock and my defense) had not preserved me. But in his protection I do
remain invincible: Text.
so that hither to mine enymes have not vanqueshed me, nor prevayled against me.


The Consolator. Did they but only moleste and torment the?


The Church. The Plowers plowed upon my back, Text.
and made long forrowes: yea they did purpose to have bound me with their
cords, and utterly to have undone me.


The Consolator. And what happyned? who hyndered them.


The Church. But the Lord that is ryghtous has hewn the snares of the
ungodly in pieces. Text.



The Consolator. Well then, be off good chere, seeing thou art under the shadow
and safgarde off shuche a lord: for all those that hate the shall be confounded
and turned back. They shall be even as the grass growing upon the howsse
tops, which wythereth a fore it be plucked up: Text.
Wheroff the mower fyllethe not his hand, nor the glener his bosom: so that
they which go by, say not so much as the lord prosper you: we wyshe you good
luck in the name off the Lord


The Church. Truly thou haste comforted me, and haste spoken to the
contentation of my heart.


The Consolator. Esai. 61.
Even therefore am I come, to comfort the. For the lord has sent me to bring
glade tidings unto the afflicted, to bind up the wounded hertes, to preach
delyverance to the captyve, and to open the prison to them that are bound, to
comfort them that are in heavynes, and that bewtye might be gyven unto them in
the stead off ashes, the oil off joy in the stead of lamentation, and
pleasant raiment for a hevy mind. It is no reason then that to the, being so
desirous off the glory off God, I should deny that which only thou art
worthy off. And so myche the rather do I it wyllyngly and gladly, for that I
know, it shall torn to thy comodite. Wherefore then, as thowchynge the first
part (O vertious Church) whereas thou complayneste that they have vexed and
tormented the wroughtfullye? Art thou ignorant off this, that to have the
grain off corn out off the ere, it must be first thresshed, and then fa^ned
before it can be separated from the chafe? To make wine, behovethe it not
first of all to gather the grape, and after to bring it to the press, to
the end the good wine may be separated from the husks?

Does it greve the then, that God purposynge to place the in his grayner, does
separate the from the chafe (prepared for the fire inextinguible) by a little
threshinge and betynge? Art thou sorry, that being put into the new barrelles
of the lord, thou art not cast forth with the husks unto the hogs? Hebr.
12.
I think well that this affliction which thou now suffer, does not seem
unto the to be Joyous, but grevous: but be assured that afterward it bryngethe
the quyete fruit off ryghtousnes unto the^ that are excercised thereby. For
truly the lord wylbe the defense of al thine, early in the morning, Esai. 33.
2. Cor. 4.
and their health in the time of trouble: the which is but momentany and
light, and yet it preparethe an exceadynge and an eternal wayghte off glory
for the fayghtfull afflicted, Roma. 8.
whosse afflictions in this lyffe as I suppose are not worthy off the glory to
come, Hebr. 11.
which then shall be showed upon them. Doste not thou remember that Moses being
great, and elevated into honor, refused to be called the son off Pharaos
daughter. Chusynge rather to suffer aduersite with the people of God, then to
enjoy the pleasures off sin for a ceason, extemynge the rebuke off Christ
greater riches then the treasures of Egypt, having respect unto the reward?
2. Cor. 7.
Did not thy son Paul say, that he was exceeding joyous in all his
tribulations? Act. 5.
And other thine apostles did they not in departing from the counsayll rejoice
that they were counted worthy to suffer rebuke for the name of Jesus Christ?
Phil. 1.
Is it not also gyven to the fayghtful for Christ, not only to beleve in him,
but also to suffer for his name sake, having a like fight? 2. Tim. 2.
For it is a true saying, that thosse that are dead with Christ, shall also
lyve with him, and thosse that suffer with him shall also reign with him.
David so often times oppressed with tribulation, does he not contynewally
comfort him self in the confidence off the promyses off God, as it apperethe
in the 10.17.22, 25. psalms, as in diverse other? Even so then knowing that
all things prosperous or adverse do work for the best unto them that love
god: Romans 8.
Cease the^ thy lamentations and comfort thy self in him.


The Church. Off good rygh I ought to love the, and reverence the, (O
Consolator) in reputing my self happy to have met with the, no thing
doutynge but that thy coming unto me is a synguler gift off God. Wherefore
perswadynge my self off thine accustomed cleme^cye, I will devyce so myche the
more familiarly with the: Let it not seem strange unto the the^, that I do move
unto the the same question that the holy prophet Jeremy so myche experime^ted
with afflictions: Iere 12. Psalm 73. Job. 21. Abac. 1.
David so faightful and renowned a king: Job the just, the invincyble rock
of patience: and Abacuc the vertious, have done: al they not a little
meruelynge to se the wicked abound in prosperity. And for my part I am not so
myche perplexed and sorrowful for all the oultrages and iniures that they do
unto me in my members, as to se the holy name off my God blasphemed, blamed,
and defamed. As also to hear that the Seducers, are called holy Doctors.
People co^tagious, good Religious. The Apostates, Apostles. The wicked,
vertious. The persecutors, zelators. The poluted, undefiled: And contrarywysse
the peace makers are said to be heretykes, and troublers off comen wealths:
and good people are extemed worsse then dogs: But yet the thing that most
troubles my children: and ministers matter off pride unto the ignorant, is,
that the lord semethe interely to resist against thosse that by all means
seek to avaunce his glory: and on the other side is favorable unto thosse that
do resist him with all their power: from the which thing only proceadeth
that diverse do affirm, the evell to be good, and the good to be evell: light
to be darkness, Esa. 5.
and darkness to be light: sower to be sweet, and sweet to be sower. I could
produce unto the sufficient examples hereof out off all ages past, yff we had
not now in thesse days some presently priest before our eyes. What fayghtfull
man is there, that does not sobb and mourn when as he remembrethe that
miserable realm eff England? Whosse eyes are so dried up, that does not
distyll plenty off tears, to be hold, A land so floryshynge, A king so well
instructed, Churches so well reformed, to have had so sodde^ a fall, so spedy a
rewyne, and so hasty an overthrow? Was there ever tragedy more tyrryble,
horror more horrible, and judgment more admerable? To behold the holy service
off God and his divine word so tyrannously trodden under fotte, dysdaynfully
disspiced, and contemptiously corrupted: and contrarywysse the servyle
supersticious servyces off idols erected and avansed. What may the wicked
seduced say at this present, or at lest ways (all though they speak not) what
do they think? Do they not say, that either the word that was preched off
late, was not the pure word off God, or else they think that God is weaker
then the devell, seeing that he does not defend and mayntay-his word. Is not
this an intolerable blasphemye and worthy to be lamented?

where fore yff there be any exhortation in Christ, Phil. 2.
yff there by any consolation off charity, I pray the power forth the same in
me.


The Consolator. I will not depreue the off that, for the which (as I said
before) I was sent unto the. Wherefor to satisfye unto thy first request,
whereby thou we^teft about to prove the occasion of thy sorrow to be just,
allegynge for the same diverse testimonies worthy off credyte which here to fore
were produced off shuche as were perplexed as thou art now: The one purposynge
to dispute with God, and to talk in judgment with him. Iere. 12. Psalm. 73.
Job. 21. Abac. 1.
The other saying that his fette were al most gone, and his treadynges had well
nigh slypte. The third troublynge him self said that fere had pocessed his
flesh. And the fourth complaynethe to have cried violently, and yet not
heard. Wherein it behooves the to understand that not witstandynge the
fidelite, virtue, and piete of thesse holy men, yet had they their humayne
affections, off the which the scriptures has not kept silence, to declare
thereby that no thing is perfytt but one only God, who has easily pardoned
them that fault, wherein also they did not remain, as weary well declares
their godly sayings afterward. Forther more it may be said with out
straynge from the truth that shuche questions are as excessyve admirations off
minds, transported and rapte into the judgment off God. Considering that a
no^ after, Abac. 1.
one off the^ says: O lord my God my holy one, thine eyes are clear, thou
may not se evel, thou cannest not behold the thing that is wicked. The
other does he not say with a great confidence: Iere. 12.
But thou Lord to whom I am well known, thou have seen me, and proved my
heart? And David coming to him self does he not say by and by after: Psalm.
73.
Yea I had all most said eve^ as they, but Lo then I should have comdemned the
generation off the children off God, until I went into the sanctuarye off the
lord, then understood I the end off the wicked? Job. 21.
But Job speaking more profoundly said: who ca^ teach God any knowledge, in as
myche as he has the highest power off all? For other wysse it is written:
Esa. 45.
Cursed be he that stryuethe against his maker, as the pott against the
potter: seeing that he is that great lord formynge the light, and creatynge
darkness, making peace, and creatynge aduersite: Has he not created the
waster to distroye? Job. 5.
Is not he also the almighty, that makethe the wound, and layethe to the
plaster? that hurtethe and makethe whole again? Job. 9.
Who shall say unto him the^, wherefore doste thou this or that, and be reputed
innocent? And therefore the justice off his will is a sufficient contentation
in this behalf: not witstandynge the scriptures does here and there declare
certain causes. Wherefore then as to wchynge the wicked, I believe that thou art
not offended with the goodness that God does unto them. Math. 5.
Causynge his son to shine upon them, and sendynge them rain, Math. 20
as to the good: for other wysse that great father off how should might justly
allege against the, that which was said unto the murmerynge laborers: Is it
not lawful for me to do with mine own what I will? And, thyn eye, is it evel
by cause I am good: But I persayve very well that the cheffe cause why thou art
offended, is, to behold the godly comtemned, dispyced, persecuted, oppressed,
and God in them dyshonored: Thou haste all ready hard how that every man in
this respect ought to captyvate his understanding, and to subdew him self
unto the pleasure off God, as he has also wylled us to pray, That his will be
done in earth as it is in heaven, being rich and plentyfull in both.

Psalm. 115.
For all the wholl heavens are the lords, the earth has he gyve^ unto the
children off men: yea even to the wicked to the end that there by they might be
made inexcusable, Job. 9.
when as God shall reproach them off their ingratitude, and that there was no
let in him why they should not be ressayved into the riches off the celestial
kingdom: seeing that he has all ready so benyngly allured them there unto by
earthly goods and pleasures. Even so was it answered unto that wicked Dives
being in torments in hell: Luc. 16.
Son (said Abraham unto him in whosse bosom was Lazarus one off thy
children) remember that thou ressayvedst felicyte in this lyffe, and Lazarus
ressayved pain, and now is he comforted, and thou art tormented. Even so then
the wicked neither belevynge nor scerchynge any thing else but things
temporal: God does gyve unto them some time, for some special respect,
prosperyte: wherein also shynethe forth the greatness off his mercy. And this
truly may suffice to co^tente the: understanding that god reseruinge to thosse
that are his, the celestial treasour and riches to come, he will not have them
to muse and to be carfull about the felicites and pleasures off this world:
which compared to the things eternal are no thing but vanite and miserye.

And all be it that he has some time gyven to some off his fayghtfull
servantes abondance off riches, as to Abraham, Isaac, David, and others: yet
has he always myxed the same with many aduersites and troubles, be cause he
would with draw their hertes from things cadu^que and corruptible, to
stablyshe the same on things perfytt and durable. But myche more syns the
coming off Christ, who knowing fully the will off his father has more
amplye expressed as well by doctrine, as conversation that by many tribulations
it behooves us to enter into the kingdom off heaven. Act. 14.
And he him self being set forth for a sign off contradiction, Luc. 2.
Hebr. 12.
for the joy that was set before him, abode the cross, dispiced the shame,
and suffered shuche gain saying off sinners against him. It ought not then to
greve them that bear his name, to be are also his mark: neither ought the
members to presume to pas by any other way then the hedd has done. For the
father has set him forth for an example unto all that are his, and we must
ask non other reason theroff, but that which the apostell. S. Paul gyvethe, to
wytt, that God has made the wysdo^ off this world folyshnes, 1. Cor. 1.
in that it pleasethe him by the preaching off the cross (which the world
reputeth folishnes) to save thosse that believe: 1. pet. 4.
who ought not to be abashed when as they are proved, as in a furnace, in as
myche as they do comonycate in the afflictions off Christ. who not
witstandynge has suffered for an other occasion and purpose, then do his
fayghtfull, as also his blood is off an other nature the^ is the blood of his
marters: 1. pet. 3.
For Christ has suffered for the sins of all the world, the ryghtouse for
the vnryghtouse, as he in whosse mouth there was found no gyle: But thou most
commonly in the person of thy children, psalm. 32.
thou suffreste for thy sins, the which never the les it pleasethe the lord
to hyde and cover, and through his inexplicable mercy not to impute them unto
the: But rather in thine afflictions makethe the confirmable unto the image of
his son, Romans 8. Hebr. 5
who has learned obedience by the things that he has suffered: whose blood
also does produce and budd forth better things, the^ the blood off thosse
that are thine: For the blood of Christ does bow and inclyne God to mercy,
Hebr. 12.
and publyshethe the glade tidings of peace. Where as the blood off thy
children prouokethe the justice of God, Gene. 4. Apoc. 6.
and cryethe for vengance against thosse that shede the same, to whom
co^maundment is gyven to rest a little, till shuch time as the number off
their follow serva^tes be acco^plyshed: and their brytherne who must be
slain, as they are. Whereby it apperethe that the number off the sanctified
marters off Christ are not yet accomplyshed. 3. Reg. 19
Forther more when as Helias did complain to be left alone, having the zeal
off the lord: Answer was made unto him that in Israel there were yet
reserved.vij. m. whosse knes were never bowed before Baall.

Romans 2.
This is a another cause also off the patience of God, that for the love off his
children does some time spare the wicked, whom he by his long contynewed
patience and benyngnyte does inuitate and provoke to repentance.


The Church. Thou haste greatly recreated and forty fyed my spirete, with thy
sweet sayings: so that thou have al most dried up my tears: or at least wysse
changed them: for whereas before I did bewail with sorrow off heart the
afflictions off my children, thou do now mynyster matter unto me to sorrow
rather the impiete off mine adversaryes, in hearing the say, that the
terryble recompense off their wyckednes is eternal death: and that the pains
off my children is but momentanye, abiding an infinite glory. But I pray the
express unto me more abounda^tly by the testimonies off the holy scriptures
this matter, according unto the good gift that god has gyve^ the, Hebr. 4.
wherein only restethe all my joy and comfort: for thou do allege no text
unto me that does not perse even to the devydynge a sonder off the soull and
the spirete, and off the joints and mare. 1. Cor. 6.
Wherefore I require the off the same remuneration, as off my child, and as I
have opened my heart unto the, eve^ so enlarge me thine.


The Consolator. It shall be to me no small pleasure to induce the to yield thy
self laudable in all things, as the seruante off God, 2. Cor. 6.
in my the tribulation, in afflictions, in necessites, in angueshes, in
strypes, in imprisonmentes, in stryves, in labors, in patience, by the armor
off ryghtousnes off the right hand, and on the left hand, by honor and
dishonor, by evel report and good report, in shuche sort that thy children
being extemed as dyssayuers, and yet found verytable, as deiynge and yet
lyvynge, as chastyned and yet not killed, as sorrowynge and yet always merye,
as poor and yet making many rich, as having no thing and yet pocessynge
all things. Col. 1.
Yea it is also very expedient that they do accomplish that which is left
behind off the passions of Christ in their flesh as long as they are in
this world: berynge always every where in their bodies the mortifycation
off the lord Jesus, 2. Cor. 4
that the lyffe off Jesus Christ might appear in their bodies, 1. pet. 4.
with out being ashamed, yff they be afflicted as christeans: knowing that
they do gloryfye God in that behalf: for at the apparynge off the glory of
Christ they shall rejoice with an inexplicable gladness. The which thing also
Jesus Christ does very aptly declare by a proper simylytude, Ioh. 16.
A woman (says he) when she travaylethe, has sorrow, because her hour is
come, but as soon as she is delyvered off the child, she reme^brethe no more
the anguyshe, for the joy that a man is borne into the world, Even so he
promysethe that after their sorrow he will se them again and their hertes
shall rejoice, the which joy no man shall take from them, saying forther more
unto them, In the world ye shall have tribulation, but in me ye shall have
peace, and in the end he does e^corrage the^ with this saying, that he has
overcome the world. To this purpose also serves very well the parabole that
is proposed unto Esdras, 4. Esd. 7.4.
of a sumptious Cite set in a dangerous place, the entrance very narrow and
ill to come to, for at the right hand there is fire, and a deep water at the
left, and but one little strayte pathe betwyrte them both, to wytt, betwyxte
the water and the fire, so small that the pathe co^taynethe but the breadth off
one man: Yff this Cite were now gyven to an heir, and he never went through
the perelous way how would he enjoy his enherytance? Even shuche is the
portion off thy children. The which similitude Jesus Christ confirmethe
saiynge, Mat. 7.
that the way is narrow that leadethe unto lyffe, and few there be that
enter there by. There is no doubt but that this narrow way, is the pathe of
afflyction: 1. pet, 4.
as it is said that the just is scarsely saved by suffrynge: And the cause
is, that Adam having ons tra^sgressed the constitutio^s off the lord, 4. Esd.
10
the entrance off the lyffe to come was forth with made strayte, weary, and
paynfull. And all be it that the same be comone as well to the fayghtfull as to
the vnbelevers: yet is it so, that the almighty God willing to declare his
power toward his children doethe cause them to come to their determined and
most happy end, by things that are contrary: to wit, to sovereign
felycite by great myserye, to honor by dishonor, to blyssynge by cursynge, to
rest and quyetnes by travayll and pain, to joy and gladness by weeping and
sorrow, to tranquylyte and peace by troubles and afflictions, to a haven of
rest by a stormye tempeste, to lyffe by death, to salvation by perils, to
liberty by captyvyte, to light by darkness, to riches by povertye, to
contentation by contempt, to amyte by inimyte, to consolation by dyssolatio^,
to saciete and fulness by hou^ger and nedynes, to pleasure by dyspleasure, to a
moderate coldness by an excessyve heat, to glory by infamye, to a happy state
by an unfortunate means. Wherefore as thou have now present eyperience off
things adverse and troublesome, even so assure thy self off things happy and
prosperous in time to come.


The Church. The more that I hear thy sweet saynges and comfortable
consolations so myche the more do I ressayve co^tentation by the same. Wherefor
blyssed be thou off the lord that haste so myche comforted me. And seeing thou
doste so freely and largly comonycate thy self unto me, I am thereby so myche
the more boldened to dysclose unto the all that lyethe in my heart. Thou
hardest me say even now, Text.
that the wicked have assauted me all the day long, even from my youth up,
and have many times vexed me, but they could never as yet overcome me nor
dystroye me. But I now feale my self greatly debylytated and weakened, as well
for that I am waxen decrepyte and aged, as for that my great age is not so
prompte and apt to sustain shuche grevous blows and buffetes, as when I was
young and strong. And yet not withstandinge the more that I am feabled and
and approchynge toward mine end, so myche the more do they lade me with
strypes: so that I fere me in the end I shall be constrained to yield up my
weapon and armore, and to hold my self for vanqueshed. For even as I do
declyne to impotencye and feablenes, so do mine enymes increase in force and
stre^ghte: yea they have made all ready a wonderful breach in my fortress.
Truth it is, that I have plenty off monytions: but if I throuh weakness cannot
use them, nor defend my self with them, what shall they proffyte me? I was
wount to have the greateste and myghtyeste on my side, but now god has taken
them away from me. There are a great number that in the begynynge did show
them selfs very stout and manly in my defense: The Fait herted.
But afterward wayinge the long contynewance off the battayll, and the great
danger off the same, they are now utterly dyscourraged, and are become very
faint hearted and ferefull. Other some are so gyven over to voluptiousnes, The
Libertines.
in the which they are so drowned that they seek no thing but to have peace
with the enymye, to the end they may wallowe in their wealth, and remain in
their fylthy puddell off fleshly pleasure. The Inco^stante Minded
Othersome throught an inconsta^t lyghtnes have quyte abandoned and forsaken me
at my need, and have united them selfs with mine enymes, to take part with them
against me. Othersome are disperced here and there who do enforce them selfs
to the uttermost off their power not only to wage battayll against me, The
Anabaptists
but also against the Papists mine aduersares. The Davidiens.
Othersome are as spies to spy ont thosse that are most weak, to werye them:
and to pursewe the stronger, to trouble the^. So that fynaly I se none remain
on my side, 1. Cor. 4.
but people condemned to death, shuche as are made agasynge stock unto the
world, to the angels and to men, people that are become fools for Christ's
sake, and dyspiced unto this time, having hounger, thyrste, and nakedness,
being buffyted with fystes, strayinge from place to place laboring and
workynge with their own hands: who are revyled, and yet they bliss: who are
persecuted, and yet thy suffer: who are evell spoken of, and yet they pray:
yea they are made as it were the fylthynes off the world, and the ofscourynge
of all things, even until this day.


The Consolator. Truly thou art worthily compared unto the woman great with
child, Apo. 12.
who cryethe in travel and suffrethe great pain to be delyvered: For the
serpent does most cruelly and continewally fight aagaynste thosse of thy
seade that keep the comau^dement off God: and have the testimonye off Jesus
Christ, whom I doubt not but that thou loueste as a mother her dear children.
But, 4. Esd. 5. Dani. 12.
doeste thou love the^ more the^ he that has made the^? Who by that means
will clence pourge and prove them: whether it be by sword, by fire, by
captyvite, or by the spoil off their goods for a long season. But now I
will answer particularely to all the complayntes that thou haste made. Whereas
thou allegeste that from thy youth up they have vexed the: Lame^. 3.
that ought not to trouble the, seyinge that it is a good thing to take up the
yoocke of the lord in youth, prou. 22.
for so waxethe it the more easy in age, for the way that men are accustomed
to travel in, in their youth, they do not loathe nor refuse in their age.
Wherefore content thy self with the contynewance of this yoocke, for the lord
will not forsake the for ever. And me thynkes that thine age us more to thine
avantage then otherwysse: For the elder thou waxeste, the better ougheste thou
to be exersyced in the war: and the better that thou knoweste the cautel and
sutteltye of thine enymes, so myche the easelyer may thowe over come the^,
for the more experyence that a man has off fighting, so myche the sonner
does he vanquyshe his aduersarye. Which thing ought not a little to encorrage
the, and to pull up a good heart, as one that hops shortly to fynyshe the
battayll, subdew the enyme, and obtain full victory. Wherefore seeing that this
excersyce off fighting is appointed unto the of the lord, 2. Tim. 2.
is it not then thy part like a worthy champion valiantly to stryve un to the
end, for no man that stryvethe for a mastrye shall be crowned, except he strive
lawfullye? They also that ro^ne in a race, ro^ne all, but one berethe away the
price, namly he that perseuerethe his curse unto the end. Math. 16.24.
For it is written that he that perseuereth unto the end, shall be saved. It
behovethe the husband man first to imploye his labor, before he taste off the
fruits. Wherefore I think it not unmeet to put the in remembrance off the words
off thy son Paul approchynge toward his end: 2. Tim. 4
I am now ready (says he) to be offered and put to death, the time off my
departing, is at hand: I have fought a good fight, I have fulfilled my
curse, I have kept the fayght, from hens forth there is laid up for me a
crown off ryghtousnes, which the lord (that is a ryghtouse judge) shall gyve
me at that day: not unto me only, but unto all the^ also that love his coming.

Yea, but thou wareste very weak (as thou sayeste) and thine enymes increse in
strenght? Psalm. 34.
Truly, the aduersytes off the ryghtouse are many, but the lord delyvereth
him from them all. Psalm. 35.
Is it not he that supporteth thy quarrel against them that move war
against the? Do the he not take up the buckler and the spear and rise up into
thy succor? Doethe he not bring forth the spear and stope the way against
them that pursewe the?

Doethe not he confound and put to shame all thosse that seek after thy soul,
and image^ evell against the? Are not all they repulsed and put to foil that
pretend myscheffe against the? Doethe not the magnifecent lord love the
peace off his servants? Seeste thou not how that the wicked have drawn out
their sword, and bent their bow, to cast down the poor and nedy, and to
slaye shuche as be off right conversation: but their swords shall perce
their own heart, and their bow shall be broken? Off thesse things I will
speak more amply here afterward.

Content thy self then (with out being discorraged through thine age) with
the answer that was made to Paul, when as he prayed unto the lord that the
angel of the lord might depart from him: my grace is sufficient for the, 2.
Cor. 12
for my stre^ght is made perfyte through weakness, says the lord. Wherefore
then with that holy apostell rejoice against thine adversaries in thine
infirmites, to the^de that the strenght off Christ thy spouce may dwell in
the: Take the like delectation that he did in infyrmytes, in rebukes, in
necessites, in persecutions, in anguyshes for Christ's sake: For when thou
shall be so weakened, then shall thou be found strongeste.

Finally whereas thou doeste bewayll the inconstant weakness and wicked
ungodliness off them that have forsaken the: Does not Jesus Christ say, Math.
15.
that every plant that my father has not planted shall be pluked up by the
roots? Ioh. 15.
Doethe he not also cut of from the true vine (which is Christ) every bra^che
that bryngethe not forth good fruit? Esai. 6.
Are they not that people that have their hertes hardyned, their eayres
stopped, their eyes blinded, Esai. 8.
whom the lord has thrown away? All though they assemble and conspyre to
gyther, fear them not, Esai. 1.
neither be a fearde of the^: for it is a synful people, a felowshype off great
iniquyte, a sede off ungracious children corruptynge their ways, who have
forsaken the lord (and not only the) and have provoked the holy one off Israel
unto anger, and are gone quyte away from him. Esai. 30.
Yea they are that rebellious people, whosse sons are mortherers, and whosse
children will not hear the law off the lord. But what shall be their end? The
same prophet declarethe it: Esa. 49.
therefore shall they have myscheffe for their dystruction, and fall like as a
high wall that fallythe by cause off some ryfte or blaste, whosse brekynge
comethe suddenly. But off the, it is said: that thosse that shall bylde the up
shall make haste, and thosse that would rewynate and dystroye the, shall be
expelled fare from the.

As towchynge that People off England which thou lamentest so myche, because
off the great iniure and sklanderous offense that they have committed against
the: Apoc. 13.
Suppose, England to be one off the.vij. heads off that beast that rysse out
off the sea, which was (as it were) wounded to death, and his deadly wound
was healed: which wound was made with that sword dyed in blood, which is the
word off God, who has now reproved and rejected them, wherein he has
declared his marvelous judgment But what wrou^ge has he done to them, Esai. 50.
by gyvynge them shuche a byll off devorcement, and by putting a way shuche a
harlott? And who is the vserer to who^ he has sold them? Were they not sold
for their inyquytes? And was not that wicked strompet forsaken for her
offenses? When he came unto them: why would they not ressayve him? When he did
call them: why did they not answer? But yet for all that, is his hand so
shortened that he cannot help them? Or has he not power to delyver them?
Behold all the wicked amongeste them shall be like unto an old clothe, and the
mothe shall eat them up: Cannot the lord then restore them again, when it
shall please him? And all though he will not do it: what art thou (O peacyble
Church) that so myche fereste mortal man, Esai. 54.
and the sons off men, who are like unto wythered hay. For even as the lord
did call the being as a young desolate sorrowful woman, and as a young wyffe
that has broken her wedlock, so al though for a little while he do forsake
the, yet with great mercyfulnes shall he take the up gain: and all though he
being angry for a little ceason do hyde his fate from the, yet throught an
everlasting mercy will he have compassion on the. And hold this for a sure
certaynte that not withstanding the inconsta^t mutabilite of me^, their
vanite and corruption: 2. Tim. 2
yet the fyrme fondation of God abydethe parmanant for ever, which has this
seal: the lord knowethe the^ that are his, and let every man that callethe
upon the name of Christ depart from iniquyte.

And finally to conclude, as towchynge thosse that have withdrawn them selfs
from the, of who^ I spacke some what before, I will put the in remembrance of
that which. 1. Ioh. 2.
S. John said to the long ago. They went out from the, but they were not of
the: for yff they had byne of the number of thine, they would no doubt have
co^tynewed with the: but they are gone away, to the end it might appear that
they were none of thine: 1. Cor. 11.
Amongst who^ also it is necessary that there be sects, to the end that
thosse which are perfyt, may be known. But way the end, I pray the, of
shuche offe^cive persons and sterers up of sects, Math. 13.
Even as the tares (says Jesus Christ) are gathered and bre^t in the fire,
so shall it be in the end off the world: the son of man shall send forth
his angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend,
and the^ which do iniquyte, and shall cast them into a furnace of fire, and
there shall be weeping and gnashynge of teethe.


The Church. Truly all that is contained in the word of god is most certain
and veritable: for all the words of God are pure and clean and a shylde unto
all the^ that put their trust there in, prou. 30.
yea it is like unto a fire that co^sumeth all the assautes of Satan: Iere. 23.
and like unto a hammer that breketh the hard stone. And therefore in herynge
the speak it semethe unto me that my grevous wou^des are eased and couled with
the most comfortable plaster of consolation: And by the power of the word of
God I feale my self wonderfully fortyfyed: for thereby, in fyghtyng I am
sustained, in trouble comforted, in dangers assured, in mornings reioysed, and
in temptations protected. Wherefore I will from hens forth more fyrmely put my
trust in the lord, psalm. 37.
my delight shall be all to gyther in him, I will cast my care upon him, I will
co^myte my way unto the lord, and put my whole trust in him: Job. 13.
And all though he will kill me, yet will I settel my hope in him: for I know
he wylbe my salvation. And yet for all that I am wonderfully invyroned with many
grevous afflictions. Namly the plowers have plowed upon my back, Text.
and have made long forrowes: and have forged upon my back as yff they had
beaten upon an anvyle: in shuche sort that all thosse that pas by me, Lame^. 2.
clape their hands at me, hyssynge, and waggynge their heddes: so that this
co^playnt of Esdras may worthily be appropried unto me. 4. Esd. 10
Our sanctuarye (which is the pure servyce off God) is now laid waste: Hebr.
13.
Our altar (to wytt Christ imolated) is broken down: our temple dystroyed,
and changed into a temple of idols: our singing of psalms (by desolute
songs) is laid down: our thanks gyvynge (by falls invocation) is put to
silence: our myrthe (by sorrow) is vanyshed away: the light of our
candelstycke (which is the word off God) is quenched by ignorance: the arc of
our covena^te (by the corrupters of sacraments) is taken away: our holy
things (by the fylthynes of men's traditions) are defiled: the name that is
called over us, is dishonored: our children (for want of instruction) are put
to shame: our minysters of the word, are burnt: our seuiours and elders are
led into captivite: our vyrgens (by wicked vows) are defiled: our wyffes (by
baalles prestes) ravyshed: our ryghtous men, spoiled: our children (by
naughty educatio^) distroyet: our young men, compelled to serve strange
gods: and our strong worthyes have lost their stre^ght, and are utterly
fallen away from me by the suttell perswations of popyshe prelates: and that
worste is, it semethe that I am utterly forsaken, and destytuted of my honor,
and that God has delyvered me into the hands of them that hate me. Yet
nevertheles for all that I will not dyspayre nor dystrust in my god, but that
he will perform in me all that he has promised. Wherefore considering this my
purposed intent founded upon the holy word of my God: do not hyde from me (O
Co^solator) thosse tale^tes that God has gyven the: Math. 23
but trafyque and imploye them with me, hoping that thou shall gain as many
more, to the end that the lord havynge found the a fayghtfull serva^t in a
little, he may co^stitute and stablyshe the over myche and so enter into his
rest.


The Consolator. In all thesse thy tribulations, which thou haste alleged, thou
can do no better the^ to stay thy self upon the goodness and mercy of thy
God: 1. cor. 10.
who is fayghtful and will not suffer the to be tempted above thy strenght, but
will in the mids of thy temptation make away, that thou may be able to
bear it. The which thing thou haste all ready sufficyently experime^ted in
that he has al ways delyvered the from so many enymes, as thou have had syns
the begynynge, being so strong and mighty, Eccle. 2.
and from so many grevous assautes as they have made against the: and therefore
it was not written with out a cause, that he that will enter into the service
of God, let him prepare his soul to temptation: For the hatred of the
persecuters is neither, 2. Cor. 11.
new, nor seldom: As Paul one of thy worthy warryours and valiant cha^pions
has suffyciently experime^ted, in strypes above measure, in prison
ple^tiously, in peril of death often, having ressayved of the jews fyve
times.xl. strypes lacking one, being thrysse beaten with rods, ons stoned,
thrysse suffered shypwracke on the sea, whereon he was night and day, in
iorneynge often, in perils of robbers, in perils of his own nation, in
perils amongeste the heathen, in perils in the cite, in perils in the
wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils amongst falls brytheren, in
labor and travel, in watchynge often, in hou^ger and thyrste, in fasting
often, in cold and nakedness: having thoroughly tasted that which the lord
Christ promised him before, Act. 9.
na^ly how grrat things it behooved him to suffer for his names sake.

Forther more also were as thou sayeste that the plowers have plowed upon thy
back: Text.
thereby thou may understand that thy persecuters are called and compared to
plowmen and laborers for as myche as they do take pain to persecute the, as do
the the laborer to labor, and the plowma^ to till the earth: which has byne
ever syns the begynynge. Gene. 4.
For Cain co^spyrynge the death of his brother, was not his face altered and
changed with displeasure?

Pharao persecutynge the people of Israel in what pain was he? Exo. 8
9.10.11.14. 1. reg. 18.
Saul afflyctyng David, and lokynge overtwharte upon him, after that he had
killed the Philistian: was he not more troubled and vexed then David him self?
3 reg. 21, 22.28.
In what travel and agonye was Achab persecutynge Nabot for his vynyarde, the
prophet Elias and Micheas? Dani. 3.
In what affliction and agonye was Nabucodonesor beholdinge the great co^stancy
of the three young Israelytes? was he not all together replet with indignation
so that the cou^tynance of his face changed against them? 2. mac. 9.
What happyned there unto that miserable Antiochus persecutynge the Jews, then
the people off God, did he not fynyshe his days with myserye and dollor
intolerable? Luc. 16.
What inexplycable pain and trouble had thosse wicked scribes and phareses in
pursewynge that most innocent, Jesus Christ? And thosse also that did
persecute Stephen, Act. 7.
did not their hertes cleve a sonder and gnashed on him with their teethe?
Act. 14.
Herod the mortherer of James persecutynge the in thine youth, was not his
wyckednes most grevously ponyshed? Act. 16.
Thosse also that impresoned Paul and Silas at Philippos, were they not more
troubled and vexed the^ they that were imprisoned? Act 12.22.23.
What travayll and trouble had the persecutors of Paul, as well in their
process, as in their co^spyraces against him? And to conclude, in thesse days
what pain and trouble have thine aduersares, in all their atte^ptes,
enterpryces, spyinges, serchynges, chasynges hither and thither, commaundynges,
prohybytynges, thretenynges, excomuny catynges, and pursewynges? And there for,
in respect of the pain that they do take, they are justly called plowme^ or
laborers: and for the fruit of their labor there abydethe them no thing else
but eternal damnation. In that also thou art plowed and labored thou have some
similitude with the earth, the which as by plowynge and laboring it is pourged
and cleansed off all thorns, bra^bels and wedes, and afterward bringethe
forth good and pleasant fruit: eve^ so by afflictions thou art excitated and
better disposed to bring forth the fruit of godlynes in patience. And as many
times as thou art plowed and harrowed by persecution and affliction, Math. 13.
Luc. 8. Mat. 4.
so many thorns and wedes are there taken away from the. For this sede which
is the word of God ca^ bring forth no fruit in the: except first thesse
stony places be altered and dygged up with the mattocke of adversyte: the
thorns that so miche check the word of god turned up by the ploughe of
persecution, and that hard high way labored with the harrow off affliction:
For otherwysse the good sede that that is sown therein wylbe come utterly
unprofitable and eaten up of ravens. But thou beyinge thoroughly tylled and
labored, art not altogyther unlike thy spouce Jesus Chrlste of who^ it is
said. That he has trodden the vine press alone, Esa. 63.
and there was no man to help him. Forthermore thou may evyde^tly persayde
that thy persecutors thinking to do the great hurt, they do the myche good:
al though they beat upon thy back as upon an anvile, yet can they no more
hurt the with their strypes, then the smite hurtethe the anvyle with his
hamer. Text.
I persayve also that the long lasting of thy persecution signyfyed by the
long forrowes, does not a little anoye the and seems unto the very tedious
and long: But be of good chere, and assure thy self that the end of all
things approaches and drawethe nigh. 2. pet. 3.
For this is the last time. But thou may not be ignora^te of this, that a
day with the lord is as a thowsande year, and a thousand year as a day: the
lord is not slack in his promise, as the persecuters exteme slacknes: but is
pacie^t to wards all, in that he would have no man lost, but would have al
me^ torn to repentance. And let this suffice the, that thine enymes do no
thing else, but hasten and prycke the forward to the coming of the day of
the lord: wherefore mark this sentence well which is written. Apoc. 22.
The time is at hand, that he that does evell, let him do evell still, and he
which is fylthy let him be fylthy still: and he that is ryghtous, let him be
more ryghtous, and he that is holy, let him be more holy: for behold I come
shortly, and my reward with me, to recompense every man according to his
deeds. Text. Hebr. 6.
For the lord whose thou art, and who^ thou serveste, is just, he will not
forgett thy work and thy labor. Text. Hebr 13. Joshua. 1.
He has all ready cut in sonder the cords of the wicked. And has said I
will not forsake the, neither will I aba^don the. So that thou may surely
say: the lord is my helper. psalm. 118. Hebr. 10.
I fere not what man can do unto me. Tarry a little whyll and he that shall
come, will come and will not tarry, who cuttynge a sonder the cords off thy
persecutors, will render unto them as they have done unto the, and will reward
the^ double according to their deeds. And into the same cup which they have
filled unto the, Apoc. 18.
the lord will power in double: And look how myche they gloryed in them
selfs, and took pleasure to afflicte the, so myche shall there be gyve^ unto
the^ of torment and tears. And this is it that one of thy prophets speaking
unto the in the name of God, sayethe: Esai. 51.
O thou miserable and dro^ken, but not with wine, hear this, thus sayethe the
lord: thy lord and god, the defender of his people: Behold I have taken the
slu^brynge cup out of thy hand, eve^ the cup with the dregs off my
wrath: and that from hens forth thou shall never drink it more: but I will
put it into their hands that trouble and vex the. So that it is apparent
here by, that they have more occasion to weep and wayle, the^ thou. The which
thing co^sydedered of Jesus Christ going unto his death, moved him to say
unto the women of Jerusalem that followed mourning after him. Luc. 23.
O ye dawghters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your selfs and for
your children: for if they have done this unto grene wood, what shall there be
done unto the dry? prou. 11.
Behold says the wise man: the just shall be ponyshed if he do wyckedly in
the earth, how myche more then the ungodly and sinner? Where unto is to be
refarred the saying of the lord by the mouth of his prophet. Iere. 25.
Yff I begyne to plage that cite (says the lord) where unto my name is
gyve^: think ye the^ that I will leave ye vnponyshed? Ye shall not go quyte,
Job. 21.
but will cause your tribulation to fall upon your own hedd. For truly the
wicked is kept for the day off dystruction, and the ungodly shall be brought
forth in the day of wrath.

Thou say that they have plowed and harrowed the, well let them also prepare
their sythes, for the harveste is ripe: Joel. 3.
let them come and get them down, for the wynepresse is full: Yea the
wynepresse ronnethe over, for their wyckednes is waxen great: What restethe
now the^, but that the angel of the lord me^sioned in the Apocalypes, Apoc. 14
do thruste in his sharp syckell into the earth, and gather the clusters of
the vynes of the earth, for her grapes are ripe, and cast the^ into the great
wine fatt of the wrath of god: who bryngethe marvelous things to pas, who
forseethe the cou^sayll of the wicked, Esa. 25.
and stablysheth things certain. For it is he, that is the stre^ght of the
poor, and the succor of the nedy in his trouble: A refuge against foul
weather, and a shadow against the heat: It is he that suppressethe the noise
of the wicked infideles, as the heat in a dry place, and bryngethe low the
bra^che of the mighty, as the heat in the shadow of the cloud: And the
persecutors shall be trodden down under him, Iere. 49.
and consumed to pieces, as straw in a dou^g hill. For behold they that me^
thought unmeet to drink of the cup, have tasted of it with the first, and
shall the ungodly the think to escape fre? No, for eve^ as they have done to
the, so shall it be done to them again. Esai. 63.
Thou shall be as the fire, and thy children as the fla^be, and thy persecutors
shall be as the straw. For the lord will tread them down in his wrath, and
bathe the^ in their own blood in his displeasure: and beat down their
stre^ght upon the earth, and consume them in the fury of hid indignation.

Deuteronomy. 33.
But as for the* thou art most happy (O Church) who is like unto the? for thou
art saved in the lord, which is the shylde off thy help, and the sword off
thy glory: thine enymes shall loss their strenght to the ward, and thou
shall tread upon the highest of them, This is the justice of thy God, Esai. 66.
and the patience of Saynctes, who in the end shall rejoice, when as the
wicked shall be confounded: Then thy children shall sing for joy of heart, and
thy persecutors shall cry through sorrow off mind, and shall howl through
dysquyetnes of spirete, and shall leve their name for execration unto the
elect of god.


The Church. Truly thou haste greatly comforted me, and haste spoken very
lovyngly unto me: Ruth* 2.
and have sufficyently satisfied all my demaundes: not doubtinge but that
throught thesse consolations off the scryptures which thou have alleged, I
shall from hens forth be greatly fortyfyed in all my tribulations, when as the
glory of God shall require the same: And seeing that he is my helper, Esai. 50.
I am sure I shall not be confounded: and all though my face be hardened like a
a flynt stone in the fire, yet am I certain I shall not come to confusion: for
he that will iustifye me, is at hand: who will the^ go to the law with me?
Let mine adversarye come forth now and pleat against me, for the lord shall
hear my cause. Behold the lord standethe by me, what is he then that shall
condemn me? Esai. 51.
I do not fere the curse of men: I am not afferde of their blasphemes and
reuelynges: for mothes shall eat them up like clothe, and worms shall devour
them like wool.

Yet would I feign have forther instruction of the issew and fynal end of the
ungodly mine aduersares, all though thou haste partly all ready towched the
same. For what? Shall they floryshe any long contynewa^ce before their flower
fall? Shall their glory last for ever with out being thrown down? Shall
they all ways have the upper hand? Shall they not one day be brought under?
Their crualtye, shall it not cease, so that they shall no more shead the blood
of innoce^tes? When shall the impostumation of their corrupt hertes break a
sonder? Shall not the dregs of their pride be shortly pressed out, so that
the fylthynes thereof may appear? Shall the flower of their vanyte last long
with out wytherynge and corruption? Is the time long before their grennes be
dried up, to the end they may be cast into the fire and bornte?


The Consolator. Job. 34.
The ear provethe and deserves the words: and the mouth tastes the meat. I
am glade that the lord has gyven me a tou^ge, to express in time co^venyent
the word of consolation to her that is vexed and afflycted. Hebr. 11.
I have all ready declared unto the, how that thy children have been racked and
beaten and would not be delyvered: how that othersome were tried with
skornynges and mockynges, with bonds and impresonme^tes: other were stoned,
were hewn a sunder, were tempted, were slain with sword, walked up and down
in shepskins and gotskins, being destitute, troubled and vexed, of who^ the
world was not worthy of: whosse enymes are also peryshed, as though they never
had been. But thesse are ryghtous me^ whosse ryghtousnes shall never be
forgotten, Eccl. 44.
whosse children and glory shall never be forsaken, their bodeys are buried
in peace, but their name lyvethe for ever, the people ca^ talk of their
wisdom, and the congregation ca^ speak of their praise: for it was requysite
that (with out any excusse) distructio^ should come upon thosse that used
tyra^nye, Sapi. 16.
whereby they might leve an example unto men as a memoryall of their follye,
and to show unto other, how their enymes were dystroyed. Sapi. 17.
For when the vnryghtous think to have thy holy people in subjection, then
shall they be bound with the bonds of darkness and long night, and cut in
pieces: Sapi. 3.
But the souls of the ryghtous are in the hands of God, and the pain of
death shall not towche them: in the eyes of the vnryghtous they shall seem to
dye, and their end to be very dystructio^: but they rest in peace, and all
though they suffer pain before men, yet is their hope full off i^mortalite:
they are ponyshed but in few things, never the les in many things shall they
be well rewarded, Eccle 32.
for God provethe them and fyndethe them mete for him self. As evell is all
ways against good, and death against lyffe, so is the ungodly against
shuche as fere God, the sinner against the ryghtous, and the persecuter
against the fayghtfull: but in the end god will break the hedd off the enymes,
who say, Text.
there are none but we. Not witstandyng for thy consolation it is said, that
shuche as hate the shall be confounded and put to silence. psalm 73. Esa. 29.
And that not with out a cause, for they are set in slypry places and God will
make them fall into dystruction. For eve^ as he that is hongrye, dremethe that
he eats, but when he a wakethe his soul is emptye, and as he that is
thurstye dremethe that he drynkethe, but when he awakethe, he is faynte, and
his soul has appetyte: even so shall it be to the multitude off all thosse
nations that fight against the. For thosse that do the hurt shall be
extermyned: psalm. 37.
and it shall come to pas shortly that the ungodly shall have no more place.
They shall peryshe co^sumynge as the fatt of a la^be, and vanyshe away as she
smoke. Tarry the lords leisure and thou shall se the dystruction of the wicked:
who all though they have some time floryshed as the grene lawryell, yet so is
it that they passing a little forther shall be no more found, for their last
reward is dystructio^. For the lord will pluck the^ up as untimely grapes
from the vine, Job. 15.
and shall let their flower fall as does the olyve tree, yea they shall be as
chafe before the wind, and as duste that the horse wind blowethe away. The
which thing is more amplye expressed in those words which I resyted unto the
before, to wytt, Text.
They shall be as the gresse that grows upon the house tops, which wythereth
a fore it be plucked up. Behold this is the end of the labor off the ungodly,
and their wyn^ynges, for all their long forrowes, toil, and pain: for all
that shall profit the^ no more the^ the gresse that growethe upon the howsse
top: yea, and they them selfs shall be cut down as hay, and shall dry away
as grene gresse. So happyned it unto Senacherib, Esa. 35. 4. reg. 19.
persecutynge the Church of of Israel in the days of Esaias and Ezechias, of
who^ thesse words are spoken, as of all other thy persecutors: Shuche as is
the sede of the wicked, shuche is their harveste.

He that sows in the flesh, Gala. 6.
shall also of the flesh reap corruption: But of the and thine which sow in
tears, it is said, that ye shall reap in joy. psalm. 126.
They went (says the psalmiste) on their way weeping, berynge forth
their sede, butt doutles they shall come again with joy and bring their
sheaues with them. But it shall happen co^trarywysse unto the wicked, for they
sow in joy, but they shall reap in tears: Text.
for of their sede the mower fylleth not his hand, nor the glener his bosom.
Job. 24.
And why? For they spoil the suckynge fatherles child, and take the pledge
from the poor, so that they let him go naked with out clothing, and have
taken away the sheave of the houngrye: is it any mervell then yff their sheave
be with out fruit? seeing that they have violated and taken away the sheave of
others? Eccle. 8.
The preacher notes one goodly sentence, By cause (says he) that evell
works are not forth with ponyshed in the workers, therefore the heart of man
gyveth him self unto wyckednes: for all though an evell person offend an
houndreth times, and god defarre, gyvinge him long lyffe: yet am I sure that
it shall go well with them that fere God, by cause they have him before their
eyes: as for the ungodly it shall not be well with him, neither shall he prolo^ge
his days? but even as a shadow so shall he be that fereth not God.

To conclude all the labor of the wicked and ungodly tends to no thing else,
Eccle. 10.
but to afflicte them selfs: in as myche as the sheave of their labor does
not fill their hand. And if the mowers do find no thing that is valuable,
psalm. 1.
the gleayners need not to go after them, to hope to gather any goodness. For
how ca^ there be found any good thing, when as they are as chafe, which the
wind blows away? Their vain atte^ptes are well expressed of the prophet,
whereas he sayethe: Esa. 17.
They shall be chased away like as dry straw upon the mountains before the
wind, and like as a thing that torneth before the storm: at eve^ behold
there is trouble, and or ever it be morning behold it is gone. And this is it
that John baptyste me^t, Math. 3.
when he said, that god has his fan in his hand, and will purge his
flower, and gather his wheat into his barn, but will borne the chafe with
vnque^cheable fire. For the wicked shall be beaten as small as duste before the
wind, psa. 18.
and shall be cast forth as the dyrte in the streets: And their hope shall melte
away as the winter, Sapi. 18.
and rou^e away as a swyfte water streme in the ryver. By thesse and shuche
other similitudes the scriptures does declare unto the, that the enterpryses
of the wicked are vain and nyghe to confusion, 2. thesse. 2.
to the end that all thosse might be damned that beleved not the truth, but had
pleasure in vnryghtousnes. Psa, 37.
Yea they are fallen and cannot rise up again: so that they which go by, say
not so myche as the lord prosper you, Text.
we wyshe you good luck in the name of the lord. Who are the goars by, but
the lyvynge? What good ca^ they say of that, werof there comes no goodness?
Who will praise that, that god has dispraysed* what good luck shall any man
wyshe unto a thing that is so wicked? what shall our blyssinge prevayl in that
thing, that god has cursed? who will rejoice in the fact of a mortherer? who
will co^gratulate a man that sheadeth blood, which thing requires ve^ga^ce
and no blyssyng? who will allow a tyrra^t, but only shuche as thirst the blood
of innoce^tes? An objection. Math. 5. Romans 12.
what the^? Is it for naught that Christ has said, bliss the^ that curse
you, do good the^ that hatt you? And does not one of his apostels say as
myche? Speak well of the^ that persecute you, bliss the^, but curse not?
Lykewysse a another says: 1. pet. 3.
Render not evel for evel, nor maledictio^ for malediction, but contrary wysse
bliss, knowing that you are there unto called, na^ly to pocesse the heritage
of blissynge. Or else? The faightful are not they the by goers, and passers by
thosse wicked workmen, of who^ we spack eve^ now. How the^ agreethe this
doctrine of Jesus Christ and his apostles with the doctrine of the psalmiste
and the prophets before resited, the one forbiddinge us to bliss the ungodly,
and the other coma^dynge to bliss the? An Answer. We maij pray for the
conversion of the tirra^t jf^ it do not evide^tly appear that he is the
reprobat of God For vvho^ we are forbidd to pray. 1 Ioh. 5.
Truly Jesus Christ nor yet his apostles do coma^de no thing against the
doctrine of the prophets: for God has all ways wylled, and yet wylleth, that
al thosse that are his, do bliss, love and pray for their persecutors. But it
is a another thing to pray for the persecutors: and for the persecution. What
godly man is there that would pray for the good success of any wyckednes? we
must pray for the tyrra^t, and not for his tyrra^nye, but rather for his
conversion. And this is it that the prophet me^te when he said. Lord have I
not hated the^, that have hated the? and am not I grieved with thosse that rysse
up against the? yea, psalm. 139.
I have hated the^ with a perfytt hatred, eve^ as though they were mine enimes.
But this hatred how vehement so ever it be, yet does it not hinder the
faightfull to do good unto the ungodly, as long as it shall please the lord to
permye^t the^, succorynge the^, in that thing which they have of god, to wytt,
in the body for, seeing that god does not as yet with draw from the^ his
benevole^ce: who so ever will resemble him, must not also withdraw his. But in
that thing wherein they are like unto Satan, na^ly in their lyffe and naughty
ma^ners, in their enterpryses and iniquites, they must be abhorred and detested
as a pestele^ce, with out wyshynge well unto the^ by any means. There rests
the^ no thing else unto thosse that shede the blood of innoce^tes but
maledictio^, execratio^, and cursynge, as it has been sufficiently declared
unto the here before. Wherein thou may comfort and co^fyrme thy self in
patience, in abiding the comi^ge of thy spouce, who will come shortly, and
will not tarry.


The Church. I have diligently noted all thy words, which seem unto me more
sweter the^ ho^ny. 2. Cor. 4.
The lord my god who has coma^ded the light to shine out off darkness,
knowing things that are not, as if they were: which has shyned in our
hertes to the^de we may ressayve the light of the knowledge of his glory in the
face of Jesus Christ: accordi^ge to his great mercy and infinite bou^tye
replenyshe me, with all strenght, constancye, corrage and patience in my
tribulations: gyvynge me an invyncible heart interely to abhere and cleve unto
him: to settel and stay my self in his promysses: to fere and reverence his
thretenynges, and to avaunce the kingdom and glory of his son. And forther
that it will please him to publyshe and manifest his gospel every where, and
his god will toward al people, so that the darkness off ignora^cye may be
universally expelled, by the coming of his bryghtnes: and that all ignorant
persecutors may be reduced to the right way of salvation, ceasyng (...)
(...)re tyrra^nye and persecution. (...) I do undoubtedly believe, co^(...) (...)
(...)lege that the lord god (...) the castle, the stre^(...) (...) thosse that
p(...) (...) who is Go(...) (...) strong but (...) wayed (...) me, (...) he
(...) sla(...) (...) me (...) (...)re (...) pl(...) (...) for we are his,
whether it be in lyffe or death. Only we beseech him that he will not leave
us, nor forsake us, but that we may perfytly serve him, to the forthera^ce of
his glory, and the exaultation of the kingdom of his son Jesus Christ, who
lyveth with him and the holy ghost in eternal felicyte: to whom be praise for
ever and ever. So be it.


FINIS.

