THE CRISTALL OF CHRISTIANITY, OR LOOKING GLASS OF GODS LOVE.

Containing the Principles of our Christian profession, by the way of
disputation between Master and Scholar, in Schools and Families, fit for the
profitable practice of all (especially of youth) to be used.

Initiated formerly by others, and amplified by R. P. Minister and Preacher of
Gods word.

Barnard in his Morrals.

Sacra scriptura mentis oculis, quasi speculum quoddam opponitur, ibi pulcra
nostra in Christo perspicimus, ibi feda nostra in nobis Cernimus, ibi quantum
perficimus, ibi quantum a pro factu long distamus: plane sentimus. Imprinted
at London by Thomas Dawson, dwelling near the three Cranes in the Vinetree.
1617.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, VIRTUOUS, AND Religious Gentleman, master George
Bostocke, Justice of his Majesty's peace in the County of Denbigh, R. P.
wishes Grace, Peace, and in Jesus Christ all health and happy prosperity.
LICVRGVS (Right Worshipful) the LACEDEMONIAN Lawmaker appointed condign
punishment for every offender according to the offense, but for an unthankful
person he could find no severity (nor severe punishment) sufficient; In
consideration therefore of your worship, and ever approved favors toward me,
as I am bound, so I am moved to remember them, and show my self mindful and
thankful for them, least I should seem culpable of the gross sin of
Ingratitude: and not have power to perform my Gratuitie with gifts of
excellency. I have made bold to present to your Worship (in testimony of my
love) my poor labors, wherein I labored when I was the Lords labourer, in
that Congregation where your Worships favors were well approved, not to me
alone, but to all that were faithful preachers of Gods word, and conformable
ministers to the commendable Laws of our gracious kings Majesty: Those
apparent and approved gifts of grace, with many other commendable gifts of
nature by God planted in you, has provoked me to present; as unto a devout
patron of piety, the fruits of my labors, and arguments of my love, by Gods
grace purposing and faithfully promising (upon your worshipful acceptance of
this my widows mite) to dedicate more ample manifestation to you and yours, of
my unfeigned affection. In the mean time humbly craving pardon for this my
boldness, and ever heartily (according to my bounden duty) desiring our
gracious God in your heart (by his gracious blessing) to increase such holy and
heavenly virtues, whereby the good gifts of grace and nature planted in you may
flourish, and bring forth such fruits of godliness, whereby Gods name may more
be glorified, Christ's members comforted, our gracious Kings loyal Subjects,
by your godly obedience, to like obedience in couraged, your Worships
worthiness more illustrated, the bodies and souls of you and all yours with
blessings Temporal, more and more enriched, and with the Diadems and Crowns
of glory, by the glorious King of Heaven eternally Crowned, I rest. London the
first day of September. 1617. ()

Your worships in all love and duty over to command. R. P.

A Prayer to be said at the beginning of this Book.
O Lord our God (and in Jesus Christ our merciful and heavenly Father) we thy
poor servants assembled before thy majesty in this Congregation, by the sight
of our sins do acknowledge our selves to be unworthy of the least drop of
thy favor, or dram of thy mercies: Therefore we beseech thee, in the name of
thy dear Son Jesus Christ, and for his sake to pardon all our sins passed,
and by thy gracious spirit, to grant us such grace at this present, that we may
religiously proceed in the true understanding of thy holy word: And by the
same thy spirit be made more obedient to frame our lives by direction of thy
Laws, that thereby we may be more apt and able to set forth thy glory, by
practicing the precepts taught us in thy holy word at this present, and daily
be more ready by hearing the same thy holy word, to receive such increase of
faith as may sustain us to the attayning of all godly instructions, and full
fruition of true and eternal felicity, world without end, through Jesus
Christ thy dear Son our only Savior,

Amen.
The Cristall of Christianity, or looking Glass of GODS love.
Question. AS You do profess to be a Christian, so show me what estimation
you have of the divine scriptures where on you ground your Christian
profession?

Answer. I do and I ought to esteem the holy and Canonical scriptures, to
be the spiritual glass and clear Cristall, wherein the divine favor, and
everlasting love of God does appear, even to the attaining of eternal life.
John 3. 30.

Q. Wherein may Christians principally prove and find that divine favor and
everlasting love?

A. First that God the Father did out of his mere love, create us to his own
Image.

Secondly, that God the Son (when that Image was defaced) did of his tender
love, give himself to redeem us.

Thirdly, that God the holy Ghost, graciously (both sanctifies) and in
sanctification preserves us.

Q. As you have mentioned the Godhead in three persons, Can you prove them by
the Scriptures to be one, only true God?

A. The Apostle John does plainly prove it in these words, There are three
that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Spirit, and these
three are one God John 5. 17.

Q. Wherefore has God Created, Redeemed, Sanctified, and in sanctification
preserved Christians?

A. First, that we in this life should live to the glory of God.

Secondly, in the life to come, we should receive glory everlasting with God.

Q. How may Christians learn to glorify God in this present life?

A. By ordering this life according to the rule of Gods holy word, in the
Scriptures reueiled.

Q. What rules of life are in the scriptures reueiled, to guide us to the glory
of God?

A. The first is the rule of Gods holy precepts and Commandments.

The second is constant faith in Gods fatherly promises.

The third is religious Celebrating the holy Sacraments.

The fourth is the practice of holy, faithful, fervent, and devout prayers.

Q. How many are the precepts by God commanded?

A. The Commandments are ten in number, and in two Tables they were written
for our instruction.

Q. What things are in those two Tables principally contained?

A. In the first, a Christians duty to God.

And in the second our duties to our neighbor, are both taught, contained, and
commanded.

Q. What are the words in the first Table mentioned?

Q. I am the Lord thy God which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out
of the house of Bondage. Exodus xx.

Q. Are these words a part of the ten Commandments?

A. These words are not of the Commandments, but are a profitable preface,
before the precepts.

Q. What learn christians by this preface?

A. A Christian by the word, Lord, may learn the Lawgiver to be the chief
Lord and governor.

And by the word, God, a loving Father and most merciful deliverer of his
people, from bondage, distress, and dangers both of body and soul.

Q. What use may a Christian make of this preface?

A. A Christians use of this preface is to fears the Law giver as a Lord and
Master and to love and obey him as a gracious God, and loving Father. Mala 1.

Q. What are the words of the first Commandment?

A. Thou shall have none other Gods but me.

Q. What learn you by this first Commandment?

A. I learn that first I ought to worship God only: and to give divine
worship to none but unto this divine Maiestis of the Dietie.

Q. In how many points does this divine worship stand and chiefly consist?

A. The first part of divine worship consists in that perfect love described
by our Savior Christ. Mat. 12. 35. And in that zealous love expressed by the
Prophet David saying. Whom have I in heaven? but thee: and there is none that I
desire on earth in comparison of thee. Psalm. 73. 25.

Q. What is the second part of Gods divine worship.

A. The second consists in such reverend fear as makes a Christian neither
to omit willingly any good thing by God commanded, nor commit wilfully any
evil thing by Gods law prohibited. Mala. 1. 6.

Q. What is the third point of Gods divine worship?

A. The third part consists in yielding all praises, and directing all our
prayers to God only, and to hold it a gross impiety to give Angels, Saints,
or Creatures, any such honor, glory, or divine worship, as is due to God only.

Q. What is the fourth point of Gods divine worship?

A. The fourth part is to acknowledge God the giver of all good things James
1. And therefore to trust and depend only on Gods grace and goodness, hoping
as he has given us his only son, he will by him give us all good things.

Q. What are the words of the second Commandment?

A. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, nor the likeness, etc.

Q. What learn you by this Commandment?

A. First, I learn to hate, loath, and abhor, the presumption of such vain
men, as by imagination will presume to make the Image of the invisible God,
whom no mortal man has seen at any time, neither can be seen with mortal
eyes. John 1. 18. Q. What do you learn further?

A. I learn secondly to avoid, and to lament the gross blindness of men,
which receive Images for Gods, and by falling down to worship Idols, do
worship Devils. 1. Cor. 10. 20.

Q. What learn you else by this precept? A. I learn thirdly, that as the
Lawgiver is a jealous God, he will render vengeance on the third and fourth
generation of all Idolaters and haters of his divine worship. Exodus 20. So he
is a gracious God, which will show mercy to me, and to thousands of
generations of Christians, that obey him, and religiously worship him. Psalm.
103. Exodus 20.

Q. What are the words of the third Commandment?

A. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, etc.

Q. What learn you by this Commandment?

A. First I learn that I must in all things and at all times use the name of
God with high reverence, and not so much as to think, or to speak of God,
without a due, reverent, and a religious regard.

Q. What do you secondly learn here?

A. Secondly, I learn in conference and com munication to use no oath, nor to
swear by any creatures. Ier. 5. 7. Psalm. 16. 4.

Q. What learn you more hereby?

A. Thirdly, I learn that to use the name of God to sorcerie, enchantment,
cursing, and in false testimony, is no leu^e then a finne of blasphemy. Deuteronomy.
18. 10.

Q. When there is cause of an oath, by whom must we swear?

A. In lawful and requisite causes, to swear by God is part of his glory.
Deuteronomy 6. 13. Psalm. 63. 71.

Q. In what causes are oaths lawful and requisite?

A. When before a Judge to witness a truth for the ending of controversy. Heb.
6. 16.

Also when the truth is testified for preservation of our brethren from intury.
Ie. 4. 2.

Likewise, when an oath is requisite in any case for the setting forth of Gods
glory, it may lawfully be used. Romans 9. 1. and the 2. Cor. 11. 31.

Q. What is the fourth Commandment? A. Remember that thou keep holy the
Sabbath day, etc.

Q. What learn you by the word, Remember?

A. I learn by that word, the waightinesse of the matter, for in matters of
weight that word is used. Eccle. 12.

Q. What signifies the word, Sabbath, and what means the keeping it holy?

A. The word Sabbath, signifies Rest, and teaches Christians to rest from
bodily labors, and not to be idle, but to spend it in holy exercises, and
divine duties.

Q. What are those holy exercises and divine duties commanded?

A. First, a Christian is to remember to seek the Lord early in such prinate
prayers, as may move God to direct them to holiness. Pro. 8. Psalm. 51.

Secondly, with them that keep the holy day to resort with prepared hearts
to the house of God and place of prayers. Eccle. 5. Psalm. 44.

Thirdly to labor to increase his faith by hearing Gods word, and to
strengthen his faith by often and reverend celebrating the Sacraments appointed
by Christ. Romans 10. 1. Cor. 11.

Fourthly, after the hearing of the word and receiving the Sacraments, to make
per fect what they have learned, by the Noblemens practice of Berea* Act. 17.

Fifthly, and finally with devout prayers to God, and with David's devotion, in
singing Psalms to the praise of God, and to spend the whole day, to the honor
of the Lord, is the sanctifying and keeping holy the Sabbath.

Q. Who are commanded to keeps holy the Sabbath?

A. First, all Governors, as Fathers, Mothers, and Masters.

Secondly, sons, daughters, men, and maid servants.

And thirdly, Governors are both commanded and chiefly charged, that
themselves, their family, and strangers in their houses, do keep holy the
Sabbath.

Q. What learn you more from this precept?

A. I learn that the very Cattle this day by Gods commandment should rest,
and not be labored nor toyled.

Q. What is farther to be learned out of this precept?

A. In the last part remains a memorable presedent of our Lord God the
Lawmaker.

Q. What learn you by the Lords presedent?

A. First I learn, that as in six days the Lord ordered and ended his works
of creation: So a Christian should order and end the work of his vocation.

Also I learn, as the Lord rested the seventh day and ordained it to be
sanctified: so a Christian ought earnestly to immitate Gods presedent, and obey
Gods commandment.

A. As you have showed me largely what a Christian should do on the Sabbath
day, so show me briefly, what he should leaus undone that day.

A. All things that necessity constrains not, and Gods word commands
not, a Christian on the Sabbath ought to leave undone. Esaias. 58. 13. Mat. 12.
3. 5.

Q. As in order of the Tables of the Law, the duty of a Christian to Gods
majesty is first placed, so show me what is thereby to be learned?

A. First I learn, that GOD is first and principally to be obeyed.

Secondly, that the kingdom of God is before all things to be desired.

Thirdly, that all our goods and substance are to Gods glory to be employed.

Fourthly, to express our love to God, our lives are not to be regarded.

Proceed now to the first precept of the second Table.

A. Honor thy Father and mother, that thy days may belong in the land, etc.

Q. What learn you by this word honor thy Father?

A. I learn that I am bound to love, fear and obey, to reverence, relieve,
and comfort all those which God has placed in place of my parents.

Q. What persons are by Gods word in place of parents to be honored?

A. First, natural parents which are instruments of our life, first are so to
be honored. Ephe. 6.

Secondly, Kings and Queens, which are Gods anointed, as princely parents,
and are so to be honored. Esaias. 54.

Thirdly, Bishops and all Preachers, and all pastoral parents, are so to be
honored.

Magistrates and all governors, which are instruments for ordering of our
Country, are so to be honored.

All aged men and women, and all our elders, as is before mentioned, are so to
be honored.

Q. What learn you farther by the fourth precept?

A. I learn that this commandment has a promise of blessing, to move
Christian to be more dutiful to their parents, namely long life to the
obedient.

Q. Seeing we do see the wicked flourish and live long. Psalm. 37. and often
the righteous to perish, and live not so long. Esaias. 57. How can that promise
be rightly approved, or to the obedient applied?

A. First we are taught that a wicked man's life is death. Luke 15. and the
prolonging of his days in sinful life, is heaping of vengeance by his long
life. Romans 2.

Secondly, we are taught, that the life of a righteous man does not end when
his mortal life is ended, for Abell being dead, yet speaks. Heb. 11. And
long life is not only to live in the body, but to be alive ever while the
world lafteth, by faith and famous memory.

Q. Do you conclude then that the wicked live long to increase their
condemnation, and Gods children have a double blessing both of gray hayres, and
living holy lives.

A. I conclude that the wicked live long (by Gods permission) to their further
confusion, and Gods obedient children, both in speedy death and long life,
have and justly may have, consolation of this promised blessing.

Q. What is the sixth precept, and what learn you by it?

A. The commandment is, Thou shall not kill. And first I learn to refrain
my tongue from lying and slandering, from mocking and quarrelling. Mat. 5. 22.
Psalm. 15.

Secondly, I learn to keep my hands from striking, fighting, and generally
from every thing that tends to killing and murdering.

Thirdly, I am bound, as not to kill, so to seek to preserve life as much as
in me lies. Mat. 25. 35.

Q. Rehearse the seventh Commandment, and show me what you learn by it? A.
Thou shall not commit adultery: wherein first I learn, that as the act of
adultery, fornication, and all uncleanness of body is forbidden so all unchaste
thoughts, desires, and vnpure words are also forbidden. Mat. 5. 28.

Secondly, I learn that matrimony is chiefly to be preserved, and the wedding
bed to be undefiled, and that whoremongers and adulterers shall of God be
judged. Heb. 13.

Thirdly, I learn to refrain from all unchaste behavior, all unchaste words
and songs of Kibaudry.

Q. Show me what are the words of the 8. precept, and what you learn thereby?

A. Thou shall not steal: whereby I learn to abstain from stealing, from
robbing defranding, from unlawful dealing, and all unlawful games. Leuit. 19.
11. Ephe. 5. 5. 1. These. 4. 6.

Secondly, I learn, That I am bound to labor truly for my own living. 1.
These. 3. 10.

Thirdly, I learn to the uttermost of my power, to relieve by my labor the
needy members of Christ's body. 1. Tim. 6. 18.

Q. Proceed and show me what is the ninth Commandment, and what you learn
thereby?

A. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor: Wherein first I
learn not to testify any untruth. Pro. 10. 5.

Secondly, I learn not to dissemble, but to speak truth in my talking. Ephe.
4. 25.

Thirdly, I learn not to give out false reports, nor slanderous speeches of
any man. Q. What is the tenth Commandment, and what learn you out of it?

A. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house etc. whereby I learn, That all
the thoughts of men's heart, are open to Gods eyes, and every covetous desire of
man's heart, whereby the love of God or of our neighbor is violated, though it
be not sin to the eyes of men nor committed in act, yet such thoughts and
desires are sinful in Gods sight. Romans 7. 7.

Q. What is sin prescribed to be in the holy Scripture?

A. Every transgression of Gods law, either in thought, word, or deed, is
sin. 1. Ioh. 3. Q. What is the reward of sin and transgression?

A. The reward of sin and of unbelievers is death and condemnation. Romans 6.
23.

Q. Can any man so fulfill the law, whereby he may avoid eternal death.

A. The most just est man is unable, by fulfilling the law to avoid eternal
death. Luke 17. 10.

Q. What benefit then brings the law to these that obey it?

A. The law is a glass, that by the sight of sin humbles the Christian.
Romans 3. 19.

And secondly the law is a schoolmaster to bring humbled Christians to believe
in Christ, and to be saved. Gal. 3. 24.

Q. Seeing by the works of the law a man cannot be saned, why according to the
law should good works be performed?

A. First, good works of the faithful ruled by the line of Gods word, are
done to glorify our heavenly Father. Mat. 5.

Secondly, good works that proceed from the faithful, are signs of
sanctification and Pars prima.
work hope of election. 2. Pet. 1. 10.

Thirdly good works wrought in us by the holy Ghost wins other to godly
conversation. Mat. 5. And be wrought in the faithful as arguments of
salvation.

Q. Seeing by good works no Christian can have salvation, show me then how
shall a Christian be saved?

A. Every faithful Christian obtains salvation by faith in Christ Jesus
only. Romans 3. 28.

Q. What do you learn true Christian faith to be?

A. True Christian faith is a full and perfect persuasion and assurance to be
saved by Christ. Romans 8. 38. 39.

Q. How is it wrought in the heart of man? A. The outward means, by hearing
the word preached. Romans 10. 9.

The inward means is the infusion of grace by the holy Ghost. Ephe. 3. 16.

Q. Whereon is this faith grounded and established?

A. It is grounded and established on Gods promises in Christ Jesus. Romans 4. 3.
Gal. 3. 26.

Q. Show me how and whereby Christians may behold this Christian faith?

A. The twelve Apostles in a clear cristall glasie has described it plainly.

Q. Kehearse the first Article, and show me what you learn by it.

A. I believe in God the father Almighty etc. First I learn hereby, God on
whom I do believe is my Father, and I am his child by faith in Christ. John
1. 12. Gal. 3.

Secondly, I learn I am one of them to whom God says, I will be their God,
and they shall be my sons and daughters says the Almighty. Iere. 33. 1.

Thirdly I learn, that my almighty Father will so sustain me, that I shall
lack nothing. Psalm. 23. And so defend me that the gate of hell shall not
prevail against me. Math. 16.

Q. Rehearse the second Article, and show me what you learn by it.

A. And in Jesus Christ his only son our Lord.

First I learn the name and nature of Jesus does assure me, that he is my
Sauiuiour. Mat. 2.

By the second title of his name which is Christ (and signifies aunoynted) I
am taught that as the ointment on Aarons head did descend to all his garments,
so on me and all Christians the oil of grace descends from Christ unto us.

The third as he is the only son of God from everlasting, so he brings
many children to God everlastingly to be saved.

Fourthly I learn, That he is my Lord both by right of redemption, and my Lord
and husband by right of conjunction. Hos. 2. 19.

Q. Rehearse the third Article and show me what you learn by it.

A. Which was conceived by the holy Ghost: borne of the virgin Mary: whereby I
learn, first that he is free from sin, and altogether pure and unspotted.
Heb. 9.

Secondly I learn, that by his divine nature and power, he is able to
perform what soever tends to the conquest of man's foes. Col. 3.

Thirdly, it does assure me that he being borne of a woman, is a perfect man,
and in his person and manhood endured the wrath of God for the sins of
mankind, and to free the faithful (by his satisfaction) from all their sin
and transgression. Esaias 53.

Q. Rehearse the fourth Article, and show me what you learn thereby?

A. Suffered under Poncius Pilate: was crucified, dead, and buried, he
descended into hell. First I learn, that under Poncius Pilate the Judge, he
suffered on the Cross to work out my Redemption. Math. 27. Gal. 3. 14.

Secondly, his descending into hell, signifies the humbling of his soul, to
suffer the torments of hell for my sake. Psalm. 22.

Q. Rehearse the fixed Article, and what you learn out of it?

A. He rose again from the dead: Hereby I learn, that his resurrection does
assure me of my justification. 1. Cor. 15. 17.

Secondly I learn, that risting from sin and delighting in righteousness,
does assure me that I am a chosen member of his body. Romans 6. 4.

Thirdly I am taught that I rising with him, should set my affections on
heavenly things where he is. Col. 3. 1.

Fourthly, the rising of his body from the grave so gloriously, does assure me
that my body shall arise to enjoy with him eternal glory. 1. Cor. 15. 18.

Q. Rehearse the fixed Article, and what you learn by it?

A. He ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God, etc. First I
learn by his ascension into heaven, that he has taken possession for me, and
all his members of the heavenly Mansion.

Secondly, That he is seated on the right hand of God in majesty, does assure
me that he is above all Angels, placed in a secondary dignity to the father,
to whom in his humane nature he makes intercession for his members
continually.

Thirdly, he there placed in glory assures me and every member of his body,
there to be placed with him in everlasting glory.

Q. Rehearse the seventh Article, and what you learn by it?

A. From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. Wherein first I
learn to my comfort, that my Sauieur shall come to be my Judge. Job 19. 25.

Secondly, I learn that his second coming shall be with great glory, when
he comes to Judgment. Mat. 25. 41.

Thirdly I learn, as he shall be glorified in giving glory to his faithful
members: so he shall also be glorified in rendering vengeance in flaming fire,
to the faithless that have contemned the faithful, and disobeyed the Gospel.
1. These. 2. 8.

Q. Rehearse the eight Article, and show me what you learn out of it?

A. I believe in the holy Ghost: wherein first I learn, the holy spirit being
very God does certify my soul and my spirit, that I and all faithful
Christians, are the children of God and coheires with Christ of his glorious
kingdom. Romans 8. 16.

Secondly I learn, that the spiritual power of the holy spirit mollifieth
sin in me, and makes all holy desires to take place in my soul, and
indueth me with true holiness of life. Ephe. 4, 23.

Q. Rehearse the ninth Article, and what you learn therein?

A. I believe the catholic Church: whereby I learn, that God has on earth
and throughout the world, a holy Chuch and sanctified Congregation of people.
Math. 8. 10. Act. 10. 34.

Secondly I learn, That in this holy society, there is a Communion of Saints,
of which number by faith I am assured through thy favor to be one. Ephe. 5. 26.

Q. Rehearse the tenth Article, and what you learn by it?

A. I believe the forgiveness of sins: by which Article first I learn, and
steadfastly believe, although I am a sinner, yet Christ making satisfaction for
my sins, and for the sins of the whole world, my sins shall neither to me
be imputed, nor to my confusion remembered. Ier. 33. 34. Psalm. 32. 1.

Q. Rehearse the eleauenth Article, and what you learn by it?

A. I believe the resurrection of the Body: Whereby I learn, that when the
trumpet of God thall blow, and the Archangels sound out this powerful
sentence, Rise you dead, my body shall be raised from the dust, and so raised
shall reign with Christ for ever. 1. These. 4. 17.

Secondly I learn, I shall be clothed with Christ his body, and in my
resurrection my vile body shall be glorious. 1. Cor. 15. 42.

Q. Rehearse the twelfth Article, and show me what you learn thereby?

A. I believe the life everlasting* Wherein first I learn to my comfort, that
after death I shall be placed in the throne of life, and crowned in the
kingdom of life. Reu. 2. 10. 1. Tim. 4.

Secondly I learn, the life which I and every faithful member of Christ shall
receive, shall never end but be everlasting. Psalm. 21.

Thirdly I learn, that of all these graces and favors of God to me and to
all the faithful, comes of the free gift of God to me, and to all the whole
Christian Church, through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior, to whom with the
Father and holy spirit, I and all the faithful are bound to render, all honor
and glory, world without end, Amen. ()

A Prayer briefly to be repeated at the end of this first part.
Gracious, holy, and heavenly Father, which of thy love, have (of clay) created
us to thine own Image, by thy dear son redeemed us from bondage, and by the
holy Ghost do sanctify and preserve us in holiness to serve thee. Grant us
we beseech thee, that as by thy holy word, we are taught the duties of
Christianity, so we may without hypocrisy, sincerely serve thee in such sort,
as may tend most to the setting forth of thy glory, in our pilgrimage of this
life present: And may also most directly guide us to the attaining the eternal
felicity provided for us, and all thine elect, in thy celestial Paradize in
the life to come. And powerful Lord we pray thee, by the rule of thy Law, so
religiously govern our hearts, that we neither stray after our own
Imaginations, nor deceive our selves by any vain ostentations, and bring us
(by embracing the doctrines of thy holy Scriptures) to account and esteem them
the holy, and clear Cristall, wherein thy love is reueiled, and thy law for
direction of our lives plainly described. To true obedience of which thy law,
good Father so incline, form, and frame our hearts we beseech thee, that
unfeignedly, above all things we may love thy holy Majesty, and by proceeding
in the rules we practice, by an holy christian charity, we may perform our
love one to another, with pure hearts unfeignedly: And finally, by a true and
unfeigned faith obtain the promises of grace, to serve thee in true holiness
and righteousness of life, and after this true sanctification and grace
present, we may reign with thee in everlasting glory, world without end,
through Jesus Christ our blessed Savior and Redeemer.

Amen. ()
Here follows the second part of the Cristall of Christianity, wherein the
Sacrament of Baptism is discussed very plainly, and very familiarly.
Question. TO that end that all Christians may understand what the true Church
of Christ is, show me whom and what you do call the true Church of Christ here
on earth.

Answer. The name of Church by signification, signifies, (...)*
Calling, And all Christian people that profess the faith of Christ, are named
by the name of the Church visible, generally.

Q. Who are more effectually and truly called the Church?

A. They truly in this world are called the true and invisible Church of
Christ, whom God elected to salvation before the beginning of the world: And
which in receiving Christ by faith, do believe in Christ alone to be saved
eternally.

Q. What is the condition and estate of them which be true members of the
church and do believe in Christ effectually?

A. Although it does not to men always so appear, yet it is apparent, that
the true members of the Church are replenished with true happiness, holiness,
and endued with divine and saving graces.

Q. How are they which are members of Christ his true Church, made happy?

A. The true Church, and every member are blessed and made happy by Christ,
which takes away the curse and wrath of God due for sin from them, and
bestows his righteousness on them.

Q. How are Christ his members made holy?

A. Through his holy spirit, which sanctifies all the elect in Christ, with
true holiness.

Q. How are they replenished here on earth with heavenly graces?

A. As the Sunne-beames are made pertakers of the Suns glory and brightness:
So the true Chruch is replenished, and every part made pertakers of such
heavenly virtues and divine graces, whereby God our heavenly Father is glorified
by his grace given to the members of the Church in this life present.

Q. Do you conclude then that all Christians which truly believe in the Son
of God, which are sanctified by the spirit of God, and through his grace
express in this life the glory of God, are effectually called into the true
Church, and they are rightly called the true Church of Christ.

A. This is my conclusion, that all faithful people, elected before the
foundation of the world in Christ: gathered throughout the world universally,
which are justified, sanctified, and ordained to be glorified, are the true
Church of Christ, of whom Christ is the Lord and head, and are therefore called
the true Christian Church rightly.

Q. What assurance has the Church here on earth of Christ's love?

A. Christ has appointed the preaching of Gods blessed Word, and the holy
Sacraments as testimonies thereof.

Q. How many Sacraments has Christ's ordained in his Church, necessary for the
salvation of his Church?

A. Christ has ordained, and in his church instituted the Sacrament of
Baptism, to receive and entertain them which are his members, into the favor
of God, by his love.

Q. What other Sacrament was by Christ instituted?

A. The holy feast and banquet of his most blessed body and blood, to feed
them and sustain them by, and with full assurance of his love.

Q. What mean you by this word, Sacraments?

A. Sacraments are outward signs, that do represent all those spiritual,
inward saving graces, which the faithful receive from God through Jesus
Christ.

Q. What is the outward sign in Baptism?

A. Water, wherein the Child is dipped or sprinkled with: and it does
represent the two properties of Water, which does both cleanse, and comfort.

Q. How does the property of clensing agree with the inward graces represented
in Baptism?

A. The property of clensing, represents the clensing of our sins by the
precious and pure blood of Christ, which was shed on the Cross for our sins.

Q. How does Water in Baptism represent comfort to us?

A. As Baptism is instituted in stead of Circumcision, which was a seal of
righteousness by faith, so the faithful are sealed, and comforted by faith in
Christ to be saved.

Q. Does Baptism both signify clensing from sin, and sealing unto
righteousness?

A. Our clensing from sin, even from the infection of the Leprosy, which
came by Adams disobedience: And the essential righteousness which comes by
Christ, is represented by Baptism.

Q. What is the cause you compare original sin to the infectious disease of
the Leprosy?

A. The word does declare original sin Gezar, or Gazar*
to be full of evil, to flow with evil, and to ouerflow all men naturally,
with corruption tending to damnation.

Q. Does that dangerous disease bring danger of damnation naturally on all
men?

A. In one significant word the Apostle does (...)
show that the infection, does so infect all man's affections and parts with
disobedience, that the will of the natural man will not obey the will of God:
for the which rebellion the wrath of God comes over all the children of
disobedience to condemnation.

Q. How are the faithful freed from this infectious sin of Leprosy,
proceeding from Adams disobedience?

A. As it came by disobedience of one, upon all men to condemnation: So it is
taken away by the perfect obedience of one (namely of Christ) from all that be
members of Christ, and ordained to salvation.

Q. Are not all men as well as some partakers of that benefit, by the perfect
obedience of Christ?

A. None have this benefit by Christ, but the regenerate only.

Q. What mean you by regeneration?

A. Regeneration is a saving grace in Baptism, pertaining to the regenerate
only: for it is not sufficient for children to be dipped into the water, but
to be also buried with Christ in Baptism, and to be borne anew by the power
of the holy Ghost.

Q. How does this appear in the regenerate?

A. As many as spiritually receive the son of God by faith, to be their
Savior: they receive privilege, and power, to be the sons of God, which is
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and father of all the faithful.

Q. Show me this privilege of them which believe, and how they be borne anew
and made the sons of God.

A. They are not begotten of flesh and blood, nor conceived of the will of the
flesh, nor borne of the will of man, but of God.

Q. How comes it to pass that in the regenerate, the blemish of sin does
remain, being borne of God.

A. God does suffer some sin to be found and in the best to remain (but
never suffers it to reign) and it remains for their good, and Gods glory.

Q. Can the remaining of sin in the children of God, turn to their good, and
Gods glory?

A. It can and does appear for many purposes to be so by the word of God.

Q. Show me some and such proofs as you find to be approved?

A. First, the faithful find, that feeling sin, and finding their own
corruption: thereby God works in the faithful a true humiliation.

Secondly, when the faithful find they have strong combats with corruption.
In such strong conflicts, the faithful fly more fervently to seek succor of
God, by fervent prayer, and earnest invocation.

Thirdly, the faithful finding the power of Gods spirit, to support their
weakness, and to preserve them safely in all perils: are provoked to praise
God daily for their safety and preservation.

Fourthly, God often times appoynteth that the best and most perfectest shall
have strongest battle with corruption: That when the victory is gained, as
victors and valiant Soldiers of Christ: a greater weight of glory may be
provided, and with more glorious Crowns of immortal glory shall such be
crowned and glorified.

Q. Do you conclude then, that all the elect shall be glorified, which live on
earth to Gods glory: and such as most glorify God before men, shall receive
greatest glory in heaven?

A. It must be so concluded as it is by testimony of Christ himself conclnded
(to the comfort and encouragement of all godly and faithful members of his
true Church) which according as they covenant in Baptism, be faithful unto
death.

Q. What is the duty of Christians which are partakers of the Sacrament of
Baptism?

A. Those things ought to be in Christians baptized, which were found to be in
Abraham, both when he was Circumcised, and after he had received Circumcision.

Q. What was found in Abraham before Circumcision?

A. First, Abraham's obedience appeared, by obeying the voice of God, when God
called him from parents and patrimony, from kindred, and country.

Secondly, Abraham's constant belief did appear, in believing, and by faith
depending on Gods promises.

The third grace found in him before Circumsion was his willing mind, both to
receive the covenants made by Gods Majesty, and to make covenants of dutiful
service unto God again.

Q. How can Children in infancy Baptized, take any covenants from God, or make
any covenants to God.

A. Although Infants Baptized cannot themselves, yet their suerties do enter
into covenants for them, and it is their duties when they come to knowledge to
perform those covenants: And as they hope to have God to be their Father by
Christ, so to keep Christian covenants.

Q. What are those covenants you mean? A. I mean a Christian is first bound
to embrace the Christian faith with all his whole heart. Secondly, to love God
with his whole heart. Thirdly, to endeavor to serve, and please God in true
holiness and righteousness all the days of his life: and fourthly, to
express such obedience in this life, as his covenants he made in Baptism,
bind him to perform.

Q. You do approve, that even very Infants receiving Baptism, are bound by
covenants to perform holy duties: Show me now the duty of Elders, of Parents,
and of Masters, which are Christians, and by faith hope to be saved.

A. As Abraham father of the faithful, after Circumcision, when he had entered
into covenant with God, according to that covenant, himself, his seed, and
his servants (by his instructions) did walk according to that holy and
heavenly vocation: in believing Gods promises, and living virtuously, to the
uttermost of his power obeyed Gods Commandments: So in like manner, by virtue
of their covenant in Baptism, all Christians are bound to perform such duties
of obedience.

Q. What does Abraham's faith and obedience teach us?

A. As Abraham walked, so faithful Christians must walk: and endeavor to
follow his steps in faith, and obedience, and become such faithful Fathers,
as may approve them, not only to show a duty of Parents, in bringing their
Children to the holy Sacrament of Baptism (and see them Baptized) but also
after Baptism, parents must and are bound to see their Children and servants
instructed and educated from their infancy, to live holily and religiously,
whereby Gods name, who has called them, may be glorified in them, their
Children, and family.

Q. I do understand what you mean by the Church of Christ: and likewise the
benefits of Baptism, and duty of Christians in Baptism (which hope to be
saved) show me now a reason why the faithful freed from eternal death, do
die a bodily death.

A. The benefits of bodily death are many to the faithful: and death of body
brings advantage to Christ's members, both in body and soul.

Q. What benefits brings bodily death to the faithful?

A. First, by bodily death all rebellious affections in the flesh are utterly
killed, and all sinful affections utterly quenched.

Secondly, as the dead body is buried: so all carnal affections are perfectly
mortified: And every part by perfect mortification made more fit to receive
glory in the day of the resurrection.

Q. Are both the laying into grave, and rifing from grave, benefits to the
faithful?

A. The grave has ever been a chamber of safety to the faithful: But now
sithence the blessed body of Christ was laid into the grave, it is made the
bed of sweet spycerie to the godly.

Q. If the very grave be beneficial: show me what benefits does rising from
grave, bring to the buried bodies of Christians?

A. The bodies of Christians which are buried in Seas or Land, are sown in
corruption, in dishonor, in weakness, in estate mortal, they rise in
incoruption, in honor, in power, and in immortal estate, never to perish,
never to dye a second death, as the wicked do.

Q. What benefits find the faithful after death, in the estate of
Immortality, and after this mortal life?

A. The death of every faithful member of Christ, washed in Baptism with his
precious blood, is precious in Gods sight, and as the sight of God shall bring
all celestial joy: so the presence of God, where is all fullness of Joy and
perpetual peaee, shall fulfill the faithful so full of that felicity,
tranquillity, and heavenly glory, which is unspeakable, for excellency and
perpetuity, whether good Lord bring us all. Amen.

A Prayer at the end of this second part to be used.

BLessed Lord God, as we praise thy Majesty for thy mercy in instructing us,
so we humbly pray thee, that we being instructed in the true knowledge of thy
elected Church and sanctified Congregation, and having learned, that as a
pledge of thy love, thou have left the Sacrament of Baptism, by effectual
operation to represent the washing away of our sins, and sealing assurance of
salvation to our souls, by the precious blood of thy dear Son, to our
eternal safety. Free us good Lord we beseech thee from all original
corruption: By thy holy spirit make perfect our Regeneration, by our new birth
grant that our old evils of Adam in us naturally, may more and more be
mortified, the fruits of holiness in us may more be increased, to thy glory
and our good. And good father we pray thee, by the example of faithful
Abraham, which has by thy word been taught us, so instruct us thy servants,
that we and our seed may faithfully keep our promised Covenants made to thee
in Baptism, both in obeying thy holy commandments our selves, and also
instructing our children and servants in the same obedience, so that we and our
family may daily endeavor to please and serve thy Majesty in holy obedience.
And gracious Lord, seeing we feel sin to have in our flesh a permanency,
give us such power over our sin, that in us it may never have soueraignitie.
And grant us such grace, that both bodily death, and the grave, may bring
benefits to us, and to all true believers: And in the day of the Resurrection
(our bodies rising to immortality) may be joined to our souls, to enjoy in
thy glorious kingdom, everlasting glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord, and
glorious Redeemer.

Amen. ()
A Prayer before the Sacrament of the LORDS Supper.
BLessed, holy, and heavenly Father, without whom there is no felicity, no
sanctity, nor at the banquet of thy dear son (with thy Saints) no society. We
beseech thee good Lord, sanctify us poor sinners, that both our bodies and
souls, may from all former impuritie be purged, and with the wedding garment
of true Christianity and charity be clothed: For our farther preparation
pierce our hearts with an earnest sorrow for our sins, that by such penitency,
we may be purged from our grievous offenses: Moreover, we beseech thee, plant
in our hearts that faith in thy promises, that by believing thy Son to be the
bread of life, he may sustain our souls to eternal life: And we with a
lively faith believing and receiving those banqueting Dishes, and purified
Wines, may through faith be freed from eternal death. And finally, grant we
beseech thee to us, such faith and perfect persuasion, that in us this
spiritual food may have spiritual opperation, and we thereby nourished, may
in grace be more increased: From death eternal, by faith freed. And by our
constant faith everlasting life may be granted in thy glorious kingdom, to
live and reign with thee and thy dear Son, through the same thy blessed
Son, our only Savior and Redeemer.

Amen. ()
Here follows the third part of the Cristall of Christianity, wherein the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper is discussed very plainly, and very familiarly.
Question. Proceed now to the Sacrament of the LORDS SVPPER, and both show me
the outward signs of the Sacrament, and what inward saving grates be thereby
presented to the Church?

A. The signs in the Lords Supper are bread and wine, signifying by bread, his
blessed body broken for us, and by wine, his precious blood, powered out for
remission of our sins.

Q. How does bread signify his body, and represent the blessings of his body
to us? A. As the word for bread in the true signification, does signify all
kind of sustentation and nourishment for our bodies, so does the giving us his
body, signify spiritually all sustentation for soul and body. He is our
wisdom, he is our sanctification, he is our justification, he is our
redemption, he is our salvation: The giving of Christ from God to mankind, is
with him, giving all good things to mankind, for this life, and the life to
come, for he is the true bread that came down from heaven to sustain us by
his grace on earth, until we attain glory with him in heaven.

Q. How does Wine represent his blood powered out for us?

A. Christ calls himself the true Vine, and his grapes are spiritual
graces, and as he is full of grace, so his grapes are full of spiritual power:
and when his head was with thorns rased, his hands and his feet with nails
boared, his sides and heart pierced, the purified Wine of his peirced heart,
was powered out (to comfort our hearts) wherewith he does command his Prophet
to comfort his people at the heart, namely, with pardon of their sins, which
comfort of remission of sins, does approve his blood to have the property of
Wine, which is comfortable.

Q. You call it a banquet, and a Supper of Christ, show me for whom this feast
is made, and especially provided?

A. It is made principally to his true church which before I expressed to be
the true believers, and none but the true believers, are effectually partakers
of this spiritual banquet.

Q. Do not all that communicate at the Lords table, by the sign of bread
receive the saving graces represented by the bread. A. As wicked Judas received
the bread of Christ, but not Christ the true bread, so as many as be
Communicants, having such or the like corruption, can never receive the body of
Christ, and his benefits presented by the bread (consecrated by the Word)
although they receive bread and wine at the Sacrament with others.

Q. How does the bread that is consecrated differ from other bread, which is
usual for the nourishment of our bodies?

A. As Wax before it has impression of a Seals, is bare Wax, and after it is
more, it is a Seal: So the usual water in Baptism, and Bread and Wine in the
Lords Supper, by the word are made sacraments and seaies, of assurance from
Christ, to assure his true Church (and every member thereof) of his saving
graces contained in the Sacraments.

Q. What may be the difference of men, which communicate all at one Communion?

A. As the danger or peril of the one is great, because they receive it
unworthily, not considering the Lords body, and often times such for unworthy
receiving, do receive punishment, and sometimes such do eat and drink their
own damnation, as the Apostle testifies.

So the benefit of them that receive it worthily is great, for by faith they
feeding spiritually, do eat the spiritual food (which never perishes) by
virtue whereof they are preserved from perishing, and sustained unto eternal
life.

Q. What means the Apostle by eating and drinking their own damnation in the
Lords supper?

A. The Apostle does signify, that even this banquet received by the wicked
persons, careless, and without consideration of their own impiety, without
faith, repentance, or charity, trampling under foot that precious blood: Even
for such contempt (he means) such wicked persons shall find the receiving
thereof, to testify their condemnation more fully.

Q. What does he mean that he says, some of you are sick, some are weak,
and some are fallen asleep?

A. He admonishes them which were (and us that are now reputed faithful
professors) that for lack of that worthiness, which is required of them, and
us which come not fully or fitly prepared, such were and are punished with such
sicknesses and punishments, as might make them better to consider their own
crimes, and unadvised receiving Christ his blessed body: and so condenme their
own selves: And by such punishment also God moves them to fly to him for
mercy in this world, that they may not with the wicked of this world, perish in
the world to come, for want of Christian duties.

Q. What duties are of Christians required which come to this Sacrament of
Christ, that they may be reputed worthy receivers thereof?

A. There is required principally of them, a three-folde consideration or
examination, which worthily and effectually be partakers of Christ.

Q. Show me those principal considerations, and examinations?

A. As it is not fit for a servant, or a subject, to come to the Table of a
temporal King uncleanly, or uncomely, so it is much more unfit and further
offense to come to the table of the eternal king Christ Jesus, with any kind
of uncleanness, as might give offense to his mighty Majesty.

Q. Show me first what cleanness is required of Christians, coming to his
presence, to be pertakers of this precious banquet?

A. The people were commanded when they came to hear the Law promulgated on
Sina, Certain days to wash and sanctify themselus, before they came to hear
the Law: When the Lord would have his people talk with his Majesty, he
commanded them to wash them, and make them clean from all their wirkednesse.
Before King David came to Gods Altar, he washed his hands in innocence. And
Christ Jesus did both wash and wipe the very feet of the Apostles, when he
would make them fit for this feast.

Q. What learn we by all these washings? A. First, when we come to hear the
Law or Gospel preached, all wickedness, and ungodliness must be washed by
earnest sorrow, for former sins committed, and our selves sanctified by
belief, that pardon for sin, and increase of grace, may by Christ be granted.

Secondly, when we come to the majesty of the glorious God, by invocation, or
prayer, we must with the Publican see and be sorrowful for our own misery:
and not with a proud, but a pure zeal of soul hope to be purged, pardoned,
and by Christ justified.

Thirdly, we must not presume to come to the Temple, nor to the Altar, nor
Table of this great King, until heart, and hand, body, and soul, and every
part, be found, by proof, to be pure and clean.

Fourthly, by Christ we are taught, that except we be washed by him, and be
pronounced clean by his mouth, none are fit for this feast, and that is the
cause that the Apostle says, some eat and drink their olone damnation,
because that every man does not examine himself to find, his testimony of his
washing (through Christ Jesus, Lord of the feast) before he come to the Lords
feast, and blessed Sacrament of his body and blood.

Q. As you have showed me what cleanlines is fit for Christian Communicants, so
show me what comeliness is required at the table and Supper of the Lord?

A. As at a festival Table of a King, comely and desent garments are required:
so at the feast and table of the Lord, every Christian must have a comely and
Christian garment, such as may please God through Christ.

Q. What garment is fit for a Christian to come to the Lords table in?

A. There belongs first, a Christian care of casting away the garment of the
old corrupt Adam.

And secondly, an endeavor to put on Christ Jesus.

Q. Show me what the casting away of the old Adam does signify?

A. First, it signifies the casting away the corruptions that we are clothed
with naturally, by Adams transqression, and the Apostle names them to be
principally these following, namely, lying and slandring in any sort.

Secondly, stealing, and all kind of false dealing, uncomely, ungodly, and
especially all filthy and profane talking.

Thirdly, all bitterness, wrath, and wrathful, or evil speaking one to
another, seeing we are all members of one body.

Fourthly, and finally, to banish and cast from us, all thoughts, words, and
works, that either are evil or tend to evil purposes.

Q. Let me now understand what the putting on Christ Jesus means?

A. First, we must understand the remoouing from the mind inwardly all evils,
is the work of the holy Ghost, which afterward does cloth and garnish the
godly with the form and shape of God in true holiness and righteousness by
Christ.

Q. Show me the signs of the holiness and righteousness by Christ Jesus
bestowed on us?

A. As we are clothed by Christ with sanctification of Gods spirit, and
justification before God, so it does often appear before men, and is
expressed, in speaking the truth without dissimulation. In honest dealing and
godly care in our vocation, justly to labor, and live. To speak that which
may be instruction for others, and consolation to those that hear our words.
Christians must be courteous one to another, merciful one to another, loving
one to another, and by love, which they seeing in God toward them, one to
forgive another, as God for Christ his sake forgiueth them, and in the true
garment of union clothed, coming to the Communion of the body and blood of
Christ, shall be accepted as ghests worthy of Gods graces, by Christ at the
table presented.

You have showed me from the first consideration, what comeliness and
cleanness becomes Christians to have when they come to be partakers of the
Lords supper: Show me now the manner of eating and drinking of the Lords
body and blood.

Q. What must a Christian man consider in the worthy eating the body of
Christ Jesus, and drinking his precious blood spiritually?

A. As all that work the work of GOD, must believe in him whom God has sent,
so all that will eat the body of Christ, and drink his blood worthily, must
believe in his Incarnation, in his Passion, in his Resurrection, and in his
glorious Ascension, rightly and religiously: and on these, and such benefits
spiritually feeding by believing, are nourished with the benefits of his body
and blood effectually.

Q. What must we consider and believe in Christ his Incarnation?

A. A Christian must consider the cause of Christ his Incarnation to proceed
from Gods love, (for man's restoration, or restoring again into the favor of
God) for the benefit of all that truly believe. And must constantly be
persuaded, that believing in the Son of God, by this his faith, he shall live
eternally, and shall never perish.

Q. What must a Christian man consider and believe of Christ his Passion?

A. A Christian must consider, that Christ in his passion did suffer all things
requisite for remission of the sins of all faithful believers: And must
believe, that Christ redeemed his by his passion, from all manner of sin,
both concerning Adams sinful transgression, and also concerning his daily
sinful corruption, and vain conversation.

Q. What must a Christian consider, and believe in Christ his powerful
Resurrection?

A. A Christian must consider, that as Christ Jesus dyed for the salvation of
the faithful, he (namely a Christian) must fully be persuaded that thereby he
is effectually risen, and shall thereby eternally, both in body and soul be
saved.

Q. Now concerning Christ his glorious Ascension, show me what must be a
Christians consideration, faithful belief, and full persuasion.

A. First, a Christian must consider, Christ Jesus being heir of all things,
and having showed all power in heaven and earth to be given unto him, and
having led Captivity captive, is ascended into heaven, to take real and
royal possession of heaven (in his holy humane soul and body.) And secondly,
a Christian must believe, that where Christ is, every believer shall be, and
also be fully persuaded, that from the right hand of God, where Christ now
sits in glory Celestial, Jesus Christ shall come to Judgment (and after a
joyful sentence sounded) all that believe in Christ, shall ascend with him to
receive the fullness of joy, and peace perpetual.

Q. You have showed me what consideration and examination is fit before, and at
the feeding in the Lords supper. Express unto me now, what becomes a
Communicant to consider of, after he has received the body and blood of
Christ.

A. That which a Christian must consider after he has received the Supper of
the Lord, is a right spiritual disgestion of that spiritual food.

Q. What mean you by a spiritual disgestion?

A. First, I mean a feeling of Gods favor Motion.
in Christ, when the will is so bent by force of the love of God (in sending
his own Son) that those which believe in Christ should not perish: That he
will with the Prophet say: I will love the Lord which has delivered my soul
from a second death, Mine eyes from wayling in the lake of eternal death, and
my feet from final falling into the endless damnation of them which taste
the torments of a second death.

Q. What is the second opperation of spiritual disgestion.

A. The second is a divine apprehension of Inclination
Gods spirit moving the mind to an holy inclination, by desiring and loving
of that which may most here on earth please Gods Majesty: And above all things
earthly to bend and set our affections on things heavenly, and to say, I
desire to be with my Savior, of whose sweets savor, I have in this banquet
tasted by faith.

Q. What further feeling of divine favors is in spiritual disgestion of these
holy mysteries*

A. The third opperation of holy disgestion Hope of fruition.
is a lively hope of full, and firm fruition, of these heavenly things, that
by holy defires, a true Christian member has set his affection upon, and by
this lively hope, he is fully assured, that when Christ (which is our life)
shall appear in glory, he shall by his body (full of glory) so powerfully
raise our mortal bodies from death, that both body and soul of the faithful,
shall receive life immortal, and glory eternal.

Q. Are there any farther comforts to be found or felt by spiritual
disgestion?

A. The celestial comforts that the faithful do find in disgesting these
divine graces, dainty dishes, and purified wine of Christ his body and blood,
are unaccountable. I will conclude with a fourth disgestion, and although set
last, yet is it not the least, for thereof this banquet has (of the disgestion
and opperation) a true right title, and denomination.

Q. What name has this feast by opperation of the same?

A. This feast by famous Fathers of the (...).
Church, was named by a word that signifies a feast of thanksgiving, in the
greek tongue.

Q. What is signified by that denomination?

A. Thereby is expressed a fourth spiritual and holy disgestion, when the
feeling of Gods grace, fills the soul with such fullness of true gratuitie,
that as with Marrow, and fatness of meat, the bones, and body are filled, so
with praise and hearty thanksgiving, the mind and mouth of the faithful are
filled, and thereby forced to praise God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, by
feeding on that spiritual sustentation, and drinking of the cup of salvation,
in remembrance of Christ: This grace of thanksgiving is given to all the
faithful.

Q. You do mean by the faithful, all the members of the true Church, which
are entertained into the love of God by effectual Baptism, and freed with the
Son of God spiritually in the Lords supper here on earth: Tell me what are
their triumphs in Heaven?

A. I confess my powers are unable to apprehend the least part, but this the
Scriptures testifies with faithful Abraham, Isacke, and Jacob, every
faithful member of the Church militant shall rest, and with the triumphant
Church, triumphantly reign in heavenly tranquillity, in eternal felicity,
and in unspeakable glory: shine as the stars in heaven: And sing with the
Angels of heaven, that holy and heavenly song of triumph, Aleluiah, all honor,
glory, and praise be to God, world without end,

Amen. ()
FINIS.
A Prayer to be said at the end of this third part.
O Lord our God, and gracious Creator, which of thy love, before the world, or
man was created, did in thy sacred and secret decree, appoint and ordain
out of mankind, a holy Church and chosen Congregation, eternally to be saved
in Jesus Christ, and with him, and by him to be made Co-heires in thine
everlasting kingdom. The testimony of which thine eternal love, being left
by thy dear Son, to his members generally, he vouchsafed in Sacraments (as
perpetual pledges) to ordain and institute publicly, of which holy ordinance
we be now made partakers, we humbly beseech thy blessed Majesty, to grant
us participation, of all those saving graces, and promised blessings, which
appertain to faithful receivers, by spiritual receiving those holy pledges,
so that by our faithful feeding on him, thy dear Son, we may feel the
fruits of his In carnation, the benefits of his bitter Passion, the power of
his glorious Resurrection, and receive by faith assurance of the Celestial
possession, that he has obtained by his Ascension. And after this life is
ended, with him we may enjoy celestial triumph, and triumphantly with his
victorious Church, in heart triumph (when sin and Satan are conquered) we
may everlastingly with the Crown of eternal life be Crowned, by and through
Christ our Captain, and blessed Conqueror,

Amen. ()
FINIS.
Printed at London by Thomas Dawson, dwelling near the three Cranes in the
Vinetree, and are there to be sold. 1617.


