SOMMONS TO Doomes day

SENT UNTO HIS BELOVED ENGLAND, AS A Memorial of his deep printed Love and
Loyalty.

By HENOCH CLAPHAM.

EDINBVRGH PRINTED BY RObert Walde-graue, Printer to the Kings Majesty. An.
1595.

Cum Priuilegio Regio.

SCHOLASTICIS.
LArge spatiari, Rhetoris est; stricte autem Dialectici. Hoc proprium
Academicorum Scholis: illud, Rostris. Medium inter vtrunque, hoc potius (vt
uaggela, Prophetae accommodatius) hic studui. Lineae si quae occurrunt otiosae
(error vero hujus saeculi loquacis, maxim fluitans) illas ego repudio nec
probo. Facilius autem est destruere, quam astruere: nec difficilius labeculae
non serpente connivere, quam labiorum labem (vt ne dicam luem) in aliorum
lucubrationes, evomere. Quid tum peto? vt aequo (si non placido) legatis animo;
vel saltem pacato, haec mea qualiacunque deponatis: hoc summisse petitur ac
flagito,

Valete. H. C.

THE EPISTLE.
SWEET ENGLAND, wishing all true happiness to thee and my sovereign Queen
ELI^^^^TH, (whose bloo^ ^^^ersaries intestine a^^ ^^rane, God in due time
convert or confound) Being urged to voyage from thee for a season, I have
here commended unto thy reading, this mite of a mountain of Good will.
Forewarning, is a fore-arming, neither will my sommoning thy soul (howsoever
harshe at first) prove otherwise than healthful at last. Some in whom is
small good Zeal but more malice, will (considering my person) wring what senses
they list from my sentences, that so they may snarle behind my back: But let
such learn, that Love will judge the best, but Malice never spoke well. Some
in whom Zeal overmatcheth knowledge, will e contra affirm, that I have not
plainlye enough rebuked sin, etc. Let such learn, that I have learned, that
there is one manner of Rebuke in the Church of the old Testament, another Rule
in the Church of the new Testament: one manner of dealing with persons within
the visible Church, another wisdom toward them that are without. He that
follows one rule for form of rebuke may as well confound the first and latter
ministry. This not observed causes much teaching, but no good done. Words
uttered according to knowledge discretiue, Prove. 25.11
are like apples of gold and pictures of silver. Accept it with no worse
meaning than I offer it, then neither shall thou disdain to receive it, nor I
repent the gift: and so beseeching the Lords blessing to accompany my
labor, I end. Edinburgh, 1595.

Fulgura sic flammas qui terris servat iniquis
Anglorum Soter semper, vbique siet.
Thy humble petitioner unto God for thy good. HENOCH CLAPHAM.

SOMMONS TO DOOMES-DAIE.
2. PET. 3. verse. 10.11. 10 But the day of the Lord will come as a Thief in the
night, in the which the Heavens shall pass away with a noise, and the Elements
shall melt with heat, and the Earth with the works that are therein, shall
be burnt up.

11 Seeing therefore, that all these things must be dissolved, what manner
persons ought ye to be, in holy conversation and godliness.


THE holy Apostle PETER, writing unto all wheresoever, that had obtained the
like precious faith, even the precious faith of Christianity, does unto all
(and so consequently unto us, if we be Christians) deliver many saving
doctrines and wholesome exhortations grounded upon their doctrines, for the
further confirmation of faith and increasment of sanctification. Amongst which,
this one (namly a Caveat and warning peale of the destruction of the whole
world by fire, and the great day of Doom) is not least urged, but of all the
rest most forciblie in this Chapter propounded and pressed, and especially in
these two verses now read. Before the handling of which two verses, it shall be
unto me neither grievous, nor to you unprofitable, that I sum up the
precedents of the chapter. In the two first verses, the blessed Apostle,
stirs up the Readers of his Epistle, to receive the ensuing doctrine into
the purity of their minds, (for indeed a corrupt mind will but mock there
at) and the rather they are moved thereunto, because the doctrine should be no
new or strange doctrine, but even such a doctrine as before had bin delivered:
First by the holy Prophets, secondly by the Apostles of our Lord and Savior:
which doctrine he calls a Commandment, because it was not a lesson left, to
learn or believe at a christians leisure or pleasure, but enjoined upon every
Christians neck, by the holy Prophets before Christ came, by the blessed
Apostles after Christ come: a commandment to the Church of the old Testament,
and a commandment to the Church of the new Testament: and therefore not such
a lesson as may be believed and vnbeleued, received and refused at men's
pleasures: but a commandment sent unto all that study purity of mind, and
do awaite the coming of our Savior.

In the third and fourth verses, he foretells the pure minded of certain
adversaries to the said doctrine: and this he does, first by setting down
their time of arising: namely, In the latter days: secondly, by giving unto
them an Epithet drawn from the quality of their speech, vz. Mockers: thirdly,
setting down a Synopsis or compendium of their speech, which is this: Where
is the promise of his coming? for since the Fathers died, all things continue
alike from the beginning of the Creation: as though they should say, You write
and you talk of Christ's coming unto Judgment, saying, that there shall be
an end of all these worldly things: I cannot tell, the old ancient Fathers
they died and so do we die, others came in their rooms, and so does there in
ours and not only that, but such creatures as were then, such are now, days,
months and years turn about, departing and coming again in a word, I see
nothing changed, but all things alike now as of old, and therefore I cannot
believe that the saying (The World shall be consumed, and the Christ shall
come unto Judgment) that it is any thing else, but a tale of Robin-hood, and
therefore I will walk on in the ways of mine own heart, and in the delight
of mine own eyes, making my heaven here whilst I live here: for after
death, I cannot believe there is any account no nor life, no more then of a
dead Dog, and pitted caryon. All these and such like blasphemies, the holy
Apostle accounts no better than a Mock, and the persons themselves Mockers,
namely, of God and his word. In the 5. and 6. verses, the Apostle renders a
reason of their Atheism and Infidelity: namely, that they are willingly
ignorant, of what? That they are willingly ignorant how the heavens had their
being by the word of the Lord, (for they think the Heavens to come of
themselves) as also ignorant how the earth by the same word of ELOHIM was
separate from the waters and had his foundation (as the Psalmist says) laid
upon the waters: Psalm 24.2.
and therefore by the same word of God brought above the Earth, what time the
old world was destroyed by water. This I take to be the true sense of them two
verses. In the seventh verse, he teaches the pure minded, that the same word
that brought forth the former effects, the same word is the preserver of the
Heavens and Earth, during the time of their conservation: but that the same
word has determined an end unto the Heavens and the Earth, which shall as
verily take place by fire (as erst by water) The day of which destruction shall
be, what time the Lord shall utterly destroy the ungodly: closely intimating
thus much: As the waters overflowed the Earth, in that day wherein God had
appointed to preserve Noah and to destroy the unbelievers: so verily shall the
fire ceaze upon the Heavens and Earth in that day, wherein our God has
secretly concluded the destruction of all such mockers and ungodly persons.

In the eight and ninth verses, he stirs up the beloved of the Lord to be
grounded in a persuasion quite contrary unto the former mockers: First, in not
being ignorant, as the former were willingly ignorant: Secondly, to testify
their not being ignorant by believing, first, that before the Lord, one day and
a thousand years are alike; (this is secretly opposed to the ignorant
judgment of the mockers, who thought God would never come, because he had
driven so many years) Secondly, by believing that the Lord will not be slack
in keeping his promise of coming, howsoever some in their foolishnes accounted
him slack: for the effecting of which belief in them, he gives in the next
words a reason (not of the Lords slacknes, but) of his not destroying the world
and coming unto judgment, as yet: namely, because he has decreed a time,
wherein (with all long suffering) he will awaite the repentance of people, that
so they might be saved: This secretly insinuates thus much: Even as the Lord,
(before he would destroy the old world by water) did with love and much
patience even an Genes 6.3. 1. Pet. 3.20.
hundred and twenty years, awaite the repentance of the people: even so with
patience and as much (ey more) lenity, he now awaiteth the conversion of people
from Sin to Sanctity, that so in that great and fearful day, they might be
saved, and not with the ungodly be destroyed.

Now come we to the text read: wherein is considered two things; First, the
propound of the doctrine general in the first verse read, by a simple
affirmative: Secondly, by way of concession in the first clause of the next
verse: then an exhortation, urged by an interrogation in the next and last
clause. In the proposition general, we have to observe the coming of the
Lord in these words: But the day of the Lord will come: Secondly, the manner
of his coming, like a Thief in the night: Thirdly, what shall be effected by
his coming, vz. the passing away of the Heuens, with the Elements melting:
Secondly, of the Earth, by the burning of fire: Thirdly, the concession of the
whole in these words: Seeing all these things must be dissolved. The
exhortation included in the interrogation, lies in these words, What manner of
persons ought ye to be in holy conversation and godliness? The coming of the
Lord, expressed in these words, But the day of the Lord will come, is an
opposition to the mockers negative axiom which was this: The day of the Lord
will not come. And to make the affirmation more forcible, the holy Apostle
preponeth the particle, But: as though he should say, You mockers affirm that
the Lord will not come, But I affirm he will come. Thus the Apostles of
Satan and the Apostles of Christ, will be ever in contradictions, like to
JEHOVAH and Satan in Paradise, The Lord he said, In eating of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil, thou shall die the death. Genes. 2.19.
Satan soon after said, Chap. 3.4.
Ye shall not die at all. The impes of Satan can say, Lo all things in the
world are as they were wont to be, therefore God will not come to judgment:
The Apostle of JESUS he says, But the day of the Lord will come. Whether now
shall we believe? the abominable Atheist, or the blessed Apostle PETER? To the
wicked their fore-but, the Apostle opposes his But: which But, will prove so
mighty a wall in the end, as neither mockers nor mockers disciple, shall be able
to leap over without breaking the neck of their soul. The Apostle PAVL, he
plainly says to the Thessalonians, 1. These. 5.2
Ye know perfectly that the day of the Lordshal come: but our Mockers say, we
know perfectly that the day of the Lord shall not come. Holy IVDE brings in
the prophecy of Jude. 14.15.
Henoch, saying, that the Lord comes with thousands of Saints to give
judgment: And our Savior himself affirms Matthew. 24.
that He will come with the sound of a Trumpet:: but our Helhounds affirm,
that all these things are but tales and devises of men: whom shall we believe
now? The blessed Apostles, and our Savior himself: or these birds of the
bottomless pit, that breath blasphemy against God and his word? A wonder of
the world, that man should be so infatuate and sensles. But the Apostle a
little before gives the reason hereof: namely, that they willingly are
ignorant, how the Lord by his word has made and conserved the Heavens and
Earth, as also how heretofore by the same potent word, he brought the waters
upon the Earth to the destruction of all Creatures breathing, excepting them in
the Arc. These Atheists, blind Moles, are ignorant of the Word and works of
God, ey willingly ignorant, else they could not but know that the Lord will
come unto judgment. Let the rankest mocking Atheist answer to this question:
Is there not sometimes a qualme coming over thine heart, when thou murdreist,
when thou steals, when thou commits adultery, etc. Feel thou not
sometimes a griping of thy Conscience, Speak plain, ly not? Oh yes thou
Atheist! thou art not ever exempted from such nips, girds and cold qualmes.
What means thine heart to admit of such molestures? Oh thou Atheist, thy soul
is afraid and trembles to come before one, that will take an account of thy
wicked life: that will judge that sin, and plague it with Hell fire. Thy
Conscience therefore accuses thee: thy soul trembles with thy Predecessor
Diagoras, neither shall thou escape the Judge before whom thy soul so cites
and sommoneth thee. Prou. 14.13
Even in laughing thine heart is sometimes sorrowful, and the end of thy mirth
attainted with heavines. Put the evil day far from thee for a while, yet the
remembrance thereof, will sometimes cross thy banquet: when thou art so
overthwarted, imagine thy self to be 2. King 21.20
Ahab, and that overthwarter to be Elijah. Say unto the twitching light of thy
Conscience, Have thou found me, oh mine Enemy? and it shall answer, I have
found thee, for thou have sold thy self to work wickedness in the sight of the
Lord: when the Apostle says, But the day of the Lord will come, he would oppose
that Day, unto the day of the wicked. The wicked now have their day; the Lord
then will have his day: and therefore, that great day is called the Lords day.
Christ his resurrection day, is called the Revel. 1.10.
Lords day, because he then triumphed over the Devil, death and sin: so this
day of Doom, is called the Lords day; because he then will for ever commit
the Devil, and those that have delighted in the ways of death and sin, to
everlasting torture. As ABRAHAM could equally conclude against DIVES, Thou
had then thy pleasure, and Lazarus his torment; therefore now it is just,
that thou be tormented and Lazarus have pleasure: so against all wicked ones,
I conclude; As you have your day now, so Christ shall have his day then: walk
on in the ways of your own flesh, but be sure, the day will come that shall pay
for all. In this day the wicked shall cry, Hills and mountains fall upon us,
and cover us from him that sits upon the throane: but as for the godly, let
them hold up their heads, for then is come the fulness of their redemption.
Woe be unto these that now laugh (because of sin) for then they shall mourn,
but blessed be these that now mourn (because of sin) for they then shall
laugh and be comforted. This day of the Lord (says PETER) shall come, as
though he should say, tremble oh wicked man, for thy day of judgment shall
come: be patient and rejoice, thou that art persecuted for righteousness sake
for the day of judging thy cause shall come. This day is figured out by the
Prophet Joel. 3.12 14.
JOEL, under JEHOVAH, his pleading in the Valley of Iehoshaphat, in the day of
his threshing the Heathen. Howsoever the Lord seem now to be a sleep (the
wicked thinking God like to themselves) yet then the Lord shall awake as a
Giant refreshed with wine, Pfal. 50.21
and bring them under the crushing blow of his flayle, a flayle of judgment
that shall beat them like chafe: In the mean time let all know, that
whatsoever Mockers say, The day of the Lord shall come. Judge righteouslie (oh
ye rulers of the Earth) prefer not the cause of the Potent to the cause of
Widows and Orphans: slaughter not Christ in Habell, commit not 1 King. 22.27.
Michajah (with Ahab) unto prison, nor dare to feed the Lords Prophet with the
bread and water of affliction, for after ye have had your days of judging and
pleading, the Lords day shall come, wherein he will examine the cause of the
poor and oppressed. If ye have not judged and done according to God his book,
but according to the inequall balance of your own making, then hearken to
Isai. 10.1.
ISAIAH, Woe unto them that decree wicked decrees, and do write grievous
things, for keeping back the poor from Judgment, and for taking away the
judgment of the poor of my people, that Widows may be their pray, and that
they may spoil the Fatherless. What will ye do now in the day of visitation
and of destruction, which shall come from far? to whom will ye fly for
help? and where will ye leave your glory? Oh ye Rulers of the Earth, The day
of the Lord shall come as verily as the Assirians, Medes-Persians, Graecians,
Syri-Egyptians, upon Judah: your judgments shall be weighed in the balances
of the Sanctuary: if they be found faithful and full weight, then enter into
the possession of glory: but if they be found partial and too light with
Belshazzars kingdom, then thou shall be cast out for counterfeit coin. If oh
ye widows, fatherles and wrongful distressed ones, ye here in the day of man
cannot be equally dealt withal, do not curse, murmr, but rest patient for a
while, Revel. 6.9.
(as under the bloody Alter Jesus, more injured than thou) and after man has
had his day of playing Rex jex, The day of the Lord shall come, what time the
Lord will examine their Law Books by his sacred Testament, and call back the
examination of thy cause in the hearing of men, angels and devils. Loosers must
have their sayings, and the wicked their words for a season: but The day of
the Lord shall come, wherein they shall be forced to stand by, and to hearken
what the Lord shall say. Jesus himself was here, of the Rulers and Priests of
the people, scarcely used as a Lord, nay, used like a traitor to Caesar, like
a sower of seditious doctrine, like a superstitious conjurer; in a word, like
an of skouring of the world, even as are his members: but in this day he will
come as a LORD, to whom al power in Heaven and Earth is given, and they shall
look upon him and his members mystical, whom they have pierced. In the day of
this life they would dominere, and Lord it over him and his: but now shall he
and his Lord it over them. In this day of the Lord, Habel shall Lord it over
Cain: the Matthew. 2.
slaughtered infants, over the Fox Herod, Lazarus over Dives: In this day, the
Lord Jesus shall awake the mocking Atheist, and let him know, that there is a
God that judges the earth. The workers of iniquity, (notwithstanding their
preaching and casting out of Devils) shall this day be driven from the
society of the faithful and the face of Jesus. Now, the Lord will examine, how
they have Mat. 25.24
fed and clothed the poor: visited the prisoner, and been merciful unto the
distressed. They shall in this day (even every lippe-gospeller) know what
difference there is betwixt a dead faith, or idle belief not working: and a
lively Faith that brings forth fruits of righteousness and holiness. If
they will not here in this life Iam. 2.18.
show their faith (which is invisible) by holy works, (which are visible)
then fear in that great day of our Lord to hear the sentence, Depart from me
ye cursed into everlasting fire. Mat. 25.41.


Oh, this shall be a day of fear, and horror: Our Lord shall be unto the
wicked and ungodly, the roaring Lion of the tribe of Judah: but unto the
faithful members of JESUS, it shall be a day of solace and glory: for unto
them, shall Christ be the meek Lamb slain from the beginning of the World,
wiping away all tears from their eyes: setting them on his throane, even as
himself now sits on his Fathers throane, and so aeternize their felicity
unto them; for that shall be the Lords day.

Oh, who will not beg with Lazarus now, that he may glory with Lazarus then?
who will not now lay down the life of his body for an hour, that so he may
receive of the Lord then, life for years, millions of years, even for
aeternitie of time beyond al time? On the other side, who will be so mad, to
murder with Cain here, for satisfying a sudden momentaine lust, and then be
damned to the pit of torment for ever? who will be so mad, as for sparing a
little meat and drink, with the proud glutton from the needy, to sell his
body and soul to the Devil, and the damnable pit for ever? Oh foolish and
untoward flesh of ours, that remembers not this day, this fearful day, to
the workers of unrighteousness. It is written of a certain Ancient, that he so
lived, as ever opening his ear, and listening unto the voice of the Angels
trumpet that should cry, Come, come away unto Judgment. If we would so live, as
ever listening after the appearance of the Lord in this his day, then
assuredly, we would not dare to rush into adultery, stealth, and other
prophanesses as we do. When thou art tempted to defile thy Neighbors bed, to
filtch away thy Neighbors goods, to imprison or kill the innocent, etc. Then
say thus within thy self: Oh miserable man, now the spirit of Hell with the
bellows of his malice, is blowing and puffing up thy lusts to set them on
fire, that so thy members may commit iniquity: this Satan does, to have me
damned with him: If I follow the motion of this wicked spirit, what gain shall
I thereby win? I shall satisfy my lust of uncleanness, of filching, of wrath, of
pride: Oh, but God has damned that lust, and set his curse upon that work:
what if the terrible day of the Lord come, as I am committing that sin? or if
not, how shall I exspect Gods mercy unto repentance after the doing of the
sin, that knows before hand, that it is displesing unto my God? what is an
hours pleasure to fiery torments enduring for ever? why should I grieve God,
and cause the Devil to be merry? though the great day of the Lord come not
upon me at this instant, yet this day may be the day of my death, and then
comes my souls Judgment: shall I then hazard my soul, nay, shall I
wittinglie commit it to the Devils service, who is desirous to draw me with
himself unto the black burning pit? Thus debate with thy self, then tell me
what pleasure thou can take in sinning? Oh Lord, sweet Lord Jesus! though
this shall be a terrible day to the Atheist, mocker, and counterfeit Christian,
whose pleasure then ends, and whose endless pain and torture then begins:
yet unto thy poor afflicted sons and daughters, it shall be a day of glee and
gladness, for then shall their dolor end, and their never fading glory
begin: then shall the wicked be tormented in hell fire: but thy people shall
reign in the beauteous heavens, then shall the wicked be coupled and chained
with the Devil and his Angels, in the Iron bands of thy wrath: but thy
sanctified members shall be John. 3.2.
like thee, see thee as thou art, and wait upon thee (the Lamb) whither soever
thou go. Sweet Jesus, sanctify the consideration hereof unto thy people,
that by the torture of the wicked, and the glory of the godly, they may be
drawn from sin to serve thee in righteousness and holiness all the days of
their life.

But how shall this day come? The Apostle having learned that, of our Savior
Jesus, what time he preached unto them the destruction Mat. 24.
of Jerusalem does answer: it shall come as a thief in the night, that is, even
as the thief steals upon a man in the night season, unawares to the
householder, even in the time of his sleep; so shall this day of the Lord
unawares and sudenly, come upon the inhabitants of the earth: ey, our Savior
according to Lukes rehearsal says, that this day, shall as a Luke 21.35
snare come on all them that dwell upon the face of the whole earth, that is,
even as the beast or bird not thinking of any danger near, is then unawares
caught in a snare: so shall the dwellers on the earth, suddenly without
foreknowledge, be arrested by the day of the Lord. Methinks to him that is
content but to understand according to sobriety: Romans 12.3
another question (and that a curious one) is herein answered. Many demand in
what day or in what year, This great day of the Lord shall fall? Of the hour
and day, no professor of Christ dare define, because our Savior has said
plainly, Matthew. 24.36.
Of that day and hour knows no man, no not the Angels of Heaven, but my
Father only: but concerning the year some dare determine: for say they, though
the hour and day be not reveiled in the word, yet the year is clear lie
understood from Daniel 12. etc. neither (say they) let it be marveled, that the
year should be pointed at, considering the Devils had some foreknowledge of
that time when they cried, Mat. 8.29.
Art thou come hither to torment us before our time? As also Elias plainly
fore-prophesied: The World shall stand six thousand years, and then it shall be
consumed with fire. And having determined the uttermost day to fall out Anno
1700. they then qualify their judgment by saying, Mat. 24.22. etc. To answer
to all these things at large, would require a peculiar treatise: and it is
bruited (but I know it not of certainty) that L. Chadderton, M. of that
College
one of Immanuel in Cambridge, has publikelie there confuted the opinion, I
therefore as I speak of it but by the way, will therefore but by the way shape
forth this little answer. The shortning of the days, Matthew. 24.22. is
properly spoken of the cutting of them troublous days of misery, which came
upon Jerusalem, what time the Romans besieged it. This may be gathered from
our Saviors words in the 15.16.17.18.19.20.21. verses aforegoing. The people
there are willed for avoiding them troubles, to flee out of Judea. If them
days were meant of the days immediately before the ending of the world, to
what end should he speak of flying out of Judea? to what end should he will
the people to make such haste in flying from house and substance? and how
should it then be better for such women as were not with child, then for these
that were, except he meant, that the first might with less pain and trouble
fly away from the sword of Titus and his soldiers, as also from the sword
of the Read Josephus de bello, Iud.
Divided in the City? why should he wish them to pray that these troubles
might befall Judea in the summer, rather than in the winter, but that he knew
that snow and foul weather would hinder the speedines of their flight.
Secondly, to cause our Savior in DANIEL, to give forth a limited year, and
then in the time of his flesh, to cut somewhat from that time, even 12.
years, as some have, is to make Christ yea and nay, which the Apostle PAVLE
denies, 2. Corinthians. 1.19.20. as also a breaker of the Prophets, which himself
denies. Mat. 5.17. Them troublous days there spoken of (and it is affirmed,
verse 22. of them that they should be shortened) can not be spoken of the last
troublesome times, that shall come upon the whole world.

To Elias prophecy, (which may be numbered amongst the Papists unwritten
verities) I say no more but this: I acknowledge him not for Elijath the
Tishbite: for his Canonical speeches are registered by the holy Ghost in the
book of Kings, neither have we any such speech there or else where, in the
Canonical Scriptures as is this.

As for the Devils, they might well say, that the latter day was not yet come,
wherein they should begin to be more notably tormented, and yet
notwithstanding be far enough from foreknowing the Latter day. The Devil had
learned by the prophecies of the old Testament, that there should be a long
distance betwixt the incarnation of Christ and the end of all things. He knew
that Christ must have his spiritual possession to streatch over Psalm. 2.8.
the Heathen, unto the corners of the Earth. As yet the partition wall was not
broken down: and after the law should go out from Zion to the Gentiles, there
would be some years spent for gathering the Heathen unto the faith of Christ.
Besides, Isaiah, Isa. 59.20.
had prophesied an universal calling of the Jews (which time as yet is
vnexpired) and from many other circumstances every where in the Prophets, the
devils might easily know, that the time of Christ his incarnation could at noe
hand be the time of the Lords last coming, namely, to judgment. That speech
therefore of the Devils, is nothing to this purpose.

As for the numbers, Dan. 12.11.12. which some would have (as to be so many
years, so) to be accounted from Julian the Apostates time An 365. what time it
is said, Carrion, Chron. lib. 3.
that he in spite of Christ commanded the Jews to build the temple, which
afterward was by thunder and earthquake overturned to the ceasing of
Sacrifice, and so accounting from that time, would have the world to cease at
fardest in the latter number, Dan. 12.12. Thereto I answer: If it were the
Angels meaning there, to speak of the end of this world, I could not but
reverence that conjecturall beginning of the account: but as the spirit of God
in the greatest visions, as of that of the 4. mettels, and the other of the
Dan. 2. Cap. 7. Cap. 11.
4. beasts, as also in the Revele of the Syrian and Egyptian acts (their
Kings termed, King of the North, King of the South) as in all these, the Lord
leads Daniel, not to the consideration of the state of the new Testaments
Church, (except under type or figure) but for the comforting of him and the
Jews, does foretell unto them the state of the Church of the Jews, under the
kingdoms of Chaldea, Mede-Perse, Grecia, Syri-Egypt, and that until the
coming of Christ in the flesh, and the Dan. 9.24
sealing up of (the old Testaments) vision and prophecy. so I cannot easily
consent unto the former conjecture, but rest in this judgment; namely, that
them days, Dan. 12.11.12. were properly given forth for the Jews to account,
what time their Dan. 7.8. etc. and 11 36. compared with 2. These. 2.3.4.
notable Antichrist of Gogs land (the figure of our Son of perdition) should
tread them and their temple underfoot.

And whereas they think, that the age of these last times, (by reason God is
one and the same) should no more be hid to the faithful now, then was the
date of the first world unto Noah, I answer: God is one and the same, though
he reveal not the things whereof we have no promise, as also not like need,
as had Noah, who was during that 120. years, to prepare an Arc for
preservation to the second world. Secondly, if the knowledge should be
proportionable, then all the faithful must know This, for so no doubt the
faithful then with Noah understood that. Again, the very year, ey the day
should be known of This: for so was Genesis 6.3 and 7.4.
That. But the day, our Savior plainly denies, (does he therefore Repent his
goodness toward the faithful?) and themselves give it 12. years compass to
fall within, (vz. between 1588. and 1700.) themselves therefore conclude against
themselves.

Lastly, I see not why from this speech of Peter, The day of the Lord shall come
as a Thief, as also that our Savior says it shall come as a snare, that is,
unawares, and that not only upon some, but upon all that dwell upon the Earth
I see not (I say) why I may not from this form of speech conclude, that noe
probable conjecture of the year may be given. And whereas they affirm, that
though the Day be not known, yet the year may be known: I answer, first, I
see no such thing from the Scriptures alleged: Secondly, where our Savior
denies the foreknowledge of the Day, I see not why by Day may not (ey, must
not) be understood Time, indefinitely, as though he should say: That time is
unknown to the son of man: even as when he says, The householder would watch,
if he knew the Time. The faithful all know, that that day will come, and
therefore do watch over their ways: so that whenever it shall come, it snal
1. These. 5.4
not come unlooked for: and yet our Savior says, it shall come unlooked for
as a thief. This then must necessarily be our Lord and Master his meaning:
Watch and be ye sober, (speaking to all Christians in their persons) that so
that great day (in regard of limitation coming unawares upon you) may not in
regard of your believing and waiting for the same, steal on you as on the
wicked. This take I to be the very native sense of our Savior and his Apostles
words and allusion: from all which I conclude, that I see not how from
Scripture, the definite time of our Lords coming to judgment can be gathered.

Many having in their mouths, in the Apostle Paul his time, 2. These. 2.3
That the day of the Lord was at hand, he therefore amongst other things, writ
unto the Saints at Thessalonia (where chiefly this was bruited) that it was
false: because, before that great day of the Lord, there should be a Departure,
(or general Apostacy from the faith of Christ) a thing taught by John in his
Apocalypse, where he says Rev. 6.14.
Heaven, (not a part of Heaven: neither are we ignorant, how the Church is
called Heaven in all that book, as also, Mat. 11.11. and 13. etc.) Heaven
(says he) departed away as a scrole when it is rolled. Secondly, (says Paul)
before that day of Christ, the man of sin shall be 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.
disclosed: Thirdly, he shall be consumed: (and therefore called the Son of
perdition) Solomon, Psalm. 45.4. upon the white Horse in the Rev. 6.2.
first seals opening, namely, upon the word of truth, meeknes, and
righteousness) so shall he return for the perdition of the Antichristian body,
upon the same word or Revel. 19.11. etc.
white Horse issuing out of Heaven (the Church) then opening, and the armies of
faithful issuing forth with him, for the destruction of the Gentiles, the
Beast, the earthly Kings, false Prophets, and Idolatrous marked People. At the
perimplishment whereof, I look for the general obedience of Israel, prophesied
plainly of by Isaiah, (59.20. and 60.) by Zechariah, (12.10. etc.) by Paul
(Romans 11.25.26.) and the glory of their Church figured out plainly, Revel. 21.
compared with Isaiah, 60. All which well waighed, some may say: Many things
fore prophesied of, and yet unfulfilled, are to fall out before that day,
therefore not like it is at hand: I answer, how things are effected abroad in
the world, I nor thou wholly understand: Secondly, I fear that the multitude
of the world will not perceive these effects, nor acknowledge the holy Church,
but rather arise with weapons to assist Revel. 20.7. etc.
Gog and Magog, against the Church, till fire come down from heaven and
devour them. Thirdly, the Apostle Peter not ignorant of the former prophecies,
did notwithstanding in his time cry out, The day of the Lord is at hand, (1.
Epist. 4.7.) teaching us, so to fix our eye on this great day, as no numbers of
years foregoing, may be deemed a day, in comparison of that eternity of time
that then begins. This Time finite and endable: that infinite and without
end, as to the elect saved, so to the reprobate damned: as also, to stir us
up to account of Time, as God accompteth time: that is, future time to be
present before our eyes, the glass of time run, the Judge at the door, and
therefore accordingly to prepare our selves to judgment: This necessarily by
the way, now to the use of the doctrine.

Will the day of the Lord come as a thief, even then when all the inhabitants
of the earth shall no more discern the time, then did Sodom, Gomorrha,
Zeboim, Admah, the fire and sulphur rained down upon them? Oh how had we
need to watch, and Luke 21.34
to take heed to our selves, (as our Savior admonishes) lest at any time our
hearts be oppressed with surfeting drunkenness, and cares of this life, lest
that day come upon us unawares? how had we need to worthy to escape al these
things, that then shall come to pass, and that we may stand before the Son
of man? If a servant knew that his Lord at such a time would come, he would
happily within that time, orderly dispose of all things: but alas, we are
ignorant of the time of our Lords repair. Sure we are he will come, but how
suddenly we know not, except even then, when we least dream of his coming.

If any man say, tush, tush, the day of the Lord is not near, I answer: but
thou knows that thy day is near. Admit the Great day be far of, yet thy
death-day is not far off. What lease have thou of thy life but till to
morrow? and when thou art dead, all the world is dead with thee. As thou
falls, so receives thy soul judgment. Have thou been never so righteous, if
thou be cut down in sin unrepented off, Ezech. 18.
all thy former righteousness shall be forgotten: thou shall until the great
day of the Lord, be chained in the prison of horror, where the unfaithful and
disobedient to 1. Pet. 3.19
Noah's preaching are still pent: and in that general doom the body shall be
united with his soul, and as they sinned together, so live a never dying death
together. Let not the Devil therefore sound in thine cares, the day of the
Lord is nor near wherein all souls shall be judged, considering there is a day
near, wherein thy soul shall be judged. Death may as suddenly arrest thee
unto this particular doom or Fore-session, as fire shall sommon the whole
world unto that general Assizes and Judgment. He that now says, Heart be at
rest, may by and by hear: Oh Idiot, this night they shall take away thy soul.

When Noah preached the end of all flesh, they eat, drank, married, builded,
planted, sported out the day, and slept out the night: but then, even then,
the Cataracts of Heaven burst open, and the waters below mounted above their
bounds, swelling till they overpeered the highest mountains, and suffocated
all flesh, excepting them in Noah's Arc: when with the fat franked Boar, and
rainging Heifer, they deemed themselves most happy, even then they became
haples and accursed. With the faithful, Sorrow is over night and joy in the
morning: but with the profane and unbeliever, Joy is over night, and sorrow
in the morning: Fear, fear and tremble then, oh thou Earthworme, who savours
nothing but earth and dust, as does the serpent who was appointed to Genesis 3.14.
glide on the earth, and to feed on dust. Solomon knew it a Prou. 28.14.
blessed thing always to fear, and art thou wiser, in thinking thy self
blessed, living fearelesse? As the lightening flashing suddenly from East to
west, so shall the coming of the Son of man be. Outward conjectures may be
drawn of his near approaching, (as is, Faith lively, hard to be found:
Coldness of love, vnnaturalitie, etc.) but the period of time, (be it day,
month, year) as uncertain, as is the day, month, year of the thieves
assailment unto the householder. Ephesians. 6.
As wise housnolders therefore, have we always ready the helmet of Salvation,
not of Damnation: the brestplate of Righteousness, not of Injustice: the girdle
of Truth, not of Falsehood: the shield of Faith, not of Unbelief: the sword of
the Spirit, not of the Flesh: shoes prepared to carry us to Utter forth, and
to hear the Gospel of peace: not to carry us from uttering and hearing he
peaceable Gospel: and above all other things, let us Always pray, that come
the Day general or particular, we may be found well exercised: that when the
wicked shall yell and roar, and cry out to the mountains to cover them, then
we may with comfort lift up our heads, because that is the day of our
Redemption.

But because the Apostle well knew, that the bare and naked saying, The day of
the Lord will come suddenly, would smallie avail to rowse up persons addicted
unto the things of the world; he in the next place joineth with his coming
such an effect, as happily may cause churlish Nabal to tremble: The Heavens
(says he) shall pass away with an hissing noise, the Elements shall loose
with heat, and the Earth with the works therein shall be burnt up. Here (sed
pace Doctorum dixerim) by Heavens I understand the celestial globes of the
seven planeticall or wandering Stars, together with the firmamentall sphere
and first Moouer, as also other exterior circles (if any such be) beyond our
sight, and probable conjecture. By the (stoicheia) Elements, I understand
according to the nature of the word, the Elements of Fire, Air, Earth, water,
whereof other creatures have their constitution: all which, by that Judicial
heat shall be loosed By the Earth and works therein, I understand the gross
corrupt commixture of the Earth, together with the edifices and other works of
men remaining upon the corrupt composition of the earth: for otherwise, every
Scholar knows, that the Elements are essences and substances simple, single,
as is the spirit of man.

That the Heavens are said to pass away with an hissing noise, he would
teach, that in that great day, the celestial spheres, shall depart or give
place with an hissing, as does a scroule of parchment having received fire.
This sense is probable from the form of speech used by John, where he says,
Rev. 6.14.
The Heavens departed as a scroule when it is rolled. I well understand, that
John there speaks of an other Heaven; namely, of the heavenly places of the
Saints, and visible face of the true Christian Church, making as Paul faith,
2 Thessalonians. 2.3.
A departure: but as for the phrase or form of speech, it is borrowed from
this effect, as though he should say, The face of the mystical Heaven (the
Church) shall so depart from his former outstretched visibilitie, as shall the
material Heavens at last, when they shall role away together. As this by the
way gives a gird unto these that plead a perpetual outstreatched visibilitie
of the Church: so it plainly pronounces, that the superior heavens shall
once (even in the day of the Lord) depart and run together as a scroll. That it
is said, The Elements shall melt (or be loosed) with heat (or as they do
heat) I know not what, but this should be meant: namely, that the Elements and
simple substances (who now are commixt and possessed with corruption) shall
then be loosed (as pure silver is melted) from their commixture, dross and
corruption, and so consequently be restored into their first excellency and
liberty: seeing this is the end of their groaning Romans 8.19.20.21.

Oh thou Churl that now cries, Heart be at rest: and oh thou Harlot, that
say with Babell, Isai. 47.10.
I am and none else: what will thou do when the Heavens rattle, the Elements
melte, the Earth and all earthly things are set on flame? fly out of the
City, the fire is in the fields: run out of Judea, the fire is in Syria:
climb Nimrods Tower, and sulphur from Heaven powers down upon thee: skulpe in
the cavernes of the earth, and the earth it self falls on burning like a
barrel of pitch: descend into the Seas, and the water is vanished through heat.
Now Cain, the City builder, shall see his City on fire: Absaloms Pillar
shall frye, and he that intytleth his house by his name, shall in this great
day see it wholly on a flame. Oh London, London, and oh ye her sister
Cities, in this great day of the Lord (if so the Lord meet not with you
before) what shall become of your golden shows in your shops? What (in this
day) shall become of your sumpteous ward-robes? what shall then become of the
rentalls and debtbooks? Surely, this destinate fire shall pay all debts. All
these earthly works shall be set on flame: and in a moment and trice, all shall
be consumed, for which all have cared, and some consumed themselves. The King
as poor as the pesant: and the meanest Cobbler equal with Caesar. If thou will
hardly give credence to me, enquire of Dives (that having passed the Session,
awayteth with horror the general Assizes) and he will tell thee, that his
back and his soft raiment, his belly and his dainty fare, have made an
everlasting parting: Lazarus as rich as himself: nay, as rich and blessed in
Abraham's bosom above, by reason of faith: as himself is beggarly and
accursed, (not worth a drop of cold water) lodged in the Devils bosom below,
by reason he had no faith; at least no lively working faith. The miserable
Churl in the Gospel, having filled his barnes, sat down, saying, Now soul
rest thee; but immediately, he heard from Heaven this speech; Thou fool, this
night they shall take away thy soul. Thus a fool and his substance were
quickly parted: and when he dreamed his soul should be at most rest, then it
was utterly divorced from rest. And if before the great day of the Lord, we
see even every day, that worldlings and the world are sundred, and al they
take with them to be but a winding sheet: what shall we think of this great day
of fire, devouring unmerciful fire, that will not leave so much as a winding
sheet unburned to ashes? when the Heavens shall depart with hissing, the Elements
dissolve, the Earth and his works be set on fiery flame: what shall become of
the gods of the Heathen, and of our Romish halfe-gods and halfe-goddesses, made
of gold, silver, bone, stone? will they then for the Popes sake escape this
devouring fire? Genesis 31.34
Rahel under the color of a foul disease could cover her pretty gods from
Labans eyes: But in this great day, who will cover their painted, enoyled
shrines? no, cursed shall be both Image and Image-maker, howsoever now they are
termed Laymens books: yet in that great day, it shall appear true, Habak.
2.18.
that Habakkuk long since writ, namely, that they are but teachers of lies. Oh
day of horror, oh thou day of fear and trembling, oh that man is forgetful
of thee: now pursuing egerlie after worldly trash and vanity: all which, in
that great day shall be turned into ashes. Gold, silver, precious stone, trees,
plants, herbs, flowers, straw, dyrt, dunge, all shall be jumbled together,
all wrapped up in one: for this is a fire of wrath and confusion. All which
well waighed, what marvel was it, that Solomon should cry out: Eccles. 1.1.
Vanity of vanities, Vanity of vanities, all is but vanity. When the fire
shall cause all the glory of this world to vanish, no marvel if it be called,
vanity: most vain then is man, that sells his soul and body to the Devil
for Vanity.

Here it will be demanded, If so the faithful shall together with the
unfaithful frye in this fire? thereto I answer: when the floodes of wrath
came upon the old world, then was Noah in the Arc: when fire and brimstone
rayned down on the Cities of the plain, Genesis 19.22
then was LOT in Zoar: this question therefore, is thus answered by Saint PAVL
unto the Thessalonians, (1. Epist. 4. Chapter, verse 17. These that remain
living, and these that arise from sleep, (namely, from the grave) shall be
together caught up in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air. As the waters
of deludge ceazed on the disobedientspirits, not on Noah: as the fire and
sulphur fastened on the carkases of these that vexed the spirit of Lot, not on
Lot himself: so this Fire of wrath, (not of Correction) shall parche the
bodies of the wicked, not of the Lords people. As the faithful that carry
here the Cross of JESUS on their shoulders, may hereby receive just occasion
of comfort and rejoicing: so, thieves, adulterers murderers, witches, all that
love lies and unrighteousness, may be smitten down and not have wherewithal
to be solaced. After this day, (the great day of deliverance) says PAVL,
Romans 8.
We groan that have the first fruits of the Spirit: These that now groan
not for this day, as for the day of jail deliverie; they shall groan in that
day, as being the day of fearful captivity. That great day (oh my God) thou
knows I long after: looking for little rest till that day, but after that day
desires not the man, that has not received the earnest penny of thy spirit:
for here is his Heaven, neither does he exspect any good in that great day of
fire. Oh my God, cause me to be ravished so strongly, with the memorial of
that day, (as always present to my eyes) as I may not dare at any hand to
cease preaching thy sacred word, nor for any worldly maintenance to be
drawn to conceal any truth from thy people, Amen.

After this day of deliverie, groan not only we that have the first fruits
of the spirit, (and the first fruits sanctify the whole lump, Romans 11.16.)
but says the blessed Apostle, Romans 8.21 22. etc.
Every creature (whether having only being; or being and moving: or being,
moving, and sense:) every of them groan together with us, and traueleth in
pain for the presence of this great day, that so they (as well as we) may be
delivered from their bondage of corruption. As by our sin they became
corrupted (and so subject to rottennes, stench, impuritie, etc.) falling
together with us, so they shall rise and recover their pristine, glorious
estate, but not till the day of our deliverance, and therefore introduced
groaning together with the Faithful after the Last day. As these creatures
(after a sort) do groan under the burden of our sin, so woe unto man, (more
sensles than a stone) that cannot groan under the burden of his own sin:
rather adding sin unto sin, as though it were no burden. These creatures in
their kind, desire after this great day: as for the adulterer, thief, murderer
of bodies or souls, or both; they and all their companions of darkness, desire
there may never come such a day. The Atheists believe not that there will be
such a day: as for them, they shall need none other to testify against them,
than stocks, stones, oxen, asses, nearer God than they are. The consideration
of whose blindness and insensibilitie, causes the Lord sometimes to turn away
from men, and cry out, Isa. 1.2.3
Hear oh Heavens, and hearken oh Earth: justifying the Ox and Ass before
them. Against such, the Lord will call the Heavens above, and the Earth to
judge, Psalm. 50.4. as being persons unworthy to be judged by any, but
insensible and unreasonable creatures: because such Atheists are unreasonable
and sensles.

If the Heavens and the earth (whom I see not to be accessarie to Satan and
Adam his sin, except because the Satan might be made of the heavens nature, as
Adam of the earthly, and so the lumps should suffer with the Reasonable
creatures formed out of them, being once apostate: If the heavens and the earth
role away, and give place at the appearance of our Lord, how shall wicked
sinful man, author of his own and their misery, how shall he appear before
him that sits upon the white throane, from whom shall proceed nothing but
pure judgment and justice? For in the day of this fire, the Judge shall
appear in unspeakable glory: his garment as white as snow, his throane a
fiery flame, a stream of fire issuing before him, and thousands of Angels
round about him. Oh beloved brethren, this shall be the great day of
deliverance, for the Judge appears to take vengeance on corruption, and to
glorify sincerity and righteousness.

If any enquire, Whether the creatures shall be delivered from their
corruption, before man have received his full and final doom in the flesh? I
answer, that point seems to me not very plain from holy writ: yet by some
reasonable conjecture, I easily condescend to this: vz. That the Creatures
shall first be loosed from corruption. First, because (before man was) the
creatures were existent, and that Genes. 1.
good every one of them. As they were created for man's use, so, ELOHIM would not
bring man into the wast world (as into an empty house) but first furnished the
temporary mansion of the world with all necessaries, and then brought man into
the palace of the world (and the most pleasant chamber therein, Eden) that
therein he might be exercised. Now when as the creatures shall be restored to
their former liberty, I see not to what end, but that the same may (as in the
order of first creation) be first restored, and then manifested to mankind in
the glorious act of judgment, for the letting of him see, how good and
glorious all things were, before they were attainted, and corrupted through
man's sin. And this may well be a preparation to the judgment or general
Session of Christ Jesus. Neither seems this to be contrary to blessed John
his words, where he says, Revel. 20.11. etc.
I saw a great white throne, and one sitting thereon, from whose face fled
away the Earth and Heaven: after which giving place of the corruptible heavens
and the earth, he introduces the dead and the opening of the books of
judgment. And if the 2. Pet. 3.13.
new Heavens and new Earth, wherein Righteousness shall dwell, be the Heavens
and the Earth then restored: then so much the more plain it is, That all the
creatures under degree of reason (and Angels and men are only creatures
Reasonable) shall be loosed from their bondage and corruption, (corruption
giving place to him that sits on the throne) and then be ready (as it were)
to give in verdict with the Faithful that have used them soberlie,
righteouslie: as also to witness against the wicked that used them
intemperatlie, vnholilie, to the dishonor of the Creator. Secondly, I am rather
induced to think, that before all men have received full and final doom,
they shall see the other creatures restored to liberty, as for the animating
and lifting up of the heads of the Elect: so, (and that more specially) for
the tormenting of the hearts of the Reprobate: who having seen, the Creatures
restored and beautified, shall then upon the books opening, be not only driven
from the sweet behold of Jesus, Psalm. 1.5.
from the glorious Assembly of the Saints, but also from enjoying (so much as
the very sight) of the excellent creatures. If any demand, what shall become
of these Creatures after once they be delivered from corruption and bondage? I
answer, repair unto me the day after Doomes-day, and then I will tell thee. In
the mean time, I am sure that nothing shall be, which shall not bring delight
and glory unto the sons and daughters of God. Let curious questions therefore
cease, and study rather how in that day thou may be found blameles, and to
Jehovah acceptable. Awake oh ye foolish virgins, the heavens are ready to run
on a heap: the elements about thee to melt; the earth under thee to burn: and
the Judge of all flesh is coming in clouds, majesty and power. Hark, hark,
the trumpet calling unto judgment: the Angels ready pressed to gather the
harvest: the grave, seas, and hell giving up all: for all must presently to
Judgment.

The Judge is set, thousands of Angels about his fiery throne: Satan and his
black Guarde, come plodding toward the Throane, as a Bear to the stake. The
glorious Martyrs and all the faithful, come flying toward the Judge, with the
wings of an Eagle, crying Save I pray thee.
Hosanna, hosanna, blessed is he that comes in the name of JEHOVAH, Hosanna
in the highest. As for the Beast, false Prophet, their marked people, and all
workers and lovers of iniquity, me thinks I see them pulling back, but the
decree of God whipping them all forward. Seduced People cry to the false
Prophet, Cover us oh Father, from the wrath of him that sits on the Throne:
but he replieth, Aes me, Aes me, I am unable to hide my self. One cries, Oh
King, oh Queen, save me: but they answer, Accursed subjects, we are not able
to save our selves: They replye, Oh, your fearful Laws and tyranny, have
caused us to worship God after a human, carnal, and foolish manner. Oh, oh,
(say Kings and Queens again) we are therefore accursed and you condemned. Me
thinks I see the Murderer with a bloody sword in his hand, and the souls of
the persecuted and slaughtered crying, Oh God our Avenger, now judge thou
between us and that Murderer: and the Murderer, me thinks I hear him cry,
Now I see these I persecuted had in honor, but I the persecutor, unable to
behold them in the face, against whom, I heretofore did harden my heart and
flint my face: oh that I might be killed to die, but I must live ever to die.
While thus their consciences debate their false worship, adulteries, murders,
thefts, blasphemies, pride, etc. the Lord commands all to appear Coram. As
by the Lords word, Genes. 1.
Let it be, every creature at first was formed, so, at one word, all appear
before the glorious Judge and innumerable sight of Angels.

If the Israelites trembled at the giving of the Law, how shall Law-les
people now tremble at the execution of the Law? Now Revel. 1.7.
every eye shall see him, even they which have pierced the Christ thorough, and
all kinreds of the Earth shall lament before him: All the earth encompassing the
face of the Tribun all seat, the books (even every conscience) shall be laid
open. Every soul shall be naked to his eyes, that sees the secrets of the
heart, and (as it were) in the tables of the soul shall every unrepentant
sin be written: Oh the secret murders, thefts, uncleannesses, wicked
counsels against Christ's Church, that then shall be open to all the world, in
so much as one running by may read them. In the face of Judas his soul shall be
written, I have betrayed innocent blood: In the face of Pilate shall be
written, I condemned the innocent for pleasing the people. In the faces of Esau
and Nimrod, We have loved hunting, but neglected holiness. In the portall of
Chams conscience shall be printed: I rejoiced to see the corrector of sin
overtaken with sin: and therefore published it to my brethren, that they
together with me, might for ever after, make his nakedness a reason of our not
hearing nor bearing his corrections: as un fit to rule us, that first could not
rule himself: therefore just that now my nakedness be laid open before God,
Angels, and men. In the Conscience of Herod, shall be drawn as it were, in
great text letters, I used not my gifts to the praise of God the giver, but
labored thereby to catch praise unto my self: In Balaam and every covetous
teacher his face shall be written, I preached for pelf: but then, Oh woe, unto
the dumb Minister: for his Conscience shall thus indite him: Balaam was better
than I, for though he did all for gold, yet he preached: as for me, I occupied
a feeders room, and had a feeders fee, but I fed not the people, by dividing
the word, and causing them to understand the holy mystery. Then shall the
wicked Kings, Queens, Magistrates, have graven deeply in the face of their
accusing conscience: We have kept out the kingdom of Christ, for planting a
Religion drawn out of our politics, an Ethelo threskia or Will Worship, Coloss.
2.22.23.
which had indeed a show of wisdom, but was not according unto the
wisdom of God. In a word, then shall every man his conscience carry his own
indictment, his sin hanging before the door of his Conscience, as does the
Iuiebush before the wine-seller: and he that knows not this, knows less than
did the Heathen Philosopher Plato.

As for the consciences of the Elect, they shall all in this great day be clear
from clamor and accusation, every one having written in his conscience, (as
had Paul) 1. Cor. 4.4.
I know nothing by my self: and this purity of their conscience falls out,
by reason that they here in this life disclaimed their sins for bastardly
fruits, and by the tears of unfeigned sorrow, did wash their consciences, the
Lord therewithal putting all their sins out of his remembrance; and so are
they by the Col. 1.28.
Lords Prophets and preachers, presented perfect in Christ lesus.

The consciences of all this multitude, Romans 2.15.16.
either accusing or excusing one another, (in this great day, wherein God shall
judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, and that according to the Gospel)
immediately thereupon, shall the conscience excusing be placed on the right
hand: but the consciences accusing upon the left hand of the Judge.

Then unto his recovered sheep shall Christ say, Mat. 25.34, etc.
I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat: I thirsted, and ye gave me drink. I
was a stranger and ye lodged me: being naked ye clothed me: I was sick, and
ye visited me: I was in prison and ye came unto me: But they unwilling to
assume any thing to themselves, shall reply, When did we so unto thee? to
whom he shall answer: having done it unto one of the least of my brethren,
ye have done it unto me. Therefore (or, in as much as all may see your faith
was no dead faith) Come ye blessed of my Father, (even blessed Ephesians. 1.4.
before the foundation of the world) inherit ye the kingdom prepared for you
before the Worlds foundation; even before ye could do good or evil.
Whereupon, the glory of God encompasseth them, and not only that, but they are
filled with glory, and are made 1. Ioh. 3.2.
like unto Christ (in quality, though not in quantity) seeing him as he is: a
glory beyond the conceit of man. And therefore oh my soul, here glut thee, and
be thou ravished in the spirit (as was JOHN in Paetmos) and be content to
contemplate that which neither thy hand can set down; thy tongue utter, nor yet
thy self look toward, until thy flesh by strength of Gods spirit, be humbled
to the Earth, and ly as dead, for giving further scope unto the inner man.
Neither having contemplated profoundly in the spirit, shall thou attain to
the least period, or jod of that glory: a glory beyond the glittering shine of
the Sun, Moon, stars: for this must be endless, as Christ himself is endless.

But unto the goatish multitude and hypocritical tares, he shall say: I was
an hungered and ye gave me no meat: I thirsted, and ye gave me no drink: I was
a stranger, and ye lodged me not: naked, and ye clothed me not: sick and in
prison, but ye visited me not: But as willing to cover their vnworking faith,
they shall say: When did we see thee and not relieve thee? The judge shall
answer: Verily I say unto you, in as much as ye did it not to one of the
least of these, ye did it not to me. Depart therefore from me ye cursed, into
everlasting fire, which is prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Hereupon the
Devils and all workers of iniquity shall go into everlasting pain: as the
former into life everlasting. Oh the horrible noise and roarings of devils and
men at this departure to the bottomless pit, where the worm (worse than a snake
or viper) shall gnawe every of them to the death, and yet not die. The Lord his
flayle and whippe of Scorpions, shall now bruise and lashe them more fiercely,
then does Iehouahs flayl the Heathen, in the valley of Iehoshaphat. for the
first, is but a part; but this, the fulness of his wrath.

But as the shritchings and howlings of the latter shall be immeasurable: so
the Singings of the former, together with the glorious Angels, shall be
unspeakable heavenly, even a melody unmatchable. The Devil departs with his
mystical black body, and hellish corporation. Christ arises together with his
glorious and mystical body, ( 1. Cor. 15.24.28.
now all his adversaries trampled under his feet) and delivers up the
kingdom to God the Father: he and his body thence standing subject unto him,
that did subdue all things under him, that God may be all in all. First, God
and Christ is all one: secondly, Christ and the faithful are all one: lastly,
the Father, the Son, and the Faithful are all one: according to our Savior
his petition: John. 17.20.21. etc. And all this falls out after an
unutterable manner: God first abasing himself by assuming our nature: and
lastly, lifting us up unspeakable high, that so being like Christ, we may
behold the glory of the Father, and be one with God. Neither thenceforth can
the mystical members of Christ fall away from their mystical head, more than
Christ from his head the Father; and the Father from himself. Oh filthy
flesh, filthy lumpish flesh, that savoureth not this mystical Union, glorious
Com-vnion: God (as it were) translated into man, and man into God: the Creator
into a creature; and the creature into the Creator. Die, die, oh my flesh, and be
thou more and more vivified oh my spirit, that I may be lifted up beyond my
self, to see my self greater than my self. Oh miserable wretch I am, to sin
against this God, merciful God, that by his vncompassable wisdom has
provided, that I (a base worm) should become one with God.

Oh my beloved brethren and sisters of England, (as also, oh ye people of
other Nations,) Considering all these things (not only, the consumption of all
by fire, but especially the Accepting and Rejecting of souls immediately
after) what manner of persons (say I with Peter) ought ye to be in holy
conversation and godliness? If the corruptible Heavens, elements, earth and the
works therein, shall be unable in their corruptible estate to apeare before that
great and incorruptible Judge: how had ye need while it is called To day, to
cast aside all filthiness and superfluity of wickedness; that so you may with
boldness stand before that white Throne? as though the Apostle would say, do
not your Consciences bear witness, that ye had need to live in pure
conversation and godliness? and if your consciences do testify, that much
purity and holiness is required, at the hands of those that shall come before
that Judge: then (lest your own consciences do condemn you in that great
day) do labor more in holiness of conversation toward man; as also that such
outward conversation, may proceed from an heart, inwardly affected with
godliness, The Apostle taking it for granted, that every man's conscience will
make such answer to his demand, does secretly even in the same demand, exhort
unto holy conversation and godliness. In deed, no exhortation can in better
time be urged, then when the conscience is convicted. And oh thou Atheist,
whosoever thou be, tell me if these things sometimes lie not at the door of thy
conscience, (as did Genes. 4.7
Cains sin at his door) and give thee a twitch and bloody nip, snarling at the
banquet of thy sin, as a Dog under the table? Oh thou Atheist, that
corroding of thy Conscience, will prove the sculpture and ingrauement of thy
sin in thy soul, that so it may be visible to the eyes of all the world, in the
great and general doom. Awake therefore, oh Atheist, and all ye lovers of
iniquity, and Heb. 12.14
follow holiness, without which, no man shall see the Lord. See him without
holiness they may, as Satan, the sheepherd of hell and his goats shall see
him, namely, a fearful and terrible Judge; every word of whose mouth, shall
wound them as an envenomed arrowe: but see the Lord to their comfort (as shall
lovers of holiness) they never snall; and therefore (as our Savior says)
Matthew. 5.8
The pure in heart are blessed, for they shall see God: as for the impure
hearted, they (by the nature of contraries) are accursed, for they shall see
the Devil.

Be not deceived, God will not be mocked; as thou sowes, thou shall reap. If
thou reply, Though I live in uncleanness, Idolatry, witchcraft, hatred,
debate, emulations, wrath, contentions, seditions, heresies, envy, murders,
drunkenness, gluttony, and such like, yet I hope to be saved: I answer, and not
I, but PAVL: They which do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God,
Gal. 5.21. Christ will present man before his Father, as he presented himself:
but Heb. 9.14.
he presented himself without falt, therefore he will present man without
falt. If thou say, I hope he will present me as a son to God: John makes
this answer: 1. John 3.3
Every man that has this Hope, purifieth himself, even as he is pure.
Purgation goes before salvation: the putting off of the old Adam, with his
deceivable lusts, before the new Adam can be put on with his holiness and
righteousness: before Christ can exalt thee, Moses must humble thee: before that
Christ's works be imputed thine, thou must forsake the works that are thine:
before God adopt thee his Son, thou must disclame the devil, the father of thy
corrupt nature: and if thou will have Christ to be thy King, thou must covenant
holy obedience due to that King. The Heavens are pure in comparison of thee,
yet the Heavenly Spheres and glittering Stars must give place to the
brightness of his Throne: how much more must thy damnable corruption be cast
away, except thou, together with thy corruption will be for ever cast away?

Come we but before an earthly King, Queen: Lord, oh how we will trick up
our attire, make bright our countenance, and study to place our words in
order: and all this, why do we? because forsooth, we must come before a noble
man, a noble woman. But how prepare we for meeting of the Lord of Lords, in
the clouds, who shall come with the 1. Cor. 15 52. Matthew. 24.
sound of a Trumpet, his Angels marching before, to gather together his Elect
from one wind unto another? how are we fitted with spiritual garments? shall
we be clad with the works of darkness? with what face, will we look him in the
face? harlots faces, theeuish faces, murdering faces, faces puffed up with
pride, these will not serve the turn. With what words will we greet the judge
of all the world? He says, we shall give an account of all our Mat. 12.36
Idle words, and dare we meet him with vnsavourie speeches and rotten words?
Away, away with such care to please men, and in the mean time careless to
please God, careless how Christ find us occupied, careless how to come before his
judgment seat. The Heavens shall give place, but man will stand still in the
way of sinners: the Elements shall melt; but man's heart will not melte more
than an Adamant: the earth shall willingly permit the fire to consume his
corruption, but man will not let the fire of God (his spirit) burn up and
consume his corrupt nature, and unprofitable lusts: The Devils at the
rememberance of this great day do tremble: but man can hear of the Great day,
the Fire of that day, the judgment of that day, and never be stirred in his
soul. Oh miserable man, and ten times more stupid than any creature, strive and
contend to fear before the Judge of all the Earth, studying holiness and
righteousness, without which thou shall never see God. Let (now at last) thy
stony heart gush out tears (as the Israelites Nomb. 20 10.11.
Rock gushed out waters) and bath thy soul in them contrite tears, as in
another Baptism: and rise up from thy earthly ways (as Act. 9.
Saul smit down, rose from the Earth) and hereafter (shaking the scales of
natural blindness from thy eyes) go and learn to be holy as our head is holy,
that so thou 2. Pet. 3.14
may be found of him, in Peace, without spot and blameles.

Mount Sinaj, upon the promulgation of the holy law, was al on smoke; the smoke
ascending as the smoke of a furnace, and the mountain trembled exceedingly:
but in this great day of the Lord, all the mountains of the world, all
valleys, high things, low things, shall not only smoke, but frye in a
consuming flame. The Israelites trembled at the first, and shall not we
tremble at the second? The Israelites durst not approach Sinaj, before they were
Exo. 19.14*
sanctified by Moses: and dare we approach the great day of doom, (what time
the breach of the Law shall be punished in the lake of scortching brimstone and
unquenchable fire) before we be sanctified by Christ Jesus? They durst not come
near the Hill with unwashed clothes, but we think to stand before Christ his
pure throne of Judgment, and that with unwashed hands, unwashed hearts; where
as no one shall appear (without confusion of face) that first have not Rev.
7.14.
made their Robes white in the blood of the Lamb. I say not, in his own
works; but ^ say again, in the blood of the Lamb. Blessed therefore is he
that watches and keeps his (spiritual) garments, least (at his sudden
coming) he walk naked: and men (ey, and Angels) see his filthiness. If thou
shame not now at unholy conversation and ungodliness; in that great day, an
hellish shame shall cover thy face, and horror of conscience shall confound
thee. If the Devil shall not then claim thee for his own, do here shake of his
livery cote of vnholines, and tear of his cognizance of ungodliness: but if
thou here will carry his unholy brand in thy fore-heade, hand, and heart, then
together with thy black Lord, exspect to be committed to the Rev. 21.8.
Lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death.

In that great day, wicked Cain and his City: Nimrod and his bloodhounds:
wicked Saul and his desperate Iaueling: Balaam and his bribe: the Usurer and
his money-bagges shall be parted: Theuish Achan and his wedg of gold, shall be
sundred: the harlot and whore, divorced: The murderer, and his bilbow-blade:
the Idolater, and his shryne: the dronken Nabal and his tippling cup: the
Merchant, and his false measure: the Courtier, and his soft raiment:
Nebuchadnezzer, and his pallatial prospects: the Glutton, and his belching
banquet: the mad dauncer, and his instrument, in that great day they shall
shake hands and never meet more. Seeing all which and more terrible than that,
must and shall be effected, what manner of persons should Kings and Queens
be? what manner of persons, had rich men need to be? what manner of persons, had
Prophets need to be? what manner of men and weomen, had we all need to be, in
holiness of conversation and godliness? That when Cain shall roar for his
murder: Cham for not covering his fathers nakedness: Esau for his misspent time,
and scorning sacramental signs: Saul for his persecution: the false Prophet
for preaching Peace to men, when men were not at peace with God, Shechem, for
his defiling Dinah: Alexander the Coppersmith, for resisting Paul: That when
Demas shall wring his hands for departing from preaching the Gospel, to live
as a Farmer and grazier: that when proud Diotrephes shall curse himself for
prattling and playing the busy-body against the Saints; to the end, that then
we may boldly hold up our heads, in the testimony of a good conscience, let us
now so live, as we may not fear presently to die. Let us now study so to
die, as we may not fear presently to make appearance before that glorious
Judge, and all the glorious Army of Heaven. So lived not the earthly minded
Prophet, who in the testimony of a bad conscience, cried: Nomb. 23.10.
Oh that I might die the death of the Righteous, and that my last end might be
like his. But so lived the humble poor Apostle, who in the testimony of a good
conscience, cried: I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ. So lived
good Simeon, who could say, Lord now thou let thy servant depart in peace:
And so must every professor of Christ live, as when he hears Christ say,
Reu. 22.20
Surely I come quickly: he with longing soul may answer, Amen: even so, Come
Lord Jesus, Amen.

Sic vivamus n t kosmo,
Vt ne simus k to kosmo.
Amen.


