A CHRISTIAN Letter, containing a grave and godly admonition to such as make
separation from the Church assemblies in England and elsewhere.

Written in Latin, by that most Reverend and learned man, Master Francis
Iunius, Divinity Reader at Leyden in Holland, and translated into English, By
R G.

AT LONDON, Printed for Robert Dexter, and are to be sold at his shop in
Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign of the Brazen Serpent. 1602.

To the Christian Reader.
SVCH as of late years have rent themselves from the holy service of God,
used in the public congregations and Churches of England, being destitute of
any sound warrant from the word of God, have sought from time to time so much
the more earnestly (as the manner of such is) to shroude themselves under the
shadow of humane authority. Hence it came to pass that master Francis
Iunius, a man of great learning and godliness, was solicited by some of them
(as may appear by these letters ensuing) in the year 99. to be a favorer of
their erroneous opinions and of their unchristian disordered and undutiful
proceedings: whose answer, being delivered by himself to a religious and
worshipful knight, and so coming to my hands, I have presumed to communicate
with thee, by the motion of some godly and well disposed, hoping that through
the blessing of God, and thy prayers it may prove a good means to stay such
as are wavering, to confirm such as do stand, and to recover such as are
fallen. For although he do not enter into an exact discussing of the question
with arguments, objections, and answers: yet he uses a very grave and godly
admonition, which is oftentimes of greater fruit, then a long and learned
disputation. And whosoever does diligently study the book of God, shall find,
that the holy Prophets and Apostles do in many places insist upon a plain and
simple asseueration of the truth rather the upon multitude of proofs and
arguments. Besides, if we observe the story of the holy Martyrs of our own
Church and others, we may perceive that by the sound profession of their faith,
and suffering for the same, they have glorified God and advanced the kingdom
of Jesus Christ as well as others have done by arguments and reasons. And yet
notwithstanding if thou do well observe these letters of master Iunius, thou
shall find in them not vain and empty words: but weighty and sound
reasons grounded upon the holy Scriptures of god. Thus praying thee to take
these first fruits of my poor labors in this kind in good part, and
beseeching god to give a blessing hereunto; I bid thee heartily farewell in the
Lord.

Thine in the Lord, R G.

Grace mercy and peace from God the father and our Savior Jesus Christ.
I HAVE received of late (belooued brethren in Christ) a little book by one of
your company; which is entitled, A confession of faith of some English men
banished in Belgia, and have known your desire partly by the speech of the
same messenger, partly by the preface of the writing. But as concerning my
self, beloved brethren, whom peradventure ye have thought meet to be
appealed unto a part, I verily see not how much I can do in this cause, or how
I can fit your purpose. For I know that now long since every man does abound
in his own sense; and that those that are otherwise minded are so far to be
borne with, holding the head and foundation, till the Lord reveal things
further unto them. I know it is my part not to play the busy body; but that I
should serve the truth and charity in my standing and measure which the Lord
has bestowed upon me, in Christian modesty and simplicity, as far as my
skill and ability will stretch unto. Certainly when I considered more
diligently, I thought nothing more commodious or more safe both for you and for
my self, publicly in all this matter; then that we should embrace a holy
silence. If there be any thing wherein we be offended, let us commit our cause
to the Lord, the author of our faith, and righter of our cause. But because
after a sort, you will not suffer me to be silent, and to condole in secret
for the wounds of the Church, which is rent more then enough, by actions
thrust forth in public in this our age; I will declare faithfully, and with a
good conscience before God what I think: beseeching him who is author of peace
and truth that he would lead both you and me alike into all truth according
to his promise, and also dispose each of our minds and affections to interpret
brotherly one another requests, answers, admonitions, and finally all our
duties, although (as it comes to pass, and is incident to man) disagreeing
from our sense and taste. I observe therefore that there are three chapters in
your little book, wherein you desire our counsel and judgment. The first is
that head of doctrine which you profess in your little book. The second is
the fact whereof ye have accused the English Churches. Lastly the third is,
the conclusion which you infer by comparing that your doctrine with that
practice of England; namely that ye cannot with good conscience entertain a
communion with those Churches, but that ye do abhor them with all your
hearts. Therefore I will speak briefly of these 3. things, entreating you
brotherly to take my answer in good part. I marvel that the point of
doctrine, or little book of your confession, beloved brethren, is sent over to
me: I marvel that it was sent over to all the stude^ts of holy Scriptures in
all Christian Universities; for if there be a certain consent of doctrine as
you pretend it, truly I do not see what need there was, that you should set
forth a new confession in this present of holy and ancient doctrine. But if
there be a dissension peradventure in the doctrine, or rather a difference, the
same ought not to be dissembled, if so be that ye thought it necessary, that
your doctrine should be declared. Besides, in that you send to me; yea that
you send to the public view of the whole Church. I marvel, brethren, yea I
greatly marvel, what your meaning should be, both in respect of the end and
the fact. For if ye have set it forth to that end, that ye might purge your
selves, I pray you brethren, wherefore do ye desire, to purge your selves
with so many souls; who never could know you as yet to be accused; which can
never take knowledge of the right or wrong of your accusation; and who are not
called unto it by any lawful means; and (that which is worse) wherefore would
ye have that done before so many enemies to God and the Church, who thirst
after nothing so much as the blood of the Church of God, and do rejoice that
we indiscreetly do cause a publishing of these wounds that by these wounds they
might spoil the Church, that precious body of Christ, of the blood of
verity, and juice of charity. Finally, why do ye this before so many weak
ones, who not yet knowing, that ye are borne (as I may so say) are offended,
rather with a carcasselike stink of schisms in the Church, before they know
certainly the body whereunto they may cleave? Alas brethren, is your
purgation so much worth unto you that therefore the public good of the Church
should be brought into so great danger. A Christian an humble, and godly
mind ought to be otherwise affected, and setting aside the respect of their
own private good, instantly so to determine, that the earth should rather
swallowe them up (as the Poet says) and let me rather be accursed for my
brethren, then that by me, and for my credit sake one of these little ones
should be offended and kept from coming to Christ, and abiding in Christ my
Savior. Verily let what will of my estimation go to wrack, who am a
Christian, let me be trampled under all men's feet, so that by my fact, I take
nothing from Christ, no not the least thing from his body. And that you my
brethren, should determine and resolve, to bend all your counsels to this end;
I am as strongly persuaded, as he that is most. But what end have ye in
common? alas for grief in this particular case (pardon if I speak more
freely, for ye would have me to speak) ye seem to have erred: for herein,
if I see any thing, the contemplation of your particular cause has deceived
you, which thing ye your selves without doubt will mark if ye would go a
little from that your particular sense.

I have showed that there is some error in that end. Let us come to the fact.
In the fact ye have framed a purgation of your selves. That thing is denied to
none, if there shall be a cause, if a measure, if a place, if a time. But
wherefore with me brethren, who do neither hear these accusations of yours;
neither if I should hear them would I receive them rashly? Wherefore in
public? where ye know that it falls out for the most part, that they who
purge themselves, before they be accused, either betray themselves, either
raise such suspicions against themselves as they can not afterward easily wash
away. Ye know that the public voice is neither a just judge oftentimes, nor
at any time almost a lawful Judge; so greatly does malice prevail and bear
sway in the public. Therefore ye appeal to these Judges, who can neither
judge, nor take knowledge: finally, they are not only no Judges, but not so
much as witnesses: so the private cause is not furthered, and the public is
many ways hindered. Ye will say then, who shall be? What judges, what
witnesses shall we appeal unto? Your own preface shall answer ye for me.
For when ye pronounce that ye have found a place of rest by the mercy of God in
these places (ye do acknowledge I think your own words) ye plainly signify
two things. One, that if ye have found a place of rest, ye shall do wisely, if
ye do not stir, where ye may be in quiet. The other that where you have a
lodging, and a quiet seat that there ye must also be judged, there you must
receive the judgment of your doctrine and faith, if ye will have the same
lawfully known and approved. Ye are in a Church furnished with the servants
of God, whose piety, learning, and brotherly love to the members of Christ
good men do know. It is an unlawful course verily, to omit those among whom
ye are and to appeal to another Church, or to the whole public state, or to
me who am a weak member therein, either in part, or in common. This order is
godly, just, lawful, and tends to the peace, and edification, which you
ought first, modestly to regard, and to which I being a weak brother, am
bounden by brotherly duty, to all my brethren, that go astray, and not to be
carried headlong, and to rush upon the knowledge of these things by this means
offered; besides all equity and good order. Till ye shall do that, I admonish,
exhort, pray, and beseech by the most sacred and holy name of Christ, that ye
would not appeal to me, neither to any other, neither to the whole Church: for
by this preposterous course (as we may so say) ye do not disburthen your
selves, as ye think, of envy and blame (if there be any) but ye do burden
your own cause, to which I will bring no prejudice. Let them speak first,
with whom ye soiourne, whom ye deny not to be your brethren. But if
peradventure they shall not satisfy you, or ye shall not satisfy them, then
let a new course be taken by lawful order. This no good man will deny, but
till this be attempted, it will be unprofitable to you, and hurtful to the
Church, to take another course. But neither I, nor my Colleagues, nor other
wise men, will ever be so impudent as to prevent or take this thing out of the
hands of them, to whom the knowledge thereof does of right appertain. And so
much of the doctrine. I come to the accusation which ye use, against the
Church of England, as ye write in this accusation beloved brethren, I do
lovingly entreat you, that ye would not take it in ill part, if I do admonish
ye, of a few things which I think, I may of right do, first, what need is
there, that ye should accuse them? Ye have given place, ye have (as we may
so speak) passed over into another Court, wherefore have ye given place? No
body desires to know, or does trouble ye. If wrong be done you, in England
(that I may grant it that is done, for it belongs not to me, to affirm or
deny who have not known it) yet they do not prosecute this injury ye being
departed from them. What compels you to be moved, and to take upon you, the
burden of accusation? Why are ye not quiet being without the danger of any
hurt? Why do ye not rather pass over the injury that is past? Why do ye
not rather bear it (if there be yet any hope in silence) then to move, that
which is in rest? It is plainly a Christian part, if ye bear it, and a
prudent part, if you abstain from stirring the evil that is well appeased, an
impudent thing, if ye do contrariwise. And to what end I pray you is it? To
the end that you might purge your selves. But here is no man that does repeat
anew, or lay these accusations against you. Wherefore serves this purgation?
that ye may be even with them against whom ye complain. But this is not the
part of a Christian. I do not think that this is your meaning. Is it to
reform them? This indeed is an holy endeavor. But if ye could not do this,
when ye were present, consider what ye may do when ye are absent. But first
of all consider with your selves, by what means ye take this way, namely to
accuse to me, to other to a public place in the theater of the Church, in the
circle of the world. Ah beloved brethren, was it ever heard of, that any
private man (to say nothing of a great community) was ever amended by this
course. Further consider I pray you before whom ye bring these things, I will
say of my self, to whom alone ye will commit this your little book; I know
not whether in this your little book ye appeal to me, as to an intercessor,
or examiner, or a Judge. For if as an intercessor, were it not better that your
complaints were kept secret, then laid open (which tends to reproach) and the
Church of Christ, innumerable souls, weak, strangers, to be beaten with the
types of your impressio^. It is most manifest, that they against whom ye
deal, will be more provoked by these grievous things. If as an examiner, by
what right can I do it? who have no lawful authority from God, from the
Church, from the Magistrate, or from both the parties: neither if it should be
committed, would I easily accept it; I am so privy to my self, of my own
insufficiency: for who am I? or what am I? that I should be able, thoroughly to
see every particular thing, concerning you, and them, which are required to a
just examination. And this the right course of examination does require,
otherwise (as Seneca wisely faith) he that judges one party being not heard,
albeit he judges that which is right, yet he is unjust. Ye are not a little
deceived in this your judgment beloved brethren: Ye almost do me an injury,
when ye call me to be a busy body, or think that I will take upon me the part
of an examiner, or (that which is more subject to envy and far from duty)
of a Judge. And brethren, that which I say of my self, think that is the
answer of other brethren in Churches and Universities. No wise man will easily
go down the steps, or clime up to the seat of judgment. Concerning your
faith and doctrine something may be said, if you expound it, and if the thing
be done in order. For touching the accusation of your countrymen, and of
matters passed to and fro; no wise man by my consent, will take upon him the
burden of judging. And for Gods sake, consider the event of this fact. For I
pray you whom would it profit if that were done which ye desire? Certainly
neither would it profit you nor them, nor these with whom ye soiourne, nor the
Church of God. Contrariwise whom would it not hurt? This thing would set you
more on fire: it would more alienate them whom ye injuriously traduce to be
enstranged from you. For this is not the way of teaching, nor of informing, nor
of seeking reconciliation. To rent the good men whose hospitality ye do
commodiously use, or to divide them from you, or amongst themselves (which
duty they have not deserved of you by their hospitality) will make that
impudent man which should usurp this authority a scorn to ill tongues, while
good men would pity his vain labor, and your vain expectation. Lastly
(that I may also add this, mark brethren, how sincerely and brotherly I deal
with you) albeit you might and would lawfully both of your faith which ye
declare and also to give sentence of the fact of the accusation which ye bend
against your Countrymen: Yet ye by this course and manner of dealing have
taken from me that which ye require touching your fact. Ye will marvel
perhaps at that which I say, and yet it is so. For you do so require my
judgment as you do also require the judgment of all Students and
Universities in common; then you do not desire that I should do it alone: but
if particularly, do you think that any of us will be so mad, that when the
judgment of so many good men and diligence is desired, some one Palaemon
should take upon him the chiefest parts: and should by him self speak of that
thing, which is required of so many as learned, yea better learned, and better
furnished with piety, judgment, and experience, which requires a serious
consultation, an holy communication, and a ripe in offensive judgment. But of
the third thing what shall I say? touching the conclusion which you draw from
thence, that is, from those premises, if I shall yet determine any thing on
either side, it were utterly unjust. Wherefore? I verily brethren suspend my
judgment in this cause even as God and nature, and reason, and al laws
command me to do. Ye know the causes by these things which ye have now read,
and shall learn besides by other things which God shall minister unto you (I
hope) by the spirit of truth and wisdom. I ought not to judge with my self
of matters unknown, at least not so evident, neither yet with such forward
boldness to pronounce among you or others, the matter being not sufficiently
manifest to my self. God knows and judges them which stand or fall, as many
as are his servants. Otherwise I trust ye are not ignorant that there are
three things which even from the very infancy of the Church, the holy fathers
would have to be distinguished by the word of God, among the people of God;
namely, faith or doctrine, conversation or manners, and the order of
discipline. And all wise men have taught that with one consent, and delivered
it to posterity, that where the foundation of the truth of doctrine remains,
which is the pillar of salvation although with most corrupt manners and
discipline, there the Church remains, and that no man ought rashly to
separate himself from that Church (whiles he may tarry in it without
shipwreck of faith and conscience) or take from it the name of a Church,
especially seeing every Church consists of Pastors and flocks, which if some
Pastors or Prelates trouble, yet it is unmeet that this name either should be
taken away from the other Pastors, which Christ does witness by the doctrine
of truth, or from the flock which Christ has purchased with his own blood,
and does daily sanctify with the washing of the new birth by the word. This
ought to be sufficient for you if any thing offend you at home. Now the
fatherly and merciful providence of God has provided for you elsewhere.
Certainly whiles ye inueigh against those Churches, ye shall make that your
cause never the better, neither more probable with good men: which thing if ye
have not yet considered and conceived by my advise and counsel, and by the
admonition of those which wish you well; experience it self at last (God grant
it be not to late, and inform you in good) will prove all these things unto
you. For by the truth of doctrine, holiness of life, by the work of faith
and patience, and by the duties of charity even toward them of whom ye
profess that ye are wronged, ye shall rather approve your selves and your
cause, then by outcryes and publishing of writings, even as our Savior is
said to bring judgment to victory not by filling the streets with shouting
and clamours, but by blowing gently into the smoking flax and tender handling
the bruised reed: which things seeing they be so, I beseech you most loving
brethren in Christ by that most holy name of Christ which ye profess, by
those bowels of mercy, wherewith Christ has embraced us from on high, that
ye would think of another course, that ye would take another way to
edification to salvation to peace. If there be any consent shake not your
faith, which is not to be winnowed again by new reasons. This course is
suspicious, but if it must need be sifted let it suffice you that it be first
approved by those servants of God among whom ye dwell: this is certainly a
lawful course: Forgive the former injuries if any have been by Christian
charity to them from whom ye have received the same, and hide them from
others by Christian wisdom. There is no fear, that by so doing ye shall
suffer violence: God will enlarge your hearts by the spirit of charity most
commodiously. Look to your selves that ouercomming al sharpness and al
bitterness of mind ye may be acceptable to Christ and profitable to the
Church; and that the odor of your piety may be spread in speech, in life, in
order to all the godly most sweetly without the stench of enmity and schism.
Judge not that ye be not judged: But abstain from those heavy conclusions
and determinations (as they call them) against other men, neither labor either
to get Abetters or partakers in that your former judgment (which would be
said in you to be a spice of faction in them of impudency, or else to draw
them to an unseasonable, uncivil, inconvenient or dangerous delivery of
opinions. Pity your selves I beseech you (most loving brethren) and the whole
flock which is gathered among you; have pity of them whom thorough error
and infirmity ye cry out be hurt. Pity your entertainers among whom it were
a most injurious thing that ye should sow these tares; especially being
admonished. And it would be a great indignity by clamours and writings to
bread in them suspicions and sinister opinions, either of your selves or of
those your adversaries (as you count them) or else of both. Finally pity the
Church of Christ, which verily it is not comely, nor expedient neither in any
case tolerable among so many and grievous wounds which are given unto it to be
further galled with this particular wound. So let God almighty love you and
Jesus Christ that most merciful Lord, and our Savior be merciful unto you.
And if I shall be able to do any good in the public cause and in your cause:
assure your selves that I will spare no diligence, no labor, no pains; that
you with us and all together may be filled with sanctimony (without which none
shall see God) with the good things of the Lord in his house, and before his
face. And the God of peace which has raised from the dead our Lord Jesus that
great sheepeheard of the sheep, by the blood of the eternal covenant, make
you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you, that which is
acceptable in his sight by Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever,
Amen. And I pray you brethren suffer this word of exhortation, which I have
briefly written unto you. The grace of God be with you all, Amen. From Leyden
this Saturday the 9. of January. 1599.

Yours in the Lord Francis Iunius.

FINIS.

