THE ART OF WAR, AND ENGLANDS TRAYNINGS; PLAINLY Demonstrating the duty of a
private SOVLDIER; with the Office of each several Officer belonging to a
Foot-company: and the Martial laws of the field.

As ALSO, The office and charge belonging to the command of a Colonel; the
Exercise of trayning or drilling: With diverse other necessary and profitable
disciplined NOTES and Observations.

BY EDW. DAVIES Gentleman.

LONDON Printed by EDWARD GRIFFIN, dwelling in the Little-Olde-Baily near the
sign of the King's Head. 1619.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY CHARLES, ONLY SON OF HIS MAJESTY, Prince of WALES,
Duke of CORNWALL, YORK, ALBANIE, and ROTHSAY, Marquise of ORMONT, Earl of
CHESTER and ROSS, Lord of ADMANOCH, and Knight of the most noble Order of the
GARTER.
THE ample and deserved commendation (which Fame has blazed over all this
Kingdom, and more and more shall to your eternal memory) of the ardent zeal
that your Highness has unto Military Discipline, and the virtuously disposed,
and of your encouragement of them, has amongst many hearts truly devoted to
your Highness in all submissiue humility, incensed and animated mine (though
most unworthy) to present, offer, and dedicate unto your Highness, this rude,
and unpolished Pamphlet, treating and demonstrating the pathway to the youths,
and the many inexpert traine-men of this Kingdom, to lead them to the mark,
which is to become perfect and absolute Soldiers. Who (having reaped a large
harvest of peace under the most peaceful Monarch in Europe, your most renowned
Father) are very raw and altogether ignorant in most points of Military
Exercise. My long continuance in the wars has by experience gathered, that
it is very necessary and requisite, in the Summer of Peace, to forecast and
provide against the Winter of Wars. Mars has long time slumbered, and as
Joshua commanded the Sun to stand firm, so our Royal Joshua, our Sovereign
King JAMES (whom God protect from outward and domestical invasions) with his
glorious beams appearing and entering the Confines of this Kingdom has
dispersed the clouds, as well of foreign, as homebred broils and
dissentions, and established our peace like Mount Sion: Yet tho Mars be
fettered, I hold it (under your Highness correction) both convenient, and
agreeable with the policy of other Nations, that this Commonweal be ever in a
readiness to prevent accidental, and ensuing dangers, least (wallowing too
long in the cradle of Security, and Mars on a sudden awaking, and sounding
in our ears unexpected Alarmes) it buy Repentance at too dear a rate. And to
register the same in the Tablets of my Country-mens hearts, and for their good,
I have compiled and collected the observations and directions in this Book
following; the which I humbly desire may be respected by your Highness, not
according to the merit of the action, or matter it self, but according to the
intent and affection of the Agent and Dedicator; and that your Highness will
imitate herein that great Patron and Pattern of humility, who made more
account of the poor widows mite, than of the superfluity and abundant
treasure of the rich. And thus with my incessant prayers to the Almighty, the
Lord of Hosts, that your Highness may daily more and more grow in the favor
of God and Men, and in the practice of all virtuous, pious, and valorous
actions, to the advancement of Religion, the vanquishing of your enemies, and
the good of this Commonwealth; craving pardon for my boldness, I humbly take
my leave, and ever rest with my best endeavors,

At your Highness service and commandment, Edward Dauies.

To the READER.
THe exercise of training has been much neglected, and chiefly in the Marches
of Wales, till now of late that it has pleased God, and the Kings grace, to
send us that thrice worthy Earl of North-hampton, Lord President, established
in the principality of his Majesty's Council in the Marches of Wales etc. For
it has pleased his Excellency in times convenient to call together the
Traine-men; and his Lordship was honorably, and dutifully entertained, and
conveyed from Shire to Shire by his Lordships Lieutenants of the Shire; and
also all the Knights and best Gentlemen in the Country. The Military men being
assembled together, it pleased his Lordship to take great pains in ordering,
directing, and exercising both Horse and Foot most bravely to behold; and his
Lordshippe taking special view both of Horse and Foot, where his Lordship
apprehending debilitie and error to be committed amongst them, his Lordship
gives the Captains a straight charge, by no means, not to neglect their
exercise of training under pain, etc.

Likewise, to make it more apparent to the view of the world of his Lo:
affection toward the exercise of Marciall discipline, his Lo: has now of late
called together, not only his Lo: own Gentlemen, but also all the Clerks
belonging to the Council in the Marches of Wales; and his Lordship being well
provided of an able Leader, which is one of his Lo: Gentlemen, who in times
convenient does exercise the said Company.

Moreover, I ought not to omit to relate his Honors due commendations, as also
his special care of the KINGS Majesty's service, to maintain not only all
Martial discipline, but also to lead his Ho: Successors to the mark of an
honorable subject; and to perform the same his Lordship is always provided
of 18. goodly and brave young Horses, the which are daily trained in all points
of war (at Luddlow Castle-yard) by one of his Gent: of the Horse, who is an
expert and sufficient Rider, etc.

Also it is my part to say somewhat herein of the worthy Rulers, and Governors
of the Low Countries the school of War; his Excellency Grave Mauris has
invented and set out diverse Postures belonging to the orders both of Pike and
Musket, very necessary and profitable for the exercise of arms, the which are
maintained and practiced by the thrice worthy Commanders, Coronell Cissell, and
Coronell Veare; and is directly followed by all other valiant Leaders: the
which Postures and Orders are practiced in the Artillery-yard, and also in the
Military-yard, by worthy Captains, well experienced in the Martial
discipline, and also they are well provided of sufficient Officers.

There came a little Pamphlet to my hands wherein I found, and made use of
certain Orders of the exercising Muskettieres: The said book was dedicated
unto that worthy Commander Coronell CISSELL, who did much practice the said
Orders: Viz. also that the said volume was set out by that worthy Leader
Captain WAIMOVTH, who is worthy of great commendations, for his good work.

The Contents of the first Book.
Fol. 1. fol. 32. fol. 41. fol. 44. fol. 60. fol. 71. fol. 73. fol. 75.
The Contents of the second Book.
fol. 78. fol. 86. fol. 95. Saint Georges squadrons. fol. 101. fol. 110. fol.
124.
The Contents of the third Book.
fol. 134. And Muskettiere. fol. 135. fol. 136. fol. 137. The distance to be
observed betwixt rank and rank, man and man, both in marching, and also in
maine battle. fol. 139. How Pikes are to be raised up and abased in closing
and opening of a battle. fol. 140. How Pikes are to be carried in array,
march, or battle, with also their necessary Notes. fol. 141. Certain words
to be used of the Officers that train. fol. 147.
THE FIRST BOOK OF MILITARY Directions: Jn the which is set out how a good
Soldier DISNIER and CORPORAL, ought to behave themselves in Wars: Together
with the Martial laws of the Field; And other necessary Notes and Offices.
CHAP. I. And first what is to be required, and necessary to be observed in a
private SOVLDIER.
THE plat-forme of a Fortress, by how much more it is planted upon a sure
foundation, by so much more it is participant of a firm and forcible
perfection: which reason duly considered it ought to lead every man so to rule
himself in all his affairs, as he may be both apt to receive, and able to
perform all virtuous and valorous actions. Therefore he that desires to become
a Soldier of assured good quality, to the intent he may be able to persevere
in each enterprise, bear out every brunt stoutly, and serve sufficiently, he
ought to have a strong body, sound, free from sickness, and of a good
complexion: So shall he be able to resist the continual toil and travel,
which of necessity he must daily take, as continual and extreme cold in the
winter, immoderate heat in the summer, in marching in the day, keeping
sentinel in the night, and in his cold cabben, in secret ambushes, and in
trenches, where perchance he shall stand a number of hours in the water and
mire up to the knees: and besides upon bulwarks, breaches in espialls, in
sentinels, perdues, and such like, when occasion requires and necessity
constraines: of all which exploites and discommodities he must perforce be
partaker.

Wherefore that man which is not of such sufficiency in body (to the end he
spend not his time in vain) it is very requisite he resolve himself to
exercise some other profession, for although some do hold that few men be
strong by nature, but many by exercise and industry: yet that notwithstanding
strength of body is first to be required, in respect that a Soldier must be
as well acquainted, and as able to bear continual travel, as a bird can
endure to fly, yea and to put on a resolute mind, to bear all the miseries
and hazardes of warlike affairs. A Soldier is generally to be chosen betwixt
18. and 46. years.

Moreover, I suppose it most necessary, that every man according to the nature
of his body, and inclined motion of his mind, make election of his arms and
weapons, as of pike, halbert, or hargabuse: Nevertheless respect ought to be
had to the proportion of his person, and to take such arms as does best agree
with the same: to a tall man a pike, to a mean stature a halberd, and to a
little nimble person a piece. But if he prefer his proper disposition before
the quality of his person, it is very necessary he exercise that weapon he
makes choice of, to the intent he may attain unto a most perfect practice of
the same, for as no man at the first time when he takes any tool or instrument
in his hand, grows immediately at that instant to be a perfect artificer: even
so it is with a Soldier, until experience has instructed him: touching which
I mean to say somewhat.

He which seeks to attain and attribute to himself the honorable name of a
Soldier, must first employ his time in practice of those arms wherewith he
means to serve, and so apply his time, that when any enterprise shall call him
forth to make proof thereof, he may be able to handle his piece with due
dexterity, and his pike with an assured agilitie: since those be the weapons
wherewith now Mars does most commonly arm his warlike troop, and try each
doubtful fight of bloody battle: for in this our age experience and practice
makes apparent that Archers amongst foreign Nations be never used, and the
halberd but either amongst few or few in number. The Archer serves to small
purpose, but when he is shadowed with some trench or bulwark free from
hargabuse or musket shot: Or that lyning a band of Hargabusiers, he does
second them in any inuading onset, and then a whole flight of arrows, so that
they be light and able to fly above tweluescore, will maruellously gaul any
maine battle of footmen or Squadron of Horsemen. The Halberd likewise does
only serve in the sack of a town, in a breach, in a sally, or canuisado, to
enter a house, or in the throng of a stricken battle to execute slaughter;
wherefore touching these two weapons, unless necessity constrain, and that
Hargabusiers be wanting, Archers may well be spared: and these great numbers of
Halberdiers and Bill-men, which are and have been in times past used in
England, may well be left off, save a few to guard every Ensign, and to attend
upon the Colonel, or Captain, which in an army will amount to a sufficient
number to depresse the overcome and flying enemy.

Therefore a Soldier must either accustom himself to bear a piece or Pike:
if he bear a piece, then must he first learn to hold the same, to accommodate
his match between his two foremost fingers and his thombe, and to plant the
great end on his breast with a gallant Souldier-like grace: and being ignorant,
to the intent he may be more encouraged, let him acquaint himself first with
the firing of touch-pouder in his pan, and so by degrees both to shoot off,
to bow and bear up his body, and so consequently to attain to the level and
practice of an assured and serviceable shot, readily charge, and with a comely
couch discharge, making choice at the same instant of his mark with a quick
and vigilant eye.

His flaske and touch-box must keep his powder, his purse and mouth his
bullets: in skirmish his left hand must hold his match and piece, and the right
hand use the office of charging and discharging.

Being against the enemy, whilst with an indented course he does travel his
plain ground, or else takes advantage of his place and invasion, as under the
safeguard of a trench, the back of a ditch, old-wall, tree or such like: let
him ever first load his piece with powder out of his flaske, then with her
bullet, and last with amuring, and touch-pouder, foreseeing ever that the pan
be clean, the cover close, and the tutch-hole wide, or else well proind: so
that still observing modest order in his trauerse, neither ouerslow, nor
ouer-speedy, to the intent he become not each man's mark through his
sluggishnesse, nor run himself out of breath through his own rashness, for
the most part keeping his side toward his enemy: let him discharge going, but
never standing: so shall he the better shun the enemies shot and choose his
assured advantage.

A soldier ought to be careful that his furniture be good, substantial and
staunch from rain, the charge of his flaske just for his piece, and the spring
quick and sharp: The pipe of his touch-box somewhat wide, that the powder may
have free passage, which otherwise would choke up.

In time of marching, and traveling by the way let him keep a paper in the
pan and tutch-hole, and in wet weather have a case for his piece somewhat
portable, or else of necessity he must keep the same from wet under his
arme-hole or cassocke, or by some other invention free from damage of the
weather, and his match in his pocket, only that except which he burns: and
that likewise so close in the hollow of his hand, or some artificial pipe of
pewter hanging at his girdle, as the coal by wet or water go not out.

It is moreover requisite, that a soldier keep his cock with oil free in
falling, and his piece bright without rusting, neither must he want his
necessary tools, as a scowrer, tirebale and worm, having every one a vice to
turn into the end of the scouring stick, so that if through wet weather or
any other accident, his piece will not be discharged, the skillful Soldier may
with his tireball pull out his bullet, with the worm, the paper and wet
powder, and with his scourer make his piece clean within: His scourer must be
trimmed on the end with a linen cloth of a sufficient substance, therewith to
make clean the cannon of his piece within. The one end of his scouring stick
ought to have a round end of bone of just bigness with the mouth of his piece,
therewithal at his pleasure to ram in powder and paper, or in steed of
paper, such soft hair as they stuff saddles withal, the danger whereof is
not like: but this the Soldier must use when time permits. During the time of
his service let him ever have a diligent care to keep his piece clean and
bright within, and once a fortnight, or at the least once a month take out the
breech and throroughly view and wash the barrel within, to see whether it has
any flawes, brackes, chambers, frettings, or ruptures, which would endanger the
breaking thereof, especially if before hand the end of his bare scourer have
given him any cause to suspect such faults, to the intent he may change the
same for a new for fear of spoiling himself.

He that loves the saftie of his own person, and delights in the goodness and
beauty of a piece, let him always make choice of one that is double breeched,
and if it be possible a myllan piece, for they be of a tough and perfect
temper, light, square, and big of breech, and very strong where the powder
does lie, and where the violent force of the fire does consist, and
notwithstanding thin at the end.

Our English pieces approach very near unto them in goodness and beauty
(their heaviness only excepted) so that they be made of purpose, and not one
of these common sale pieces with round barrells, whereunto a beaten soldier
will have great respect, and choose rather to pay double money for a good
piece, then to spare his purse and endanger himself.

But to return to my matter, let a soldier have hanging ever at the strings
of his tutch-box, or some other ready part of his garment, a couple of
proyning pinnes at the least, that if by fortune the tutch-hole of his piece be
stopped or furred up, he may therewith both make his pan clean, and yield a
ready passage that the fire may have her course, by incorporating both the
tutch-pouder without, and the corne-pouder within together. But a ready
Soldier will always foresee that the tutch hole be so wide, as the powder
without in the pan may have free concourse to that within the piece, thereby to
hasten more speedy discharge, considering a soldier cannot have leisure and
commodity to proine his piece at all times, but must of necessity use a great
dexterity.

But since I am fallen into the speech of a quick charge, and nimble discharge,
I will by the way declare the opinion of certain nations therein.

Experience of late days has taught us, that those Nations which follow the
wars, invent every way how they may endomage the enemy in all their
enterprises, but especially in skirmish, which for the most part consists in
shot, and by such as can with the eye of his mind make an assured level, and
with a nimble discharge, both choose out and kill his enemy.

And therefore those soldiers which in our time have been for the most part
levied in the Low Countries, especially, those of Artoyes and Henault, called
by the general name of Wallownes have used to hang about their necks, upon a
baudricke or border, or at their girdles certain pipes which they call
charges, of copper and tin made with couers, which they think in skirmish to
be the most ready way. But the Spaniard dispising that order, does altogether
use his flaske.

The Frenchman, both charge and flaske. But some of our English-nation, their
pocket, which in respect of the danger of the sparks of their match, the
uncertain charge, the expense and spoil of powder, the discommoditie of wet,
I account more apt for the show of a triumph and wanton skirmish before Ladies
and Gentlewomen, then fit for the field, in a day of service in the face of the
enemy: and in like sort the charge which either does shed and loose his powder
whilst a Soldier does trauerse his ground, or else is so cloddered and rammed
together, that he shall be forced sometimes to fail of half his charge.
Therefore I conclude with the Spaniard, that a good flaske is that which is
most warlike and ready in service without the curious help of any
extraordinary invention.

One of the greatest helps consists in powder and match: for a Soldier must
ever buy his powder sharp in taste, well incorporate with saltpeter, and not
full of coole-dust. Let him accustom to dry his powder if he can in the
sun, first sprinkled over with Aqua-vitae or strong Claret Wine etc. Let him
make his tutch-pouder, being finely sarsed and sifted, with quick-pale, which
is to be bought at the Pouder-makers or Apothecaries: and let his match be so
boiled in ashes, lie and powder, that it will both burn well, carry a long
coal, and that will not break off with the touch of your finger. The
preparations will at the first touch give fire, and procure a violent, speedy,
and thundering discharge. Some use brimstone finely poudered in their
tutch-pouder, but that furs and stops up your breech and tutch-hole.

The bullet of a soldiers piece must be of a just bigness with the mouth of
the same, so that falling in smoothly, it may drive down, and close up the
mouth of the powder. Some contrary to the laws of the field use chaine-shot,
and quarter-shot, which is good in the defense of a breach, to keep a
fortress, or upon shipboard: but being daily used, it will gaul a piece
within, and put it in hazard to break, specially in a long skirmish when the
barrel is hot.

Note that after his piece is very hoate, let the Soldier if he can, give
somewhat a less charge for fear of bursting his piece, unless he have good
trial thereof. If the stock of his piece be crooked, he ought to place the
end just before above his left pappe: if long and straight, as the Spaniards
use them, then upon the point of his right shoulder, using a stately upright
pace in discharge.

It is not in vain to advertise him, that in skirmish he must hold his piece
betwixt his thombe and the ends of his fingers, which I account a sure mean,
betwixt griping of the barrel, and laying the same only upon his foremost
finger and thombe, for the one is over dangerous, and the other altogether
vnsteedy.

I judge it likewise most convenient for him, to take hold of his piece with
his left hand in that part of the wood (wherein the barrel lies) there as the
piece is of most equal balance. Although some accustom themselves to hold it
just under the cock, by reason whereof he shall be enforced to change his hand
if he charge out of a flaske, into the midst of the piece, to bring down the
mouth to his flaske which is great delay and hinderance in skirmish. So to
conclude, he that means to be accounted a forward and perfect good shot, by
continual exercise must be so ready, that in all particular points touching
his piece, powder, match, bullets, and the use of them, that he neither be to
seek, nor grow amazed in the furious rage of Bellonas fiery skirmishes, her
sudden surprises, and bloody slaughter of dangerous assaults of cruel
battles.

The Musket is to be used in all respects like unto the Hargabuse, save that in
respect he carries a double bullet, and is much more weighty. He uses a
staff breast-high, in the one end a pike to pitch in the ground, and in the
other an iron forke to rest his piece upon, and a hoale a little beneath the
same in the staff: whereunto he does add a string, which tied and wrapped
about his wrest, yields him commodity to train his forke or staff after him
whilst he in skirmish does charge his Musket afresh with powder and bullet.

Now to speak somewhat of a Pike-mans charge, a few words shall suffice,
because I will not be ouer-tedious. Let him learn to toss his pike, couch and
cross the same, to receive the violent charge of Horsemen, to front the
furious shocke of foote-men, and be able to furnish out his fight both a
farre-off and near hand: Which Notes with the like will be sufficient, by
reason that he is for the most part put to stand in a maine and
square-battaile. Both the Hargabusier and Pike-man must wear a short rapier
and a small poinado: for if in the midst of Encounters and Skirmishes, they
be driven to use them, their length is an occasion they cannot be drawn,
unless he abandon his piece or pike, whereby he shall either loose his pike,
or want his rapier, which at the Sera and close is very necessary both for
defense and offense: contrary to the careless custom of some, whom I have
seen come into the field without rapier or dagger, which was an assured
argument, that their heels should be their target, and their shameful flight
their safety, when their powder was spent.

Now as these careless persons far miss the mark with over great
security, so some bring in a custom of too much curiosity in arming
Hargabusiers, for besides a piece, flaske, tutch-box, rapier and dagger: they
load them with a heavy shirt of male, and a Burganet: so that by that time
they have marched in the heat of the summer or deep of the winter ten or
twelve English-miles, they are more apt to rest, then ready to fight, whereby
it comes to pass that either the enterprise they go about, which requires
celerity, shall become frustrate by reason of the stay they make in refreshing
themselves, or else they are in danger to be repulsed for want of lustiness,
breath, and agilitie.

Wherefore in mine opinion it is not necessary, that this extraordinary
arming of shot should be used, but in surprises of Towns, Escalades, and
assaults of breaches, to defend the Soldiers heads from stones, and such
stuff as they besieged have prepared to drive them from their enterprise: Or
else in some special set battle against the cut and thrust of weapons: which
exploits, for that they be not so ordinary as is the skirmish, so are these
arms nothing so necessary, but rather a burden more beautiful then
beneficial, and of greater charge then commodity; specially a shirt of male,
which is very dangerous, for shot, if a number of those small pieces should be
driven into a man's body by a bullet.

The furniture due to a Pike-man besides his pike, rapier and dagger,
consisting of a common corselet, having a collar, curiat, tases, back-part,
poldrowes, wambrasses, and burganets for the head, for that they be
sufficiently known, because I will not be over prolixe upon every particular
point, I will only say thus much more touching the Pike-man, that he ought to
have his pike at the point and midst trimmed with handsome tassels, and a
handle, not so much for ornament as to defend the Soldiers body from water,
which in rain does run down along the wood.

Every Soldier ought to carry his Hargabuse, Pike or Halberd, upon that
shoulder and side, which is outward in rank, for that side which is discovered
inward is more defended by the general order that is kept, then any of the
other. Which order of carrying arms, is not only ready and commodious to use
at all occasions, but also does make a gallant show, and a general form of
good proportion, and true prospect: a thing most necessary for a man of valor
to use in all his doings.

He ought likewise ever to have good regard to wear his weapon of like length
the other Soldiers use, which in marching does make the ranks to be of one
just line, and in show of a seemly and straight proportion, causing the whole
band to carry a brave and singular grace.

A Soldier ought ever to retain and keep his arms in saftie and forth
coming, for he is more to be detested then a Coward, that will loose or play
away any part thereof, or refuse it for his ease, or to avoid pains:
Wherefore such a one is to be dismissed with punishment, or made some abject
Pioner. Therefore during his service and after his return home, let him still
be wedded to his weapons and armor, that when he is called upon again to
serve his Prince, he be not enforced to furnish himself again with new Arms,
sometimes old, of little value, and less goodness: as some soldiers now
adays to their great discommendation do use. A custom altogether different
from the true exercise of arms, and varying from the rule of other
warlike-nations, which make true profession of arms: amongst the which the
Spaniards and Zuitzers at this day are to be commended; the one for observing
an apt, sumptuous, and warlike choice therein, and the other for that they
bear all sorts of arms with great advantage, both in length and strength, the
which unto them becomes very familiar through the ability of body they
possess.

Those Soldiers which cannot endure the toil and travel to bear arms of
defense, namely the Pikeman and Halberdier are made subject to receive both
blows and death by the hands of their enemies, or through their disadvantage
to take a shameful flight, or at the first encounter to remain their
prisoners.

Therefore it is very necessary for a Soldier to take pains in daily
practice, and to acquaint himself thoroughly in the exercise and carriage of
arms, whereof he ought to use practice, specially of those that be offensive,
and in those which ordinarily we are accustomed to carry, as the Rapier, and
Dagger, Pike, and Halberd and such like, without making open and apparent
profession of the practice thereof, but secret and several from the wide sight
of the world, that afterward he may put the same in practice to his greater
advantage and commendation.

Finally the Halberdier, who is armed either with brigandine or corslet, ought
of duty to attend with his halberd when his turn comes about his Ensign, in
marching, and set squares, in the Captains lodging and tent for his guard, and
at the entrance of a house etc. to be the foremost person to force the passage.

But in a day of battle the old Roman shield and a short sharpe-pointed
sword, to execute in a throng of men, exceedes the Halberd and browne-bill.

Besides the Pikeman which is armed all over with a corslet, and is to perform
his duty in a maine square, stand, or battle, to receive the shocke of
horsemen, or charge of the enemies infantery;

There be yet another sort of light-armed Pikes, which only have the forepart
of a corslet, and a head-peece, as is the Almaine riuet, or good light-iacke,
or plate-coate: these sometimes may be sent amongst the forlorne-hope of
Hargabusiers, to defend them from the invasions of Horsemen.

But touching shot, I would wish our Nation, being men of strong constitution
of body, to bear a Piece betwixt the boar of a Caliuer and a Musket, the
which with small use they would be able to weeld very well at the arms end;
which would carry a great advantage in skirmish: the which like unto the
Hargabuse, they might (as I said before) exercise, and with a gallant and
assured raising-vp the crooked end of the stock, to his breast, having
beforehand fitted the coal of his match to give quick and just fire, whereof
ever he must take the certain measure, must then discharge amidst his modest
trauerse, to his greatest advantage, and to endomage his enemies: Which done he
must first fold-vp again the fallen match in a ready and convenient sort
betwixt his fingers, having both the ends of his match light at once, that
whilst the one is spent, and in kindling again, the other may serve his turn.

Besides these foresaid weapons I would not think it inconvenient, to have in
a Band certain targets of proof to march in the front, which were very
necessary to defend a rank of men in a streight-lane, passage, breach or
other place from the enemies shot, they all closely and in a low order marching
under the favor and shade of them: as in a skirmish I saw put in practice,
when Cassimire did march with the STATES army under Louaine, 1578.

The Captain is to set down by the Generals appointment, the sum of all
their paies, and the difference therein, according to every man's weapon and
quality. But to speak of other directions and military observations;

A footman that is a Soldier, ought above all things to be obedient to his
Captain and officers, and never abandon his Ensign, nor be absent from his
company without leave or special let. In his march he ought to be modest,
ready in his rank, observe a long distance in his Laumband, and keep an
equal stay in his Alta.

If words of advertisement do pass over from rank to rank along the
marching band, let him deliver those words plainly and with diligence, which
the Captain gives over to be pronounced from mouth to mouth, as to pass
Parole appertains.

If the enemy cause sudden Arm, let his bale en bouche and his match in the
cock show his ready good will either to receive repulse, or give charge.

If either for pleasure in a muster, or in any other show in sport or earnest,
his Company be commanded to discharge certain volies of shot, or a Salua, he
must either hold his piece sidelong the ranks, whilst he does prepare the
same, or with the end higher then their heads, and discharge over the tops
of the foremost ranks, for fear of hurting his Companions: which rule they
ought to observe, and thereunto be constrained, upon pain of severe punishment.

If any enterprise be made in the night, let him not only keep his match close
from open show, or falling sparks, but be vigilant and keep silence, to the
intent that through his negligence and noise their actions be not discovered.

If he keep Sentinel, and have the watchword, let him give ear diligently
to all rumors, noises, and view warily all suspected places, to the intent if
he hear any trampling, neying of horses, or approaching enemy (which he may
the more easily hear by making a hole in the ground, and laying his ear to
the same) or that he does see the twinkling light of matches, or perceive any
other presumption of the enemy, he may either by discharging his piece, and
crying Saint George, arm, arm, give warning to the next Corpse of guard, that
the enemy does approach, or else if his sudden invasion require not present
advertisement, he may defer the report thereof until the coming of the next
round, unto whom he must from point to point declare what he has seen and
heard.

During the time of his Sentinel, he ought to keep himself very close,
wakefull, secret, and without noise or rumor, his match close and sure from
seeing, and his piece ready charged, laden with her bullet, and proind with
tutch-pouder.

If the Round or any other Officer come to search to watch and Sentinels, when
he does first hear or see them approach, let him so soon as he does perceive
them, demand with a loud voice, Qui va la? Who goes there? to which when
answer is made, Friends, and that they draw nearer, then let him call to them
and command that all the whole troop, but only one with the watchword, to
make present stay, until the word be given. And if at the same instant another
Round should come another way, let him cause the one of them to pause and abide
still, until he have received the word of the other, that thereby he may
avoid the inuironing snares of foreign or privy enemies, which might by that
means surprise him.

Therefore in this respect let him take great care, especially before a Town
besieged, or about the circuit of a Camp, and that he always remember to
receive him that gives the word at the end of his piece or pike, and out of
danger, having his match ready in his Cock, ready to give fire, thereby to
reward him with a bullet as an enemy, if he give a wrong word, or entertain
him as a friend if he give the right: for under color of giving the word, many
Sentinels have lost their lives, and sudden surprises and canuisados have
been given.

If in the night Arm be given in the Camp, he must make repair immediately
with his piece and furniture to his Ensign, where he shall be employed as
occasion does offer.

That he may be the more ready at any sudden Arm, lying in a town in
Garrison, and being furried and lodged in a house, he ought to have all the
night burning in his chamber by him a candle or lamp, or at the least his fire
so well raked up as he may light a candle at the coals with a match of
brimstone, or otherwise: that thereby he may the more speedily not only find
his arms (which of purpose he ought to lay readily in an ordinary place) but
also be better able to prepare himself, and kindle his match with all speed.

Note that a Soldier in Garrison being furried in a house, is allowed the best
bed and chamber save one, fair sheets, board-clothes, plates, napkins,
towels, dressing of his meat, service at the table, oil, vinegar, salt,
mustard, candlelight, fire, etc.

Whilst a Soldier is in the Camp, he ought never to lie out-of his clothes,
his piece ready charged must lie by his side, his furniture at his girdle,
which is his flaske, match and tutch-boxe, his rapier very ready, and his
poinado likewise at his girdle, which if they should be so monstrous daggers,
or such a Cutlers shop as our English Fencers are accustomed to wear, they
would be both combrous in carriage, and troublesome to his Companions, and to
himself, especially when they lie in their Cabbins.

A Soldier in Camp must make choice of two or three or more Camerades, such
as for experience, fidelity, and conditions, do best agree with his nature,
that be tried Soldiers and trusty friends, to the intent that like loving
brethren, they may support one another in all adverse fortune, and supply each
others wants. As for example, having marched all day, and coming at night to
the place where they must encampe, one of them chooses out the driest and
warmest plot of ground he can get in the quarter, which is appointed to his
band for lodging place, does keep all their Clokes, Arms, and Baggage,
whilst another makes provision with one of their boys, in some adjoining
village (if time and safety from the enemy does permit) for long straw, both
to cover their cabin, and make their bed of: during the time that an other
with a little hatchet (which with a lether bottle for drink, a little kettle
to sees meat in, and a bag of salt, which are to be borne of the boys
amongst other Baggage, and are most necessary things for encamping) does cut
down forked bows and long poales to frame and rear up their cabin withal,
and provide timber, or firewood, if it be in winter, or when need requires,
whilst another does visit vniandiers and victualers (if any follow the camp)
for bread, drink, and other cates, if otherwise they be not provided by
forage or picoree, and makes a hole in the earth, wherein having made a fire,
stricken two forked stakes at either side, and hanged his kettle to seath upon a
cudgel of wood upon the same, or that for rost-meate he makes a spit, wodden
gauberds, etc. And whilst thus every one is occupied about their necessary
occasions at one instant, they may in due time make provision for all their
wants, and by means of this league of amity amongst them, enjoy a sufficient
time to rest their wearied bodies, which otherwise would be hard to be done.

Therefore I judge it very requisite that the whole number under the charge of
a Desnier or chief of a chamber, should link themselves together in perfect
friendship, and as well in skirmish and fight aid one another, as in all
other actions, by which invincible knot they should receive wonderful
commodity.

It imports much that a Soldier should be tractable, for a man cannot imagine
a thing either more ingenuous or better, then due and convenient ciuility.
Therefore let him accustom himself rather to be of a Saturnine and severe
condition then a common Skoffer, and an ordinary make-sport, that he may
continue in friendship with his companions, and continually remain in their
amity.

Moreover, he is much to be commended, which aptly with facility and great
dexterity can be conversant with every one: wherein if a man do not with great
judgment very circumspectly govern himself, he shall for the most part
incur the evil will of those in whose company he remains. The which
dealing is of great importance, as well for the interest of his life, and proper
honor and credit, by which means the one and the other does hang in
balance, as also for that he cannot, being drawn away with debates, apply
himself diligently to follow the wars and service of his Captain: the which
ought to be his chiefest object and end. For discord amongst men of this
Honorable profession, does hasten, and occasion very much the destruction of
their well doing; and altogether hinder whatsoever they take in hand, by reason
of the suspicions, discordes, despite, and other respects which of necessity
are commonly accustomed to grow and ensue.

Besides, he must be so moderate in spending his wages, that he be not
constrained before the midst of his pay, either to follow the spoil, or borrow
of others: whereof springs a naughty reputation and a great discredit: yet
notwithstanding he must not suffer himself to be noted for a covetous person,
or as some say, the enemy of himself: that is, by sparing nigardly, to find
a great want and extremity in necessary things appertaining to his apparel
and victuals, whose expenses ought chiefly to be in galant Armor and furniture.

Note that the pay and wages which he receives of his Captain and Treasurer,
must not be taken or thought to serve or supply for any other use, but to
sustain life with victuals, keep him apparelled, and maintain his arms.
Therefore ought it to be governed discreetly and orderly at all times, in what
place soever he shall remain, either in the camp, civil cities, or in his
proper house, as well to keep himself in health, as chiefly to make apparent
to his Captain the noble motion of his mind: So that pricked forward by this
spur of honor, and not for any other extraordinary and base occasion, a
good soldier is continually constrained to win credit, despising all other
dealing which arises from hope of commodity and greedy gain, the way to make
a man esteemed to carry a base mind, and almost not disagreeing from brute
breasts without reason. For these private Soldiers which seek by such means
as be extraordinary, to advance themselves above their proper pay, without
doubt give an evil presage of themselves, and so evil that it should be
better for them to apply their time in some other sort, as about merchandise
and other occupations, rather then follow the honorable exercise of Arms,
which is altogether grounded upon a noble mind, valiant courage, and extreme
travel of body.

He must dispose himself to be very diligent in what exercise or enterprise
soever he shall be put unto, as to make Sentinel: wherein it is convenient, as
I have touched before, that he be very vigilant when it is his lot to be
commanded thereunto, that in doing the contrary, there succeed not a most
rigorous chastisement by leaving his body dead behind him, as it may very well
fall out, and to whom it may be said, I left him as I found him, since sleep
is the image of death.

A good Soldier ought continually to accompany the Ensign, and have special
regard, that the same fall not in danger of surprising by the enemy, and that
he endeavor himself by all means without any respect of danger to preserve
and recover the same: for the loss thereof is a perpetual shame to the whole
band. And therefore he ought at no time to abandon the same for any occasion,
but lodge himself so near it as he can, to the intent that amongst the rest,
if it be possible, he may be one of the first at all rumors of arms, and
sudden alarums, as well by day as night. And being armed with the weapon he
caries, having conducted his Ensign to the place appointed, by the head
Officers, he may in the sight of his Captain (showing a moderate forwardness
and desire) breed an opinion of his courage and valor: so that when occasion
does offer, his Captain amongst the rest may make special choice of him.

He must for no occasion absent himself, or go to any far distant place about
any enterprise or booty of picoree, without the express license of his
Captain: for he that is once become a Soldier is now no more his own man, but
his under whose government he is paid: who desiring to serve his turn when
occasions be ministered in time of wars, not having his valiant and best
Soldiers present and ready about him, shall not only be made frustrate of
that he would perform, but sometimes also suffer and sustain damage, and
only in respect of those which be absent abroad at their own pleasure,
contrary to the consent and knowledge of the Captain.

He ought sufficiently to eat, rest and sleep, whilst time does permit, to
the end he be not called for unprovided, and that he may the more readily
perform all enterprises needful, without any discommodity or want of
ability, which commonly do fall out unlooked for, and upon the sudden, for
in ordinary and accustomed enterprises, it is an easy thing to find every
soldier provided, but in sudden surprises not. Besides, I think it
appertains and is proper to a good Soldier, to follow the wars so long as
he possibly can, for the increase of his experience. But being constrained to
return into his Country, or into any City, fortress or other place of
defense, by reason of some truce, seconded by peace, or through any other
accident, which does constrain him to abandon the wars: then it is necessary
he fall to exercise that Art, wherein he chiefly has been brought up, either
in merchandise, handicraft, or husbandry, or else whatsoever, thereby to
supply his necessities, to exercise his body, and to live honestly: and by that
means fly idleness, a thing most incident to youth: who being altogether
ignorant in treading the steps of a stayed life (through the small experience
he has of the world, which by tract of time is obtained, and by long
practice, specially in the exercise of arms) persuades himself he shall win
credit and commodity through the means of insolent actions, which altogether
ought to be abhorred: through rash and prodigal bravery, which oftentimes
torments innocent Families and poor Parents: and through galant garments and
sumptuous attire, whereby they grow Bankerout: so that they are brought in time
(being entangled in those sweet traps sauest and sharp showers) to run
headlong into a thousand and most miserable ruins. Therefore good Soldiers
ought specially to endeavor themselves by some commendable industry to gain
the good grace of valorous and valiant Captains, and mighty Princes, the true
Possessors and fathers of war, through whose authority and commendation they
may be preferred: for the faith and assured credit of all warlike and worthy
Soldiers does depend upon men of valor, and not of weak authority, small
valor; and great abuse of the ignorant and common people, called the beast with
many heads. Therefore let them ever observe the honor of the good and
virtuous: for since that in time of wars every soldier of good conditions
does sharpen his wit, and willingly adventure his life, not respecting toils
or travel, expenses or danger, but does employ his industry to prefer his
Princes profit, by great reason in time of peace he ought to be advanced and
maintained by them: and much the more for himself, is to use all his endeavor
to compass his own commodity, and thereby make manifest his proper virtue,
the which does not consist in outward appearance of valor and discretion: but
in the true action thereof, agreeable to his honorable profession.

A soldier must apparel himself in the wars with cloth of fresh color,
profitable and commodious: amongst the rest, red, murry, tauny and scarlet
makes a galant show in the field, which he must wear to honor the military
profession, and for his most fit and apt wearing, and not to hinder the
disposition of his members, as does our great bumbasted and bolstered hose,
which not many years since has been used: but in steed of them a strait
brabantie and gascaine is to be worn, together with a close cassocke, which
may shield both his flaske, tutch-box, his match and piece from rain if need
be, whereby he may be ready to execute any enterprise he is commanded to
perform, and that of necessity he ought to do: and so arm himself in other
respects, that he may readily do any service he is assigned unto.

He must be willing to put in proof all things commanded, without making
reply, or denying any one thing, or deferring the matter from one time to
another, either for fear of spoiling or spotting his apparel in foule-way, or
foule-weather, or that he shall not be able to enjoy commodious lodging, store
of victuals, and such other respects, not to be esteemed of, but worthy great
reprehension. Therefore it is requisite he practice himself first of all to be
a perfect private Soldier, before he be drawn to the desire of bearing
office, which were to set the cart before the horses, and work by contraries:
for first we must learn to obey, and then it is lawful to govern. But it is
no new thing, nor to be marvelled at, that some men are accustomed to obtain
charges by unlawful and indirect means, I will not say, that they use them
accordingly. Therefore to merit a charge, it is always far more excellent
and more convenient to win them by desert, then to enter theteinto by
intrusion: for those that do not beg them do feel in themselves their
proper sufficiency: where contrariewise they are a heavy burden to those
that know them not, although with great instance they have procured and sought
for them. Which want and unwary dealing in this our age, peradventure
proceeds of the small need the world seems to have of good Soldiers at this
day, and of the little experience most men in our time have of the Art of war
or at leastwise our Superiors are blinded with the sweet baits of
covetousness, chief cause of such elections. Yet this notwithstanding we
ought to retain with all reverence, the honor and credit due to an expert
and good Soldier, who with diligence being sought for and selected, as near
as is possible, ought to have the most chosen charges, and expeditions given to
their government. To the end those affairs may fall out happily, to the honor
of their Nation and profit of their Prince. Whilst he does follow the wars,
or is in Camp: let him carry as little baggage with him as is possible, that
he may be the more nimble and light of body, speedy in his journey or marching,
and the more apt for all enterprises.

During the wars (or else not) he ought to wear in some convenient place of
his garments, that is most apparent to the view of the band, a token, red
cross, or scarf, whereby in skirmishes and other attempts he is to be known
of what part he is (the Emperials use a red scarf, Englishmen Saint Georges
Cross, the French the White-crosse, etc.) or such a sign as the General of
the field shall make choice of, which he ought to do willingly, thereby to
remove suspicion out of the mind of his Captain and Cheifteines, that they
need not to stand in doubt of him: and for diverse other worthy respects, since
that by these and like manifest means, the Soldier shows inward faith and
loialty to the Officers and Captains which govern. But if otherwise they
carry the said token and mark loose at their neck, breast, arms, or any
other place, it gives matter and occasion of doubt touching their fidelity:
specially being but newly entertained, since that being not made fast, they may
easily cast away or hide the same in time of peril or doubtful fight: Which
suspicion ought diligently to be removed by him which carries an entire desire
and full intent to deal truly and loially.

He ought likewise to beware, under pain of great punishment, for running from
one camp to another, for what occasion soever shall urge him to it, but is
bound to serve that party with which he does first place himself, even
until the end of the wars.

I have seen it likewise not lawful, that a Captain should receive into his
service a Soldier that is departed from another Captain of the same faction,
and this was observed, to the end that Soldiers should be kept obedient and
steadfast under their Ensign, where first they have placed themselves. Provided
always, that their Captains entreat them honestly and well, which is to be
decided by the Marshall of the field. Nevertheless, so often as a Soldier is
forced of necessity to leave the wars, he ought not to depart out of his
service, but by the special license of his Captain, accompanied with an
autentike pasport of his good service, so shall he shun many confusions which
are great occasions of scandals and infinite troubles, by means whereof he may
freely make relation of the good service he has done, and boldly show himself
before any man's face.

He ought to take special care, that he be not the beginner and occasion of
any discords and mutinies, neither consent thereunto, what reason soever should
lead him thereunto, since that such perverse proceeding does not agree with the
worthy, noble, and famous Art of war, which is a dangerous discredit to such
malefactors, and for the most part without any recovery does procure the
general ruin of many valiant Captains and mighty armies. And therefore
Ruffians and common Hackers that live idle in the streets at home, and follow
the wars only for spoil, are most unfit to make Soldiers, for experience
makes manifest, that they are the only cause of mutinies, so that one such is
able to corrupt and disorder a whole band. Wherefore a good Soldier ought
rather to apply himself to suffer things impossible, then commit so great an
error, for by the one great honor and praise shall redound unto him, and by
the other vile act, he shall gain manifest blame and assured death: for such
notable errors, without any remission, or any pity (as in part I have before
touched, and hereafter in the marshall laws shall set down) are severely to
be chastised.

When the Company does disband, and every soldier is to go to his lodging or
cabin, it is very requisite he stay until such time as he see the Ensign
lapt up and lodged, to the intent, if he be of the guard about the same, that
night he may attend to do his duty, otherwise he may lawfully depart, and
thereby shun the shameful name of a stubborn, licentious and disobedient
person. He must learn to understand the assured sound of the drum, thereby
to know always whereunto he is appointed, and what thing is to be done and
obeyed, which of duty is accustomed to be done, since that with this instrument
Soldiers are given to understand, during the wars, what things be necessary
to be executed: One thing besides is most necessary for a Soldier, which is,
that he learn perfitly to swim, both for that waters cannot always be
passed with wading, neither at all times boats and bridges can be conveyed
with the camp, by reason of naughty passages, as also in diverse enterprises a
man is both more safe and more bold, knowing what he can do: whereof young
Shelley made a most famous proof, who at the victualing of Midleborow, when
their navy was assaulted by the Flushingers, having all his company slain,
swam a shore with his arms, being the last man left alive a shipbord: and as
the Spaniards at the passage of the arm of the sea, when they went to besiege
Siricke-sea. Besides the notable attempt made at the great river of Alba in
Saxony, the year 1547. where the Imperialists had so famous a victory.

Now therefore let no man persuade himself, that the several and particular
experience which belongs to a perfect good Soldier, can be perfectly and duly
obtained by any other way, but by a continual delight, exercise, and
observation. For no man does bring any work to perfection, whereof he has not
the Art: every Art does spring of experience and knowledge, and knowledge does
arise by means of study and continual practice. Military profession being
then more perfect and above all other Arts, consequently it is necessary we
use in the same greater study, and more continual exercise then is to be used
in any other Art: for so much as it is a most ancient and prudent sentence:
All arts do consist in exercise: and therefore continually at idle times it is
very fit and necessary for a soldier, to practice and exercise himself
amongst his Companions in the camp, in running, leaping, throwing the bar,
or such like, to make him active, and to avoid such idle pastimes as Soldiers
commonly now adays use, contrary to all good order.

Besides which, as I have partly touched before, every private Soldier ought
not only to be well able to use the weapon he serves withal, but also
suddenly to understand all commandments of his Governors, whether it be by
voice or sound of drum or otherwise, and to know how to maintain himself in
order without breaking array, not only marching, but also turning in a troop
or retiring. For that Soldier which knows his duty how to behave himself
in the camp, in watch, scout etc. and likewise in marching, turning, retiring,
and fighting or skirmishing to observe the order prescribed by his Captaiue,
may be called a trained and old Soldier: Whereof if he be ignorant, although
he have been twenty years in the wars, he is not to be esteemed a
Soldier. But in these exercises the Sergeants and Officers are daily and duly
to instruct generally and privately each soldier, which Officers ought of
necessity to have knowledge in reading, that both what is written before, and
shall be written after in this book, specially touching the Marshall laws of
the field, they may ever read as a Lecture to their soldiers, being in corpse
de guard, or at other sit and convenient times. For these be things so
necessary to be known and observed, that it does both import very much that
each soldier should have them by heart, and if it were possible, sowed upon
their garments to be a perpetual glass to look into, whereby they might
guide all their actions, that thereby they might see what they ought to shun
for fear of punishment, and what to embrace to increase credit.

To knit up this our first discourse, he that finds himself sufficient and
well inclined to exercise this most excellent profession, ought with all modest
humility, and good intention, frame himself to a perfect obedience, as well to
observe order, a thing so convenient and necessary in this exercise, as also
to execute that which shall be commanded him by his Captain.

Before a Soldier bind himself to serve in a band, he ought advisedly to
consider, and expressly to persuade himself, that under an expert, valorous,
and worthy Captain, seldom or never our travail in well doing is forgotten
or lost: when as the contrary does chance under those that be vain, vicious,
and of small experience, who through want of perfection and practice, do not
know the merit of the valiant and valorous acts of a good Soldier: so that
consequently they neglect all toil and travel done in any honorable
enterprise. Therefore it behoues a Soldier to make a good choice at the first,
for after whatsoever he be, he must still obey him: and likewise always have
respect, and carry a reverence to the justice of Marshall law, and the
Ministers of the same, though they be of base condition, since both by the law
of Nature and Nations, they ought to be obeyed and observed, and particularly
known, and had in memory of every private soldier: for thereby both horsemen
and footmen are kept in perfect order.

But above all things a soldier ought not to forget his duty and devotion
toward the goodness of our Lord God, and our sacred Christian religion, by
which the true gift of virtue, valor and fortitude, and all good things
beside, we most certainly receive, and are assured to attain whilst our
determinations be lawful and honest. And for that a soldier being subject to
a thousand daily dangers, it behoues him continually to live as he dare die,
and oftentimes to reconcile himself to God by confession of his sins, and
receive the benefit of the most blessed Sacrament.

I have been somewhat more copious in this first discourse touching a
soldier, then perchance I mean to be in any of the rest, by reason this is
the first step and degree a man ought to set his feet upon, before he mount
the throne of perfect government in Marshall affairs: for if a soldier can
obtain tried experience in this first point, he may with more ease ascend the
other, since this is only the ground work of all the rest.

CHAP. II. The Office which appertains to a Corporal, Cape de Squadre,
Disnier, or chief of Chamber.
IT is not to be doubted, but that all notable errors depend only of
idleness, and that all worthy and commendable acts spring of vigilant
wariness. Therefore a Corporal, Cape de Squadre, Disnier, or chief of
Chamber, or how you list to term them, ought to be no less prudent and
careful over the government of his people, then a father in ruling of his
family: and as every parent does pass in age his children, even so a Corporal
should be such, that he may exceed any soldier, if not by experience and
years, at leastwise with diligence and sharpness of wit. Through which
endeavor and exercise, joined with a fervent desire and delight, to attain to
the perfect tip of this honorable profession, he shall every day become more
capeable, and of greater experience: wherefore I would as near as is possible,
not only have him expressly acquainted with the aduertisements and Martial
laws following, but also endued with the best of those conditions which I have
set out in my former discourse of a private Soldier, since that to mount up to
this second degree, it is very necessary and requisite, that he have made long
abode in the practice and experience in the first step of service appertaining
to a private Soldier. The Captain must select and choose four of the most
skillful Soldiers, which be honest, loyal, and perfect religious Christians,
out of every Hundredth in his band: whereof two are to have charge of the shot,
the other two of the pikes, every one guiding 24. a piece, the which ought all
of them to be lodged together, and the Corporal himself in the midst of his
charge, whereby when any secret service is to be done, they may call and
assemble by the appointment of the Superior officers, their whole squadron, or
what less number else, without the sound of any drum.

Now then a Corporal with his squadron of 25. or more, according to the
discretion of the Captain, lodging together with his company, must provide
generally for all their reasonable wants of wages, match, powder, and other
munition, and must instruct them how to handle their weapons. He must likewise
remember perfectly how every one is armed and furnished when he receives them
in charge, and to see that no part thereof be spoiled but preserved neat and
trim: and above all things to look well to the behavior of his company,
not suffering them to use unlawful and prohibited gaming, neither to give
themselves to drinking and surfeting, but to spare of their pay to furnish
themselves bravely and surely against the enemy, wherein he ought to use his
chief endeavor. And if it happen that any fault is committed, his part is not
violently to punish the Soldier himself, as hereafter is touched: but to make
it known to his Captain, who must not neither, as some rashly do, revenge
himself, but communicate the same with the Marshall or his Provost, who only
have under the General authority to punish: and this due course of justice
shall be more terrible to the Soldier, and breed less euill-will in them to
the Captain and Officers: generally in these respects, the Corporal must
touching the foresaid causes or such like, or it any Soldier be sick, hurt,
or absent, by way of imprisonment or death, immediately make report thereof,
finding any thing worthy relation, and spare no man, but deliver over the truth
to the Sergeant, the Sergeant from him, or together with the Corporal to the
Lieutenant, and he or they all jointly to the Captain, who is to take order in
the cause. Thus shall dignity of Officers be maintained, and Officers and
faults redressed, to the great example of the evil, and comfort of the good.
But somewhat more amply to set down the foresaid respects together with
certain other aduertisements. A Corporal must always foresee and examine,
that the soldiers of his Squadron keep their arms in order, clean and
entire: and the Hargabusiers stored with match, bullets and powder, and such
like necessaries: a thing worthy to be noted and observed in this profession:
the which makes show that the same is of a good soldier not only used in time
of war, but in all other times and places, being a known difference betwixt
the legitimate, and lewd Professors of arms. He ought of necessity still to
instruct and exhort them, that they live together friendly, without discord:
that they be modest and sparing in their victuals, profitable in their
apparel, and that generally they do shun swearing, and blaspeming upon
grievous punishment, by which act of blaspheming and swearing by the holy name
of the sacred Trinity, they commit greater villainy and offense before God,
then if before the world they did commit most wicked acts, or infinite errors.
Likewise let him prohibit all unlawful games, for the performance whereof he
ought to proceed with as great dexterity and courtesy as he can, that always
in matters of importance, he may have that due obedience which is required, and
not through cruelty gain the hate and euill-will of those persons, which in
many other things beside are to obey him: for to chastise them, lies neither in
his power, neither in the arbitriment of other Officers, although they be of
degrees higher then he, but does justly appertain to the Office of the Master
of the Camp, and Marshall of the field. The which point is to be noted and
observed, to the discredit of some Captains, which at this day delight to
imbrew their murdering hands in the blood of soldiers, and men perchance of
honest behavior, being moved thereunto through some hatred, toy, or beastly
passion.

Therefore he must always be mindful to observe this honorable rule of
diverse good and discreet Officers, who sometimes do ouer-see and wink at
light faults, and proceed with a certain modesty and lenity, although in
matters of greater insolency, with severity.

Notwithstanding these and such like authorities, the Corporal ought to be no
less obedient to every least point of the Marshall laws: and in rank and
array, or in other places where those of greater government be, he must perform
and observe the part and duty of a private Soldier, and retain like order
and obedience: for where our betters be, the less give place.

But when alone with his squadron he is conducted to the place where he is to
make watch and ward: then must he take upon him his office, and make provision
of wood or coals, that he may always have fire burning in his corpse of guard,
as well in the day as in the night, and as well in the summer as in the winter:
without which he ought never to keep watch, because it is a most necessary
munition for the Hargabusiers, to light their match withal, and for other
needful respects. Likewise he must provide for oil, for candles for the
night time, for lant-hornes and such like at the Sergeant Majors hands, or of
some others, who have charge to provide for those things, and are accustomed to
distribute the same. If he keep his corpse de guard in an open and plain place
or otherwise: he must conform the company of his squadron, according to the
order appointed by his betters: and with the most speedy and artificial manner
that he can, must arm and fortify with ditches, trenches, and sentinels, the
place where he must make his abode with this his small band and troop of
soldiers, the better to resist the enemies fury, or any surprise he might
assault him withal, considering that sometimes, yea and that very often, being
set upon, the Sentinels and corpse de guard be repulsed and have their throats
cut, to the great disturbance and universal damage of the whole Camp. He must
ordain his watch in such a place, that in the same at all times he may remain
wary and vigilant, placing himself in the most high and eminent seat of all
the corpse de guard, to the intent that he may know and discern in due time
every particular accident that shall happen or succeed: and thereof
immediately advertise his Captain of all, that he may provide remedy with
speed, according as the case requires warily and secretly, even at the closing
of the night, until the bright spring of the Diana, and fair daylight: he
must ordain and place Sentinels, and often search and visit them, with the
aid of two of the Captains Gentlemen of his company, called of the Italians
Lanze Spezzate, or might be termed more aptly, extraordinary Lieutenants,
that he may always remain vigilant and assured, to the intent he be not
assailed unprovided, to his great damage, and before he can give warning of the
enemy to the camp, which does rest and lie in safety in that quarter where
he is, under his charge, care, and diligence. In such cases he ought therefore
to employ the best men he has, that he never rest deceived in a matter of so
great importance, since that of those which be but mean Soldiers, or as I may
well term them, negligent persons, nothing else is to be looked for at their
hands, but error, loss, and danger.

Moreover he must at the least cause the third part of his squadron to remain
and stand continually armed at all points, both night and day, consisting of
greater or less quantity of people, according as the suspicion does argue the
need of them to be small or great: the Hargabusiers having their flaskes and
furniture tied to their girdles, and their pieces ready charged, that upon a
sudden they may contend by skirmish, according to needful occasion, and
readily resist the enemy without slacking or any remission of time, until all
the squadron be put in order.

He must be very circumspect, that the rest of the soldiers weapons, and
principally his own, be laid up and placed in such order, one kind being
divided from another, that in one instant they may be speedily and readily
armed: the which he must daily put in practice, and inure them withal, by
fained alarmes, by special commandment and of set purpose, which be most
necessary to be practiced before hand for diverse honorable and important
respects, worthy to be had in good consideration.

Therefore let him have and carry a continual care, that their arms never
remain in any confused order, the which if he should suffer, he should find no
doubt to be a great want: but the same may be prevented, and made easy, by
accommodating the Hargabusiers in rank one by one, upon a board or bank: the
Pikes and Corslets, in order reared and hanged upon some wall or other apt
place in the corpse de guard, and upon each particular weapon and piece, every
soldier should have a proper and special mark before hand made whereby to
know the same. He ought daily to instruct his squadron every one apart, how to
handle the weapon wherewith they serve: the Hargabusier to charge and discharge
nimbly, the Pikeman to toss his pike with great dexterity.

Sentinels ought with great reason to be placed about the corpse of guard, to the
intent the same may be defended and kept with more safety and security. He
himself at the closing of the night, must place the first Sentinel, and so
consequently the rest, instructing them orderly what manner they have to
observe, and how they ought to govern themselves in such accidents as might
ensue: who are to remain in Sentinel in winter and cold weather, but one
hour, or two at the most: but in summer, two or three hours before they be
changed: for which respect, that every one may be taxed with aequity, let him
first make a just division of his number, according to the number of the hours
in the night, and following that proportion, let him see the same performed,
without favoring or omitting any, the which he may the more certainly
perform, if the names of his Soldiers be written in a roll, and when the
hour glass has run their time (which is necessary for him to have in his
corpse de guard) then to prick their names, and place new in their rooms, so
shall each Soldier be partaker of the travail, and rest maruellously well
satisfied. But for that in wars, canuisados, surprises, sallies, such like
casualties and aduertisements be infinite, I will leave the rest to his own
vigilant discretion, and suppose it needless to advertise him of every
particular point; more then that I have and will touch in this my first book
of Military directions, as cases most proper for private Soldiers. I
therefore at this present think it sufficient for a Corporal to know, that it
is necessary he should so dispose the matter through his provident provision,
that all his people may be reduced into order, and already have taken their
weapons in their hands, before the enemy give charge upon them. And therefore
in time and place of suspicion and danger, he must place lost Sentinels without
the watchword, a good distance off, from the corpse de guard, in places most
suspect. But in other places not needful so much to be suspected, and that be
nearer him, he ought to set Sentinels with the watchword, so far one from an
other, as it shall seem unto him reasonable or requisite, and that they may
inuiron the ground one within the sight of an other, or so that the enemy
cannot enter, or any espion issue without their knowledge. If great occasion so
demand, let him place together one Hargabusier, and one armed Pike, to the
intent that the one may keep the enemy far off, and in a certain sort
sustain his fury at the point of his pike, whilst the Hargabusier with the
discharge of his piece, gives Arm to the corpse de guard and camp, which
exploit may be the better performed, if a corporall-shippe of Pikemen be
joined together with an other of shot. Sometimes without making any noise or
rumor, Arm is given to the camp, for one of the two Sentinels may retire,
and make relation to the Corporal what has appeared, been since, heard or
happened, whereby he may speedily with great silence give Arm to the guard,
without leaving the place of the Sentinel disarmed, which they ought never to
abandon, but at such times as the enemy is manifestly discovered, the occasion
of the alarm being certain, at which time being retired, they must unite
themselves together with the soldiers of the guard, that they may all wholly in
one company execute that which shall fall out best for their purpose, which is,
to retire fighting or skirmishing to the camp, according to ordinary custom,
notwithstanding by the order and appointment of those which have authority to
command them, as their Captain, Sergeant mayor, etc. but never otherwise.

He ought moreover to be circumspect, that in the body of the watch a solemn
secret silence be kept, without singing, brawling, or any rumor or noise, and
specially in the night, both in respect of the enemy, to hear when the alarm
is given, and to the intent that those which rest and sleep, and are not yet
in Sentinel, may be the more apt to resist and apply themselves to these
actions and exercises, which are required of them with vigilant watchfulness,
since a man cannot without great difficulty remain without sleep or rest,
any much longer time then our nature is accustomed by ordinary course to
bear, and therefore at the entrance of the corpse de guard, he ought likewise to
keep a proper Sentinel appertaining to the guard, that neither friend nor
enemy coming out of the camp or elsewhere, shall be able to enter without
yielding the watchword: and in this sort must the Corporal proceed, even
until the diaua be sounded through all the Camp. For other respects, I
finally refer him to my following discourse, which together with that written
before, it is requisite he have in perfect memory as well as the private
soldier.

CHAP. III. Six special Points appertaining to SOVLDIERS of all sorts.
IT is written in the history of Pietro Bizari, touching the incredible and
marvelous obedience of the Turkish soldiers, that a certain Gentleman at his
return from Constantinople did declare unto the Earl of Salma, that he had
seen four miracles in the Turkish dominions: Which was, first an infinite
army almost without number, consisting of more then four hundred thousand
men. Secondly, that amongst so many men, he saw not one woman. Thirdly, that
there was no mention made of wine. And last, at night when they had cried with
a hie-voice Alla, which is God: there continued so great a silence through the
whole camp, that even in the pauilions they did not speak but with a low soft
voice, a thing worthy to be admired, to the great shame of Christians:
therefore if the Infidels observe such strict discipline, why should not we
that be Christians endeavor our selves to surpass them therein? recommending
our selves and affairs to God, with reverence and silence, which I would wish
to be continued until the diana, when together with the sound of the drums,
the same might be with a cheerful cry renewed. But together with silence to
set down certain other virtues, take them here as I find them written.

SILENCE.
In all places of service such silence must be used, that soldiers may hear
friends, and not be heard of enemies, as well in watch, ward, ambush,
canuisado, or any other exploit: in which point consists oftentimes the
safety or perdition of the whole camp.

OBEDIENCE.
Such obedience must be used, that none regard the persons but the office to
them appointed, diligently observing the same: any offending to the contrary,
running into the danger of the law, for longer then obedience is used and
maintained, there is no hope of good success.

SECRETNESSE.
Soldiers must be secret, and have regard that they disclose nothing, though
sometimes they understand the pretense of the higher powers. The Disclosers of
such, merit most cruel punishment.

SOBRIETY.
In Sobriety consists great praise to the soldiers, who using the same are
ever in state of preferment, such regard their duties, and reprove the rash
Busi-bodies, Drunkards, etc. are ever in danger of punishment.

HARDINESS.
The Captains and soldiers that be hardy of courage, be much available in
service, specially such as will ponder what may be the end of their enterprise.
Some in times past have hardly given the onset, and after repented the same:
but the praise of the advised cannot be expressed.

TRVTH and LOYALTY.
The virtue of Loyalty and Truth is far exceeding my capacity to write, the
Practisers of the contrary are not worthy of life, but to be soon adjudged.
Subtle enemies approve to corrupt soldiers with gifts, and the Devil to
entrap them with the sweet intising baits of lewd liberty. But since the
reward of truth is everlasting life, and the untrue and dissembler loses the
same in continual darkness, I trust none of our Contrymen will learn the
one for the other, will be false to his Sovereign, or flee from the assured
pillar of the true faith: from which God keep all good soldiers.

CHAP. IV. How a Soldier may maintain obedience, and keep himself in the
favor and good grace of his Captain.
A Good Soldier ought to have consideration, that since due orders and laws
are the assured foundation and stay of every state: and contrariwise, discord
and disobedience the ruin of all Realms: so that above all things a well
governed General, and a careful Captain, ought prudently to foresee that
their Camp and Soldiers be paid and punished with equal execution of
justice, not respecting person: yielding to the Offenders punishment, and
reward to the virtuous: depressing vice, and exalting virtue: using
commendation to the good, and correction to the evil, joined with
admonishments of magnanimity, the which if they prevail not, to chastise
them: and as the good husband does pluck the weeds out of the good corn, to
the intent that they by their wicked and pernicious example, do not infect the
rest, and consequently does provide that no fault pass unpunished, nor no
valorous act unrewarded: by which means he becomes feared, favored, obeyed,
and beloved of all the army: even so on the other side, the good natured
soldier must ever have respect to keep the bonds of modesty toward his
Superior, and yield many thanks to God, that he has given him so just and
virtuous a Captain and General, toward whom he must always yield like
obedience, that the son does to the father, being bound so to do by the
divine law, without showing himself opposite to the order of general justice,
nor ungrateful for his received benefits, but continually by his good guiding
in the one and the other, give his Captain just cause to love and like well of
him.

Soldiers be ever bound to obey the justice and commandments of their
Superiors: and the Superior likewise to embrace the obedience of his
Soldiers, whilst he does see himself honored and obeyed of them, either in
deeds or words, in earnest or dissembling.

Although the General or Captain were a right Sardanapalus, so that his laws
be obeyed all things fall out well: wherefore a Soldier ought with all his
endeavor to be obedient to the law, with his whole heart love his Captain,
and fear him with all his force.

Cyrus being cruel, covetous, miserable, and an Exacter of taxes, through
justice was beloved and obeyed.

Cambyses, Marcus Cato, and Marcus Antonius, the two first being severe and
cruel, yet amongst the Soldiers were maruellously favored: and the third,
although he was drowned in the deep and gaping gulf of Lechery, Gluttony,
and riotous gaming, yet was he so beloved of his army, that his Soldiers
would have suffered themselves to be crucified, to have done any thing
grateful unto him, and that chiefly through his justice: and therefore it
behoues a Soldier to keep inuiolate the Martial laws of the field. But to
touch the chiefest means whereby a Soldier may be drawn to obey, to fear,
and love the Captain, and altogether gain his good liking and favor, carry
in mind what insueth.

First, a Soldier must presume and persuade himself, that whatsoever he does
in secret, that it shall come to the knowledge of the Captain, whether it be
good or evil: which fear if he be wise, will restrain him from doing any
thing pernicious, or against the Marshall law, or the misliking of the
Captain, and so ought to rest in continual doubt, lest his evil deeds come
to light, and to the ears of the superior Officers, that with the sword of
justice, the rod of revenge, and the scepter of rule, may and will chastise
him. If he remember this, no doubt he will live modestly, in observing those
laws which are commanded by the Captain and General: for it behoues a
soldier still to live in suspect, that spials and intelligencers be ever
present at his elbow, which no doubt will accuse him for his evil behavior:
of which sort a Captain and General have great store to keep the Camp and
Soldiers in continual suspicion and fear.

A Soldier must ever show himself grateful to his Captain in words and
deeds, by remaining patient in his actions, and not to use complaints in his
speeches suffering with quiet contentation the penury of victuals, if the
Camp should want, either through fault of the General, bareness of the
Country, or otherwise by his negligence, or through the malignitie of fortune,
that neither by water nor land corn and victuals can be brought to them in
safety: wherefore we must wear out this want patiently, and not with a
melancholic countenance, make appearance of a wrathful and furious person, by
charging of the Chiefetaine openly with those wants: for which proceeding, let
him assure himself that he shall be esteemed of every man an insolent,
seditious, and impatient soldier. Murmr not against thy Captain with thy
tongue, but rather lament in thy heart thy evil fortune, resting content with
that portion of victuals his Sergeant shall give thee for that day. Seem
joyful whilst thy Captain is merry, and sorrowful when he is grieved,
yielding comfort and consolation, together with faithful counsel, as the
cause requires.

Show not thy self full of wrath and malcontent, for want of thy wonted pay,
although thou manifestly perceive the same to proceed of the covetousness of
thy Captain: but dissemble and show him so grateful a countenance, that he
thereby may be moved to pay the band, if not all, at the least part. If these
delays proceed not by his fault, and that therefore he laments thy lingering
want: make free offer unto him to suffer all lack and discommoditie to
pleasure him withal: whereby he shall be maruellously moved, and much more
bound to love a courteous soldier.

Do not molest him with demanding more succor and prest-money, then thou
have need of, yea and that when needy force constraines.

Report not any thing but that which is profitable and beneficial for the
public State: for otherwise thou shall be accounted a malicious Detractour,
insolent, and insupportable, making rehearsal of every little trifle, whereby
hatred is gained in exchange of gaining favor. Fail never in the diligent
execution of thy duty, and make show of thy forwardness, even purposely with
the first, even in those things that appertain not to thy charge.

Disobey not the Captains or Generals precepts, nor withstand the martial
laws: neither affirm that any thing is evil wrought which is done, for it
appertains not to a soldier to reprehend: but to a Councellor to admonish. Do
not importune thy Captain to reward thy travel and service, but attend his
liberality: for if thou become importunate, he will likewise become Marcus
Crassus, who at the first using great liberality, being continually and
overmuch craved, became at the last extreme covetous.

Present him never with any thing, specially with any thing of value: for thy
captain which has no need of that which is thine, and perceiving thee to
present him that which is not correspondent to the merit of his worthiness
will esteem the same to be done in manner of merchandise, as proceeding of
craft: but if thy Captain demand any thing under show of praising and
commending the same, or the beauty thereof, it is then requisite that the same
be liberally bestowed upon him, it being a courteous demand, which he commonly
will magnificently recompense, as did Artaxerxes.

Accept never any thing of thy enemy soldier, neither receive any letter, yea
if it should be from thy father, without license of thy Captain General, as a
thing which only appertains to Counselors and Chieftaines: for thy Captain
would become jealous over thy fidelity, suspecting that thou were corrupted.
There is another note, specially to advertise all soldiers of, that they do
not rashly, neither of purpose disdain to be governed and commanded of a
Captain, which is perchance of no ancient house, as an infinite number of
fond and presumptuous fellows do now adays: who being rude and rusticall
Clownes, disdain to be guided by Captains, whose valor and virtue, and not
whose ancient stock, has given them that degree, being ascended to so high
honor by the steps of virtue: for I have seen some that but lately have left
their nedles, their hammers, and their spades, having scarce seen a small
skirmish, but that they presume themselves to be expert Soldiers, and will
say, what is my Captains valor more then mine? Is not he of base degree as
well as I? not considering that we be all sprung out of one stock, but that
our valor and virtue has made us noble, as has been verified in diverse
Princes, Kings and Emperors, as Caius Marius, Lucius Quintus Cincinatus,
Attilius Collatinus, Valentinianus, Maximinianus, Francisco Carmognuolo, Julian
Romero, and Mondragon, besides diverse others more, which at this day do live,
being exalted by the degrees and way of virtue, to the tippe of such praise as
is most convenient to worthy Captains: and therefore no soldier ought to
disdain to be governed by such, whose virtue has made noble their minds.

And moreover, if any such a one that is become Captain, either by means of
favor or virtue, be blotted with some vice or defect, yet we ought not to
disobey him: for Caesar was ambitious, great Alexander a Drunkard; Hanniball
unfaithful, cruel, and without religion; Fabius Maximus by lingering esteemed
a Coward; Marcellus rash and unadvised: And therefore although thy Captain be
accounted most vicious yet if he know how to govern and guide his charge, a
soldier must obey him, and neither calumniously reprehend him, nor corruptly
imitate and observe his vices, but duly and directly fulfill his precepts: so
that no soldier or Gentleman, of what Great-house soever, ought to disdain to
be commanded of such as have risen by virtue, to the height of honor, neither
any man, how great of lineage soever he be, to disdain to accept less degrees
then a Captain. For those be the steps by the which he must ascend unto higher
dignity, as many ancient and noble personages have done, who from inferior
degrees by little and little have come to superior, whereof the great Emperor
Caius Julius Caesar may be example: who being borne of a noble-house amongst
the Romans, was first chosen Praetor in Spain (a base office in respect of his
worthy parentage) as being reputed unworthy of any greater office.

CHAP. V. Martial and Military laws, whereunto Soldiers of all degrees must
be sworn, to keep and maintain inuiolated at all times and in all places,
whether they serve Emperor, King or Prince.
1 FIrst, he that contrary to the word of God (whom in all our actions we must
first have respect unto) does maintain, persuade, and favor any infidelity,
heresy, schism, strange or new religion whatsoever, and does not cleave to
the true Christian faith, shall incur the law appertaining.

2 Item that those which without the fear of GOD despise and deride his holy
word, be punished accordingly.

3 Item that no man speak against the Christian catholic faith, neither write
against the same.

4 Item that no soldier of whatsoever degree or office he be do break,
spoil, abuse or profane any Church.

5 Item, that no soldier omit or absent himself from divine service, if his
Princes urgent affairs will admit him to be present.

6 Item, that all soldiers observe and keep the precepts of the Church.

7 Item, that contrariwise, no man be so hardy to outrage any Churchman,
either in word, deed, or any other sinister means, but in liew thereof, carry
a reverent respect to all and every of them.

8 Item, that in like sort no man go about to defloure, commit adultery or
fornication, with virgins, wives, or widows, neither by force, neither by
other accident (unless the party were consenting, and the matter secret, which
nevertheless is not lawful before the face of God) upon pain of death
without mercy.

9 Item, that no man shall destroy, ruinate, endomage, or set onfire any sacred
place, without license of the Captain or General.

10 Item, together with these foresaid cases, whosoever shall blaspheme, revile
or horribly swear by the Almighty name of God, by his divine Word and
Sacraments, let such a perverse, impious and blaspheming person be punished
openly, and to the terror of the rest let it be executed: for no doubt the
plague of the highest will not depart from the tents of blasphemers and
despisers of religion: for how should we use justice indifferently unto men,
when we are content with silence to suffer such injury to be committed against
God? Therefore first the offenses done against God must be straightly punished,
and he then will give thee wisdom to decide the rest, and triumphant victory
over thine enemies.

11 Item, all soldiers in general, having taken their oath to serve God and
advance his word, they shall then next be sworn to be true, just, and dutiful
to their Lord and Sovereign, and his graund General, or chief Captain of
the field, to be tractable and obedient unto every Officer placed and appointed
to rule over him, and to be ready both day and night to serve, whether it be by
land or by water, as occasion of service shall fall out and require: and
whosoever does repine or shows disobedience herein, of what degree or
condition soever he be, he must be duly punished by the judgment of the
Superiors, appointed for that purpose.

12 Item, that whenever any Chieftaine or Captain of any band, shall upon
urgent causes appoint in his absence any other whom he shall think good, to
supply and execute his room of Captainship; every man ought to follow and obey
the said Deputy with no less care and diligence, then they would the Captain
himself upon pain of such punishment as the General or his assigns shall
appoint.

13 Item, that all Soldiers must content themselves with their places
appointed, being joined together in bands, or several without resistance,
whether it be in marching, watching, incamping, or besieging, being also
commanded thereunto by the Captain or other Officers, upon such pain as shall
be thought good by the Captain.

14 Item, that every Soldier shall for his honor sake, gladly favor, and
mercifully forbear unto the uttermost of his power all women lying in
childbed, or being with child, or lately delivered from child, to defend and
succor them from the rage of the cruel and rude soldiers, or others which
follow the camp for spoil. Also it behooves, as I said before, that all
soldiers defend all Priests of godly calling, and all spiritual persons: but
now adays they be the first to whom abuse is offered, of what opinion or
religion soever they be: but God no doubt will justly plague all such before
they be aware, and when they least suspect it.

15 Item, that every soldier shall serve, and is by the law of arms bound by
long custom to serve 30. days for every month, and after that rate he shall
receive his months wages.

16 Item, if that any soldier have received his months wages aforehand, or
any part thereof, and departs without leave or pasport from his CAPTAIN, and
has not served for it, he or they apprehended, shall for the said offense be
aiudged to die.

17 Item, if there be any Soldier or Soldiers that in marching, break his or
their array without just occasion enforcing them, then the Provost Marshall,
Lieutenant of the band, or Sergeant, shall compel him or them with violence to
keep his or their ranckes in order: and if so be that he or they so
disordered, do chance in this case to be slain, there shall no man be blamed
by his or their deaths, by the law of the field, for by such disordered people
the whole army may be in danger of ruinating by the enemy.

18 Item, if that by the appointment of the chief RVLERS of the ARMY, there
be a battle fought, and that by the MIGHTY POWER OF GOD, the victory be
obtained on your side, the law of arms is such, that if any soldier has
received his months wages aforehand, he shall be discharged of the same,
neither shall he serve any longer for the said wages, after the day of victory,
neither shall owe any thing for it, but he shall be set free from the months
service.

19 Item, if it chance that in time of skirmish, or in any other conflict with
the enemy, some one do adventure to fly and run away from his Fellows, if
in the flying his Captain or any other soldier by shooting at him, or by
striking at him do chance to kill him, they shall incur no danger for so
doing: and if such a flier chance to escape at that time, and afterward be
taken, let him according to the law of arms suffer death for the same: for one
such a Recreant may be the overthrow of a great multitude.

20 Item, it stands with the law of arms, that each common soldier shall be
sworn, that they will not have amongst themselves any private counsels,
assemblies or conuenticles, upon pain of the loss of their lives.

21 Item, there shall no soldier, neither in time of marching, nor during the
time of their incamping, hold or keep any whispering or talk, or secretly
convey any letters unto their adversaries, without license from the chief
Captain, upon pain of the loss of his life.

22 Item, if there be any one, or more number, that shall go about any treason,
or any other conspiracy to be committed against the camp or garrison, such a
Traitor or conspirator shall be accused unto the Knight Marshall, and he that
bewraieth and accuses such an Offender, shall have for his reward a months
wages or more, as the fact is heinous: so the reward is to be increased unto
the party that reuileth the same, and the Offender to receive the reward of a
false Traitor.

23 Item, that no soldier shall be suffered to be of a Ruffian-like
behavior, either to provoke or to give any blow or thrust, or otherwise
wilfully strike with his dagger, to injury any his fellow soldiers with any
weapon, whereby mutinies many times ensue, upon pain of the loss of his life.

24 Item, if any one bears hatred or malice, or any evil will for any
occasion done unto him, and so strikes him, he loses his hand, if otherwise
he seeks revenge, then by the law he loses his life.

25 Item, if any Soldier be warned to watch and ward, and he do not come, he
shall be punished at the discretion of the Captain: but if any soldier be
summoned to watch, and he appear, and after the watchword given, and the
watch set, he departs and leaves the watch, such a one shall without mercy
be punished with the loss of his life: neither shall any man set an other to
watch in his place without the leave of the Captain, upon pain of his life.

26 Item, that no soldier or soldiers draw his or their swords, or use any
other kind of weapon, with violence to do hurt with, in or without the camp,
during the time of the wars, upon pain of death. It has lately been used
with more favor of life, as such an Offender to loose his hand: but it is the
discretion of the Lord chief General, in whose hands lies both the life and
death of the Offenders after their arraignment and just condemnation.

27 Item, the like law is against the Officer and Officers of any band in the
camp, if he strike any Soldier without such occasion, as is permitted him in
the articles to do, otherwise he may defend himself.

28 Item, that no person or persons presume to be mustered, or to take wages
before he be sworn to be faithful, and truly to serve his Prince in those
wars present, upon pain of death.

29 Item, that the Harold at arms shall proclaim and publish all that the
General shall give him in charge, in the place and places where he is
commanded, and not to add or diminish any part or parcel thereof upon pain
of death.

30 Item, there shall no Soldiers or other men, procure or stirre-vp any
quarrel with any stranger, that is of any other nation and such as serve under
one head and Lord with them, neither in their gaming or otherwise, upon pain
of the loss of his life.

31 Item, there shall no soldier or other person, being in camp or march,
take away any thing from any man being their friend, by violence or deceit, as
their victuals or other necessaries, upon pain of the loss of his life.

32 Item, when there are any victuals carried or brought unto the camp, no man
shall run out to take any part of them before they be brought to the
appointed place for the purpose: no though they offer for them more then they
be worth, upon pain of the loss of his life.

33 Item, if that the Provost Martial have at any time taken an Offender, and
according to his office, he carries him to be punished: and if that one or more
Soldiers seek to rescue the said malefactor, and in this stir the Offender
escape, he or they that are the occasion of this escape, shall be punished with
the like punishment as the Malefactor should have been, whether it be by life,
or otherwise, according as the weight of the crime requires.

34 Item, if there be any found, that has entered his name under two
Captains, and has taken wages, armor and weapons beforehand: such a person
shall be taken for a perjured man, and by the law of arms, shall for the same
lose his life.

35 Item, if any man has a place appointed him by the Harbinger or Officers
for his tent or lodging, he must hold himself content withal: neither shall
he molest any man lodging within his tent or cabin, or other lodging at any
time, for any occasion upon pain of the chief captains displeasure, and such
punishment as he shall think most fit for the offense.

36 Item, that no man shall sound and make any alarm, except it be need, or
upon commandment from the higher Officers, upon pain of the loss of his life.

37 Item, when of necessity the alarm is made, each man must bestirre him to
be ready for battle, upon pain of the loss of his life.

38 Item, at the first warning of the drum or secretly, all Soldiers must be
in a readiness, and resort to the place appointed, which commonly is the
market place (being first of all united with his Ensign) and from thence in
order of array to the enemies, as they be commanded, upon the pain of the loss
of his life.

39 Item, all soldiers, being Horsemen or Footmen, must diligently in order
of array by sound of drum or trumpet, accompany the Ensign to watch, ward, or
releife of the same, being there silently in a readiness to withstand or
discover the enemies: and as occasion shall serve to brute the alarm, with the
usual word arm, arm, or bows, bows, if numbers or any bands be in pay,
upon pain of loss of their lives.

40 Item, all soldiers must keep their armor and weapons fair, clean and
serviceable in a readiness at every sudden, none intermedling but with his
own, every one to help other to arm, and diligently to resort to the place
of service, at scrie, and larum upon pain.

41 Item; all soldiers must honestly entreat, and truly pay Victuallers and
Artificers, allowed for the relief, being friends or enemies, and with
courteous words encourage such to victual, and relieve the companies or camps
upon pain.

42 Item, all soldiers, in watch, ward, march, or otherwise, shall have
special regard, that if there be man or woman desirous to speak with the
Superiors, or being thy enemies for fear do forsake his own power, and
resort to thee: let such secretly be conveyed to the Lord chief General,
regarding that they view no secrets, least they be double spies upon pain of
the loss of their lives.

43 Item, Captains and Officers, must often frequent and resort unto the
Soldiers lodging to see in what state their armor and munitions be, and to
give great charge that their furniture be always in a readiness, the r
corslets with all pieces belonging to the same, and their caliuers to be made
clean and oiled, to have match and powder dry, bullets fit for their pieces,
strings whipped for their bows, their bills and halberds to be kept sharp.
And often to view every particular upon pain.

44 Item, he that shall depart out of the place where he shall be put, by his
Head or any Officer whatsoever, for a lost Sentinel, Spy, Watchman, Scout, or
Warder, as well by day as by night, as it often happens, to discover some
dealings of the enemy, without attending and staying for him, that placed him
there, to take him away, except he should remove in have to advertise his head
of the success of the enemies assaulting or doing any outrage, shall be
punished with death.

45 Item, whosoever should rashly offend or hurt, either in word or deeds, any
man belonging to the Deputies or head Officers of justice or Captain, there
being in pay for Sergeants. And they being appointed to carry no other weapon,
with steles or staves, but bills or halberds, they may be known for men of
justice, and not for Soldiers.

46 Item* whosoever stands within or without the camp or bars, to watch or
scout, and does his duty so evil, that through his negligence, the enemy
sets upon the camp at unawares, he shall die.

47 Item, he that under color of doing the duty of a Scout or Spy,
perceiving the enemies have assaulted the camp, and he with such faining lies
still, shall die for it.

48 Item, he that shall forsake the defense, in general or particular, of the
battery, of the breach, of the passage of a bridge, or other like to him
committed, but lightly, not forced goes away, shall be for so offending,
punished with death.

49 Item, whosoever entering into a City taken by force, follows not his
Ensign whither soever it shall go, until the General make Proclamation, that
every man shall take booties: And if the General cause no such Proclamation,
to be made, and that soldiers make spoil, he shall incur the pain of
death, and if proclamation be made that they shall cease from taking preies and
booties, and after license given, if they give not over, they shall fall into
the same punishment.

50 Item, whosoever seeing the Ensign, under the which he warreth in fraies or
fight, by chance be fallen in the hands of the enemies, if he be there present,
and do not his endeavor to recover it, and when it is cowardly lost, to
punish the Soldiers which have suffered it to be cowardly lost, with death.

51 Item, he that shall flee from the battle, being in the face and front of
the enemies, or shall go slowly and slackly to join, and afront with them, in
case it be to fight a field battle, or in any skirmish whatsoever, shall be
punished with death.

52 Item, he that shall feign himself sick, to avoid the fighting of the
enemy, or because he would not go to any other enterprise to use his hands,
but (I mean) there for to rob, for to such affairs they will be ready
enough, shall be cruelly punished.

53 Item, whosoever seeing his General, or his Captain, or other Coronell,
and Officer of the camp, in the hand of the enemies, and succoureth him not
with all his power, and may do it, not respecting any danger, shall suffer
death.

54 Item, he that shall rob or spoil the people of the Country, or Subjects,
or Vassels of the Prince he serves, shall die.

55 Item, he that by theft should steal or rob the armor, weapons or horses,
or other thing from any other, serving against the enemies, shall die.

56 Item, he that should ransom or tax, or otherwise mis-vse the people of
the Country, except they should be enemies or rebels to the Prince, shall be
greatly punished.

57 Item, he that shall play at any game for his armor, weapons or horses,
which are written upon the roll, or through his negligence shall lose them, or
lend, give away, or lay them to pawn, let him die.

58 Item, he that goes further then two hundred steps or paces from his
quarter, without license of his Captain, specially when the camp looks or
staieth to be assaulted by the enemies, except he should be sent for by his
Heads, shall be punished with death.

59 Item, he that shall go longer then the hour appointed in the night abroad,
in the camp wandering, except he should be sent by his Superiors for a matter
of weight, from head Captain to head Captain, by a counter-token, shall be
cruelly punished.

60 Item, he that shall lodge strangers, whether he be of the camp or not,
without license of the General or of his Captain, either in his lodging or
under a tent, except he be of his chamber or squadron, or by the Captain
appointed for service forth of the camp, shall be punished. But every one
ought to be in the night with their Camerads and chamber-fellowes, and not to
be divided from their lodgings, that occasion serving, they may be ready with
their weapons in their hands: neither ought they to lodge watch, or scoutes, or
of the search: for that the Spies having no lodging, any excuse being found
out, may the better be apprehended. Also if the Scout-watch be taken from their
quarter, faining to be a soldier of the camp when they are to spy in the
night: they for so offending shall be cruelly punished with death.

61 Item, whosoever shall make any words, deeds, or questions in the ward, or
in an ambush, or in other place, where respect and silence is needful, shall
be punished.

62 Item, he that should be revenged of any injury received, either newly or
before time done, by any indirect way: that is traitorously and not by way of
reason, or by way of combat, body to body, by the license of his General,
shall suffer death.

63 Item, he that should dare be so bold as to play with false cards and dice,
or should use in play any privy falsehood, theft or deceit in any wise, shall
be punished.

64 Item, he that of presumption should pass out of his place into another,
either before the bartell or in marching, should out of order make have to go
before, to be the first that should come to the lodging of the camp, or in
marching should go out of his rank from one battle to another, or he that
does not observe the order of marching, shall die.

65 Item, he that shall task or ransom upon his Host or Lodger, or upon any
other that is not his lawful Prisoner by good order of war, and that he is
lawfully taken, the ransom excel not the articles of agreement, that there
be a just ransom set, upon pain of punishment.

66 Item, he that shall enter in, or go forth by any other gate, street or way,
then that which shall be accustomed, into the City, pales, or list, or fort,
where the camp is lodged, that is going over the walls, or under some breach,
and not by the ordinary gate, let him fall into the pain of death.

67 Item, whosoever does not immediately retire, when he shall hear the
trumpet or drum, sound the retreat, either of a set battle, or of a
skirmish or battery, or of any other fight, or should go in or come forth of
the City, when the assault is given to the walls thereof, shall die.

68 Item, he that speaks, or calls, or cries aloud, amongst the ordinance,
or in battle, or in any place where silence needs, except he were a Head,
or other Officer, or Sergeant, commanding some new order, shall die.

69 Item, he that shall commit any thing whatsoever it be, whereby it may be
coniectured, that it is against the Prince, and domageable to the General and
the camp, shall die.

70 Item, Drums and Fifes must often sound and exercise their instruments,
warning as the mouth of man, to all points of service: so must soldiers
diligently learn and observe the meaning of the same, that none plead
ignorance, neglecting their duties to service appertaining. Also sometimes they
shall receive from the higher Officers or Captains, secret commandments by
word of mouth, the which must with all diligence be observed, and truly
executed upon the loss of their lives.

71 Item, no man in their marching through what place soever they shall pass,
shall set any thing on fire, as not their cabbins and encamped place at their
departing, without commandment from the chief General, upon the pain of the
loss of their lives.

72 Item, if at any time, any man shall in the time of his drunkenesse quarrel
and fight with his fellow, and in so doing, chance to kill him, he shall in so
doing receive as great punishment by death, as if he had been sober.

73 Item, if any soldier do drink himself drunk, or be found drunk,
within the compass of the day and night of his watch and specially if he be
unable to stand in Sentinel, or do his duty, such a one must be most
severely punished.

74 Item, note that soldiers shall swear at their first entering into service
that they will faithfully and truly serve their Captain for six months
together, and when the six months are expired, they shall swear to serve him
six months more, if he need them: And if the Captain needs them not so
long, but minds to discharge his band, the Captain shall allow each of them
half a months wages at his departing, and so discharge them.

75 Item, there shall no man make any shout, or other stirring noise in any
corner or open place of city, town, castle, fort or camp, whereby any danger
or inconvenience may grow unto the company any manner of ways, on pain of the
loss of his life.

76 Item, he that shall disclose the watchword to enemy or friends, except it
be to such a one as he shall be appointed by his Governor: or shall be found
a sleep in the watch, scout, or ward, shall be punished with death.

77 Item, if any Captain for corruption sake, shall give license to his own
soldier, or to any other soldier without the license of the General to
depart the camp, shall receive the same punishment that the soldier should
receive.

78 Item, that no soldier should go out of the camp in the night time without
the watchword, in danger of his life, for if he be slain so by the watch,
there is no blame to be laid upon them that kill him.

79 Item, there shall no soldier go out of the camp without his armor and
other weapons upon the pain of the loss of his life.

80 Item, every captain shall be sworn, that he shall charge every Corporal
upon his oath, that he shall denounce every Soldier that is under his charge,
and that is not able and meet to serve.

81 Item, in like case if the said Corporal shall receive any new or strange
soldier into his band, his part and duty is, that he give unto the higher
Captain knowledge thereof.

82 Item, no man of what condition soever he be, shall be so bold as to convey
away any Offender upon the pain of the loss of his life.

83 Item, that every soldier shall have upon his uttermost garment some
special sign or token, whereby he may be known, such a one as the higher
Captains shall agree upon. As for example, he shall have upon his garment a
red-crosse, and upon his armor a red-lace or such like, whereby he may the
better be known of his fellows: and if there be any shall be found without
the said signs and tokens, he shall be used as an Adversary, or enemy.

84 Item, that all soldiers, entering into battle, assault, skirmish, or
other faction of arms, shall have for their common cry and word S. George, S.
George, forward or upon them, S. George, whereby the soldier is much
comforted, and the enemy dismaide, by calling to mind the ancient valor of
England, which with that name has been so often victorious, and therefore he
that shall maliciously omit it shall be severely punished for his obstinacy.

85 Item, if any Captain or other Officers shall procure skirmish, or fight
the battle without commandment from the higher Officers, for so offending,
they shall receive death.

86 Item, if that any number of soldiers be commanded, and placed by the head
Captains; to defend or keep any city, tower, castle or fort, or any other
place, and they being sharply assaulted by the enemy, once, twice, or thrice,
or oftener, in this case the law of Arms is, that the Lord General shall
allow, and pay unto such a number of Soldiers but ordinary wages: neither is
there by law of arms any thing more due unto them: And if the said castles,
towers, or fortress, shall be sold or be betrayed by the said Captain,
Officers, or soldiers, or otherwise yielded, without the commandment of the
Prince, or at the appointment of the General: shall be as false Traitors used.

87 Item, if any Captain, Lieutenant, Sergeant, Corporal, or other Officer,
or soldiers, give into the hands of the enemy, any city, fortress, tower,
or place of defense, does incur, as I have said, the danger of death, if he
by chance be not more then constrained to deliver up the same, or that it is
like a man of valor would have done so: and therefore they ought never to
abandon the place, for words or letters of the enemy, neither at the sight of
the invironing camp: for it is not lawful for the Castellane to leave his
Castle, if he have victuals, men, and munition, or does hope for succors.
Therefore respect is to be had, which must be holden as a Maxim, that where
the place may be defended by assault without battery, that at least one
assault is to be abidden, and mo to be aspected if it be possible: and if it
can suffer battery, they must abide at the least a volee of Canons: and if the
place be so weak that it cannot sustain, neither the one nor the other, and
that it be far distant from succors: to yield does merit neither punishment
of the Prince, nor of the enemy: but otherwise being of force, able to
sustain the enemies fury, and cowardly or traitorously to deliver the same,
merits death of the one and the other.

88 Item, if there be any city, castle or other sort, yielded up by the
enemy, without expugnation: there shall no man be so bold to enter into the
said place, to spoil or otherwise to kill or do any outrage, without leave of
the General, upon pain of the loss of his life.

89 Item, there shall no man depart out from the precinct of the camp, with
any booty or spoil, without leave of the chiefest Officers or head Captain,
upon the pain of the loss of his life.

90 Item, if any man for fear forsakes the place appointed him to fight in,
and for fear throws down his weapon, the Officers or Soldiers may kill him
without any danger.

91 Item, if any man saying that he has done some wrothy thing in fight, and
it be proved contrary, he shall be punished.

92 Item, if a Regiment, or Band, shall by mutinies or otherwise incur the
laws of the field, it is requisite and necessary, for that all shall not be
put to death, that every man's name be taken and put into a bag, and that the
tenth Lot should be executed: The which although every man do not feel, yet
nevertheless he shall fear the event.

93 Item, at such times as the General or Captain does muster, train, or
feign any battle, skirmish, assault, or other warlike encounter, if any
soldier does either negligently or wittingly, hurt, maime, or kill his
companion with powder, bullet, or by what means soever, such a one shall
severely, and exemplarly be punished accordingly.

94 Item, that each Corporal, and other Officer, shall have either in written
hand or print, these Martial laws, and this book, wherein a private Soldier
is instructed, bought and provided at the charges of the whole squadron out of
their pay, to the end that it being continually repeated to the Soldiers, no
man may plead ignorance, but receive condign punishment according to his
offense.

95 Item, that every Captain, Lieutenant, Ensignebearer, Sergeant or
Corporal, so often as their bands, squadrons, and soldiers enter into ward,
shall appoint the Clarke of the band or some one that can read, once in the day
or in the night, to read unto the company (that must attentively give ear) not
only these Martial laws here set down, but also all the course of these
directions belonging to a private soldier, Corporal, etc. contained in this
book, for their instructions, under pain of open punishment by the General,
or Marshall.

96 Item, that the foresaid Officers after one twelve months service, wherein
the soldier has had sufficient experience, and is inured in these precepts
and directions, they shall even as the Schoolmasters does the children, call
every one particularly to account, and examine them severely herein, and to
esteem those for old and perfect soldiers, that know these laws and their
duty by heart, and at their fingers ends, and the rest Bisonians and fresh
water-souldiers, that are ignorant, although they have served seven years, yea
and to place them in the most servile services. And if there be any that
maliciously or disdainfully persist in their blunt ignorance, either to disarme
them, and discharge them, or else to punish them with open shame and infamy.

97 Item, if there be any man that shall infring, and not maintain, confirm,
and to his power diligently and dutifully keep and observe these articles
aforesaid, such shall as perjured persons with all severity be punished: And
if any soldier or soldiers shall offend in any manner of thing that does
belong and appertain to the duty of a soldier, whereof there is no mention
made in these articles, such an Offender shall be punished at the discretion of
the Marshall of the field and General.

These articles must be openly read in the presence of the chief Captains, by
the Notary or Scribe of the Court, and after that they be read, the Oath shall
be ministered unto every man by the Praetor in this wise, or the like words, to
the same end and purpose: speaking unto the whole company, and saying; my
brethren and friends, that are here present, you have heard the articles of
our Sovereign, containing the chief and principal points of our rights and
laws of the field, and of the Oath, and the manner thereof, which every
Soldier ought to take. All you that do mean faithfully and valiantly to
observe, maintain, fulfill, confirm, and keep the foresaid Articles, let him
here now either openly refuse to be a Soldier, or with me hold up his
finger, and say after me.

All these Articles which have been openly red unto us, we hold and allow as
sacred and good, and those will we truly and stoutly confirm, fulfill,
maintain, and keep so help us GOD, and his divine word, Amen.

These Articles with others, which for tediousness I omit, would be published,
some upon pain of death, some with greater, and some with less punishment, to
every one that does offend, without any remission or forgiveness, or regard of
blood, degree, kindred, or friendship: specially at the beginning to lie in
camp, whereby the army may the better be set in good order, and to make it
fearful of God, of justice, and of the General, with love and fear.

The execution hereof only appertains to the master of the Camp, for the
hearing, ordering, and determining of the causes of justice under the General,
as the Lieutenant of a city or town, Deputy for the Prince. For the master of
the camp is the chief of the orders, who has place in the field in many
things as principal next to the General who has the chief government in
pitching the camp, and dislodging.

Briefly from the General downward, it is the greatest charge and burden that
is in the army, and therefore it is requisite that he have good knowledge and
remembrance of all the Orders whereby the wars is to be governed, and that he
be of good practice and experience, and duly obeyed.

But such cases as are capital and of great importance, should be heard and
determined by the General and his Judges: It suffices that God is the knower
and determiner, of all things, and next unto him his Deputies upon earth: who
failing to do justice, either for love, or hatred, shall yield account
thereof before the divine Judge, and this law cannot be avoided by us, but we
shall be cited and called without appeal.

CHAP. VI. Brief Notes of other mean offices, as Drums, Fifes, Surgeons,
and the Clarke of the Band.
Drums and Fifes must be chosen of able qualities and personage, secret and
ingenious, skillful in the sound and using of their instruments, which must
warn as the mouth of a man to all intents of service, diligent in times
convenient to instruct Soldiers in the same, that none by ignorance neglect
their duties. These be oftentimes sent on messages, importing charge, which of
necessity require languages, sometimes to summon or command the enemies to
render, sometimes carry ransomes, or redeem, or conduct Prisoners. Many other
things to them do appertain, as before is rehearsed etc.

A Chyrurgion is necessary to be had in every band, who ought to be an honest
man, sober, and of good counsel, skill in his science, able to heal and cure
all kind of sores, wounds, and griefs: to take a bullet out of the flesh and
bone, and to slake the fire of the same, and that he have all his tools and
instruments with other necessary stuff, as oils, balmes, salues, stepres,
roulers, bolsters, splenters, and all other things to the science belonging,
which also ought to have courage for his patient, and allowed stuff, he shall
readily employ his industry upon the sore and wounded, and not intermedling
with others, to his own charge noisome. Such be placed with the Ensign, and
lodged near to the Captain, and near their baldrickes in time of fight,
which by law of the field is their charter.

The Clarke of a band would be a man chosen of a discreet behavior, such a
one as has the use of his pen and skillful in Arithmetike, who must have a
book in the which he must write all the names of the Soldiers appertaining to
the band, dividing every weapon by themselves, that they may be the readier to
be mustred, and otherwise to be placed in order of march, at watch and ward the
clarke must be attentive with his book, to call uery man's name, to see who is
absent, and that certificate thereof be made unto the Captain, who must as
before is rehearsed, without sickness or some license of the head Officers see
him or them punished to the example of all others. He must sometimes in the
watch and ward read unto the soldiers, the Military laws and directions,
causing first a solemn silence to be made, and then proceed in reading,
examining, and conferring with every particular and common soldier, touching
his memory of these things, for his full instruction. Also the Clarke is to
take charge of the Captains munition, who seeing it delivered unto the
soldiers, must take note how much is delivered, unto whom, and what day of the
month it is delivered, with the prise. Likewise he must repair to the Clarke
of the victuals, and by the Captains warrant receive such bread, beer and
other victuals, as is to be had, and to deliver it to those that shall be
thought by the Captain to be of credit, to victual the band by the Princes
price, and to take tickets of them as well for that it is delivered unto them,
as what they do deliver unto soldiers. Also he must in the Captains name and
by his warrant repair unto the Merchants and other Artificers, and take such
wares as the Officers and soldiers have need of, who must at the pay day by
the Captain be answered. Also provided that the Victualler allows but the
Soldier sixpence a day, the overplus goes to their payment of furniture and
apparel.

The Clarke must often peruse the tickets to see that no more be delivered then
their wages come to, that the Captains thereby receive no loss. The Clarke
ought to inquire when any be departed this world, also when any be slain, and
discharged the band, and to make a just note thereof, whereby certificate may
be made to the Muster-master, that the Prince in no ways may be hindered,
neither the Captains by the Victuallers receive any detriment or loss.
Finally, he must upon the report of the Corporals or other Officers, find and
procure of the Captains, relief for the sick, and wounded Soldiers and
Prisoners, which ought to be redeemed out of the enemies hand.

CHAP. VII. The Prelates charge that takes care of SOVLDIERS of the BAND.
TO knit up this first discourse of Military Directions, and Martial laws,
special care must be had to provide one man amongst the many scores of
Soldiers, that may govern and direct in spiritual causes, who ought to be
wise, learned, honest, sober, patient, and of exemplar life: who must offer up
daily prayers for his whole company, must instruct them to be penitent and to
restore to every man his right: to communicate in Catholic and Christian
manner, so often as they can, chiefly at special times appointed by the
Church, and before any dangerous attempt, to feed them with wholesome food of
learned instructions, wherein they may learn how to live, and so consequently
to teach their companies their duties toward God and their Prince, and to give
ghostly counsel and spiritual relief unto the sick wounded, weak in body
or in conscience, and that such be well armed with spiritual armor, that is,
with good knowledge and good living, ready to persuade them manfully to
withstand their enemies, the flesh, the devil, the world and desperation,
putting them in sure hope through the equity of their cause, their conformity
to the Church, and their firm faith in our Savior Jesus Christ, to enter into
the camp of everlasting life, where they shall ride amongst the Soldiers on
white Horses, clothed in white and pure silk, crowned with bright triumphant
garlands, as the Scriptures do witness. This and such like belongs unto such
personages as take care of the soldiers in a warlike band.

Now then to conclude, and to make an end of my first discourse, I would wish
all valiant minded soldiers, carefully to carry in mind those precepts which
are proper and due unto a private Soldier, which I partly have collected and
set down in this short pamphlet, that when he shall be called unto an hier
office, he may deservedly ascend the third step of Martial office, and so by
degrees rise to the height of supreme government.

CHAP. VIII. How Pikes are to be carried in array, march or battle.
THose that are appointed to carry Pikes in array of ranks or battle, must
know that Pikes amongst all other weapons that belongs to Soldiers, is of
greatest honor and credit: and truly, whosoever does carry and manage the
same weapon well and with good grace, does make a very beautiful and pleasant
show to the Beholders, and chiefly when it is carried upon the shoulder,
sustained and supported with a good grace, and the hand that does sustain it
be on that side the shoulder where it is placed, and with il Gombedo alto.

They must likewise be advertised which march in the foremost ranks, if they be
upon the right side, to hold their Pikes continually in marching in the right
hand, and upon the right shoulder without ever changing it: and so likewise
being upon the left side of the rank, to hold it always upon the left
shoulder: those that be in the midst of the ranks have liberty to use that
side that is best for their commodity, either upon the right or left hand, and
to move their Pikes from shoulder to shoulder at their choice and pleasure: It
is true that the just carrying of the Pike of those that march in the midst of
the ranks, is to hold it upon the left shoulder, and to carry their right hand
behind upon their dagger, or upon their side, and so generally all, as well
they that be in the midst, as those that be in the head of the ranks are to
observe this order, to carry that hand which is at liberty behind them, or
upon their sides. Let him march then with a good grace, holding up his head
gallantly, his pace full of gravity and state, and such as is fit for his
person, and let his body be straight and as much upright as is possible, and
that which most imports, is that they have always their eyes upon their
companions which are in rank with them, and before them going just one with
the other, and keeping perfect distance without committing error in the least
pace or step, and every pace and motion with one accord and consent, they ought
to make at one instant time. And in this sort all the ranks entirely are to
go, sometimes softly, sometimes fast, according to the stroke of the drum. The
heel and tippe of their pikes would be equally holden, both of length and
height, as near as is possible, to avoid that they fall not out to be by
bearing them otherwise, like unto organ-pipes, some long, some short. The
measure and proportion thereof, to hold the heel of the Pike is this: It is
necessary for him to have an eye to the rank that does march before him, and
so carry the Butt-end or heel of his pike, that it may be just over against
the joint of the hamme of the soldier, that in march shall be straight before
him: and so every one from hand to hand must observe the proportion of that
height, that is right behind upon the joint of the knee, for by doing so they
cannot commit error, carrying in their march that leg that is under that arm
that sustaines and caries the Pike of just and even proportion, by moving their
pace right under the staff of the Pike, going in their march, as I have said
before, just and even, with a gallant and stately, and sumptuous pace: for by
doing so, they shall be esteemed, honored, and commended of the Lookers on,
who shall take wonderful delight to behold them march in that order.

THE SECOND BOOK OF MILITARY Directions: Wherein is set down the office of a
Sergeant, Ensigne-bearer, Lieutenant, the Gentlemen of a band, and how to
skirmish, and discover.
CHAP. I. And first, the Office of the Sergeant of a Band.
SInce every Officer through his continual exercise and daily diligence in
executing his charge, does attain unto perfect experience by daily practice,
which is as it were converted into nature: therefore he which determines with
himself to be accounted sufficient and of ability, to discharge the place of
a good Sergeant of a band, with a forward intent to learn and be thoroughly
instructed, ought first to be a Soldier that has seen much, and a Corporal
of good experience, according to the directions of my first book: In which two
rooms it is very convenient, that he have tasted and been present at great
diversity of service, and warlike enterprises, and to carry a resolute mind
to delight in the exercise of this office, to the end he be not found therein
irresolute and ignorant: and that likewise he fail not in the ready performing
of any enterprise, when Martial affairs do call him forth to put the same in
execution.

First of all it is very requisite that he have most perfitly in memory, the
number of all the soldiers of the band, and distinctly with what weapons they
are armed, what quantity of Corslets and Pikes, how many armed and disarmed
carry short weapons, what number of Hargabusiers with murrians and without, how
many musket-eares, how many light armed pikes and targets of proof, that the
better and more readily upon a sudden, he may put the company in order.

He must ever plant the best armed in places most necessary, as at the front
and back, the right and left side of a square. The first rank in ordinary
long marching, the targets of proof must go in as a ready cover and bulwark
against the enemies shot: next to them the musket-eares, then the Hargabusiers,
and after them the armed and light pikes: amidst whose ranks he must at all
times place the Ensign, guarded with Halberds or bills, and then again the
light armed and armed pikes, hargabuse and musket-eares, and last of all
targets of proof: by this equality of division, the whole band at one instant
shall be ready to receive any sudden surprise of the enemy. The Sergeant
carrying these things in his mind, having laid a distinct plat, he may very
easily vary their form and order as he shall be appointed, and as the
situation of the place does require, or the accidents of war do constrain.

He must never work unwarily, or at all adventures, and tending to no
determined purpose, as those that do not remember the perfect rules and
reckonings of their office, whereof there be now adays over many, for when it
is necessary for them to alter their order, and that perforce they must quite
change the form and fashion that then they observe, they know not which way to
begin. Therefore to the end his order and ranks may be to the purpose duly
and directly changed, and with facility disposed: let him ever disseuer and
divide one part of his weapons from an other, causing every one to turn and
enter into their ranks and order by themselves, so shall he proceed in taking
away, setting forward, and intermixing one sort of ranks within another very
orderly. And thereby the full proportion of his band shall be framed, as he
has determined, or as it is devised by him that commands, either in marching
forward and backward, or in turning without disorder, by 3. 5. 7. or 9. in a
rank, as the Lieutenant, Captain, or Sergeant mayor appoints.

He ought ever to beware that in ordering the ranks, and appointing the
soldiers their places, that they begin not to make debate, or stomach one
another for dignity of place; the which does oftentimes fall out to their
great annoy and damage, and the Officers tedious toil: For in enterprises of
great importance, even in the presence of the invading enemy, some
vainglorious fellows are accustomed to strive for the chiefest places: the
which rooms by all reason, and of duty appertain to the best armed, and not
to any others, whose unruly rashness may be the ruin of the whole band.
Therefore fit and convenient places are to be observed with humility, the
naked in their places, and the armed in theirs: But to touch one point, which
we have already spoken of, I judge it most convenient that the armed (those for
skirmish excepted) must remain in maine stands and battles, as some say, to
abide by the stake, who ought to be so well armed, as they may bear and
support the blows of their enemies, and resist any furious charge, either of
horsemen or footmen: whereas beside their well ordered ranks, by reason they be
armed, they make a more gallant show; giving courage to thy own people, and
discourage to the enemy, and in proof are more profitable than the disarmed,
who remaining in their rooms, the contrary succeeds.

The Sargeant of the Company must have special regard when victuals cannot be
had for money, by forage or otherwise, to make repair together with the
Clarke of the Band, to the principal munitions, that his company taste not of
famine; and from thence procure to have so much as he well can, or as is
convenient, and according to his received order, so must he depart and
distribute all manner of munitions amongst the Corporals, that every one of
them may give to their soldiers their portions.

The like ought he to use, touching powder for the Harquebusiers and
musketeers, lead for bullets, match for them to burn, and each thing else
whereof they have need, to the end they may always remain in order, and be
very well provided and stored, as near as is possible, and as is most
convenient; and to persuade the soldier that to gain a place of more account,
he will spare his pay to arm himself the more bravely. He must likewise have
diligent eye, that the said munition of match and powder be conserved warily
from wetting, and kept with a special spare from untimely spending: for this
provident precept does import very much in all enterprises, by reason that the
negligence of the Sargeant, touching this necessary foresight and care, has
bin the cause that the shot have not bin able readily to perform their duties
according to the appointed determinations, or as necessity did require, by
reason of their unwary keeping their munition in wet weather, or their general
want through vain mispence, by which means many and most notable errors have
succeeded of great loss and moment, and to the hinderance, shame, and total
ruin of a whole company or camp.

Therefore it is most expedient that the Sargeant, together with the several
Corporals, do diligently and narrowly examine, visit, search, and view the
proper flaskes, tuch-boxes, pockets, and other places where the soldiers are
accustomed to carry and keep their powder and match, and peruse diligently all
those things without negligence, fayning, or favoring: diverse have received
great ignominy and shame in their office, for want of the performance thereof:
whereas by carrying a contrary care, they have bin universally well thought of,
and commended of all good soldiers and valiant Captains. Therefore as occasion
does serve and offer, he may admonish, put in mind, and reprehend with
dexterity the soldiers under his charge and guiding. To him it appertains to
lay his helping hands about all things necessary for his company, as well in
providing for them, as dispencing, or deferring necessary charges, except for
the provision and dividing of lodgings, which is the office of the Furrier or
Harbinger, who ought to be very tractable, diligent, and altogether officious,
not being partial to any one for peculiar profit or pleasure, and therefore it
is necessary a Sargeant should know how to write, for it is hard by memory to
discharge his charge.

The Sargeant must be careful to accompany, at the hour appointed, the guard
to the place of the watch, in going up and down along their flanks when he
has placed them in order, to see them keep due distance, make the Laumband,
march in straight line with their ranks, carry their arms in conformable
proportion; and if upon pleasure they give a volee of shot in passing, to
advertise them to do it orderly with due form, one rank after another, as
they pass over against the General, or other great officer or personage and
not in a confused sort altogether, or by pieces. When he is arrived at the
Corpse of guard, and has placed every one in order, and provided for all things
necessary for the watch of that night, he must then give his advise and
counsel to the Corporalls, that they keep good order in their Sentinels; yea
sometimes and very often, it is good that he himself aid them to chose out
the most fit places for them to stand in, to the end that the circuit of
ground, which for all their safeties is to be kept, may be conveniently guarded.

At the joining of the day and the night, or somewhat later, he shall secretly
give the Corporalls the watchword, with the which they are to govern the guard
as well by night as day: the which word by the commandment of his Captain, he
must procure the Sargeant mayor to give him, or of some other that shall have
the charge to give the same for want of his presence, or in place of this great
officer.

He must arm himself in such sort, that he be no less apt than any other
soldier to be able at time of need, both to defend himself, and offend the
enemy: touching which effect, Duke Octauio Farnese in the expedition of 12000
footmen, and 600 horsemen, which Paul the third, Pope of Rome, sent into
Germany against the Religion, did dispose that all the Sargeants of his bands
should arm themselves with Harquebuses and murrians; saying, that so great a
number of valiant men being Sargeants, as was in so great an assembly and
expedition of such importance, it was neither good nor commendable, that they
should only be armed with their Halberds, and therefore he ought to have his
page or Muchacho second him with those furnitures: neither seems it
inconvenient, but having placed in order all things pertaining to his office,
that he place himself in rank with the rest of the soldiers, yet in such a
place as he may easily depart from thence when necessity calls him away, to
reform or use remedy to any disorder he understands of.

He must with dexterity proceed in reprehending and exhorting the soldiers to
keep their due order, and not to disband and stray abroad, but upon needful
and lawful occasions, and to take order in all other particular points, which
are requisite to be observed for the honor and profit of the Company, which
things are chiefly to be procured and observed by other officers.

Let him beware and abstain from beating of soldiers at any time, that thereby
he grow not odious: for it is not convenient nor comely for an officer to
strike a soldier, for thereby he so offends, that he does incur the pain to
receive punishment for so doing, of his Captain or the Master of the Camp.

He must be diligent, careful, and vigilant in all his affairs; for in this
office, diligence and dexterity is both to the purpose and most necessary.

It is necessary he be always conformable unto the Sargeant mayor, by
imitation and obedience in action, and like his shadow, to second him in all
his doings; of whom he may always receive information and order of all such
things as be necessary for service of his band: and of him he may learn to
proceed by conformity, in that which is convenient for his office. For he that
is in company with men of virtue and valor, that be of more excellent quality
than he himself, shall ever reap some profit; and the rather for that he is
bound to be in the sight, and near about the Sargeant mayor, at all such times
as any thing is to be done, where he ought with a good ear, and diligent eye,
give ready attendance, to execute such commission as shall be given him;
especially those which appertains to the ordering of the ranks, and every
thing else whatsoever, without doing any thing upon his own judgment, but
confer with that great officer, toward whom he must always be courteous and
conformable; and with an obedient and beneuolent mind diligently imitate him.

I suppose it moreover necessary, as I said before, that he be able to write
and read, considering the infinite number of things which are to pass through
his hands, and which he ought to execute for the benefit of his company, which
cannot be always ordered, disposed, and guided only by memory: So consequently
the Sargeant is to take diligent heed and care of all the foresaid things to
execute the points of his office speedily, and to rebuke and teach such as do
amiss with lenity; and although he cannot violently strike and hurt any man,
yet nevertheless no man can resist his authority, but observe the same as to
the Captains own person, if he were present.

He is not to hear any mutinous or rebellious words amongst the company, but
immediately to reveal the same, that speedy reformation may be had, and faults
amended. And thus must he be still occupied to reform men's manners, mispence of
munition, broken araies, and to be ready day and night to service, by the
Captain or Lieutenants commandment, and to instruct the Company, to march,
train, and travail, as well by signs from him framed, as otherwise by words
spoken, and to have special regard to the company, to see that their armor
and weapons be in a readiness always for service: for the diligent and
skillful usage of this office, is of no small moment to any good order
throughout the whole band; no less than the Centurion amongst the Romans, who
was Captain over a hundredth; and so likewise every hundredth in each band ought
to have a several Sargeant to direct and govern.

CHAP. II. The Office of an Alfierus or Ensigne-bearer.
IF it be a thing most requisite that a private soldier should have a special
zeal over his proper honor and credit; how much more is the same necessary
for a valiant Alfierus or Ensigne-bearer. Therefore he must with all careful
diligence, due discretion, ascend the 4th degree of this honorable discipline,
being already trained up in the three first degrees, which is, of a private
soldier, a Corporal, and a Sargeant, whereby to his great commendation he may
sufficiently merit the sway of this office.

Having solemnly received the Ensign of his Captain, like a noble and expert
soldier, he ought carefully to keep the same, and bear a certain reverent
respect to it, as to a holy thing, yea and to be jealous over the safety
thereof, no less than an amorous person over his loving mistress: since that
only with the sacred shade of the Ensign, being well guided, the general
reputation of all the band and company is conserved.

Therefore the Alfierus ought to be endowed with such custom, and use himself
with such courtesy and civility, that he may not only procure the love of his
confederates, and friends, but of all the entire company.

Besides, it is necessary to have near unto him a couple of assistants at the
least, that be practiced and good soldiers, which may be of the number of the
Halberdiers that go next his Ensign, to the end that when he is constrained to
absent himself from the same, through some urgent and necessary occasion (for
otherwise it is not to be permitted) he may cause one of them take care and
charge of his Ensign, in what accident soever might fall out during that time:
for that thing ought never to be left alone or abandoned to a slender and loose
guard, which is of such a great importance, whereupon every man's honor and
estimation depends; wherefore it ought of all to be carefully kept, and well
accompanied.

Note that the Alfierus, to defend his Ensign and himself at one instant,
must have in his one hand his drawn sword, and in the other the Ensign: which
thing is convenient of him particularly to be performed, when it is time to
assault the enemies upon a wall, Trench, Scalade, Bulwark, Breach, or in any
strait passage or enterprise, since that with the point of iron of the Ensign
staff small defense can be made, as well for the weakness of the staff, as
through the trouble and continual wavering of the silk which is about it, so
that in bearing the same displayed he ought rather to have regard where he
shall set his foot, than to the top of the staff, or any other place less
necessary, as well thereby to fly affectation, which in carrying thereof is
made manifest, as also to conduct the same with more assured courage.

Moreover, note that the most honorable place of the threde or rank is the
right hand, and the second the left hand; which degrees likewise be observed in
all the ranks of other soldiers, as well as when diverse Ensigns do march
together in one rank: for amongst the bands and squares of soldiers, the
flanks do always resist the assaults and fury of the enemy; as the sides
which be nearest to them, be always guarded of those that be most practiced,
and the middle part not, only except the first and last rank of the ordinance
or battle, where the midst is the place of greatest estimation; for the
head or back of the square being assaulted, they then withstand the greatest
fury. And by good reason, for this place of the midst is ever much more broken
and endomaged of the enemies arms and force, than any other part: wherefore
amongst expert and valiant soldiers, this room is of greatest honor, and of
most estimation, as the place that has greatest need of defense, which being
subject to more open and manifest peril than the rest be, is of greatest
dignity. For Captains are accustomed to show notable and singular favor to
that soldier, which they prefer to an enterprise of peril and danger, so that
it be capable of issue and altogether desperate.

Neither is this to be accounted for a marvel; for as this profession is
altogether different from others, so likewise the orders, and ceremonies are
diversely managed, if a man may term those things ceremonies, which of
necessity ought with diligence to be governed with great care, art, and
industry: It behoues the Alfierus, whilst he does march in ordinance amidst
the band, to go with a grave and stately pace, advisedly and courageously
joined with modesty, and without affectation or vain bravery: neither ought
he to bow or decline his body at any time to any person, that thereby he may
represent and maintain the reputation and excellency of arms, and the
Ensign before his Prince, chief Ruler, Lord General, Coronell, Captain,
Governor etc. As he passes before them, he ought to abase the points and tip
of the Ensign, or rather with his arm bow down neere-hand all the staff of
the Ensign, and so much more, by how much he is of greater dignity and
authority. In this sort shall he make sign of reverence, and not pull off his
cap or hat, neither bend his knee, nor move any one part of his person, thereby
to retain that dignity due to the Ensign and his office.

The Alfierus being in square, rank, or ordinance, with the Ensign displaid,
does change (almost never) the place where he is planted to march, which is in
the midst of the footmen, as a place most safe and best defended. Therefore
those that otherwise would use it, do ground their opinion upon some ancient
order of the Romans or Grecians, wherein they are deceived, because at this
day we are constrained to vary our order, considering our arms be varied,
which do now fetch and wound much more and further of, and are more piercing
than those of ancient time.

Neither is it expedient to put this officer, which is of such great respect,
always in hazard, as well for the good quality of his person, the which we
must always presuppose him to be of, as also for the office of great
importance he supplies, since he does sustain the displaid Ensign, wherein
the reputation and honor of all the company consists. But at such time as he
shall march to a Scalade, breach and battery, the valiant Alfierus with his
Ensign in one hand, and his sword in another, as is before said, ought to
enforce himself to be the first, and by all means to mount up, to enter
amongst the enemies, and to advance and inuit the rest forward, both his
inferiors, companions, and betters: for in effect at such times the particular
guiding of the band appertains to him. Now to the intent that the soldiers at
the instant time of a dangerous enterprise, and in a combersome and perilous
time and place, may be invited, and fervently stirred up to follow the Ensign:
He must therefore use such courtesy to all men, that in all hazards and great
exploits, he being beloved of the soldiers, may be very much aided and defended
by them; whereas otherwise they do either suffer open ignominy, or danger of
death, when as they be either abandoned at the point of extremity, or
traitorously slain or wounded by their own companions and followers, as at
the assault of Dalahaui, and a skirmish of bravery at Louaine, chanced unto two
several Ensigne-bearers of the Baron of Sheueran, Coronell over ten Ensigns
of shot: therefore since he is the shadow of the valor and good condition of
his Captain and company, let him be careful of his duty.

The Ensigne-bearer may of his discretion and authority, espying the company
travail, or follow enemies to their discommoditie and peril, loosing the
wind, hill, or ground of advantage, disordering the array, may stand still, and
cause the drums and fifes to stand and sound the retreat, that the company may
resort and come to the Ensign, and order the array by the advantage of the
ground, rather than abide the coming of the enemy.

He ought always to have about him, and to lodge where he does himself, so
many good drums, as there be hundreths in his band; that at all times he may
make Raccolte, and gather his soldiers together, and for such like necessary
respects.

He ought never crave license to go to any enterprise whatsoever, for any
desire he has to make himself known, or to win fame, but ought to remain
steadfast and firm, when his turn of service comes, in respect of the great
charge he does carry in the manage of the Ensign.

It is necessary to have a horse for his own use, the which whilst he
marches ought to go near the Ensign, whether he be in square battle or
long march: for by taking his ease on horseback, he may keep himself
continually lusty and fresh, and therewithal may accommodate his carriage, or
baggage; as some soldiers may likewise do among the ordinary carriage, provided
for by the Captain.

Note that the Ensign which he received of his Captain, must by him be
restored again at such times as he is discharged out of the company; if during
the time of his service, there has not chanced a battle, assault, or other
enterprise, wherein the Alfierus being present, has made manifest appearance,
that he has merited and deserved the same. For in such cases it is to be
understood, that he has won and gained the same, and not otherwise, unless
the Captain of his free will does give it him, which is a very ancient
custom, especially amongst the Italians.

It is very requisite the Alfierus have besides his two Assistants, a valiant
and courageous servant, who is a practiced soldier, and not a nouice, or
yoongling, as some very fondly and unadvisedly do entertain now a-dayes, that
continually being near him, as well in the maine square battle, or
elsewhere, to second him with a piece, pike, or target of proof; and may have
in such a one that entire faith and assured credit, that he should have of a
faithful companion, whom he must not keep, as an abject servant, but he ought
to maintain him, apparel him, and arm him with convenient arms of defense;
for sometimes it shall fall out in the day of a fought battle of a whole
army, that those deputed servants may have the custody of all the Ensigns in
the maine square battle, and the Alfierus of each company, as men well armed
be placed in the head of the battle, or in some other principal or
necessary places, which are to be governed and defended by practiced and
valiant soldiers; as particularly fell out at such time as the Marquess of
Vasto, fought at Cresola in Lombardie against the Frenchmen, which journey was
lost by the Emperialists, although that day they fought valiantly; and besides
in other enterprises, such men have executed gallant service.

He must always provide a sufficient corpse de guard about his Ensign, as well
by day as night, in what place soever he shall be, although no suspicion were
to be had of the enemy, that thereby he may remain safe from all sudden
surprises, or unprovided casualties, and the rather to maintain the honor and
reputation due to the Ensign, whereby all sinister inconvenience may be
avoided, and the majesty and office of the same generally well respected;
especially when time and place of suspect ministers occasion. The Alfierus must
march to the guard, either armed with a Curase of proof, or some other
convenient garment of defense, being still seconded with his servant, who is to
carry either target, halberd, piece, or pike, or such weapon as he does delight
in, which at the seat of the guard, taking his Ensign in his hand, he must let
rest in the keeping of his servant. Neither is it requisite in going or
marching, that he unloose and display the Ensign, without some special
occasion, but ought to reserve the advancing, and displaying of the same at
full, until he come in the sight of the Cheiftaine or Prince, or in the sight
of the enemy, or other places of service.

It is necessary his Ensign have certain special countersignes and marks,
that it may easily be known of his soldiers, both near hand and far off,
to the intent that in all exploits, and at unknown suddaines, his soldiers
may perfitly perceive the same amongst the other Ensigns, different from the
rest, wherein the Alfierus must use an exquisite manage, that by his wise and
valorous actions without any other man's relation, may be discerned his virtuous
actions and forward proceedings, which he ought to make apparent by some
notable enterprise.

The Alfierus must be a man of good account, of a good race, honest and
virtuous, brave in apparel, thereby to honor his office, and continually
armed as well when no peril is feared, as in time of danger, to give example
to the rest of the soldiers not to think their armor burthenous, but by use
to make it as familiar to him as his skin. Finally, he must be a man
skillful, hardy, and courageous, of able courage to advance and bear up the
Ensign in all extremities, secret, silent, and zealous, able often to comfort,
animate and encourage the company to take in hand, and maintain such
extremities, and enterprises, as they are appointed unto, and never to retire,
but when of noble policy, the higher Officers command the same. Unto this
Officer there should be certain ceremonies used in delivery of the Ensign,
receiving it by oath in the presence of his band, at which time he must make
vow and profess the same rather to be his winding sheet, and therein to lose
his life, then through his default to lose the same: whereunto every private
soldier should likewise be sworn, as among the Romans it was used, when he
was not accounted a soldier, but a thief, or robber, till he had taken his
oath. And therefore their war was called Militia Sacrata.

CHAP. III. The office of the Lieutenant of a Company.
THat person upon whom any charge does depend, and does deservedly manage any
affair, must frame himself to use due diligence, and with dexterity suffer
such tedious toil, as in these serious affairs succeed, since that charge (as
I have already said) signifies nothing else but a burden of affairs.

Therefore that a soldier may deservedly mount up to this degree of worthy
honor and martial dignity, he must use all circumspect care to perform his
office like an expert Lieutenant, that the company be well governed, which he
must accomplish with a forward and willing mind (though of duty he is bound
to perform the same) as well to content the mind of his Captain, as to
augment his own honor and reputation. He must never appropriate unto himself
any one point of authority, but diligently discipher and understand all
things, and make relation thereof to his Captain, of whom it is necessary he
take all his commissions and directions. His part is to give willingly and
readily counsel and advise to his Captain, as often as he is demanded, and
otherwise never, unless he see that the same may do manifest good, or in case
of present peril.

The Lieutenant ought to carry with him a diligent care of concord, for that
particularly the pacification of discords and difference amongst the soldiers
of his company, appertains unto him, which must be done without choler or
passion, and must still handle them very indifferently and courteously. For his
indifferency, besides the gaining of him trusty credit, does make easy the
desciding of any difference or disagreement, and is one point which of
necessity is most convenient to an honorable Peacemaker, although it be a
very difficile thing to procure peace in points of honor, specially amongst
soldiers that stand much upon their punctos, and for that respect is it very
hard to use a just balance. Therefore in such cases it is most requisite that
every one of the interessed, show at the full his entire cause, the which is a
thing not vulgar, neither of small importance. And although the Pacifier ought
never to hang more upon the one side then the other, yet it is convenient he
have some small respect to him that is wronged against reason, rather then to
him that is the unlawful worker of the injury. But if he find any
difficulty in resolving these differences, let him confer with the Captain,
to the end that he, who is known to be the occasion, and will not agree to an
honest end, may be immediately discharged: but if it be thought good that he
remain to serve a time, for the execution of some special enterprise, then
the word both of the one and the other ought to be taken, until the same be
performed or the pay past, and then may discharge him, as is said, to shun a
greater scandale: for to enter into unquiet quarrelling and discord, one equal
with an other, and with one that receives the like stipend, is not the part and
quality of a subject Soldier, but of a free careless Cutter, and
band-Buckler, and of an insolent and importunate person, whose nature does
argue in him that his doings tend to an other end, then to become excellent in
the honorable exercise of arms. Put the case that one of them should
valiantly overcome the other, yet unto the Captain does arise no other then
want, loss, and evil satisfaction: for when first he did receive them into
his service, he did presume that they were both of them equally to be
esteemed, men of good credit and behavior, and that for such they were
conducted and received stipend. So that quarrelling and killing one the other,
as often it falls out in resolute persons, or putting him to a dishonor or
open foil: such a one does not only deprive the Captain of a Soldier, but
also of himself likewise: for the law of reason does bind the Captain not to
maintain an importunate person, a malefactor, and an homicide, in one band no
less then a well ordered city: Considering it is requisite and convenient his
Soldiers, rather then to employ themselves in such quarrels, should endeavor
and adventure their bodies to overthrow and kill the enemy, thereby to procure
his own proper praise and peculiar profit. Always provided, that the
occasion of the wars be concluded and published to be lawful and honest,
which easily in this respect does remove all difficulties, whilst a man does
place himself in the service of a Prince that is religious, prudent, and just,
and that have express and lawful power to levy arms, and not with those
which are of small authority, or tiranous Usurpers of other men's states, and
wicked blood suckers.

Therefore when the Lieutenant cannot by his own dealings supply these wants,
or pacify and accord them, in such causes he may remit the care thereof unto
his Superior and Captain. And thus let him have special care that by his
means no quarrels do grow, neither that he suffer any faction or discention,
to take deep root, for fear of banding and mutinies.

He ought to have special respect that the Corporals and Sergeants be able
duly to execute their office with due diligence for the better performance of
service, and personally aid them in setting the watch.

Likewise, to the intent that the Sergeant persist not ignorantly, or fail in
any one point of his office: it behoues the Lieutenant in many particular
points to aid him, both in respect of his own credit, and for the general
benefit of the whole band: as in using diverse directions, disciplines,
inventions, putting the band in order, rank, square, in accompanying them to
the watch, and in executing such like enterprises which commonly are to be
performed.

So ought he likewise to delight himself extraordinarily (besides the other
necessary parts of his office) in taking view of the Corpse de guard, and the
Sentinels of his proper company, to the intent they may remain continually
vigilant and ready, and each man's duty duly executed, the martial laws read
and examined, and a solemn silence generally maintained.

He must observe great affability and fraternity with the Alfierus, and
friendly consult with him (specially if the Lieutenant does not manage both the
one and the other office, as the Spaniards and other nations do use, and might
very well be used of us, if the General or Coronell think good, both for
avoiding of emulation and charge of pay) but if they be two particular
Officers, and bear distinct sway in the band, then let the Lieutenant be very
careful (as he that is the chief) to avoid all stomaking and strife that
might arise betwixt him and the Alfierus, for thereby oftentimes great
scandales have fallen out, and the division of the company, a thing above all
other to be carefully foreseen and shunned. He ought to use a gracious
gesture, and a courteous entertainment to all his soldiers, countenance every
one joyfully, and solicit their causes carefully toward the Captain and the
other Officers, as the Treasurers, Paymasters, Commissaries and such like, yet
ever by the Captains consent, yea and to the Captain himself, by whose
friendly favor inferior Officers may be relieved for their pay or other
wants. Besides he ought to give order and direction to all the company,
dividing and distributing the squadres indifferently and discretly, to the
intent the Corporals and other Officers may be obeyed, and that each enterprise
may be performed without reply or contradiction.

It is necessary that he put in every Squadre an equal number of every sort
of arms, and that each weapon be sorted in a readiness, to the intent that in
what place and time soever occasion does require, every one of them may to his
great advantage, proceed and front the inuading enemy with a forceable
strength.

Likewise it is good sometimes not to suffer a squadre or rather a whole Corpse
de guard to consist of soldiers all of one Country and nation, but ought
rather to be artificially mixed, and to separate them, thereby to avoid
quarrel and generality of factions, which by reason of their being together
may the rather arise amongst consorts of one native Country, and that more
commodiously then if they were separated.

The Captain being absent, the Lieutenant possesses the principal and chief
place, and ought to be obeyed as Captain Nevertheless in his presence, it is
requisite he use a certain brotherly friendship and familiarity toward all,
yet that notwithstanding, he must proceed in all things with such modesty and
gravity, as he may retain such authority and reputation, as the office he
does hold, does most worthily inuest him withal.

There ought to be in him a reasonable good knowledge and facility in
expressing his conceit and meaning sensibly, that the soldiers may understand
what they have to do, to the intent he may the more easily imprint in the
hearts and minds of his Soldiers all such things as he determines, and that
be necessary for the better service of his Prince, and the benefit of his
Country and company, whereunto he ought to apply himself with all possible
diligence, since that of the Prince he is liberally paid, has his being of his
Country, and is diligently obeyed of his Band, where he swaies his present
office and charge, which is truly of great credit and no less commodity.

Let him provide himself of a horse to bear him, to the intent he may be
lusty and fresh in all enterprises, and that he may continually take the view
and diligently survey the order which they are to keep in marching, or in
making Alta, and at all other times besides in what enterprise soever.

He must take order that his baggage or carriage, which ought to be as little
as may be (which rule the common Soldiers ought likewise observe) be borne and
conuaide amongst the common carriage, which the Captain has ordained and
provided for the use of the whole band.

He must take diligent care to the redeeming of pressed or lent money, which the
Captain shall make according to occasion or need amongst the company, and to
distribute the same conveniently amongst the Soldiers, and thereof to render
and yield good account to the Captain, by doing whereof he shall pleasure the
Soldiers much, in which time of pay, he has very good opportunity to put the
Soldiers in mind, and to teach them to proceed in well doing, and to desist
from evil.

It appertains generally to every Lieutenant of a band to be of great
experience and ripeness of service, whose authority in the absence of the
Captain (as partly I touched before) extends to examine, try, reform,
correct, and amend any offense committed within the band, and also day and
night to bring the company with the Ensign to the place of assembly, there in
order train and exercise the same, as to the necessity of service does
appertain, and being commanded by the higher powers to march toward the
enemy, must encounter and fight with them, as if the Captain were in
presence, who upon impediment, must sometimes be absent.

Finally, it appertains to the Lieutenant to watch, ward, approach, conduct,
advance against the enemies, and to encounter, animate, comfort, and also to
encourage the company by word and deed as need serves: to retire continually
maintaining skirmish, until he have recovered some place of safeguard.

CHAP. IV. The office and duty that appertains to Lanze-spezzate, voluntary
Lieutenants, the Gentlemen of a Band, or Caualliers of S. Georges squadrons.
THe sundry degrees whereunto valiant Soldiers with aspiring minds seek to
ascend, for that they be many, and for that those which have attained and
served in those rooms and other great offices, by diverse sinister means and
accidents, be now and then disseuered and made frustrate from their charge, as
experience has made many times apparent, who yet nevertheless being naturally
desirous to continue in service, and perchance through foreign necessity are
driven to remain in pay, in attending further preferment: Therefore this place
was first invented for such persons, as a special seat wherein the flower of
warlike soldiers do sit, like a green Laurel garland that does environ the
martial head of a mighty Army, whose order for warlike force or fame, gives
not place to the Grecian Phalanges, the chiefest of the Roman Legions, or to
the knightly constitution or courageous enterprises of those of Arthurs round
table. For there neither has bin, nor can be found any place of honor or
reputation, as to be a Gentleman of a Band, whether we serve for pleasure or
for profit, or have attained thereunto by merit: or whether we have bin
Corporal, Sargeant, Alfierus, or Lieutenant, wherein Captains sometimes do
plant themselves, specially in the Colonels Squadre, and temporise the time,
until preferment do fall: for thereby their former reputation is nothing
disgraced, nor their charge had, in or of any other company, nothing derogated:
Considering that those in these Squadrons, either are or ought to be soldiers
of such policy and perfect experience, that they be capable of any office under
the degree of a Colonel, and may supply any of those foresaid offices, or
perform any other enterprise of great importance commanded by the Captain,
Colonel, or General.

And for that many youths of noble parentage, and Gentlemen of ancient houses
do likewise follow the wars, I would that upon due trial of their merit,
they should enter into these Squadrons, which the Prince or General is to
confirm, and make a distinct order of valiant aduentrous soldiers, and call
them Caualliers of S. Georges Squadrons, or some such other title; at whose
entrance thereinto, they shall take a solemn oath appertayning to their order,
and their Corporal shall invest them with some Bandroll, Medall or Scarf,
whereupon is pourtrayed S. George his arms, which they must be bound to wear
openly at all times, and in all places, enterprises, skirmishes, battles, and
assaults. I do not put this title for a general rule, but only as an example
for instance, the title may be as authority shall think fit.

It is requisite that a singular good soldier, being the Gentleman of a band,
and Cauallier of S. George his squadron, if he mean to gain the grace and
favor of his Captain and Colonel, that not only he be sufficiently valiant
and wise, as of necessity is required at his hands: but it is also convenient
for him to be reasonable well horsed, and to have in store all sorts of arms,
as a Halberd, Harquebuse for the match or fire-locke, Armor and Target of
proof, his Lance and case of Pistolets, his Pike, his Pertisan or Epien to go
the Round withal, that he may both day and night vary and change his arms at
the offer of all enterprises, and as change of service does call him forth.

He must always of necessity have more than one servant, and ought to
apparel him in gallant order: these are to be near his elbow to follow him
with his arms. He ought always to lodge himself as near as is possible, to
the lodging of his Colonel or Captain, to the intent that either armed, or
without arms, he may always, according as the cause does require, be about
his person, either on horseback or on foot; for that the principal guard of
this singular personage, that is to say, the Colonel or Captain, does consist
in the diligence and custody of the Caualliers of S. George his squadrons: for
so I will be bold to call them, though the title be to be varied. These things
notwithstanding, day and night when it falls to his lot, or that he shall be
commanded by his Corporal to watch, he must dispose himself to be able to
make particular guard, and that after a most exquisite order: wherein he must
have special care (without making refusal at any time) to perform that which
shall be appointed him by his Corporal, or by any other that shall command in
the name of his Colonel or Captain. His office in time of watch, for the most
part, consists in going the Round, searching the watch, keeping good order in
the Corpse of Guard, in being a Coadiutor to the officer that guides the
company, or rules the watch, and is for the most part exempted from standing
Sentinel, and such like duties of a common soldier, unless great necessity
or special service constrain. It appertains to him to have good experience
in going the Round, that in performing the same, he may discreetly govern in
the oversight of the watch, called the Sopraguardia: for in this point does
very much consist the provident good order and form that is to be observed, in
avoiding the stratagems, surprises, sallies, and deceits of the enemy.
Approaching near to the Sentinel, he must give eye and diligent regard in what
order and sort he does find him vigilant, how ready he is in demanding and
taking the word, and after coming nearer him, he must examine all that has
passed or fallen out whilst he has bin in Sentinel, and the order he does
observe, and what has bin appointed him to do: the which if it be good he
must confirm, and when he does find it to be otherwise, he must rehearse and
refer the same to the Corporal of the Sentinel, that he may use diligent
redress.

Arriving in any Corpse de guard, he must above all things advertise them, that
they always keep fire light for the necessary commodity of the
Harquebusiers, and for light in the night, taking order with the soldiers that
they and their arms may remain in a forcible readiness: through which his good
instruction, there may grow to be no want, and so consequently he must in like
cases proceed with like provident diligence.

After this he must with great consideration and modesty, examine every
particular thing, carrying a mind with himself to continue and increase the
same from better to better, and both in himself and to them use necessary
aduertisements, and in such sort shall he pass through all the Corpse de
guards, and Sentinels.

If it chance him to encounter another Sopraguardia or Round, to shun the
occasion of dangerous difference, which sometimes is accustomed to follow: or
for policy, in fearing to give the watchword to him that purposely comes to
rob the same, that coming from the enemy secretly, counterfeits the Sentinel,
or by some other practice, as it sometimes has caused damage to the grievous
loss and total prejudice of the Army: to prevent such inconvenience, let
that Sopraguardia which shall be nearest to the next adjoining Sentinel, turn
back, giving the word after a due accustomed sort unto the said Sentinel, to
the intent the foresaid Sopraguardia may do the like, and when they are of
accord, every one may follow his own path; but if otherwise they do disagree,
the deceit remains discovered, not only in that counterfeit Round, but also in
the fained Sentinel, whom the Sopraguardia must examine, and demand at his
hand some special countersigne or double word, that thereby he may know him
for an assured friend, or find him an enemy or negligent person, the which of
all men is very well known to merit sharp and extreme chastisement, which at
no time, so near as is possible, is to be omitted.

This former rule is to be observed of those soldiers that be of one self
nation: but when the Rounds or Sopraguards be many and of sundry Nations, and
the Corpse of guards likewise; then the Sopraguard coming into a quarter that
is stranger unto him, is bound to give the word to the Sopraguard of that
nation, and of that quarter; so that by such means as well the suspicion of
deceit, as the occasion of discord shall be avoided.

And if in case the said ordinary Round or Sopraguard, do encounter in their
own quarter, with the extraordinary, those that be ordinary shall endeavor
themselves to take the word of those that be extraordinary: for so it is
convenient, and most conformable to that order before-said, wherein I have set
down what is necessary for a Sopraguard or Round to do in a strange quarter.
And for that it is requisite, as I have already touched, that the Caualliers be
always about the person of his chief Captain, without either being bound to
Standerd, Guidon, or other Ensign whatsoever, he must endeavor himself, when
any enterprise or warlike affairs is committed to his charge, to be apt and
ready to use practiced experience in directing and guiding a skirmish, in
taking the view of a battery, in discovering of the enemy, in marching or
making Alta, in Passa parde in the valiant repulse of a sudden inuading enemy
by Bawl en bouche, in taking view of the situation of a place, in guiding a
Road, or troop of horsemen, in giving alarm to the enemy, in plucking
aduertisements from the enemy, in placing Imbascades, in giving Canvasadoes,
and to know very well how to execute with sound judgment these and such like
important affairs, the which for the most part appertain to the Caualliers of
this Squadron to perform. As likewise it has bin the custom to give them the
charge for to plant Gabiones for the defense of the Artillery, to batter and
endomage the walls, the trenches, the lodgings, and the enemies Squadrons.

Let him remember when he has bin at any exploit, to bring back again into
his quarter, those soldiers he has led forth to any enterprise, united and in
rank, marching together behind him, and never suffer them to return disbanded
one by one out of order, which is an occasion of great confusion, and brings
but small reputation to the Captain and conductor of them.

Moreover, it is very necessary he know how to make a road and destroy the
enemies country; the which likewise does oftentimes appertain to him to
perform: in which exploit he must beware above all things, that no soldier in
those enterprises disperse or disband themselves, but with an assured good
order, for the most part conformable to my following discourse, wherein I set
down directions, how to conduct soldiers to the skirmish: and particularly
where I declare that he ought to keep and maintain for his people the
strongest place of situation, wherein he must skirmish; for that commonly
soldiers being in disorder, wearied and laden with spoil, may be easily put to
flight, broken and oppressed of the enemies, unless they be seconded or shaded
by some forceable succor.

I suppose it likewise most necessary, that he endeavor himself to be apt and
sufficient at all times, and in all places to solicit and negotiate for his
Prince or Chieftaine, any cause of what weight or moment soever, considering
that most men are not fit to attempt the performance of such doubtful and
difficile causes: for although many make great estimation of themselves, and
presume much by their daily reading and Theoricke of those weighty affairs,
yet do they want and come far short of that bold and ready practice, which
plainly appears, that the worthy professors of Arms possess; and specially
in the presence of great Princes, whose majesty and reverence for the most
part, does make cold and bring out of countenance the hottest and most resolute
determination: as Demosthenes before Philip of Macedone made apparent, when he
was not able to pronounce three words of a long premeditated Oration, in
behalf of the Athenians.

This worthy Gentleman of a band, this Cauallier of S. Georges squadre, and
likewise all other professors of warlike arms, ought to carry in mind, that
of him and his equals the exercise of Arms is to be applied, and diligently to
practice the same, to the intent he be not for want of knowledge despised of
others; and not ignorantly to despise them that deserve due commendations, but
rather to carry and use the countenance of authority to those persons that
merit not to bear sway and government, than toward forward soldiers: Yet for
all that toward the rest in some other respects, he ought to gratify them and
help them to his power, and so courteously win the goodwils and freindly
favor of all soldiers his equals, to instruct and courteously to admonish
every Soldier privately and apart, what appertains to his duty. This
Caualliere must be able also to train soldiers, to make them march in orderly
proportions, to cast them in ringes, esses, snailes, hearses, squadres, to
receive and give charge, to feign skirmishes, onsets, retraites, and how to
order any number of soldiers, from a hundredth to five hundredth, for so many
may be in a Band, and under one Ensign, as the Swizers and Germans yet use
at this day, and as in former ages our Countrymen have used, which in some
respects may pass without reprehension. If a Captain be disposed to have so
many under his Ensign, when he is not able to bring the number unto a whole
Colloniship, together with the knowledge of the order how to train, he must
endeavor himself to be perfect in drawing platformes, in the Mathematikes, in
the martial Laws, in besieging of towns, batteries, mines, and each thing
else belonging to martial discipline.

Let this worthy Cauallier of Saint Georges squadre have then before his eyes
such like precepts, and manage of martial affairs, that he may increase his
own credit, win his country fame, favor of his Prince, and honor of his
house and friends, rather then for the regard of riches, stately houses,
livings, and such like, but rather prefer prudent policy, courage, valor
and approved experience before such base benefits, whereby he may attain to
the Laurel crown, wherewith diverse mighty Conquerors have their heads
adorned: that he may be an example to the reproach of such as lewdly spend
their days in idleness, prodigality, lust and obloquie.

CHAP. V. The office of a Captain which has the guiding of a Band of men.
THat person which has the charge to govern other men, specially in matters
of weight and of great importance, the lives of men being committed to his
hands, under whose conduct if any quail through rashness or want of
knowledge, he is bound to render account before God: and therefore he ought to
be of notable capacity, experience, and exemplar in all his actions and
enterprises, since it is a general note that the eyes of all those that be
subjects, be turned toward their principal head and chief, in whom as it
were in a glass, they retain an assured hope to behold most ready rules and
perfect examples, whereby they may guide and govern themselves.

In this particular charge of a Captain, the quality of his Officers, make
almost a manifest show of his valor and experience: Therefore like an old and
expert Soldier, as one that has past through all those degrees and offices
set down in my two former books, he must use a circumspect care in leuying
and making choice of his company, that is, to make election of a politic and
practiced Lieutenant, of a courageous Alfierus, of a careful Sergeant, of
gallant and valiant Caualliers of his squadre, of valiant Corporals, of a
diligent Chancellor, Secretary, or Clarke of the Band, of a faithful Furrier
or Harbinger, being of good judgment and consideration, and of a Surgion
provided of all things necessary to minister according to his art. But above
all things let him provide to retain in his Band a Preacher, or such a person
which may take care to minister the Communion to the Soldiers, and specially
to root obedience in their hearts: who likewise every day may celebrate divine
service, which even from the beginning has been used of the Church. And
finally must have for every hundredth a practiced Drummer of good understanding.

When he has gathered and united his company, the whole Band being present,
his Minister must devoutly read certain prayers, and afterward the Ensign
shall be publicly placed in the hands, and recommended to the custody of the
Alfierus, and as in my former discourse of this point, command him to have as
much care thereof, as of his proper life, honor and credit, which he ought
courageously to advance and display, to prefer his party in a rightful
quarrel, according to my speech where I set down his duty. This done he must
privately make election amongst his chiefest Soldiers of so many Caualliers or
Lancia Spezzata, that is to say, Gentlemen of his Band, as may amount to the
number of two out of every squadre. Some nations use 50. to a squadre, as the
Suitzers and Germans, some others less, according to their discretion: but
in my opinion 25. is a more convenient number, both for that the Corporal may
the more often and with greater diligent care instruct and see to his charge,
then if they were 50. Besides 25. soldiers divided into 5. ranks makes a just
square, so that by the same account 300. may contain 12. squadres, and every
one have a Corporal of the same number: whereof 10. Corporalls have the
leading of mixed weapons, the 11. charge over the Halberdiers, and the 12. to
consist of Gentlemen, old and expert Soldiers, amongst whom the targets of
proof ought to be in number. The Captain at the same time, when he appoints
his Ensign, must likewise solemnly constitute and confirm a Corporal over
the Caualliers of his squadre, which he may entitle of Saint George, and enroll
their names by this title, the Corporal and Caualliers of of S. George his
squadre. He may inuest and bestow upon the Corporal a scarf of red and white
sarsnet, and a Medall or jewel of gold or silver double gilt, wherein the
portrature of S. George is lively wrought, to hang about his neck, at his
scarf or otherwise: and moreover to him and all the rest of the squadre he may
give a little Phane or Penon of silk upon a wire, whereof the Cross must be
of red, and the rest of the square white, the other part of the sarsenet of the
Captains coulors, or with what words, or devise therein shall please him best:
They must wear this behind, either upon their burganets, or upon their hats if
they will in a plume of red and white feathers, specially in all enterprises
and warlike attempts: Besides this upon their cassockes or mandillions toward
their right breast a red cross of velvet, satin or scarlet, imbrothered or
comely stitched, that they may appear manifestly and be known from the rest
of the Soldiers, like worthy Guides and Leaders, whose courage and valor may
incite others to ascend to their dignity and degree.

They must solemnly promise, vow and swear to their possibility, not only to
be the first to force the breach of a battered town, trench, or fortress, to
give the first courageous onset upon the maine battle, or the enemies
squadrons, to pierce a passage, and gallantly guide the Soldiers to the
skirmish, to sudden sallies, surprises, escalados, canuasados, and such like,
but also to observe, maintain, and instruct the ignorant in all military
directions, observations, and martial laws of the field.

In respect hereof those that be Caualliers and Gentlemen of this squadre, must
be entertained with a stipend and greater pay then the common Soldier, and
with other notable signs of manifest difference, by reason they either are or
ought to be the best and most practiced Soldiers in his whole band: for this
word Lancia spezzata amongst the Italians, is of no other signification, then a
tried experience in the wars. To which Caualliers he may freely and
faithfully with great confidence and trust, commit the charge of any office in
his company that is vacant, or the performance of any other enterprise or
accident, and may if he will term them extraordinary Lieutenants, which he
must always have about him upon any sudden to execute his commandment, and
supply other offices when time shall serve.

A Captain ought to have special and particular knowledge of all those things
that appertain to the office of a Lieutenant, and the office of an Alfierus,
which if he think good he may link both in one, for amongst diverse nations
now a days, one man commonly supplies both their offices.

The office and duty of the Sergeants of the Caualliers of S. Georges squadre,
whom he must esteem as extraordinary Lieutenants of the Corporals, Clarke of
the Band, Harbinger, Drums and Fifes: and finally, the duty of every
particular and common Soldier, that he may presently redress any thing
amiss, and upon any new accident to instruct them either in marching,
encamping, or fighting, so that he may be able to command them, according as
time, place, and reason does require, without contradiction or appointing that
to be done of one Officer, which ought to be done of an other: or that he does
command them to do things not convenient, and much less that which is not
lawful or not honorable. Which order of proceeding does very much displease
and bring men of war in mislike of such indirect dealings. Since the
principal point and practice whereunto their exercise in arms does tend, is
to attain reputation, honor, and credit, he must continually court his
Collonell and Cheiftaine, forcing himself to be one of the first that does
salute him in the morning, and of the last to depart from him in the evening,
that thereby he may be sufficiently instructed and informed in every
particular act and practice, which is to be put in execution, touching the
performance of any enterprise or warlike act, since that in those cases a wary
man may best take hold of occasion, whereof he ought to make trial in time of
war, the which he is likewise to accomplish, as well for the service of his
chief and Prince, as also for his own satisfaction, and the honor, benefit,
and reputation of his Soldiers.

Let him in some sort provide with as much advantage and commodity as he can,
that his soldiers baggage be always conducted from place to place, always
prohibiting superfluity, and in long voiages their corslets and arms of
heavy burden: provided that he march not in suspected places, and in the
enemies country, but not otherwise.

Let him take order that his Soldiers be light in apparel, so that it be
warm, and have as little baggage and otherwise laden as may be, to the intent
they may use all their diligence about their weapons, and not to hale back for
fear of loosing the same, but rather have respect to the wary keeping of
their arms, and that they may rather be more bent and determined to fight, in
hope of gain and honor, then suspected thorough the doubt of loosing that
which they already possess.

He must not be covetous, neither retain one penie of pay from his Soldiers,
but rather distribute amongst them, all the advantages, dead paies, and
capisoldi: to the intent they may be well paid and rewarded which merit the
same, so shall he gain honor and make them assured in perilous service.

Let him restrain soldiers from having horses, thereby to avoid confusion,
for that commonly every one must march about the Ensign, to the intent the
ranks be not broken and disturbed by horses: And that Soldiers be not
occupied in going abroad for forage for their horses, as of necessity they
must, which is proper to Horsemen and not to footmen, but only those which are
to be permitted with the Lieutenant, the Alfierus, and some of the Caualliers
of Saint Georges squadre, that are Gentlemen of greatest experience, for that
they may serve in steed and place of light horsemen, to view, discover, conduct
and carry a message or commandment with great speed, when and where need does
require.

It is necessary for him to have some knowledge and sight in making bulwarks,
trenches, platformes, skonces, fortresses, and such like, and to know the
nature and quality of them, as well that with advantage he may be able to know
how to assault, as also to make them with facility, in times and places most
necessary: which understanding and Art, is particularly convenient for him,
considering the defense of men of war in the field, for the most part
consists as well in trenches, bulwarks, and perfect platformes, as in good and
well governed squadre and in maine battle.

He must have with him a pair of lanthornes for the camp, some cressets,
linkes, or torches that blow not out with the wind, and such like to use in
the night, and in storms and tempests for service of the company, as in
roundes, alarmes etc. And for his proper commodity and ornament a pauillion or
tent of sufficient capacity, vessels to accommodate his victuals, and
furniment for the fire and kitchen, of small weight and disturbance in carriage,
and certain household stuff necessary for himself and his train, to the
intent he may so near as is possible commodiously make supply to the
continuation of things requisite for victuals. He ought always to lodge with
his Band, and remain with the same both in good and evil, and continually
show himself loving and courteous, and take such part as the Soldiers do:
for contrariwise, taking his ease, and suffering them to be lodged or fed
miserably, breeds him hatred or contempt.

Neither ought he to shun toil and travail, but carefully take delight and
liking to be always the first, that with provident prudence does lay his hand
to any work, or perform any enterprise which is convenient to be done: for
that for the most part the rude stubborn multitude of Soldiers is not
constrained and forced so much, to do his duty by compulsion, as they be
voluntary moved thereunto through shame, and a reverent respect they have to
the example of their Superior. Neither let the practice of the same be
painful unto him, for that to live at ease and to be curious of his own
commodious being, and suffer his Soldiers taste the toiles of travail, is
rather the order of a delicate Prince, then of a careful and courageous
Captain.

Let him not fail every night that he is of the watch, to send his Sergeant to
take the word secretly of the Sergeant mayor, (wherewith the watch of that
night ought to be governed) or of some other that shall be appointed to give
it, which he must use wisely and warily, since that negligence in like cases
may be the ruin of him and his company, and consequently of a whole army. He
must have tried experience, and full practice in all the points noted of me in
my first book, and be perfect in the conduct of martial affairs, that with
great facility he may be able to know, and with great advise to deal in all
the particulars belonging to all the degrees of soldiers under his estate, and
of less estimation then a Captain.

It behoues him to carry a valiant and courageous heart, that upon all
suddaines he may be able to execute all enterprises, and that having
ouer-viewed, ordered and disposed those things that be necessary, he may be
able to execute the same with such prompt and ready dexterity, as appertains
to the terrible and bloody accidents of arms. And although there be very few
who have such happy success, as they may be accounted fortunate and politic
both together: Nevertheless it is requisite he be prudent, and discipher and
look before hand into such things as are like to fall out, that he may with
discreet modesty use either good or evil fortune, whether soever shall arise:
for the life of man is to be compared to the play at Tables, in the which the
player may desire and devise which is the best cast, but yet which way soever
the dice turn, either good or evil, he ought with as great discretion and
art as he can, accommodate himself and serve his turn withal. He should
possess and be endued with a noble mind, that he may always have the same
inclined to discreet liberality, and not to nigardly covetousness, by which
vice we see many incur and fall into most opprobrious chances, into treasons
and pernicious rebellions, which are men worthy of most shameful corrections.

I judge it likewise very necessary for him to be eloquent, since that
quality has great efficacy in persuading of men's minds, which oftentimes
have much need to be wakened and pricked forward with a spur, specially in
those terrible accidents that fall out in the exercise of arms, which in
painful perilous actions would otherwise languish, faint, and become
fearful. Therefore let the love toward God, the care of their Country, their
present peril, the example of magnanimity in their forefathers, the quarrel,
cause, and benefits to soul and body, be means to make them valiantly
accomplish their acts. He ought never to make conference, concerning that which
he is to put in execution, neither of any one thought imagination, or invention
appertaining to the state of those warlike attempts and affairs, but with
those persons, of whom he may assuredly reserve faithful and friendly
counsel; for that the importance of such and so great dealings, ought ever to
be had in suspicion of discovery. Therefore a wise and careful man will ever
have a wary and jealous eye over such weighty affairs.

Now the order for him to punish his soldiers in cases wherein they are not
guilty of death, I think the most important punishment which appertains to
the Captain to give them, is openly amidst the whole company and band,
shamefully to disarme them, to take away their money and chiefest garments, and
so to banish them and send them packing: for to put them to death, or furiously
to beat them, belongs to the office of the Master of the Camp and Marshall of
the field, and not to the Captain; for if he should beat his soldiers, he
should make himself hated and embase himself, and bring his soldiers either
to become mutinous or abiects. Note, that it is not sufficient only for a
Captain to have ordained his Company discreetly, and therein to have great
numbers of good men, which is to say, in warlike affairs valiant men: but
above all things it is very necessary when he shall come to blows and fight,
he should adventure and perform the same to his manifest advantage, or else
constrained thereunto by pure necessity, although he ought to fly the last so
much as he is able, observing this for a general rule, not to fight either by
chance, either for pleasure, or for ambition, as many times we see done by rash
and ambitious Chiefes and Captains.

Moreover, he must work in such sort, that his soldiers have very good
occasion and apt means to win the victory, and that they be fresh and lusty,
to the intent that in fighting they may overcome: for without these and like
aduertisements by tempting fortune, men for the most part both loose, and are
overthrown.

It is very convenient he procure the having of an ample and autentike Patent
of his Colonel, with as large words of favor as may be, wherein must be
declared at the instance and appointment of what Prince the expedition is made,
and so with modesty and prudence he shall use the authority that is given
him, but nevertheless there, as it behoues him so to do.

It is not requisite that in all places he suffer his Ensign to be displayed;
the manner and doing whereof shows force and authority, the which many times
is not to be used, neither in each place: when a man is inferior to others, he
ought to use great dexterity and modesty, which ever falls out both to be
commodious and commendable.

And moreover according to the order of Passa parole, of aduertisements from
mouth to mouth, he ought ever to observe a silent and assured plain
information to his whole band, whereby they may upon the sudden alter array,
make alta, march slow or fast, close or in wide ranks, or prepare their piece,
match and bullet for a sudden Alarm, invasion, skirmish, or defense.

A Captain that must levy a band is to make his election and choice of his
officers and soldiers, not only approved and sufficiently experienced, but also
use such speedy march in his expedition and journey, that he may join his
company to the rest of the Army, at or before the appointed day and place.

When he may march by land with his company, let him never desire to go by
sea, hoping to spare cost and shorten time; for by becoming subject to the
indiscretion of the wind, either through long abode, or some accident by
shipwreck or tempests, there has risen many times great disturbance and ruin
without remedy, since by this defect many good occasions, and of great
importance have bin lost and made frustrate.

He ought never to take journey in hand without a guide, the which he must
procure to be given him by the Chief that does command him, to the intent he
may always remain excused and faultlesse from those errors, that by such
defects may or do commonly arise; which diligence is not only particularly to
be used, when any journey of small length is to be guided, but if any long
journey is to be made (not being able to do better) he must circumspectly have
him always by his side, neither ought to have him slip away from him or
absent, since that every small error or going out of the way in a journey and
marching, does displease soldiers and warlike persons, and yields less
reputation to the Captain, who ought always to march with them, and to
provide and procure through his authority all things necessary, with the
greatest favor and advantage possible.

He ought always to keep his soldiers exercised, by often view and muster of
them, marching sometimes along in ranks by 3.5.7. and 9. etc. in a rank:
sometime in trayning them in Rings, Esses, Dees, Battles, Squadrons, turning
one rank through an other, in leading them to skirmish, and in such sort
practice them daily. And also he must cause his soldiers to shoot vollees of
shot, sometimes all at once, sometimes by ranks, and sometimes mixed: the
which vollees upon the sign or sound of drum, or word of mouth by the Captain
must be accomplished with celeritie, and closely together and cunningly, and
not out of disorder or by pieces, a great while one after another, but upon
their discharge, jointly together; without rumor, noise or tumult they must all
charge again, and upon a sign given by the Captain, give a fresh vollee etc.

He must likewise delight to see them well armed with all sorts of arms, every
one according to the weapon he bears: and sometimes likewise exercise them in
running, leaping, wrestling, throwing the bar, and ordinarily cause them to
be wakened in the morning betimes, charging the drums to strike the Diana
throughout the whole quarter.

A Captain may at all times accompany his band with the sound of drum and
fife, which must give order to their continual march, and directs all their
other enterprises, unless to accompany prisoners, to entrench, make plain the
way, to make and carry fagots, baskets, or gabions from the wood, and such like
servile and pesantly service, hardly digested of honorable soldiers.

He to the intent he may be both loved and obeyed of his soldiers, must apply
himself to be provident and politic in pacifying discords, and all such
difference as shall arise amongst them, wherein if he find any obstinate, so
soon as he has performed his endeavor, and that thereby they will not agree
and become friands, so soon as their pay is ended, he ought to discharge them.
In times past it has bin used of notable Colonels to permit the combat, and
cause them to fight it out, thereby to extinguish their obstination, to bridle
their fury, and give notable example to the rest: the which order although it
has bin tried to avail very much for their good government, yet it is not to
be used amongst Christians, Counsels of Divines having forbidden the same;
unless to fear the parties he faigne that the same shall be performed of them
to the uttermost, and at the joining in fight to cause them stay, and take
other order of punishment, except they accord, and to discharge them.

A Captain ought to use all art and industry to invade, endomage, and
overthrow the enemy, specially infidels: and above all things to be frank of
mind, and to fear nothing but dishonest fame: likewise that he purchase
authority amongst his soldiers by means of virtue and valor; let him procure
by practice and effectual experience to be accounted a wise and a worthy
valiant Captain, rather than to bear the name of a simple, weak, and
indiscreet Colonel: for the name of a Captain is a type and title of special
honor.

He must likewise in respect of a certain inward desire of emulation, not
carry a base and abject mind, but still aspiring with great subtlety, by good
invention and industry, of a firm and faithful disposition, and never subject
to forgetfulness, to the intent he may retain in memory those things that be
well done, and all commendable enterprises, the which do marueilously and
incredibly delight and feed men's minds and dispositions.

A Captain must ever take care that his whole charge be still furnished with
men, armor, weapons and munitions, with all things needful, and distributed
at convenient times.

He must suffer none through idleness to neglect his armor, weapons and other
furniture, whereby he shall grow unready to service at need, but give his
officers commandment circumspectly to look to the same.

Soldiers should be prohibited from overmuch liberty, neither to use
whore-hunting, drunkenness, common swearing, quarrelling, fighting, cousening,
or such like, but speedy correction to be used.

Provision of victuals, armor and munition being made, it must discreetly be
used in due time by victuallers appointed, and to be distributed unto the
soldiers, and to see that the victuallers and other artificers, lending unto
soldiers upon their credit at need, until their pay day, may be truly
satisfied.

If any soldiers be taken prisoners, to be ransomed home in due time, that his
bands remain not unfurnished.

Diverse points of service are committed to the Captain, wherein great
discretion and service is to be used, as in a Conuoy, Canuisado, Ambush,
Skirmish, Approach, Assault, retreit, surprise, passage of rivers, streights,
sudden fortifications, discoueries, etc. As in these and such like
occurrences, it is necessary to use the advice of expert soldiers, whose
opinions are worthy to be observed, gratifying and rewarding them according to
the value of their counsels. So likewise a Captain must sometimes prove, and
circumspectly try by fained pretenses, affirming that he means to perform
certain exploits, and will march to some place, nothing intending the same, to
the intent to discipher those that be busybodies, rash and vnsecret in
counsel, and such as presume without knowledge or experience; afterward
revealing the same, may try the truth and punish the offenders, as to his duty
and office is convenient.

CHAP. VI. The Office of a Colonel.
A Valiant and worthy Colonel, after he has a lawful dispatch of his Prince,
and has obtained his patent and pressed money, to conduct that number of
soldiers his charge and expedition shall contain, with all convenient
diligence, and according as he is appointed, he must make election of as many
Captains as be needful, distributing to every one 300 for a band, which
number is of most convenient quantity: for by reducing companies to a less
number, as in our time is used, specially amongst the Spaniards and Italians,
and followed by the French and English, they may rather carry the name of
Lieutenants and Centurions, than bear the title of Captains. Besides a band
being made of a small number, the Treasurers consume much more money amongst
the great store of officers, the which ought to be by all means possible
avoided of a politic General, and of a prudent Prince, to avoid
extraordinary expense and confusion, which does easily arise amongst the
multitude of officers.

He must be provident to entertain those that be old Captains, practiced, and
bearing a good port, and that be loved and desired of the soldiers, whom he
ought to accompany and prefer with the greatest authority he can give, with
ample, sealed, and autentike Patents, thereby more speedily and more easily he
may accomplish his affairs.

It is requisite he equally impart to every one, the quantity of that pressed
money he has received, to the intent the Captain and the officers arise not
to be burdened, taxed, and consumed by ordinary and extraordinary means, and
other manifest ways about those affairs; and to the intent the soldiers may
taste of benevolence of their Colonel: for by that means credit is sustained,
and his train augmented, a thing most necessary to personages that supply so
great a place. For it is requisite that men in the beginning be not discouraged
for want of necessary provision, yea rather to lend of his own (considering he
is to be paid again) then his soldiers should be brought to any extremity.

The distribution of the prest-money ought to be preferred with great prudence,
for afterward at the bank, the same otherwise may be retained, and
substraction made of all the whole money, either in the first pay or those that
follow, more or less as it seems expedient, principally for the use and
commodity of the soldiers, considering (that according to the Proverb) a man
can hardly at any time serve two masters, and therefore he must stand upon
this special point, to be more careful not to do any thing prejudicial to
the honorable exercise of arms, then to please the covetous and insatiable
humor of some Captains, whom in effect it pleasures but little, in respect
their greedy desire is never satisfied: Nevertheless it falls out to be a
marvelous loss and hinderance to the enterprise, specially to men of valor
and soldiers, without whose aid a Collonell is but of small force and value:
And to conclude, money must always be procured, dispersed and spent with great
discretion, order, and consideration, since the same is so necessary to man,
as it is called the sinews of wars.

It is a thing most requisite that he carry with him at the least, one
Minister, a man of good life, who may exemplarly attend about the care of
Ecclesiastical matters, wherein above all other things we ought thoroughly to be
staid and instructed.

He must likewise have in his regiment besides the ordinary Surgeons, an
excellent and tried Physician, well provided of all drugs and spiceries, and of
other things necessary to be ministered to those that be sick.

His Lieutenant for his regiment must be of a singular quality and excellent
experience, who not only must particularly govern his own band and company,
but also with great prudence and policy take care and charge over all the
people which are in the bands under his Colonel, wherein the Lieutenant must
proceed according to my rules for the Lieutenant of a private band, and the
notes in my second and third book. His own Alfierus as General and Superior
to the rest of the Ensigne-bearers under his Collonnelship, must be guided and
governed by a singular and substantial soldier, a Gentleman of an ancient
house, courteous, wise and endowed with good conditions.

The same order he ought likewise to observe, in the election of his Caualliers
of the squadre, of his Sergeants, of his Corporalls, of his Drummers, and every
other Officer. It is a thing most necessary and convenient, as in my second
book, and the office of a Captain I have touched, that a Collonell should
retain in his regiment, and specially in his own band about him, a number of
wise and worthy soldiers, to be the Gentlemen of his company, Lance Spezzate,
or serve for extraordinary Lieutenants, whom the Collonell must not only use
and entreat well with an advantage in their pay, but also feast them, cherish
them, and set them oftentimes by course at his own table, and always show
them a courteous countenance, with which show of friendly courtesy, soldiers
be incredibly fed, and contrariwise maruellously displeased with the hautie
looks of proud disdain. For all those that make profession of this worthy
Art, are of great curiosity and courage, and therefore men of war ought
never (against right) be villanously handled, either in word, deed or
countenance.

He must create a Sergeant Mayor, that is a soldier of great experience, and
that particularly is a professor of that office, to the end he know precisely
what is to be preferred in every practice: such a one as can yield thereof a
perfect account and discourse, and that consequently can much better by deed
then by word execute any enterprise. And for that in his office it is
necessary for him to vary and change purpose, with infinite aduertisements and
considerations, as the shortness of time now and then requires, the
discommoditie of the place and seat thereof does enforce, the order of the
enemies does constrain, or according to his own proper policy, or the
provident prudence of his Collonell: but for that this place does not permit to
speak particularly of every point, I will pass over the same, and only
refer all to the providence of his long and approved experience, which of
necessity is required unto him, which I further refer to my following
discourse of the Sergeant Mayor general.

He ought to make a Marshall of his lodgings, who must be his principal
Furrier and Harbinger, that must attend with great diligence, to procure
lodging for all, without pleasing any one particular person for any private
commodity whatsoever, but must equally distribute, and depart the quarters and
lodgings according as need requires: neither is it to be borne withal, that
he do make free any houses or lodgings, neither go about any such like gain,
a most dishonest and unlawful robbery, which oftentimes does cause great
loss and discommoditie to men of war, small reputation to their Conductour,
and great vexation and disturbance to the poor people, who for the most part
are innocent. The Colonels Harbinger having allotted out lodgings to every
band he must prefer the particular distribution to the under Harbingers.

A general Drummer ought likewise to be created and appointed, who may take
charge and care over all the rest of the Drummers, whose office and custom
amongst them is to conserve and keep orders, to the intent they may be obeyed,
and that every one perform his duty appertaining to his office, as to strike
the battery in marching in battle, or disseuered, to make general bands and
cries, in the morning, in the evening at the closing of the night, and in
sounding the march, the call, the charge, the battle, the retrait, with such
other like observations and necessary things to be done.

He must procure to have part of every munition for his regiment, out of the
principal and general munition, as corslets, pikes, halberds, hargabuses with
their furniture, match, lead, powder, of all sort of victual, and each thing
else as occasion and necessity requires, which he must cause his Sergeant
mayor to distribute amongst his bands, that his soldiers be not exacted on the
prise. The like division he must cause him to make by money it self, but never
more then that which rests as due to them, as many very maliciously have
accustomed to do, making merchandise thereof to the loss and ruin of their
soldiers: toward whom they are bound continually to procure manifest
commodity and profit. The like is to be observed in all other things
necessary and comformable to this before said, without selling of furniture to
them of excessive prise, for nothing is more dishonorable or more miserable,
then to extort upon soldiers.

It is very requisite that he examine the election* and choice, that every
Captain has made of his Officers in every band, and whether they do thoroughly
possess or approach very near to the perfect experience they ought to do, of
whom and not otherwise he shall like and allow. Note that these aduertisements,
make manifest appearance, and sets forth to the view of the world, the inward
valor of the Conductour and Collonell: for if he neglect these observations,
the contrary does easily ensue. I judge it a thing not out of square, but
rather most expedient that the one half of the Caualliers of the choice
squadre should be Hargabusiers on horseback, specially when wars be made in
large and open countries, or else howsoever it be situate: for being men of
valor, they may both on horsbacke and foot do great service, as often has
been tried by manifest experience in our time, specially in the late wars of
Flaunders, under my Collonell the Baron of Sheueran, in service of Don John of
Austria, and the Prince of Parma, where I being of the number of the Gentlemen
of his own band, have seen daily excellent good service done by them, as well
by discovering the enemies ambuscades, as to draw them into the danger of our
footmen. And likewise in the speedy taking and keeping a passage of
importance, in winning aduertisements and the watchword from the enemy, in
taking Prisoners, in breaking the way for free passage, in clearing and beating
the highwaies, and scouring them free from the enemy and Freebooters, in
making roades, courses and incursions, in discovering the Country and taking
view thereof like to light horsemen, specially in the absence of the Cauallery
of the camp. And therefore I conclude that they shall be found to be a knot
and kind of necessary soldiers, provided that they be practiced, and above
all full of valor and aspiring minds, and not to be common soldiers, taken
at unawares out of ordinary bands of footmen, neither such as carry a dull,
base and abject mind or disposition.

If the Colonel had the authority to be able to keep together a band with a
Standerd or Guidon, and a trumpet to them, they would do singular good
service, which nevertheless when service on foot did call them forth, might
deliver up their horses, lances, and hargabushes with fire-lockes unto their
servants, kept and maintained for that purpose, and enter into rank or
battle amongst the rest of the Caualliers squadre, and so should the
ordinary and common custom of having horses amongst private soldiers be
avoided, save such as are permitted and granted to some Officers, as in my
former discourses I have already declared. The which observation shall bring to
pass that the soldiers in marching and in other enterprises shall go
together, and be united about the Ensign, which is a thing most convenient and
necessary, and ought greatly to be shunned, for that horses by overthwart
traversing are accustomed to deface the squares, and break the ranks of the
footmens battles, which truly is very odious and of great disturbance and
discommodity: but that which I speak of this extraordinary band is to be
understood and taken, when there is no ordinary bands of horsemen joined to a
Collonells regiment. He ought to take vigilant care that the Gentlemen of his
band and Caualliers of his squadre, being continually about his person do
diligently perform, that which they are appointed of him to do by commission
or otherwise, and that they make faithful and true relation to him of every
particular thing, that he may be ever fully informed of all things, and chiefly
of that which does pass in the watch worthy and necessary to be noted, as well
by day as by night, since that by going the round, which does appertain
principally to these Caualliers, many things of moment and importance may very
well be observed, being able to execute any of the inferior offices, and both
quickly conceive and sensibly utter any new accident.

The Collonell must most carefully with humble courtesy court his Captain
general, use great respect toward him, obey him, and give him faithful
counsel: and to the end he may perform this through well, he must never
refuse toil or travel, since that to take pain about matters of like
importance, is agreeable and convenient to honorable personages his equals,
whereas easy delicacie and curiosity appertains to women, or other
effeminate persons, who esteem more of belly-cheere, gallant attire and
riches, then of the peerless prise of valor and virtue, and that prefer a
frail body before an immortal soul.

Some hold opinion that a Collonell having to allot out what number of pikes,
short weapons, and shot is to be in every band, that it is far better to have
but one sort of weapons, so shall the Captain ever accompany his own
soldiers, whereas otherwise they being disseuered in a stand-battaile, he must
either lose the company of his shot or pikes, the one of them being committed
to a Second, and the short weapons to a Third, which does nothing so much
encourage the Soldier, as to see his Captain companion of his perils, and the
contrary no less dismaieth him: but for that foughten fields chance seldom
in our time, I cease to wade further therein, only aduertising that amongst
the rest of his soldiers, the armed pikes must be gently used, showing them a
cheerful and good countenance, who must be chosen men, very hardy and
valiant.

He must procure that his Officers diligently perform his commissions, and
that faithfully they make relation of every particular thing, that he may be
informed of all, and especially that which happens inwards, as well in the day
as in the night, for they going in circuit, as appertains unto them, may well
perceive what chances of any great importance. So that by observing these
aduertisements, the industry of the Leader does appear, whereas not being
well looked unto great ruin does arise.

To conclude, when his regiment is discharged, either at the end of the wars
or otherwise, he ought to take care that he in any wise procure, that they may
be conducted wholly together, and afterward disband them in such a place, as
from thence every soldier may easily and without fear transport himself into
his own country, and if it be possible, having his health, his arms, and his
apparel entire: for otherwise if soldiers be disseuered in far countries,
they suffer great inconvenience, in hard and difficile passages, in victuals
and lodgings, the which does cause their destruction, the discredit and
dishonor of their Conductour, and is a great blot in the fame of our nation,
as those that have seen Holland and the Low Countries can witness: wherefore it
is a thing to be reformed for the increase of our credit and old natural
valor.

THE THIRD BOOK OF MILITARY Directions: Containing the exercise of Trayning or
Drilling: and also the manner of arming both Pike and Musket, according to the
custom allowed in these days within this Realm of England, with certain
other Observations.
CHAP. I. First for the arming of a Pike-man.
IT is necessary that his corslet and gorget be fit for his body, as also that
his Tasses and powdrels or arme-pipes be large and suitable, all these to be
strongly buckled and riueted, well oyled and bright, then a murren or
head-peece well lined, and fringed, agreeable to the same: then a straight pike
of a middle size, of 15 foot of length, with a sharp iron pike or point at the
end, of the right Spanish fashion, well oyled and bright.

Then that he have a good back-sword with an Irish basket hilt, and hanged in a
strong belt.

Note that all Pikes of the same company ought to be of one length, otherwise
if they disagree, they will be uncomely, and seem to the beholders like unto
Organ-pipes, which be of different lengths. Moreover, they are very
unprofitable for service, for they will greatly trouble each other, and
especially the huge and long pikes, and therefore are to be refused. Likewise a
short pike is not good in a maine square, neither in camp or battle, except
it be in strait and narrow places.

Secondly, for the ordering and arming of a Musketeere.
IT is convenient that the barrel or canon of his piece be in length four
foot at the least, clean and sound, with a straight and right bore, having a
close stock and well joined thereunto, of a right Spanish making: Then that
the cock of his piece be swift and well oyled, bearing a true deliverance to
the midst of the pan, the touchhole neither too great or too narrow, the pan
close, the eyesight true, and then having a strong breech-peece, look that
all these instruments be well scrued, and especially the breech-peece: A
charging rod or stick of a meet length to the barrel of the piece, the same
to have a worm or a scowrer at the one end, the other end thereof tipped with
a horn.

Then foresee that he have a Bandeleere with 16 or 18 chargers or mates at the
least, hanged thereunto, with strong laces, with a priming charger or mate, and
also a bullet bag and priming wyre: then a Rest of a fit size and length breast
or chin high, with a trayle lace fastened thereat, together with a head-peece or
murren, and sword in all points provided as is aforesaid.

CHAP. II. The Office of the Muster-Master, both necessary and profitable,
when a Prince or his General have diverse Regiments of several Nations under
pay.
THe Muster-Master also may be accounted an Officer as it were dependant on the
Treasurer, for that his duty is nothing else, but by often reviewing of the
bands, to see how every Captains band is furnished (according to my former
directions for the arming both pike and musket) noting the defaults from time
to time, and the supplies; and thereof to make a perfect book, exhibiting the
same at the pay day to the Treasurer, that allowance may be made to the
Colonels and Captains accordingly. When he first takes the view and muster of
any band, he must not only write down the name of the soldier and his weapon,
but also of what Country he is, the towns name where he was borne, and his
fathers name, and what years he is of: and finally shall take special care to
set down, some special mark or cicatrice upon his face, together with the
color of his hair and beard: to the intent, his Prince be not charged with
paying of dead pays, to such as be hired but for that day, as many Captains
use to fill their purses with unlawful gains.

CHAP. III. A Rule to set Soldiers in array.
THe Footmen being assembled at the place where they are to be set in array:
First, you must foresee, that the ground be fit and capable for the purpose,
that the array may commodiously turn to the right or left hand, as much as may
be nevertheless, according to the number of soldiers you have, you are to
proceed in this sort as follows.

First, to wit that all the soldiers of a band of footmen are bound by the law
of Arms, forthwith and as soon as they shall hear the Drum beat a Call to
repair to the Colors, under pain etc. except that sickness be the cause
thereof; or that having a license or forelofe they may thereby excuse
themselves. But to return: you are to begin in this order following: First,
you are to draw the pikes by themselves on the one side, together with the
Ensign: and upon the other side all the musketeers, somewhat aloof distant
from the pikes, beginning to make the musketeers march so many in a rank as
you list, parting them nevertheless according to their number: you may put
them from 3 to 12 in a rank; for it is not often seen that more than 11 is
put in a rank, how great soever the number of the footmen be: neither in troth
ought they to be any more than 11 in a rank: for when they pass 11 or 12 they
are not to be accounted an array, but rather a battle: I have omitted to
write herein of the placing of my officers belonging to a company of footmen,
you shall find it plainly set down in the march, and at the beginning of the
exercise of training: so to return, having then placed the number of
musketeers you shall think good of to be in a rank, you shall cause them to
march in good proportion, sending forth one rank after an other; the Sargeant
standing still on the one side, causing them to pass before him, judging by
the eyesight from Rank to Rank of all the soldiers, one by one, whether they
be right in line, observing true distance: and also that they carry their Arms
in warlike order; for this is the beauty of an array. Moreover the Sargeant
having special respect to accommodate and place at the head of the array, the
Gentlemen of the company, and also the Corporals which carry muskets; placing
next unto them the best men, and the best furnished soldiers; and placing also
at the Rear of the battle your best men, and the rest of your best armed; to
the intent the array may show the better: forasmuch as when they are divided
into array, the musketeers from the pikemen, and that they turn their faces;
then the back part or Rear is made the front: therefore the Rear ought to be
as well furnished as the front, as I have said before in the duty of a
Sargeant: the which if you desire to do, it is necessary you put in the midst
of the Ranks the weakest and worst furnished; aduertising the Sargeant that
the soldiers are best furnished, when they have all sorts of Arms and
furniture that be necessary for them: and there appertains to a musketier
good match, fire-cole, powder and bullet, and moreover l'assine. And this is to
be observed with all speed and diligence that the time or occasion does carry,
and the suspicion of the enemy does import.

Here next is demonstrated the distance observed betwixt Rank and Rank, man
and man, both in marching, and also in maine battle.
FIrst both pikes and muskets are to be ordered into files of 10 deep, the
musketeers in marching are sometimes placed in the front, sometimes in the
front and sometimes in the Rear of the pikes, but most commonly being in
single array they are to march both in the Front and Rear: In maine battle the
soldiers are placed sometimes in the right flank, sometimes in both the
flanks; and sometimes it will be commanded that they be brought in the Front
of the battle, and also in the Rear.

In exercising the motions there are two distances to be kept.

The first is when every one is distant from his fellow 6 foot square; that
is, in File and Rank 6 foot.

The second is when every soldier is 3 foot distant one from another, as well
in File as in Rank: And in respect the measure of such distances cannot
always be taken euenly by the rack of the eye; the distance of 6 foot
between the files is measured, when the soldiers stretching out their arms,
do touch one another hands: and betwixt the Ranks, when that the ends of
their pikes come very near to the hams of them that march before them: And the
distance of 3 foot betwixt the Files is when their elbowes touch one another:
and betwixt their Ranks when they come to touch the ends of one another
Rapiers or swords. In marching in the field the distance of 3 foot from File
to File is kept, and of 6 foot from Rank to Rank, when the soldiers order
themselves in battle; and also when they march toward the enemy, the
distance of 3 foot both in File and Rank is to be observed. And likewise in
conversion or wheeling. The musketeers making ready to shoot by ranks keep
the same distance of 3 foot, but going to skirmish they go a la disabande,
that is, out of order.

There is also used another order of distance; which is seldom observed but
for to receive the enemy with a firm stand, and serves for the pikes only:
for the musketeers cannot stand so close in files, because they must have their
arms at liberty, and that is, when every distance from file to file is a foot
and a half, and 3 foot from Rank to Rank: and this last distance is thus
commanded: Close your selves thoroughly. But it is not to be taught the
soldiers: for that when necessity shall require it, they will close themselves
too much of their own accord without command.

How Pikes are to be raised up and abased in closing and opening of a battle.
I Will not omit to put in memory unto them that know not of the particulars
of those things and order that are required in making a battle of footmen.
Therefore those which would make a battle of footmen, must be advertised that
in shutting up the said battle, the ranks of pikes as well armed as unarmed,
must not raise up confusedly, but with order; that is, when the Sargeant mayor,
Captain, or Lieutenant shall say: Raise or right up your Pikes, then it is
requisite that the first and foremost Rank must begin to raise up it self: and
that the second do not move to raise up it self till the first be raised up:
and so the third and fourth: the same order is to be observed in all the other
Ranks, from one Rank to an other.

The like Rule is to be observed by them in laying down of their pikes upon
their shoulders: for so much as Rank by Rank, in order and without confusion
they ought to let fall their pikes; appointing the first Rank to fall after
the second, the third after the fourth: and so is all the rest of the Ranks to
follow the same order, till the hindermost Rank of all: And by observing that
order, they cannot commit disorder, but rather make a gallant show, and prevent
many confusions.

How Pikes are to be carried in array, march, or battle, with also other
necessary notes.
THose that are appointed to carry pikes in array of Ranks or battle, must
know that pikes amongst all other weapons that belong to soldiers is of
greatest honor and credit: And truly whosoever does carry and manage the same
weapon well, and with good grace, does make a very beautiful and pleasant show
to the beholders; and chiefly when it is carried with a good grace, as I have
said before, and with il combedo alto. And as touching the observation of
shouldring of pikes, to wit, that there is a new order observed in the Low
Countries now of late; the Commanders there will have the pikes to be carried
upon the right shoulder, and not to remove or change to the left shoulder at
all.

Note also that the Pike-man do march then with a good grace holding up his
head gallantly: his pace full of gravity and estate, and such as is fit for
his person: And let his body be straight and as much upright as is possible:
And that which most imports is that they have always their eyes upon their
companions which are in rank with them; and before them: going just one with
the other: and keeping perfect distance without committing error in the least
pace or step: and every pace and motion with one accord and consent; they ought
to make at one instant time: And in this sort all the ranks entirely are to
march sometimes softly sometimes fast according to the strokes of the drum:
the heel and the tippe of their pikes would be equally holden: both of length
and height as near as is possible: to avoid that they fall not out to be seem
by bearing them otherwise like unto Organ-pipes some long some short. The
measure and property thereof: to hold the heel of the pike is this; it is
necessary for him to have an eye to the rank that does march before him: and
so carry the Butt-end or heel of his pike that it may be just over against
the joint of the hamme of the soldier that in march shall be straight before
him: And so every one from hand to hand must observe the proportion of that
height: And that is, right behind upon the joint of the knee: for by doing so
they cannot commit error; carrying in their march that leg that is under that
arm that sustaines and caries the Pike of just and even proportion: by moving
their pace right-vnder the staff of the pike: going in their march as I have
said before: just and even with a stately and sumptuous pace, for by doing so
they shall be esteemed, honored and commended of all the Lookers on, and they
will take wonderful delight to behold them march in that order: And whereas I
have said before that the Soldiers should march forward with one consent: I
mean not only that the Pike men ought to observe that order: but also that
the musketeares are to follow the same rule of order: because that the whole
company must be ready to march forward at one instant time observing the true
strokes or battery of the drum, which active observation may well be compared
to a Dancer; for the one by hearing his music is prepared to tread the
measure answerable to the time: And the other by hearing the warlike and
comfortable stroke of the drum: is ready to advance his pace and march forward.

The Officer is to pace toward his people, so to give the word, and so to lead
march, and also observing the strokes of the drum, the first rank being the
file leaders it to follow their Leader: The second rank every one to follow
his pile-leader also: The third, fourth and fifth ranks; and so the rest with
one consent.

I hold it therefore both convenient and needful for all men that follow the
wars, to learn all the warlike sounds that the Drummer beats, as the call,
the march, to draw up maine-battell, the charge, the retire, to troop, to
wheel about which is also a charge, then and lastly the diana. And whereas
every nation do differ the one from the other in the battery of their
drums, and chiefly in the sound of their march every nation or Province do
also differ in the mark of their colors, for that they bear in their colors
the proper Arms or Scutchion of the Nation under which they do serve. But to
return, let a soldier be diligent to learn, as I said before, the strokes of
the drum: And chiefly to understand the usual strokes of march which the
drum beat in the regiment wherein he bears arms: he must also take notice
of the marks that are upon the colors; especially of the Ensign which he
serves under, the knowledge whereof may serve his turn so well that it may
save his life, for by night being in fight with the enemy, and being also
ignorant of the sound of drum, he may as well fall into the hands of his
enemies as otherwise, which may cost him his life: Then as touching his Ensign
the soldier being scattered from his company in marching, or otherwise in
fight, and if it be by daylight he may perceive his own colors far off. To
wit, that both drums and fifes were first invented by the Switzers, wherewith
they will even live and die in all manner of fight. The Almaines also invented
a pipe which is called by them Schalmeyen. Some nations when they do fight a
pitched field by reason of the tumult, and rumor that will grow amongst the
soldiers, they have trumpets to give the charge, which yields great comfort
to the soldiers in regard that they hear the echo and sound of the trumpets
so plain, that in all distress they do not only keep together, but also
know their charge. Therefore in foreign Countries the footmen are as well
acquainted in all points of war which the said trumpets do use to sound that
they know their charge even as well as horsemen do. But to return to the
matter aforesaid: the Turk when he does either expect the charge given him by
his enemies, or when he will give a charge etc. it will be commanded that a
Drummer shall ride from rank to rank to give the soldiers notice by a soft
sound: And as touching marching, it is to be understood that some kind of
march is a right induction; other some a deduction on the right or left hand;
and that in single, double, treble, or quadruple sided battle: in a single
when one enemy is feared; in a double when two; in a treble when three; and in
a quadruble when the enemy purposes to invade on all sides: Therefore the
march is undertaken sometimes in a single challenge, and sometimes in a twofold
challenge, or else in a threefold challenge, or in a fourefold challenge. The
soldiers, both Pikemen and Musketeares are to be divided into companies, and
every company is to consist half of pikes, and half of musketeares.

The companies happen and fall out sometimes to be more in number, and
sometimes less; some extend to 100. men, some 200. some 300. some 400. and so
forth till 800 men or more. Every company ought to have these Officers
following: a Captain, a Lieutenant, an Ensign, two Sergeants, three
Corporalls, two Drums; but by the opinion of many worthy soldiers, every
hundredth men ought to have a Drum; the reason whereof I omit to speak
thereof in this place, and return to the matter: it will be needful for a
Captain to have in his company for necessary uses a Clarke, a Surgeon, and a
Provost. Companies are drawn into Regiments, and the Regiments are ever to be
commanded by Coronells: Regiments do sometimes likewise differ in the number
of companies, some consist of 6. some of 7. some of 8. or 10. some 15. etc. In
the ordering, and managing of every regiment is to be required a Coronell etc.

Certain words to be used of the Officers that train.
WHen any Officer determines to exercise his company to train, or drill them,
he must cast them into a ring, the double or single bissa, the Roman S or
such like necessary form, and use these or the like words as hear follows:
My loving friends, fellows, and companions in arms, we be gathered together
for the service of God, his holy Church, our Prince and Country; and for that
none through ignorance shall perish or run in danger of the Laws of the
Field, you shall from time to time, by me or other Officers of the Band be
instructed by words or deeds in such sort, and points, as to your calling and
the necessity of service shall require, the which you must diligently observe,
and follow, though the same shall seem unto you many times, both dangerous and
painful: also if any of you, my fellows shall find an occasion convenient
to declare to me, or any other Officer, his mind and opinion in any thing
beneficial touching service, we shall diligently hear, and gratify the
party the double value thereof; and God willing Equity and Justice shall be
ministered; also regard that all Soldiers know, and obey their Officers in
their place, according to their calling.

The first thing of moment in the motion of a Company is how they should
orderly march, and how their Officers should be rightly placed, the which I
have demonstrated in the figure on the other side, according as it is practiced
in the Low Countries, the school of war: First the Captain, marches in the
Front, and leads the company, whose place is marked with C: which is six foot
distant before the first division of muketeares. The Lieutenant is to march in
the Rear of the second division of Musketeares, marked with L: six foot
distant behind the same. The Ensign is to march with the colors six foot
behind the first division of Musketeares, and six foot before the first
division of pikes, marked with the letter E. The eldest Sergeant is to march
six foot behind the first division of pikes, and six foot before the second
division of pikes, marked with S. 1. The second Sergeant is to march six foot
behind the second division of pikes, and six foot before the second division of
musketeares, marked with S. 2. the drums beat between the third and fourth
ranks, marked with D: The chiefest beats in the first division of pikes; The
second in the first division of musketeares; And the third drum beats in the
second division of musketeares: The pikes and muskets march six foot in file,
and three in rank, every division consists of ten ranks and five files, all
which is made plain in the next figure following.

The order how a Company should march.
Leaders.

First division of Musketieres.

Bringers up.

Leaders.

First division of Pikes.

Bringers up.

Leaders.

Second division of Pikes.

Bringers up.

Leaders.

Second division of Muskets.

Bringers up.



AFter that the company has marched in such order as aforesaid in the former
figure, then the first division of shot (when they are come to the place where
they should exercise, train, or drill) makes a stand; and the first division
of the pikes marches up to the front with them, on the left hand: Then the
second division of the pikes marches up to the front with the first division
of pikes, on the left hand of them also: lastly, the second division of
musketeers marches up on the left hand of the second division of pikes: which
done they are commanded to stand right in their files, and right in their
ranks, at 6 foot distance, and commanded, silence, that every one may hear
the words of command, and be ready to execute the same. The figure on the other
side page 149 shows the form and station of the company, all things
performed as aforesaid: note the distance is reckoned from the middle part of a
man.

Front

left flank

(...)

Rear



To the right hand.
The Company standing right in their files and ranks, at six foot distance
(as in the figure before) unto which the Captain has an eye in the front, and
the Lieutenant in the Rear, and the Sargeants in the flanks; the Sargeants
having an ear to the Captain are ready to inform the company what he
commands: then the Captain commands them to turn to the right hand; and then
they move all together, keeping their left foot fixed, and moving with the
right foot only; and having performed it; the front is where the right hand
flank was; as in the figure page 151 is plainly demonstrated.

Note that in or at their facing to any quarter, the pikes are (to avoid
weariness) ordered; and the muskets shouldred for ease and fitness. The
reason of this motion is to make the company perfect to be suddenly prepared
for a charge in the right hand, flank or wing.



As you were.
Having stood a while according to the form in the former figure, the Captain
commands, As you were, and then they move all toward the left hand, till their
faces are turned to the first Front, according to the demonstration, page 153.



To the left hand.
BEcause the enemy may sometimes charge on the left hand flank, therefore that
you may suddenly be ready to defend your selves, and for diverse other reasons
this motion is used, to turn to the left hand, which is done by moving the
right foot, the left foot standing still till your faces front toward the left
hand flank, according to the demonstration, page 155.



As you were.
THen having performed the aforesaid motion, the Captain Commands; As you
were: and then they move all toward the right hand, till they are turned to
the first Front, according to the demonstration page 157.



To the right hand about.
BEcause there may be a charge given in the Rear, therefore is this Motion to
be practiced, to turn toward the right hand (the left foot remaining fixed)
till your faces front to that Quarter which was before the Rear; and then will
they be ready to receive the Enemy and defend themselves: this form is
demonstrated in the next side, marked with the number of 159.



To the left hand as you were.
Having performed the former Motion, the Captain commands them, To the left
hand as you were; and then they move all toward the left hand, the left foot
remaining fixed, until their faces are turned to the former front: according
to that of page 161.



To the left hand about.
BEcause it is sometimes more convenient to turn to the left hand, then to the
right, therefore this Motion is also used; which is to turn toward the left
hand, till their faces front to the Rear: according to the figure in the page
163.



To the right hand as you were.
Having performed the former Motion, the Captain commands them, To the right
hand as you were; and then they turn all toward the right hand, until their
faces are toward the first Front, as in the figure page 165.



To the right hand double your Ranckes.
BEcause there will be an occasion sometimes to strengthen the Front; it may
one way be done thus: when all in the second Rank march up into the first
Rank, to the right or left hand, according to the command (as here to the
right hand) and all in the fourth Rank march up into the third, and so of the
rest, as in the Example or Figure, page 167. Where you may perceive by the
letters marked with a Star, that the motion is to the right hand: and the
Stars in the second, fourth, sixth, eighth, and tenth Ranckes show the places
from whence they moved: and the figures in the lest flank demonstrating the
number of your Ranckes which did move, being ten Ranckes, as you may perceive
thereby.



Ranckes as you were.
Having performed the former motion, the Captain commands, Ranckes as you
were; and then every one marches into his own place, all at one instant, and
so are again like the form in the figure, page 169.



To the left hand double your Ranckes.
THis Motion differs nothing in effect from that page 167. but that there
those that doubled, did it to the right hand of their Leaders, and here they do
it to the left hand: which is plain by the Stars in the Figure, page 171.



Ranckes as you were.
THe former motion performed, the Captain commands, Ranckes as you were; and
then every one that doubled, marches into his own place or Rank, and so are
in form again, according to the figure, page 173.



BEcause that there was an odd file of musketeares, in either flank and wing
of my former figures, and being desirous to make the double files perfect
without intermixing the pikes with the shot, I was forced therefore to change
the form of the Company, and to place all the Musketeares in the Right hand
flank of the Pikes, according to the demonstration in the other side marked
with the number of 175.

Note then to alter the form of the former station, and to bring the Company
into the form, set down in the other side, (as I said before) you are to do
as follows. First you are to lead forth the Right wing of shot, then the
first division of Pikes, which be in the right hand flank of the second
division of pikes, and march with them to stand just against the first division
of musketeares, on the left hand of them, leaving a space to place the second
division of shot between them both; then you are to march up with the second
division of Pikes to stand on the left hand of the first division of Pikes:
Lastly, the second division of Musketeares, marches up to stand on the left
hand of the first division of Musketeares, which will be on the right hand of
the first division of Pikes: which done, they are commanded to stand right in
their Files, and right in their Ranks, at six foot distance, and commanded
silence, that so every one may hear the words of Command, and to be ready to
execute the same. etc.

Front.

Rear.



To the right hand double your files.
BEcause there may be occasion of strengthening the Flanks, as also for other
purposes, these words of Command are used, To the right hand double your Files;
which is thus performed: All the second file, from the right hand, march every
one behind his side-man, into the first (or right hand) File, and so the
fourth File into the third, and the sixth into the fifth, etc. which is done of
all at one instant after the command is given. The order whereof is plainly
demonstrated in the Figure marked with 177. In which you may perceive by the
Stars, from, and to what place each man marches. The Stars are only set
down in the first and second Files, but you are to understand the same order
in the third and fourth Files, and so of all the rest. etc.



Files as you were.
Having performed the former Motion, the Captain commands them, Files as you
were; and then all those which doubled, return unto their own proper places:
the which is plainly demonstrated in the Figure marked with 179. by the
Stars in the first and second Files, the which order you must conceive in the
third and fourth, fifth and sixth, etc.



To the left hand double your files.
THis Motion differs little from that marked with 177. but that here the
Motion is to the left hand, as there it was to the right hand: so that those
Files which moved then, stand still now; and those which stood still then, move
now: all which is so plainly demonstrated by the Stars in the figure marked
with 181. that it needs no further explanation.



Files as you were.
THe former Motion orderly performed, the Captain commands, Files as you were;
and then those which doubled, return into their proper places: according as
you may plainly understand by the figure page 183. in which the Stars
demonstrate both from what place they come, and whither they march.



Having performed the doubling of Files in all points and orders demonstrated
in my figures before this, which was done with the shot in the right hand
flank of the pikes: hereafter follows the exercise in the very same form
and station of the Company where with I began the exercise of training: the
which Musketeers are divided and placed in both the flanks of the pikes,
according to the figure in the next side, page 185.



Half Files to the right hand double your Ranckes.
IN the figure, page 166. was showed one way how that upon occasion the Front
might be strengthened: here is another form of strengthening the same; which
requires two demonstrations or Figures for explanation. In the first marked
with D. is showed the manner of acting this Motion; and in the second marked
with E. is demonstrated the action performed: wherein you may perceive how the
sixth Rank, or as some improperly call them, middle men, doubleth the first
Rank, the seventh the second Rank, the eight the third Rank, the ninth
the fourth Rank, and the tenth the fifth Rank. Note that in performing this
motion, the half files of Pikes that doubled, advance their Pikes till they
have doubled, and then order them.

D
E


Half Files as you were.
WHen they have performed the former Motion, according to the direction, the
Captain commands, Half Files as you were; and then the half Files advance
their Pikes, and fall back with their right leg, and so march into their
proper places: and then they are again ten deep at six foot distance;
according to the demonstration page 189. Note that in turning into their
places, every one ought to turn to the right hand, which is both easier, and
more pleasing to the eye, then turning to the left hand.



Half Files to the left hand double your Ranckes.
THis Motion differs nothing in effect from that before demonstrated in the
187. Figure: the difference only is, that here the half Files which move,
march up to the left hand of the half Files that stand, whereas according to
those Figures they marched up to the right hand of them. The Figures marked
page 191. make this very plain.



Half Files as you were.
Having performed the former Motion, the Captain commands, Half Files as you
were; and then the Half Files which doubled, advance their Pikes, and fall
back with their right leg, to be clear, of their Sidemen, and so march into
their proper places, turning into the same toward the left hand: which done,
they will be in the form marked with 193.



Files to the Right hand Countermarch.
WHen a charge is expected in the Rear, and it being thought convenient, to
have the Leaders of files to be in the places of the bringers up, because they
are men best able to receive the enemy, it may be performed in this manner:
The Captain commands, Files to the right hand Countermarch, and then the
Leaders of Files advancing with their right leg, turn to the right hand, and
march down toward the Rear, all the body of the company moving together; and
so the second rank, turning as the Front or Leaders of the files did, when
they have marched up to the place where the front was; and so does the third,
fourth, and fifth ranks, etc. The manner whereof is plainly demonstrated in
the figure marked with B. and the figure marked with C. shows the motion
performed.

B
C


Files to the left hand Countermarch.
THis Motion differs nothing in use from the former; the difference of acting
it is only, that there they advance with the right leg, and turn to the
right hand: and here they advance with the left leg and turn to the left
hand: The manner of doing this is demonstrated in the next page marked with G.
And the thing done in that marked with H. And therefore needs no further
explanation.

G
H


The Postures of the Pike.
HAndle your Pike. Advance your Pike. Shoulder your Pike. To the right hand
charge. As you were. To the left hand charge. As you were. To the Front charge.
As you were. To the Rear charge. As you were. Advance your Pike. Port your
Pike. Comport your Pike. Traile your Pike. Cheek your Pike. Advance your Pike.
To your funeral posture traile your Pike. Recover your Pike. Order your Pike.
Your open order at foot. Your close order at foot. To the Front charge. To
the right hand charge. To the right hand charge. To the right hand charge. To
the right hand charge. Order your Pike. Advance your Pike. Lay down your Pike.
Take up your Pike. Shoulder your Pike. Slope your Pike. Level your Pike.
Traile your Pike. Recover your Pike. Charge your Pike, and advance your ground.
Retreat charging. Advance your Pike. Lay down your Pike.
The Postures of the Musket.
HAndle your Musket. Lay down your Musket. Lay down your bandeleers. Hold
your Rest in your left hand. Take up your bandeleers with your right hand. Put
on your bandeleers. Take up your Musket. Bring your Rest to your Musket. Open
your pann. Prime your pann. Shut your pann. Cast off your loose powder. Bear
over your Musket into your left hand. Traile your Rest. Charge your Musket.
Draw forth your skowring stick. Short your scowring flick against your right
side. Ram down your powder. Draw forth your skowring stick. Short your
skowring stick. Return your skowring stick. Bring forward your Musket into
your right hand. Recover your Rest. Poyse your Musket. Bring your Rest to the
right side of your Musket. Bear your Rest and Musket in your left hand. Draw
your match. Blow your match. Cock your match. Try your match. Guard your pann.
Blow your match. Present to the Front. Give fire. Take down your Musket.
Vncock your match. Return your match. Blow your pann. Prime your pann. Shut
your pann. Shoulder your Musket carrying your Rest in your left hand. Slope
your Musket. Vnshoulder your Musket. Rest your Musket. Stand to your saluting
Posture. Lay down your Musket.
The first order of exercising Musketeers.
FIrst understand that they are three foot in File and three foot in Rank,
having a division in the midst of six foot; then the Captain bids the two
first Ranckes, Make ready, and marches with them some five or six paces before
the rest of the Company, and bids the first Rank Give fire; which it does,
and then marches away, turning to the right hand, the one half marching by
the right hand Flancke, and the other half through the midst of the body,
and so fall every one into his own File in the Rear: and then the Captain
commands the second Rank to give fire, which performs all as aforesaid; and
then two Ranckes more advance in the former order, and so they may continue
discharging with ten Ranckes a long time. The Demonstration page 201. makes
this very plain, to which I refer you for speculation. This order is of great
use to win ground upon an enemy.



The second Order of Exercising Musketeers.
IN the former Demonstration was showed an Order of winning ground upon an
enemy; in this the contrary of loosing ground, or retraiting is showed, and yet
to offend the enemy. The distances and division being observed as in the former
Figure, the Captain in the Rear commands, To the right hand about and give
fire; and then the Rank in the Rear performs the same, and presently after
they march into the Front, every man into his own File; the one half march on
the left hand File, and the other half through the midst of the body. Then
the Captain commands again, To the right hand about, and give fire; which the
Rank then in the Rear performs, as aforesaid, and so forth infinitely: all
which in the Demonstration page 203. is made plain and easy.



The third Order of exercising Musketeers.
THe whole Company being three foot distant in Files and Ranckes (without any
division as aforesaid) the Captain marching in the Front, commands, Right
Flanck to the right hand and give fire; and then the right hand File turns
toward the right hand, and performs the same, and the rest of the body
continues marching till they be clear of that File which gave fire: and then
the Captain commands again as before; which the then right File performs,
the rest of the body marching: and so in like manner, till all the Files have
discharged. The order hereof is demonstrated page 205. If there be occasion to
discharge on the left hand Flancke, the same order is to be observed as on the
right hand Flancke. Note that when the second File has discharged, that then
the first File marches up to Front with it: and both those with the third File
when it has discharged, and so forth till all front with the last File: and
then they are ready to discharge again, if occasion require.



The fourth Order of Exercising Muskettieres.
THis fourth way in use, is all one with the third order; the difference is
only in the manner of performing the same; for according to this order the
depth of the Company is divided by making the fifth and sixth Ranckes six foot
distance each from other. The Captain marching in the Front, commands, Right
Flancke to the right hand and give fire, which the right File does; and then
half thereof march through the Division, and the other half in the Rear, and
so march on the left hand of the left hand Flancke, every man into his own
Rank: the order whereof is plainly demonstrated in the Figure marked page 207.



The fifth Order of Exercising Muskettieres.
THis Order is another kind of loosing ground; the Captain in the Front
commands, Make ready altogether, and then says to the first Rank, give fire:
which done, the one half of that Rank marches down into the Rear, on the
right hand of the right hand Flancke, and the other half through the midst of
the body (which for that end is divided) every man falling into his own File.
Then the Captain says likewise to the second Rank, Give fire, which it
does, and falls into the Rear, as the first did, and so the third, fourth,
fifth, etc. The manner whereof is demonstrated in the Figure marked with 209.
Note that here the whole body stands still, and are only in motion by
particular Ranckes, when they have discharged, till they come again into their
proper Files in the Rear, and then stand still again, till they have
redischarged.



Close your Files both ways at a foot and half.
IF a charge of Horse be expected, then the foot are to be in the closest
order; which is one foot and a half in Rank, and three foot in File. The
words of command for closing Files are diverse; as Close your Files to the right
hand: or, Close your Files to the left hand: or, Close your Files both ways:
the last whereof is most commonly used, and therefore I have demonstrated that
order, as you may perceive in the Figure marked page 211.

Note also, that because I desired to observe the distances precisely in all
the Figures, that therefore the Printer was forced to change the Letters in
this and some other Figures, and in steed of M. for Muskettiere, has placed S.
for Shot: which I thought good to give notice of for thy better understanding.



Close your Ranckes at three foot.
THe Files being closed, at a foot and half demonstrated in the Figure marked
in page 211 the Captain then commands, Close your Ranckes at three foot, or,
at Swords point; which is the closest order for Ranckes: the which is plainly
demonstrated in the Figure marked in page 213.



To the right hand, wheel.
Upon occasion of the Enemies charge on the right hand Flancke, to receive him
with the most able men, which are usually in the Front; it may be performed by
commanding them, To the right hand wheel; and then the Leader of the right
hand File stands fixed, only turning his body, and all the rest move upon
him as the center: according to the Demonstration page 215. Note that the
Officers must be very careful to command and see them to keep their distances
in Rank and File, without which, this Motion will not be gracefully acted.



To the left hand, wheel.
THis Motion differs from the former page 215 only in this; that here the
Leader of the left hand File stands fixed, as there the Leader of the right
hand File did: which by the form of the Demonstration marked with A. you may
easily understand.

THere is another way which I have seen Grave Maurice his guard to wheel,
viz. to move upon the middle of the Front, and then if they wheel to the right
hand, All to the right hand of the middle of the Front go backwards, and the
rest forward: and if they wheel to the left hand, then all to the left hand of
the middle of the Front go backwards, and the rest forwards. All which is most
plainly understood by observing the Demonstration marked with B. In which and
the two former Figures is a Star placed near the center, on which the
Company moves.

A
B


Open your Ranckes backwards.
TO open the Ranckes, understand that the Front or first Rank stands still,
and the other nine Rancks fall backwards altogether, till the second Rank be
six foot distant from the Front, and then it stands still, and the rest of the
body moves till the third Rank be six foot distant from the second Rank,
and so till the fourth Rank be distant six foot from the third, and all the
rest of the Ranckes in order. The manner whereof I have demonstrated in the
Figure marked M. and the thing done in the Figure marked N.

M
N


Open your Files both ways.
IN opening the Files, half the body moves toward the right hand, and the
other half toward the left hand, in gross; and then the two middle-most
Files when they are 6 foot distant, stand still, and the rest of the body
continues moving both ways, till the next two Files are distant six foot from
the former which stood still: and so the Motion continues in this order till
all the Files have taken their distance of six foot each from other. The
manner whereof is demonstrated in the Figure marked with E. and the thing done
in the Figure marked with F.

Thus much for the manner of exercising footmen, fully performed, after the
right order and modern use of Theoricke Rules, accustomed in these days.

Now lastly you are to lead forth your soldiers by five and five in Rank, in
like order as is set down in the Figure of the order how a Company should
march. Note that the Captain marching out of the field, most commonly does
march in the Rear of his Company, and his Lieutenant in the Front, the rest of
the Officers are to march in like order as is demonstrated in the order of
march, except you do troop out of the Field; for then you are to alter etc.
howsoever you are to conduct the Colors to the place where they are to be laid
up, where having made a guard, the Captain and his Officers repairing to the
Colors, being within the said guard, and toward the Front, he says to the
Drum or Drums, Beat up a discharge, which being done, (with sometimes a volley
of shot given) and the Colors wrapped and folded up, every man departs to his
home. etc.

E
F


FINIS.

