ARTICLES, To be enquired of within the Dioces of London, in the third
general Visitation of the reverend Father in God, Richard Bishop of London.

HOLDEN In the year of our Lord God 1604. In the second year of the reign of
our most gracious Sovereign Lord JAMES, by the grace of God of England,
France, and Ireland, King, defender of the faith; and of Scotland the thirty
eight, etc.

Imprinted at London for Clement Knight. 1604.

A Branch of the Statute made in the first year of the reign of our late
Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, entitled, An Act for the uniformity of
Common Prayer and service in the Church.
THat from and after the feast of the Nativity of St. John Baptist next
coming, all and every person and persons inhabiting within this Realm, or any
other the Queens majesty's dominions, shall diligently and faithfully (having
no lawful or reasonable excuse to be absent) endeavor themselves to resort to
their parish Church or Chapel accustomed, or upon reasonable let thereof to
some usual place where common prayer and such like service of God shall be
used in such time of let, upon every Sunday and other days, ordained and used
to be kept as Holy days, and then and there to abide orderly and soberly
during the time of common prayer, preaching, or other service of God there to
be used and ministered, upon pain of punishment by the Censures of the Church.
And also upon pain that every person so offending, shall forfeite for every
such offense twelve pence, to be levied by the Churchwardens of the parish
where such offense shall be done, to the use of the poor of the same parish,
of the goods, lands, and tenementes of such offender by way of distress. And
for due execution hereof, the Queens most excellent Majesty, the Lords
temparall, and all the commons in this present Parliament assembled, does in
Gods name earnestly require and charge all the Archbishops, Bishops, and other
Ordinaries, that they shall endeavor themselves to the vttirmost of their
knowledge, that the true and due execution hereof may be had throughout their
Diocese and charges, as they will answer before God for such evils and
plagues, wherewith almighty God may justly punish his people for neglecting
this good and wholesome Law.

The tenor of the Oath ministered to the Churchwardens and Swornemen.
YOu wall swear, that all affection, favor, hatred, hope of reward and
gain, or fear of displeasure, or malice set aside, you shall upon due
consideration of the Articles given you in charge, present all and every such
person of or within your parish, as has committed any offense or fault, or
made any default mentioned in these, or any of these Articles, or which are
vehemently suspected, or otherwise defamed of any such offense, fault, or
default: wherein you shall deal uprightly and according to truth: neither of
malice presenting any contrary to truth, nor of corrupt affection sparing to
present any, and so conceal the truth, having in this action God before your
eyes, with an earnest zeal to maintain truth, and to suppress vice. So
help you God and the contents of this Book.

The Charge of the Churchwardens and Swornemen, set down for the better
performance of their duties, and discharge of their Oaths.
THey are straightly charged to hear all these Articles read over to them, and
diligently to consider and inquire thereof, and for that the time is so short
in this Visitation, that they shall not be able to make a perfect answer unto
all them; and that notwithstanding there are many notorious faults presently
worthy of presentment and reformation, they are charged after their return
home, that together with their Minister they do read over all these Articles
distinctly and leasurely, to the end they may consider of every particular
Article, and of the offenses in them contained, as of such persons in their
parish as shall be noted to offend in any of them: and after that, to assemble
themselves in some convenient time together and to make their Bill, answering
every Article by it self, before the feast of St. Martin next ensuing, being
the 10 day of November: which Bill shall be signed with the hand of the
Minister and of all the Churchwardens and Sidemen, and shall for their better
ease be brought by one of the Churchwardens upon the (...) day of November
next, unto the Church of (...) where for the saving of their travel and
charges up to London, the Judge and the Register will be ready to receive them.

Articles to be enqired of within the Dioces of London in this Visitation
holden in the year of our Lord God. 1604.
Articles concerning the Clergy.
1 WHether is Common prayer read by your Minister in your Church or Chapel
distinctly and reverently upon all Sundays and Holy days, and in such order
as is set forth by the Laws of this Realm in the book of Common prayer,
without any kind of alteration, omitting or adding any thing, and at due and
convenient hours?

2 Whether does your Minister upon Wednesdayes and Frydayes (not being Holy
days) read in your Church or Chapel, publicly the Letanie and other prayers
appointed in the said book for those days: and whether does he read the
Commination against sinners, in such order and form as it is there also
prescribed?

3 Whether does your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, in the administration of the
Lords Supper, or of Baptism, when he solemnizeth Matrimony, burieth the
dead, churcheth women, etc. use the forms and prayers prescribed in the
Communion book, without omitting or altering any part of them, and without any
of his own additions?

4 Whether does your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, read public prayer and
administer the Sacraments ordinarily himself, using such rites and ceremonies
as are prescribed in the book of Common prayer: as namely whether does he
kneel at the receiving of the holy Communion, and administer the same to none
but to such as do kneel at the receiving thereof: make the sign of the Cross
upon the childs forehead in the administration of Baptism: Baptize any
without Godfathers and Godmothers: use the Ring in marriage: and generally
whether does he in the discharging of al these duties, and when he reads
Common prayer either upon Sundays, Holy days, Wednesdayes and Frydayes wear
a Surplice?

5 Whether does your Minister upon Sundays at morning prayer declare unto the
parishioners what Holidays and Fasting days are appointed to be kept the
week following; whereby they may be put in mind to prepare themselves, and to
repair to the Church to public prayer, according to the laws of the Realm?

6 Whether does your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, or either of them reject at any
time those women (being married) which do come to church to give God thanks
after their childbirth, or refuse or neglect to visit ye sick, or to bury the
dead, according to their duties prescribed in the book of common prayer?

7 Whether does your minister in the Rogation days of procession use the
perambulation of the circuit of your parish, appointed by Law: and whether
does he in the said perambulation moon the people to give thanks to God in
the beholding of his benefits, for the increase and abundance of his fruits
upon the face of the earth: and sing or say the two Psalms, beginning, Praise
the Lord O my soul. etc. with the Letanie and suffrages thereunto belonging:
and at certain convenient places read the Homily of thanksgiving to God,
already devised, and divided into four parts, without addition of any
superstitious ceremony heretofore used?

8 Whether does any man, being neither Minister nor Deacon, read common prayer
openly in your Church or Chapel, or administer the sacrament of baptism, or
solemnize matrimony, or take upon him to practice any other ministerial duty
in the church, that is prescribed to be executed particularly by such as are
either ministers or Deacons; and what is his name that so does?

9 Whether is your Parson or Vicar a Preacher, licensed to preach by lawful
authority according to Law? if he be, how many Sermons does he preach yearly:
if he be not, how many does he procure to be preached by others: who has
preached them, and whether were they Preachers lycensed, as is before expressed?

10 Whether does your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, every Sunday and Holy day when
there is no Sermon, read distinctly and plainly some part of the Homilies
prescribed and set forth by Law.

11 Whether does the Parson, Vicar, or Farmour of the Benefice in your parish
cause or suffer any Curate or Minister, either to read service, etc. or to
preach, before he the said Curate (being no preacher) be examined and admitted
by the Ordinary in writing: and before he the said Curate being a preacher be
thereunto admitted according to Law, and before they show their said several
licenses unto the Churchwardens?

12 Whether does your Preacher in his prayer which he makes at the entrance
into his Sermon, use at all times the prayer for his Majesty, for our geacious
Queen, the Prince, and all the rest of the royal progeny, with his whole
title; as, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, defender of the
faith, etc. and of all causes, and over all persons within his highness
dominions, as well ecclesiastical as temporal, next and immediately under God,
supreme governor. And whether does he in like manner then pray for the
Archbishops and Bishops, as by law is also appointed?

13 Whether your Minister does serve two Cures in one day?

14 Whether does your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, every Sunday and Holy day
openly in the Church earnestly call for, hear, and instruct all the Children,
Apprentises, and Servants of both sexes, that be of convenient age within your
Parish, or at the least so many of them by course as the time will serve, and
as he may well hear and instruct one hour at the least, before or after
evening prayer, in the ten Commandments, the Articles of the belief, and the
Lords prayer: and diligently examine and teach them the Catechism, as it is
now allowed and set forth in the book of Common prayer?

15 Whether is there any man in your parish, being neither your Parson, Vicar,
nor Curate, that takes upon him to preach or read Lectures either in private
houses, or publicly in your church or chapel, who is not licensed to preach
or read there: or who does not once a year at the least administer the
Sacraments in your said Church or Chapel, where he so preaches or reads,
according to the book.

16 Whether your Minister has or does receive to the holy Communion any
persons which be not of his own parish, without testimony from the Minister
of the place where they dwell, what they be, that it may appear that they be
not persons excommunicate, or otherwise infamous.

17 Whether does your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, reject any from the holy
Communion, who is not by public fame, or by presentment of the Churchwardens
detected for a notorious Fornicator, Adulterer, or other wicked liver, or
disturber of his neighbors by whom public offense is given: and whether he
receive any such person so infamed or presented, to the holy Communion before
public penance enjoined by his Ordinary be by him first performed, to the
satisfaction of the Congregation according to the Law in that case provided?

18 Whether does your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, or any other Minister or
Preacher, baptize in your Parish Church or Chapel, any Infants, not in the
Font according to the ancient custom, but in a Basin, and urge the parents of
the said Infant to be present, in place of Godfathers for their children?

19 Whether does your Parson Vicar, or Curate, once every quarter of the year
read his Majesty's Injunctions openly and deliberately before his parishioners
at one time or at two several times in one day, according as in the said
Injunctions it is prescribed?

20 Whether has your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, or any other Minister,
publicly or privately preached, declared, or spoken any thing in your parish
in derogation of the book of Common Prayer, which is set forth by the laws
of this Realm, dispraysing, or deprauing the same, or any thing therein
contained; or against the present estate of the Ecclesiastical government,
established by the same authority, or against any office, function, or part
thereof, affirming the same to be unlawful?

21 Whether has your Parson or Vicar, more Benefices then one? if he has not,
whether is he resident upon that one? if he be not resident, where does he
remain? and whether does he leave a sufficient Minister and Preacher to supply
his absence, allowyng something yearly toward the relief of the poor? and
what does he so allow?

22 Whether is your Parson or Vicar, who has two Benefices within this Dioces;
or one Benefice in this Dioces, and an other forth of the same, resident one
half of the year on one of them, and the other half year, or the greater
part thereof upon his other Benefice: and whether does he leave the Benefice in
your parysh provided of a sufficient Preacher to serve it: and has an especial
care of some convenient hospitality to be kept in his absence according to his
ability, and the proportion of that living?

23 Whether does your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, keep a just and perfect note
of all such as do communicate in your parish, and do not rather, regarding
their private gain, receive their offeringes at Easter, deliver them Tokens,
enter them into their book, and so certify as communicantes those who never
received?

24 Whether does your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, keep any man or woman in their
houses, that are suspected to be either of evil religion, or of bad life: or
whether be they or any of them incontinent persons themselves, or given to
drunkenness, or to be haunters of tauerns, alehouses, or suspected places,
common Dicers, Carders, Tableplayers, Swearers, Dauncers, or otherwise
suspected persons of any notorious crime, or light and unseemly behavior, or
give evil example of life, or use disordered or unseemly apparel, either in
colors, guardes, or light fashion?

25 Whether there be any Ministers or Priests within your parish, which live
idly without any care, neither serving in any place, nor having any place of
reading or preaching, and so become offensive to their calling, and what be
their names who so live, and how long have they been with you?

Articles concerning the Church.
1 WHether have you in your parish Churches and Chapels all things necessary
and requisite for Common prayer and administration of the Sacraments,
especially the book of Common prayer with the new Calendar, two Psalters (all
set forth by his Majesty's especial commandment and Proclamation only to
be used, printed by his Highness Printer, the which you were by your
Archdeacons commanded from me, to have bought before Whitsontide last,) the
English Bible in the largest volume of the edition set forth by the Bishops,
and lately imprinted by the Kings Printer; the Table of the ten
Commandments, a convenient Pulpit well placed, a comely and decent Table
standing upon a frame for the holy Communion, with a fair Linen cloth to lay
upon the same, and some covering of Silk, Buckram, or other such like for the
clean keeping thereof; a fair and comely communion Cup of Silver, and a
cover of Silver for the same, which may serve also for the ministration of the
communion Bread, a decent large Surples with fleeues, and a strong Chest or
Box for the alms of the poor, with three locks and keys to the same, and
all other things necessary in and to the premises?

2 Whether there have grown in your Church since the last Visitation in the
year 1601. any contention betwixt any of the parishioners, touching the
placing or displacing of any in any seat or pew in the Church: and whether
there has been any Pew builded since the foresaid year 1601. in any your
Churches, without the express leave and consent first had of the Ordinary of
the Dioces, and by whom have any such been built.

3 Whether is your Church or Chapel, and the Chauncell well and sufficiently
repaired and kept without abuse of any thing: whether does your Parson, Vicar,
or Curate, or the Proprietarie or Farmer of your Parsonage or Vicarage in your
parish keep the Parsonage or Vicarage house with all other the edifices
thereunto appertaining in good and sufficient reparations: and whether is your
Churchyard well fenced and cleanly kept without any lapstall or other
annoyances,

4 Whether your Church be a Parsonage or a Vicarage presentatiue or bonatiue,
or otherwise served by a Curate: whether did they ever heretofore hear or
know that it was a Parsonage or Vicarage, and how came it to be decayed from
being presentatiue, to be in the state it now is, and when was it first
decayed, from being a benefice presentatiue, as you remember.

5 Whether your Fowls or Baptisteries be removed from the place where they
were wont to stand, toward the lower end of the Church: or whether any
persons, leaving the use of them, do christen or baptize in Basins, or other
vessels, not accustomably used in the Church before time: or do use any kind of
Lauor with a remooueable Basin, or have taken down the old and usual Font
heretofore used in your perish?

6 Whether is there in your Parish a sufficient Register book of Parchment of
marriages, christnings, and burials, provided at the charge of the Parish:
whether are all the names of those that have been either christened, married,
or buried, since the beginning of her lace Majesty's reign newly written into
the said Parchment book? Whether does the Minister every Sunday read the names
publicly of those that were either christened, married, or buried the week
before? Whether have you a public Chest with three locks, for the Minister
and the two Churchwardens to keep the said Book in: and whether have you
brought a transcript of all the names of such as have been christened, married,
and buried this last year into M. Blackwell my Register his office, as you are
bound to do every year hereafter, within a month after the Feast of Easter, by
the Constitutions.

Articles concerning Ecclesiastical Officers.
1 WHether the Chancellor, Archdeacon, Commissarie, Official, or any other
using Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in this Dioces, their Registers or Actuaries,
Apparators, or Summoners, have at any time winked at and suffered any
adulterers, fornicators, incests, or other faults or offenses presented unto
them, to pass and remain unpunished, and uncorrected for money, rewards,
bribes, pleasure, friendship, or any other partial respect?

2 Whether does the Chancellor, Commissaries, Archdeacons, or any other
Officials, hear any matters of office, or correction privately in their
chambers without the presence of the sworn Register or his deputy* or do
discharge any man's penance, for money, without the consent of the L. Bishop,
according to the constitutions; or do send any writing under their own hands
to your Church, without the Registers presence at the doing of it, either for
marryage of any couples, or for ending or ordering of any matter or penance?

3 Whether the Chauncelor, Official, or Commissarie, have caused for, or
caused the Churchwardens to make, bring, or to pay for any more Bills of
presentment, then once in every year; or do call for their quarter Bills, or
make the Churchwardens pay for them?

Articles concerning Schoolemaisters.
1 WWhether the Schoolemaister or Schoolemaisters within your parish openly or
privately in any Noble or Gentleman's house, or in any other place, be of good
and sinceere religion, life, and conversation, and be diligent in teaching and
bringing up of youth: and whether they have been examined, allowed, and
licensed for Schoolemaisters by the Ordinary in that behalf?

2 Whether your Schoolemaister or Schoolemaisters do themselves receive the
holy Communion as often as they ought to do: and whether do all their
Scholars, which be of age sufficient, and of copacitie by instruction, to
receive the Lords Supper, come to the Communion either in your Church or where
their Parents dwell once every year, and be diligent to hear Common prayer?

3 Whether your Schoolmaster or Schoolemasters do orderly on Sundays with
their Scholars, come to the Church of their parish where they teach, and there
see their Scholars placed in some convenient place, so as they do not disquiet
the minister or parish in time of divine service, but may exercise themselves
godly in reading and hearing the Service and Sermons, and in answering with the
congregation in reading of public prayer?

4 Whether the Schoolemaister or Schoolemaisters either private or public do
teach their Scholars the Catechism authorized by public authority, at the
least once every week, and do instruct and examine them in the same: or do
teach any other Catechism, and what Catechism it is that they so do teach?

5 Whether your Schoolemaister or Schoolemaisters, or any of them be known or
suspected to read unto their Scholars privately any unlawful Books: or
privately to instruct them in their young years either in popery,
superstition, or disobedience, or contempt to his Majesty and his laws
Ecclesiastical by public authority allowed?

6 Whether your Schoolemaister or Schoolemaisters, or any of them under
pretense of Catechizing their Scholars, which is a most godly order, carefully
by them to be observed, do keep lectures, readinges, or exposition in
divinity in their houses, having repair unto them of people not being of
their own family and househould?

7 Whether the Schoolemaister or Schoolemaisters within your parish, do teach
his or their Scholars any other Grammar then that which is commonly called the
Kings Grammar, set forth by the authority of King Henry the eight?

Articles concerning the Parishioners and others of the Laity.
1 WHether all Householders in your parish cause their children, servants, and
apprentises, both mankind and womankind, being above seven years of age, and
under twenty, which have not learned the Catechism, to come to the Church on
Sundays and Holy days at the time appointed for Cetechising, and there
diligently and obediently to hear, and what be the names of those that do not
cause their children, servants, and apprentises so to come to the Church to be
instructed and examined?

2 Whether the Churchwardens do deliver to the Archdeacon at his Visitation, a
note of all those who do not send their children and servants to be
catechized?

3 Whether any do work, or keep any shop open upon Saboth days, or upon
any Holy days appointed by the laws of this Realm to be keep Holy day, or
use any work or labor, or open show of their wares in any of those days?

4 Whether you your selves, or the Churchwardens in the years before you, have
suffered any unmarried women being begotten with child, to go out of your
parish before she has by you or them been presented to your Ordinary: or any
man defamed of whoredom, to depart unpunished, upon direction appointed by the
Ordinary? And forth of whose houses have they gone away with child
unpunished, and what be the names of such unmarried women which have been
delivered within your parish this three years last past, have gone away
without doing of penance?

5 Whether the parish Clarke be appointed according to the law, by the Parson
or Vicar of the parish, with the allowance of the Ordinary: and whether he be
not obedient to the Parson, Vicar, or Curate: and whether he be able to read,
and whether he keep the Books and Ornaments of the Church fair and clean,
and cause the Church, and Quire, the Communion Table and the Font, to be kept
clean and decent against the Service time, the Communion, Sermon, and Baptism?

6 Whether there be any person or persons ecclesiastical or temporal, within
your parish or else whese within this Dioces, that have retained and kept in
their custody, or that read, sell, utter, disperse, carry, or deliver to others
any English Books or Libels, set forth either on this side or beyond the Seas,
by Papists or Sectaries against the Kings supremacy in causes
ecclesiastical, or against true Religon and Catholic doctrine now publicly
professed in this Church, or the government or discipline of the Church of
England, now within this Realm received and established by common authority,
and what their names and surnames are?

7 Whether there be any in your parish who are noted, known, or suspected to
conceal or keep hidden in their houses any Mass books, portesses,
breuiaries, or other books of popery and superstition, or any Challices Copes,
Vestments, Albs, or other ornaments of superstition, uncancelled or undefaced,
which it is to be coniectured they do keep for a day, as they call it?

8 Whether there be in your parish any popish or sectary recusant or recusants,
which for any cause whatsoever, forbear to come to Church to common prayer, or
to hear Gods word preached, pretending it unlawful to come to our assemblies,
as the Church of England now stands, established by his Majesty's authority,
and what their several name or names are, and how long they have been
recusants?

9 Whether any do refuse to receive the holy Communion at their own Ministers
hands, either because he is not a Preacher, or because he duly observes the
order of ministration appointed by the book, and who they be that do go from
their own parish, to receive at any other ministers hands?

10 Whether any of your parishioners having a Preacher to their Parson, Vicar,
or Curate, do absent themselves from his Sermons, and resort to any other place
to hear other preachers?

11 Whether all the people of your parish above 16. years of age, and
especially householders, having no lawful excuse to be absent, do resort with
their servants and children to their parish Church or Chapel on the Holy
days, and on the Sundays to morning and evening prayer, and who they be that
either negligently or wilfully absent themselves, or do irreverently behave
themselves in the Church, or use any gaming or pastime abroad or in any house,
or sit in the street or Churchyard, or in any tavern, or alehouse, upon
the Sunday, or Holyday, in the time of Common prayer, Sermon, or reading of the
Homilies, or any of them, either before or after noone?

12 Whether the forfeyture of xii. pence for every time of absence from the
Church upon every Sunday and Holyday, appointed by a Statute made in the first
year of the late Queen Elizabeth's reign, to be levied and taken according to
the same Statute (the tenor whereof is set down in the beginning of this
Book) by the Churchwardens of every person that offends, and by them be put
to the use of the poor of the parish if it be not so le^^ed, by whose fault it
is?

13 Whether there be any Inkeepers, Alewiues, Victuallers, or Tiplers, that
suffer or do admit any person or persons in their houses to eat, drink, or
play at Dice, Cards, Tables, Bowls, or such like games, in the time of Common
prayer or Sermon, on the Sundays or Holidays: or any Butchers, or other that
commonly use to sell meat or other things in the time of common prayer,
preaching, or reading of Homilies? and whether in any Faires or common Markets
falling upon the Sundays, there be showing of any wares before morning prayer
be done: and whether any markets and selling of wares be used or suffered in
any Churchyards on the Sabbath day by common Packmen or Pedlers going about,
or any Butchers?

14 Whether the Churchwardens of the last year, has given to the Parson or
Vicar and the parish, a just account of the Church goods that were committed
to their charge, according to the custom that has been before time used: and
what Church goods they or any other have sold, and to whom, and whether to the
profit of your Church or no: and what has been done with the money thereof
coming?

15 Whether the Churchwardens and Swornmen, since the fourth day of August
1601. have of any private corrupt affection concealed any crime or other
disorder in their time done in your parish, and have not presented the same to
the Bishop, Chauncelor, Archdeacon, Commissarie, or such other as had
authority to reform the same? and whether they or any of them, at any such
time as they should have been at divine service on Sundays and Holy days, and
should there have observed others that were absent, have been away themselves,
at home, or in some Tavern or Alehouse, or else about some worldly business,
or at bowls, cards, tables, dice, or other gaming, without regard of their
office and duty in that behalf?

16 Whether your Minister and you the Churchwardens, or any other in your
parish have in your regestries made any orders, or do use to call any parties
before you for any cause to be ordered by the Ecclesiastical laws, and so do
use a kind of Presbiterie or censuring over your neighbors, under pretense of
your vestrie meetings?

17 Whether any of your parish, being of convenient age, have not received the
holy Communion thrice this last year at the least, and namely at Easter last,
or thereaboutes for once, and what their names are, or which at their receiving
have not signified the same before to your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, that he
might conveniently examine them: and who have refused to come to him to be
examined?

18 Whether there be any in your parish that does administer the goods of
those that be dead without lawful authority; or any that suppress the last
will of the dead, or any Executors that have not fulfilled their testators last
will, in paying of legacies given to the Church, or to other good and godly
uses; as to the relief of poverty, to Orphans, poor Scholars, poor Maidens
marriages, Highways, and such like, and by whom are they so deteyned?

19 Whether there be any in your parish, that since the fourth of August 1601.
has or does offend contrary to the Statute made in the seven and thirtieth
year of the reign of King Henry the eight, for the reformation of Usury,
and revived by an Act made in the thirteenth year of the reign of our late
Queen Elizabeth, taking above the rate of ten pounds for the lending of an
hundred pounds by the year: and what be the names of such offenders?

20 Whether has your Minister, or any of the parish, without the consent or
priuitie of the Ordinary, caused any to do penance, or be punished either
openly or otherwise, for any crime punishable by the Ecclesiastical laws
only, and what be the names of the parties that have been so punished, and in
what manner?

21 Whether there be any amongst you that do use Sorcerie or Witchcraft
punishable by the Ecclesiastical laws, or that be suspected of the same: and
whether any use any Charms or unlawful Prayers: and whether any do resort to
any such for help and council, and what be the names, both of such as use it,
and of such as resort to them for help?

22 Whether any couples that be married in private houses within these three
years last past, have been known, or suspected to have been married by any
popish Priest or otherwise, after any other order then is appointed by the
Church of England?

23 Whether there be among you any blasphemers of the name of God, great or
often swearers, adulterers, fornicators, harlots, or whoremasters, incestuous
persons, bawdes, or receivers of naughty and incontinent persons, or harborers
of women with child which be unmarried, conueying or suffering them to go away
before they do any penance: or any that be vehemently suspected of any such
faults, or that be not of good name and fame touching such crimes and faults
of drunkards, or ribawdes: or any that be malicious, contentious, or
uncharitable persons, raylers, scoulders, or sowers of discord between
neighbors, and especially raylers against ministers and against their marryage,
and what be all their several names?

24 Whether there be any in these parts, that have been married within the
degrees of affinity or consanguinitie, by the laws of God forbidden: or any
that being divorced or separated for the same, do yet notwithstanding cohabite
and keep company still together: or any that being married without those
degrees, have unlawfully forsaken their wives or husbands, and married others:
Any that being divorced or separated a sunder, have married again: any that
have married without Banes three several Sundays or Holy days solemnly
asked, and without lawful license thereunto: or any couples married that live
not together, but slanderously live apart?

25 Whether there be any in your parish who will come to hear the Sermon, but
will not come to the public prayer appointed by the book of Common prayer,
making a schism or division (as it were) between the use of public prayer
and preaching? And whether there be any, who being present at public prayer,
do not devoutly and humbly kneel upon their knees, at such times as by the
Book of common prayer they are appointed; to wit, when they make a general
confession of their sins: when all prayers and Collects are read: in the time
of the Lettenie: when the ten Commandments are read, and at their receiving
of the holy Communion, etc. and what are their names that have at any time
showed themselves undutiful and vnreuerent in this behalf?

26 Whether the Minister and Churchwardens have suffered any Lord of Mis-rule,
or Summer lord or ladies, or any disguised persons: any players, or May-games,
or any Moris-dauncers at any time to come irreverently into the Church or
Church yard, and there to dance or play, or show them selves disguised in the
time of Common prayer, and what they be that commit such disorder, or that
accompanied or maintained them: or any Plays to be played in the Church?

27 Whether there be any married women or others within your Parish, which
after chyldbirth, refuse or contemn to come to the Church to give God thanks
for their delivery, and to have the prayers publicly appointed in that behalf
by the book of common prayer?

28 Whether any within your Parish do resort unto Barnes, Fields, Woods,
private Houses, or to any extraordinay exposition of Scriptures, or conferences
together, or that be drawers or perswaders of others to any such scismaticall
conuenticles.

29 Whether any do keep their children unbaptized longer then is conueuient,
unless it be for sickness of the child, or other urgent occasion: And whether
any do carry their children from the Parish they are borne in, to other
Parishes to be bapitzed, and so refuse their own Parish: or do bring strange
ministers into their own houses to baptize their children privately, according
to their own fantasies;

30 Whether any notorious Recusant, who obstinately refuses to be partaker
with the Church of England in public prayer, and hearing of the word of God
preached, who is for his disobedience and contempt excommunicated, and dies
excommunicate, be buried in Christian burial, not having before his death
sought to be absolved, and testified the same his submission to some honest and
discreet man, who shall upon his oath signify to the Bishop of the Dioces,
whereby his Lordship may give order to the Ordinary, before whom he was
excommunicate for his absolution.

AT the delivery of your Bill of presentment, at the time and place above set
down, you are likewise in the said Bill, to set down the names of all such as
have been buried at any time since the seventh of August 1604. being men,
maids, or widows: and likewise the names of such as have been married by any
License since that time, and out of what Court they have been granted, since
the said seventh of August.

FINIS.

