A godly exhortation, by occasion of the late judgment of God, showed at
Parris-garden, the thirteenth day of IANVARIE: where were assembled by
estimation; above a thousand persons, whereof some were slain; and of that
number, at the least, as is credibly reported, the third person maimed and
hurt.

Given to all estates for their instruction, concerning the keeping of the
Sabbath day.

By John Field Minister of the word of God.

Exodus 20. 8. Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holier. Exodus 31. 14. Ye
shall therefore keep the Sabbath, for it is holy unto you: he that defiles it,
shall die the death: therefore whosoever woorketh therein, shall be even
cutoff, from among his people. Published by Authority.

GOD IS MY HELP. Psalm. 7. 11. GOD IS MY HELPER printer's device of Robert
Waldegrave

AT LONDON; Printed by Robert Walde-graue, dwelling without Temple-barre, and
Henry Carre in Paul's Churchyard. 1583.

TO THE RIGHT honorable, the Lord MAYOR, OF THE CITY OF London: and to the
worshipful, M. WILLIAM FLEETEVVOOD, Esquire, Sergeant at the Law, Recorder of
the honorable City of London; and one of the Queens Majesty's Justices of
Peace and Quorum, within her highness said City and Counties, of SVRRIE and
MIDLESEX: and to the worshipful Aldermen of the said City, John Field wishes
increase of grace, and constancy in the blessed truth of God to the end of
their lives. Amen.
YOu will perhaps marvel (right honorable and worshipful in Christ) that I
taking occasion to speak somevvhat, by this late and fearful example of Gods
judgment: do dedicate this pore and sudden labor unto you, as though it
should more concern you then others. I profess that I do it advisedly, and my
reason is, because it most concerns you, and such as are in authority. For
who are more specially bound to look unto the observation of the laws of
God, then the magistrates, who are set up as conductors and leaders of the
people, in steed of God? And although you may say that this thing happened out
of your jurisdiction whereby you might seem to be cleared: yet forasmuch as
they that resorted, unto this profane spectacle (and were justly punished,
with their own transgression) were of your city, and you did not restrain
them being under your commandment: this transgression must needs also reach to
you Is it not a lamentable thing, that after so long preaching of the Gospel,
there should be so gteat profanation amongst us? that Theaters should be
full, and churches be emptier that the streets should be replenished, and the
places of holy exercises, left destitute? I write not this simply but in
respect, and by comparison. For I know that Churches (thanks be to God) are
frequented? But what is this in respect of the multitude? Why should not
holy places, in respect of their holy exercises be more frequented, then these
places of abuse, that undoubtedly provoke Gods heavy displeasure? For admit
that the thing it self were a recreation, lavvfull by the word of God: yet
who will grant it upon the Lords Sabbath? upon that day of rest, wherein
our exercise should be in spiritual and holy works. If you say that this
thing belongs, not unto you: because that Parris garden, is out of your
jurisdiction: yet why are these men suffered to bring their Bears into the
city, that thereby they may gather your company unto them? It were duty in
you to hinder these, and to take order, that none of the city should repair
unto such places: Nay further, you ought to provide that at the time, when by
the law of the land, all are commanded to resort to public prayers and
reading of the word of God in the church, the same word may be also expounded
unto them: so should you both keep the people committed to you of God under
her majesty, from wicked abuses of his holy Sabboths, which provoke his wrath
against the City: and also procure them to be godly exercised, to their
increase in all obedience to her majesty and to your own authority. But I
would* to God your selves were not examples of this disorder* For if there be
any market, or piece of a Fair, falling out upon the Sabbath, or on the
saterdaye before, any other triumph, Shooting, or show of actiuity to be showed
in it: you spare not to do it less upon this day then upon any other. And
though preachers have cried out, from time to time, for the reformation of such
profanation, yet there has been little of no amendment at al. But I beseech
you, even in the bovvells of Christ, as you have received the glad tidings of
your salvation, and do make profession of it: so learn now at length to put
it in practice. Be not unprofitable hearers of the word of God any longer, nor
dull beholders of Gods judgments, neither shut your ears when God cries
out by them so loudly, that their sound goes not only throughout the land,
but also even throughout the whole world, least you be made also to feel
them. God has spoken to us many wais, his frowning cou^tena^ce has appeared
by this long and lingering visitation, both here and elsewhere: by this
unseasonable wether, and by this present judgment, that is yet so green and
fresh in memory. I am sure if you lack any necessary help and assistance,
for so good and godly a work, you may be, and shall be supported to the
uttermost. But hither to neither the word of God by the ministry, and voice
of the preachers: the godly and noble advise of their honors, the unspeakable
benefit, and comfort of your selves, your City, and all your vviues and
children, nor the sundry judgments of God following one another, and
threatening more to come, could yet be able to stir you up to any such worthy
duty in this behalf, as the Lord no doubt requires at your haundes.
Wherefore I beseech you in time, even in Gods fear: consider what belongs
unto your peace, and according to the places, wherein God has set you, be
vigilant and diligent for your own good. It shall be no profit unto others,
the gain shall be yours, many disorders shall be stopped, many ignorant and
erring minds instructed and reclaimed; God shall be served, the prince better
honored, your selves obeyed, and every one ranged to keep a happy course
toward heaven. Now the Lord Jesus establish your hearts in his truth, and
give you a svveete feeling and taste of his exceeding mercy, that with true
judgment you may discern his judgments, truly turning unto him, and
fearing under his hand, that in the end you may be saved. Amen.

Fare you well this eyghteenth of January. 1583. Your humble and bound in
Christ. ^ohn Field.

The Lord Jesus open our hearts, and give us true understanding, that we may
fear his judgments, and profit under his hand, to turn from our sins*
till faith and assurance be wrought in our hearts, of that everlasting
kingdom, which he has freely by his own blood purchased for us. Amen.
THere is no man will deny, as I suppose (dearelibeloued in Christ) but ye the
more a man has received of ye graces and gifts of God, ye more is he bound by
duty unto his obedience. And surely if this be true of all (as it is most
certain) then of all others, has this little Island as a garden of the Lord,
been decked and garnished with sundry most gracious and excellent gifts,
whether we respect those that are temporal or spiritual, that the Lord might
work in us, both duty and thankfulness. For concerning both these, where
should I first begin yt I might reckon them all up, being so infinite both in
the one and in the other. And first concerning temporal gifts, what is it,
that in his rich mercy, either for ye sustentation and maintenance of this
life, or for other earthly commodities and pleasures, that he has not bestowed
upon us? he has set us, as it were in the paradise of the world: where even
within our selves we have all good and necessary things: he has given us the
fat of the earth, and ye dew of heaven: he has made ye earth fruitful under
us, and the heavens beneficial above us: we have corn, wool, flesh, and fish
in great plenty, ye beasts of ye earth, and the fouls of ye air are ours: we
have gold, silver Copper, Tin, Lead and Iron, with other commodious metals
in all plenty. Again, with these earthly commodities and all the rest, he has
given us public peace, protection and quietness. Every man enjoys his wife,
Children, goods, Cattle, and possessions. Every man sits under his own
Vine, and hears the voice of his children in the streets. Our young men and
our maidens, rejoice in public places, and the noise of Music is heard in
our assemblies. We drink in Bowls of gold, and in cups of silver: our heads
are anointed with sweet ointmentes, and our faces are cheereful, because our
hearts are merry. Our Princes sit in the gates, and our Nobility ride in
Charriots and Coches. The voice of mourning is not heard amongst us, neither
has terror and fear amazed us. Our weapons are turned into Plowe Shares, and
Lions and Lambs do play together without hurting one another.

As for spiritual things bestowed upon us, they are infinite: how should I
give but a shadow of them? God has given himself unto us to be our God, and
has chosen us to be his people. He has given unto us his Son Jesus Christ,
and with him, all other good things, necessary for our salvation: he has given
him to us, his enemies, to take our nature upon him, to die for our sins,
and to undergo everlasting damnation, to ye end he might acquit and deliver
us. For this he fulfilled ye law, wrastled hand to hand with his fathers
judgments, was cast, condemned, and crucified, and as a man rejected of God,
and thrown down into the extremest humiliation, became the most forelorne of
the world, that he might recover happiness for us. And therefore he advanced
his power, and brake the chains of death and of hell, ascended with glory,
making a show of all his enemies, and giving gifts unto men. For all this he
wrought for us, and for our redemption, that we might be a peculier people unto
himself: upon whom he would power forth the whole riches of his mercy. And
in deed upon his Church what is there, that he might have more done for her,
that he has not done. He has purged her by his own blood out of her blood,
and crowned her with his righteousness. He has given her a place in the
highest heavens, and strengthened her to triumph over all her enemies. He has
forgiven her her sins, and decked her with special joy, and peace that
passes all understanding: he has given her the gospel, a tidings of comfort,
wherein the riches of his grace are fully displaied. Can the heart of man
conceive, the tongue utter, or the pen set down, what God has done for his
people in all times and ages? he did much for his people in Egypt land: but he
has done more for us. He did much for the^ being in wilderness: but he has
done more for us. He did much for them when he made so many kings to fall
before them, when he brought the^ to the land of promise: but he has done more
for us: he has euercome a mightier army, and made greater Kings to bow under
his scepter and brought us to a larger inheritance, which can neither* wither
nor perish. He fed them with Manna, that corrupted, when they transgressed the
commandment touching the sabbath: but he has fed us with him self, that our
corruption might be put off, and we might be clad with immortallity and
everlasting glory. The Jews were his people, by a conditional covenant, that
stood in their obedience: they were the apple of his eye, and signet of his
scale, to whom he gave peculier blessings: and yet because they were
unthankful, and knew not the day of their visitation, they have no part by
reason of their unbelief, in the promises that were made to Abraham and the
rest of the Patriarks, to their seed and posterity: but we are his people
adopted, assured in a new covenant, sealed in the blood and obedience of Jesus
Christ, the end of all the promises: whose salvation is now wrought and
performed, if he be in us and we in him; if his glorious grace and mercy have
not appeared in vain unto us. What could the Lord have done more for his
people then he did for them, and yet Isay the Prophet vpbraided them for their
ingratitude, so many excellent been fits of God being bestowed upon the^? I will
sing to my Isay. 5.
beloved a song of my beloved of his vyneyard. My beloved had a vineyard in a
very fruitful hill, he hedged it about, and gathered out the stones of it, he
planted it with the best plants, and buylt a Tower in the mydest of it, and
made a winepres in it. He looked that it should have brought forth grapes, but it
brought forth wyld grapes. O Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah* Judge
therefore, between me and my vineyard. What could I have done more to my
vineyard, that I have not done unto it? Why have I looked that it should bring
forth grapes, and it brings forth wild Grapes? Now I will tell you, what I
will do to my Vyneyard, I will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten
up, I will break down the Wall* and it shall be trodden under foot. And I will
lay it waste, it shall not be cut nor dug, but Briars and thorns shall grow
up: I will also command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it.

You see how the Prophet sets forth the large liberality and goodness of
God toward his people: and again their unthankfulness, with those judgments
that it drew upon them: The benefits no doubt that God had bestowed upon them
were excellent, but their abuse was like wise intolerable, and therefore for
the one, there is threatened the taking of them away, and for the other, what
horrible punnishments he would bring upon, them He takes his occasion, from a
plain parable, because it should be understood: leaning down to their capacity,
even as our savior Christ did in his documentes and instructions. And yet I
suppose he could have soared as high in the clouds as any other. So Paul used
similitudes taken from husbandry, from building, from running 1. Cor. 14. 18.
19. Ioh. 15. 14.
and from fighting and such like. Moses in a plain style applies himself to
the capacity of the rude people, in the highest history that ever was
written, concerning the creation of the world. This is against his beloved,
his spouse and Church, even to his beloved the spouses friend.

The situation of this vineyarde was in an open and fruitful place: It had a
notable Tower in it, to defend it, it had a hedge round about it, and a wine
press in it. These were rare and excellent benefits, and yet instead of
grapes, it brought forth wild grapes. The like in every respect agrees with
us. He has given us a lot in a pleasant and good place, whereas he might have
set us in one more barren. He has in mercy planted his vineyard amongst us,
hedged it about and built a Tower of defense, and a wine press in it, to
gather the fruit of it: this was not done by our own arm, nor by our own
election, but in his good mercy: And as he waited for fruit, in great patience
before his judgments were executed, so he has waited upon us these many
years: he sits looking to that tree mentioned in the Gospel, which long since
had been plucked up by the roots, had nothe in a wonderful patience expected
our conversion and better fruits. But alack it was ill with them, it is worse
with us, they brought forth wild grapes, but ours are scarce grapes. They
were taxed with many sins, but ours are multiplied as the sand of the sea,
and as the drops of heaven. We are come to the dotage of the world, set on
mischief, and growing to worse and worse iniquity, as our Savior says is
multiplied, and the nearer he has approached unto us, the faster and further of
does the world fly from him. It is so laden with sins and abominations, that
grievous is shipwreck, when a ship is left to the winds to be tossed, and
without a guide, it must needs be drowned. Even so, must this tottering
world come to utter destruction. Only they shall be preserved that walk with
God, to believe his promises, and to fear his judgments: They shall be
preserved that are his, of all times: whom he has loved, chosen, called,
justified, sanctified and saved, in Jesus Christ his son. These shall not
abuse his patience, but tremble at his judgments, and be careful to walk in
all dutiful obedience. They shall make have to meet him, when fire is come
forth from him, but the wicked shall scorn his wonderful and merciful long
sufferaunce* to their own destruction.

Because he cutteth not down the tree at once, being staid by the prayers and
humiliations of his servants: that in contrite hearts how down before him: the
wicked insulte and are more encouraged, and as it were fleshed in their sins
and wickedness, even to dispite him, (as Pharaoh and other tyrants did) upon
whom yet he Exodus 5. etc. Exodus 17. Number. 21. 31.
brought a swifte and a sudden destruction: And yet the greatest Oaks are cut
down with a little blast from him and the highest buildings can not stand if
he do but shake them. For he is just, even as he is merciful, and he loves
justice to punish the wicked, and Psalm. 1^.
to mayntain the godly. If the thrones of earthly princes, must stand upon
these pillars, no doubt the throne of ye highest, yt is Judge of the whole world
must be founded thereon, that as the Prophet says. He may do Justice, and
Iere. 9.
show mercy and judgment upon the earth. So he made Amalecke an example of
his wrath, Canaen the king of Arad, Sehon of the Amor^its: and Ogg of Basan,
So he met with Eglon of Moab, Judge. 3. Judge. 4.
slain by the hand of Aod, and also with the army of Iabine king of Ason,
that had oppressed Israel by the Judge. 7.
space of twenty years. Gedeon was his hand against the Madianit^s, and though
Oreb and Zeb fled away, yet they were afterward taken and killed.

The Princes of the Phylistims though they were many and mighty, and thought
themselves in safety and assurance in their Temple of Dagon: yet his hand
found them out, and in mocking of Sampson: they lastly received a just
judgment meet for their iniquity. what should I speak of Saul Judge. 17. 2.
Sam. 15. 17
and Agag, of huge Goliath, of Achab, of Hazael, of Senacharib, of Balthazar, of
Antiochus, Herod and all the like: because 1. King. 20.
they were cruel, were they exempt 2. Kin. 6. 7. 8.
from judgments? No no, he found them out, and he will find out all his
enemies. He will strike them upon the hearie scalpes, and their cheek bones
shall be broken, he will ^owe their backs, and his judgments shall declare his
justice, from generation to generation. The lives of the wicked are not in
their own hands, but the Godly are the cause of their prosperity. These from
whom they seek to take l^^e, goods, and limbs, are in cause, that they are
spared for a time in the world. And hereby as God calls his to repentance, so
he hardneth the Godles in their sins, that he may be glorified in his just
judgments. But where are the wise to mark these things, and to make their
profit? Who takes a note of his judgments showed against our
unthankfulness, that we might be moved to repentance? Our benefits have been
greater, then ever were bestowed upon any Nation excepting one or other: and do
we walk worthy of them? Is there thankfulness in us* to return unto him the
praise of his mercies. He has given unto us his word, which is an
incomparable jewel, in respect of which the psalmograph says: He has not
dealt so with every nation: but do we bring forth the fruits of it. Nay do we
not rather tread it under our feet, as it were in dispite of the author of
it? Is it not a lantern unto our feet, with out which, we must stray? And is
it not the food of the soul, with out which we must starve: and yet who does
either seek unto it, or feel the sweet comfort of it? If the prophet appealed
to the inhabitauntes of Jerusalem, and to the men of Judah, to judge this
cause, being come to an issue, in the assurance of it, committing it even to
them selves: shall not our own mouths, in the testimony of our conscience
pronounce sentence against us? who seek his grace to late, and stay until his
irreuocable sentence is passed? He that has ears to hear let him hear,
while God speaks unto us. He that might have been both judge and accuser, will
have us both to judge and accuse our selves, that we may understand, how
greatly we have displeased him. And if our conscience pronounce against us, is
not God greater then our conscience? If our own heart condemn us, is not God
greater then our heart? We are wont to be partial in our own causes, because
our senses are dull to perceive our own iniquities: and yet he commits this
to our selves, to the end to draw us to speedy repentance.

True it is, yt our partialities, though we would flatter our selves, and could
be so impudent to do it, that cannot stain his judgments, but even as he
took away the hedge of his vineyard, showing him self a just judge, in being
avenged upon their unthankfulness, so he will deal with us. That which he has
builded amongst us, he will overthrow again. That which he has compassed about
from foreign force, from oppression of enemies, to keep out unclean beasts,
that he might have received a large croppe, he will lay open and waste. The
wall and tower, shall be ouertourned within, beasts, dogs and hogs without
shall fall upon it, devour and trample it under their feet. One stone shall
bruise another, and the clouds shall not rain, to make it fruitful but to
make it rank with thorns and briers. O England repent, thou that have tasted of
so many blessings, and yet have provoked God with so many sins. O London
repent, thou that haste sit as a Lady and Queen over thy neighbor Cities, to
whom the Lord has given besides temporal blessings these precious jewels:
sending thee many messengers to warn thee, to preach unto thee, and to comfort
thee: but thou have not regarded the day of thy visitation. If thy hedge be
taken away, if thou be laid open and waste for thy horrible sins. If the
Lord plant his vineyard in an other place, a more fruitful soil: what shall
be come of thee? Is God more bound unto thee, then he was unto his own people?
Have you any greater privilege, then they who were once so precious in his
sight? And if he spared not them, will he spare thee, that do pass them in
all abominations? they regarded not the holy commandementes of God, to keep
them and observe them, no more do thou. They were Idolaters and followed the
Gods of the Nations, every one rearing up an Idol in his own heart, and
following his own will, and so do thou: thou art as far from the true
spiritual worship of God, belonging to such a majesty, even as they were.
His precious name is profaned and abused every where, in swearing,
forswearing, and lying, thinking, speaking, and practicing superstitiously and
wickedly of it. And as for the Lords Sabbath, as in times past they did defile
it, did not consecrat it to God, to rest from sin and to follow his will,
but gave him only a ceremonial and outward service, defiled with following
their own wills, even so do thou. This day is the sabbath of the Lord thy
God: that is to say: a day consecrated to his glory, wherein, all solemn
assemblies of Gods saints should be occupied in hearing his word, in giving
themselves to prayer, in receiving his sacraments, in meditating of his
wonderful works, and putting in practice of holy duties: but we contrariwise,
even from the highest to the lowest, break this Sabbath of the Lord our God,
whither we come or do not come to the place appointed: For if we come, we come
with profane minds, divided from God, for custom and fashions sake, without
any preparation for so spiritual a service, there hearing we hear not, to
make any conscience to learn our duties to grow in knowledge and carefully to
practice holy doctrines: we come as they did in the Prophets times, with lame
sacrifices, having served first our selves, and as they did in their solemn
fasts: We bow down our heads like Bull rushes, and perhaps have torn
garments, we put on the countenance of sorrow, and our faces are not
anointed: but there is in us no sorrow yt leads to repentance, nor hearty
turning unto our God. We come to sit before the ministers, as ye people then
did before the prophets, to hear the word preached, as some pleasant song:
but when they have said they have done: we go our ways, and they pass
through our judgments, but the word is passed as a dream. And if these
sins be found, in all sorts of our comers, what shall we think of them that
come not at all, who through covetousness and profanation despise these holy
assemblies: either following their wordly chaffaire and business, or else
thinking that the sabbath is well enough kept, if they give God some little
piece thereof, othersome i^ they be idle, following their pleasures, and
wicked pastimes with all greedines. O Lord what shall become of these loose and
sinnful dais? How many profane persons are there in this realm, both in
City and Country, that having taken a muster of all the holidays in the year,
urge the keeping of them, and will loose no jot of tune, that they may follow
their vayn delights, and yet know not truly how to keep one holy or Sabbath
day to the praise and honor of God? Both in Summer and Winter, they can find
occasions, to bereave themselves of spiritual comfortes, either to run out
into the country with their bags and bottels, or else being at home to
follow wicked exercises. Every door has his stake, and the streets are full
of blazers of iniquity. There is gadding to al kind of gaming, and there is no
Tavern or Alehouse, if the drink be strong, that lacks any company: There
is no dycing house, bowling alley, or Theater, that can be found empty. Those
flagges of defiaunce against God, and trumpets that are blown to gather such
company, will sooner prevail to fill those places, then the preaching of the
holy word of God, the Catechizing and instructing of Children and Servants,
can be to fill Churches.

Nothing can stop them from the same: neither fear of danger, loss of
time, corruption of manners, infection of diseases, expense of money, suspi^ion
of honesty and such like. But to the other, where to they should come with
great joy and cheerfully, as to the house of the Lord, nothing in a manner can
allure or draw them, neither their own necessity, the sweetness and comfort
of true doctrine, the reformation of manners, the holiness and obedience that
by the grace of God, is wrought in his Children, by such exercises: nor the
hope and assurance it self of faith and salvation. Here three pence, six
pence, a shilling or two a quarter, is a great matter and a wonderful burden,
much humming and hawing about it, but pounds and hundreds can be well enough
afforded, in following these least plesures, every door has a payment, and
every Gallerie makes a yearly stipend. Every dog has a collar, and every
Bear a prise.

Here is no fear of infection, nor any inconvenience or discommoditie that
can let them. Is not this think you to keep the Sabbath? the laws of the
land have Godly provided, that all the people of all sorts, shall repair to
the public places of Gods worship, then to be taught and instructed in the
wholesome word of salvation, and there is a penalty set upon it: but how this
is looked unto thorowout the land, I leave it to them to consider that are
wise and in authority. The Lord blessed the sabbath day, and sanctified it,
because in it he rested from all the works of his hand, that hereby we might
learn, to rest from sin and iniquity, and consecrate our selves to his
spiritual service. And this he instituted for man's commodity, that al flesh
might come to worship before his face: He gave them double food in respect of
this, that it might abide with them, and that none might come out of their
place, but might rest in his provision and providence: So that it appears, he
would not have them occupied in making provision for the belly, to gather
sticks, to tread the press, or to carry burdens, either upon their own
shoulders, or upon their beasts The commandment for the observing of it, is
so often set down in the scripture, as nothing more. The seventh day is the
Sabbath of the Lord thy God: Thou shall do no manner of work in it, neither
thou, nor thy Son or Daughter, thy man seruannt or thy maid, thy Cattle and
the stranger that is within thy gates. Keep my sabbath, for it is holy unto
you: He that shall defile it, shall dye the death: He that shall work on that
day, his soul shall be cut off, from the midst of his people.

Now to work, is to do things of our own, that are profane or wicked: And
because the commandments of God are moral, the equity of this commandment
belongs unto us. In deed there was some thing peculiar to the Jews, in
respect of the ceremony, and the day: But there is yet a day to be kept,
because intermissions from the travails of this life, are necessary both for
the soul and body: That both the one and the other may be provided for, the
Soul to be fed, and the body to rest, our selves and our Seruanntes, (yea
our very cattle) are to be favored in this behalf, because of this solemn
consecration to God. And therefore the king of Niniuie, commanded, that that
solemn Fast should be extended even to the Ox within the staule, and to the
Horse in the stable, and to every beast of the field.

Blessed (says I say) is the man that Isay. 56. 2.
does this, and the Son of that man that lays hold of this, taking heed,
that be defile not my Sabbath, and keeping his Isay. 58. 13.
hands that they do no evil: If thou shall turn thy foot from my Sabbath,
do not that thou delightest in, on my holy day: If thou shall call it, thy
delight holy to Jehovah and honorable, and shall honor it, not in exercising
thine own ways, not in performing that which thou delyghtest in, not in
speaking a vayn word, then I will advance thee, delighting in the Lord, upon
the high places of the Earth: and thou shall enjoy the possession of Jacob thy
father, because the mouth of the Lord speaks it.

So God speaks by the Prophet Iere. 17. 21.
Jeremy also: Take beede unto your selves and bear not burdens upon the
Sabbath day, neither bring those things into the Ezec. 20. 20.
gates of Jerusalem. etc. The Prophets are very vehemente in this behalf: and
therefore our sin stands at the door, that have made no regard of these
things. For we do worse then bear burdens.

Not only our carriers Post up and down, but men travail all most with
out conscience in every quarter, yea we do things that are naught, and
therefore the wrath of God, must needs be powered out against us.

And yet God has showed us within these few years, many fearful signs and
tokens of his heavy anger and displeasure, and one judgment does even
overtake another, and yet nothing can move us.

He has spoken to us from Heaven by Comettes, Ecclypses, and fiery
impressions, he has set Stars in unwonted places, and sent upon the world,
strange tempests. He has rumbled in the howels of the earth far and wide:
and has losed the depest and strongest foundations. The earth has quaked at
his presence, and the very creature has sled from before his face. He has
opened the windows of heaven, and covered the earth with his displeasure. He
has made bare the roots of the corn, and fed the fowls with our
nourishment. He has sent out the pestilence, and burning fire from before his
feet, that they might wast and devour the inhabitauntes of the earth. Many
men have received short summons, to appear before him, and to render account
of their doings. They have perished (as Job says) by the blast of his mouth,
and by the breath of his Job. 4. 9. 10.
nostrils they are consumed. By the roaring of the Lion, and by the voice of
the fierce Lion. and with the teeth of the Lions whelps, they are ground to
powder.

And yet notwithstanding all these Judgments and many more, that I can not
reckon up, who turns to the Lord, who leaves his wickedness: and forsakes
the company of fools? Who is wise to understand the plagues at home and the
miseries that are abroad, that he may be prepared to a better Kingdom? Who
looks to the keepinge of the Sabbath, and considers this fearful example,
fallen out amongst us?

But that it may be remembered the better to do us good, that by ye harms of
other, we may make our profit I will set it down as plainly as I can, and as
truly as can be gathered from the examination of those same common euidenses,
that have fallen out: waying some circumstances that shall teach thee, that it
was not the work of any man, but the finger even of God himself, to warn us
to turn and especially from these sins that we commit in that behalf, for
profaning of the Sabbath, which are too horrible

You shall understand therefore (dear Christians) that upon the last Lords
day being ye thirteen day of the first month, that cruel and loathsome
exercise of bayting Bears being kept at Parrisgarden, in ye after none, in the
time of common prayers, and when many other exercises of Religion, both of
Preaching and Catechizinge were had in sundry places of the City, diverse
Preachers having not long before also cried out against such prophanatious:
yet (the more pity) there resorted thither a great company of people of all
sorts and conditiones, that the like number, in every respect (as they say)
had not been seen there a long time before.

Being thus vngodlilie assembled, to so unholy a spectacle and specially
considering the time: the yearde, standinges, and Galleries being full
fraught, being now amiddest their iolitie, when the Dogs and Bear, were in
their cheifest battle. Lo the mighty hand of God upon them. This Gallerie
that was double, and compassed the yard round about, was so shaken at the
foundation, that it fell flat to the ground, without post or piece, that was
left standing, so high as the stake whereunto the Bear was tied.

Although some will say (and it may be truly) that it was very old and rotten
and that therefore a greater weight of people, being planted upon it then was
wont: that it was no marvel that it failed: and would make it but a light
matter. Yet surely if this be considered, that no one piece of post, board or
stock was left standinge; though we urge it net as a miracle, yet it must
needs be considered as an extraordinary judgment of God, both for ye
punishment of these present prophaners of the Lords day, and also to in form
and warn others.

In the fall of it, there wear slain five men and two women, that are come to
knowledge who they were and where they dwelled, to wit. Adame Spencer a
Felmonger, in Southvvarke, William Cockram a Baker, dwellinge in Shordich, John
Burton Clarck, of S. Marie Wolmers in Lombard streate. Matthew Mason, servant
with Master Garlande, dwellinge in Southvvarke: Thomas Peace, servant with
Robert Tash^r, dwelling in Clerken well. The Maidons names Elice White
servant to a Pursmaker without Cripplegate: and Marie Harison, daughter to
John Harison waterbearer, dwelling in Lombard street. There is to be considered
in the quality and condition of these persons: who^ God has thus laid alonge
amiddest their vanity, to be an example unto us, how commonly these of such
sort are affected and disposed. For if these in the state of poor men had
feared God, and in the hearing of gods words had upon such short summons been
called to appear before God: yet had they left an undoubted testimony, of
their religion and piety unto others. And therefore I do exhort all men to
take heed of such follies. Let them learn always to be prepared for death,
seeing yt death is so certain, though no man know of the bower. If God have
set them in a mean state, let them not follow rudeness, nor hunte after
such vain pleasures, but seek the best things, and those that are most
precious. Let them heard the comfortable word of salvation that shall comfort
them against poverty, and other afflictions whereunto we are subject in this
life.

And for servants, let masters, see them better employed upon these days
that are consecreated to holy exercises that they may be free from their
blood, and let servants think it no bondage, to be restrained from such
vanities: But alack the world is now grown to that wickedness, that the
masters being profane themselves, the servants are trained up in all
profanation: yea servant will indent before hand, to have their liberty
upon such days to go to the Devil freely: and thereof spring infinite
corruptions and sins not to be named. If these servant had had masters,
that would have called them to a reckoning how they had spent that day (as
good masters ought to have done) and have had an account what they had
learned, they might have had less cause to sorrow, because they had performed
good duties. But O you servants that fear God, return from such filthiness
Live to God faithfully in your vocation, and think it a great mercy that in
peace, you may possess such a bounty. You se in these, fallen before you, an
example to make you seek better things that you may walk as in the sight of
God faithfully to do your duties: you see the vanity of pleasures: that our
life is but a puff: to the end you may learn always to be in a readiness.
You have heard that ye father bringing his child alive thither, carried it
home again dead, which came not to pass by chance but by Gods providence.

Now beside these that were thus killed outright, with the flat fall of the
Galleries, strangely wrunge in pieces at it were by God himself, it cold not be
but in such confusion, there must needs come great hurt to many. How many
carried away death, as it were in their bosoms, that dyed the same night, or
some little time after, the Lord knows.

But this is euydent, that some are* since dead, and namely a Pewterers wife,
that dwelt in Limestreete, who being therefore wounded, is now dead, and
diverse others. Of all the multitude there, which must needs be far above a
thousand, it is thought by the judgment of most people, that not the third
person escaped unhurt: and by some that have made search, they esteem that
there were sore hurt and maimed, one hundred and fyftye persons, some their
legs and arms broken, some their backs, their bodies being sore bruised, so
that every way into the city from that time till toward nine of the clock
and past: and specially over London bridge, many were carried in Chayres, and
led betwixt their friends, and so brought home with sorrowful and heavy
hearts.

They say also that at the first, when the Scaffolde cracked (as it did once or
twice) there was a cry of fire, fire, which set them in such a maze as was
wonderful, so that as destitute of their wits, they stood still, and could
make no shifte for them selves, til the Scaffold was ouerturned.

But as in the execution of Gods judgments, we shall often mark the
miraculous providence and mercy of God toward many, even so fell it out with
diverse of these, that when as they had justly deserved not only to be hurt and
wounded, but even to be killed, yet God as a most merciful Corrector rather
seemed to have shaken a rod toward them., then to have touched them. For
amongst the rest it is credibly reported that thore was one Woman; that being
in the Gallery, threw down her child before her, and leaped after her self:
and yet thanks be to God neither of both had any manner of hurt, so was it with
diverse others. But it should appear* that they were most hurt and in danger,
which stood under the Galleries on the ground, upon whom both the we^ghte of
Tymbre and people fell. And sure it was a miraculous work of God, that any one
of those should have escaped.

But here also God showed his power for one man falling down into a hole, it
pleased God that it was the mean of his deliverance, so as al things that sell
upon him did not touch him, and by yt he was preserved, whereas two of the other,
were slain of each side of him.

Now what we have to learn of these judgments sufficiently has been
touched before, and therefore for a conclusion: A beseech all Maiestrates by
the mercies of God in Jesus Christ, that by this occasion, they take good heed
to look to the people committed to their charge, that they take order
especially on the Sabbath days that no Citizin or Citizins servants, have
liberty to repair unto any of those abused places, that albeit the place be
without the City, and by that means, they have not to deal with them, yet
that they keep their Bears out, and their straggling Wantons in, that they
may be better occupied. And as they have with good commendation so far
prevailed, that upon Sabbath days these Heathnish Enterludes and Plays are
banished, so it will please them to follow the matter still, that they may be
utterly rid and taken away. For surely it is to be feared, besides the
destruction both of body and soul, that many are brought unto, by frequenting
the Theater, the Curtin and such like, ye one day those places will likewise be
cast down by God himself, and with the^ a huge heap of such contempners, and
profane persons utterly killed and spoylod in their bodies. God has given
them as I have heard many fair warnings already.

And as I pray Maiestrates, so I beeseeche Ministers, my faithful brethren,
that they perform this faithful work that God has committed unto them,
that they call upon ye people more earnestly to keep the Lords Sabbath, and
that they employ themselves in teaching, exhortation, and doctrine, in
Catechizing and trayning up their people and youth, that they may know to
detest such corruptions: that being occupied in such holy exercises, they may
be their crown whom they shall win to Christ and to this obedience.

And lastly I beseech you my brethren all, of what estate or condition so ever
you be: Faint not in the happy course of the Gospel so freely and in so great
mercy offered unto you. Love the assemblies of Gods Saints, that you may feel
the hope and assurance of a better life. Be ashamed to follow vanities, which
when you have fed your selves with as full as you can, can work nothing in
you but lothsomnes, vexation, and sorrow of spirit. Pleasures are like unto
sweet poisons, when the sweetenes is past, they work tortures and torments.
Keep ye Lords Sabaothes. If you be Masters be patterns unto your servants
of diligence in hearing, and of true godliness, in putting holy doctrines in
practice. If you be servants and youth, learn in the days of your youth,
before age and death come upon you, that there is no felicity but in the
faith of Christ, there is no faith without the ministerye of the word, there is
no ministry of the word unless gifts be given unto men of God, and they be
reared, up to teach you, and to lead you in ye ways of God, and lastly* when
these ordinary means are neglected, dyspised, and resisted, then we can have
no certainty or comfort of our salvation.

Now the Lord Jesus who by his death and passion, resurrection and asse^tion
into heaven, wrought full satisfaction to his Father for our redemption and
salvation, give us faith and sanctify us throughout, both bodies and souls:
that we serving him in a spiritual service in both, may feel it to be our
greatest happiness: may despise this vain and totring world, may detest all
vanities, and specially accurssed prophanations: and having faith and a good
conscience, may walk on with good courage in ye hope of that everlasting
inheritance which he has s^ dearly purchased for us.

Amen. January. 17. 1583. I, F.


