ARTICLES TO BE INQUIRED OF IN THE VISITATIon of the Right Reverend Father,
JOHN, by the Providence of God, Bishop of Worcester.

In the year of our Lord God, 1632.

LONDON, Printed for John Grismond, 1632.

The Advertisement.
THe Minister and Churchwardens are to call unto them the Neighbors of the
Parish, and out of them to make choice (according to the custom of the place)
of two of the discreetest Parishioners to be Sidemen; and they altogether are
to read over these Articles diverse times.

Then, after they have duly considered of them, they are to write their answer
or presentment unto every Article particularly, and truly, according to their
consciences.

Lastly, they are all of them to bring their presentiments to the Visitation,
and there the Churchwardens and Sidemen upon their oaths; but the Minister
according to the Canon in that behalf; are to deliver them up under their
hands:

The Oath ministered to the Churchwardens and Sworne-men.
YOu shall swear, that all affection, favor, hatred, hope of reward and
gain, or fear of displeasure or malice set aside: You shall upon due
consideration of the Articles given you in charge, present all and every such
person of, or within your Parish, as has committed any offense or fault; or
made any default mentioned in these, or any of these Articles, or which are
vehemently suspected and defamed of any such offense, fault or default, wherein
you shall deliver uprightly, and according to truth; neither of malice
presenting any contrary to truth, nor of corrupt affection sparing to present
any, and so conceal the truth: Having in this action, God before your eyes,
with an earnest zeal to maintain truth, and to suppress vice: So help you
God, and the Contents of this Book.

God save the King.
Concerning Church and Churchyard.
WHether is your Church and Chancell in all respects well and sufficiently
repaired, and kept sweet and clean, if not, in whose default? Have you therein
the ten Commandments, the Articles of the Belief, and other godly sentences
fairly written: the Bible of the largest volume, the Books of Common prayer,
the two volumes of Homilies, the book entitled God and the King, and all
other books requisite: a seemly Pulpit, a convenient seat for the Minister at
prayers, a large and comely Surplesse, whole and untorn?

2 Have you in your Church a strong Chest for Alms, with a hole in the top,
and three locks and keys thereto: Is the money therein put, employed to the
use of the poor?

3 Have you a Register of Christnings, Weddings, and Burials, in a book of
Parchment duly kept in a Chest with three locks and keys?

4 Has any man pulled down or uncovered, or suffered to decay any Parsonage
or Vicarage houses, or any Church, Chancell, Chapel, Vestry, or Church
houses, in part or in all, or employed them, or any of them to any profane
uses?

5 Whether is your Parsonage, Vicarage, or Ministers house, or any part thereof
converted, made, used, or employed, to or for any common passage, entry, through
fare, or common way for people, or cattle usually to pass through, forth of
the Churchyard into or unto any Alehouse, Tippling, or victualling house, common
Inn or Wine-Tauerne. And by whom, and by whose sufferance and permission, and
how long has the same been so made, enjoined, used, employed, or rather
misused and misimployed as aforesaid?

6 Whether are the pales, fences, enclosures, and marks of ancient bounds and
limits of your Parsonage, Vicarage, or Ministers houses, or of the courts,
entries, gardens, backsides, or other appurtenances belonging to the same, or
any part thereof, removed or altered, or taken away from their ancient places,
bounds, and limits thereof, and laid and used to and with any
victualling-house, common Inn, or Wine-Tauerne? And by whom when, and by whose
sufferance, and how long time has the same ^^ene so done and suffered? And
whether by the continuance of the use of ^he premises as aforesaid, may not the
same in short time grow out of ^nowledge, and by some prescription to become
prejudicial to the Church or succeeding Incumbent thereof?

7 Are your Bells, Bell-ropes, and Clock in good repair, and well ordered? Is
your Churchyard well fenced and decently kept? Is it not profaned with
fighting, brawling, chiding, gaming, dancing, playing, or with unlawful
cattle, or otherwise, and how, and by whom, and by whose default?

Ministers and Curates.
8 Does your Minister read or say the whole divine Service every Sunday and
Holy Day, and administer the holy Sacraments according to the book of Common
Prayer. Is your Minister a licenced Preacher, does he diligently preach sound
doctrine, and for matters of government seriously teach and maintain the
Kings supremacy under God within his Majesty's dominions over all persons, and
in all causes as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, and the abolishing of all
foreign power?

9 Has your Minister more Benefices than one, if two, or more, does he reside
upon one of them himself, and maintain a licenced Preacher, on the other? If
he have but one, is he resident and dwelling thereupon, is he painful in his
vocation, of sober and good conversation, and given to hospitality?

10 Does your Minister use decency of Apparel as well in the Church as
elsewhere. And in the time of Divine Prayers and administration of the
Sacraments, does he use to wear the Surplesse? and if he be a Graduate, such a
Hood as is agreeable to his calling?

11 Is your Minister a peacemaker, and no sower of discord, or is he
suspected, famed or noted of any notorious crime, or gives he any ill example,
in his carriage or demeanor?

12 Does any preach in your Parish, that refuses to conform himself to the
laws, ordinances, and rites of the Church of England?

13 Has your Minister a Curate, and how is he licenced? does he serve two
Cures, and does he give notice of the fasting days and Holy Days commanded
and allowed? and amongst others of the fifth of November?

14 If your Minister be not a Preacher allowed, does he procure monthly
Sermons? and when there is no Sermon, does he read an H^mily, does he take
upon him to expound any text of Scriptures?

15 What Preachers have come from any other place, and Preach in your Parish:
have you their names written in a book kept for th^^ purpose? has such a
Preacher subscribed his name thereto, and set dow^ the day when he preached,
and by whom licenced?

16 Has your Minister obtained his Benefice by any Symontacall compact, either
directly, or indirectly?

17 Has any of your parish, or of any other parish, irreverently used your
Minister, laid violent hands on him, or disgraced his office and function, by
word, or deed?

Divine Service.
18 Is divine Service in due time on Sundays, Holidays, and their Eeues, and
at other times appointed, reverently said or sung in your Church or Chapel,
with the Letany on Wednesdayes and Fridayes, and all other rites and
ceremonies, according to the prescript form of Common prayer in the Communion
book?

19 Whether does any not being licenced (or any not ordered, at least for a
Deacon) say Common prayer openly in your Church or Chapel?

20 do any men, young or old, use to wear their hats in the Church or Chapel
in time of divine Service, or are there any that behave themselves disorderly
in the Church, Chapel, or Churchyard, or any disturbers of divine Service or
Sermons?

21 Whether do any Victualers (or others in your Parish) suffer any drinking
or gaming in their houses on Sundays or Holidays, especially in time of
divine Service or Sermons?

22 Whether any in your parish, upon Sabbath days or Holidays, do use their
Trade, or do any other work or labor, as Brewing, Baking, Washing, Barbing,
or such like, or do any Mercers, Drapers, Shoomakers, Butchers, or others
whatsoever, open their shops for sale of Wares upon those days, or do hedge,
ditch, dig, carry, or draw burdens by themselves, their servants, horses, or
other cattle whatsoever on such days? And is the fifth day of November
observed, according as is ordained in that behalf?

The holy Communion.
23 Have you a decent Communion Table on a frame, with a seemly carpet and a
cloth of Linen, a Communion cup and cover of silver, a fair Flagon of pewter
or purer metal for the Wine, a plate for the Bread, and a Towell to lay over
it?

24 Whether is there any in your parish, which being full sixteen years of
age and upward, has not received the holy Communion three several times in
the year past at least, in his or her parish Church, wher^f Easter to be one
of the three times?

25 Does your Minister instruct or examine his Parishioners concerning the
Sacraments at convenient times before he administer the Communion? And does he
admit any thereto that cannot say at least the Lords Prayer, the Articles of
the Christian Faith, and the ten Commandments?

26 Is your Communion ministered with Bread and Wine* consecrated in such order,
as in the book of Common prayer is appointed? And does your Minister deliver
both kinds to every several Communicant, with the blessing prescribed in the
book of Common prayer?

27 Does any receive the holy Communion either sitting, standing, or otherwise
than kneeling as is prescribed in the book of common prayer? or do any refuse
to receive the same kneeling: and does your Minister admit any to receive the
Communion, otherwise than kneeling?

28 Does your Minister admit any notorious offenders, or any Schismatics to
the holy Communion, before due penance enjoined by the Ordinary be duly
performed by them, or does he admit any notoriously known to be out of charity?

29 Whether does your Minister appoint and observe so many Communions in one
year, as that the Parishioners may conveniently receive all of them three
several times in the year. And does he use to give public notice thereof in
the Church, the Sabbath day next going before every such Communions, that the
Parishioners may prepare themselves to be partakers thereof?

Baptism.
30 Have you in your Church a convenient Font of stone, well kept and covered,
standing in the ancient place: does your Minister Baptize therein, or in any
Basin, or other thing, or with any other ceremonies than such as are allowed in
the book of common prayer: or does he omit, neglect, or not use all the
ceremonies therein prescribed, and does he use the sign of the Cross in
Baptism?

31 Does your Minister refuse to Baptize any children of Christian Parents that
are brought to the Church unbaptized?

32 Are Parents urged to be present at the baptizing of their children: or be
any admitted to be Godfathers or Godmothers, that have not received the holy
Communion: or do any Parents refuse to have their children signed with the
sign of the Cross in Baptism.

33 Have any children that were borne in your Parish been carried ou^ of the
Parish to be baptized else, where: or have any not been baptized all, or in
places, or by parties unknown.

34 Whether has your Minister refused, deferred, or delayed to c^r^ unto, and
to christen any child being in weakness, or in danger of death being
thereunto required, by reason whereof such a child has (throng, his
negligence, or by his default) died unbaptized.

Catechism.
35 Does your Minister or his Curate, duly Catechize according to the late
Canons every Sunday, such children and servants of both sexes as are of
convenient age, or at least so many of them by course, as the time will serve?

56 Do Parents and Householders bring, or send their children and servants to
the Church every Sunday duly to be catech^zed, according as the Canons require,
and who are negligent therein?

Matrimony.
37 Whether is Matrimony solemnized in your Church or Chapel, according to
the book of Common Prayer?

38 Have you in your Church a Table of the degrees of Marriage? are any married
within the degrees of consanguinity or affinity therein forbidden: or do any
children under the age of twenty one years, contract themselves, or marry
without consent of their Parents or Guardians?

39 Have any been married without the Banes thrice asked in the Church three
several Sundays or Holy Days (unless by License of the Ordinary granted
under seal) or at any time of the day, than betwixt the hours of eight and
twelve in the fore-noone, or at any time prohibited, that is to say, from
Aduent Sunday to the Octanes of Epiphanie, from Septuagesima Sunday, to the
Octanes of Easter, from Rogation Sunday, to Trinity Sunday?

40 Have any that dwell in your Parish, been married in any other Parish, or
any of another Parish been married in your Parish? Or have any been married
privately out of the Church or face of the Congregation: when, where, by whom,
and who were present at such marriages?

41 Have any women not well known to be married, been delivered of any child
in your Parish, and in whose house? Or has any woman in your Parish been
carnally known, or begotten with child before marriage, and by whom?

42 Have any forsaken their Wives or husbands, and married others? Have any
married again after they have been divorced: Or do any which have been
diuozced, keep company still together?

43 Do any married couples live asunder and not together, and do either of
them keep in their house, or secretly resort to any other, to the ^^ising of
suspicion or fame of incontinency?

44 Has any in your Parish, for money or reward, married any Woman that
committed Fornication or Adultery with another man? Or ^ath any unmarried
Woman begotten with child, gone out of your Parish before she has done
penance enjoined by the Ordinary, where was she or is she received or
harbored, at whose charge, and who conveyed her away?

Visitation of the sick.
42 Does your Minister or Curate visit the sick, does he admonish them to
repentance, comfort the penitent, and exhort them to charitable Almsdeeds?

Burial of the dead.
45 Are your dead buried according to the form of burial set down in the
Book of Common prayer: or have any been buried secretly or in the night, who,
and by whom, and who were present thereat?

47 Do the Executors or Administrators, or other friends of them that are
buried in Church or Chancell, repair again the pauement, and give any thing
to the Church, or in whose default is the same neglected and not repaired?

Churching of women.
48 Does any woman refuse to give God thanks openly in the Church, or (as we
term it) to be churched at convenient times after Childbirth, or does any
Minister refuse to church them, or church them any otherwise then is prescribed
in the book of Common prayer?

49 Has any woman unlawfully begotten with child, bin admitted to public
thanksgiving in the Church, before she has performed such penance as was
enjoined her by the Ordinary, or at least been Churched in a white sheet, and
confessed her fault penitently before sufficient witnesses, and undertaken to
stand to the censure of her Ordinary for her said offense?

Parish Clearks.
50 Have you a Parish Clearke chosen by the Minister, is he of honest
conversation, has he a competent skill, in reading, writing, and singing: And
does any withold or detain his Wages or duties from him?

Scoolemasters.
51 Have you any Schoole-house, and how is it repaired? And have you any
Schoolmaster in your Parish that teaches publicly, or privately, is he
lawfully licenced? does he come duly to the Church and receive the holy
Communion? does he instruct his Scholars in the Catechism^ allowed, and in the
book entitled God and the King? causes he them to repair to divine Prayers
in the Church, and to hear and note S^^mons? Teaches he any other Grammar
than that which is allowed*

52 Is any Schoolmaster known or suspected publicly or priu^^^ly to read
to his Scholars, or suffer them to read any book that (...) confirm them in
Popery, superstition, or disobedience to the Kings Majesty, or to his laws
Ecclesiastical or civil, and how many either men or women, do teach children
in your Parish, and what be their names?

Schismatics and Recusants of all sorts:
53 Do you know any that teach or maintain any doctrine contrary to the
Articles agreed upon in the convocation, Anno Dom. 1562.

54 Does any preach, minister the Communion, baptize children, or church women
in private houses, or other where then in the Church, except it be in cases of
necessity?

55 Know you any that absent themselves from the Church negligently, or
wilfully, how long have they so done? And of them that are absent without a
sufficient and lawful cause, is the forfeiture of twelve pence taken every
Sunday, and converted to the use of the poor, according to the Statute, Eliza.
1.

56 In your Parish where there is a Preacher, do any use to absent themselves
from his Sermon, and resort to any other?

57 Know you any that forbear to participate with the Church of England in
prayer, or Sacraments, either denying the Church to be Apostolical, or
condemning the ceremonies thereof as superstitious?

58 Have you in your parish any Popish Recusants, and half Papists that come
to the Church, and receive not the Communion, any Church Papists that come and
receive themselves, but either persuade others, or maintain their wives,
children, family, or friends, not to come?

59 Does any Seminary Priest or Jesuit, resort to any place within this
Diocese, or suspect you any such: Or do you know any that resort to any
popish Priest or Jesuit?

60 Know you any that by writing, talk, or argument, impugn the Kings
Supremacy, or any that have kept in their custody* that sell, disperse, carry,
or deliver unto others any unlawful Books against the Religion and government
established, or in defense of any foreign power, or domestical Consistory?

Excommunicated persons:
61 Are all excommunicated persons kept out of the Church from divine prayers,
and receiving the holy Communion, until they be lawfully absolved: And are
there any in your parish which have stood excommunicated forty days and
upwards, are such persons as stand excommunicated, once in every six months
denounced in your Church in time of divine Service upon some Sunday?

62 Has any Excommunicated person not absolved (at least in his extremity) not
giving any testimony of his repentance before his departure, been burled in
Christian burial, who buried him, her, or them? where and when, and who were
present at such burials?

63 Do any retain or keep in their house or service, any person denounced
excommunicate, or do any way encourage them therein, or converse with them in
buying, selling, eating drinking, or otherwise, keep company with them in any
sort.

Wills, Testaments, and Administrations.
64 Do any in your Parish administer the goods of the dead, or any way
intermeddle therewith, without lawful authority committed unto them under the
Ordinaries seal.

65 Know you any in your Parish that suppress the last will of the Dead, or
any that forge or alter any Wills, or any Executors that fulfill not the
testators Will: or any that detain Legacies given to any charitable uses?

Several Articles.
66 Do any in your Parish profane the Sabbath-dayes: or not duly observe the
Holy Days appointed? Are Ember Fasts orderly observed at the four times of
the year appointed?

67 Are the days and orders of Perambulation duly observed in the Rogation
week, if not, in whose default?

68 Are the Canons, Constitutions, and Orders made and agreed upon in the
Conuocation-house Anno Dom. 1603. read over once every year in your Church
upon Sundays or Holy Days, according to his Majesty's Commandment in that
behalf?

69 Does your Minister yearly present, and give up in writing to the Ordinary,
the names of all Recusants, and half Recusants men and women, as well
sosourners as Parishioners, and common guests in your Parish, above the age of
thirteen, according to the 114, Canon or not?

70 Do any in your Parish take upon them to practice Physic or Surgery,
not being lawfully licenced?

71 Are any in your Parish (or which were of your parish, and are now departed)
known, suspected, famed, or reported to have offended in Fornication,
Adultery, Incest, Witchcraft, Sorcery, Charming, Usury, Swearing, drunkenness,
common slandering, sowing of discord, brawling, scolding, or any other
uncleanness of life or had manners?

72 Are any Householders in your Parish (in whose house there is any one that
can read) which have not the book entitled, God and the King, and who be
they which want the same?

73 Have any Apparators, or others, taken any reward to compound or conceals
any offense presentable, or punishable in the Ecclesiastical Court, if so, let
the same be presented.

74 You shall further present whether any in your Parish upon Sundaies or
Holy Days, do use any dancing, plays, or other sports or pastimes
whatsoever, before all Service on those days be fully ended? And are the same
used by any of another parish, or any which have not the same day been at
divine prayers in their own parish Church, who be they which have offended in
any of the premises?

Church wardens and Sidemen.
75 Are your Church wardens and Sidemen chosen yearly in the Easter week,
according to the Canons: And do the Churchwardens yearly, truly make and
deliver up in writing, their account of all their receipts and disbursements
whatsoever, by them received and laid out for the parish, and of all the Church
goods, Books, and other things as the Canons require?

76 Do your Churchwardens themselves come duly to the Church to divine
Prayers and Sermons, and do they their best endeavors especially upon Sundays
and Holy Days to cause all parishioners to do the like?

77 Whether is there a transcript or copy of the Register book of the Church,
or christnings, weddings, and burials, yearly exhibited and delivered up into
the Registry of the Ordinary, or not?

78 Whether is there a sufficient terriar of the gleebe land and other rites
belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage, truly taken and exhibited into the
Registers office, as by the law it ought.

79 Have the late Churchwardens concealed any crime, offense, or disorder in
their times, and not presented the same: what be the matters so concealed? or
does any trouble, molest vex, or abuse, in words or otherwise, the Ministers,
Church-wa^rdens, or Sidemen for doing their office according to their Oath and
duty: and who be they that so do? And have your Churchwardens continued in
that office above one year, without a new Election?

Articles concerning the order and injunctions lately enjoined by his Majesty.
81 Have you any Lecturer or preaching Minister in your Parish, does he preach
in the afternoon on Sabbath days, and does he then use a Catechisticall form
by Question and answer?

82 Whether does your Lecturer or preaching Minister in your Parish before his
Sermon reade-diuine prayers in a Surplice, and if he be a Graouate, in a Hood
answerable to his Degree, and does he Preach in a Gown, and not in a Cloak.

83 Have you any in your parish either Rerusants or others, which refuse or do
not come to Divine prayers, Lectures, Sermons, and Catechiz^ngs in your Church,
or do negligently absent themselves and not frequent the same, or any of them,
present the names, and true additions of every offe^^^r herein.

84 Whether is there any in your parish, which keeps any private Chaplain in
his house, and who by name?

85 Have you advisedly and diligently perused, read, or heard others read and
peruse this book of Articles, and every particular Article and branch thereof,
and have you framed your answers or Presentiments to the same accordingly?

86 Generally, whether do you know any of the Canons broken, or any other
Ecclesiastical matter worthy to be presented, or not, and if you do, you
shall truly present the same (by the Oath you have taken) as well now as
hereafter, when it shall come to your knowledge.

FINIS.

