THE School of good manners.

OR, A new School of Virtue.

Teaching children and youth how they ought to behave themselves in all
companies, times, and places.

Translated out of French. By W. F.

LONDON, Printed by I. Danter, for William Ihones: and are to be sold at the
sign of the Gun, near Holburne Conduit. 1595.

TO THE VERTVous and tovvardlie young Gentleman, Master Edward Harington,
Son and heir to the Worshipful Master James Harington of Ridlington in
Rutland Esquier.
NOT without just cause (in my judgment) did that renoumed lawgiuer of the
Lacedaemonians, among other things ordeine, that all parents should not only
frequent the public banquets themselves, but should always bring with them
their children thither, that there they might the better learn to observe,
what fashions, manners and usage were best beseeming, and holden most praise
worthy, where the reverent account of the presence of their betters, might be
as a bridle to hold them within the bounds of modesty; and the beholding of
the glorious rewards of such as deserved well, and the open contempt, reproaches
and shame with the sharp punishment of dissolute and evil disposed children,
might terrify them from vice, and anymate them to labor greedylie to be
holden virtuous. If the like assemblies were now houlden among Christians,
where children with mirth might learn good manners, and together with the
refreshing of their bodies might learn with quick and wise sayings to
exercise their wits as well as their members with active feats, I think it
would prove to youth a way very profitable: For Example I hold to be the most
forcible schoole-mistres that can be, touching manners. Now having of late
happened upon a little book in French concerning childrens manners, I having
more laisure than I well liked, thought good to expel my languishing ydlenes,
by translating, and (in places needful) correcting, this treatise, which I
have entitled an A. B. C. or the first schole of good manners. Much more
sufficiently (I confess) this argument deserves to be handled: but all good
and virtuous manners be as most loving sisters: who so is daily conversant with
some of them, cannot long be unacquainted with the residue. And that child
that will lay fast hold on Diligent observation, and be ruled thereby as by his
Paedagogue he shall attain in good time to the knowledge and use of al good
manners.

This treatise (good master Edward) I have dedicated to you, not as though you
needed any such instructions; for I am assured that you know and daily
practice, mo and better than here are prescribed. But for that I esteem you
already a pattern of virtuous good manners in the view of many other, I have
thought good, to make you a patron of this little schole, where the rude and
ignorant may (if they will) learn some form of fashions, by reading and
practicing that here is proposed.

Now the Lord the Author and fountain of all goodness, vouchsafe so to power
his graces upon you, that you may profit and prosper in all your virtuous
endeavors, and so apply your self in husbanding this spring time of your
Adolescencie, as when you are grown to a perfect man, you may gloriously reap
the happy harvest of your labors, to your own good, and the comfort of all
your friends.

Your vvell-vviller William Fiston.

A School of good manners for Children and youth.
THe fear of the Lord, is the beginning of wisdom, said Solomon the wise
most truly: wherefore he judged those to be already in a great forwardnes to
knowledge, and right understanding, that seek diligently to learn how they
may walk rightly in the fear of god: For that fear does not terrify, but
teach: it with holds not from weal, but forewarneth how to fly from evil:
yea, it is a nurse that nurtureth, but therewith gives most wholesome
nourishment. Let Children therefore, first and principally learn to walk in
this fear: and let them know, that the first point of good manners, is to
show most dutifulnes unto him, who is most of Majesty, honor and
worthiness, and to whom for benifits received they are most bound. Consider
then (O Child) that in regard of honor and majesty, all Nobles, Princes, and
greatest Emperors, are but inferior underlings in comparison of God
Almighty, holding their states but during his pleasure: yea, in respect of his
excellency, they are but as the shadow of a man is in respect of the man
himself: and all the pomp and glory that thou can see in this world, is
but as a thing of naught in comparison of Gods perfect true honor and eternal
glory in heaven: whereof thou shall be partaker in the life to come, if
(walking in his fear) thou indeuourest to do well.

If thou also consider, how infinitely thou art bound unto God Almighty for
benefits received, thou shall have just cause to desire, that thy whole life
might be nothing else but a continual praising and glorifiyng of Gods name.
For what good thing have thou or ever had thou, which thou have not freely
received of his bounteous liberality? Nay what good thing could be wished,
whereof he has not most graciously made thee partaker? He has not only made
thee a living creature, whereas thou had no being, but has made thee a
reasonable and everliving soul; even a Semblance or Image of his own
excellent Majesty, a partaker of reason and divine knowledge in heavenly
things, with the Angels. He has also ordained thee (if thou walk in his
fear) to be an heir of his everlasting kingdom, and a fellow heir with his
own Son Christ Jesus; where shall be joy without ceasing, true glory never
failing, plenty without wanting, and all happiness without harm for evermore.
God has also sent his Son Jesus Christ to redeem thee, by his merits, and
sufferings, he has accepted him as a Sacrifice for thy sins and for all those
that shall be saved, whereas otherwise thou wast accursed, and like to have bin
damned for ever. This did he of mere mercy and love: wherefore thou art most
bound to fear and love him.

God has also given thee the comfortable use and enjoying of his holy spirit,
if by earnest and faithful prayer thou crave the same: That spirit
regenerateth thee, and yields thee always present comfortes against all
fears, safety against dangers, strength against assaults, warranteth thee
harmless against all thy wavering doubts; and is to thee a sure Bulwark of
defense, against all the sleightes of Satan, the malice of enemies, and
whatsoever might hurt or trouble thee. Seek diligently then for the aid of
this holy spirit, by daily fearing and obeying God.

If thou would weigh thy duty toward God, by consideration of the outward
benefits that thou receiuest of him in this life, I say it again, what have
thou or ever had thou, but thou receiuest the same of Gods free benefit. He
conjoined thy Parents together in wedlock: and afterward gave them both will
and power to beget and conceive thee: that done, he powered into thee a living
and reasonable soul, he formed thee into a right shape, and nourished thee
miraculously, even in thy mothers womb. He gave unto thy parents after thy
birth, a tender loving care over thee, to cherish thee in thy helpless
infancy: he has given and still gives unto things growing from the earth,
virtue and power to nourish and sustain thee. He makes thy hands and diverse
parts of thee delighted with feeling, thy mouth with tasting, thy nose with
smelling, thine eyes with seeing, and thine ears with hearing. Thy heart also,
he makes full of joy and gladness: and (that which passes all the residue) he
gives unto thy soul (if thou walk in his fear) a taste in this life of the
endless and unspeakable joys of heaven. Consider with the aforesaid
benefits, how he has relieved thee from time to time, and made thee grow
stronger and stronger, and wiser and wiser; and still assures thee (thorough
hope) that he will daily more and more multiply his graces in thee, if thou
endeavor to do well.

If then thou meditate well on Gods wonderful wisdom and power, showed in his
benefits bestowed upon thee; thou shall find in thy self (as it were) a
little beautiful world of Gods glorious workmanship. To God therefore, to whom
thou art most bound: nay, to whom thou owe thy self, and all that thou have,
yield all duty, studying to live according to his laws, so as thou may best
please him, that is best manners. But forasmuch as thou must learn in every
particular action how to live godly, partly by hearkening to good instructions
of parents and teachers, partly by hearing, reading and meditating on Gods
word, and chiefly by the inspiration and direction of Gods holy spirit, which
must daily be craved for, by earnest prayer: all which cannot be sufficiently
handled in this short Treatise, I will now hasten to my purposed instruction
touching thy manners and behavior among men.

Understand therefore (O child) that, by reason of original sin corrupting thy
nature, thou art but as an untilled piece of ground, apt to bring forth nothing
that is good. Daily experience shows thee, how the Earth yields itself a
most bountiful and kind mother, in bringing forth brambles and unprofitable
weeds, nourishing the same most liberally: but corn, and herbs, best for
men's use and necessity, it hardly releeueth and nourishes, after much
painful plowing or digging, diligent and careful sowing, setting or planting,
and continual weeding, showing it self unto them an unkind and cruel
stepmother. Even so, thy corrupt nature, most plentifully brings forth, and
willingly nourishes and cockereth in thee, all vices and evil manners: but
virtuous and right commendable manners, it hardly admits to be planted in
thee, and practiced of thee, after much careful tilling and digging up by the
roots, of the weeds of wickedness and ill behavior; and the diligent sowing,
setting and planting of civil and good behavior, endeavored by thy tender
parents, and vigilant teachers.

Let then, thy industrious diligence concur with the sage instructions of thy
teachers; and knowing thy self to be ignorant of many things which they know,
be ready to hear, and diligent to practice, what good they shall propose: so
shall their documents do thee good: and thou shall be delighted in that which
is good and seemly, forsaking filthy, rude, and corrupt manners and fashions.

The chiefest cause that hinders many Children from the practice of good
manners, is, for that they esteem themselves to know sufficiently how to
behave themselves, when as indeed they know not at all, or at least regard not,
to observe that which for their tender years is comely, or to fly that which
in them is most unseemly in any point. But rejecting such headstrong
carelessness, suspend thou thine own judgment, and submit thy self dutifully
to the good direction of thy discreets advised Governors, and skillful learned
Teachers: and still be sure to eschew (with all diligence) whatsoever thou
shall be admonished to be ill beseeming thee, or hear or seeest to be noted
unseemly in other.

And see thou mark heedfully, and imitate rightly, all good manners taught
thee, or whatsoever behavior praise-worthie that thou shall see in another.
Beware therefore of ungodly and ill mannered children, how thou accompany thy
self with them: but with the virtuous and well nurtured let thy fellowship
be: for of a virtuous and industruous young age, comes an honorable, or at
least a commendable old age. But now to our purpose.

The tung is called the interpreter of the mind, and the behavior may be
rightly termed the true image of a man: for by the manners are lively
represented the habit of the mind, and disposition of man. And according to
the behavior, so is the party judged of: and by the same he gets either
credit or discredit. Learn thou then in childhood so to behave thy self, as
with the best thou may win praise. Which manners, although they cannot be
so largelye taught by precepts in each particular, as by an industrious
practice of him that will be diligent to observe, they may be learned
perfectly: yet for the instruction of those that have willing minds to learn,
and small means to attain, I have thought good to set down these few rules
to be followed.

In meeting with any person that is thy better (as thou art to esteem all
thine Elders thy betters), see thou give him the way; and putting off thy hat,
use a reverent show in countenance or manner of greeting to him. And if he be
some Man of authority, a Minister of Gods word, any of thy Parents, thine
Uncle or Aunt, or thy Schoolmaster, look that thou boow also thy right knee
somewhat in thy saluting of them.

Let it be far from thee to reason thus: What should I show duty or
reverence to one that I know not, or to him that never did, nor is like to do
me any good? For God (by Solomon) commands thee to rise up, and make
obeysaunce before thine Elders. Age is honorable, and commanded of God to be
honored: nay, it is a sign of Gods great lasting favor, and of everlasting
life in heaven. To despise it, is then to despise Gods favorable mercy and
loving kindness toward thy self and others.

God by S. Paul commands also, that double honor be given to the Ministers
of his Word. And as for those in authority, as Princes and all Magistrates,
etc. S. Paul says plainly, that to despise the^, is to despise Gods
ordinance: he speaking of heathen and unchristian Princes and Magistrates. How
much duty then owe we to those Princes and Magistrates that endeavor to show
themselves the faithful lieuetenants of God on earth, commanding and ruling
according to Gods own will, and seeking our good both of soul and body.

The nerest duty that thou in thy childhood owe privately next unto God, is
to thy parents, which are the isntrumental causes of thy being: without them
thou had never been begotten nor borne: without their tender love and
careful providing for thee, thou had never been relieved nor fostered in thy
infansie, when thou wast of thy self quite helples: they still provide thee of
all necessaries, and labor so to maintain thee, and bring thee up in
learning, and knowledge of good arts that thou may be able heareafter to
live in credit as a man among men: Which benefits received of thy parents thou
can never be able in any sort to recompense them.

Be then diligent to please, and ready to be ruled by them of whom thou have
thy being and all thou have, and whom God has made so able and willing to
bring forth, to help and do thee good: and whose kindenes so far excedeth
all that thou can deserve.

Next to thy parents, thou art nearely bound in duty to thy Schole-maisters
and teachers, who are as spiritual Parents, to beget and bring forth in thee
virtues and all Godliness; and who endeavor to nourish thee, and to make thee
grow up stronger and stronger in knowledge, learning and wisdom, until thou
become a perfect man.

A certain duty and reverence, saint Paul also wills to be used to equals:
thou then being a child must be careful to use good behavior in manners
and courtesy even toward thy equals and companions. And know, that he that
shows himself most courteous and well mannered among his equals, is so far
from sustaining any discredit thereby, that he gets thereby the good will
and commendations of all his familiars.

In speaking to thy superiors, use not many words: and let those words thou
speak, be uttered with reverence, both of speech and countenance. When thou
speak to thine equals, let thy countenance be amiable, and thy speech
familiar and friendly.

Shamefastnes is a Virtue beseeming a child, so as it be moderate: for, as to
be brazen-faced and shameless, is a vice; so, to be over bashful and ashamed
to show his face, is a fault also.

If any honorable man, or one of great account offer to take thee by the hand,
before thou deliver him thy hand, kiss lightly the forefinger of thy right
hand, then delivering him thy hand, boow modestly first thy right knee, after
thy left, and humblye boow thy body withal: and always when he speaks to
thee, or thou art about to answer him, boow thy right knee once modestly. If
he continue talking with thee, look thou still modestly on him, not moving
thine eyes much: but beware thou stare not too much in his face, for that were
a shameless and most unmannerly part. Neither let thy looks be too much hanging
down, for that were peevish, and a sign of one having a guilty conscience.

To look askew with thine eyes cast aside, were a sign of one imagining some
mischief.

To toss thy sight, or turn thy face this way and that way, were a sign of a
foolish and unconstant mind.

It is also a foul and unseemly thing for thee to make faces, in wrything thy
visage into diverse forms: or, to rub one while thy nose, another while thy
forhead: or, one while to lift up thine eye brows, another while to pull them
down too much, or to patter with thy lips; or, one while to thrust out thy
mouth too much, another while to pull it in overmuch, or to shake thy head, or
to cough, unless thou be there too enforced: or to spet often, or to scratch thy
head, to pick thine ears, or to blow thy nose, or to smoothe thy face with
thine hand, as if thou would wype away shamefastnes from thee: to be
picking or rubbing thy neck, as if thou were lousy: or to clyng in thy
shoulders, as some Italians use. All these are evil.

In standing thus before thy betters, hold thy hat in thy left hand, with both
thy hands mannerly before thee: for to hold thy hat or book under thine
arme-pit in standing so, were clownish.

As thou art thus standing in talk, thou may not wink with thine eyes, nod
at any body, nor turn away thy head.

If were an ill favored thing, thus standing, to play with thine arms, to use
apish toys with thy fingers: or, to be short, not to seem for to speak with
thy tung, but with thy whole body.

Let thy voice be gentle and soft, and therewith deliberate not too quick nor
too slow: nor too high, for that were clownish, nor too low, but it may easily
be understood.

Let not thy speech be too hasty, (as I said) but let it go with thy
understanding, and be uttered so leysurely as it may well be understood: for
many are so rash in speaking, that they make themselves soon windlesse, and
forget half of that which they should have spoken: besides that, it brings
them to an ill habit of stutting and stammering, which might have bin avoided,
if heedefull deliberation had been used in their childhood.

In speaking to any Honorable or Worshipful person, it is good manners to
repeat now and then the title of his Honor or Worship.

There is no name should be of greater account, nor more dear than that of
Father and Mother: nor none more loving and friendly than the name of brother
and sister.

If thou be ignorant of the titles of dignities of each estate, know that
Lords are honorable, Knights and chief Gentlemen, worshipful, and use to
any man seeming of any good account, this title, Sir, etc.

It is a most shameful thing for a child to be heard swear either in test,
or in earnest. A like shame it is for them to utter any word of ribandrie or
filthy speech: nay they must not abide to hear any such filthiness. But in
many places now a days, (all fear of God, and care of modesty set a side)
children even from their infancy, are delighted in these abominable evils,
which they ought most of all things to abhor.

If thou be driven to name any unclean or dishonest thing in speech, use
first this preamble, saving your honor, saving your worship; or to mean
persons, saving your reverence.

Beware that thou once name not, much les that thou show any secret part of thy
body, which nature wills to be kept hidden and secret.

Beware how thou gainesay any thing spoken by thy elders, and if thou hear
them affirm any thing that thou know to be contrary to their saying, if
thou be driven to reply unto their speeches; deny not flatlye their speeches
but courteously first say: with your favor, Sir, I know the matter to stand
thus, or thus: or, I have heard Sir, that it is thus, or so. Nay, it is evil
and unseemly for thee to give the lie to thine equals or fellows.

A well mannered child will never quarrel nor brabble with any: but will
rather, either put up wrong, or commit the matter to arbitrament.

Thou must not boast nor extol thy self above other, thou must not find fault
with the doings of another. Be not hasty to reprove other. Tattle not abroad
whatsoever thou hear. Backbite no body. Disdain not another for whatsoever
infirmity or vncomelines Nature affoordeth him: knowing that God could also
have made thee more ugly than a toad: but thank God for shaping thee aright in
all parts, and comely to see too; whereas he has made diverse ill favored,
lame, blind, etc.

To interrupt any body while he is speaking, and break off his tale, is an
unmannerly part.

Be not angry, nor quarrelling with any body: use gentleness and friendly
behavior to every body. But make choice of such for thy nearest familiars,
to be conuersaunt withal, as thou find to be most virtuous and well
mannered.

Say nothing to any body, that thou would not have known abroad to al: for
it becomes not children to be talkers or medlers in any thing, but those
things that concern their learning or profiting in goodness.

It is a folly for thee, to look to have kept that secret by telling it
another, which thou could not keep secret thy self.

The surest way for thee to eschew blame and reproach, is, that thou never do
nor say any thing, whereof thou may be justly ashamed, or have cause to
repent.

Be no medler in other men's matters: and if thou have seen or known any
thing of their doings, make as though thou knew nothing.

To look aside over another man's shoulder, while he is reading his letters, is
an unmannerly part.

If a man open his coffer or deske while thou art by, go aside: for it is no
good manners for thee to look therein, much more unseemly is it for thee to
handle any thing that is therein.

If any men nere thee enter into any secret talk, get thee aside, and
intermeddle not thy self with their speech, unless thou be called.

The manners (as I said before) are lively representations of the dispositions
of the mind and those do shine principally in the good order of the visage,
let therefore thine eyes be modestly, yet pleasantly disposed: shamefast and
steadfast, and also peaceable; not too much lifted up, or disdainfully cast
aside, for that were a sign of pride and cruelty: not wavering, and affraide
to look up; for that betokens folly and want of wit: not be amishly
hanging down for that betokens sullennes: not with an eager sullen show for
that betokens one practicing some treason: not too open staring, for that
shows a blockhead and shameless fool: not twinkeling, for that betokens
cowardice and in constancy: not looking wildly, for that is like mad folk,
and men amassed: not sharply as if thou were angry: not beckoning and as it
were speaking to the party with thy look, for that were want of shamfastnes:
but let thy look be so ordered, as thereby may thy mind appear to he quiet,
settled, amiable and courteous, with all reverence, And surely not without cause
did the ancient philosophers call the eyes the seat of the soul.

Paintings made in old time do show, that in times past it was counted
especial good manners, for to look with the eyes half shut, as among some
Spaniards it seems yet to be esteemed comely to look with the eyes somewhat
wincking. Also we find it by the said paintings, to have bin esteemed a
valorous and manly part to go somewhat back and to close the lips: But that
which is comely by nature, will be accounted fair and seemly among all
people: yet, in these matters we must some times do as the fish does, which
changes the color according to the thing that it meets.

There are certain countenances of eyes, which nature has given to one after
one sort, to another after another fashion: the ordering of which cannot in
every point, be sufficiently handled in precepts: but this I say, that evil
and uncomely behauiours, do spoil not only the fashion of the countenance but
also of all the body: whereas contrariwise, well ordered and seemly
behauiours, make that which is comely by nature, to be most well beseeming and
commendable: and whereas is any uncomeliness or imperfection of nature, it
takes away, or at least, makes to seem less the blemish thereof.

It is unseemly to look upon any man holding one of thine eyes shut, as if
thou were shooting in a gunne.

Let thine ey-browes stand also stretched right forth, not rimpled together by
being turned back again, which betokens fiercenes: not staring up on high,
which is sign of pride: not hanging down over the eyes, which is a sign of
one meditating mischief.

Let thy forhead be merry and plain, showing cheerfulnes, and a resolute quiet
mind, not wrinkled and turned up again like an old man, not going up and
down like a hedgehog, not casting thy forehead a cross like a bull.

Let not thy nose be snottie, for that is a most filthy and loathsome thing to
behold: neither may thou wipe the same upon thy hat, cap, clothes, hand or
sleeue: for, that is too slouenly: neither may thou blow thy nose with thy
hand, and straight way wype thy hand upon thy clothes: but blow thy nose on thy
napkin, turning thy head aside from the company: if thou want a napkin, go
into a corner, and blowing thy nose with thy forefinger and thumb, tread out
quickly that which fell from thee.

To snuffle or make a rutling in the nose is filthy: to speak also in the
nose is unseemly and ridiculous.

To blow thy nose very loud, is unmannerly.

If thou be driven to neese in company, it is manners for thee to turn a
little aside, and afterward to put off thy hat, and to thank them that have
bid, God bless thee. But let the violence of thy neesing be first past: for
neesing and yawning do take away the sense of thine ears utterly. It is holden
also for good manners, after thy neesing to put off thy hat, and to say, With
your leave.

When thou art driven to yawne go aside, or else, if thou can not put thy
hand before thy mouth.

It is good manners to salute another when he neeseth, saying, Christ help
you.

When as thine Elders or betters shall salute any man that neeseth, it is
manners for thee to put off thy hat.

To strain thy self for to make much noise in neesing, or to neese oftener
than necessity forces, is unmannerly. Neither take I it healthie for to
restrain thy self from neesing, when thou art moved violently theretoo: and
health is commonly to be preferred before too nice manner lines.

Let thy cheeks be died with natural shamefastnes, and not with painting. To
blush when thou art reproved, or charged with evil (though undeserved of
thee) it is a sign of grace, and good manners. Beware thou show not too bold a
face: and take like heed, that thou be not too bashful.

To puff up the cheeks is a sign of foolish pride. And to pluck in the same
too much shows one of mind forlorn, and despayring of himself. The one
betokens a proud fool having too high a conceat of himself: the other
betokens a Judas like traitor.

Let not thy mouth be too close shut, as if thou fearedst to take breath: nor
yet let it be gaping open; for that is like a fool: but let thy lips be even
as it were gently kissing one another.

Take heed thou powt not out thy mouth for that is ill favored, and beastly.
Neither make a pohing with thy mouth in company, as men do passing by some
stinking place.

To laugh at every thing, betokens a fool: neither may thou laugh a loud
at any thing: nor stir and shake thy body in laughing in a cause of great
laughter, thou must smile and show a modest ioyfullnes. But, beware thou laugh
not at any ribawdrie or filthy knauerie, nor once smile thereat. Too earnest
and violent laughter, is seemly for no age: but most unseemly for children.

Some laugh so unreasonably, that therewith they set out their teeth like
grinning dogs: make wry mouths and disfigure their faces. But fly thou such
dissolute and unmannerly fashions.

These are words of fools to say: I was like to be piss my self with
laughing: I had almost burst with laughing: I was like to have died with
laughing: or I had almost sounded with laughing. If so great a cause of
laughter be offered, that thou cannot choose but laugh out, thou must hide thy
face with a napkin, or with thy hand. To laugh alone or without cause is
accounted foolishnes: yet if at some conceit thou smile to thy self, it is the
more tolerable, if thou can readily yield a sufficient cause therefore.

To bite the nether lip is a vile unmannerly part: for that is the sign of a
furious man, or such a one that is spiteful and threatening, and like evil is
it to bite the upper lip: and as unmannerly is it to lick out the tung above or
below the lips, or on either side of the mouth.

It was in times past holden a grace or good fashion amongst the Dutchmen, to
put out their lips somewhat, as if they were ready to kiss: but that is holden
for a bad fashion now a days.

To mock any body by blabbering out the tung, is the part of wag-halters and
leand boys, not of well mannered children.

When thou spittest, turn thy face aside: and beware that thou spittest not
upon any body, nor before any bodies sight.

If thou have spet any thing upon the ground, that is foul to be seen,
tread it out quickly, least it offend any bodies sight.

If thou be where thou can not turn from the company, receive thy spettle
with thy hand-kerchiefe from thy mouth very closely.

It is a beastly thing to use spitting often, as some do by a lewd custom,
not for need. Some likewise use still coughing and humming almost at every
word they speak, as if they were still forging a lie that would not frame. All
such foul fashions must thou warily eschew.

Some others get a filthy custom in their childhood, to rospe, and make as
though they would break wind upward still in their talk and use the same
until their age: whereof Clitipho in Terence was reproved by a servant. But
if thou be forced to cough, cough a side: and beware thou cough in no bodies
face, neither rospe, nor break wind in any company, as near as thou can,
especially eschew it in talk.

If thou be driven to vomit, get thee aside out of company least thou make the
stomachs of other to loath thee: and they judge thee a glutton or drunkard.

Keep thy teeth clean by rubbing them, and thy Gummes every morning before
thou rise with a linen cloth, for that is most wholesome. As for powder to make
them white, leave that to nise maids. To use rubbing much with salt or allume,
does fret the gummes. And as for washing them with Urine, leave that to the
Spaniards.

If there be any thing hanging in thy teeth, get it not out with thy knife,
nor with thy nails, like Cats and Dogs, nor with a napkin, but with the point
of a toothpicker, made either of some fine piece of wood, or of a quill, or of
the little bones taken out of a Capons leg.

It is esteemed comely and wholesome, to wash the mouth with fair water once in
the morning: but to use the same often in a day, is foolish and unseemly. Of
usage of the tung we will speak in another place.

It is both a thing clownish and unwholesome to go vnkembd. I speak of kembing
for cleanlynesse, for avoiding lice and nits, etc. not of chrisping, curling
and laying our locks like wanton young women.

To use to scratch the head in presence of others, is both slouenly and evil:
and so is it to use scratching or rubbing thy body. Let not the hair of thy
head hang in thine eyes, nor on thy shoulders.

Shake not much thy head, nor strout it not too much out with bridling in thy
chin: for that is more comely for great Horses than for thee: yet must thou
remember to carry thy head upright in a modest sort.

To pull in thy head and thrust up thy shoulders, were the part of a slothful
slouen.

To bow in thy back thrusting out thy belly, is foolish proud gesture and
very unseemly: but to go with thy body strait up is comely and commendable.

Let not thy head hang lolling on one side nor other: for that shows either
a fool or an hypocrite.

Thou must bear thy shoulders even, with an equal counterpois, not thrusting
up the one and down with the other like Antikes, for many children practicing
such Apish and unseemly toys, make their bodies grow crooked for ever, and
become thereby deformed and ill fashioned in their whole body beyond nature.
Some also by crooking out their shoulders, and stooping with their backs get
such a custom in their childhoode, as they grow crooked for ever, and cannot
by any means go strait again when they would.

The bodies of children are like tender plants, which may be made to grows
strait with heed and propping: But without regard had, those that by nature
are disposed to be most strait will soon grow crooked, or some ways deformed.

When thou sit, let thy knees be near together, and thy feet not far
asunder. But whether thou sit or stand, beware thou set not thy
feet too wide at the toes: for the use thereof will make thee splay-footed.
Neither use to tread thy shoes awry.

Sit not, nor stand with thy legs a cross: nor with one leg cast over the
other. It was indeed an ancient fashion of Kings, to sit with the right foot
cast over the left thigh, but that is reproved in children.

In Italy some use to set one foot upon the other, like a Storke, but that is
not comely for children.

To make a leg, bowing thy knee handsomely unto thy beters, thou art bound of
duty: but if it be not done orderly it disgraceth thee. Some use to bow both
knees together, holding their bodies straight: but that is for women and
girls: for a aman or boy it is holden, in England, for the best manners when
they make obeisance to their superiors, to bow modestly first the right knee
and then the left. And this obeisance must thou observe as often as thou
meetest, or talkest with or receyuest any thing at the hands of thine elders
and betters.

The frenchmen use to bow only the right knee, with a gentle moving and bowing
of the body.

But if thou be conversant with strangers, or with thy betters, delighted in
the manners of strangers, it will not be amiss, if thou sometime frame thy
self to use the manners of them best pleasing.

Let not thy going be either too slowly, and dreamingly, like one that cared
not whether he went or not, nor yet too hastily, as if thou were rash and
headlong in thy doings. The one is like effeminate persons: the other like mad
folk. Neither go traversing the way inconstantly; as does the Switzer
Soldiers, who take it a great glory to wear great plumes of feathers in their
hats.

Neither go as though thou did half halt; nor yet nicely tripping with thy
feet: the one is like counterfeite rogues; the other like harlots.

To shake with the legs as thou sit, or to make much stamping and toying
with thy feet, is the property of a fool. And to ^^mble or show a number of
Apish toys with thy hands and fingers, is a sign of one not having a sound
and stable wit.

Of Apparel.
WE have spoken of the body already, and the ordring of it: now we will
speak a few words of apparel: for apparel may be called the body of the
body: and by it and wearing thereof, may partly be coniectured, and judged
what is the nature and quallitie of the mind.

Yet thereof can be no certain fashion prescribed, in as much as diversities
of Countries, honors, dignities, and riches, make some kind of apparel well
or ill beseeming one Country or calling, and some other like to another. Again
times change the fashions in many Countries: whereto somewhat must be yielded,
but I would not have thee follow every fond and strange devise.

Be thou content with such apparel as thine estate and the bounty of thy
friends affoordeth: knowing it is not the outward gorgeous apparel, but the
inward virtues of the mind, that makes one esteemed. What apparel so ever
thou have, see thou do not ware it torn, or foul, and slouenly: but keep it
clean and handsome, brushed and and rubbed: See thy points be tied, thy
girdle on, thy hat clean, thy shirt band rightly set about thy neck, thy
clothes fit about thy body, thy stockinges clean and close gartered, and
thy shoes made clean also.

Party colored and too gaudy clothes, are fitter for fools and Apes, than
for discret and well nurtured folk.

Fine apparel is to be desired none otherwise but for comlines, and according
to the dignity and riches of thy friends.

Children must not be curious of gay clothing, but careful to please their
Parents and Teachers, and study to learn virtuous Arts.

There are some children so slouenly, that they wet and perfume the lower
parts of their shirts and clothes with urine: Some other that bespotte and
all to dawbe their breasts and sleeves filthily, with dropping of drink and
Pottage and so forth: Nay which is most loathsome, with sniueling of their
nose, and driueling of their mouth, but in any wise beware thou of this
beastlines.

Others let their clothes hang about them like a sack, like such as are all
careless of credit, and cleanlines.

If thy friends have given thee any trim clothes, go not thou when thou
wearest them, casting thine eyes still on thy gay clothes, in a foolish
iollitie and pride, like the peacocke beholding his tail. Neither show thy
clothes to other bragging thereof: for so much the more as thou art partaker
of worldly commodities, so much the more good manners and modesty it is for
thee to show humility.

Let poor folk and such as have escaped out of Captivity or any great
misery, rejoice for their better estate and deliverance: (so it be modestly,
and with attributing the praise unto God:) But, for a rich body to glory
insolently in his riches or costly apparel; is esteemed a reproach unto those
that want such plenty: and the ready way to get hatred.

Of manners at School.
When thou go to the School, remember that the School is the very
nurserie of all virtues: the worke-house of framing thy mind and body to a
right fashion: the pathway to knowledge and the very direct entrance into a
happy and well ordered course of life.

Esteem of thy teachers, as of spiritual Parents, knowing that all their
studies and endeavors is to do thee good: And know that to them thou owe
most great duty, love and reverence next unto God, and to thy natural
Parents: For surely unto thy Parents and faithful Schoolemasters, thou can
never be able to make sufficient amends.

Be it far from thee to go unto the School with as ill a will as wicked dooers
go unto the Stocks, or to the Gallows: Neither account it an intolerable
toil and labor, to apply thy self daily to learning, for learning is but a
sport and play to such as have willing minds, and therefore in Latin it is
called, ludus literarius. And indeed, how soever the corruption of man's nature
misliketh of, and strives against Learning and knowledge, yet knowledge and
learning (being rightly applied) is the food of the soul, the best delight
of the mind, and brings with it (if it be well sought) the greatest and
surest honor and happiness.

Pray therefore earnestly to God every morning, that he would suppress in thee
all rebellious, stubborn and careless affections: that he would lighten thine
understanding, make thy mind willing, dilligent and tractable; ready to
conceive and able to carry away whatsoever shall be taught thee. These things
if thou crave unfeignedly, God is able to give, and will readily bestow on thee.

When thou art at School, be studious in thy lectures learning, attentive to
thy Masters words and documents, what soever thy Master shall teach, mark it
heedfully, and meditate thereon earnestly until thou have learned the same
perfectlye. At void times be sure to get all those rules, phrases and lectures
without book, which thou must render again or may make use of, to have
them in readiness.

Be ashamed that any of thy equals should learn faster than thou: but endeavor
thou to learn faster tha^ al those in lecture with thee.

In matters of doubt, ask help earnestly by entreaty or rewards, at the
hands of other scholars better learned than thou. And be thou most ready and
willing to help any thy equals or inferiors in learning.

Fly all fighting and wrangling with thy fellows. But be courteous, gentle and
lowly, among all both rich and poor.

Make no noise nor use any mean, whereby thou may disturb thy
schoolefellowes: much less thy schoolmaster.

Be a pattern of good manners, industry, courtesy, and obeying thy Master unto
all in the Shoole. So shall thy praise be great, and thy profit greater.

Of manners at Church.
WHen thou come into the Church, remember that it is the house of
God-Almightie, consecrated to his service who is the King of Kings, Lord of
Lords, Father of thy Father and thee, governor of thy governors and of thee:
he gives all things unto them that give any thing to thee: he gives that
nourishment unto meat, drink and clothing, which does nourish thee: he
makes pleasant those things that delight thee: all thy relief, comfort, and
defending from evil, comes by his merciful bounty, and invincible power.
And albeit his glory fills every place, his eyes see all things in all
places: his ears hear all that is said or intended: and he understands
all the thoughts: so as thou can think, say, nor do any thing never so
secretly but it is known to him: he therefore is to be prayed unto, obeyed,
reverenced and pleased in all places. Yet the Church is a place appointed
especially for all people to meet of al sorts and ages, and there (as it were)
with one heart and voice to call upon Gods name: to praise him for benifits
received, for he only gives all good things: To pray for wants to be
relieved, for he has the storehouse of all plenty, and gives most
bountifully, and is most liberal to all that faithfully ask to crave his
aid against all perrills: For he is an impregnable bulwark and fort of
defense to all his: And to conclude all spiritual as well as corporal graces
are for all estates to be sought for by earnest prayer in general, and Gods
name is there to be heartily glorified, by Psalms, spiritual Hymns, and
singing praises. And this ought to be each Saboth days whole endeavor and
work only.

When thou art in the Church, see thou be not idle, much less given to play
or tattle: but let thy whole meditation be on heavenly things, lifting up
(with the Minister and (people) devoutly thy heart by prayer, to him that
sits in the throne of endless Majesty in heaven for evermore.

When the Minister reads the word of God or preaches, be attentive to mark
all that is read and preached, meditating on the same afterward: that thou
may still carry in mind the effect of that which was spoken, and profit by
it. So shall thou amend thy memory, grow in knowledge, and learn to live as
becomes a Christian, if thou will observe what sin is reproved in Gods
word, and fly the same, and mark what virtue is commended, and indeuourest
to practice the same.

Of manners at the Table.
AT the table thou must show a cheareful and modest countenance, neither is it
fit for thee to use prattling there: nor to speak much in the company of thy
betters; unless thou be asked questions, or some matters of importance
necessary to be uttered, lies in thy mind and not that, if before or after
it might as well or better be by thee uttered. Before thou sit down, see that
thy face and hands be clean washed, and thy nails pared, so as no foulenes
be seen left, for that would be holden for a slovenly part.

When thou have wiped them, cast off all pensiuenes and grief before thou sit
down: for thou must not at the Table show a heavy countenance, nor make
others sad and heavy.

If thou be to say Grace, set thy face in a modest order, and holding thy hands
up devoutly, then fastening thine eyes mannerly on the worthiest person at the
Table, bow thy knee and begin and say distinctly and plainly: if some other
say Grace, stand thou with like modesty and devotion.

Place not thy self too high, but first give all thine elders leave to sit
down: If for thy birth, or some especial friendship, the chief of the
company, offer to place thee above, refuse it shamefastly once or twice: but if
they still force thee, refuse it not obstinately.

When thou art set, hold both thy hands on the table, not joined together, nor
on the table napkin, but on each side of the trencher, but lay not thy hands
on thy lap, nor in thy bosom.

Lean not with thine elbowes upon the table, for that is only lawful for
old feeble persons: Notwithstanding some Courtiers use it, judging all that
they do is to be tolerated.

Take heed that thou trouble none of them that sit next thee with thine
elbowes, nor those on the other side of the table with thy feet.

To sit rocking on thy stool is foolish wantonness, and too unseemly for
children: or to sit hitching from one side of the stool to another is a most
slouenly part: But sit thou as upright and still with thy body as thou can.

If thou have a table-napkin, lay it on thy lap, or hang it on thine arm, or
as some will have it on thy left shoulder: and wipe thy fingers therewith when
they are foul, and not on thy clothes nor on the tablecloth.

It becomes thee not to be covered on thy head, sitting at table with thy
Parents or men of account, unless they command thee to put on thy Cap or Hat.

Some use to have their children stand at their meat at the tables end, and
not there to abide all Dinner or Supper, but having eaten somewhat, to take
away their trenchers and napkins, and so making a courtesy looking toward the
worthiest of the company, to go their way, and then to wait at the table.

Others have their children sit until the meat be taken away, and when fruit
is brought in, then they rise and wait. Let children each way be diligent to
please their Parents, and every way careful to use good manners.

Break not thy bread at the table, neither pare it about, nor feel it
thrusting with thy hands, but cut it crust and crumme together, a piece and
away.

Folk in old time did at all their meals use to eat bread with very great
reverence, as a sacred thing: thereupon grew a custom to kiss the bread, when
one had let a piece of it fall. And surely it is to be received with great
reverence and thanksgiving to God, for God gives it force to nourish and
sustain our life.

To begin the meal with drink, is a fashion of Dronkardes, which drink for
custom and not for thirst: and that custom is both unwholesome and unseemly.

It is also both unhealthy and unmannerly, to drink presently after eating of
pottage or milk.

It is neither healthy nor seemly for a child to drink above twice or thrice
at a meal. And when thou drinkest, guzzle not greedily but let it go down
softly and quietly, not pouring like a gutter.

Wine and strong drinks are both hurtful for the health and memories of
children: and a discredit for them to use. Wine and strong drinks are fittest
for old age which is cold. Let children drink small drink, or small wine
mingled with water, and that not too much of it, for their blood will soon be
inflamed, and they in danger to surfeit, besides the weakening of their brain,
and spoil of their wits.

See here what profits they reap that are delighted in wine and strong drinks:
their teeth soon wax yeallow and hoarie, their cheeks puffing hang flabbing:
their eyes staring and ill favored, their wits and memory quite dulled, their
body subject to the palsy, dropsy, gowt, and infinite other diseases, their
bodies drowsy and unapt to all goodness, they wax old in young age, and are
in danger of destroying both body and soul everlastingly.

Swallowe down that which is in thy mouth before thou drink, and before thou
put also the cup to thy mouth, wipe the same well with thy table napkin: and
after thou have done do the like.

It is an unmannerly part to look aside, or backward when thou drinkest.

Thank him gently that drinks to thee, and make semblance to pledge him,
setting the cup to thy mouth, and making as though thou did drink, though
thou drink little or nothing.

But if any be so rude and void of good manners, that he would force thee to
pledge him more than is necessary: refuse it modestly, desiring him to pardon
thee.

In drinking, let thy drink go down leysurely and easily, not gulping it in,
or swallowing it greedily like a brute beast.

When thou eatest pottage, thou may not bite thy bread, and so put it in,
neither wring it a pieces in with thy hands, for that is clownish, but cut it
on thy trencher in small morsels, and then put it into the pottager. And beware
thou soupe not thy pottage, but eat it leisurely with a spoone, without taking
it into thy mouth greedily, forcibly drawing thy breath with it, as some
clownes do use, sounding at the receipt of every spoonefull Slurrop. Beware
also that thou spill no pottage nor sauce, either on the table cloth, or on thy
clothes.

Some there be, that can scarce abide, till they be set at the table, but they
will fall to their meat, like greedy wolves, or cormorants: but be not thou
too hasty, though it be among thy equals, for so thou may be noted of
arrogancy and immodestie: and by putting a morsel too hoate in thy mouth,
thou may be driven quickly to void out the same again: than the which
nothing can be more slouenly, and make thee more laughed to scorn.

A child must stay a while, before he begin to eat, though he be hungry,
that he may learn to moderate his affections: therefore Socrates, when he was
old, would not drink as soon as his cup was filled, although he were very
thirsty. If a child sit at table with his betters, he must be the last that
shall put his hand in the dish, and scant do that unless he be bidden: but
must be contented with that is given him.

A child must not use dipping his hand in the sauce: but if he be willed to
use sauce with his meat, let him take the meat on his knifes point, and dip it
therein. To turn the dish, and choose where to cut, is a lickerish and
unmannerly part: but cut on that part next thee, how ever it fall. Leaving the
daintiest morsels always for thy betters.

Thou must neither lick nor pick the meat nor lick the sugar from about the
platters side. Beware thou offer not to eat of any dish whereof thy betters
have not first eaten. Much less may thou presume to touch those dishes
first, which should be last.

Whenever thy betters shall offer thee any meat, reach out thy trencher and
take it, but remember that presently thou bow thy body reuerendly to him that
gave it thee. If a dainty piece of meat be offered thee, make a reverend show of
refusal, as if thou had rather that the party should keep it to himself:
but if thou be earnestly willed to take it, receive it with like modesty as
is aforesaid: and of such dainty piece give always part to him next thee, or
to two or three by thee, if the portion will extend so largely.

That which being offered, thou can not receive conveniently, according to
manners with thy fingers, receive the same with thy trencher or plate.

If a piece of Pie or of Tart be offered thee, receive that on thy plate or
trencher, and not with thy fingers.

If Custard or such like meat be offered thee, receive it on thy plate or
trencher, and wiping the spoone (wherewith it was delivered thee) with thy
table napkin, deliver it again with humble bowing of thy body to him that gave
it thee, if he be thy superior.

It is unmannerly and evil to lick thy fingers being moistened with the fat of
meat, or to wipe them on thy clothes: and as unseemly and also unwholesome is it
to swallow down whole morsels without chewing like Storkes and Herons.

If thou see one cutting meat that thou likest, it is ill manners for thee
to offer thy trencher before he make any offer thereof to thee: for thou
should so be judged a lickorish greedy gut.

When thou receiuest any thing at the table with thy hand, lay hold of it
with no more but thy thumb and two forefingers, the hinder fingers being bowed
in mannerly.

In eating thou must put thy morsels of bread and meat being cut, leysurely
and modestly into thy mouth with the thumb and forefinger of thy left hand,
the other three fingers being bowed in, one beneath the other.

If one offer thee meat that thou love not, or goes against thy stomach
deny it not churlishly as Clitipho answered his mother, saying: I will none of
it. But give him thanks shamefastly: if he still offer it, say: Pardon me Sir
I love it not: or it is not good for me.

Let Children also learn how to carue meat: for there is one manner of
caruing the leg of flesh, another of the shoulder, another of the breast, etc.
one manner of cutting up a Capon, another of a Fesant, another of a Partridge,
another of a Ducke, another of a Conie, etc. all which must be learned by
daily experience.

Beware that in cutting thy meat at the table, thou handle or tutch no part
of the meat, more than thou cuttest for thy self. For avoiding of which evil
the Italians and Germans use little forkes of silver or steel with their
knives in cutting meat.

It is a most slouenly thing to offer to gnaw any bread or meat at the table.
And as evil is it to offer unto another, that which thou have already half
eaten.

To bite meat or bread and then dip it in the sauce, is very clownish: and as
unmannerly to take any thing chewed out of thy mouth, and lay it on thy
trencher.

If by chance thou have got into thy mouth any stinking or unsavory morsel
of meat, which thou can not swalow, turn thy face aside, and with thy
napkin cover thy face: and so rid it away secretly, that it be not seen or
perceived.

To take up again to eat the fragments from thy trencher, is no good manners.

Throw not down thy bones to file the house, or make dogs fight: nor lay them
on the cloth, but put them on a voyder, or on a corner of thy trencher.

Pick not the meat out of an egg with thy fingers, nor lick it with thy
tung.

Let no grease hang about thy lips, but keep thy mouth clean with thy table
napkin.

To gnaw bones is dog-like, but to pick the meat off with thy knife, is good
manners.

Thou must take salt with thy knife out of the salt-seller, not with thy
fingers: if it be too far off, desire some others help.

To lick the dish or trencher whereon any sweet thing has been, is rather
the property of a cat, than of a well nurtured child.

Cut thy meat in pretty morsels, and to every morsel of meat, eat a morsel
of bread: that is both wholesome and good manners.

Some rauenously devour their meat, rather than eat it, as if they should
never again come to meat: but these rather steal their meat, than receive it
thankfully.

Some thrust so much into their mouths at once that their cheeks swel like
bag-pipes. Other open their jaws so wide, that they smacke like hogs: some
blow at the nose. All which are beastly fashions.

To drink or speak when thy mouth is full, is not only slouenly, but
dangerous.

Some eat and drink all the while they sit at the table, glutton-like. Others
scratch their heads, pick their nose and ears, or play some apish toys with
their hands, or shake their heads, or wincke, or look awry with their eyes,
or play with their knife or cough, or spit: but all these are signs of
Clownish fools.

Though children be not permitted to talk at the table, in presence of their
betters; yet they may mark the wise and pleasant discourses of other: And if
they be asked any question, they must have a regard to answer discreetly,
yet chearefullie. And if they be willed to discourse of any thing, they must
not be too bashful, as they may not be too saucy.

It is not good manners to sit at the table looking heavy and sad, but to
show a lightsome and cheareful countenance, is requisite and commendable.

There be some so blockish that sitting at the table, they mark nothing what
is done or said: Nay if a man speak to them, they are as it were half a
sleep, and can scarce tell what they eat. These are rather like senceles
stones than like men. But a heedfull child may get much profit, as well by
marking the wise sayings of others, as by observing the manners of those that
best behave themselves at the Table.

It is no good manners to gaze about the Table, marking what every one eats:
neither may thou look long upon any that sit at the Table, or that stands
by: and it is less good manners to look a squint still upon any that is
beside thee.

It is a dishonest part to report abroad whatsoever has bin spoken at the
Table in secrecy: or as one friend may utter to another, things which he would
not have published.

A child sitting at table with only his equals may talk, but let his talk
be seasoned with modesty and wisdom. But if he sit with those that be far
his superiors he must not talk at all, except it be that a question be asked
him.

When merry talk is used of his superiors, he may not laugh a loud: but
must smile a little modestly.

If any his superiors chance to utter any speeches of of ribawdrie, he may
in no wise laugh thereat, but must make semblance, as though heard them not.

Silence is counted a virtue in women: and much more seemly is it in Children.

Beware thou answer not, before he that speaks to thee, has ended his
speech: for so shall thou be but mocked.

Solomon the wise accounted it foolishnes to answer before the tale were
heard: and it it were necessary to pause a little after the question.

If thou understand not well what he spoke, and he expect an answer, pray him
to bear with thee, and tell him the cause.

When thou understand his demand, answer discreetly, briefly and
cheerfully.

Thou may not there speak any thing against a man's credit, nor to renew his
grief.

Thou may not dispraise any victuals set before thee: but those thou love
feed on modestly and thankfully, leaving the other.

If any at the table behave himself indecently, seem thou rather not to see
than to mock him.

Be not thou ready to find fault with others follies, but endeavor to be thy
self unreprovable: imitating those that best behave themselves.

It were not good for children to sit over long at the table: for that both
hinders health and dulleth the wits. But children must obey their parents wills.

Those that would suffer children to be pinched with hunger, are merciles: and
they that would have them eat and drink until they be ready to burst, are
less their friends.

Children should be fed, and not crammed: for some think that they are
neuerfull, unless the belly be thrust so full, that they he like to burst, or
to spue. But a measure should be learned from the infancy.

Some think to love, but hate their children so, that they suffer them to be
banqueting almost all night.

If the banquet be so long that thou can not well sit it out, arise, take
away thy trencher and scraps with thy napkin, making obeisance toward him that
seems the worthiest in the company, and come and wait by the table mannerly.

In taking off or setting on any dish to the table, beware thou spill no broth
nor such like upon any bodies clothes.

In reaching or taking any thing, use thy right hand, and not thy left.

If thou will snuff the candle, take it from the table, and being snufft,
tread out the snuff plucked off quickly, least the smell thereof offend any
body,

The manner of voyding the table: like as also of furnishing the same, and of
spreading the cloth is sundry ways used, according to the dignity of persons
that are to eat: for the service of princes is of one sort; that of great Lords
is of another sort; of worshipful persons is otherwise: all which fashions are
far above this subject, which is but a short instruction for certain
observations to be marked of the ruder sort. Yet forasmuch as some Gentlemen
and other, will have their children to take away the table commonly after
meat, I think it not amiss to speak a few words of the manner how to take
away the Table.

When thou therefore art appointed by thy parents or betters to that function,
look that in taking off the dishes, thou take them off in the same order that
they were served to the table, the grosest meats (which were first served)
being first taken away, and the daintiest (that were last served) take last
away: and in taking away the dishes, beware that thou spill no broth or sauce
on the table cloth, or on the clothes of any that sit at table. And if thou
be willed to fill any wine or beer to the table, fill not the cup too full,
least thou spill in delivering it.

But forasmuch as children are not troubled with any more than with voyding of
the last furniture of the table, namely, with the chief and fruit, let us
speak thereof.

If in waiting this while at the table there be given thee an apple or such
like, thou may not stand eating the same before the table, but bestow it till
afterward: neither may thou gaze steadfastly on such iunkets as thou see and
likest there, much less may thou stare on those that sit and eat: but be
attentive and ready to serve what shall be called for.

When dinner is done, and thou willed to take away, first cover the salt, (if
it be not covered before) then take away the fruit dishes in order, the last
served first, and so on, and lastly the cheese. But beware of catching for
figs, comfets, or such dainty things, before the table be voyded, and grace
said. When cheese and all is voyded, set on the table a fair voyding charger,
making therewith a leg: then with thy trencher-knife take up the trenchers,
putting them into the voyder one after another, beginning at the upper part of
the mess first: and with the same trencher-knife gather all the crummes and
fragments into the voyder, and still lay or deliver away the table napkins, as
thou gettest them, all save one, which thou shall hang on thy left arm. When
thou have thus gathered into the voyder all the crumbs and scraps, bring down
the voider lower, and with the table napkin that hanged on thine arm, holding
the one end thereof in thy right hand, and the other in the left, take with thy
right hand the loves from the salt, one by one, and put them in the voider, but
so as the end of the table napkin be between the bread and thy hand, and
lastly take the salt as thou did the loaves with thy right, and holding the
same on the right side of the voider with that end of thy table napkin, and
having before laid the voiding knife on the top of the voider, draw over the
other end of the napkin with thy left hand, and so lifting up the voider with
both hands, make obeisance and carry it away: then return and fold up first
both the sides of the table cloth, then the ends, and so turning it three or
four double, drawing it toward thee downward, take it of, making a low leg,
looking toward the chief at the table.

In honorable and some worshipful houses, the salt and voiding knife is taken
away solemnly alone after the voider. But, this shall suffice for the meaner
sort. After the table cloth is taken away, attend till the company be silent,
then with a sober countenance and iesture after thou have made obeisance, begin
to say grace.

A grace or prayer before meat.
O Lord God almighty and father most merciful, which give all good things,
and blessest all that is blessed, bless us we beseech thee, and all thy good
benefits ordained by thee to our comfort. Give us grace thankfully to receive
them, moderately to use them, and to be bettered by inioying of them. Vouchsafe
also to save, prosper and preserve thy Church universal, our Queen and this
realm: and send us true peace both of conscience and of bodily state, and a
right unity in religion, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior. Amen.

A grace or thanksgiving after meat.
WE yield thee most humble and hearty thanks O God of all graces, and father
most favorable, for this our good refreshing, and all other thy infinite
bounties bestowed most mercifully on us. Feed us also we pray thee, with the
food of thy holy spirit, that we may daily grow stronger and stronger in true
faith, godliness and virtue. Vouchsafe also to save, prosper and preserve thy
Church universal, our Queen and this Realm, and send us true peace both of
conscience and of bodily state, and a right unity in religion, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

Of manners at play.
PLay is to be used for sport at some times, and for to refresh the spirits,
and make the body more healthie and active: it is not to be used as an
occupation.

It is said that the natural disposition of a child is most easily to be
seen in play, whether he be given to pride, lying, anger, strife, self will,
deceit, or what other virtue, or vice.

Be thou therefore in play gentle, pleasant just and friendly, remembering, that
thou playest to exercise thy body and delight thy mind: and by contention and
wrangling thou should distemper thy body, and disquiet thy mind.

Play not for great wagers, but for friendly familiarity. Strive not so much
for the wager, as to win victory, yet rather than thou should seem
contentious, yield over the victory to the vanquished, and fly al falsehood or
fraud.

Of manners in the chamber.
WHen thou come into thy chamber at evening, remember that thou art now
going to bed, which is a figure of thy grave, and that sleep is an image of
death. Call to mind therefore, how thou have spent the day past: examine thy
conscience, whether thou have committed any evil thing: if thou have, cry God
heartely mercy therefore, and pray him for Christ's sake to forgive thee.
That done, look over heedfully once or twice that which thou have to repeat
next morning. Afterward, kneeling on thy knees devoutly, pray that God would
lighte^ thine understanding with his holy spirit, which may lead thee into all
truth: that he would protect thee and keep thee from all evil both of soul
and body. Pray also for all in authority, for thy friends, and for all whom God
would have prayed for: and concluding with the Lords prayer, commit thy self
into the hands of God almighty.

In putting off, or putting on thy clothes, beware that thou uncover not any
part of thee which Nature would have hidden.

In lying with another, touch him not, nor be any way troublesome unto him.

Make no noise, shouting, nor foolish laughter in the chamber, but remember,
that even there where thou think thy self most private, God almighty
beholds all thy doings: to whom thou owe more duty and reverence, than to
all the men in the world.

Be cleanly and neat in thy chamber, avoiding all sluttishnes.

In the morning when thou risest, call to thy remembrance also, how thou art to
enter into the course of that day, as into a long and dangerous journey: for
the devil will be ready to assault thee diverse ways, the examples of the
wicked to allure thee, the lusts of the flesh to entice thee to evil: and all
these are enemies to the true happiness of thy soul and body; besides many
mischaunces that may befall thee. Pray therefore earnestlye unto God, to
safe conduct, guide and defend thee, so shall thou be safe under his shield.
And remember in the day to use as occasion shall serve the manners before in
this Treatise spoken of.

Now the Lord of life, and Author of all goodness, grant thee grace to walk in
true godliness and good manners, that thou may grow to be a perfect man in
Christ Jesus.

Amen.

A prayer for children to use in the Morning.
O Lord God, most holy, most high, mighty and glorious: that by thine
unspeakable wisdom and omnipotency have made all things, and placed them in
their beings: and which gouernest all thy creatures according to thy good
pleasure. Look mercifully I beseech thee on me, that am the work of thine own
hands. And as it has pleased thee of thy great loving kindness, to keep, save,
and defend me from the manifold dangers of this night past: for the which I
yield unto thine excellent Majesty, all due humble and hearty thanks: so let
it be thy good pleasure to keep and defend me this day and evermore from all
evils both of soul and body. Be thou my protector, my guide, and my
sovereign Lord and Governor. Grant O Lord, that as the night of darkness is
now past, and the clear daylight does appear; so I may by thy gracious
assistaunce learn to cast off all darkness of wickedness, error and ignorance,
and have my soul and understanding more and more lightened with true faith,
wisdom, and godly knowledge. Let thy holy spirit be my instructor and
chief teacher: which is able to lead me into all truth. Make me, dear
father, apt to conceive, and diligent to practice whatsoever good and virtuous
documents shall be taught me by my parents, schoolmasters, or wise elders.
Keep stubbornnes and disobedience far from me: but make me delighted in that
which is good, that I may with all patience and dutifulnes be ready to
incline my heart to all wise and godly precepts.

And forasmuch, as both natural duty binds me to be mindful of the weal
and prosperity of the Prince and Magistrates, under whose protection I live in
safety, as also for my parents and friends, whom thou have given to be the
authors of my life, nourishment, and maintenance: and for that also Christian
charity binds me, to be careful of the good of all Christians in general,
yea, and to pray, that still more may daily be added to the Church: I
therefore for them all even as for my self, do beseech thee to extend forth
thine abundant mercies to every one in his place, that they may live and die
to thy glory, and their own salvation, concluding with that holy and perfect
prayer, which thine only son Christ Jesus has taught us, saying, Our
Father, etc.

A prayer to be said of children at evening before they go to bed.
O Lord God, our most gracious heavenly Father, I most humbly thank thee for
thine unspeakable mercies and bounty showed me at al times hitherto, and
namely for keeping me this day past in thy fatherly protection, defending me
from all evils, and bestowing on me co^forts necessary both for my soul and
body. O Lord, now that the dark night is come, which is a sign of horror,
death, and woe, and that I am to lie and sleep on my bed, which is an image of
the grave wherein my body after this life is like to rest, let thy holy
spirit so guard, protect, direct, and comfort me, that neither terrors of
conscience, assaults of Satan, suggestions to sin, fleshly concupiscence, idle
sloathfulnes, nor fearful dreams may trouble me: but that sleeping and waking
my soul, mind and spirit may wholly be meditating on thy precepts, and may
still awaite to attend to do thy will: that I may learn to die unto sin,
and live unto righteousness, and my rising in the morning may put me in hope of
the rising to everlasting life. Grant this to me and to all thy Church, for
Christ's sake. In whose name, etc.

Every creature of God is made holy unto us by his word and prayer. 1. Ti.
4.5.
A Prayer before meat.
WE humbly beseech thee, O heavenly Father, to forgive us all our sins, and
to bless us and these thy good gifts which we receive from thee, through
Jesus Christ.

When thou have eaten and art full, thou shall bless the Lord thy God.
A prayer or a grace after meat.
O Lord we beseech thee to make us thankful for these and all other thy
benefits bestowed upon us miserable sinners, but specially for thy holy word,
and our redemption by Jesus Christ. Amen.

Two other prayers, for morning and evening, made by a zealous and learned
minister of Gods word.
Morning prayer.
Watch and pray, least ye enter into temptation. Mat. 26.41.
O Most mighty God our heavenly and merciful father, we most wretched sinners
humbly confess unto thy Majesty, that all good things we have, do come from
thy only mercy, that we are most unworthy of them, and yet altogether unable
heartily to pray for the continuance thereof, yet seeing thy dear son Jesus
Christ has commanded us in his name, to pray, and that with assurance to
speed, and to be heard: we beseech thee for his sake to prepare our hearts by
thy holy spirit, to put out of our minds all wordly things and vain fancies,
and to stir us up earnestly to consider what great need we have of thy
continual help both in our souls and bodies. O Lord we have through our
manifold sins deserved thy wrath, and eternal damnation of body and soul,
yet by the virtue of the great sufferings of Jesus Christ, and the shedding of
his precious blood, forgive and wash away al our offenses: we are unworthy of
thy favor, either in this life or in the life to come, yet through his
holiness receive us unto mercy, and make us heirs of thy blessed kingdom,
and so increase in our hearts every day unfeigned repentance for our former
wickedness, in that we have neither worshipped thy Majesty, nor lived toward
others according to thy word. Strengthen our faith (O Lord) in Jesus Christ,
for the forgiveness of our sins; and for thy tender mercy sake, power into our
hearts the grace of thy holy spirit, which may stir up in us a more hearty
love unto thee and thy blessed word, that by it we may learn to worship thee
aright, and to live faithfully and truly toward all men in our callings,
striving continually against all sin, chiefly in our selves, and then also in
others, so that whenever it shall please thee to call any of us out of this
short and sinful life, we may willingly deliver up our souls into thy blessed
kingdom, and may come with joy (as loving children) to thee our heavenly and
merciful father. O Lord make us thankful for all thy corrections, giving us
grace by them to fear thee more carefully, and to sorrow for our sins more
heartily. Make us also thankful for all thy benefits, namely for the sweet
sleep and quiet rest whereby thou have this night refreshed us, we beseech
thee now in like manner (O gracious God) for Christ's sake, to receive us this
day into thy blessed keeping, preserve us from all perils and dangers, from
sin, from the wicked cares of this life, and the vain desires of the flesh,
shining into our hearts by the grace of thy holy spirit, and the true knowledge
of Jesus Christ, the true light of the world, that we may guide all our
thoughts, words and deeds, according to the same, and walk painefully and
truly in our callings, to the glory of thy blessed name, the good example of
all others, and the great assurance of our own salvation, through thy dear
son Jesus Christ our only Savior, in whose name we pray for these and all
other graces, as he has taught us saying, Our Father, etc.

Evening prayer.
The Lord is nigh unto all them which call upon him, even unto all such as call
upon him faithfully. Psalm. 145.18.
WE most humbly beseech thee, O gracious God and heavenly father, even for thy
dear son Jesus Christ's sake, to pardon and forgive us all our sins, in
thought, word, and deed committed against thy holy laws and commandments, to
turn away from us graciously all those plagues which we most justly have
deserved for them, both in this life and in the life to come, working in our
hearts every day by thy holy spirit more true and unfeigned sorrow for them,
with greater care ever hereafter to know thy blessed will revealed in thy
word, and to order all our opinions and doings according to the same, and so
much the rather, O Lord, because of thy manifold blessings whereby thou do
daily move us hereunto, for the which (O heavenly father) make us more heartily
thankful, specially for our creation at the first after thy own holiness
and righteousness, for our redemption by Jesus Christ when we were utterly
lost, for that knowledge of our Savior, which by the preaching of thy blessed
Gospel through thy holy spirit thou have wrought in our hearts, for true
repentance, for faith, hope, and love, for watchfulness in our doings, and all
other gifts of thy grace perteining to our salvation, all which graces (O Lord)
are very weak in us, because of the great wickedness of our hearts striving
against thy holy spirit, so as in thy wrath thou might justly forsake us
utterly: yet (O Lord) let it be thy gracious pleasure to increase them in our
hearts every day, even so long as we live in this world, as of thy goodness thou
have begun, that thereby the assurance of our salvation may be more certainly
sealed up unto our own consciences, that so we may also learn to be more
truly thankful unto thy majesty for the benefits of this life: namly, that
thou have hitherto ever since we were borne, given us those things that were
needful for our bodies, as health, food, apparel, and such like, that thou
have kept us from many dangers, comforted us in all our troubles, and
strengthened us in all our weakness, and given us grace this day to labor
faithfully and truly in our callings, having brought us safely past all the
dangers thereof, unto this present hour. O Lord forgive us the sins of this
day and of our whole life, and specially our great unthankfulness for these thy
manifold blessings, and in Jesus Christ thy dear son continue them toward
us ever hereafter both in souls and bodies, and specially this night receive
us into thy blessed keeping, preserve us from all dangers, from sin, from all
ungodly dreams and fancies, granting unto us comfortable rest, so as we may be
the better stre^gthened to serve thee faithfully in our calling, and giving us
grace always both sleeping and waking to be ready when thou shall call us out
of this miserable world. Last of all, because thou have commanded us to pray
for others also, we beseech thee good Lord be merciful to all nations,
specially to those churches where thy gospel is truly preached, continue thy
mercy toward this realm, preserve our Queen, bless her counsel, and all
in authority with necessary graces, increase the number of faithful preachers,
strengthen the godly, lighten the ignorant, convert the wicked, be merciful to
all schools and places of learning, to all our friends and kinsefolkes, and
others, afflicted in body or in soul, granting to every one of them, as to
our selves, those necessary graces which thou know to be needful for every
one of us in our several estates and callings, to the glory of thy name, and
the better assurance of our salvation through Christ Jesus, in whose name we
ask of thy majesty as he has taught us. Our Father which, etc.

FINIS.

