ARTICLES TO BE INQUIRED OF BY THE CHVRCH-WARDENS AND SWORNE-MEN within the
Archdeaconrie of Excester in the visitation of the Right Worshipful Thomas
Barret, Archdeacon of the said Archdeaconrie of EXCESTER. Anno Domini. 1612.

LONDON Printed by William Stansby. 161^.

The tenor of the Oath ministered to the Churchwardens and sworne-men.
Ye shall swear, that upon due consideration of these Articles given you in
charge, Ye shall present every such person of or within your Parish, as you
shall know to have committed any offense, or omitted any duty mentioned in any
of these Articles, or which are vehemently suspected, famed, or defamed of any
such offense, or negligence. So help you God, by the contents of his Holy
Gospel.

Articles to be enquired of within the Archdeaconrie of Excester.
Belonging to the Church.
FIrst, whether your Church or Chapel, with the Chancell thereof, and every
part of either of them, be well and sufficiently repaired?

2 Whether have you in your Church, or Chapel, 1 The book of Common prayer.
2 The Psalms. 3 The Bible in the largest volum. 4 The two tomes of Homilies. 5
The Paraphrases of Erasmus. 6 A table of the ten Commandments. 7 The table of
the degrees of Marriage prohibited. 8 A convenient Pulpit. 9 A decent Communion
Table. 10 A comely covering for it. 11 A fair linen cloth to lay upon it. 12
A Communion cup of silver with a cover. 13 A convenient seat for the Minister
to read Service in. 14 A decent Font. 15 A comely Surplesse. 16 A chest or box
for the Alms of the poor conveniently placed. 17 A Register book for
Christnings, Marriages, and Burials, kept in a Chest, having two locks and
keys.


3 Whether is your Churchyard well fenced and ^^eanly kept, and whether has
there been any trees felled therein had for what use?

4 Whether has there been any fighting, (...), brawling, or quarrelling in
your Church, or Churchyard, and by whom, or has any interlude been played in
your Church, or wares sold by chapmen in your Churchyard on the sabbath and
holydaies or otherwise?

5 Whether the mansion house of your Parson or Vicar with all the buildings
thereunto belonging be well and sufficiently repaired are and maintained?

6 Whether your Parish Alms house, and Church-house, if you have (...), be
kept in sufficient reparations, and to what uses they implo^^^

7 Whether are there belonging to your Church-house any implements and
vtensils, and in whose custody are they: and whether any have been sold or
alienated from their ancient use and by whom.

Touching the Ministry.
1 WHether public prayer be said in your Church both Morning and Evening,
every Sunday and holiday, distinctly reverently, and in due time, and in such
order as is by the book of common prayer prescribed. And whether upon
Wednesdaies and Fridaies not being holydaies, the Letany and other prayers are
said?

2 Whether has your Parson or Vicar preached, or caused to be preached the
monthly and quarterly Sermons, by the Kings Injunctions required. And whether
has there been any admitted to preach or read any Lecture, or the divine
Service, not having license?

3 Whether does your Minister every Sunday and Holyday, when there is no
Sermon, read distinctly and plainly some part of the Homilies, as by authority
is prescribed?

4 Whether is your Minister resident upon his benefice, if he be absent, how
long has he been so, and whom has he placed to serve the Cure in his stead?

5 Whether does your Minister usually upon the Sabbath or Holydaies, in the
Church openly call for, hear, and instruct in the Catechism, the children and
sruants, which are of convenient age within your Parish?

6 Whether is your Minister a Preacher, or contrariwise is he a sower of
discord, a haunter of Tauernes, or Alehouses, a common hunter, hawker, t^^^er,
carder, swearer, or dancer, or is suspected to live incontinently, or does
frequent any suspected places, or give evil example of life?

7 Whether does your Minister upon the Sunday, about the midst of divine
Service, openly signify, what holy days and fasting days are to be observed
the same week following?

8 Whether has your Minister baptized any children, married any persons,
churched any woman, buried any dead, or administered the holy Communion in any
other-sort then is prescribed by the book of common prayer, or has he refused
to reform any of these duties according in the same?

9 Whether does your Minister use to examine the Parishioners, before they come
to the holy Communion, to know whether they be fit to be admitted thereunto?

10 Whether has your Minster admitted to the holy communion or into the Church
any open and notorious evil liver before penance done by appointment of the
Ordinary?

11 Whether is your Minister diligent in visiting the sick, and comforting
them with the holy Scriptures, and does he then move such as be of ability,
especially when they make their testaments, to consider the necessity of the
poor, and to give to their box or chest, their charitable devotion, or alms?

12 Whether does your Minister quarterly read in the Church the Kings
Injunctions publicly, as is required?

13 Whether has your Minister conferred with, and persuaded all persons within
your Parish suspended or excommunicated, to submit themselves to the
Ecclesiastical censure, and to seek their restitution from the Ordinary, and
whether does he use it in the presence of one of the Churchwardens at the least?

14 Whether does your Minister keep a note of all excommunicants in your
Parish, and the first Sunda every month about the midst of Morning prayer
recite their names, and admonish the Churchwardens to remove them out of the
Church?

Cocerning Parishioners.
1 Whether have you in your parish any dweller, or soiourner which is a
favorer to the Romish or foreign power a maintainer of popish doctrine, or
any that have said or heard Mass, or which have in their Custody, any popish
or schismatic books, or are any way suspected to maintain heresies, errors,
or false doctrine?

2 Whether there be any in your Parish that use sorcery or witchcraft, or be
vehemently suspected for the same, or that use soothsaying, charms, unlawful
prayer, or inuocations, and whether any do resort to such for help and
counsel, and who be the offenders therein?

3 Whether your parishioners do diligently resort with their children and
servants to your parish Church on the sabbath day and holidaies, both morning
and Evening, and there remain the time of common prayer, preaching or reading
of Homilies, catechizing, and other service of God there used, reverently and
devoutly hearing the same,

4 Whether have you any common resorters unto your Church? which are not of
your Parish, nor licensed by the Ordinary usually to repair thither, and what
be their names that so resort, and of what Parishes are they?

5 Whether any of your Parish, while they are in the Church, in the time of
divine Service, use to walk, or spend the time in talking, or whispering
together, or do sleep in the Church, or have their heads covered indecently
in the time of prayer, or do make any noise or disturbance in the time of
Service.

6 Whether any of your Parish absenting themselves from the Church, have in the
mean time used any gaming abroad, or sitting in the street, or Churchyard, or
in any Tavern or Alehouse, in the time of any part of divine Service, or
exercise of Religion, and by name in whose house.

Whether there be in your Parish any shops open, of any artificers and
tradesmen, and buying and selling used by them upon the Sundaies, and holydaies
in the time of divine Service.

8 Whether any of your parishioners do work upon Sundaies at any time of the
day, or any Butchers kill any flesh on the Sunday, or any Millers set their
Milles to work on the Sabbath or holydaies, in the time of Service or Sermon,
or whether any man has gone with Cart, or occupied himself in worldly labors
upon those days.

9 Whether there be any in your Parish that receive the holy Communion in any
other sort then kneeling, or do there use any unseemly or vnreuerent
behavior.

10 Whether there by any of your Parish, or soiourning in your Parish, being of
convenient age, that have not received the holy Communion thrice this last
year at the least, and namely at Easter last, or thereabout for once.

11 Whether any young persons of your Parish have contracted themselves, and
married without the consent of their Parents, or governors.

12 Whether there be any in your Parish that be married within the degrees of
consanguinitie forbidden, or that have married two wives, or two husbands both
living, or are famed or suspected so to have done: or whether any being
divorced or separated, yet do notwithstanding cohabite and company together,
or marry again, the former wife or husband yet living.

13 Whether any couple being lawfully married, have the one forsaken the other,
of their own wills, without authority of the Ordinary of the place, and do
live a sunder, to the offense and evil example of others, and who do so offend?

14 Whether there be in your Parish any adulterers, fornicators, incestuous
persons, bawds, receivers, or close favorers of naughty and incontinent
persons, or such as harbor any woman with child unmarried, or have conveyed
away the said woman, or suffered her to be conveyed, or to go away, before
that she has made satisfaction to the congregation by order of the Ordinary.

15 Whether there be in your Parish any blasphemers of the name of God, common
swearers, or such as have taken up a custom of any vain oath, and what be
their names that so offend.

16 Whether are there any in your Parish, that are common drunkerds, or are
common haunters of Tauernes or Alehouses, to the offending of others, and evil
example, and who are they that so offend.

17 Whether there be in your parish any malicious, contentious, or uncharitable
persons, common slaundeoers of their neighbors, raylers, scoulders, or such as
be sowers of discord between neighbors, and what are their names that offend
therein?

18 Whether their are in your Parish, any that have uncharitably contemned, or
by any means in word or deed irreverently abused your Minister, and in what
sort or manner the same was done, and by whom.

19 Whether any in your Parish give the Churchwardens and Swornemen, or any of
them evil words, for doing their duty according to their oath, and conscience,
in making presentment of any fault.

20 Whether do you know or have heard say that within your parish there is any
person that offends in letting money to usury, contrary to the laws and rules
of charity and christianity, and who offends therein.

21 Whether there be in your Parish that do administer their goods of the dead
without any authority, and whether any suppress the last will of the dead or
be there any Executors that have not fulfilled their Testators will, especially
in paying of legacies given to the Church, or to the relief of the poor, to
Orphans, poor Scholles, poor Maidens marriages, high ways, Schools and such
like, and by whom they are so detained.

22 Whether any of your Parish do see ay secret conuenticles, or have any
Preaching or Lectures in any private house, or either of the Sacraments
administered, or any prayer there used, and what they be that offend.

23 Whether do any of your Parish refuse to pay, to the reparations of your
Church, as they are severally seassed, at at a lawful vestry or do any other
which hold any land in your parish refuse to pay, which are not of your parish,
and what be their names that so refuse to pay?

24 Whether any youth in your Parish, do neglect to come to Church to be
catechized, having had notice of the days and times appointed for them by your
Minister, and what be the names of such youth, and of their governors?

25 Whether any person suspended or excommunicated, be suffered to hear divine
service, or the Sermon, to receive the Sacrament, to be married, churched, or
buried in Christian burial, or to be partaker of any of the rites or benefits
of the Church?

26 Whether any woman known or suspected to be unlawfully begotten with child,
have been married, or churched in your Parish, before she and the party with
her offending have been ordered for their offense by the Ordinary?

27 Whether any have been married without banes thrice publicly asked upon
three several sabbath or festival days, in time of divine Service, or have
any been married in the time of Lent, or within the other times wherein
marriage is by law restrained, or in any other place, then in the Church
without sufficient license?

28 Whether have any of your Parish been Christened, married, Churched, or
buried out of your Parish, or have any received the communion out of the same?

29 Whether has the Perambulation of the circuit of your Parish, been
observed once every year or not, according to the kings Majesty's Injunctions.

30 Whether have all women in your Parish that have been delivered of child,
come at convenient time after to the Church to give thanks, and whether have
they been churched according to the form in the book of common prayer?

31 Whether any in your parish refuse to be examined by your Minister how he is
prepared before he comes to receive the communion?

32 Whether have you in your Parish any Schoolemasters, and whether do they
together with their Scholars frequent your Parish Church on the sabbath and
holydaies, do they give any offense or evil example of life, and whether are
they licensed to teach.

33 Whether is your Parish Clarke dutiful and serviceable to your Minister,
does he read plainly and distinctly, does he live soberly and honestly as
becomes him.

34 Whether does your Clarke or Sexten keep your Church clean, and whether
does he keep the doors thereof safely locked, or is there by his default any
thing lost or spoiled in the Church, or does suffer unreasonable ringing, or
any profane exercise in your Church, or does live offensiuely amongst you?

35 Whether have you any in your Parish, which practice Physic or Surgery,
and whether are they licenced by the Ordinary or not?

Of Churchwardens and Swornemen.
1 WHether the Churchwardens of the last year have given to your Parish a just
account of the Church goods and rents, together with the Collections,
Seasments, and Sums of money committed to their charge, according to the
ancient custom of the Parish, and whether they have disposed the Church goods:
and laid forth the Church money to the profit of the Church or no?

2 Whether all Churchwardens and swornemen of your Parish, do at the end of
every quarter meet and confer about the answering of these Articles, and
who has after intelligence given to the time and place of meeting, negligently
or carelessly absented himself?

3 Whether forfeiture of twelve pence for absence from Church, appointed by a
statute to be taken to the use of the poor, be levied, takin and imployyd,
according to the same statute, by the Churchwardens of your Parish, of every
person that offends?

4 Whether the said forfeiture be in special, levied and taken of such as
wilfully stand suspended or excommunicated, and so are absent from the Church,
for every day that they so do, according to the statute?

5 Whether the Churchwardens and swornemen of your Parish do diligently confer
with your Minister at Easter and Michaelmas yearly, and give in their
presentiments to master Archdeacon or his Official, for intelligence of those
things which by his help and information, they may the more truly and directly
present according to these articles?

6 Whether do you the Churchwardens, Constables or Officers usually about the
midst of divine service walk forth of the Church, and see who are in any
Alehouse, or other house, or abroad elsewhere absent, or evil employed, in the
time of common Prayer or the Sermon, and have presented to the Ordinary all
such as you shall find so to offend?

7 Whether do you the Churchwardens keep a true Inventory of all the
ornaments, goods, rents, lands, and leases of the Church, as also an Inventory
of all the implements, and vtensiles of your Church house, and whether do you
deliver the same together with your accounts to the Churchwardens which do
succeed you?

8 Whether if any more be given to your Church, or Church-house, then are
entered into the said Inventory, and if any be lost, sold, or detained, have
you presented the same to the Ordinary?

9 Whether have you the Churchwardens, or one of you at the least, been
present with your Minister, and have heard him confer with, and persuade
every person standing wilfully suspended, or excommunicated within your Parish
to submit themselves to their Ordinaries.

10 Whether do you know of any offense committed, or duty omitted, by any of
your Parish before your time, and heretofore presented to the Ordinary, or as
yet not reformed, and you shall present the same?

11 Finally, whether you know or understand of any matter or cause being a
breach to his Majesty's Injunctions of Canons and Laws Ecclesiastical here
not expressed, and you shall present them?

Certain directions and orders given to the Ministers.
INPRIMIS, It is enjoined to the Ministers of this Archdeaconrie, that every
of them, for the better proceeding in Catechizing of the youth of his Parish,
shall take a note in writing of the names of all such youth, of both sexes* as
are of sufficient age to be catechized, and shall assign them their several
days and times on the Sabbath and holy days, to come to the Church to be
instructed in the Catechism, set down in the book of common Prayer, with the
additions of late set forth by authority, and if any of the said youth shall
neglect so to do, that then the ministers shall deliver the names of such
youth, with the names of their parents or governors, to the Churchwardens to
be presented in their quarter bills.

2 It is enjoined to the Ministers, that they shall keep every one a book
containing the names of all such as are meet to receive the Communion in every
family within their several Parishes, that thereby they may be able to deliver
a true note to the Churchwardens, of the names of all those which shall not
receive the holy Communion thrice in the year, and especially at the time of
Easter for ance, as is by authority required. And for the better observation
hereof, they shall give publicly warning in the Church, that all the
Parishioners do give sufficient knowledge before time of their coming to the
Communion, and shall not admit any thereunto, which have not given such
sufficient notice of their coming.

3 It is enjoined that the Ministers shall perform these offices, both with
the suspended and excommunicated, first privately, and after in the presence of
one of the two Churchwardens, if his former labor take not effect, that both
the diligence of the Minister may the better appear, and the parties wilful
disobedience be more sufficiently testified, when they shall be justly
puunished by his Majesty's high Commissioners.

4 It is enjoined the said Ministers, that for their better proceeding in the
premises, they shall keep a note in writing of the names of such persons as
shall be excommunicated, and shall wilfully so continue, and the same note they
shall publicly read in the Church the first Sabbath day every month, about
the midst of Morning prayer, vt magis pudefiant, with admonition to the
Churchwardens, that they then remove such persons out of the Church.

FINIS.

