ARTICLES TO BE INQUIRED OF IN THE ORDINARY Visitation of the Right
WORSHIPFUL, JAMES MARSH, Dr. of Divinity, Archdeacon of Chichester.

Holden Anno Dom. 1640



LONDON, Printed by B. A. for RICHARD MEIGHEN. 1640

The form of the Oath to be ministered to the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
YOu shall swear, that you and every of you, shall duly consider and
diligently inquire of all and every of these Articles given you in charge, and
that without affection, malice, favor, fear of displeasure, or hope of ^aine
or reward, you shall present all and every such person that now is, or of late
was abiding or inhabiting within your Parish, who has committed, or is
suspected to have committed any offense, or made any default mentioned in these
^r any of these Articles, wherein you shall deal uprightly, ^ully, plainly
and truly, neither presenting, nor sparing to resent any contrary to truth,
having GOD before our eyes, with an earnest zeal to maintain truth, and to
suppress ^^nne and error: So God you help, and the holy Contents ^f this
Book.

Articles concerning Consecrated places, Churches, Churchyards, Chapels of
Ease.
1 WHat Church have you for Divine Servine Service? what Chapels of ease
belonging to them? is any part of such Church or Chapel demolished or put to
any profane use?

2 In what repair is your Church and Chapels, and every part of them? are the
walls and roof firm, the windows fairly glazed and unbroken? the floores
decently paved?

3 What kind of covering has the Church or Chapel, is it of lead or tiles?
or how else defended from the weather? Has lead been taken from any part of
it, and slats, Tiles, or something else used in the place of it: if so, by whom?

4 Is your Steeple furnished with Bells, or have any of them been taken down,
or sold away?

5 Is your Church swept and cleansed, at least once a week? the walls whited*
the windows and roof kept clean from Cobwebs, the doors kept locked, the
Portall not made a Lodging for Beggars?

6 What Galleries or Scaffolds have you in your Church or to what use? whether
there be not convenience of room for the Parishioners to be present at
Sermons, or divine Service without them?

7 In what manner are your Pewes built? are they decent and uniform? are not
some so much higher then others, as may hinder their neighbors in hearing
divine Service without them?

8 Is your Chancell severed with a Partition from the body of the Church, is it
decently kept, not encombred with Pewes or any other lumber?

9 What quantity of ground have you consecrated for a place of Burial? how is
it fenced or mounded? has there been encrochment made upon any part of it?

10 Is the Church yard kept clean from feeding and dunging of cattle?
especially from swine rooting up the graves of dead bodies? or what other
nusances are there from any houses that abutt upon it?

11 Have there been kept in the Church or Chapel, or Churchyard, any
Plays, Feasts, Suppers, Church ales, temporal Court, or Leet Lay, Iuries,
Musters meeting, for rates, taxations, levies, especially at the Communion
Table by the Parishioners?

Of Church Ornaments, Vtensils, Possessions.
1 Have you a strong Chest or box for alms for the poor, with three locks
and keys, one for the Rector, or Vicar, the other for the Churchwardens?

2 What Font have you for the Sacrament of Baptism, of what materials is it
made, where placed, whether toward the entrance of the Church or no, is it
fixed or moveable, is it decently covered, cleanely kept, or is there any Basin,
or vessel used instead of it?

3 Have you a convenient pew for him that officiates to read divine service in
a Bible of the largest Volume, a Common Prayer Book in folio, the Books of
Homilies allowed by Authority? a fair Surplice or two to be used by the
Minister and him that shall assist him in the administration of the Sacrament?

4 Have you a Pulpit so conveniently placed, as the Auditory may best hear: is
it decently made and accomodated with a fair cloth and Cushion?

5 Have you a Register Book in Parchment for Christnings, Weddings, Burials,
is the same kept in all points according to the Canons, is a true transcript
thereof brought in yearly to the Bishops Registry within a Month after our
Lady day in March?

6 Is your Communion Table, or Altar, strong, fair, and decent: is it set
according to the practice of the ancient Church, upon an ascent at the East end
of the Chancell, with the ends of it North and South: is it compassed in with
an hansome Rail to keep it from profanation, according to the Order made in
the Metropoliticall Visitation?

7 What Coverings have you for the holy Table? have you one of silk or some
good stuff to cover it at all times, another of fair clean linen for the
time of celebration of the Sacrament?

8 Have you a fair Communion Cup and Flagon, with a dish for the Bread, of
what met all are they, pewter, tin, or silver?

9 Are the ten Commandments set upon the East end of your Church or Chapel,
where the people may best see to read them, with other well chosen sentences
of Scripture upon the walls?

10 Have any ancient monuments in your Church been defaced, the Brass pull's
off, the stones taken away, or the Inscriptions raised, as also what
Historical representations in windows have been defaced or broken?

12 Is there adwelling house and Glebe belonging to the Parsonage or Vicarage?
Is the House kept in good repair, with all Barnes, stables, outhouses
belonging to it? Is there an exact Terrier made of all the Glebe Lands,
Meadows, Gardens, Orchards, houses, stocks, Tenements, pensions or portion of
Tithes belonging to it? Is this Terrier made in Parchment, and returned into
the Bishops Registry?

13 What timber trees grow in the Churchyard, or upon the Glebe? Has any
boon felled, or by whom?

Concerning the Clergy.
1 IS your Minister a Parson, Vicar, or Curate: or have you besides him any
Preacher or Lecturer? and how authorized?

2 If Parson or Vicar, does he reside upon his Benefice? If not, what relief
does he give to the poor: how long in the year is he absent: how dispensed
withal: by whom is the place supplied?

3 If he be a Curate, is he allowed by the Bishop under his hand and seal?
has he an honest and sufficient salary? or does he serve more then one Church
or Chapel in one day?

4 Is your Minister of honest, sober, exemplary life: a maintainer and procurer
of peace among those that are committed to his charge: or does he give any just
scandal or offense by haunting of Taverus, Innes, Ale houses, by using going
any other irregular way which may be a stain to his profession, and is
punishable by the censures of the Church?

5 Does your Minister or Curate use such decent and comely apparel, as
becomes the gravity of his calling, and may distinguish him from the Laity:
or does he wear long hair, deep ruffes, falling bands down to his
shoulders, or any other unseemly garments not proper to his Ministry?

6 Does your Minister use such servile bodily labor as is not fit for one set
apart by Imposition of hands for Divine Employments? Is he a defamed Usurer or
Broker, a Chopper of Church-Liuings, a frader in Faires or Markets, does he
idely vague up and downs, a fault so often censured in ancient Councels: or
does he any way else so entangle himself in secular affairs, as to neglect
the duties of his calling?

7 Is your Minister so zealous of the good of his Flock, as diligently to
labor the reclaiming of Recusants of all sorts within their charge, whether
they be such as with periil of their souls superstitiously adhere to the
Church of Rome, or such in the other extreme, who having perversely
relinquished our Communion, find nothing to adhere to but their own private
fancies?

8 Is Divine Service orderly performed in your Church by your Minister or
Curate upon appointed times as the Book of Common Prayer prescribes, without
any kind of alteration, addition, or omission? particularly does he read the
Letany on Wednesdays and Fridayes?

9 Is he entirely conformable to all Orders, Rites, Ceremonies of the Church,
or using them only for a show, does he privately or publicly speak any thing
in derogation of them?

10 Does he in celebration of divine Service use such vestments as are enjoined
by authority, does he constantly in performing that Duty wear a Surplice, and
an Hood (if he be a Graduate) suitable to his degree?

11 Does he before his Sermon use such form of Prayers as is prescribed by the
Ecclesiastical Canon, for the prevention of the indiscreet flying out of some
in their extemporary Prayers?

12 Does he preach in such a solemn habit as becomes him, in a long Gown and
Cassocke, not in a riding or ambulatory Cloak?

13 Does he in his Sermons preach Christ, and him crucified, abstaining from
those high points of speculation which have in several ages raised combustion
in Christian Churches; and therefore to preserve peace among us, forbidden by
his sacred Majesty in his late Declaration?

14 Does he sometimes take occasion in his Sermons to teach obedience to the
King as supreme, to all Magistrates substituted under him, to all Laws of the
State, all Canons and Constitutions of the Church, which being lawfully
enioyn'd, we are to obey, not only for fear, but for conscience sake?

15 Has your Minister at any time revealed the Confession of any made to him
in secret, contrary to the 113. Canon, and so has brought a scandal upon that
ancient Remedy of sin and sinners?

16 Does he at any time from the Pulpit point out particular men damning some
and saving others; and in his inuectiues against vice does he fall from the
general, and particularly design such as he thinks delinquents?

17 Does your Preacher or Lecturer read divine Service before his Sermon or
Lecture? does he besides twice a year at least administer the Sacraments in
his own person?

18 Does he in Rogation week yearly use the accustomed perambulation,
informing his Parishioners not only of the cill use of that custom, but also
of the religious, to pray to God for his blessing on the fruits of the earth,
and to deprecate his anger?

19 Has your Minister taken upon him to appoint any public or private Fasts,
Prophesies, or exercises not approved by Law or public Authority: or has he
been present at any Conventicle where either the Doctrine or Discipline of the
Church has been traduced?

20 Does he in the time of divine Service use due and lowly reverence at the
mention of the blessed name of JESUS, instructing others to do the like, not
as an adoration of the bare sound of the word, but as an humble acknowledgement
that there is not either in heaven or earth any name by which we shall be
saved, but that alone?

21 Is your Minister a Preacher licenced by lawful Authorityor not: if he be,
having no lawful impediment, does he preach ordinarily in his Cure? If he be
not, does he procure Sermons once a month at least to be preached by such as
are lawfully licensed?

22 Does your Minister upon every Sunday when there is no Sermon, read on
Homily out of the Book appointed?

23 Does he once in the year upon some Sundays or Holidayes read over the
Book of Canons before Evening Prayer, that every one may the better know what
the Church requires of them?

Of the Sacrament of Baptism.
Does your Minister or Curate in their Sermons, or otherwise, or any other,
teach or maintain that Baptism, in Gods ordinary dispensation with man is not
the door that lets us into the Church, nor any way necessary to salvation?
does he not admonish you that are his Parishioners not to defer it beyond the
accustomed time, least some sudden sickness should take away the infant
without the seal of the new covenant?

2 Does your Minister baptize the child at the Font the place assigned for it,
does he do it in clean pure water? Does he take it in his arms, sign it
with the sign of the Cross asking such Questions, and using such Prayers as
are enjoined?

3 Does he baptize any without any Godfathers or Godmothers to answer for them:
Or does he not give to them such directions as are prescribed in the Rituall
for the education of the child in true Religion?

4 In case of necessity where the child is in danger of death, does the
Minister being sent for, refuse or delay to come to give it private Baptism;
or does he privately baptize where there is no necessity?

5 Have any children in your Parish died unbaptized, how long remained they so
before they died, and by whose default was it that they were deprived of that
holy Sacrament?

Of Confirmation and Chatechisme preparatory to it.
1 IS your Minister careful in examining and instructing the youth and
ignorant persons of the Parish, by teaching them Principles and grounds of
Christian Religion delivered in that short Catechism, approved by the Church,
and insorted in the Common Prayer Book?

2 Does he, according to his Majesty's Instructions, convert the popular
afternoon Sermons on the Sunday into catechizing by Question and Answer?

3 When children by the benefit of thus catechizing are able to give an account
of their faith, does he admonish their Parents to bring them to the Bishop to
receive by Prayer such confirmation as may strengthen them in Captismall Grace
received?

Of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
1 IS this blessed Sacrament administered in the Church every month upon the
first Sunday, or at least thrice in the year, whereof Easter to be one?

2 Is it administered in that reverend and decent manner as becomes so high a
mystery: are the words of Consecration solemnly pronounced: the Elements
reverently touched and handled?

3 Does your Minister deliver this Sacrament to any standing, or sitting, or in
any other posture than upon the knee: does he first receive it himself, and
after deliver it to the Communicants, not in gross, but one by one, using all
the words enjoined severally to each of them?

4 Does he admit to this blessed Sacrament any person excommunicated, or any
public, notorius, scandalous offender, without satisfaction made unto the
Church, or does he admit any under age who are not yet able to render an
account of their faith?

5 Are the names of such as intend to receive given in to the Minister over
night, that he may before hand know who, and how many they are, and that the
bread and wine may be proportionably prepared?

6 Is the Bread and Wine of the best sort, is a sufficient quantity of each
provided: or if either fail, are the words of Consecration renewed over them
before they de distributed?

Of Marriage.
1 ARe the Banes of Marriage asked three several times openly in the Church
upon three several Sundays at such time when the Church is fullest? or if
not, has there been dispensation not only obtained, but presented to the
Minister before Marriage?

2 Is Marriage solemnized openly in the Church, not in private rooms, or
chambers, at due times not prohibited, and due hours between eight and twelve
in the fore noone?

3 Does your Minister use in Marriage the ordinary Rites of the Church with the
usual prayers, and blessing: and does he perform this solemnity with a Ring,
and joining of hands?

4 Have you a Table set up in your Church or Chancell of the forbidden degrees,
that incestuous Marriages may not have the plea of ignorance?

5 Be there any in your Parish who are married within the degrees of affinity,
or consanguinity by Law prohibited?

6 Are there any in your Parish being lawfully married who live apart one from
another without due separation by law, or who being legally divorced keep
company with any other at bed or at board?

Of Visitation of the Sick.
1 IS your Minister diligent in visiting the sick, especially such as being
upon their death beds, stand most in need of the work of his Ministry? Does he
pray with them the prayers of the Church, adding such devotions of his own as
the necessity of the party does require?

2 Does he over-rigorously and unseasonably press to them at that time the
heavy judgments of the Law, without intermingling such words of comfort as may
set forth the mercy of God to a departing soul?

3 Does he exhort them at that time not to let any bainous sin lie heavy on
their conscience, but to disburthen themselves of it? Does he upon confession
made, and all the signs of true repentance shown, pronounce the words of
absolution prescribed by the Church?

4 Does he excite the sick party to lay up treasure for himself in heaven, by
doing here charitable works, and disposing some part of his goods to the
honor of him who has given him all?

5 Does he last of all seasonably administer to him the holy Sacrament of the
Body and Blood of Christ, while he is yet sensible of the comforts of it, and
before the extremity of his disease has rendered him less capable?

6 In the mean time is there a passing bell tolled, that they who are within
the hearing of it, may be moved in their private devotions to recommend the
state of the departing soul into the hands of their Redeemer, a duty which all
Christians are bound to, out of a fellow feeling of their common Mortality?

Of Burials.
1 Has the Minister refused to bury any dying within the bosom of the Church,
being required?

2 Has he buried any in consecrated ground who have been murderers of
themselves, or cast out of the Church by excommunication?

3 Does he meet the corpse at the Church-stile, conduct it to the Church, go
before it to the grave, and using such prayers as are prescribed, commit it to
the ground as becomes the body of a Christian?

4 Are so many buried in the Church or Chancell, as may occasion digging up of
dead bodies not yet fully consumed, or as may breed annoyance to the living?

5 Are the graves dug deep enough, and is the ground broken up covered
again with stone or brick?

Of Churching of women after Child bed.
1 Does your Minister observe the order of the Church in Churching of women?
does he do it in private houses when there is no urgent necessity, or publicly
in the Church?

2 Does he go up into the Chancell, the woman also repairing thither, kneeling
as near the Communion Table as may be, and if there be a Communion, does she
communicate in acknowledgement of the great blessing received by her safe
delivery?

3 Does the woman who is to be churched use the ancient accustomed habit in
such cases, with a white veil or kerchiefe upon her head?

Of Schoolmasters.
What School have you in your Parish: is it a free School endowed: what
maintenance has it: is any part of the maintenance kept back, or otherwise
employed: if so, how, or by whom?

2 Does any openly or privately in your Parish, teach without License of the
Ordinary: is he conformable to the Religion established in the Church of
England: and does he endeavor to render his Scholars so?

3 Does he to this end teach and instruct his youth in no other Catechism then
such as is allowed by authority?

4 Is there any who keep School in the Chancell or Church, by which means
that holy place is many ways profaned?

Of Physicians and Chyrurgions.
What Physicians or Chyrurgions have you in your Parish: have they been
trained up in the study of Physic or Chyrurgery: at home or abroad, and by
what licensed do they practice?

Of Parish Clerks and Sextons.
Have you a fit Parish Clarke aged twenty years at least, of honest
conversation, able to read and write, diligent in his office, serviceable to
his Minister: is he approved by the Ordinary: has he taken his Oath as is
required?

2 What wages has your Clarke and Sexton according to the ancient Custom of
the Parish: are the wages duly paid, or by whom kept back?

3 Does your Clarke and Sexton do their duty in keeping the Church clean, the
doors locked, or is any thing lost of spoiled in his Church through his
default: does he suffer any unseasonable ringing, or any profane exercise in
your Church?

4 Has your Parish Clarke or Sexton taken upon him to meddle with any thing
above his office, as Churching of women, burying of the dead, or such like?

Of Churchwardens.
ARe you the Churchwardens lawfully chosen according to the Canon: have you
taken your Oath for performing the duties of your place?

2 Have any who have borne the same office before you failed in exhibiting
their presentiments to the Ordinary at the times appointed: have they retained
any of the Church goods without making a just account: or have they not
faithfully distributed the Alms of the Church to the use of the poor?

3 Is there decency and order kept in your Church in time of divine Service:
do you take notice of such as absent themselves on Sundays, Holidayes, times
of Letany? Do you diligently enquire of such as remain in Tavernes, Innes,
Ale houses in the time of Prayers or Sermons: as also such as forbear coming
to the holy Sacrament thrice in the year, being above sixteen years of age?

4 Have you suffered any strange Preacher to preach in your Church, without
seeing his license, by which you might know how he is authorized: do you note
the names of such strangers as do preach in a Book for that purpose, and by
whom they are licensed?

5 Is any Legacy withholden being given to the Church or the poor, for the
mending of highways, or otherwise by the Testators?

6 Does any man trouble, threaten, or revile you for doing your duty? Has any
gone about to tempt you to leave vnpresented any offenses committed contrary to
the Articles given you in charge, or to persuade you that you may dispense with
your oaths by using equivocation, mental reservation, or double meaning in
making your presentiments?

7 Do you know of any thing complained of that is not yet redressed?

Concerning the Parishioners.
Do your Parishioners frequent the Church in all times of divine Service? do
they behave themselves reverently in that holy place, do they keep their Hats
off: do they devoutely kneel, when the Confession, the ten Commandments, and
all Prayers and Collects are read? do they stand up at the reading of the
Creeds and the holy Gospel? and do they use due, and lowly reverence, when
they hear the blessed name of JESUS?

2 Do all the Parishioners above sixteen years of age receive the blessed
Sacrament of the Lords Supper in your Church thrice every year, whereof once
at Easter, and do they all (none expected) devoutly kneel at the receiving
thereof?

3 Do any of the Parishioners, being admonished thereof, neglect, or refuse to
send their Children, Servants, Apprentises to the Minister to be catechized on
Sundays and Holidays at such times as are appointed? Do any so sent refuss to
come, or being come, refuse to be catechized?

4 Do any of your Parish entertain within their house any sojourner, common
guest, or other persons who refuse to frequent divine Service, or receive the
holy Communion as aforesaid: present their names, their quality, or condition?

5 What Popish Recusants are there in your Parish, or other Sectaries? how long
have they abstained from the divine Service or Communion? present their names
and their quality, and whether they be excommunicate, or not?

6 Whether any of the said Recusants do labor to seduce, or withdraw others
from the Religion professed in the Church of England: do they instruct their
families or children in their own errors: or have any of them at any time
being called to it, refused to take the Oath of Allegiance?

7 Are there any in your Parish who hold or frequent private conventicles? or
who publicly or privately speak against the Book of Common Prayer, against
the Rites and Ceremonies, against the Articles published and maintained by the
Church of England: against the Church government under his Majesty by the
Hierarchy of Bishops? Are there any Authors, maintainers, or favorers of
heresy or schism, or that be suspected probably to be Anabaptists,
Libertines, Brownists, of the Family of Love, or of any other heresy or
schism: present their names?

8 Are there any in your Parish who retain, sell utter or disperse any Popish
books or writings, or other books, writings, defamatory Libels of any
Sectaries touching the Religion, State and Government either Ecclesiastical or
Civil of this Kingdom of England?

9 Do any of your Parishioners usually go to any other Churches to hear
divine Service or Sermons, or to receive the holy Communion: do any of them
procure their children to be baptized in another Parish: or do any strangers
resort to your Church in divine Service, to hear Sermons, or to receive the
holy Communion?

10 Are there any in your Parish who will come to Church to hear the Sermon,
but will not hear the public Service appointed in the Book of Common Prayer,
making a schism or division between the use of public Prayer and Preaching?

11 What persons within your Parish for any offense, contumacy, or crime of
Ecclesiastical cognizance to stand excommunicate? how long have they so stood:
do they presume not withstanding that censure to be present with you in time
of divine Service: and what persons do wittingly and usually keep them
company?

12 Has any in your Parish exercised any trade, or labor, bought or sold, or
kept open shops upon any Sunday or Holiday, by themselves or their servants, or
have otherwise profaned the said day by gaming, drinking or dancing in time of
divine Service: you are to present the names of such delinquents, with the
names of the parties in whose house the offense has been committed?

13 Is the fifth of November kept holy according to the ordinance in that
behalf, that the memory may never dye of the great mercy showed to this State
and Church in that wonderful deliverance?

14 Has any of your Parish stricken or laid violent hands either upon your
Minister or upon any other in your Church or Churchyard: Has any quarrelled
or given oppobrious speeches within those precincts: has any slandered your
Minister to the scandal of his vocation* or defamed any of his neighbors
touching any crime of Ecclesiastical cognizance?

15 Are there any who not being in Orders do exercise any Priestly or
Ministerial Office in the Church, Chapel, or Churchyard: or on the other
side are there any who having taken upon them the order of Priesthood, or
Deacon, have since relinquished the same, using any other kind of life?

16 Have any of your Parish suppressed the lost will of the dead, or
administered the goods of the dead without lawful authority? Are there any
goods not administered, or any Wills vnproved? Fail not to present the
Executors, with all others faulty therein?

17 Have any in your Parish harbored any woman unlawfully begotten with child,
and suffered her to depart away before she has been punished for her offense.

18 Are there any in your Parish to your knowledge, or by common fame or
report, which have committed incest, adultery, or fornication, or that have
attempted or solicited the chastity of any woman, or which are reputed to be
common Drunkards, Swearers, Blasphemers, Bawdes: or are there any in your
Parish vehemently suspected for any of these crimes?

There must be a full and several answer made to every one of these Articles,
else the presentment will be returned back again and the Churchwardens
compelled to make a better.

Memorandum, It is lawful for every Minister, be he Parson Vicar or Curate,
to presentany enormity or common fame of any enormous crime that shall arise
within his Parish: And whereas it seems by the Canon that the Church officers
are not to present oftener then twice a year, It is to be understood as in that
Canon Appears of presentiments in general. But it is lawful and meet for
every Minister, Churchwardens, and Sidemen to make notorious offenders known
to their Ordinaries as often as occasion is offered, to the end that such
offenses may be punished and reformed.

FINIS.

