MEMORABLE HISTORICK Descriptiones draven.

From the Sacred Books insert in the subsequent page.

By ALEXANDER GARDEN.

NIL PENNA, SED USUS. printer's device of Gerrit Moulert

Prented AT MIDDELBVRGH, By GERRIT MOVLERT, Anno 1637.

Genesis. Exodus. Leviticus. Deuteronomie. Joshua. Judges. Ruth. 1 Samuel. 2
Samuel. 1 Kings. 2 Kings. Esther. Job. Tobit. Ezekiel. Daniel. Jonah. 2
Maccabees.
TO The deservedly worshipful and wisely wirtous SIR THOMAS BVRNETT of Leyes
kinght Baronett.
Right Worshipful
SIR be you pleads'd J pray
To Read that with respective love I lay
Your worships learned and linx-like eyes before
A five month's work, and noght a moment more
Some Select'd dravghts suckd from the sacred Story
Noght upon hope of Honor, Gain, or Glory
Nor on Conceat, of skill, or knoledge hye
This Interprise at all attempted J
No but that better with that blessed Book
I might acquented come this taste J Took.
Knowing the subject, vits diviner merits
Nor are poluted, and Imperfect Sperits
And of all mortal most vn-meet is mine
For it, so, worthy, weaighty, and divine
Yet my attempt, once may prove profitable
TO encourage one, to acqueat himselfs more able
Yen Sir woutchafe, to look upon my Lines
Suppose, for such a proesence poor propine.
Your wor-in all affectonat duetye divoted AL. GARDEN.

To the READER.
THink naught these Verses vented are by me
Which after in these Sheets insert you see
For any profit or aplause of fame
Or Reputation that may rise be Them
No motion such by my immortal mind
Induced, and me these to compond, inclynd
But in my curt prepond Epistle, Their
My motiwes all and causes I declare
Hope then for no high style nor stately strame
Or figured Phrases from a lofty Brain
Nor for Hyperbolees, that great Jngines
Use for to fraught with, and to larde their Lines
No naught a Sillab such shall Thou see heir
But simply all, is said, and said, Sincear.
(...)
Heaven, Earth, and seae, round, eirc'lare sphericall,
Of ane rude mixed Mass, God made them all.
He stamped, with stars, the heavne, and with these lights
The Sun and Moon, devyded days from nights
Beasts, fishes, fowls, he creat of all kind
And fitly each, it is Element assign'de
The liquid waters, from the earthly mass,
He ^^parats, and them apart did place,
The thin, hot, moist, and subtle Aer, above,
The cold dry earth, about, h' assigned to move
And tuixt the earth, and fire, that all jmbraces
The aer and water providentlie places
And seeing all, that he had done, was Good
He made man syne to his similitude.
Genesis Chap. 2.
When God of Heav'ne, and Earth, had formed the frame,
And made ane end of all the host of Them,
Into the body that he builded has,
H' jnfuis'd a soul, and breathed a living breath,
And when he thus, perfectly framed the same
From Rud reed earth, he did, him Adam name
Man so created, perfect, pure and chaste,
God in his Garden, Paradise him placed,
And there with freedonie full, before his fall,
To eat of every fruit, and to use all,
Excepting that of knoledge he bestrait,
Command and charge prohibit was to eat.
And when he should, that Tree of knowledge cun
He then should dye, that day, and be undone.
Genes. 2.
THe Lord God Adam, sound a sleep he laid,
And Eva of, one of his ribs, hes made
Then with divine, inimitabill art,
Closed cleanly up, with flesh, the empty part.
And when he did awake the woman Than,
His flesh and bone, God offered to the man
Whom Adam when, he finds, so fitly framed
(Made out of Man) he hes her woman named
And as his Wife, he hes her jntertaind
For God there first the Mar'age rites ordaind
A straght conjunction, and a sacred band
In Paradise kint be the Lords command.
Injoyning Them, therefore to join there hands
And married, To multiply, commands.
Genesis. 3.
THe Serpent Eve, induced with Deceat,
And Adam, she inveits, and he, did eat.
(O Lamentable for ever, and fearful fact,
That did there State, so mar and murnfull make,)
The fruit forbidd'n of knovledge Good, and Evil,
And heirby both, deluded by the Devil
From purity, and there perfection fall,
And so sucked in, the Sin Original.
Ambitions both, too greedily began,
To lay the Ground greef, of the Greefes of Man.
There misbeleef, and blindness yet both blind
Into there fault, and fall, enforced, they find
And liable therefore, to Death, they be,
Themselfes, and since, all there posterity.
Genesis 3.
THe fruit once eaten, opned ar their eyes,
And they, there own poor nakedness espyes.
Wherefore they both, unto a fig Tree came,
And pulld some Leaves, and sevved of the same,
For to be Brecches, to them both, to hold,
There Shame unseen, and clothe them from the cold.
Before they taste, of that sequestrat Tree
They knew noght that, they bare and naked be.
No fig tree leav's, nor fig tree Trunks, could beild-them
Nor from the All-seeing-eye could sheeld-them
Nor could those fig tree leaves (tho cloith there skins)
Preserve unseen, there Trespass, nor there Sins.
No no, there Conscience for there Crime, did call
And God without, within, he Saw them all.
Genesis 3.
THe voice of God, they in the Garden heard,
And faulty hid, them for there falt, a feared.
But heavne, nor earth, nor them, the darksome deep,
From there Creator, knowing all, could keep.
Excuses put a part, They must apeare
And ansver to the points, that he sold spear.
That dreadful voice, that Thunder did resemble,
Made heav'ne, and earth, and Man much more, to tremble.
He called, they come, h' accused, and they confessed
And guilty both, Grant that they have Trangsgressd.
The Woman, He, the Serpent, She, They say
This foul defection, drew on ws, this day.
And Ws, Invegled with, its wicked wit
To ^at that balefull, and forbidd'ne Bit.
Genesis 3.
A Curse to them, a Time, God hes denune'd
And punishments, to it, for ever pronune'd.
And said, because this deed, sly Serpent Thou
Thou did, ay on, thy Belly shall thou bow
And lick the Dust, without saueguard, or sheeld
A boue all Beasts, accursed of the field.
Also betnix, the vomans seed, and Thee,
Shall ever be discord, and Ennimitie.
And be assured, that for this Sin, thy Seed
May bruise Hers heel, but hers, shall brak thy head.
Then of Goat Skins, to them, he Garments gave
And from, his Paradise divine, them drove:
Then set a Cherub, with a flamming sword
To watch it as, is wretin in his word.
Genesis 3.
With Toil, and Travel, Adam, grief, and Sweat
His living earneth, and his Bread did eat.
And was constraind, to do, to dig, to delfe
His Mothers Bosom, to suport him self.
Because God for his Crime the earth accurss'd
And made it bring forth Breers, of weeds, the vvorst.
And since, to sin, he did obey his wife
With Great vexation, shall he lead his life.
And Eva so with unacquainted fitts
In bringing out her Bairnes with sorrovv sits.
And surely subject shall be her desire
And plainly prostrat to her Lords Impire.
Estrangd and far from that contentement great
That they enjoyed, in There first estate.
Genesis 4.
THe Sons of Adam now be Time, began
To sacrifice, as was, the Custom than.
The Sheep-herd Abel, his first Lambs he taks
And of the fat, of Them, oblation makes.
And Cain, of, the frutage of the Ground
He sacrifiede, the first that He hes found
The elder Cains did the Lord reject
And younger Abels favor and respect
Cain heirfoir, in fury, and Disdain
His blessed Brother Abel here does brain.
And out of vvoodness, vvraethfull, and Invy
Committs this Murder, Irreligiously.
The Lord then marks him to be known herefore
To be his Brothers Butcher ever more.
Genes. 6. and 7.
HOw soon God sies, the Sins of men grow great,
All man kind he, to overthrow did Threat,
And did a hunder year before foreshow,
To N'oa by water all the worlds orethrow,
And he be preaching for man's Sin, declaird,
All earthly perish should, and none be spaird.
The Lord commands him then, to build the Arc,
And when perfected was, and wroght, that warke,
Himself, his wife, his Childring, and there Wives,
All such as God decreed to save there Lives,
Of living Things at least, takes to him Their,
For ester plenishing the earth. a pair:
Clean, and unclean, they enter in, and than,
To flow the universal flood began.
Genes. 7.
THe vindow's of the Heavens ar opned large,
And all the waters in the clouds, discharge.
The Caverns of the earth, cast up there bryne,
That long into there Ludgings low hes lyn,
The floods, and fontans, from there heads, and springs,
There watrie store, into abundance brings.
Above, and under, all at once, jshe' out,
Each pore a spring, each spring, a speat did spout:
And with a wrackfull all orespreading speat,
Oretop'd the tallest Trees, and montans great.
Five months and more, the earth these floods oreflow,
That Land nor Sea, nor mont nor meadow show.
Than they decressd, and rejncaled there store.
Unto the bounds whair they had bein before.
Genesis 8.
THe waters all consuming course decayed,
The Arc on the Armenians montanes stayed,
And no more on that world of Seas did flot,
But as God would, a Ground the Arc it got,
The twstes of Trees, the Cronns of montans Grene,
And late dronnd Woods, and Valeys, dry ar seen.
The winds all blew, and Arid earth did make,
And then the Dove, and olive brauche brought bake,
But sent to try the drouth, at once before,
She flew abroad, and bake returned no more.
And N'oa, and his, alive are lest alone,
When all the rest, on earth were drowned each one.
Then ore the universe they Rule and Ragne,
And as the mono-monarches sole Remain.
(...)
Now N'oa himself, and all with him within,
The arcke j she, out, and to descend begin
^hair all (saif Cham, that ever did debord)
^esolue to rander. Thanks unto the Lord.
and unto him, ane altear do up raise,
^o sacrifice thereon, and offer praise,
and with their humbled hearts, his povv're proclaim,
that by all others had preserved Them.
^he Lord thence smelled ane sweet sav'ring smell,
and said, into his heart, unto him self
^o more for man's saik, will I curse the ground,
^or smit again all living in this mund:
but vvhil the earth Remains, there shall be ay,
Succeeding Seasons, seed Time, night, and day
Genes. 9.
GOd spoke to Noa, blessed him and contramands,
The shedding humane blood, with humane hands.
Then Reconfirmed wedlock with his word.
And there declard, the power of the sword,
With what authority to man is geven,
^re Things created that be under heavne,
^o him and his, great blessings, did he grant,
^and up with Them and knit his covenant:
and gives for ever, a sign to make it Good
(...) rising Raine-bovv in a watrie cloud.
and when he sies that circling arch he shall,
His former covenant, to mind Recall.
In witness that, the waters, shall no more,
Drown all the World, as they had done before.
Genes. 9.
Ester the drovning deludge No'a began,
To plant his vines, and play the house band man.
and drank thereof, and drunk thereon became,
and then vncover'd he is seen be Cham.
That mocked, and Jested at his aged father,
No no but cursed he contemnd him rather,
and went, and told it Japhet, and Just Sem.
but he again, re-clothed is by Them.
That step, be step, both backward to him go
Lest that unseemly They should see him so.
Heirfore he blessed both the one, and other,
and Justly cursed Cham, there wicked brother.
The seed, of these Three sons, the earth ore spread
and all thar borne be since, of them are bred.
(...)
THe poeple here, intends to bouild a Toure
In there proud thoughts, to counterchek Gods power
With there Assisters that, that Time one Tongve
Spoke all and were from Cham accursed sprung.
But God from heav'ne, there hautie hearts beheld
An how with pride, and high contempt they svveld.
Heirfore he will, in there attempt, and aim
Vn-do and disapoynt them in the same.
For they that but one languadge spoake before
He changed and caused them mutter money more.
And so confounded all, that noght one Brother
Did understand a word, spoak be ane other.
God then, he dois divide them, and constrain
To quyte that work, that they began in vain.
Genesis 12.
THe Lord called Abram, and Directions gave
To queat his country, and his kindred lave.
And to ane other land directly draw
That in his Journey thither, he should shavv.
The Land that he had destinat to give
To him and his, for ever in to live.
Wherein he should, be Great, and Greatly he
Great as his name, a Blessing great, should be.
There, should he bless, that blessed him, all Those
And curse them all, that curssd him, as his foes.
His Wife, his flocks, and family they go
And Lot with him, his Brother sone also.
Then come, thereto, ane Altar he hes Reard
Wnto the Lord, that unto him apeard.
Genesis 13.
ABraham past, and up from Egypt went
And greatumly, God did his Goods augment.
For in all Riches him encreass he would
In cattle, coin, in Silver, and in Gold.
And lykvvise Lot, he hes Incressd, his store
And daily did, augment it, more and more.
But Abrams heard-men, and Lots Sheep-heards Jar.
And for a pasture move, among them war.
But when there actions Abram, understands
He meekly moves, Lot to divide there bands
And to the Right, or to the left hand Go
Lot then prepares and since desird-did so.
For such encress and store of Goods, they had
That hardly could, they be together fed.
Genesis 13.
THen Lot lift up his, eyes and understood
That all the plains, and groudd about was Good.
and dreading stay, should dravv on more disdain
therefore to the east, he Tends with his Train
(...) Land well grass'd, and vvatred well was it
(...) Land for heard-men, and their flocks most fit.
^eirfore therein, he myndeth to Remain
and pitched his palions, into Sodoms plain.
^or all the vvale is lovv, near Iourdans Shoir
^s vvatred well, of pasture had like store.
and plentifully stood, and stuffd did stand
^s once was Eden, or as Egypt Land.
Before the all-consuming anger of the Lord
These cities Sodom, and Gomorr' devourd.
Genesis 14.
WHen Iidall King of nations, and the Rest,
That joynd with him in Battle had oppressed
^he Sodomit, and the Gomoran King
^hey spoild there Goods, and captive Lot did bring
and on his substance, as there pryse, they prey,
^ut Abram armed, Invades them on there way
^oyld, and defate, and smartly them he smot
and in Triumph, brought home his nephew Lot.
^hen does he chargd with spoils in triumph so
^o Melchi-zedeck, King of Salem Go.
Who blessd, and brought to Abram, bread, and vine
and Abram there solemnly offered sine.
To him of these, his Spoils, the Tithes of all
Goods of these Kings, that did before him fall.
Genesis 16.
^N Can'an, Abram, ten years hes t'emaind
And Sarais womb, from bearing was restraind
Which greevd her much, and did torment her still
and as she meand, she would go mend her ill.
When surely She, her Belly barren sees
and thus, to secundarie helps, she flies.
^or vvnto Abraham her Lord, she said
^eire, I have Hagar, and Egyptian maid
(...) give her to thee, use her, for it may
^e, Childring I, obtain be her some day.
(...) bram obeyed, and in to Hagar went
and knevv her, wha conceavv'd Incontinent.
Then proud of that conception in her eyes,
Her dame, and mistres Sarai, did despise.
(...)
SArai contemnd much mov'de there with Remains,
Expostulats, with Abram, and complains.
And tells him plinly for her kindness now,
She is mis-vsd, vvrong'd, and contemned too.
Yea prays the Lord, to judge betinxt. Them tuo.
But abram seeing her iucensed so.
Hagar be his authorit' and command,
Is set to suffer, vvnder Sarais hand.
Who hardly dealt with her, heirfore a-dread
And fearing worse, far from her mistres fled.
But asked by the angel, whence she came,
She ansverd fleing from her angry dame.
Then, to Return again, her, he, commands
And humble her wholy, under Sarais hands.
Genesis 17.
THe Lord Iehova most alimghtye here,
Wnto his servand Abram, did apeare.
And made him promeise, for to multiply
And him, and his, to incress exceedingly.
Beside great, blessings, he to him do is grant,
And knits with him, for ever his conveuant.
Than changed from Abram vvnto abraham,
and her for Sara, Sarai, called to name.
Yea also unto her, he granted more,
To bear a sone that, barren was before,
But Abr'am langh'd into his heart for he,
Hes thonght it strange and vvounderfull to be,
Since he himself a hunder years was old,
And Sarai nyntie numbered had, and Told.
Genes. 18.
Again the Lord to Abram did apeare
As he sat in, or to his Tent durr, near.
And when he looked, Three men he standing savv,
That then approatch'd, and toward him did draw.
To those three angels then he bovvd, and ran
And offered to his Lord his service than,
Which they accept, and then there breakfast done,
God said that Sarai, she should have a sone,
And then their he declaird, and did impart,
To Abram, that he Sodom, will evert.
For of there wickedness, to him the cries,
Had monted over, the Elements and skies,
The abominations all, that therein be,
Vn-nat'rall sins, and bestialitie,
That rankly rages, and reigns them among,
With wenge ance he, he will, revenge ere long.
Genesis 19.
^e Lord their ills and naughtines did nots,
And sent his Angels, to his servand Lot,
^ring him thence for kindled was his tree,
^o consume, these Cities, all with fire.
^hen, that sat at Sodom gat, them sies,
^rysing bowed done to the earth, his eyes,
^humblie prays them to his house but they,
^ss but ester they turn in and stay.
(...) Sodomits, preass Lot, and the Angels sought,
^^lv'd to abuse, and know Them, in there Thought.
(...) therefore would, brak up his Gates perforce,
^erminnig to deall with Lot no worse.
^^t lo the Lord with blinddess brands them Their,
^et sightless search, They will, but knevv not vvhair.
Genes. 19.
He Angels Lot, then out of Sodom led,
And from the Sodomitick fury fred.
^^o up the montans unto Zoar flevv,
^^e fiery hail and burning storm t'eschevv.
^^s after Lot, his daughters, and his wife,
^^y had pulled out, for to praeserve there life,
^^mmanding straightly, none to be so bold,
(...) to look back unless they Perish would:
(...) Lot his wife, offended in this falt,
^^d therefore turned was, to a Toure of Salt,
^^en when they were far from the City vvalls,
^^oode of fire, and burning Brimstone falls.
That Cities all, and Men within did burn,
And in the plains, did all to ashes turn.
Genes. 19.
^^t Thus and his, preserved from the fire,
To leave that city Zoar, did desire.
(...) left it Then, and went therefrom, for fear,
(...) to a mont, and in a Cave, duell'd their.
(...) daughters vvanting Company of Men,
^^k and to gether hes agried then,
^^drink there Father drunk, and make him so,
^^en Cup-shot both Them, but his knoledge kno^
^^ch They have done, and in the elder goth,
(...) younger next, and so he lies with both.
(...) of this vvyld, jncestous meiting, Lot,
^^-ammi he, and Moab both begot.
and as in Sin conceav'd, the Scripture says,
^erverse were they, and there is, in all there vvayes.
Genesis 20.
A Braham to the South, his Iournay Takes,
And into Gerar, he his duelling makes.
Syne said that Sarai fearing for his life.
His Sister was, albeit indeed his wife.
Abimelech, the King of Gerar Their
Perceiving Sarai, beautiful and fair
And hearing Abram her his sister call
And she her self t'affect her he did fall.
Then taks her from her Lord, but God constrains
That he her person, in no point prophanes.
And dreadfully him in a dream, did threat
And his with death, and a destruction great
Gif he did noght, to Abram her restore
Pure and un tuiched, as she was before.
Genesis 21.
THe promise of the Lord, as is foretold
To Abraham, and Sarai being old,
At the set Time, accomplished was, and done
And She her Travel took, and boore a Sone.
Out of whose loins, in his own Time, should spring
That ever blessed, Prophet, Priest, and Kiug.
Abraham eight days ester at the least,
His Is'ac circomcisd, and made a feast.
And as young Is'ac grew, Ismael Iested
Which Sarais mind, much moved and molested
That she did eagerly, to Abram plain
Of Ismaels mirding, mockage, and disdain.
But Abraham t'ev eit, all sturrs and strife
Puts Isma'l, and his mother, from his Wife.
Genesis 21.
Who wandering in the vvoods, and wilderness,
Both ar by thirst, brought into strange distress.
That evven the Mother, pity for to see
Lays him a pairt, lest that she spy him die
Than than the weeping, of the child ascends
And dovne the Confort, of the Lord discends.
For lo, the Angel does, there mvrning heir
And opned up her eyes, and made them cleir
And there to her, A well of water shois,
Wherevvith her Sone, to quench their thrist She gois.
He gives Her confort, and forbids her dread
But tend her Sone, for he will make him head
(By heising him, to Honors and Estate)
Yea and a father of a Nation Great.
(...)
^^re faithful Abram, be the Lord's command
(...) Noght faut but freely lifts up his hand.
(...) Immolat, and offer to the daeth
(...) dearest child, for to approve his faeth.
(...) act almost, above Belief, to see
father his Sole Sone to Sacrifie.
^^edient, and gladly is'ac gois
^^d that be willingly, will suffer shois.
^^e true and lively Type, that should foresho
^^at for our sins, Gods Sone, should suffer so.
^^old, the Lord, Abrams belief, and faith
^him for Rightcousnes, Imputed has
^^d holds his hand, tht it is noght defyld
^^th Isacs guiltless Blood, the Chosen Child.
And does a t'amme, provide for sacrifice
That he, entangled in a Thicked sies.
Genesis 23.
Arai, Abraham's chaste, and vertous wife
^ixscore and seven year old, departs this life.
(...) whom, her loving husband Abram moans
^^d testifies, his grief, with money groans.
^^en after weeping, from her sight arose
^^d for to buy, a Beriall he gois.
^^aham dolorons, a field, did buy
(...) her, and him, and his, therein to ly
Hebron lay this field, therein a Cave,
^^t Abram fittest thought, and sought to have.
^^erein the Iustness of the Man, is shown
^^t no whair bury would, but in his own.
^^our hundredth silver Shekels he hes paid
therefore, and then, there in his dead, hes laid.
Genesis 24.
Braham old, his eldest servand he
Prayed for to put, his hand, below his Thie
(...) by, the almighty God of all, to swear
^^t he should none, Into Canaan There
^^e to his Sone for wife, but search and find
^^is own Country, an, of his own kind.
^^man then hartly to the Lord, did pray
^rosper him, in his adois, that day.
(...) faithfully, all that his Lord, directs
^^romises, and punct wallie effects.
^ecca than, as would the Lord, it fell
(...) and her drawing water at a well.
(...) by the conference, that they fell in,
(...) new, she was, ane of his Masters kin.
^^en gladly gwes, her Armelets, and ear-ringhs
^^d Laban home, him, to his Inns he brings.
Genesis 24.
REbeccas friends, unto the Lord, committ,
Her wedding and the whole effect of it.
Then with content, She is, for Js'ac geven,
Blessd be her friends, she gois, and blessd from heav'ne,
To Abrams house, they Them directl' adrest,
An Evening as the Sun sunck in the West,
It chanced Is'ac and It happned That
He to the fields went out to Meditate
And lifting up his eyes, abroad to vieu,
A court of Camels nearc, he coming knevv;
His servand told, unto Rebecca Than
That there was Isaac, that should be her man
There then She lights, he lovingly imbracd-her,
And in his Mother Sarais Tent, he plac'd-her.
Genesis 25.
A Braham charged, with money happy years,
A hundredth sevntie five compleit, expires.
A faithful man, beloved of the Lord,
With grace, and heavenly Gifts, jndevv'd, and stored.
And yet before expiring, and his daeth
His Goods, and Store, to Jzaac did bequeath.
And what, he had, as dearest to him Their,
Gives him that should, be of the promise heir.
To Mishpelach, the Cave that he had bought,
Is by his Sons, there to be buried brought.
(With great Lament and mourning much among
All those that knevv and did to him belong)
And lays him there, all with there weeping eyes,
Where with his Sarai side for side he lies.
Genesis 25.
Now Izac forty years, had livde, his Life,
When he Rebecca vvedded to his Wife.
But boore no Bairnes, to him, wherefore he come,
And prayed the Lord, to bless her barren womb.
The Lord is Good, and Gracious to his own,
And that he was entreated heir, is shovvne
He heard his Cry, and gave what he did crave,
For his Rebecca after did conceave.
And shortly boore, two male-contending Tvvines,
Whose struggling in her belly first begins.
A combat vvounderfull for to considder,
Tuo Brether babs, unborn, to brall, together,
For at their birth, in Story is jn rolld,
The younger-borne, the elders heell did hold.
Genesis 25.
THe Sons of Isac waxing wight, and strong
Wp with there Years, these dispositions sprung.
and by the trad, that they did take them too
Wheretoo they were inclijnd declare, they do.
^h' one as he waxed, and unto manhead grew
^sav a hunter was, and wild beasts slew.
and often in woods, and wilderness remains
^ut Jacob dweld, in Tents, and on the plains.
^^ak his elder Esaw, did respect
and Jacob more, his Mother did affect.
^ut Esavv, one day earning for to eat
and madly hungry, for a meass of meat.
Blush may he ever, and Tremble when it is Told
His Primo-genit t'oom, and Birth-right-sold.
Genesis 26.
A Famine, Into Izaks days began.
But God his Lord, provijds for him his Man.
and unto him appears, and does him sho
What land, he should eschew, and whair to go.
^is promises, to Abram, past before
^o him, his Son, he hes renewed once more.
^o Gerar than, to Abimelech the King
^e gois, that over the Philistims, did Reign.
Whair he his wife, called Sister, for respects
^ut after to be circumspect, neglects.
^or once, he sporting with her their it chane'd
^bimelech, out of his window, Glane'd
and sees the same whereat he some what mowed
^id Izak call modestly reprowed.
That had, denyd his wife, because among
His people some one, might have done her wrong.
Genes. 26.
NOw whill the famyn, and the dearth remaind
In Palestine, was Js'ak Intertaind.
and all his flocks, still favored be the Lord
(...) Gerar mightelie, incressd, and stord.
^bimelech, perceaving his estate
^hus multiply, and more and more, grow great.
^e Iz'ak then, entreats, with fained Love
^^om him, and his Philistims, to removve.
^hence Iz'ak past, resolved to remain
and pitched his palions, Into Gerar-plain.
and vvhill the dearth, into that land did lest
^o digg up water wells, he him adrest.
The herds in Gerar, then, these pits, they cleame
And shrevvdlie stryve with Jzaks men, for them.
Genes. 26.
ABimelech proud, hateful, in his heart
Bids Is'ak from, his Palestene, depart.
And he obeyes, for to eschew offense
To Beer-sheba, he removved Thence.
Yet the Philistim seeing, that the Lord
In all his ways, Izak incressd, and stord.
Therefore he posted, for to pitche, and plant
With him a freindship, leagve, and Covenant.
That each, to oter, alwise, to there ends
Should do no harm, but faethfullie be friends.
Izak, he feasts him then, and on the morn
They mutvvallie, the covenant, have sworn.
And thus they great, ane, in the others Grace
Remain, and then, the King depairts in peace.
Genesis 27.
IZ'ak waxd old, and both his eyes grew dim
Than he his first-born-Esaw, called to Him:
And charged him, as often he vsd, and wount
To search, and seek for venison, and hunt
That he, might cat thereof, and after this
Before his daeth, his first borne Esavv bliss.
But God heirin, he had his hand, no doubt
And otherwise, this Blessing brought about
Nor Izak had, determinat, beforne
To give it unto Esaw eldest borne.
Rebecca heard, and Jacob, did advise
For to suplant, his Brother be disgvise.
And with Praevention, and a mease, of Meat
The Blessing from his firstborn Brother get.
Genes. 28.
ALon, whill Jacob Iourneys, on his way
To ease, and rest him, on some stons he lay.
Whair fallen a sleep, amids his rest, he sies
From earth, a Ladder reaching to the skies.
And thairon Angels, they appear, and sho
TO ascend, descend, and up, and down, it go.
O but behold, the Lord apeard, to Sit
Above in Heavne, upon the Top of it
And unto Jacob, from the same, he said
I am the God, thy Fathers hes obayd.
Thairfoir this Land, vvhereon Thou lies, here I
Will give to thee, and Thy Posterity.
And as the Dust, I shall thy Seed increass
And on the Earth, all nations in Thee, bless.
Genesis 29.
Acob on journey to the East, it fell
He came, where heard-men, watered at a Well.
^here Camels, and there flocks, then rolled thereon
and coverd closs, the fontane, with a stone.
^e then demands them, if They Laban knew
^^ey ansverd yea, and to him Rachel, show
^^at was his daughter, and that there did keep
unto her fathers use, a flock of Sheep.
whom he saluts, and kissd, and hes, her Told
(...) was her kins-man, and the stone then rolled
^^m the fonts mouth, that after, as She list
(...) flocks, might thither come, and quench there thrist.
Then to her fathers house, he does Repair
And Lea first, then Rachel married their.
Genesis 30.
Achel, long Time, her Belly barrd, remains
And sies it shut, She heirvpon complains.
^^d did her sister Leah, much envy
^^t She hes sein, so ost, in Child-bedly.
(...) she her self, despisd, as She suspos'd
^^use, her Belly barran was, and closed.
^^fore, unto her Lord, She says, by Thee
(...) I no Childring, I shall surely dye.
^ise, and vvilfull women, so debord
(...) will not bide, the leisure, of the Lord.
^^st, the Lord, mynds her, and hears her moan
want of Childring, and he grants her one.
and when, her Time, of Travel to her Came
^^e boore a Boy, and Joseph called his name.
Genesis 31.
^^ban perceavves, still Jacobs wealth, augment
Therefore, he murmurs, and is mal-content.
Sons complain, he frouns, upon him too
(...) does noght use him, as he vvount to do.
^^e grudge, againes him is, because, that They
(...) God is with him, and assists him ay.
^^acob with his wife's, concludes, herefore
(...), to Iz'ak, and to serve, no more.
(...) with his families, and flocks, by day
(...) martch out and, they move forth on there way
Rachel stole, her Fathers Goods, that be
^^oushold. Things, that he did hold, most hie.
(...) father searchd Them, and she sat on These
^^novved with, her monthly disease.
Genesis 33.
Jacob, into his Iournay home, did hear
That than his Brother Esaw, did draw near.
He called to mind, the wrong, he did, his Brother
By the advice, and Co^unsall of his Mother.
Which brodds him some what, and that bree him fear
That made him panse, and think upon it there.
Wherefore his hands, up to the Lord, he liftes
And prays for Peace, and Esaw pleased, with Gifts.
Then with an Angel, as a Man, all night
He wightlie, wrestled hes, whill near day light
And with, that Angel great, he parted not
Whill he his Grace, and Benediction got.
And for a witness, of that wrestling ay
Jacob he halted, to his dying day.
Genes. 34.
THe wandering Dina ravished, and defyld
The godly Jacobs only faemel Child.
Weinen, and wenches, that a gadding go
And worthily, ar often rewarded so.
The sight of Novelties, in uncouth places
Smits with disgrace, and Shame, the farest faces
Which blot brought on there house, when known, her Brother
All wroth, and discontent, agree Together
(Tho Shechemits, for to repait, propone)
Most guilfullie to be revengd there on
(No thing but blood into a Bloody Thought
Will expiat a wrong wnto it wrought.)
And fearsly slew, the Shechemits when They.
Were circomcised, and at leaching lay.
Genes. 37.
WHen Joseph, did attend, his Fathers Sheep
A Time when he awaked after sleep.
His Aparitions, visions, and his Dream
Unto his Brether, he declared Them.
Who spightfully, disdain him, and envy
For prating over Them of Supremacy
What, said They, shall, thou Boy, above ws Reign
And we thy wassals, and thy men Remain.
Thus grudge they greatly, and him highly hate
VVhill he his visions, and his dreams relate.
They muse among Them, how they meetest may
Put the divining Joseph done, some day.
The fathers low, likewise, unto the boy
Temp^s them for to dispatch him, and destroy.
(...)
HIs Brether hearding, into Dothan lands
Jacob there, Joseph, for to go commands.
To visit them, and for to look, how lucks
Into the Leasurs, of these fields, there flocks
He gois in search, of them, and at the last
He hears, they are, to Dothan pasturs past.
Whair when he come, Joseph the dreamer They
Or the most part, conclood, to kill, and slay.
But Revv-ben ruled, with a righter sp're it
To kill, or murder him, he thought not meet.
But seemed, as pleased, that in a Cistern dry
He should be put, to perish there, hard by.
Yet with a mind, to save his life, and tak
Him thence, to gvve him to his father back.
Genesis 37.
^Uda his little Brother, pieties much
Therefore his life he will noght, they shall touch.
Nor with there hands, so fearss, and cruel prove
And merciless, to murder Jacobs love.
But they, they will, some other way devise
To rub the Boy, that eye sore, from there eyes.
Although, they will not slay, yet they will sterve him
And with, vnkyndlie kyndness, so will serve him.
Then they, some Mid'anitish merehants spy
With spyceries, going unto Egypt by.
They go to counsall, and concluds thereon
That they to Them, will coopt him, and dispone
Which for some tuentie Pieces, they have done
Selling there Brother, and there Fathers Sone.
Genes. 37.
THe Brether then, their they did kill a kid
This to be-blood, there Brothers coat they did.
They rent, and than, his party colourd-Coat
With that same blood, they sprinkle it, and spot
Which. when, old Jacob sees, berayd with blood
He tinks gone vvrong, and vandring through some vvood.
Their he is bucherd, by some bloody Beast
Too good a morsel, for so gross a Guest)
His members peece-mail separat, and shorn
His flesh, made food, and with its teeth alltorne
^e toar his clothes then longryme dools, and dwynes
And sorrofull puts sackcloath, on his loins
^e much amazed for that male our does mvrne
And woved his gray hairs to the Grave shall turn
With grief and sorrow, for his dearest Child
Consumed with merciless, and mensters wyld.
Genesis 3^.
THamar, by Onan frustrat, Judas Sone
And what was promised to her, undone.
She knovving Judah was in use to keep
At such a Season, for to shear, his sheep.
The rayments sable, that in doole, before
And in her widovv'ed she used, and wore.
She pute a part, and by a Subtilty
To mend her self, thus does attempt, and try.
Her father be the Law, to circomvvein
That had, to frustrat her, the Author bein.
Disguisd, and vvail'd her face, in neat array
She purposly, hes placed her, in his way.
Whom for an whore, he took her, by attire
And did herefore, to deal with her, desire.
Genesis 38.
THamar the Time, taks right, for at the same
Judah upon his journay, to her came.
And taks her for, a prostitute, and woos
And with fair fitting words, to Induce her dois.
Dealt with, as she desired, then she, demands
What recompense, shall she have, at his hands
If fne allow, that he with her, shall ly
Who well apleas'd, did presently reply
To send a kid, and for her promised wage
His Cloak and Signet, she will have in pleage
His staff also, in tokin that, that day
So covenanted, and accorded They.
Then knew he her, unknown, and with-her mells
And she conceaved, and her belly Svvells.
Genesis 38.
UP She arose, and home She did repair
And Judah to his flocks, his sheep to shear.
Returned, she would, (as she was vvount) remain
And on her widow. Garment gois again.
And widow like contmevvs their, for fevv
Or non, what they committed had, yet knevv.
He than, did tak a kid, and to her send
By Hirachs hand, h' Adullameit, his fremd.
For to redeem, his Garment, staff and ring
That she in gadge, got at there Barganing.
Hirach made search, for her, a Harlot thought
But he his Travels tint, and tried her naught.
For none such their, was known in any case
Nor did their hant, a Harlot in that place.
Genesis 38.
NOw, after three months, Tamar is reported
That with some friend, in private she had sported.
For fame, often busiest in baddest Things
Fresh nevves, of suchlike slips, and o'resights brings.
But lo, when Judah hears she is with Child
And as in vvhoordome he suppon'd, defyld.
He damns, and judged her, by the fire, to die
And that for her supposed, Im purity.
Wha when brought forth, to suffer, She declares
Her child was his, to whom, pertamd these vvares.
The staff, and Clok, and the gold signet that
As pledges for, the promised kid she gat.
Which tokins sein, by Judah tried, and known
Acknowledged, and there confessd his own.
And heirfore publictlie proclaim he must
That She is righteous, and he unjust.
Genesis 39.
THe Ismaleets, that had young Joseph bought
Be daily travvell, him to Egypt brought.
And sold him unto Pot^phar, a man
Chief Captane of the Guard, of Pharo than.
Who loving Joseph, did to him, committ
His house, and all the Gouvernment of it.
^or he hes favor, in the Enuches sight
because he sies him just and walk upright.
The Lord with Joseph, was, and did at large
Hess and incress, all that he had in charge.
^ut Lo his masters wife, him, she does eye
and sies him fair, and falls in fantasy.
Than sham less so solistes him for to ly
And know her fleshly, but he does deny.
Genesis 39.
But one day all Inflamm'd with leachrons fire
And Tickled with intemperat Desire.
^ut any senss, of ather Shame, or Sin
^r to the room reguard, that She was in.
^ost leudly like a Luster, one that lovv'de
^nmodestly beyond all measure mov'de.
^^lls Joseph by the Clock, and would intyse
^^im as before, but he resolved, denyis
and leaves his Garment with her, and he flies
^^t when her self, so much disdaind, She sies
^^e calls her household men, and shameless bold
^^e impudent and vvhorish lie she told.
Yea hes resolvd of falsoods, on the vvorst
And falsl' affirmed, that he would her have forced.
Genes. 39.
THE Incontenent, and vicions woman now
A villainy and wicked wrong, did wow.
And unto Potiphar, hes made Complent
Upon a pure, and spotless Innocent.
Wha (howsone moved with a vanton wife
That seemd to love, and now sought Joseph's life)
Albeit an Innocent, and harmeless, he
Hes put this Guil^less in Captivity.
And causd him in a Carser be enclosed
That was for Trators, to the King composed.
But with him was the Lord, and he Got grace
And favor from, the keeper of the place.
For all, that their, were Captive, and in Bands
Allowed by the keeper, he commands.
Genes. 40.
INto lose Majesty, or some such Thing
Tuo Officiars, had faulted to the King.
The Butler chief, and Master Bakar both
Whereat t'h Egyptian Phar'o waxed wroth
And will noght with, this there, Trespass dispense
But tried, will pumsh where he finds, the offense.
These he hes causd, commit where Joseph lay
And by direction, he o'resies them ay.
Each one of These, a sleep, they dreamed one night
A diverse dream, that did Them both affright.
Which the nixt day, to Joseph they declair
And he interprets Them, unto Them their.
He tells the Butlars, to his honor tended
And told the Bakers, he should be suspended.
Genesis 41.
KIng Phar'o one night, in his Bed, at Rest
Tuo dreadful dreams, his slesping spreit oppressed.
Seav'n fat fair kine, and Seavn, as lean, and lanke
And Seavn, thin ears of corn, and seavn as rank
Sprang up, and in, a meadow, did apeare
Unto him, by a River running near
The lean, the fat, the Thin, the rank, devore
Yet nather of Them, fuller are the more.
Then called he for, his wisemen all, but none
Of these Magitians, could his dreams expone.
The Butlar then, remember Joseph would
That his advancement by his dream foretold.
And Pharo tells, a youth in Prison lay
That would his dreams, be wit divine bewray.
Genesis 41.
When all the visards, that in Epypt were
In exposition of these dreams, did err.
The Hebrew Joseph, is, from Bands releast
And in the praesence of Kinh Phar'o placed.
The Egyptian then, his visions does record
And Joseph there, arffirmes alon, the Lord.
It is, and noght in him, in such a Case
That can give Phar'o ansver, and in peace.
Yet he inspired, the dreams, declares, and Cleares
By famyn, and by Plenty, twice seav'ne years.
The twice seav'ne Ears, and kine to years h'alloods
Of want, and wealth to come, and then concloods
With and divine devise, for to praevent
Intime of fulness, famine Imminent.
Genesis 41.
When Joseph had these Dreams expon'd, and cleared
The Egyptian Monarch hes, the man admeer'd.
And second to him self, in all his Land
Committs, to him the Care, and chief command.
And herefore gave, his Signet, in a Sign
To make him be obeyed nixt the King.
In Linning pure, and purple, he is cled
And through the Cities, and the Land is led.
To have, of all men honor, and Respect.
For so did Phar'o, Ordane, and direct.
A pompous Charet, caused the King provide
For Joseph nixt, the Royal ane, to Ride.
For he will have him higher honors have
Nor ever Egypt to a stranger gave.
Genesis 41.
THe years of plenty come, as was fore shown
All Grain, and Corn, is in abundance growde.
And as the Prophet Joseph Prae expressed
Above belief, in Egypt all Increst.
Joseph herefore, provids and does praepare
For the approaching penury, to spare.
He herefore from, all Limits of the Lands
To carry to the Cities, Corn, commands.
Ye a from all hamlets, farms, and fields, for store
T'abundance daily, he adds more, and more
His woundrous wisdom, owerwent his years
And in his prudent Providence apeeres.
And so much wheat, and grain, together Masses
That these all reakning, Counpt, and measure passes.
Genesis 41.
A Senath Joseph wife is brought to bed
And of tuo mailes tuo Tvins delivered
This his Asenah daughter was to One
Poti-pherah the Priest or Prince of O N
Manasseth he hes nam'de the elder Brother
And Ephraim he called hes the other
These names upon respects that moy'de him So
(Declared into the Text) he grave these Tuo
They both were borne before that Egypt fand
The fury of the famyne in the Land
And when that famyn raged the Egyptians rrn
And cried and cravved some Corn from Phar'o than
The King to Joseph them directs, and he
With sing'lar Prudence does there want suplie.
Genesis 42.
THe force of famyn over the earth incress'd
And entered Jacobs house and it distressed
Whill prudentlie he to his Sons did say
Why gare you so, and do amared stay
I know in Egypt there is Corn herefore
Take money go, and buy-for ws some store
Lest that into the famyn you and I
And all our Household perish heir and dye
They go to buy and Joseph hes them known
And questions them (but keeps himself wnshovvne)
They have one Brother more, and One is naught
Said they, and Joseph bids that he be brought
There Silver secretly put in each, Sack
Unknown they Carry to there Father bake
But Simeon, a pledge dois their remane
Whill they come back with Beniamine again.
Genes. 43.
WIth much entreating Jacob mov'de did twin
With his delight his dear Son Beniamine
The Brether double moneys tack and go
To Egypt for more Corn provided fo
But Benjamin, when Joseph sies he went
And weep for joy so did his heart relent
His brother Simeon than he hes in larg'd
And the Commander of his house hes charged
Some dainty fatlings for to kill and slay
Since that these men should be his Guests that day
Most librally h'intreats Them evrie Guest
But Benjamin be fyve tym's by the rest
His mease was more, because he was his Brother
An vrerein, and both borne be one Mother.
Genes. 44.
When Joseph so had cherishd Them he makes
His chief o're-sier for to fill there Sack's
And therein put the moneys that they had
And in the Sack of Benjamin the Lad.
Who was the least and youngest ane of Those
His moneys and his Silver Cup t'inclose
Directed so, all done, by break of day
They load there Asses and they went away
The Cup is challenged and they promise all
That he that hes it die therefore he shall
It Is fund with Benjamin then dollorous
They all return again to Joseph's house
Whair Judah for his liberty Entreats
And all there former Conference repeats
Last offers, therefore him a slavve to be
Lest for his loss there Father Jacob die.
Genesis 45.
NO longer Joseph could his tears contein
Vnbraking ont and bursting from his eyn
Nor longer will delay nor be vushovvne
But make him there, to all his Brether known
Then kissed he Benjamin and weep'd for jo
And kissed the rest in low and weep'd also
^oseph declaird that God had send him Their
For them in time of famyn to Prepair.
Then told they Phar'o that these Hebrew men
Be Joseph's Brether and were with him then
Then Phar'o glade the Egyptian king commands
To bring there Father unto Egypt lands
They told there Father Joseph lives: and he
Is glad to go and sie him 'ore he die.
Genesis 46.
THen Jacob journay took and rested next
A T Beer-sheba says the sacred Text
And sacrifird according to his word
Unto the Almighty Izaks loving Lord
Who unto Israel did appear in sight.
And called him Jacob, Jacob on the night
Then said I am thy Fathers God wherefore.
To go to Egypt henceforth fear no more.
I have a care of Thee and thy estate
And there shall make Thee Multiply and Great
I will go dovne and with Thee there remane
And thence I shall re-bring thee back agane.
But there thou shall expire, depart and die
And Joseph there shall lock and lovk thine eye.
Genesis ^^^
Jacob to Pharo gois in Egypt stays
He numbers their and after ends his days.
And yet the famyn did in Egypt rage
And noght its fury did relent nor Swage.
But cruelly both man and Beast did grieve them
When they hane naught to live on nor relieve them.
The people when there Grain was gone they run
And cries to Joseph all their Coin was done
Yet seek they Bread he tells Them they have store
And he will sell them bread and corn therefore
That spent Themselves there duellings Goods and ground
They pass for food for they must needs befund
So Joseph bought for Corn all Egypt land
And so did over Egypt all Command.
Genesis 48.
WHen aged Isr'els dying day drew nigh
A hundredth forty seven year old was he.
Joseph's two Sons are made unto him known
Whom he acknoledgd and took as his own.
To bless Them hestreach'd forth his hands, the Right
On Ephrams Head yet noght for want of Sight
But purposly for Ephrame should be great
And much surmonnt Manasseth in estate
Doubtless the Lord commanded so the man
Prophetickly to bless these Brether than
Then Is'rel said to Joseph now J die
But God shall both protect and prosper Thee
And to thy fathers land from whence thou come
To brook thy dowble Partage bring Thee home.
Genesis 49.
OLd Jacob blesses all his Sons be name
And one by one bestows it upon Them.
To Revben and the Rest conveined Their
What shall befall them after did declair.
To Juda he prophetically Told
The Scepter still he in his house should hold
Whill Shiloch come that shall the people tie
In after times to him aeternally
To evrie one of Them his fate he shows
And when he finds he fants and weaker grows
He charged them then and made them all to swear
To Mas-pelach his Body dead to bear
And in his Fathers country lay't in Grave
Which is by Mamre into Abrams cave.
Then Jacob in his Bed pulled up his feet
Divinly ended and gave up his spreet.
Genesis 50.
With all pomp funeral in solemn sort
The Sons of Jacob do his Corpse transpor
and lays thas balmed Body in a Grave
^t Mach-pelach by Mamre in the Cave
^hen Joseph with his Brether back did go
^et for there former fault they doubt him (tho
^e passed all there unkindness strenge)
that now he would, take there, of Them revenge
^ut godly Joseph he assures them all
that their unkindness he will never recall
^ut nvr'she them as a father ever more
and for there welfare still provide Them store
^et swore he them and th'Ebrews their that they
^is Bones should Bury where his fathers lay
Then Joseph old his childring sies
And then in Peace this happy prophet dies.
Genesis 50.
PIvinly lowed Joseph died when
He aged was a hunder year and Ten
A man whom God directed all his days
And did advance him very woundrous ways
A blessing for his Brether Sire and friends
^ow'de and admit'de of Egypt all, he ends
Then boveld was the Body with praetence
To be transported by his Brether Thence
As when he lay a dying they before
At his desire Solemnly to him swore
Yet to a fitter time they thought it best
To laid Imbalind in Egypt in a Chest
Whill They from thence with honor might it have
And bury it Into his fathers grave.
Exodus Chap. 1.
IN Egypt Israel and his Sons all dead
Yet there incrediblie increfsd there seed
For all Things ever hes incress'd and stord
That blessed hes been and favored be the Lord
Whill that it happened that there Regn'd a new
An other King nor ever Joseph knew
Who hearing that the Hebrews their of few
In so short time, to so great numbers grew
And fearing that his peace they should perturb
He mynds to rain, and all there Courses curb
With Tyresome Taskes, and working with there hands
And for to bear brick burdens them commands
To weary, wrack them and to keep them under
But more and more they waxed unto his wounder.
Exodus 1.
THE Egyptian sies there servile slavrie wile
Gains noght, but what he greens for, dois begvyle
Then compas'd he and casts an other course
Noght better bo^tt a wickeder and worse
He charged the mid-vvyves, then that they, each boy
Into the Birth should murder and destroy
And if it were a maid then they should spair
And kill none but a maile or manchyld their
Perversely whair men ar disposed to ill
Means seldom wants for to affect there will
Yet did they multiply and grevv the more
That thus to kill and cut them short they shore
The women feared the Lord and did it naught
Wherefore he prosperd Them and with them wrought
Exodus 1.
THe Tyranne Phar'o finding that his will
(The mid-vives merciful) did noght forth fill
In killingh of the Hebrew mails: he did command
All the Egyptian people in his Land
That they no Hebrew female nor a maid
Should once persew to death drovne nor invade
For in his block-head-brain and wit vnvise
He thought no harm to him by These could rise
But all the mails he bids (o cruel King)
That in the River they, and flood should fling
Which carelessly by cruel hearted men
There instantly is executed Then
To cut and curb the incressnig afterward
Of the trve Ghrafts into the Lords wineyard.
Exodus 2.
THe cruelty of the Egyptian Prence
Made the Ebrew dames with piety dispense
And with there pity and a tinder heart
(Into the outcasting of there Childring) part
Lo as exemplified and vvievlie hear
In Moses exposition dois appear
Left desolat alon the infant lay
Expond to perish on the River Bray
But God above compassion had and He
Of Moses fate did otherwise decree
And had resolved by his ministering hand
To bring his Israll out of Egypt Land
In thrie months old he was cast out and after
Was fund among the flaggs be Phar'os daughter.
Exodus 2.
^He little Boy fund in a pitched Arc
By God preserved for a worthy wark
^^to ane Ebrew nource is gevin to feed
(...) natural mother and his dame indeed
^^w grew the child and then the Ebrew broght-him
(...) Pharos daughter for her Son She thought him
(...) Boy was lovely pleasant in her eye
^^^d did indeed delight her greatumlie
(...) called him Moses and her reasone show
^^^ause from water dying she him drew
(...) God his safety wrought and brought about
^^t none but Phar'os child sold draw him out
^o be a means agains her Fathers mind
^o safe a Salver of the Ebrevv kind.
Exodus 2.
^Ovv in those days when Moses waxed stroug
To sie his Hebrew Brether thinking loug
(...) went and Savv the Burdens that they buire
(...) all the indignities that they endure
^^^ich could not bot molest and move his mind
(...) Pity and compassion all inclynd
(...) when he sies where ane Egyptian
(...) boldly beat and hurt ane Hebrew man
^^^spights thereat and Separats them Tway
(...) in revenge the Memphit man did slay
^^^n waroly looked, least any should him sie
^^^by an other Hebrw sein was he
^is Carcas then as he could with his hand
^e buried there and hid it in the Sand.
Exodus 2.
^He second time went Moses forth an fand
Tuo Isralits much at contentionn stand
(...) for some sort of Odds and diffrence that
(...) fallen betinxt them tho he knw not what
^^^he revveills the Smitter with rebooke
(...) hardly with his Reprehention took
(...) men incensed with fury hardly know
^^^mself nor whom to they a duty aw)
(...) said who made thee judge in this debate
^^^vill thou kill me as thou killed of late
(...) Egyptian here: so Moses clearly knew
(...) it was known that he the Egyptian slew
(...) dreading forder danger and for sear
^e fled to Midian and Tarried their.
Exodus 2.
THe slaughter thus reveald King Pharo send
Horsemen and foot To search and apprehend
And bring him th'Ebrew Moses that had slain
Yea evn in Egypt ane Egyptian
In the reparing wrong and righting than
The injury done to ane Hebrew man
For Moses was the man that from above
God in compassionn Pity and his Love
Had made and prae appointed for to be
The instrument to set his people free
But fear gave feet and feddred him his wing
To post from perrill of that Tyran King
And in his flight did by a fontane stay
That in the field and land of Midian lay.
Exodus 2.
WHen Moses in his flight had rraveld long
Ester the righting of the Hebrews wrong
He wearied was, with walking on the way
Thearfoir to ease him is constraind to stay
And whill he restes him at a fontane than
Seav'ne daughters of the Priest of Midian
Come to that Cistern and these springing Rocks
For to refresh and water there their flocks
But then come heard-men, hanting their, and they
Unmanerly, would dryve these mayds away
And stubbornly, debarr them for to bring
The needful waters, from that running spring
But Moses did them from incombrance keep
And waterd all there Goats and flocks of Sheep.
Exodus 2.
THe virgins from the well reverted tell
What with the Sheep-heards their to Them befell
Who would not suffer them in any Case
With these there flocks t'approach unto that place
And how a man they by the fontane fand
That did with hold from them the heards-mens hand
And drew there water in their Troghs and Cuds
That did suffice to water all there Goods
There father taxed them then that they had naught
Him that had help them so home with them brought
They went and brought him and there father when
He came, most kindly did entreat the man
Then of these Daughters Se'vne he gives him one
Zipporah called and she bore him a Sone.
Exodus 2.
^N tract of Time the King of Egypt dies
And the Israleits in bondage Sighs and cries
And these there Groans and cries that they were wount
To spire, and spend, up to the havns did monr
Sprang through the air, the Clouds in sunder tears
And enters all in the Almighties ears
He knows there Carces, there Griefs, regrats, and groans
And will have mind and mercy on there moans.
His Covenant kint with, his Servands kind
Abraham and his Sons he hes in mind
^o looked the Lord upon their Stress extreme
And shortly shall send Confort unto Them
For all that trust in him and cry for aid
He will support them as him self hes Said.
Exodus 3.
^N Horeb monr where Moses used to keep
His father Iethro's herds and flocks of sheep
The Angel of the Lord there did apeare
unto a Bush vn-brunt, but burning clear
And did with sundry Circomstances sho
That he will have him Into Egypt go.
For he had heard his Servands long in Thrall
There Sighs, there sorrow's grief and Groanings all)
unto proud Phar'o the Egyptian King
from thence his Hebrew Israleits to bring
^ppressd with bearing brick in burdens still
^o satisfy a Tyrans wiked will
He said he sold Insttuct him what to say
And plague all Egypt if he disobey.
Exodus 3 and 4.
HEre Moses doubts and hardly will believe
That th'Israleits will credit to him give
^or trust said he that from a living flame
^y Lords command to me his servand came
^or that my Lord would make me messinger
^o be the Israleits deliverer
^hen said the Lord what is that in thy hand
^e ansverd him and said it was a wand
^ast thou it down said he, and lo the form
word^ grown a Serpent or a creeping worm
(...) an tack it by the tail and thon shall sie
^^^^mrne a Rod and now no Serpent be
(...) said he in thy Bosom thrust thy hand
(...) draving't forth he it a leprous fand
(...) ^once again he says Thrust thou it in
(...) ^^aks it forth a fresh flesh colored skin
Go fordward then and these (...) he Signs
That there belief and creded with them brinpes.
Exodus 4.
YEt Moses would eschew and feign would fly
This noble Charge and to the Lord said he
I am naught eloquent and want of it
And my slove tongue maks me therefore unfit
The Lord with Moses he was angry than
And said to him^ who gave a mouth to man
But I, go then and I will gwe The speech
And thee there all what thou should say shall teach
Yet once more Moses heirabout contests
And ane moresit to send the Lord requests
The Lord then werie wroath wit him did say
Do I noght know thy Brother by the way
The Levit A'ron thou shall meet who shall
Speak wnto Phar'o and delyver all.
Exodus 4.
THen Moses went and did with Ara'on meet
That graciously each other gladly greet
Then past to Egypt and together call
The heads of evrie house of Israel all
Ar'on the Love of God wnto them their
With there delw'rance quickly, does declare
Of all the words that God to Moses spak
He does to Them a trve rehcarsall make
And in there presence with a woundring eye
Strange wounders wroght among them there they sie
The miracles that God to Mofes show
He did them in there presence all of new
Then they belew'd confirmed in there mind
And all to worship bowed and inclynd.
Exodus 5.
MOses and Aa'ron unto Phar'o gois
And the almighties mind and message shois
Commanding that his people long in stresse
He would let go wnto the wilderness
To him there Lord the God almighty that
They might a feast solemnly celebrat
No but King Pharo hardened had his heart
And would not suffer Isr'al thence to pairt
But spightfullie commanded dovvblie more
To make there tasks nor they had bein before
The people with Moses and with Ar'on than
TO expostulat and for to grudge began
And herefore Moses dois to God regrate
(Since he with Pharao dealt) there worse estate.
Exadus 7.
THe men of God to Ph^^^ gois again
And profits nothing with that Prince profane
He will not grant the people nor accord
To let them go and offer to the Lord
For deepl' indurd and hardened is his heart
That he will noght permit them to depart
The Prophets than their Budding Rods down throvves
And their the miracles to Pharo shows
Then strak they Nile, 1. Plague.
Egypts enriching flood
And it turned Tart black and in bitter Blood
The Egyptian Magi with there charmed Rods
Will so work wounders to there pagan Gods
But as there rods turned Serpents creeps and Crall
The living rod of Aaron cates them all.
Exadus 8.
PRoud Pharohs heart yet stiff and steeld did stand
That it no ear could give to Gods command
Nor be brought to believe tho he had sein
His might in miracles befoir his eyne
Wherefore he sent past number numberless
Infinite froggs all Egypt to distress 2. Plague.

So that these noisome Things Innumerable
Creept up on Pharos Bed and Pharos table
Yea noght a foot of field in Egypt be
That from these all defyling froggs is free
Than Pharo Moses dois entreat that he
Would pray to God and make these froggs all die
Moses requested be King Pharo prays
And heard, the Lord these froggs consumes and slayes
Exodus 8.
TO Pharos heart such cursedness still cleaves
That noght his wonted hardness yet it leaves
The vvounders vvroght so visible and strange
His marble mind did neuir mint to change
But quyt of these again his heart he arms
And Aaron smott the dust and lyce in swarms 3. Plague.

Through Egypt all (Goshen except) increst
And multiplied over all on man and beast
King Pharos Magi and Enchamters too
Assay to bring forth Lyce but naught could do^
Then they enforced before King Phar'o brought
Acknowledge that the Lord these wounders wroght
Yet Pharos hardened heart and wicked will
Endured remaind and stiff continevved still.
Exodus 8.
THen on (...) the Lord sent flightes of flies
That non the clouds for Clusters of them sies 4. Plague

On men and beasts on house and sields they fall
And merv'lously they multiply on all
Yet was the Hebrews Goshen (to record)
Free from the plague praeserved be the Lord
The flintie hearted. Pharo now espyes
That on his Land Gods heavy Judgment lies
And he no power no, nor means had man
That Egypt from that Curse deliver can
Therefore (constraind) Moses to pray commands
An dhe t'intreat the Lord holds up his hands
God heard his prair and then the flies depart
But hardened yet holds out King Phar'os heart.
Exodus 9.
THe fist Time Moses Pharo do'th demand
To suffer Israel to depart his Land
Bur hardened is his heart, Endured in ill
Herefore the Lord a Morame sent to kill
The beasts of evrie kind through Egypt all 5. Plague

But noght a beast in Goshen perish shall
And all one day that be in Egypt bounds
The forcefull finger of the Lord confounds
The herds and flocks in field the fowls that fly
The Camel and the Colt dropped done and dye
This mighty Moram in the almighties wraeth
All Bestiall Bands in Egypt dryves to death
But Pharos heart is hardened yet the faster
And still stays the Ebrews to go serve there master.
Exodus 9.
FOr Pharos stubborn and hard hartednesse
With scab and Boatch the Lord will Egypt press
And heirfore he the Prophets both commands
In the Aer to throw some ashes from there hands
Which shortly after into dust did turn
And Man and Beast with Boatch and Blisters burn 6. Plague

That neither of these kinds therefrom was free
But therewith, all, and each, ore plastred be
Then flew from heav'ne fire thunder hail and Rain 7. Plague

That mightily plagues all upon the plain
And yet where Israel is in Goshen Land
The earth and aer but storms vnstressed stand
Now Pharo sies his Sin and Egypts grief
And pray's the Prophets pray for there relliefe
And promises to let the people Go
Yet hardens his heart and after dois not so.
Exodus 10.
Endured Pharo wilful yet with stands
And God sent Grasshoppers in Egypt Lands ^. Plague

Of these innumerable numbers Than
The earth o'recoverd from the sight of man
And all the herbs, that hail and thunder left
Like hungry Harpies they raye up and reft
So that nothing in Egypt growing green
Nor blade nor leaf theye vnconsum'd was sein
Pharo again does for to grant begin
Agains the Lord his wickedness and Sin
Imploring Moses to the Lord to pray
That he his vvraeth would from that land alay.
Moses then prayed and to the Lord inclind
Who sent a strong stiff gall, and vvestern vvind
Which those Grasshoppers to the Sea did post
That none was sein on all the Egyptian coast
But God endured the heart of Phar'o So
That yet he letts the Isralits to Go.
Exodus 10.
THe Lord to Moses his command hes geven
For to streach out his hands up toward heaven
That darkness on the land without all light
For thrie days may vvrap Egypt in one night ^. Plague

Obedient Moses lifting up his fist
The Land is all oremantled with a mist
And dreadful darkness is over Egypt spread
And all with thick and pitchie clouds o'recled
So palpablie and gross the darkness shovvs
That what to do or vvhair to go none knovvs
All buried as in night and darkness lies
But light of day or sight of cheerful skies
Then Pharo seemd content that th'Ebrevvs they
Except there cattle should go all away
In Goshen yet vvhair Israel livv'de was light
Delightful day and vndistemperd night
To be a vvitness that the Lord was their
He keep'd untroubled both the earth and aer
But God the Lord ty is Pharos heart up so
That he the Hebrevvs hinders yet to go.
Exodus 12.
WHen God had promisd Israel to enlarge
He institute the Passovver and did charge
With circumstances for to eat the Lamb
As he apoynts and had ordaind the same
Moses and Aaron he directs to tell
Unto his Congregation Israel
How evvrie nou^^^old or the (...)
To eat the ^asso're sold it self prepair
With girded Loins kint Shoes and staff in hands
And-when they kill their Lambs to stroke commands
There liutels with the Blood that shall record
The Passover of the Angel of the Lord
Which Israls saifety did foreshovv, aright
And Egypts first borne slaughter, the nixt night.
Exodus 12.
AT midnight or the davvning of the Morn
The Angel of the Lord killd the first Borne 10 Plague

Of man and beast that then in Egypt Iwde
Non then was spaird nor from that Plague repriv'd
But those of that of the house of Israel be
From all the Ten plagues they were fenced and free
No house there was in Egypt from the East
But there in killed was ane unto the west
The mempheits moan, there maest and mvrnfull cry
Upon the morn rose up and reathch'd the skies
When they before them their stark dead and cold
There first borne man and beast streatch'd out behol^
They unto Pharo madlie roaring rin
And tells what God onthere first borne had done
They pray him than that he will favor sho
At last and lat the people of Isral Go.
To adore and serve there God or certanly
They for his Induration all should dye,
Exodus 12.
PVnish'd with plagues and be the people pressd
Pharo at last for there relief thought best
To let the people pas then did the Brether call
And thence commands them with there Ebrews all
The Prophets then conveines them moir and less
And altogether to depairt address
Whill willingly the Egyptians to them gave
What of there wealth, and riches, they would have
Jewels, gold, and Garments then they borrow
Against there great Migration on the morrow
And then they plenishd with the Egyptian spoil
Dislodge to leave and martch from memphit soil
In numbered men six hundredth thou sand Lives
Besyds there strangers Childring and there wives.
Exodus 13.
THE almighty God Jehoue the Hebrew Bands
To celebrat a publict feast commands
In memory and in rememberance
Of that there vvounderfull deliverance
(...) And that they should in after times to come
All the first borne that oppen shall the womb
The mail of man and beast allenarlie
To him their Lord as his still Sanctify
And on that day vvnto there Sons declair
What he the Lord ten times did for them their
Unto that Tyrannous hard hearted King
When he from Bondage did there Fathers bring.
Exodus 13.
DEad Joseph's bones in Egypt long before
Moses transports that Israel sometime swore
Wnto him when infirm himself he fand
To bury Them into the promised Land
God led them naught the vvayes that nearest ar
Lest the Philistims in there martch make war
But the Ebrevvs armed that wise Conductor he
Brought them about the shores of the red sea
And in a Cloud before Them he be day
Through defart wilderness directs there way
And lest they strayd and through long travvell Tire
By night he lights them with a flame of fire.
The Cloud nor Colum never went away
Alternatly but past before them ay.
Exadus 14. and 15.
WHen gone away was Israel God procured
That Pharos heart was hardened and Endured
So that he stirrs and Egypt armed all
Perforce the Hebrew Camp for to recall
And heirfore with, his people posts a pace
As he were of a flieing foe in chase
The Hebrevvs fear, when they see Pharo Budge
And all aghast, againes there Guider grudge
He prays, and God commands to Rod the Sea
That shall give way, and soon divided be
Moses did so, and th'Ebrevvs saife and sound
Past trogh but all The Egyptians there are drovnd
Israel then, in praise, with one accord
A thankful Song, with Joy, song to the Lord.
Exodus 15.
HEre Miriam the matron Prophetess
Unto the Lord her thankful praise t'express
Holds up a sounding Timbrell in her hands
Backed with the Beauties of the Hebrev Bands
And sweitly singing all there woyces raise
A Psalm of Triumph and a Song of Praise
(...)
On Pharo, his Egyptians, and Those
That durst to him and his profess them foes
His mighty povvar in that Song is shovvne
Whereby the horse and Riders as o'rethrovvne
And all confounded that from Egypt came
With horror terror dreudfull death and shame.
Exodus 15.
When Isral was from Pharos forces fred
To desert Sur, Moses there Guyd, them led
Whair in that wast, and wilderness thrie days
All as they past but drink or water stays
To Marah then they came, whair bitterness
Of waters their, there Palats much oppress
They plain and Moses much perplexed in Spreit
Cries and the Lord converts these lovr to svveit
God them injoyns th'observing of his Laws
And unto Them his Ordinances shawes
Which give they keep and do then he will naught
Plague Them with These that he on Egypt brought
I am the Lord said he that can disease
Bring when I will and heal it when I please.
Exodus 15.
THan they removd and come to Elim land
Whair fontans tvelf and seavntie Palms they fand
A proper place, as pleasant profitable
Into there journay for to ease them able
The Lord there Pames with pleasure he will mix
And try there patience these, extremes betuix
Now they abundance have, anon a^^skant
And God again, with wealth repayes there want
The Lord his own he proofs but noght to perish
And as he checks so he his Saints shall cherish
In Marah tart there water was but hear
In Elim it was healthsome sweit and clear
And there the pleasant Palm's, the dainty date
Into all plenty offers them to eat.
Exodus 16
FRom Elim Israel gois and enters in
The Deserts and the wilderness of Sin
That is tvix Elim and mont-Sinai placed
A hill so often with Gods great praesence graced
Into the second month the fiftenth day
Of there Migration heir arived they
The people murmur and for hunger cry
And wext the worthy Moses woundrously
(...)
And therefore said to Moses he should rain
Bread from the heaven and that of such a sise
That daily night and should there wants suffice
In this to them the Lord did show his Love
And by such means there thankfulness would prove.
Exodus 16.
MOses and Aaron t'Isr'el said you shall
This night know God from Egypt brought you all.
The Glory of your God again said They
^ow all shall sie the morn when it is day
Whair you shall wiew if that you be not blind
^is kindness unto you, so often to him unkind
Your bold Repyning and your grudgings he
^e hears agains him self, for naught ar we
^et in all plenty and abundance great
^e from the Aer shall give you flesh to eat
^he flesh at night a blast of wind shall bring
and bread it shall come when the day shall spring
Then like the Rain and thickest shoures of hail
Among there Tents in fleets down came the quail.
Exodus 16.
Again the Glory of the Lor divine
And goodness with the Sun did to them shine
(...) when the dew was dried on the Ground
^canded Ball small like hoar frost was fund
and neuir sein before that heavenly Rain
^coverd all and Tapestried the Plain
and when the people of Israel saw it than
^^ey said ane to ane other it was MAN
^^t knew it noght although they gawet a name
^^t it, was, the Bread, praepard for Them
^^ses declard; a grain shourd down from heavne
(...) from there God t'apease there Grudging geavne
Which evrie one should gather it and use
As Gods commandment direct them dois.
Exodus 16.
^Hill Manna on the ground before them lay
Togather it God hes prescryw'd the way
(...) it appointed hes for their repast
(...) but on day and for no more to last
^^ept such as was gatherd on the Sixth
^^serve the Sabbath that succeeded nixt
(...) some was dissobedient and brak
(...) Statuts that God thereanent did make
(...) did ore night some pocked up in store
^^ugnant to he Law gevne ont before
He could noght, would noght wiew there ways perve^^s
But in the morning they have fund it stank
And full of worms with smell and savor Rank.
Exodus 16.
THe Saboth sacred to the Lord orda'nd
And naught to be with weekly works prophand
To bake and sees all on the Sixth he dois
Command, that they would on the sevnt day use
And yet ungrateful Israleits some go
Togather Manna and prophaind it so
When they should worship as the Lord commands
And noght work as they weekly wroght with hands
Whill Moses checks and chyds and dois them shaw
Debording thus there braking of the Law
And then seveirly charged Israll wholly
T'observe for evr the seav'nt, the Saboth holy
And in remembrance to observe it ay
Israel since hes rested the sevnt day.
Exodus 16.
MOses conform to Gods command and will
Of MAN bids Aron then ane Omer fill
Unto the end that after it may be
Preservd and shown to our posterity
(This man was like Cor'ander seed almast
But white resembling wafers in the Taste)
That it the Bread was that there Fathers fed
Into the wilderness when they were fred
From thraldom by the Lords almighty hand
That they were under into Egypt Land
Then Aaron did, as Moses did direct
And filld ane Omer full to that effect
Then placed it in the Testimon' or Arc
To be thereof for'ever more a mark.
Exodus 17.
THe camp from Sin to Riphidim removves
That there much pain for want of water proves
And therefore murmur muteny and grudge
Yea dois agains the Prophets Brag and budge
All into ire, hot fury, rage and wraeth
Ready to rise to stone him straght to daeth
Then Moses mov'de did at there crying cry
To god, and he advisd him by and by
That he in Horeb with his Rod sold smitt
The Rock of Riphidim and then from it
Sold come a current and a fontane fall
To queuch there thrist and satisfy them all
(...)
He aids them still in there distressed-state.
Exodus 17.
PRoud Amalek of Esavs of spring one
To fight with Isral drew his army on
And when they over at Riphidim ariv'de
To Joshua the Povvar was prescriv'd
And unto him was all the war committ
The manner and the managing of it
Whill Moses went with Aron and with Hur
To Horebs head before the armeis stur
Where Moses lifting up his hands did pray
And His prewaild whill holdm up were they
But whill they heavy waxed and weary than
The Amalekets prewaild over came and wan
But when these tuo suports his hands, in fight
Then Amalek was foild and put to slight.
Exodus 18.
IEthro the Priest or Prince of Midian
Zipporas Sire Moses Good-father Than
Heard how the Hebrews, God from Egypt brought
And what by Moses there for Them he wrought
Herefore resolves and does him self address
Whair with his wife and Childring Moses meet
And gladly other kiss salute and Greet
To Jethro Moses then does truly tell
What God in Egypt wroght for Israel
Than Iethro Joyful for so fair effects
He humbly glad his holy heart erects
And altars as the use was he dois raise
To worship God on and to offer praise.
Exodus 18.
NOw when that Iethro Moses sitting Saw
Discussing causes by the Course of Law
Considring by the weghtie Charge his pains
That in discharging thereof he sustains
He with a Judgment solid deep and wise
His sone in law thus Moses does advise
Thou cumbred ar discussing evrie cause
Therefore show Them the ordinance and Laws
And stand before and to the Lord velate
The manner of each Matter and the State
Then some among the people pick and chnise
That t'ease you in your Judgments you may use
Men fearing God and men of cowrage all
That with you justly Judge in Israel shall.
Exodus 19.
THe Israleits from Riphidim arose
And martching fordward to Mount-Sinai gois
And at the holy Sacred montane They
Stent all there Tents incamp them their and stay
But Moses called be the Lord ascends
And humbly there his will and pleasure tends
Who charged him to Israel to say
Give they his woice will hear, and words obey
They shall be his by a renewed Birth
Beyond all people spiring on the earth
The Almighties mind then Moses does declare
And bids the people purif' and prepare
There Sprits. there persons, clothing and array
And Sanctiffe them all for the third day.
Exodus 19.
THe Prophet Moses as the Lord appoynts
Commands the people for to clenge there Iointes
And cloathings vvash that then they all may be
Pure in the praesence of the all pearsing eye
For lo the Lord the third day after shall
Be seen on Sinai mont before them all
And straightly charges Them charged be the Lord
That none martch up the mont nor tonche its Board
And if they do, as lives the Lord said he
That Soul shall be persd through and surely die
The people then preparing all aright
T'apeare more pure in the Almighties Sight
They went not to there wives but did abstain
From all that could pollute Them or profane.
Exodus 19.
Upon the third day as the Lord foreshew
Long, Shrill and from above the Trumpet blew
The people trimbling and with Terror stands
By Sinais border holding up there hands
Deafned there ears, with thunder from the skies
And with the lightning dazzled ar there eyes.
For statlie Sinais sacred Top was all
Cled with a crown of fire and burning Ball
But that shrill sounding Trump and thundering noise
Is drowned and deafned with a stronger woice
That from the Montane in the waley roares
And through the Breasts of Isral brakes and Boares
From Gods own sacred month with dreadful aw
Whill he to Moses there dois gwe his Law.
Exodus 32.
WHill holy Moses on the moon. attended
The Lords directions humbly bovv'd and bended
The people murmured that Moses stayed
And from the mont so lonh delayed
Wherefore they ran to Aaron and implore him
Yea cried to give them Gods to go before-them
Thus that they knevv not, they did cry and call
What of thai Moses was become at all
He bids, and they Obey, and to him brings
There golden Bracelets and there wivves earrings
Thereof he casts a Calf and after raisd
Ane Altar to be put upon and praisd
Ungrateful all forgetting too too sone
What God for there Deliverance had done
But (disobedient) unto that Calf or kow
Nor it more brutish, they do bend or bow.
Exodus 32.
T'Idolatrize the people rudly rin.
And Aaron rashl' assents unto there Sin
Whill Moses with the Lord on Sinai mont Sits
Their bad blind-zeal Idolatry commits
For to that Idol that was made before
Out of there Yewels and there earrings store
They raise ane Alter where upon dois stand
The Calf that Aaron fashoud with his hand
And on the morn the people offerings bring
And sacrifice unto that sensles Thing
Whill God above wroath unto Moses says
Thy people lo perverted have there ways
Therefore be gone my wraeth waxed hot, does fume
And shall in it, Them for his slip consume
But Moses prayed and did Gods favor find
That he from the ill he meant them changd his mind.
Exodus 32.
THere God foregottin and Religion true
The host debord to drink and dancing drew
And most prophanly when there Phyfes did sound
about there Idol they did trip a round
^o more remembering God that so much wrought
When he from Egypt them and bondage brought
^hey sit affecting error and the Truth disgust
^^d dalts in them there own desirs and lust
^ovv they are randon run with a lose rain
and at there pleafir they will prove profane
(...) they will noght be bund nor longer live
^biect unto the Law that God did give
But they will worship Gods of there own gold
As vanely they conceit off vnconroll'd.
Exodus 32.
WHen Moses prayer had Gods wraeth revoked
That high and hotly against the people smoaked
He from the Lord and montans top did draw
With those two sacred Tables of the Law
Which he did carry be the Lords command
Wreit with the holy finger of his hand
But when descended with his ears and eyes
The people all prophand he hears and sies
And in the Camp the Calf erected Hy
His wraeth began to wax and fiercely fry
His heart could noght the Abomnation bear
But with a holy divine anger thear
Which there trespass in him did move and make
He threvv the Tabels dovne and both he brak
Exodus 32.
YEt did noght Moses wraeth and Ire heir end
But forder yet it flew and did extend
That golden Calf that for there God they chuisd
He break it boldly and to powder bruisd
And pulverizd to apprehend the Sin
The more, he made the people drink it In
His brother nixt rebuikes and much missaid-him
And for the abuse did to his face, up braid-him
That he had suffered Isral to begin
And slide in such Idolatrous a Sin
Then he this falt profane to expiat
The Sons of Levi he together gatt
And armed with the sword they kill and slay
And with thrie thousand Hebrevvs strav'd the way
Exodus 32 and 33.
THe morning come Moses to Israll says
Foull is your fall erronions was your ways
And men of Israll ye Gods wrath do mass
Agains your persons for your proud Trespass
Yet I will once ascend t'assay and sie
If his displeasure I can pacify
Up moses went before the Lord and falls
Dovne on the Ground and then for mercy callis
Confessing there that Isrels Sins was great
Yet for there pardon he does humbly treat
And wishes rather that his name shall be
Rasd from the Books of Life ev'rlastingly
Then Israls brak and Dissobedience
Be noght forgevn them and there foul offense
^^r Lo Almighty Lord thy mercies here
(...) to thy peoples Pardon shall apeare
Yet God was grevd and angry that they had
The golden Calf and molten Image made.
Exodus 33.
THe Prophet in the Tabernacle walks
And with the Lord familiarly Talks
^ho unto him dois intimat his will
and shows his Angel shall Guide Israel still
^^at shall the accursed Cananeits out cast
and lay't for them his people of Israll wast
^^e Hittits, Hivits, Amorits and all
^^us and Perizzits they perish shall
^^t Isral sad, and sorrovvfull did sho
^^at God him self denyd with Them to Go
^^en Moses to martch up the Lord commands
^^ith all the people to the promisd Lands
That to there father Abram long before
And since unto his Seed to give he svore.
Exodus 33.
Unto the Lord humbly did Moses pray
From the Host his Ire to pacis' and alay
^^d in his mercies for to make it known
^^at he there God and they were all his own
^^e Lord than his petitions did aprove
^^d grantes Them in his favor and his love
(...) more to sie (hot with a holy fire)
(...) glory of the Lord he does desire
which God likevise did grant him of his Grace
(...) none could live (he said) and sie his face
(...) in a rockie cleft God hes him placed
^^d show his bake-Partes as he by him paced
Part of his Glory in the going by
He does permit his Moses to espy.
Exodus 34.
^He Lord again commands that Moses hevv
For those he brak, Two other Tables new
^^ereon he will with his own finger grave
(...) self same precepts that before he gave
^^ses the morn with Them the mont ascends
(...) in a Cloud from Heavne the Lord descends
(...) there before him stood and did proclaim
(...) Lords almighty and Eternal name
(...) the went and past before his face
(...) strong, most merciful, and full of Grace
(...) is the Lord but Rigor fraught with Ruthe
(...) slow of goodness full and Truth
Wherefore my praecepts keep that I Command
This day and you shall have the holy land.
Exodus 34.
WHen God Almighty on the holy hill
His mind to Moses had declard and will
When he had fully fasted forty days
(For he none less upon Mont-Sinai stays)
The Lord dismisd him from the mont again
And he descends directly to the plain
The Princes of the people go to Greet
And mirthfully there Captane Moses meet
But when his face transfigurd they look on
And sies that by the wounted sort it shon
They are afraid and dread for to dravv near
And in his shyning presence to apeare
But Moses called Them then they and he
And Aaron talk together tenderly.
Exodus 34.
THe Propher speaking with the Princes heir
The people aproatch and do them dravv neir
But Moses for the shyning of his face
He is constraind to covert in that place
So beavtifull and brightly there it shon
That no eye durst behold nor looks thereon
But vvaild as he there in there presence stands
He carefully declares the Lords commands
That on Mont-Sinai he received be word
Of mouth from God the everliving Lord
And these Directions charging Them that they
For evr observe and never disobay
Upon the perrill that's pronunc'd and more
If they do fall as have used before.
Exodus 36. and 25.
THe westments and the wessels necessare
That for the daily worship useful are
The Lord will have them fashoud formed and framed
As they shall after noted be and named
The Arc shall be of Cedar Shittim wood
Without corrupting durabill and good
Lyn'd well within and all without ore Rolld
With well wrought and engravne Plates of Gold
The Cloth and Carpet for the Covenant
To make it beavtifull and Bellishant
It shall be silver silk and skarlet wool
Imbrodred bravely and made beavtifull
With Bars engrossed in Gold and Golden Ringes
Whereon when it transported is, it hinges.
Exodus 37. and 25.
THe Seat propitiatarie and the place
Where God in mercy should apear and Grace
^^d whence should ishe his Oracles divine
(...) will have made of purest gold and fine
those length tuo Cubits and an half should be
^^d half an less in breadth ordaned He
^^o Cherubims of tried Gold likewise
(...) cower't with there wings he did devise
^^d these he hes appointed for to place
(...) one oposit to the Others face
^here after, should betuix there wings be gev'en
^^we truethfull ansvers from the God of Heaven
^^ich mercy Seat his Statuts do Command
love the golden crouned Arc to stand
Because decred he had and did ordane
The Testimony therein to remain.
Exodus 37. and 25.
^Almightie Moses for to make commands
Of Shittim wood, with cunning Craftes-mens hands
^^ised for his worship wenerable
(...) set Shewbread thereon a gold-clade Table
^^ose wright work wrought and fitly formed and mad
^^s all with gold ingravne and over-laide
^^d all above well fashoned and frett
^olden Croune like stoure de luces set
(...) lenght thereof set down, and hight, and bread
(...) these Supra noted Chapters Read
^hes causd likevise Goblets make of Gold
^fumes and Incense to preserve and hold
And Show Bread set upon that Tabled Board
Eternally to offer to the Lord.
Exodus 37. and 25.
^He Lord likewise heir Moses does direct
For Lights a Luminare for to erect
Candle-sticke as we may know be ours
^^ose bowing Branches seavne, bears up, seavn flowers
^^carie lights of flamming fires to be
^^pes in the Sanctuar' Incressantlie
^^ose metal shall be of the purest Gold
(...) Boules that shall about the Branches fold
(...) ^^oures, and Base, that bears upon the Ground
(...) so be of the fynnest to be fund
(...) and Snuff-dishes likewise Too
(...) be made, as God had shown him, how
(...) it thereon seavn lamps ay burning Bright
(...) to that, that is before it, Light
Exodus 37 and 30.
BEzaleel of Shittim vvood he takes
And thereof, their the Incense Alter makes
A cubit long in Length, the Breadth, so right
But raised higher Tuo, it was in hight
About, it crovned was, with gold above
The Lords command and Artes-mans Art t'approve
Round Bars, and rings, but ^^alters framed square
With gold wark garnished and over laid all whair
The Cupes that should perfumes and Incense hold
They were also of pure and perfect Gold
The pure perfumes and pleasant Incense too
He hes composed as the Apothecars do
And therewith filled, and fird, the Censers Their.
Whose sugared smell, pears'd and perfurnd the aer.
Exodus 38. and 27.
THe Altar of brunt offerings offreth next
To be entreated of into the Tex
Bezaleel by Moses so much praisd
To build began and ent'red, up to raised
Of Shittim wood the Bulk or Body was
And all o'reclad with coverlets of Brass
Five Cubits long, five Cubits broad: and hie
This Alter was, no more at all, but thrie
And all the Instruments, that there be named
And fit therefore, of Beaten Brass was framed
Also the Grate, that stood within it He
Knits like a net of wier most Cunningly
A Lav'r likewise he of the Wemens Glasses
Made: that the best, of Brass, for brightness passes
Exodus 39. and 28.
A Aron the Priests aparell they prepare
A goodly Garment glorious and fair
The Ephod of Gold blew silk and skarlet Read
Of Linning pure and purple for his head
The gold is wrought in wier and leanid out long
To Show and set it these silk-works among
Imbrodred were the Shoulders rund about
And curiously with nedle knots cast out
On evrie side thereof ane Onix stone
They set engraven with Israls name thereon
Which on the Shoulders of the Ephod stands
To bear a Record of the Lords commands
A Breast plate more they make the form four square
A piece of gold exceeding rich and rare
And thereupon enchace four rovves at once
Of pure, imprysable and precious stons.
Exodus 40.
GOd the all director Moses does direct
To rear the Tabernacle and it erect
And all the Appertenances that pertaind
Unto it to adduce them, he Ordaind
Into the first of months on the first day
He should it raise and longer naught delay
And as injoynd he was he thereto bringers
The Arc and all the other holy Things
And with the Veil wrought with imbrodred wark
He coverd closs and over-waild the Arc
Also he brought as order did require
The Table too and lights the Lamps with fire
Aaron investes his Sons, anoynts Them too
And what to serve, God should be done, did do.
Exodus 40.
THus, this was done, into the second year
After that They from Egypt did reteere
The Tabernacle seasd then Moses came
And set the Testimony in the same
Then with the veil he hes it closs up shut
^ovv soon the Arc therein was placed and put
^he merciseate above the Arc he placed
that with a Coronet of Gold was graced
^he Laver set Moses and Aaron both
^ith his two Sons to wash them therein goes
and than the court vpread enclosing round
Whairon the Tabernacle stood) the Ground
^oses at last the veil hung up lats fall
(...) in this work he finished hes all
And God above into a Cloud did hover
And all the work did over-vail and cover.
Exodus 40.
WHill as the Lord into a cloud above
The Tabernacle abode and did noght move
^hair the most glorious Glory of the Lord
^he Tabernacle filld all up and stord
(...) that for Moses their there was no place
(...) full of majesty divine and grace
^^ere was a presence heavenly and divine
(...) there the Glory of the Lord did shine
(...) when the Sun and day was down: the Cloud
(...) over the Arc and Tabernacle stood
(...) aproatching of the night a none
(...) of fire streams and clearly shon
(...) as by day into the darkest night
(...) camp was clear and in a lamp of light
Exodus 40.
THe moveing or night marching of the Cloud
To Isral was a certain Sign and Good
Ather vnstirrd to stay stand still and tarry
Or forward thence there Host and Camp to carry
But if it did ascend and higher moved
The Camp then forward martchd and more removd
But if it did descend, and there did stay
They martchd no more, but in there ludgings lay
And noght a foot, to fair, did they intend
Whill they it sie, begin again t'ascend
And when they journay should, remove, and rise
The cloud went on, before Them through the skies
By day into a Cloud and on the night
God was a fire, to show all Isr'all light.
Leviticus 9. Chap.
T'Approve the Priestly office is from heaven
A certain Sign and sure assenting gevin
Whill Aarons offering on the Alter lies
A Sacred flamme come flashing from the skies
And opinly in all the peoples eyes
Consumed and quickly eat the Sacrifice
The woundring Israleits all looking on
That Blais breathd from above brunt evrie Bone
The then beleiving host to humble it gois
And thankful thonghts to God again vpthrois
And publictly his prases there proclaim
For all the Blessings he bestow' on Them
The Prophets then for this there Thankfulness
The people present sanctify and bless.
Leviticus 10.
A'Rons tuo Sons Nadab and Abihu
A gross mis-deed before the Lord they do
A nonted once there office to exers
Out of presumption and a Sprit perverss
They proudl' aspire no rather they conspyre
To fill there Censers full of forran fire
And than advance and to the alter go
Never used their to offer incenss so
Contrary quyt unto the Lords command
That should have ever inviolable stand
But from the Lord a flamming fire forth flevv
That boldly brint and both the Brether slew
To shovv that God will noght beserv'd by waine
Unwise inventions of a vvorsely Brain.
(...)
THe judgments of the Lord thus sharply s^as'd
Upon these Brether that his Sp'rit displeased
unto the horror of the Hebrew host
that by there own delicts there Lives had lost
^or worshipping agains his divine will
upon them fell the inevitabill ill
^o teach all others that they ne^it presume
^ut of a Brain Fantastic filld with fume
^he Lords vine zard to work it otherwise
^or he directs and in his Law done lays
^hen these two mangled miserable men
^^r careed from the Congregation then
A sad and doolfull evidence for them
Both of there deeds, there Sin and Shame.
Leviticus 24.
Unto the Host was ane Egyptian man
But by his Mother of the Trib of Dan
that going out did so from duty row
that in the host he with an hebrew strove
and in the brall that was begun by Them
(...) Egyptian did the God of hosts blasphame
^hey take the man and him to Moses led
and then the Lord eftsoon to Moses said
^ause thou be brought that bold blasphemer out
and make the men that heard (then there about)
^^e Lord blasphemd, ley on there hands vpon-him
and then to death let all the Hebrews stone-him
Which instantly they execute and act
A fit reward for his unfaithful fact.
Deuterouomie 34. Chap.
THe Prophet Moses to Mont Nebo gois
From whence the Lord the promisd land him shois
that milk and honey flowing land the same
Which he so often had heght to Abraham
^^t only having sein it did declare
that he should nev're go ov're nor enter Their
^he Servand of the Lord then Moses dies
and buried be him into Moab lies
^^t never man yet lived to this day
that knew the place whair God did Moses lay
(...) hundredth years and to them twenty told
^hen he expired was the Prophet old
(...) Prophet such whose like yet never non
(...) Israel arose when he was gone
A Prophet full indew'd with heavenly Grace
(...) God conferrd with and knew face to face.
(...)
FAmiliar Moses with the Lord and lov'de
Before, from this mortelitie remov'de
That manfully, martch'd from the memphit lands
(Divinly aided) with the Hebrev bands
But the almighty eyeing ay his avvne
Albeit their Ductor, he had from them drawn
Yet to their Good, and Glory of his name
An oter Tutor, tenders unto Them
In Joshua courageously Inclinde
H' infunds morefire in his magnanime mind
And over his Isrel limited at large
Gave him the conduct, and the Captans Charge
Commanding and encouraging the man
To Ioyn the people and pas Jordan than.
Joshua 1.
THe worthy Duke, to this Command thus called
And Isrel general in State installed
God now again renevvs to cheer Them more
The promise of the promised Land before
He marks there marks from the wilderness
And from Mont-lebanon to Euphrates.
Thence maks the Sea there Bordour by the west
Where Phoebus Car declyns and runs to rest
Then says to Joshua that vvorthie Their
Yet to incress and kindle his Covvrage mair
Whill he shall Rule and Captane their Command
No heathen foe before his face shall stand
If as his Servand Moses night and day
H' observe his mandats and his Laws obey
Joshua 1.
TO incovvrage Joshua God renovvats
And often hies promisd aid he iterats
Yet with direction that he all his days
Keep his Commands and walk into his vvayes
The Captane than the Congregation all
He convocats and dois before him call
Indicting and directing Them that They
Be ready in their arms on the third day
To pas over Jordan that far famons flood
Neerby vvose Bankis Isreal's standarts stood
The Revbenits and Gadits dress also
Thongh seized on this hither side to Go
And willingly will venture with the rest
Whill each one of their portions be possessd.
(...)
WHill that the people a providing are
Victuals and arms for martching necess ar
^he Captain finds it fit to send before
^uo Speculators prudent to explore
^he people there Pou're purposes and places
^s is convement in such warlike Caces
^he Spies from Shittim send advance and go
and enters Rahabs house in Jericho
^ut yet these Spies are in there spying spyed
and Rachab to revveale Them temptd and tried
^earing her Countries futur fall and foil
^poynted Israel for a Prey and spoil
They on their promeses preserved are by her
And secretly vnsem they saife Retire.
Joshua 3. Chap.
TH'explorators aproatch the Tents tell there
The Cananits astomshment and fear
upon the nevvs the Sone of Nun commands
^he under afficiars of all the Bands
(...) pass and charge the people with povv'r express
^or to remove to be in readmesse
^ovvsone the Levits to be martch'd they mark
^^fore tuo Thousand cubits with the Ark
^hen Joshua the people all injoynes
(...) sanctify them selfs and lave their loins
(...) cause said he the Lord to morrow shall
^ork vvoundrously in presence of you all
Then to the Levit Priests said he avaunt
And go before vvs with the Covenant.
Joshua 3.
TO Joshua the Sone of Nun then said the Lord
I will advance Thee as avvovtchd my word
^^d as I with my servand Moses so with Thee
(...) thy advancement I will do said he
(...) Isrel then sage Josua did say
^'almighty martches you among this day
(...) for a Sign this shall you understand
that he shall give you all the Heathen land
(...) Jordan whill the Ark advance before you.
^^rtch after on and going God adore you)
^^vvsoon the Priests shall touth the rivers brink
(...) bears the ark the Billovvs bak shall shrink
(...) they before that did the gravel cover
(...) part them self to give you passage over
Joshua 4. Chap.
THe Arc and Priests in Jorden dry
Whill all the people perrilless pass by
O woundrous walk a deed divine and vounder
Done only by the Thrower of the Thunder
Then Joshua in Jorden, did command
Eternally as Tropheas there to stand
And to be witness of that woundrous wark
On that same place where paused the Priests and Ark
Twell men of the twell Tribes twell Stones to Rear
And then twelf other on there backs to bear
To Gil-gall thence but to the same effect
And to remember this These their t'erect
But th'Ark and Isrel dry-foot thus past throw
The flood again as it was wount did flow.
Joshua 5. Chap.
THe Stones vp-reard t'averr the verity
Of there strange passage to post eritie
The rumor of which admirable Chance
The hearts of all the heathen lords so lance
And strangely struck them stupefied and stonird
So that never shall there Curage be Reconird
Tha' amazed look like men already lossd
And whill they hear but of the Hebrew host
The Lord commands that circomcision than
Be used to evrie Hebrew mail or man
On whom the hallowed incisers hand
Has noght bein since they come from Egypt land
An Angel armed to Nuns sone then apeard
Conferrd confirmed him and his Courage Reard.
Joshua 6. Chap.
THe army and the Ark through Jorden go
Just ore against the Town of Jericho
And martch'd whill that directed they set down
And drew there Trenches round about the Tovne
The grave Commander that the Camp conducted
How to attempt it by the Lord instructed
The people then again and Priests he taught
How that, that City circled should be caught
Seven Priests with Ram-horne Trumpets past before
The Ark and th'Armie followd whill They Roar
Seavn days they compassed the City so
And as injoynd so often about it go.
Then on the seavnt they sound and showted all
Whill that vntvich'd flat fell the City wall:
(...)
THe city entered as the Lord had doomd
(Metals except) and all with fire consumed
The slain of both the Sex into the Streets
Together in the Gore defyld there fleets
Yet Rachab is and hers by promise past
Preserved saifly in that publict wast
The Spies that in there pity she praeservd
No less with love into the sacked her servd
For all saif she t'inevitable Ire
Were sold and sold to slaughter sword and fire
There all are execrable and accurssd
That therein are or that therein were nurc'd
And all from heaven are curssd, and curssd shalbo
That Jericho mynds to Re edify.
Joshua 7. chap.
A Chan an Isralite Religious
Proves reprobat and Sacrilegious
Wherefore Gods grief to grow and glow begins
Against all Isrell for his secreit Sins
His Ire inkendled thus so boyles and burns
That from their help his holy hand it turns
As they tried true whill that with Ai they fight
With few their greater force is put to flight
Whill Joshua before the Lord did fall
And with his Cries contreit for help did call
The Lord reveals the Sin and Achan is
Upon confession he and what was his
His Blood his Brood his house and all at once
Brint up with fire and felled to death with stories.
Joshua 8. chap.
A Chan thus punished and thus Isrell purged
The Lord apeasd, he Joshua after urged
And said my Servant fant not dread nor doubt
Thou of my Aid but be of courage stout
And now with all thy men of arms arise
To Ai advance and it with power supprise
For I have gevn thee therein evrie thing
The Substance their the Subjects Croune and king
And there with do, for I command thee so
In all as thou hes done with Jericho
Then by ane ambush he hes foiled them
Then Town supprisd and firde, syn spoiled Them
The King is caught alive, and after he
As God gave charge was hanged upon a Tree.
(...)
THus that they triumphd by Gods helping hand
Well did the chief of the Ebrevs understand
Wherefore that wise Commander wills that they
Thankful therefore and grate to God be ay
In Ebal mont they then ane Altar raise
Noght hambred on with hands his name to praise
And offers thereon offerings as they know
Agried with his will and Moses Law
The altar raisd and God there praisd the Grave
Grand Captane then the Law on Stons did Ghrave
And therein Blissings, Cursins all and Threats
He publictly to them reads and repeats
Into the praesens of the people all
The Stranger as the hebrew natural
Joshua 9. chap.
AI thus sacked, some nightbour kings to those
As open Enemies to Isrel rose
But lo from Gibeon disgvysed some
As messingers unto the army come
Israel by deceat to Circemvein
And perrill by that policy praeveen
With Garments torn and but with Tags of Shoes
That they are Straugers these disgvysed does
Make Isrel think that They be come to Crave
A leagve of Love and friendship feign would have
The Suit (deceavde) the Guyd of Israel grantis
The Gibonits deceitful Supplicants
But they detected after for the same
The duke to drudgrie Them and their Condamne
Joshua 10. chap.
FYve Kings together with vindictive Spreet
Their warlike force and armies all vneit
And out agains the tovne of Gibeon sped
That Irues with Israls head contracted had
But unto him submissive Suits they send
The he is foederats would now defend
Who for their Causes were inclosd about
With five Kings forces strong men stern and stout
Then Isrels Captane with his Cohorts rose
To free the Gibonits and fight there foes
whom in his violent and wrakfull wraeth
He vterly undoes and drove to daeth
And such as fled defeated with his force
Feld in the flight with Hail a fate fand worss.
(...)
THe day whereon these armies where o'rethrovvne
The Lord his great Love hes to Israel shovvne
A vvoundrous day and admirable one
Whose like before nor since was neuir none
At Joshua his prai'r and request
The great Governor God Almightiest
A whole day stayed the^ Sun in Gibeon
And moon into the valey Aialon
And not a point come dovne declynd nor changed
Whil Isrell was on all there foes revenged
The Kings they kill when all the slaughter ended
And then the five upon five Trees suspended
Kings, Cities, Subjects of the Hills and all
The plains beside subdued before them fall.
Joshua 11. chap.
A Crowd of Kings by south east, west and north
Martch (for to force the force of Isrel) forth
There numbers great near out of number be
As Dust on earth or Sand into the Sea
But God bad Isrel be of Courage Good
And fear no force nor men nor multitude
For he before that time of day to morrow
^laine and consumed to there shame and sorr^w
Before the face of victor Isrell shall
Deliver Them forced and defeated all
Israel confident upon his word
^As well they might) assaults them with the Sword
And horribly maks havok of their host
In killing from the meanest to the most.
Joshua 11.
AS Joshua from that Attempt reteard
For such victorious Chances Inly Cheard
The Town of Hazor he took in his way
And all the Inhabitants (non saife) did slay
Yea all from Halak montane unto Gad
That by Hostility he takin had
Therein a living soul nor fighting man
As God commanded him he left not than
For heardned was from heavne there hearts that they
^ight from the earth in vvraeth be vvippd away
^f Anakims the Cities so he Sacks
And utterly them selfs with wars he wracks
The Conques then h' amongs the Tribs divyds
and then in peace sins wars their the Ebrevs byds
(...)
VIcto^rious Isrel by the Lords assistance
Agains there great and all there forced ressistance
Of Cities, Valaes Montans and the Plains
But fear of force, possessd in peace remains
On Iordains eastren side and on its west
By South and North they peaceably possessed
No petty portion nor a little Land
Did Joshua and Israel command
The Lord their Battles and all subdevv'd
And noght their forces well enough they knew it
It is lands their Swords in their subjection brings
The subjects armed of ane and threttie Kings
The Hebrevs by his help there hosts orethrew
And all their Kings consumed killd and slew.
Joshua 13. chap.
THe Lord called Joshua and to him told
That he was weak with years and waxed old
And yet much land remaind and Lordships many
Vnentred with and vnpossessd with any
Therefore the Lord he hes enjoynd him their
And how he should devide them did declare
To give nine Tribs whole portions he commands
And unto thrie to give but half part lands.
Since Moses unto Ruben and to Gad
On this side Jorden gev'n a portion had
Ilk Trib its martch there sevrally is shown
That each of them might know what was their own
To Levi yet no foot of Ground he gave
But ordaind Them the Sacrifice to have.
Joshua 14. Chap.
THe Land of Canaan divided aff
Among the former nine Tribs and a half
Caleb the constant Kenezeit, the same
That entered first the Land to Nuns son came
And said to him now forty years and more
His since unto Moses dead before
God spoke our God most great and Glorious
In Cadesh-bernea concerning us
Then he that day swore by the almighty God
To give us that whereon our feet should trod
Wherefore my Captane godly grave and Sage
I crave the same now for my heritage
Which Joshua gladgly grants and Caleb blessd
And him and his with Hebron hes possessd
Joshua 20. Chap.
THe Lord directed Joshua as Judge
T'apoynt with Isrel Cities of Refudge
(He speak the people and protests and They
Obtempre and the will divine Obey)
For such as do by accident or chance
Unwillingly or yet by Ignorance
Kill and cut aff by force and blood a Brother
An Israleit yea yet or any other
Where they may faif and sure preserved be
(Whill the high Priest livand then depairt and die)
From the Revenger of the slain and than
He may return unto his house again
So did the Lord Relief for these ordain
That any man, as is foreshowne had slain.
Joshua 22. Chap.
TO Reuben and to Gad and to Manasses Heirs
Joshua his Kins-man Patriots declares
That as the Lord and Moses had commanded
They faithfully had with there Bethren banded
And naught forsook Them whill they were possessd
Of all the promeist Land in Peace and rest
Therefore go with the blissing of the Lord
To your possessions upon Iordans Board
But care to live my Brether I befeech
As do is our Law allow instruct and teach
Bak they return and built an Altar by
The river brink and renders reasons why
Howbeet the Tribs therewith took first offense
Yet having heard them with the deed dispenss.
Joshua 23. Chap.
NOw Joshua waxd old, by Age infirm,
Into the faith the Tribs for to confirm
Exhorts them gravely, all with one accord
The serve sincearl' obey and low the Lord
He tells them there how often for them he faught
And to that Day what for them he had wrought
He shows his promises were all perfected
And to his glore and to their good effected
Therefore h' entreats Commands them and dois pray
That ever his will and Bidding they obey
And tells them if they do declyne and swerve
And unto Idol Gods bovv down and serve
Lest be him to the fury of their foes
^^^he will vvex them with a Thousand woes.
Judges 1. Chap.
NO sooner Judah was installed into
The rulers room when he began to do
And presently with all his Men of arms
He stricks up stoutly shrill and loud alarmes
And with kene-dagd unconquerable Courage
He forced his foes and did their Country forage
There King Adom-bezek he hes caught him
And his own lesson learnd to others taught him
For as his form was to afflict his foes
He cutts from him his Thumbs and points of Toes
A just reward for Tyranes he confessd
That sev'ntie Kings himself had so distressd
The Lord heirfoir his fate hes framed so
Conformly to be used by his foe.
Judges 2. Chap.
THe Lord with Isrel discontended stands
That they with Can'an had contracted bands
Yet penitent they do repent therefore
And for there fault and trespass d^^e deplore
Through all the Life and days of Io^^ua
And of the Elders that out-liv'de de them all
They did noght disobey nor yet debord
But served sincearly by the Law the Lord
Yet howsoone he and they departed all
From true divine to worschip false they fall
The Lord then left them? and what then, were They
But unto Spoilers all, a spoill, and prey
Left be the Lord what be Impires tho great
Naught but a morsel to a meaner State
Judges 3. Chap.
FIve Princes of the Philistims remaind
Yet in the Land unforced or constraind
With whom the Ebreus (to Gods will averss
Join, Marie, League with them, and do converss
So God forget in Bal'am they belive
And unto Asheroth there worship Give
Wherefore the Lord gave over and sold them has
To Chushan King of Aram in his wrath
Where they in Bondage bid and serve seavn years
As in the story penned more large apeares
But when they cried to God and did repent them
A Savior to save them soon he sent Them
So did deliver quickly Israel
By Kenaz-sone there Captane Oth'niel.
Joshua 24.
YEt Joshua the peoples Sprits to pierce
Does unto them Gods money he ps^ch^arss
And if unthankful tells them to their shame
Partic'larly what he hes done to Them
Then heartly them exhorts at home abrod
And elsewhere else for to give glore to God
With free and full consent then ansverd They
Our God his voice and word they would obey
Then covenants he with them their that day
And to be witness of their wows for ay
Beneath an growing oak or olive Tree
For evr to stand a Stone up pitched he
It heard your vvovves he said if that you Trod
A wry and after do deny your God.
Joshua 24.
THen all their Business as each one list
They go about liceneed and desinist
Now that Grand Captane Joshua selected
By God and to conduct his Hosts dir^cted
Who with great valor and great wisdo^^ie to
The Lords directions dreadlesly did d^
And virtously upright in all his waves
^vv'de to that Hour before the Lord his days
The hundredth tent year running of his age
^eath puts a point unto his pilgrimage
This worthy wise this Captane bold and brave
This gracious Judge this Stats man great and grave
With Isrels woeful all and weeping eyes
In Timnath nn Mont Ephraim buried lies.
Judges 1. Chap.
THat worthy Joshua the Hebrevs head
As is declaird before defunct and dead
^et God his own Elect he nevr deserts
^if they contim we his with holy hearts
^ut duly dois for there support provide
^or he into his Isrel gives a Guide
^onveniently to govern and conduct them
^^d into all that a pertains i'instruct them
^^t they will needs to him cry for and clame
(...) Captane and Command over Them
(...) then apoynts that Judah shall command
^^^^hold the rains of Rule into his hand
(...) he exalt him will and give him might
(...) come and quell the Cananits in fight.
Judges 3. Chap.
WHen Ehud had the King of Moab killed
And with ten thovvsands fall, the field-had filld
Of Moabits that in the Battaill fell
By heaven assisted-hands of Israel
Shamgar a goad-groome and a Rustic Boore
Guyded by God was nixt there Governor
And so with sacred strenght and stomak stord
Of Philistims that Iov'as Jacob shord
And only with his oxen Goad o'rethrevv
And (who but horror hears't) sex hundredth slew
The Israleits they are preserved so
From fury of the Philistim there foe
God th'Ebrevs heathen foes their hostile anger
Cooled by a Goad-groome courage silly Sanger.
Judges 4. Chap.
DEbora judging Israel sent to war
Barak that Sis'ra did debell and darr
And with ten thousand Isralits in fight
All Iabins power did foil and put to flight
Then Sisra fled on foot and e^ter vv^nt
Traind by a woman Iael to hir^ Tent
Who thristing there and after travel tired
To rest and ease him he a while desired
Entreating her his name noght to be wray
To any that demands for him that day
But when she sies him sleeping and at rest
To do a vvorthie deed this dame adrest
And drove a nail into his Tempels deep
So laid him in ane ever lasting Sleep.
Judges 5. Chap.
HEarken you Princes and do hear you Kings
The praisefull songs our Soul and voces singes
Unto Isreal's God before whose face
The earth dois shake and the Heavens do rain apace
The montains melt and leapt like lambs before him
Rise Barak rise and Debora adore-him
Debora up and Barak both arise
And give God praise that hes gevn you the prise
And force to foil, the Philistims, your foes
That for to raze, and ruin Israel, rose
Your Touns but trade lay desolate and vvast
And non by the Hie, but by the by vvayes past
Whill I Debora aided be the Lord
The foes of Jacob bet with Baraks svvord.
Judges 6. Chap.
ISrael often distressd, as often relvde
Be God, transgressd again and God have grievd
Herefore this Lord as in the lions Iaw's
Them in the danger of the Midian thraws
Where they in Bondage servitude and thrall
Seavn year from Den to den ar hunted all
There grain, there corns, there asses, net an Sheep
And what for to preserve there Lives they keep
When they (secure) thought surely to enjoy it
The Mid'anits, and Amalek distroy it
Then pitifully spoiled Isrel lies
Acknovvledging her miss for mercy cries
And God evr gracious their groans he hears
And by a Prophet, checks them, and he cheares
Judges 6.
When God upon the peoples penitence
Had be his Prophets shown Them there offense
And often his Grace, to Them so often ingrat
When wickedly they had praevaricat
His Angel yet apeares to Gedeon
^n Oprah by ane Oak Ioash-his-^^ne
^ndewed with his Grace he tells him than
The Lord was with him strong and valiant man
And does command him in that strength and might
^or to go forth and Isrel free by fight
^e craves a Sign and God gives by a fleece
^oth wet and dry (noght that faiznd ane of Greece)
A double ane, so Gedeons faeth confermes
And straight agains the Midanits he arms
Judges 7. Chap.
THe Lord heir to the host of Hehrevves shows
That his and noght their force, there foes ore throws
^or yet with multitudes off men will he
^^bdue and dissipat there Encinie
^Vherefore he Gedeon to chufe commands
(...) that shall lap the water with there hands
^^d noght those that he in their drinking sies
^^on the water brinks to bow their knies
(...) all of these that laped at the most
^^^^mber was three hunder in the host
(...) Gedeon with these three hunder than
(...) do^ne agains the men of Midian
(...) ^itchers, lamps, and with his Trumpets soundes
(...) there hearts and all there host confoundes.
Judges 8. Chap.
THe Ephramits proud through there povv'r in pride
With Gedeon there Captane chief they Chyd
But in depressing his own deeds he rases
What they had done, and so there Spleen apases
And told them he but vanquished the men
But they both took and killed then Princes then
Than he disposd to pass over Jorden ^^ood
From them of Succoth for his men sought food
Which they refuisd wherefore when God (he wovves)
Zebah and Salmunn' in his hands he throvves
To be revengd and for there ansver rash
In vvoods with Briers and Thorns to tear there flesh
In Penvel too, resuised as a foe
He heghts condignly to acquyt there no
Judges 8. Chap.
HEre Gedeon with his host over Jordan gois
And Zebah and Zalmunna cought his foes
Where fyftein thousand armed ar (in there host)
With this three hunder skatred killed and erossd
Succoth and Penvel promised before
There men with Briers and Thorns he vvhippd and tore
There Elders: and there citizens he slew
And therefore promised forteless ore threvv
Unto the captive Kings then he converts
And perd with da^th there deeds and there deserts
For they in Tabor pitilesse had spilld
His Brethers blood and cruelly them killd
But be the Lord made powerful and strong
He freed Isrel and revenged her wrong
Judges 8. Chap.
Now Isrel by God guyding Gedeon
Deliuerd are and fred from all there fo^n
They grate in thankfulness I think there Love
Thus they will to there Captane prudent prove
Come Gedeon said they and be our King
And over vvs after Thee thy Sons shall regne
For warr-like worthy Thou and valiant Man
Delyverd vvs from men of Median
No God forbid again said He that I
Ore mine mount up, mint, or presome so hye
The sacred holy and the heavenly povv'rs
Give you your Judges, Guids, and Governour^
None of my Sons, nor Ioash-Gedeon
Shall regne over you no, but the Lord alon.
Judges 8. Chap.
WHill thus they urge him to become there King
He does entreat them for ane other Thing
There earrings spoyld and partage in the pray
They gladly grant to give them and obey
Whereof an Ephod he did make and placed it
In Ophraah where Isrel changed and chased it
And vvandring after it a whoring went
To God ingrate and Dissobedient
Which after Ged'ons daeth was f^^d of all
His house and seventy Sons the ^at all fall
For Gedeon dead Israel went a w^y
Debord and dotted on Idolatry
For the Ephod after They did trudge and Trod
And Baal-berith they did make their God.
Judges 9. Chap.
ABimelech that was the hand maids Son
Of Isrels gallant gu^der Gedeon
With violent and with a wicked will
Did on an Stone his seventie Brether kill
And when these sevnty with the sword were slain
He caught the Croun and then perforce did reign
On Gezizzim then Iotham lifts his woce
And parables to Sechem did propose
That Gaal Ebeds Sone in arms and Ire
Against the usurping Tyranne did conspire
And goes againes Abimelech to fight
Whom in the field, he foyls and dryves to flight
And is at Tebez, by a woman wounded
Then by his page, thereto desird, confounded
Judges 10. Chap.
THat fratriced the vsurpinh Tyran dead
Hurt with a woman's hand upon the head
Whereat disdaneing in a frantic Rage
Therefore he will dispatchd be by his Page
Then Tolapuah's-dodo's sone, that day
^n Israel began the sword to sway
And under him They twenty thrie years out
Had peace, for he, was pious, prudent, stout
^^t he deceast; to Judge them Iair rose
and Isrels galay he to govern gois
^^ereat the Heline he stands and stoutly steires
(...) guyds it Gravely tuo and tuenty years
(...) Judged in Justice and he svayd the sword
(...) the direction of the divine word.
Judges 10. Chap.
I Air expird, the people foully fall
And vorship vainly Ashtaroth and B'al
With sin and shame, there Souls and Lives they load
Whill they do bovv to evvrie pagan God
Wherefore inkendled was and set on fire
Against them then Gods-all everting Ire
And they are hurled by him into the hands
Off th'Ammonits and the Philistim Bands
Who aughtene years, press wex and them constrain
Beyond the River Jorden that remain
The Ammonits, they martch over in there might
Against Boniamin and Judah for to fight
So Isrel for her sin (deserving more)
And Idol worship is tormented sore
Judges 11. Chap.
When Is'aks sons did for there Sins repent
Gods kindled vvraith is quenched and did re^ent
And Iphtah he ane outcast be his Brother
The Sone and seed too off ane whorish mother
Whom they depisd and had before refuild
Now they to be there Guide and chieftan chuisd
Instated Iphtah whill he vndertaks
With Ammon war a mad rash vvovv he maks
To Sacrifice to offer up and burn
Whom first he victor meets at his return
Up gois he then against them and the Lord
Forced them perforce fall under Iptahes sword
But see a triumph dolorous and sorry
By the said sequel off the sacred story.
Judges 11 Chap.
VVHill this grand Captane this great vict'rie go
And money Souls in twenty Cities smot
From Aroer to Minnith evrie man
Were conquered, killd and ovverthrown than
Yet this victorious Glorious Iphtah Lo
The Triumph of his wars hes turned to vvo
His only daughter in his Home retreits
T'appland his victorees her Father meets
Whose vvievv recalled his vvovv and sternly touch
His tinder heart that he amazed much
Laments and out of seasone sorrovvs now
For his too headless, rash and witless now
Yet resolute he sealed what he had said
And Immolats the pure and spotless maid
Judges 12. Chap.
THe Ephramits in Israel in there numbers
To confident raise and incress new Cumbers
And noght with Iphtah only on there perrell
But to there own undoing ruin quarrel
And all in arms they will insplene and spite
Burn up his house, and with there Captane fight
Then Iphtah all the men off Gilead
He raisd that able to bear arms he had
And Ephramits defate to let them know
He was there Master by there overthrow
And two and fourtye Thousand at that time
Perishd of Them for there presumptuous Crime
And sevne years after that his Reign began
But once unwise departs this worthy man
Judges 12. Chap.
IPhtah deceast Ibzan the Beth-lemit
Sevn years in Isrel fatt and Judged it
And threttie Sons and threttie daughters he
Begot a populous Posterity
Expird this Judge in Bethlem buried lies
Nixt Elon judging ten years did arise
And after daeth in Aialon interrd
Then to his place nixt Abdon is preferrd
And he had forty Sons, and threttie Oyes
(When he to Rule and Judge in Isrel gois)
That as it were to express there povvar passes
And daily rod, upon the Colts of Asses
In Isrel then this Abdon Iudgd eight years
And after waxing weak and aged expires.
Judges 13. Chap.
YEt Isrel still did his old Bias sollovv
And in the weels of his vain worship vvallovv
Wherefore the Lord of hosts deliverd him
To fly and fall from the Philistim
But o the vounderfull great Grace of God
Tho they walk wickedly and by ways Trod
And hold as naught the honor of his name
Yet low and kindness he did threap on them
And by his Angel unto Man'aths barren Pheere
With Promise of a Sone he does appear
Who Izaks seed from Philistims shall free
(...) he a Nazarite vnrasd shall be
The strongest then of men was Samson borne
those strength into his Tresses stood vnshovvne.
Judges 14. Chap.
THe Sone of Man'ath of the Trib of Dan
Indevvd divinly 'bovve the Strength of man
Whill he to Timnath went to woo he did
A Lion tear all like a Tinder kid
Into whose Boulk he some time after sies
With honny sweld a humming swarm of Bees
Whereof he eats and to his mar'age Gone
Ane emblem dark there Samson did propon
But to resolve't solisted was his wife
Which after grevv the ground and stirrd the strife
That money Soul and Philistim hes slain
And such as never could be agreed again
Whill being blind a house full he orethrevv
And with himself all the Philistims slew.
Judges 15. Chap.
SAmson the Sone of Man'ath now at length
As he did grow God blessd and gave him strength
And stirred thereby to marye was inclynd
And took to wife a Philistim be kind
But in his absence to wrong him they
To his Companz'on gave his wife away
VVerefore into the harvest time of wheat
Three hundredth foxes by the Tails he knet
And fire brands fixed fast betuixt each tuo
Than to the fields of the Philistims so
He drove them to their wheat and standing corn
That quickly knidled all and did them burn
There Rickes there vine yards and there olives all
Before the fury of the fire they fall.
Judges 15.
THe Philistims inflamm'd with rage and Ire
For setting of there vines and Corns infire
With resolutionn all in arms arose
And for to be revenged on Samsom gois
Who tho his Brether band him with a Cord
Yet strengthened with the povvar of the Lord
From Etan Rock when he descends his Bands
Like flax he brak that were about his hands
And armed but with a Iavv-bone of ane ass
Did to encounter all there army pass
A Thousand there a wounder to be told
Dead dang he down, and felled before him fold
But paind with thrist he prays and God then braks
A Tooth and of the Iavv a fontaine maks.
Judges (...). Chap.
SAmson gone down to Gazra was bevvrayd
And by them their to force him was for laid
But he into ane Harlots house did sleep
To midnight whill they watch and ward did keep
Than up he rose and by maigne strength extorts
And from there hinges heissd there City ports
And vnamated martched to the mount
Which does that holy hill of Hebron front
And after this his fancies does him move
One Dalila for to affect and Love
Wha tho he had from God, Gifts greater Gevne
Nor all the heathen that liv'de under hev'ne
Yet did his woman's wicked wit supprise
And Samson sold unto his Enemies.
Judges 16.
THe Philistims with his so matchless might
So often undone destroyed and forced in fight
And dreading dangers and Events much worse
Will do be frand that they could not with force
For Delila they do intise to Try
Wherein the virtue of his strength did ly
Thrice urged this vanton Samson to revveall
And he so often, his Secrets did conceall
But with her flatrie far overcome declares
The treasure of his Strength stood in his hairs
Which by her Cunningly cut off and shorn
Blind by his foes a mockrie made and skorne
Yet prays and with himself by strength extreme
O'rethrovves the house and thovvsands killed of Them
Thus with the Philistims he fought and fell
When he had twenty years judged Israel.
Judges 16.
THis Man by God praepromisd er his Birth
Incomparably strongest on the earth
That often unarmed among his armed foes
Men multituds and hudgest hosts o'rethrois
Yea only with the Iavv bone of an ass
Did Camps cut dovne as Syth-men shears the grass
VVhill constant he to his Creator cleaves
And noght his Lord to him so librall leaves
No wit could vvn no no nor valor wrong
Nor any croft ore come this Champion strong
But having blabd the Secrets of his heart
This facil Samson did the Lord desert
Wha to his foes, and by a woman then
A Prey become as other common men
Judges 17. Chap.
ANe Ephramit the moneis that before
H'abstracted from his mother did restore
Wherefore she had, all the surrepters first
(Whom now she blessd) bann'd bitterly and Cursed
And these praeordaind to ane use profane
She gives them to that Idol-vse again
The worship so prophand, the Law she braks
And with these moneis Idely Idols maks
An Ephod Michah then maks in his house
And consecrats his Sone Religious
There was no King in Isrel in those days
Wherefore they all praevaricat, and strayes
And but regrait for Sin regard of Shame
Did and Commits what best contented Them.
Judges 18. Chap.
THe Trib of Dan five men send out to Try
The Territors that in Mont-Ephraim ly
For fully noght were they as all the rest
In Can'an off there Partages possessd
And finding't for them with sex hunder men
They martchd to Michahs Inn in Ephraim then
And th'Idols fand and th'Ephod in his house
There with a Levit Priest Idolatrous
All which they took and as there prise and pray
They there with unto Laish went therd way
Which they supprise and fird brint down to dust
And slew the men that no such ill mistrust
The town they built again and called it Dan
And worshipped there Michahs stolen Idols than
For in these days no King in Isrel reign
And they did all as what they would tho wrang.
Judges 19. Chap.
NO King the sword that day in Isrel swayd
Nor non the Lords command nor Law obayd
As in a beastly bad abuse was seen
Upon a Levit wife or Concubene
From Beth-lem Judah unto Ephraim home
The Levit with wife to Geb'eah come
Whair multitud^ where they werludg'd repair
And monstrously yea in humanly Their
Avickedness beyond invention used
And vitiously all night the vife abusd
Whill on the morrow so they did her wrong
Her husband finds her dead laid all a long
Who to the Tribs did send her cut in parts
To venge her vvrong to move there manly hearts.
Judges 20. Chap.
THe Tribes the mangled martyr having seen
They as one man at Mispeth does convene
Four hunder thousand men before the Lord
Which valerous was for to wield the sword
And did demand the men that wroght this same
From Benjamin that they might punish them
But they maintaind the wrong and did one day
Off Isrel two and twenty Thousand slay
And on the nixt they them again o'rethrew
And were of Isrel aughtein Thousand slew
But humbly when they to the Lord did pray
Then Benjamin they bet down the third day
And did the abused Levits wrong revenge
When from there Sins they to the Lord did change.
Judges 21. Chap.
WHen under Isrels sword and almost all
The Benjamits killed did succumb and fall
Yet Totaly to raze and ruin more
That Tribe to God solemnedly they swore
Never to converss nor live with them there lives
Nor daigne to give their daughters to there vives
Yet were they sorry that there fury fell
Had thus lapp'd off a limne from Israel
They therefore to these Benjamits prescrives
^y force a form to furnish Them with vives
^our hunder maids in Gelead unslain
They save and only for their use ordain
And into Shiloh willed Them at there fest
To ly in wait and ravish Them therest.
Ruth. 2.
CHilions Ruth, the Moabitish maid
To Naomi her mother in Law she said
^et me unto his field go glean I pray
^^to whose eyes I favor find this day
^hen to the field of Boaz she is gone
and there behind the Reapers gleaned on
^hen Boaz there is come from Beth-lehem
whom they do Bless, and he rebresseth Them?
^e asks who Ruth was then, and one does show
^^at She Naomi's daughter was in Law
^^om he did cherish much and bids her still
(...) his maids glean after as she will
and so her forms affects that syn he takes-her
(He was her kins-man) and his wife he makes-her
1 Samuel Chap. 1.
TVo wives the Ephramit Elkanah had
Ane bearing and, ane barren in his Bed
The fruitful used Penninah with reproatch
The barren Hannah to up brayd and broatch
Wherewith She inwardly (affirms the Text
Of times tormented, weried was, and wext
Herefore to God that all afflictions Souzes
Makes sweet her plaints in prayer forth she povvr^s
Who heard her Groans (tho Ely much mistook
Her gesture, and as drunk did her rebook)
And grants her Suit, inconment requird
A Sone called Samvel, so much desird
Whom as before, awowed be her word
A Nazarite again gives to the Lord
1 Samuel 2. chap.
WHen Hannah had all finished and done
The Temple Rites in offering there her Sone
This holy Hanna did her heart strings tune
That she might with her woves her voice conjune
And into sweet and sacred sobir lays
She sang her makers mercies, Pow're and praise
His majesty and money mighty deeds
That all in heav'ne and all on earth exceeds
And with a delicat and dainty aer
She quaverd clearly his great wounders their
The Lord a Prophet then to Eli sends
Who bitterly the Priest remiss repr'ends
That slovvly checkd or never chastizd child
Who wicked vicious wanton were and wild
1 Samuel 3 Chap.
THe word was precious than the Scripture says
For there no vision was in Elis days
And as he lay that time his eyes waxd dim
And Samuel served before the Lord for him
Then sleeping, Samuel by the Lords called Thrice
And he to Eli rinns when he did rise
For so did Samvel before the word
Revealed was unto him of the Lord
Yet God again came to him and foresho'es
Eli, his house, and Childrens over throves
For God was grievd with him that he would noght
Chastize his Childring as a father ought
And what God spoke noght in a point he spaird
But it to Eli every jo^e declord.
1 Samuel 4. Chap.
^He Sons and Seed of Abra'm Ifrael
Are spurrd and spokin to by Samuel
^^n past they forth t'oppugne the Philistims
(...) they are forced and slaughted for there sins
^^d in that fight four thousand of them fels
(...) the iniquities of Israel
^^en to the camp the Covenant they brought
^^d once again with the Philistims foght
^^ho they were affrayd, dreadful and doubts
^^en for the Arks approatch the people shouts
(...) with there power the Ebrevs they Repel
^^d threttie thousand of there foot men fell
The Ark supprisd, Hophin and Phineas fall
And Eli brok his neck for loss of all
1 Samuel 5. chap.
^He Irreligious Philistims and Rash
To Dagon did, half fish, and half of flesh
^^e sacred Arc and Covenant transport
^^in a Triumph and a braving sort
(...) God agrees noght with the devil of hell
(...) Dagon on his face before it fell
(...) to try masterles they mont again
(...) by the holy Arc sets that profane
(...) God can noght by Belial abyd
^^r Satan have a consort by his syd
(...) it was fallen there found upon the morn
^^e head and hands from it cut off and torn
And whill to Gath and Ekron they have sent it
Of Ashdod They with th'Emrods were tormented
1 Samuel 6. chap.
^Ev'ne months among the Philistims remaind
The sacred Arc with heathen hands prophaind
^^en with there Priests the people purposd take
(...) send the Covenant to Israel back
(...) that they plagved were they all perceave it
^^d sies they had noght health whill that they have it
(...) empty home they do noght fittest hold
^^d therefore does there with send gifts of gold
^^^pt in the form of Emerods and Myss
(...) with Idolaters God for a price
(...) gifts of gold would pass over and dispenss
(...) ^here vain vorship with the wild offense
^^aine and unwise Idolaters think no
(...) can be gloz'd gulled and beguyled so
When feftie thousand of there lives he took
(...) cashly dared in the Ark to look.
1. Samuel 7. chap.
THe Ark of God, that the Philistims fet
The Israleits again in Kiriath set
And twenty year (a long time there) abod
In Kirath-searnn the Ark of God
The Prophet Samuel the People prays
To leave there lewd, shameful, and sinful, ways
And do no more, as they had done, debord
Nor with there wickeduess provock the Lord
Then the Idols, Ashtaroth, they put away
And after wous the Lord alon t'obay
Before there God grants and confessd there Sin
And with the Philistims to fight begin
But God disperssd them with affright and wounder
By the rud rumbling of a roaring thunder
Then are they smitt'n slanghtered and fell
By the daeth dinting sword of Israel
1. Samuel 8. chap.
SAmuel, his Sons his place for to supply
Over Isre'l Judges then appointed he
Who strangers from his stepps extremely strayes
And wrongously perverted Justice ways
There hands with Bribs defiled were and filld
And wrested all as there affections willd
The People to there father then complain
And crave a King to rule over them and Reign
Whereat he discontent to them declares
What under Kings shall be there Cross and cares
Yet still the people they do press him ever
And to have a Prince (importunat) persever
Who as the Lord directed him there clame
Yet grieud for them jngrait grants unto them.
1. Samuel 9. chap.
KIsh, Saul, his Sone, to go in quest commanded
After some asses, from the Rest disbanded
He with a servand only with him They
Did money Province pas, and went much way
But travel tint, there walking was in vain
Nor could they get the Asses strayd again
When they had Shalmi sought and Iemini
To Ramah-Zophim their, went he, and he
Then did the Servand Saul to search, advyse
That City where, was said a Seer lyiss
Which he agreed to go too and heard tell
There was that sacred Seer Samuel
Who by the Lord fore warnd Saul coming meets
Whom he to th'hie Place, to the feast juveets.
1 Samuel 10. Chap.
^Han Samuel Saul, had in the hie place plac'd-him
In the first Room, and first of all did feast-him
(...) on the Morn the nixt succeeding day
(...) Prophet Saul convoyed on his way
(...) by the knovledge of his Serving man
(...) sone of Kish t'inaug'rat he began
(...) from a viole with the Oil anointed
(...) privatlye as had the Lord appointed
(...) as he forvad on his journay setts
(...) Samuel Saul there some praedictions getts
^^^^ynted Saul is from himself estranged
(...) God to prophecy his heart hes choingd
^he peoples Sins the Prophet Samvel shavves
^^ul King again by sort the people draws.
1 Samuel 11. Chap.
^Ahash the Ammonite did interprise
To ruin Gile'ad and enraged did rise
(...) they of Iabesh unto Saul resort
(...) get against the Ammonits support
^^o quickly Jacob hes conveened then
(...) sight three hunder threttie thousand men
(...) by the morrow promisd to relive them
(...) naughty Nahash that did gall and grieve them
(...) host (a hudge on) he did pairt in three
(...) therewith up to Gil'ad marches he
^^erewith his valor by the morning watch
(...) Camp of Nahash careless he did catch
and fur'ously with force over whelmed them all
^r catchd, or killd, over threw, or made them thrall.
1 Samuel 12. Chap.
^He sacred Samvel be his mothers word
Before he was, divoted to the Lord
^^h his Integrity and Candor good
(...) Isrel tell and there Ingratitood
^^o there God and with a Grief declares
^^ft, so great, deliverances of thaires
^^h there unthankful gratelesnes again
(...) there presence he hes made most plain
(...) checked them chiefly for that foolish thing
^^hill God reigned over Them for to seek a King
(...) by a Miracle of Hail and Thunder
(...) them confessd, when there Trespass they ponder
(...) ^e to hold them be the Lord did heart them
(...) never would (if they did so) desert them.
1. Samuel 13. chap.
WHen Saul had ruld one year in Israel
And only Tuo he reigned there it fell
The Garrison that gnarded in the hill
Braw Jonathan did did them overcome and kill
Thairester Saul him self his trumpet blew
And all his men of arms tohether drew
Which fight and rumor of there friends defait
Flew to the Philistims with great regrat
Who threttie thowsaud Chariots, and more
Sex Thowsaud horsemen have armed out therefore
Whereat the Isralits in strait, affrayd
Dispersed and hiddin into Caverne stayed
But some past Jorden tho the land of Gad
And some affrighted fled to Giliad.
1. Samuel 13. chap.
LOon the People for te Prince his Sins
The wraeth of God to grow and glow begins
Saul would not stay whil Samuel come unto him
But sacrifice he will which did undo him
Wherefore the Prophet to this Timrous man
Denun'ct the Judgment of thy almighty than
And boldly told this Dissobedient
For contravening Gods commandiment
His glorions Croune, but lately, to him geven
Shall from his head, and house be quickly reven
And Isrel too, to the Philistim shall
Be in such slaverie, servitood and thrall
That Smiths, to sharp a Share, to till the grounen
Nor Sword, nor Spear in Isrel shall befunen.
1. Samuel 14. chap.
Courageous Jonathan does here conferr
On high attempts with his own Armiger
Then with the valor of there valiant hand
They tuo assault a strong Philistim band
A wounderfull of wounder to Relate
That tuo a Troop should as a front, defate
Iudeed it had been vounderfull if noght
The high Iehove for Jonathan had foght
Saul than by oath and Interdiction strait
The host too night inhibit hes to dat
But Jonathan knew not what was enacted
And therefore by the eating honey brack it
Before king Saul swore and awou'd in wraeth
That Jonathan should doubtless die the daeth
But all the People did with stand that he
That doughtely deliverd Them should die.
1 Samuel 15. Chap.
^He Prophet Samuel to Saril repairs
And what the Lord will have him do declares
(...) told him God had him anointed King
^^d for to prove more thankful for that thing
(...) wisly willed him to obey the word
(...) this most bountiful and loving Lord
^^e to tall slaughter and destruction than
(...) Amalek, vife, veuch, boy, beast, and man
(...) dois denvnce and Saul commands to slay
^^d vipt them from the world all away
^^en Saul eft soon the Sword of Israel drew
^^d all that race unto Havilah slew
(...) Agag spaird, there King and best of Beasts
(...) serve for Sacrifice and solemn feasts
But God agrieved for his great neglect
Did Saul by Samvel vterly reject.
1 Samuel 16. Chap.
^VHat God directed what Saul to do neglected
From grace herefore in Justice is dejected.
(...) miserable and wretched is there case
^o never so great that rins in Gods disgrace
^e holy Sp'rit of God the unhappy man
(...) his deserts, deserts and leaves him than
^^d in his Room an evil and wicked one
^^tortour the desarted Saul is gone
^^d when he violently wexed sits
(...) is advised with some Servands wits
(...) send for David on his harp to play
^^e fury of the rageing fendt' allay
Who whill he stood and sweetly played before-him
The foul Sprit stirrd not nor no more it tore-him
1 Samuel 17. Chap.
^Odless Goliath graceless great and grim
Isreal's foe the faithless Philistim
^^rmes with Blasphemies does brag and boast
^^d furiously affronts the Hebrev host
^^esh confiding and his worth in war
(...) Isrel does to fight and duel dar
(...) faithless fool agains the Lord he fought
^^d by a Boy was to confussonn brought
^^^ins the Lords elect the arm of Man
^^ke a Rotten reed and empty can
(...) Ishar's sone but after Isr'els King
^^^^ht with Saul's sword but with his sheepherd sling
^^at God blaspheamers tongue distempred stilled
(...) with no Cannon but a Stons cast killed
1 Samuel 18 Chap.
HEir Ionathans and David's love begins
Enduring both there days, that never Tvins
David's deserving and his Innocence
Attracted so, the affection of the Prince
That Soul to Soul, was kint so they affected
And dearly each, each other, evr respected
But hateful Saul, did David's worth invy
And money trams, did to entrap him try
But all the Fathers fellonous intents
The warly varning of the Sone, praevents
And David's fame, through famous facts arose
In felling the Philistims Isrels foes
Saul knew thereby, the Lord lov'de and mantaind him
And tho he dread him deadly yet disdaind him.
1 Samuel 19. chap.
THat reprobat King Saul invr'd to ill
The anointed of the Lord would David kill
And Jonathan his Sone directs the fact to further
And all his Servands to committ the Murder
But Jonathan did truly David love
And told him all, and did these Plotts disprove
Than Saul to slay him in his ludging sent
But Michals vvisdome, did his will, prevent
First She did lay ane Image in his Bed
And to b' obscure it with a carpet cled
And when they searched for David, she did say
That their her Lord sick and diseased lay
Yet by a window down she lets him go
And worthy David was delyverd so.
1 Samuel 20. Chap.
THe noble David in great danger brought
And by King Saul for to be slain often sought
From Naioh fled to Jonathan to plain
Of Saul's dispight to him and high disdain
Demanding deeply what misdone had he
And what his Sin was and iniquity
That he committed that his Fathers wraeth
Sought hotly his destruction and his daeth
But kindly Jonathan conforts and cheares-him
And re affirms the affection that he beares-him
And by three arrows shot suspectles Signs
Discovers Saul his Fathers fierce designs
Which madly did malicious Saul incence
Unto the slaughter of his Sone the prence.
1. Samuel 21.
When these tuo Princes had reneu'd there word
And Covenant of love before the Lord
David to Nob, to Ahimilech then fled
Where he was with the sacred Shewbread fed
And desolat of arms support did crave
And from the Priest god great Golias glave
Then he to Ashish past, and as he had
Distracted been, he faiznd, and made him mad
For hearing Achish servands of him say,
(...) this noght David, Ishays sone, said thai
That killd and slew, and unto thou sands ten
^or Saul on thousand did destroy of men
And herefore doubting of some forder dangers
He counterfits him fur'ous to these strangers.
1. Samuel 22. chap.
DAvid from Gath unto Adullam gois
To be their surer fensed from his foes
and when his Brether heard that he was their
With more distressd men they to him repair
(...) Mizpeth then, then he, to Hareth thence
^ent with four hundredth men for his defensss
^ul hearing then whair David did remain
and that he now past publictly and plain
^^eg did charge Ahimilech that he
(...) David both with meat and arms supply
(...) than his Servands that about him stands
(...) kill the Priest and all his house commands
(...) they refuisd to do it and draw there sword
(...) sacrifice those sacred to the Lord
But desprad Dog, that Doeg did belive
Kill cruelly there anghtie Priests and five.
1. Samuel 23. chap.
^Ob quyt destroyed, the Priests al killed saif one
That was to David with the Ephod gone
(...) Philistims then unto Keilah came
(...) proudly spoyld the Garners of the same
(...) David asked and did consult the Lord
(...) should smitt them that so Keilah shord
(...) Lord commands and he came to it and fought
(...) them, and, away there cattle brough
(...) Saul infists and yet will David slay
(...) ^od was with him and preserved him ay
(...) woods of Ziph saif he abode
(...) six hundredth guarded all by God
(...) ^onathan went to him too that wood
(...) ^^ard him kindly with his confort good.
1 Samuel 24. Chap.
SAul yet insistes and seekis out David still
Madly resolvd destroy him yet he will
O but whom God praeserves protects and keeps
Tho all the world invade securely sleeps
And tho Saul sought him with three thousand men
That in the Cave lay at Engedi then
God yet among the best of all his Bands
Saul hes deliverd into David's hands
For entering in that Cave to ease him their
David his lap unseen away did shaer
And cried if he, had been his foe, as thought
He might have killd him their and yet would noght
Nor ever should his heart nor hand accord
To touch nor kill the anointed of the Lord.
1 Samuel 24. chap.
WHen Saul had seen his cloak lap cutted their
And David as his Lord his life did spair
He knew the almighty that all men commands
Had then delivred him in David's hands
Tuiched then with senss of Sin and feeling deept
His wro^ghs to him, lift up his voice and weept
Than publictly professd that David had
Done good for evvil, to him, vnblessd, and bad
And willingly awov'd, avanc'd and Raisd
The worthy David's rightousness and praisd
His noble deed that spaird whill with his knyfe
He at his pleasure might have reft his life
And freely their confessd, he knew, he King
Sold be of Isrel after him and Reign
And therefore swore him after he was dead
For to be good and gracious to his seed.
1 Samuel 25. chap.
THat Judge and Prophet that in Israel
Ruld forty years, deceasd here Samuel
Then David wens down to the wilderness
Of Paran and from thence in his distress
To Naball in the Time of Shering sent
Ten youths to seek from him a suppliment
But clunish Naball David's grace abusd
For churl of churles he churlishly refuisd
And with a Judgment rash did both despyise
And David's messingers his meat denies
Whairfore the Prince resolved to revenge it
The gracious Abigail his mind hes changed
Whom David after Nabals death in marriage
Did wed for wit, and for her vettous carriage:
(...)
^Ho David in his danger brought forebore
To kill King Saul as is declaird before
^et he unthankful and forgetful Too
That God by David did and yet might do
^nmyndfull of his oath and Covenant
^ose up in arms, and then past to supplant
^etired, royal, loyal, David then
(...) Hachilah, with his six hunder men
^hen with Abishai, David only they
^ent dovne by night where Saul a sleeping lay
and might as he before have killd him there
^et spaird: and only took his pot, and Spear
And then did from a hill to Abner cry
And show his Lord his Love and Loyalty
1 Samuel 27 chap.
David so often persew'd, searched for and sought
Considred with him self resolvd and thought
that he to Gath would unto Achish go
and from King Saul his searching saife him so
^here with his army David gone, no more
^as he by Saul sought as he vsd before
^auid in Gad a dwelling he desirde
and Ziklag got incontinent requird
(...) he fand favor into Achish eyes
^ho much upon his wit and worth relyes
^hen David went and did invade and charge
^he Cananits from Shur to Egypts werge
And smot both man and wife and all hes slame
And with the spoils to Achish gois again.
1 Samuel 28 chap.
^Chish with his Philistims fierce and fell
Assembled go against Saul and Israel
^hen the heathen Prince with librall words and large
^ves David in the host the chiefest charge
and promisd him the honor for to keep
(...) person by his speeches lulled a sleep
(...) Prophet dead Saul at there force affrayd
^^at witch of Endor he implores and prayed
^^at She would Samvel from the dead recall
(...) tell him in these wars the event of all
(...) desprat Saul one simulat arose
^^at slew his futur fall among his foes
And did for dissobeying God foretell
To morrow Bondage unto Israel.
(...)
(...) with a^ there men or might
Against the Isralits conjoynd to fight
The Princes or the Captanes of the host
Consult, conclood and Achish their accost
And angry all with David ask their King
Why he that Hebrew did to battle bring?
Is he noght Servand unto Saul said they
And herefore mayb' our adversar this day
But Achish from his faith did still excuse him
And they in doubt and dread of him refuse him
So that their King constraind (is with commend
Of David's worth) back him to Ziklag send
Whil the Philistims, for to wrak in war
The Israleit in Ire advanceing are.
1 Samuel 30. Chap.
ORe David did to Ziklag back return
The Amalakits did it invest and burn
And all the vives and Bairnes that there they fand
With all their Goods they gleand with strength of hand
David's Ahinoam and Abigall
In that supprise ar Prisoners with all
Then mvrning evrie man his loss bemoand
And al most all distranghted David stond
But humble he upon the Lord relyd
That to his suite, yea, willingly replied
Then with four hunder of his hardy host
Agains the Town supprisers he did poast
And by the Egyptian guide come whair they lay
All scattred on the field he did them slay
(Four hundredth sole except) and all thought lost
Regaind again suppris'd by the heathen host
1 Samuel 31 Chap.
THe Philistims with Isrel join and fight
And Israel is defate and put to flight
The Sons of Saul the Princes of the Land
Fall their and die by the Philistims hand
Good Jonathan is slain, and Saul is wounded
And all the circumcised host confounded
Who hes noght God to guide and go before them
Pismeers and meikle more men may devore them
Saul vvounded sies that he hes lossd the day
His Sons and army slain he wishd to be away
Then called his armiger and did command him
To thrust him through but he, he did withstand him
Despairdly then himself he stabs and dies
And so self killed beside his Servand lies.
2 Samuel 1 Chap.
^O two days after David's back return
From Chase of those that did his City burn
(...) third, there come a man, that hes declaird
(...) Saul and all the hebrew host misfard
(...) longing Prince how all had sped then spears
(...) Jonathan and Saul's self slaughter hears
(...) all the armies foil and overthroe
^^ich nevvs invads this worthy with such woe
(...) neir with grief his Breast blovvne up did burst
(...) pitied he and praisd him tho accursd
(...) for his faithful friend did much lament
(...) causd he kill, that slave that Saul had shent
(...) teach all Trators to attempt, and darre
(...) tuich those that, of God, anointed are.
2 Samuel 2 chap.
(...) their daeth deplorable but most
(...) Jonathan with Saul his Father lossd
^^unsell craved from the Lord of heav'ne
(...) his God again unto him gevne
(...) designed by Samvel before
^^bron he anointed is once more
^^anks and vvov'd revvard to them that had
(...) Saul, the men of Gilead
^bner lo Saul's Captane chief Reuound
^ahan'an Ishbosheth brought and crovnd
(...), and Ioab met, conferr and then
(...) unto tuelf encounters of their men
^^ers are forced and Asahel is slain
(...) reteirs and Abner vvalks the plain
2 Samuel 3 Chap.
(...) Saul's and David's house naught petty Iarres
(...) there was wrakefull long and vi'lent wars
^ron be, sex Sons, brought forth and borne
(...) all house of David to adorn
^^eth sone of Saul, Abner accused
(...) his Fathers Concubine had used
(...) angry chaffed to be chected
(...) Ish bosheth, and his Side rejected
(...) reconceild to David sends
(...) conditions hears him, and are friends
(...) come, his plots to him h' imparts
(...) there, and thence, in peace departs
(...) ^novvne to David called again
(...) ^^ously by Ioab talking Slain
2 Samuel 4 Chap.
David displeasd, for Abners daeth that day
His blood and burden does on Ioab lay
Ishboshet hearing then of Abners fall
Dishearned is and his adherents all
Rechab and Ban'ath Captans of some Bands
Into Ishbosheths Blood imbrews there hands
Whill as he sleeping lay a bed at noone
This bloody deed by Rimmons sons is done
They then to David brought Ishbosherhs head
But as demerits their trespass they Speed
For killing of the righteous in his house
Disdaind of David they are odious
And to be killd there feet cut off and hands
Their bulks to hing in Hebron he commands
2 Samuel 5 Chap.
THen all the Tribs to Hebron did repair
And were Petitioners to David their
Desiring he, would for there saifteis saik
The royal ensigns of all Israel Take
He that whill Saul ragne in the former days
Forewent all Isrel in there martial frayes
And whom to God had said that he should feed
And be ore Israel Captane and there head
They croune him then of Iud' and Isrel King
Advisd with God then he his bands did bring
To Baal-perazim and trampled twice
Bett there and forced the Philistim lyie
As God directed David did and smot
From Geba unto Gezar all he got.
2 Samuel 6 Chap.
THe Ark of God that had remained long
In Gibeah with threttie thousand strong
David transported twice and then he placed it
Into his City and with courtains cac'd it
Vzzath by God that did attempt to tvvich
The Arc is killd for his too darring much
To learn us in the worship of the Lord
Noght to orewa^k his will into his word
David before the people and arc advanced
And Harped holily and sang and danced
Herefore Saul's Daughter Michal in her eyes
As doing basly, David did despise
Wherefore she punishd was: for evver after
Her Barrenness began that never left her.
2 Samuel 7. Chap.
WHen God had round about gevn David rest
And he sat in his house condignly dressed
(...) peace and plenty to the Prophet than
^he Royal Prince and Psalmist thus began
^ehold in lasting Shittim and in Cedat trees
With antique art ingravne we duel thou sies
And God in Tabernacles and in Tents
That rings and rops and pins for standers stents
Nathan then said do as desires thyn heart
^or God is with Thee and assists thy part
David designed to build then to the Lord
(...) house of worship but be Nathans word
Prohibit its from Heaven for to be done
For that's reservd for Solomon his Sone.
2 Samuel 7. Chap.
THe Lord the Secret searcher of the Soul
David's design, did tho divine control
(...) Labor that, he had allovvde alone
Unto his Sone succeeding Solomon
^is benefits, then he, as good, as great
^id by his Prophet to the Prince repeat
^ovv from a Shepherd boy he did him bring
(...) be over his belovv'de and chosing King
and when his days did end and he hence gone
(...) strongly stablish would and stay his throne
Unto his Sone, and always after this
unto his Seed the Scepter ever bliss
The pious Prince then pithelie and plain
Gods grace his Gifts and Greatness grants again
2 Samuel 8. chap.
THe faithful King conforted and confermd
Agains the faithless Philistims hes armd
And those that in his reach and grips he got
^or bondage he reservd or smartly smot
(...) matched the Moabits and them o'rethrew
^et saifd a third, when he the Tuo-part slew
(...) smot prince Hadadezer that did press
(...) enlarge his limits at swift Euphrates
and of the Aramits he killed then
^^cc'ring Zaboth tuentie two Thousand men
^rass, Silver, sheelds of Gold that guarded them
(...) in Triumph brought to Jerusalem
For non withstood from heaven his helped Strenght
But fetterd all, or felld were at the length.
2. Samuel 9. chap.
THis victor King in wars a Prince in peace
Of equal Justice bountye Love and Grace
The effectis of friendship faethfull and intear
Into his doings is decypherd heir
He asks if yet there any be among
The people that to Saul or his belong
They find one Ziba out Saul's serving man
That show a Sone livde then to Jonathan
Lame Mephi-bosheth of his feet unable
Whom David highly hold and honorable
And for his Fathers saik his Love he shows
Then Saul's whole Steddings upon him bestovves
And at his table vvorthely alvvayes
He treats and intertains him all his days.
2. Samuel 10. chap.
THe noble nature and the excellence
In David's disposition of a Prince
And basly how and bar brously repayd
The Prophet properly hes heir displayed
The Sprit of David it did boil and burn
To quyt old kindness with a courtess turn
And unto this effect his Servands send
Whom the Ammonits as spies did apprehend
And in dispight with all dishonor dois
The noble men ambassadors abuse
Which vvrong for to revenge he does arise
Fought, and defate, and tryumphd on them twyse
To learn all lavvless and unthankful To
With whom to deal, how, when, and what to do
2 Samuel 11. Chap.
WHen spring approatchd and days to length began
Ioab martchd forth with Isrels armies than
And as he was a Cheiftane chose and stout
He roundly Rabbah belted hes about
Whill David rests and Lash at Salem lies
Whence from a Tarras Bathsheba he spies
And by her Beauty caught became its thrall
And with her in Adultery dois fall
Than to that fact that he had fallin in
He joined blood a cruel crying Sin
And poor Vriah he expond and killd
As led his Lust and vvanton humors vvild
Then as the Prophet called her his ane lamb
He after took to be his wife and dame
2 Samuel 12. Chap.
THe Prophet Nathan by the Lord appointed
T'expostulat with David his anointed
^^ake in a mistick parable and masked
and him of his Adultrous actions asked
(...) is lust injustice, he hes taxed their
and to reprove his Stuprie did noght spair
and heartly humble, he for mercy cries
^^th for his murder and Adultries
^^'effects and fruit whereof by divine wraith
^^one after birth, is quickly caught, be daeth
^^en Solomon of Bethsheba is borne
^^d Rabbah taen, straightly besieged beforne
The Captives captive their, he savves with Axes
He cutts and carves them stents and draws and raxes
2 Samuel 13. chap.
^Mmon inflamd with lust and fleshly fire
And what was worse incestuous desire
(...) sister Thamar being fair he lov'de
(...) David by a crafty counsel movde
and her to Ammon seening sick and She
^ent in as she directed was to do
(...) wicked Ammon like a villane wyld
(...) maid ministering forced and defyld
(...) after hoter nor he lovv'de before
^hen he had whord her than he hates her more
(...) Absolon inveits him to a feast
(...) for his rapt to be revenged may
And at the table set his life did tak
For his vnnat'rall and incestous fact
2 Samuel 14. Chap.
WHen Absalom long after Ammons daeth
Had felt the weight of his wronged Fathers wraeth
(...) fleemd was from the favors of his face
^^nk in the Sea and dephs of his disgrace
(...) by a woman Ioab did devise
(...) pardon his Trespass the Prince to intize
(...) affection fatherly and Love
(...) David's melting mind to mercy move
(...) Geshur then be Ioab he is sought
(...) by him back to Jerusalem brought
(...) Absalom for Beavties and his hair
^^^ovnd, esteemd, so excellently fair
Yet tuo years there he relegat remaind
before unto a presence he attaind.
2 Samuel 15. Chap.
WIth flattries false although fair seeming shows
Prond Absolon in Isrel pop'lar grows
H'insumats him self in all men's grace
Placed in the court Portch in a publict place
For all that offers honors unto him
He claves be crast so to the Croune to clim
By tratrons Heads to help his bad desire
H'attempts unto, the Imper' all place, t'aspire
His father flies and on mont Olive stays
And all the Plotts and purposes he prays
Propond b' Ahitophel his State to stresse
That God would turn them into foolishuess
And Hushai there his Servand, to the end
To Oppose, and to uncase there counsels send.
2 Samuel 16 Chap.
Unfaithful Ziba to his master fails
And Shimei doggishly at David railes
His currish kind and naughty nature showing
By barking basly and by stoubolts throwing
Abishai would the churlish fellow smit
But myldly David did prohibit it
And does confess that he there cursing stands
And but by bidding and the Lords commands
Who then said he dar crave and ask the man
Why thus he curses and he rayleth than
My Sone, my Blood, my bowels, hunts me lo
And Wherefore may noght Shimei now do so
Then suffer him to curse and let him be
God may heirefter, heirfore look on me
As falls Achitophel did heir advise
The Lewd Sone with his fathers pairties lies.
2 Samuel 17. Chap.
AChitophel agains his Lord conspires
And force to follow from his Sone desires
A vitions counsall gave his wicked wit
But Hushai hateing him opponis to it
And besome lurking friends acquaints his Prence
With there pervers and tracterous pretense
Then wise and worthy David apprehends
The danger and departed with his friends
But lo whill Hushai Absolon advised
Achitophel fand al his plotts despised
Then on his ass fled like a fury fell
And in his own house he hes hanged him self
No better recompense can Treason crave
Nor end more happy should a Trator have.
2. Samuel 18. chap.
Unnatural unwise, unworthie Absalon
With Isrel is agains his father gone
Disloyal all, all up in arms they are
And that to wage witg worthy David war
T'hen he all his into thrie Bands Devids
And gave them Ioab and tuo other guids
T'he Battle joins and Absalon in fight
With all his followers ar put to flight
And lo himself fast by his flaxin hair
Hings on ane Oak betuixt the earth and air
VVhair Ioab contrare to the kings command
Thrice thrusts him through and killd him with his hand
This bloody end on Absolon did bring
Distoyalty unto his Sire and King.
2. Samuel 19. chap.
DAvid into a secret Chalmer turns
And for his slain suspended sone their murnes
And Ioab check yea chyds him that did sho
Such greef and sorrow for his fallen foe
Thus roghly ronsing him to rise will have him
Abroad or threats his lieges all will leave him
The afflicted King consenting rose and sat
In the most publict and frequented gate
VVhair they that erst rebelld persewd and shore him
Again restord and humbly bowed before him
True Mephibosheth meets the King ans tryes
A trustid prince in spite of Zibas lies
Barzillai leaves the King and homvards tends
And Isrel jarrs with Judah and contends
And each of them for Right and interest
Into the King strive stifli and contest.
2. Samuel 20. chap.
SHeba the Sone of the Bichri then arose
And stirrd up Isrel to be David's foes
Ioab Amasa meets and seemd to kiss
But kills and treachrously contrived this
And Sheba with his Power to Abel is past
VVhair Ioab with his forces followd fast
And did that city circomsiedge around
And by woman's wit a mean is found
To saif the City and it was indeed
What Ioab crau'de and come fore, Shebas head
The witty working of that woman wise
The Israleits and Citizens intise
To saif the Town, and get the Rebels Grace
To kill the Trator Sheba in that place
Which dead once done She unto Ioab calls
And throvv's to him the head down from the walls
2 Samuel 21 Chap.
IN David's days thrie years a famyn fearce
Did enter Isrel and her entrals pearss
And herefore David did the Lord demand
And to much blood to be the cause he fand
That then upon the Sons of Saul remaind
Which hes all Isrell maculat and staind
Wherefore to blansh that bloody Sin he gives
Unto the Gib'onites of them that lives
Sev'ne men the Sons and seed of Saul amaing
Whom in revenge they did suspend and hang
The Philistims with four tall Captans strong
That had bein enemies to Isrel long
Four tyms into four Battals come to strokes
Whose Captans staves be beams and sturdy oaks
Into these fight were forced bett and slain
By David and his doers dead remain
2 Samuel 22. Chap.
David returd from wars victorious
Praisd God most good, most great, most glorious
His Povvar he proclamd extold his strength
And laud and glore gives to his Lord at length
His mercies majesty and mightines
And grief agains the ungodly dois express
Him in his woundrous works he magnifies
Who bows the heavens, from whom the thunder flies
And for his own so often deliverance
His glorious Goodness greatly dois advance
And passing all my powers to repeat
He glorifies the God of Hosts most great
And promises to praise and to proclaim
And sing for evr the honor of his name.
2. Samuel 23. chap.
THe last words that King David spoke suppond
(Noght dying) but when he his Psalms compond
The Sone of Ishai that was set on hie
Aman created King by Gods decree
Isreal's Psalmist and its singer sweet
Thus says, a Prophet and a Prince compleet
The almighty God I grant above my merit
Breathd in my Breast, spoke in me by his Sperit
And promised that I should regne and bear
Over just men rule, men that the Lord did fear
And as ore the earth the morning Sun did shine
Illustrous from my loins should be my live
(...) aggots for fire) be rasd and thrown away
His worthies last he one by one does name
And gives to all the Glory due to Them.
2 Samuel 24. Chap.
From pride cur'ositie and fond desire
David will know his povv'res in his impire
^^erefore commands to note up all and number
(...) men of Isrel to there cost and cumber
(...) by his searchers fand that they were then
(...) thretein hunder thousand feghtan men
(...) God by Gad declard what he intended
(...) was a fault which highly him offended
(...) King repents, Gad does thrie plagves propone
(...) of the thrie David acceptis of one
(...) fall into the fingers of the Lord
^^efuseing famyn and the bloody Sword)
Who with infection that through Isrel flevv
unto three days wholl seventie thousand slew
I. Book of ye Kings. 1. Chap.
^Ow when King David seventie years was old
Heat natural hence, his blood was chill and cold
(...) coverd him with clothes but all for naught
(...) they a virgin brave Abishag brought
(...) in his Bed and bosom lay and so
(...) chafe and cherish him yet knew her no
(...) weakened age made Adoniah rise
^^^urp his Fathers croune to interpryse
^^an and Bethsheba the King acquent
(...) Adoniahs treacherous intent
(...) bids the Priest and Prophet sone begone
^^oynt and Croune his Sone young Solomon
^^'usurper flees and to the alter gois
(...) Solomon on hops him mercy shois
1 Kings 2 Chap.
^^uid a man agreeing with Gods mind
^alking the way of mortals and mankind
(...) Solomon and heartl' exhorts him than
(...) the prudent Prince and worthy man
(...) the Lord and walk in all his ways
(...) stand to his Statuts all his days
(...) knows quod he the bed from whence thowsprong
^^ow for Thee I did they Brether wrong
^^fore acquyt the in all and evrie Thing
(...) or can become a perfect King
Howbeit to punish him, himself had spaird
This holy Prophet then and hardy Prince
As any that before or reigned since
Departs in peace and most devoutly dies
And in his City David buried lies
1 Kings 2 Chap.
When Absolon the Captain Ioab slayes
Contrar command into King David's days
And after blo'tted with the guiltless blood
Of Abner and Amasa Captains good
To David in his days did naught revenge
Yet took to heart these three out rages strange
And did direct his Sone to recompense
When he was dead as did deserve the offense
But noght to suffer yet in any case
Perfidious Ioab to depairt in peace
Wherefore the King to kill him did command
Whom to the alter fled for fear they fand
And by Benayah there to be exemple
To bloody Captains killd was in the Temple
1 Kings 2 Chap.
THe Prince departed and put in his grave
Then Adoniah would Abishag have
And as is said after his Fathers life
By Bershabe demands her to his wife
But Solomon dislyking that causd slay
And Adoniah killd to death that day
Abiathar with Ioab that conspird
When Adoniah erst the Crovne desird
The King he would noght smit him with the Sword
Because a Priest once sacred to the Lord
But he degrads him from his Charge disgraced
And Zadok sacred in the Prlest-hood placed
Benayah after then advanced he
To be the Cheeftan of his Chivalrie
1 Kings 3 Chap.
WIth Egypt Solomon a marriage makes
And Pharos daughter to his vife he takes
And unto David's fort from Memphis stream
Brought her whill walled was Jerusalem
Then to the Prince in Gib'on God apeard
And what of him he would demand and speard
Who in a meek and holy humblness
Gods great and money favors did confess
And since he had created him a King
He songht true visidome in his governing
(...)
With all his other graces under heaven
And first the Plea that the two Harlots moved
His voundrous wisdom and his proudence proved
1 Kings 4 Chap.
THe Princes, Peers and great men one by one
Heir are insert that served Solomon
With all purveyance great and Glorious
^elonging to his rich and royal house
^he numbers of hts strong and stalled horses
that he himself and his Cavalliers corses
^express his Pow're wealth and riches great
^atchless magnificence and mighty state
(...) flowing from the favors of the Lord
^^he Prophet pertinently dois record
^^is all exceeding wise enlarged heart
(...) heaven in earth and in the profound part
and the all compr'ending knoledge of this Prince
^^rpassing all that livde before or since
Among the monuments of mortal men
Expressd is here by this Prophetic pen.
1 Kings 5 Chap.
^Iram the Tiriam King with Solomon
Congratulats his monting Isrels thron
and he agane with honor Servands send
that him to Hiram kindly did commend
and show his Father David for his wars
With nightbour nations and intestine Iarres
and piously he in his time intended
^ould naught begin the Temple nor yet end it
(...) when God gave him rest he set him foir it
(...) build a house for worship of the Lord
^^erefore there royal master Solomon
^equests for Cedars from his Lebanon
Into which woundrous work imployd were then
A hunder fourscore and thrie thousand men.
1 Kings 6 Chap.
When for that famous fabric fitly are
All things made ready neat and necessare
(...) hundredth fourscore years after that day
(...) God from Egypt the Ebrevvs brought away
(...) four year current of the regne noght gone
(...) David's wise and sage Senc Solomon
(...) statly Structure of the Temple than
(...) fore named numbers for to build began
(...) in seven years this wondrous works intended
(...) expression pompously was ended
(...)
In these few years was finished be Them
And God (if he obedient remain)
To Solomon reiterats again
His promise past and will perform it streaght
That to his Father David he had heaght.
1 Kings 7 Chap.
NOw whill the Church tha' accomplish and conclood
The sage and great King Solomon thought good
After the works for worship of the Lord
To have a house nixt for the King decord
He heirfore t'enter instantly ordanes
But sparing of expenses or of Pains
Then all the Arts-men exquisit at once
Gold, silver, Cedar, Brass, and marble stones
With curious craft and past all creded care
They melt they moold, cut Squinsion carve an square
And for the Princes palaces erects
Exceeding princely rich in all respects
But Hiram highly hes out hyid the rest
And passing all compare some pieces dressed.
1 Kings 8 Chap.
FVll finished these fair and famous warkes
Of his Magnificence immortal marks
The heads of Tribes and Isrels elders all
Together he did convocatt and call
The Ark from Obed for to bring with them
Unto the Temple in Jerusalem
Which by the Levites and the Priests it fet
And their with all Solemnity was set
The Tabernacle and each sacred Thing
The holy vessels all with them they bring
Then Solomon past number numbers takes
Of Sheep and Beevs and there oblation makes
And whill the Priests the offered offerings kills
Into a Cloud the Lord the Temple fills
The people than he blessd and preachd at length
The pour and Praises of the God of Strength
1 Kings 9 Chap.
AGains god as before in Gibeon
Apeard aproachd and spoke to Solomon
Protesting of his Statuts will and way
His word and Law he bid be and obey
He will to him (to David what before
Was promised) do and perform much more
The royal Croune that did decore his head
He sattle shall for evr unto his Seed
(...) go a gadding after other Gods
^^an than peremptorly he does him tell
^he honor of the house of Israel
And Grandour that it gloreed in that day
He would obscure and quickly catch away
1 Kings 9 chap.
^Ome Cities Solomon grate and benign
To quyt his kindness gave the Tyrian King
^^eat gallant Spirits a gottin Good requights
and freely favors to refound delights
^^e Cananites vnkilld in the Bbrevv wars
^^is thrice sage King hes made them Tributars
^^e Hivites, Amorites and Perizzites
(...) hopless Hittites and the Iebusites
^^at yet the Hebrevvs did remain among
(...) noght be Limme nor Line to them belong
^^is mightiest and Monarch then most Great
^^us having stayed and stablishd his estate
And regning in all Rest resold he would
To Ophir send a fleet to fett him Gold.
1 Kings 10 chap.
^He wisdom great of Solomon on earth
So others passd before and since his Birth
^^at riding on report with vinges of fame
^^ew and to the Queen of Sheba came
^^o far beyond the rising morn almast
^^sie this sapient King come from the east
(...) after seen, fame sparing and report
^^lling Truth of him she said, Shot short
^^sk'd and money Questions did demand
(...) most of God to know and understand
(...) Solomon did solve all that she sought
(...) he knew all and hid from him was naught
(...) Majesty might and Magnificence
(...) plamly spies of this vnpeered Prince
^hen they gave other gifts and She again
^eturned to the East with all her Train.
1 Kings 11 Chap.
^He Charge that God to his great King had Geven
(...) his apearing to him tuyse from heven
(...) serve his Statuts and to obey his Law
(...) his desires, to do them, did with draw
(...) Thousand stranger women wyves
(...) Concubins he kept in their Lives
^^fore the Lord was wroth and stirrd him foes
^^^ring all his days his vnfrends shois
And for his carerers Carrage and (...)
And to his makers Proecepts small respect
He do is foretell him from his Sone and Seed
That he ten Tribs shall take and from his head
Shall rent the Croun, and to his great disgrace
Set Nebats Sone his servand in his place
1 Kings 11 Chap.
After the Prophet, Jeroboam Told
In renting of his garment how God would.
Tak ten Tribs from the Groune and leave but on
To Rehoboam after Solomon
And him it pleased that pity for to take
But only for his Servand David's sake
And in this chapter tvyse to manifest
His love to David he hes this expressd
But now this mighty monarchs all amang
This welthiest and wisest to that ragne
And into highest honor in all eyes
Expired then, did end his days, and dies
That ragne there forty years, by David's Tomb
In David's city they this Prince inhume
1 Kings 12 chap.
THis man whom God gave greatest visdome too
Defunct and Rehoboam regning now
The people and elders all salute him King
And sit consulting on his Governing
But he the Counsel of the aged and wise
Did for the imprudence of the young despise
And hardly heirfore brooking this neglect
Ten Tribes there Jeroboam King elect
And so fell from the Sone of Solomon
The incensed Tribs of Isrel all saife on
The Seer then charged by the Lord by night
Prohibits Rehoboams force to fight
For that revolt by him than did begin
For Salomons and Rehoboams Sin
And Jeroboam King elected thus
God grossly greevs, and grows Idolatrous.
1 Kings 13. chap.
WHil Jeroboam at the Altar stands
Teither a Prophet God to go commands
T'expostulat and it to threaten thus
There whair you offer incenss mirrhe and thus
To David's house once shall be borne a Boy
That thereupon the Prophets shall destroy
And as you spend upon it now perfume
The Bones of men he thereon shall consume
(...) in the rest he halted and he strayd
and did the will and went the ways of man
(...) dissobeyd the Lords directious Than
and herefore whill the Prophet home did pass
^lon at leasour ryding on his ass
The Lord a Lion sent that did him slay
(Because he disobayd him) on the way
1 Kings 14 Chap.
THe Sone of Jeroboam falling sick
H'intends to try the Prophet with a Trick
and unto him his wife send in disguise
(...) make a Gul of Him that God made wise
(...) he vnvaild her by the Lords prevention
and told the vanity of that intention
and that declaird that from the divine wraeth
unto there child, approachd a praesent daeth
and for her Lords defection from his makar
that did his worship unto Idols sacrar
that Croune, that God, from David's seed, did sever
^^om him and his, he would rent it for ever
And all that unto him attingent be
The Lord from the earth shall sweep ev'rlastinglie.
1 Kings 15 Chap.
THe aughten year of Ieroboams reign
Abiram then in Judah reignod king
(...) all the vicked ways he walcked in
(...) as his Father Rehoboam Sinned did Sin
(...) yet for David's sake when he was dead
(...) with a Son his princely place suppleid
(...) ane and forty upright did stand
(...) as King David, did govern that land
(...) Asa dyed and with his Fathers laid
^^osaphat his Sone the Scepter swayd
(...) Nadab Ieroboams sone began
(...) Asas reign to rule in Isrel than
(...) Basha killd him and King eftor smot
(...) that of Ieroboams line he got
And as the Lord fortold both great and sin all
He slew and vterly destroyed them all
1 Kings 16 chap.
^Asha to regne vpraised be the Lord
As Jeroboam sinned and did debord
before this Lord for his Iniquity
(...) forfalted his Posterity
(...) whill that Elach after him did reign
(...) Captane Zimri that did serve this King
And by his death the Croune this rebel got
But when to Isrel was the Treasone told
The host cround Omri and him for King him hold
That Irizak with his warriors did invest
And it perforce he enterd hes and pre^st
Disloyal and disparing Zimbri than
With his false treason to be twichd began
And to the strength as castle he returns
Himself and it and all within it burns
A recompense for such profane appointed
That Durst be bold to kill the Lords anointed
1 Kings 17 Chap.
ELiah lo the Prophet did declare
To Achab the aproaching famyn their
(But God did feed and fosterd him with Ravens
Penned Parendars that foars along the heavens)
That shortly should for want of dew and rain
The people and Land to money straits constrain
For all the Abominations great and Sin
That Omri and himself had sliddin in
Then famyn, dearth, and want was in the I and
And God the Prophet then he did command
Eastivard in Cherith-brook himself to hyda
And there his pleasure to attend and bide
Flesh then and Bread upon that river bank
The Ravens brought him and he waters drank
For whom the Almighty dois mantain and cherish
Shall prosper when the impious all shall perish
1 Kings 17 Chap.
GOd by his word Eliah-bids again
Go to Zareptah city and remain
Whair he before him at the gate shall find
A vidow poor in poverty prove kind
He fand her their and did her then entreat
To bring him water and some bread to eat
She ansverd as the Lord did live that all
Her store of meal was but a measure small
Together with a little oil that dois
Sustain her and her Sone into a Cruse
Which Elie bids her bring and than he blesses
And they continevv'd so and never decresses
The blessings of the Lord to minds content
They be abundance and sufficient
The vidow for her Sone departed, grieved
But Helie prayed, twich'd him, and he revived
1 Kings 18 Chap.
After from Cherith Elie the third year
Was gone again God did to him apear
(...) ^rait Command and Charge expres to go
(...) to the sacrilegious Achab so
(...) in that fearful famyn, drouth, and dearth
(...) would send Rain t'irrignat the earth
^^d Obadiah than hid in Tuo Caves
^^m death a hunder holy Prophets saves
^^e by miracle the people moves
^^d him the Lords true Prophet he approves
^^n he commands the people soon to slay
(...) Bralish all and Prophets falls that day
^^nd as the Lord had heght he did obtain
(...) prayer in the peoples presence Rain.
1 Kings 19 Chap.
^^om Iezebell whill that Eliah fled
that solemly to slay him moved had
^^y an Angel as he sleeping lay
(...) in the deserts he had went a day
^^h'd and bidden rise and take him meat
^here finds vivers by his head to eat
^^d and water drank and on the ground
^ovne again and fallis a sleeping sound
^^^ce more God awaks him and did say
^^p and eat and dress Thee to thy way
(...) hes a woage forty days in length
^^^p he rose and stepped in the strength
^^^t he eaten had and drank and than
^^^eb hill went up the holy man
^^^rd yet more he dois declare him too
^^eturne what he will have him do
^^el and Iehu he does him apoynt
^^ges and Elish Priest in his place t'anoynt.
1 Kings 20 Chap.
^^adad King of Aram up in arms
^^d with steel Charrets men and horse in swarms
^^old Bravados and vnbryled Bralls
^^ed strictly the Samarian walls
that fierce famyn sternly struk and stung
(...) peer, and poor, the aged and the young
^^^m the fury of that famine free
(...) destressd in danger were to die
^^od a Comfort by his Prophet sends
^^rie promisd Achab with his friends
(...) the event and ishevv of the fight
(...) wise fell fortunat and Right
(...) ^^hadad Achabs peace in end
(...) ^^y did reprehend
(...) him did a sentence sharp proclaim
(...) he heavy to his house went hame.
1 Kings 21 chap.
AHab his avarice and Greed agrest
And covetous desire that could noght rest
Although he could all Isrel then Command
Without that Parcel of poor Naboths Land
Heir is imprinted in a brook of Brass
To b'evr a witness of his great disgrace
But bloody Iezebel the fell and fex
The cross the Curse and shame of all her sex
Both with deceat and cruelty at once
The innocent Naboth bett and braind with stons
But God repeyd their Tirany extreme
With total ruin, death, disgrace, and sha^^
Yet Ahab by Eliah taxd he rents
His Garments and his trespass he repents
1 Kings 22 Chap.
IEhosophat and Ahab both as Brether
To fight the Aramits agree together
And faethless both, into there foolishnes
Consult there Prophets falls on there succes
Who ansver friendly (although falls) they find
And the success to sort unto there mind
Michayah yet that truly served God
They asked that from the impostors free abod
Who well inspird and by the sprit made wise
Told the true ishue of their interprise
Heirfore Zidkiiah a false Prophet than
Madlyk commovde did smit the godly man
The battle joynd, Ahab defate, they slew
And things fortold of him foll forth all true
1 Kings 22 Chap.
AHaz'a nixt his Father killd and dead
A Successor and his here reign in his stead
A godless wicked and a vrongous King
Incongr'ous in his carriage course and reign
In all his doings he did evr debord
And fell both from the Law and from the Lord
His Fathers here into his worship vane
As Jeroboam all wise as Profane
No but Iehosophat evin from his youth
As walked his. Father still stood to the truth
And never did from what was right decline
But did obey the word and will divine
Yet the Idol-Altars in high places placed
Into his days they were not all defaced
His other worthy deeds they a^ set down
In Judah Annals unto his renoune.
1 Chapter.
^Hen Ahaziah King of Israel
Down throw a Lattesse of a window fell
^^d unto Baal-zebub (send to try
^he that time in that dise ase should dye)
^^e God of Ekron and the God of flies
^^om to the unfaithful vsd to Sacrifice
^^refore the almighty (by Eliah) wraeth
^^etold the messinger their Masters daeth
^^herefore the Prince the Prophet t'apprehend
^^o Captains, each with fifty Souldiars send
^^ut the God of Isrel in his Ire
^^se fifties from the hevens confounds with fire
^^nd as declard the King concluds his days
^^horam then his Sone his Scepter swayes
1 Kings 2 Chap.
^^iahs dwelling days on earth over drev'n
^he Lord resolved to take him hence to heven
(...) with Elisha he to Jordan gois
(...) by seprating it, his povvar shois
^^prit prophetic doubled then he gives
(...) Elisha that his Lord out lives
(...) than a fiery Car with flamming horses
^^e soon and suddan Separation forces
(...) in the Car caught with a whirling wind
(...) was and left his Cloka behind
(...) a then so in his faith confides
(...) there with he the waves strikes and devides
(...) walls and springs by him tart and amare
^^wre made sweet of harmefull healthful are
(...) curssd the Boys that mocked him and therefore
^^er torn in Pieces by the Tusked Bore
1 Kings 3 Chap.
Hill I'horam Judged the Isralits amang
^^ehosaphat over Them of Judah Reign
^horam wicked was and did not right
^as sinceare in his Creators Sight
^^ght so foully as his Father fell
(...) his monstrous mother Iezabel
^^et h' adheard and cleaved to the Sin
^^croboam Nebats Sone fell in
Kings with anger then against Mesha swelled
(...) his Moabits that than rebelld
^^y Elisha are stirrd up to fight
^^d over match the Moabits by might
Then Me^^a with his Sone (...)
And sacrifizd him to asvage his Gods
Which monstrous fact when Isrel understands
For pity thereof They reteird there Bands
2 Kings 4 Chap.
ELisha by the heavenly help incressd
Oil to a vidovv for her debtes distressd
In such abundant quantity and store
That all defrayd and yet enough to fore
And for the Shunamite he did implore
By prayer a Sone that had noght ane before
And this child waxed sickly and expird
But he reviv'de him by his Dame desird
The pottage likewise he made sweet of sour
When meal among that vild vine he did power
And with but tuenty loavs of Barley kind
He fed a hunder and left store behind
The Lord alone by him these vounders wrought
And but his help Elisha he did naught.
2 Kings 5 Chap.
NAaman Captane of the Assyrian host
A Leper hopeless of his health almost
Than by ane Hebrew wench in war supprisd
To journay to Elisha is advisd
Eliahs deer and double sprited Man
A Prophet in Samaria spirand than
Who by his word divine, (a voundrous change)
To wash him, did this loathsum Leper clenge
This Prophet yet no recompense would have
Nor for the Leprous cure no coin receave
But lo his groom Gehazi full of greed
Gain and tuo garments got and for his deed
That which Naaman did infect before
Shall cleave to him and his for ever more
2 Kings 6 Chap.
YEt voundrous wounderfull are wronght be him
Elisha made in water Iren swim
And all the King of Arams Counsel sealed
Unto the King of Isrel he reveald
And herefore Aram of his men almost
The choice and best he chused of his host
And secreitly unto Samaria send
The holy Prophet for to apprehend
But millious more with fiery Charets stand
To guard Elisha by the Lords command
The Prophet prayed to unshut his servands eyes
Who the heavenly host ^end for to guard the^^ sies
(...) Sama^a and they knew him naught
^^^o God preserved him Is^^l and there Prince
^^om Arams injury and violence
2 Kings 7 Chap.
WHill that the Assyrian Samaria s^^gd
Such furious famyn there in reign and raged
^^at inhumane and loathsome to Relate
(...) woman with consent her Sone did eat
(...) herefore King Ihoram swore Elishas life
should pay the price of that stup pendious strife
(...) he pronounced and b' inspiration said
(...) morrow shall this brough abound with Bread
(...) the infidull that would not trust his word
^^^d see the same but in the throng was smord
^^^cause a pallid faint and Trembling fear
^^^atchd the Aramits entrenched There
(...) And the only sound of Arms without the Sight
Confounded fearfully put all to ^light.
2 Kings 8 Chap.
(...) Lisha does the Shunamite fore arm
(...) from futur famyn of the ensweing harm
^^^telling derth and Barreness seven years
^^^emptorly that approatch appears
^^^d noght in sho but certanly itt shall
^^^sly afflict Judah and Isrel all
(...) slew siclyke Benhadad sold noght die
(...) convalesh of his Infirmity
(...) by fore knoledge then his fate he fand
(...) at he should dye and by Hazalels hand
^^^ich come to pas and shortly in his place
^^^e the Aramits he manadged the mace
^^^oram in Judah reign and Edom than
^^^uisd them a King and to rebel began
And Ahazia after Iorams reign
Governd Judah and became there King
2 Kings 9 chap.
WHen Iehu crovned King in Isrel reign
These were his doings his exployts amang
(...) honam as the Lord to kill directed
(...) quickly he performd it and effected
^^nd Ahazia King of Judah Then
^^o his flight is killd too be his men
^^^n Iehu up to Isrel mar^chd of mind
^^nd that vitch the worst of women kind
(...) Prophet killer carnell Iezebell
(...) for fire a faggot fit for hell
Wh^^^ (...)
And there dead bruisd and felled with the fall
Dogs (hands and harns except) hes all devoird
As was praeprophesied be the Lord.
2 Kings 10 chap.
ACcording to the word and divine will
Iehu to Ahab seventy Sormes causd kill
And to the court in heaps brought all there heads
Deriding then demands who did these deads
This fatal Game on Ahabs Sons begun
All Ahazias house like race had Run
For of his Brether forty he and Two
Met on the way and slew them all also
Then Baals Priests that God of stock or Stone
He at the altar caught and killd each one
Non that in Isrel serve and bowed his knee
To Baal than but all that day did die
His Altars he destroys yet never Tvines
From Ieroboams wyld and wicked Sins.
Then after Iehu was expird and dead
Iehoahaz his Son steerd in his Stead.
2 Kings 11 Chap.
FIerce Athalia sies her Sone expird
And herefore she to be revenged desird
Then on a cursed conclusion she does fall
To kill and killd the Royal Childring all
Ioash except: that from her cruel knife
By Iehosheba had praeservd his Life
And by Iehoida crovnd and anointed
Who Athalia to be slain appointed
Iehoida dispenser of the word
Betuix the Prince, the people and the Lord
Humbly a Leagve and Covenant contracts
Then all conjoyn and Baals Idols bracks
His Altars and his Temples they o'rethrew
And Mattan their his Priest they stoutly slew
2 Kings 12 Chap.
IN Iehus sevnt year Ioash reign began
A Prince that governed well and warely than
Whill Priest Iehoida taught him the word
All that he did was good before the Lord
He had a tinder Zeal and constant care
The Temples ruind parts for to repair
He stirrd his time and quick attendance taks
And much provisionn he for money maks
The Syrian Prince that boldly braved Them
And threatened Judah and Jerusalem
(...) with a present o^ (...)
^^equyred by his Fathers former Kings
^^ho he to pass, and part with them was la^th
^^es coold the Cummig heat of Hazols vvraeth
Yet in the forty year that he did reign
By tuo unfaithful servoinds he was slain
2 Kings 13 Chap.
^^N Ioash tventie third Iehoahaz
(...) The Son of Iehu King in Isrel was
^^^dolatrous as Jeroboam he
^^^eparted naught from his impiety
^^herefore the Lord delyverd him to Bands
(...) Hazael the King of Arams hands
^^hill that to God he humbly bow and bends
^^hen, then, the Lord, to him deliveres sends
^^ash, Iehoahar his Son and here
^^^e be the Lord was his deliverar
^^et left he naught his deeds Idolatrous
^^hat cleav'd so fast to Ieroboams house
Iehoahaz, then ends his days, and dies
And in Samaria he buried lies
2 Kings 13 Chap.
ELisha sick to Ioash 'ore he dies
Against Aram Isrels Tryumphes prophesies
^^nd then his Spirit that the Lord inspires
^^or to be wray his will in peace expird
^^he man of God that so often had declard
^^is masters mind and for no perrill spaird
^^isha dead and Dul' interred than
^^hill as they go t'ingrave ane oter man
^^ome bands of Moabits then Isrels foes
^^hem selfs in arms to them in erindd shois
^^herefore a bassed on Elisha's bones
^^he dead man these into his Tomb impons
And woundrously no sooner twichd by those
His sacred bones but he vpstands and gois
2 Kings 14 chap.
A Mazia Ioash-Sonne of Judah King
In tuentie five year old began his reign
^^nd as his Father Ioash walked upright
^^et not as David did in Iovas sight
^^or the hie places were noght taken away
^^t in Them incense sacrificed They
^^d when to him the Kingdom was conferm'd
^^ainst his Fathers Murderars he armd
^^d those King killers he again hes slain
^^at durst the anointed of the Lord profane
The (...)
Took Sela and ten Thousand of them slew
Then Amazia challengis to war
King Ioash then that was the stronger far.
2 Kings 14. chap.
Upon the Provocation both the Kings
There hosts and armies to the Batell Bringes
Where Isrel as the stronger in Estate
Judah out justed and its foree defate
And when the Batale brock in was and lost
They took the King and Captane of the host
And than on Salem with there force falls
The Temple spoild brack and bet down the walls
The Treasure that unto the King pertaind
And hostages they took that there remaind
Then death did end the dait of Ioha'sh days
A stout and valiant King in all his ways
Then Ierobo'me succeeds his Father syne
And Zacharia unto him be Line
2 Kings 15 chap.
SExtein year old was Azaria when
In Judah cround he to govern began
And tuo and fefty year a prince supreme
He reignd and Judged in Jerusalem
And yet his royal reign this fault defaces
That incense they brint in the Hie places
But lo the Lord chastised him for the same
And smot him so that Leper he became
Iotham his Son then underneath his hand
Governed his house and Judged in the Land
Insidious Shallum Zachary did slay
And murdered Menahem made him away
Menahem thus away and in his Tomb
Pekah his Son rose in his royal Room
2 Kings 15 Chap.
IN Isrel whill Pekaihah swayd the sword
He walcked wickedly before the Lord
And did profanely jdols dead adore
And by one Pekah killed was therefore
Then he King killer took into his hand
The Croune of Israel and did there command
But with his bloody murders he drank in
That oftymes branded Ieroboams sin
But Hos'h'a this King killer he betrayed
And then himself the sword of Isrel swayd
^o^ham the second year of Pekah than
To reign into Jerusalem began
(...) and gone
Ahaz his Son ascends into his Throne
2 Kings 16 Chap.
(...) Haz a bad Son of a better Sire
The seventein year of Pekah his impire
(...) Inda did Guberne but did debord
^^d wrought not uprightly before the Lord
(...) with the kings of Isrel Idolized
^^d his own Son to Moloch sacrifizd
^^e kings of Aram and of Isrel Then
^^iedgd Jerusalem with hosts of men
(...) the almightye he would naught permit
^^^em to Triumph on him nor to tak it
(...) Ahaz he with Iiglath joynd consent
^^nvade Damascus and t'assault it went
^^ey took it, Rezin killd, with worship wane
^^^d vnvsd offerings They the Altar stame
But when this Prince Idolatrous was dead
Then Hezekie his Son reign in his stead.
2 Kings 17 Chap.
^Hill that Hoshea reign Israel all
Idolatrize, and to fass worship fall
^^^erefore the Lord the King of Ashur sends
(...) Israel a captive Comprehends
(...) did the Prince and people in prison cast
(...) did Samaria tack in at last
(...) then in that deforc'd afflicted town
(...) Assyrians, he set in Garisone
(...) with a hateful and a hostile hand
^^^ul'd it rudly and perforce command
^^^e heathen yet the Lord they did noght fear
^^bowd to Idols in his Isrel there
Wherefore he send in Lions to devour Them
that piece maile rent and all in Gobbets tore them
2 Kings 18 Chap.
^^shea reigning into Israel
^^^n his trid year to Hezekiah fell
^^^ins and helm of Judah for to hold
^^n he himself was twenty fyve yeir old
^^ince that servd the Lord and did adore him
^^auid did his Eather good before him
^^olish'd the altars and the places hie
^^ritaments unto Idolatry
^^sen Serpent made in Moses days
^^^k it down and into pieces brayes
^^a three years is besieged and taken
^^el captive of the Lord forsaken
Because as stringers they (...)
And naught his will divine nor voyo^ obayd.
2 Kings 18. chap.
THe Ruler Rabshaketh of Ashurs host
A wyld out cast before the Lord and lossd
TO incamp, his Tents and Palions pitched down
Before the City and the sacred Town
And with his hell hounds altogether gross'd
Begins to Bandie against the Lord and boast
His powar he despisd, his Truth contemnd
And boldly too his blessed name blaspheam'd
Isreal's strength and all the might of Man
Yea and the hand of heven he skorned Than
And in disdain Gods greatness did disgust
Dissvading Isrel in his strength to Trust
And all the venom of a wicked Tongue
That fool agains the firmament hes sloung.
2 Kings 19 Chap.
WHich when the holy Hezekiah hears
He in the Temple to complaie compears
And with a sorry soul, and heavy heart
Depressd he from all his people apart
With Sack cloth clad, hisroy all Robbs all rent
Most woeful for Gods wrong his wowes up went
Great God said he that tuixt the Cherubs ^^^ell
In mercy now remember Israel
And hear there blasphemies that but all fear
The Glory of they name and Honor Tear
The Lord hes heard him and by Isay told
That vain Rud Railers words revenge he wouid
And keep untouched that Time be one of Them
In that vnhallovv'd host Jerusalem
And did of them one night of life deprive
A hunder fourscore Thousand men and five.
2 Kings 19 chap.
SEnach (...) the Assyrian Prince perverse
When God did kill, his men and horse disperse
He pausd noght therevponn nor did repent
But to his vain Gods for to worship went
And little knew he that had escaped abroad
That he at home had by himself the Rod
Which beath him should for all his blasphemies
And against Gods Hebrevvs his Hostilities
For vvhill the Idolatrous and careless King
Adores his Nishroch a dead and naughtles, Thing
Adramelech and Shatezer his brood
Un natural both his Sons they shed his blood
(...) back, they kill (...)
(...) Nishroch hears noght, nor his slaughter sies
2 Kings 20 Chap.
^He holy Hezekia that adored
(...) And walked in Truth always before the Lord
(...) ^ut this Time was sick to death and lay
^^n Ishai send from God to him did say
(...) Thou thy house to rest and order all
(...) Thou must dye and live no more Thou shall
(...) King then turned and prayed and shedding tears
^^^ats for life and lo the Lord he hears
^^^oyce, his sorrovv sies, and syne he says
^^^say tell him I will length his days
(...) to the years that he hes liv'de before
(...) adioyne and add too fifteen more
(...) this shall be the Sign, to try it true
^^^haddovv look and in the Di^l wiovv
^^hen bright and clear the Sun thou shyning sies
^^hall than backwards bend whole ton degrees
2 Kings 20 Chap.
^^^g Hezekiah of his Sickness whole
(...) almighties might extremely dois extole
^^ach-baladan then Babo^s Prince
(...) Hezekiah a Benevolence
^^^e his Love unlooked for to repay
^^^ength and Treasure did before them lay
^^^ay hotly him reprov'de heirfore
^^^ll his Seed with Babel-Bondage shore
^^^id he their, They captive shall be led
^^^ll that he and his fore-bears had
^^^nnes in Babell they shall Enuches be
^^^ord foretold me there Captivity
^^^n Iuda's godly Hezekiah dies
(...) his shrewd Son Manass his place supplies
2 Kings 21 Chap.
(...) Ezekiah dead, Manasse reigns
(...) first profane of the prophanest Kings
^^^n a fury of false worship burns
^^^ith him Isrel to his vomit turns
(...) revolts, themselfs they Rebimieres
^^^t on Idols as the Devils desires
^^^nation was there under Heven
(...) and they were all unto it geven
^^^fore Gods prophet hes praepreatchd to them
^^^e and strats once of Jerusalem
^^^ier vvrack and from the found the fall
^^^d Them that shall be therein all
Manasse then exp^^d, (...)
Ammon his Son in stated in his stead
And wicked Ammon by his Servands Trai^e
(Josias just succeeds his Father) slame
2 Kings 22 Chap.
WHen King Josiah to govern began
Azealous holy good and godly man
Materials all and means he first made clare
And gave them that the Temple did repare
Then in a hollovv woult within the ground
The Law Hilkiah hid before hes found
Then Prince and Priest the people together dravv
That unto them then might be red the Law
Whair Prince and Priest and prophets promisd all
The statuts there insert observe they shall
The people likewise there the oath they took
To stand to all into that blessed Book
And in there hearts and Souls t'indent it deep
And vvovv'd the Law, and lords commands to keep
Josiah then a Prophetess hes speared
Who all the Lords will hes declard and cleard
2 Kings 23 Chap.
THe Lavv' book fund and red therefrom the vord
Prince Prophets, Priest and people all accord
And by their oath attested whair they stand
To keep the Covenant and Gods command
Josiah then the Idol dead of B'a^
He braks and his blind Priests he killd them all
This Prince the passo're then he caused proclaim
And celebrats it in Jerusalem
Conjurers he, where with the land was cloyd
T'observe the Law gevne be the Lord, destroyed
This pious Prince that be God guyds his reign
By Pharo yet was in Megiddo slain
Iehoahaz succeeds but captive taen
Iehojakim his Sons cround King again.
2 Kings 24 Chap.
Now Nebuchadnezzar Babels great King
His bands blood breathing did against Judah bring
But vanting force t'affront Them in the fields
Iehoiakim then to the Time he yields
And three years slave to him and Tributare
Iehoiakim and Judah justly are
For with the Lords consent these slraits extreme
For Curssd Manasseths Sins was laid on Them
The money murders that he did committ
With the other Sins cried for a venceance yet
^^^kim now with his Fathers dead
^^^achin reign rased in his stead
(...) he praevaricat and still he strayes
(...) had his Fathers done before his days.
2 Kings 24 Chap.
(...) King of Babel then his Servands arms
^^^nd send them against the rebel Jews in swarms
(...) pulats rheir lands there Cities sacks
(...) with their hostile hands all hawock makis
(...) martch then on and with there hosts they hem
^^^elted round about Jerusalem
^^^kim backed but with forces slender
^^^d himself, and City too, to render
^^^e in her rvins, wrack and overthrow
^^^ory erst, and greatness, then they shovv
^^^ing a Captive then is carried thence
^^^edekie Crovn^ by the Babel Prence
^^^nassd he up, a mass beyond all measure
^^^den vessels, Gold, and goodly Treasure
(...) with the Captivs all, and evrie one
^^^sports this rich spoil unto Babylon
2 Kings 25 chap.
(...) City siegd, was brought to voundrous straits
(...) famyn vemen their avvne Bowels eats
^^^er thrie years siege so was it shakin
^^^cibly was brokin up and taken
^^^rat house for worship, wounder once
^^^his mvnd was then a mont of Stons
^^^ghted Zedekiah they have sought
^^^o Bands to Babels King him brought
^^^nes they kill and killd to him ar shovvne
^^^pless Prince hes both his eyes out thrown
^^^m catened to a Carcer carry
^^^age and in blindness there to tarry
^^^on his people permitted these oppressions
(...) there gross sins and there great Transgression.
Ester 16 Chap.
(...) Haman that did all the Jews envy
Mordecay's noght bowing going by
^^^ore the Persian Prince intysed he
^^^me Them all, by his decreit to dye
^^^ordecay did call on God, and Go
(...) and exho^rts her to do so
(...) prayer near the Presenoe drevv
^^^ntreat as Mordecay the Jevv
(...) formed and she did favor find
(...) the Kings heart unto her inclind
And by ane other Edict, then proclaimed
That former cruel ane, it was reclam'd
And Haman that the king and Jews had wrang'd
Full fifty Cubits high was hies'd and hanged.
Job. 2 chap.
THat dreadful Enemy to man the Devil
Devising ever to wrack and work him evvill
Upon just Job (God suffering did assay
To tempt and try his patience ewrie way
Vith boyls his Body he, behind before
And from each side to side assault him sore
Whill with a Pot shard all his Skin he scrapes
For no part of his Skin from Scabs escapes
His wicked wife bidds, him blasphem and die
But sweetly all his Soars yet suffered he
His faithful friends to visit come and wievv him
And weeped all when none of them there knevv him
But patient Job never opned once his lips
For to curse God for all his cruel whipps.
Ezechiel 37 Chap.
THe Prophet is transported to a field
By Gold and their Bones numberless beheld
Then did the Lord demand him if these Bones
So blansh'd could live that ver departed once
He ansverd thus thou knovvs o Lord God than
Says prophecy upon them Sone of man
Which when I had obeyed, they begood
To re assume their Sinevvs flesh and blood
He prophesied again and lo they braeth
And army hudge resussitat from daeth
Stand up all living men, and They (Said he)
The Bones of-all the house of Israel be
Which from there graves and Sepulcures I shall
So smetyme home to their own land recall.
Daniel 3 chap.
THe Babel King ane Image up did raise
And all commands to worship it and praise
His Lord convend he open court did hold
For dedication of that God of Gold
But their three faithful Jews aback abod
And would not bovv unto that Idol God
Wherefore they threvv them in a furnace hot
But from the Lord their God support they got
And therein They vnharm'd with the Angel we^^
Whill that their Burri'os with the fire were b^^^^
Then much affrighted Babels King conf^^^ (...)
Their God was God of Gods almightie^^
Come Shadrach Meshach and Abednego.
Daniel 5 chap.
WHen Belshazzar a proud and impious Prince
Into all Riot pride and Insolence
With thousand Princes with him at a feast
And Concubines as many to almaist
Profaning their the Coups where with tha' adord
In Israel sometime the living Lord
O but amidds there mirth behold a hand
That wrait before them on the wall did stand
Some secreit words (...), Mean ^^^vphar^^ (...).
unto Them all vnknovne
But Daniel resolved them and hes shovvne
That for the kings great wickedness and wrong
His life and Croune he should both loss ore long
And that same night this Prince proud and profane
His reign is rent from him and he is slain.
Daniel 14 chap.
THe prancks pernition of the Priests of Bell
Reveald are be the Prophet Daniel
Bell then pulled dovne and the displeased Prince
Confounded all the Priests for there offense
And then the Dragon that indeed did live
Ane whom to Cyrus did false worship give
Then Dan'el he commands as others all
To worship it and flatt before it fall
But he refuisd, and would the Prince permit
He laid his Life to kill and master it
Then took he pitch Bitumen fat and hair
And boyld together, there with killed it their
The God of hosts was Iealouse of his Glore
And by his Daniel did he that theirfore
Daniel 14 chap.
FOr this dispight as these Idol'ters thought
All with envy agains the Prophet wrought
And in a rage agains their King they rise
And for the killing of the Dragon cries
Yea they upbraid him to his face and tell
That he is turned Jew with Daniel
They press him to deliver him and drevv
Him to the Lions den and their him threvv
For those forefamized a fitting feast
By kind a bloody and a cruel Beast
But God still Dan'el from there fury fred
And by the hand of Abacuk him fed
God ever preservs them in most per'lons places
Whom in his Love and favor he embraces
(...)
THe Sins of Nineveh God from the skies
Beholds and sies with his alseing eyes
His worship wronged and but prophand his name
Yet will premonish or he punish Them
And Jonah to be warner he inveets
Of all the naughtiness of Nineveets
But rebel careless of his Charge then he
Fled unto Iarshish to eschevv't be Sea
But lo a Tempest stirrd be God arose
And he to light the Ship by lot be those
(Is over board thrown) that then with him did Sail
By providence yet kepped by a whail.
Tho careless he his Lords command did brak
Yet would he save him for his mercies sake
Jonah 2 and 3 Chap.
THen ceased the rage and roaring of the Sea
When headlong hurled into it was he
But whill he in that whails big belly lies
Perplexd in Spreit he prayed to God and cries
Thrie days and nights that hel-like house within
Abyds rebellious Jonah for his Sin
A Type of Christ that did presigure plain
That he thrie days should in the Grave remain
His crying from that hollovv vvoult ascends
And God at last his loveing ear he lends
Their to and did that monstrous fish command
To lay the Prophet out a life on Land
Then spoke the Lord to him to this effect
In Nineveh go do as I direct
Jonah 2 and 3 Chap.
Jonah relivde lovv humbled did record
With thankful heart the mercies of the Lord
Then unto Nineveh, in haste he hyes
And one days journey, entered in he cries
(For it was great, as any in the east
And thrie days journey long, and large at least)
That notably the Ninivites annoyed
Yet forty days and It shall be destroyed
This warning Bell through out the City Rong
The people thickly to the Temple throng
And with there Prince appareld in sack cloth
Repent, and pray to appease God with them wroath
He sies them humble and hears there hearts desire
Then with their Pardon pacisies his Ire.
(...)
^^^e Tobit reakins out and does Relate
^^^s parentage, his Carriage and Estate
^^^st declares in Enemessars reign
^^^yrian King, he was a captive caen
^^^e unto his Brether heir with all
^^^nde in their afflictions does recall
^^^htousnes he likevise does record
^^^s zeal and worship of the Lord
^^^eveh his Care he does declare
^^^ying his Brether dying their
^^^ght for be Sennacherib perforce
(...) himself and fled for fear of worss
(...) by a friend that did at court remain
^^^s restored unto Grace again,
Tobit 6 chap.
^^^as by his Father Tobit sent
^^^th Raphael vvnknovvne to Gabel went
(...) they had that by them did abyd
(...) Angel was his good and gracious Guide
^^^st day they at night to Tygris came
^^^obie took a fish into the same
(...) heart and Livver the Angel caused preserve
(...) perfume, ane other time to serve
^^^ges then they come and Raph'el said
^^^ght Thou shall take to thy wife a maid
^^^sings Daughter Raguel, since that
(...) the Law to Thee is destinat
^^^ontrare Raph'el Tobie reasond their
^^^ovves her when these Things he did declare.
Tobit 8 Chap.
^^^as wedding as before intended
^^^ith Rag'els daughter Saranovv is ended
^^^er feasting They go in to rest
^^^om of purpose for them dressd
(...) the Lord told Tobie he assumes
^^^es heart and fird the place perfumes
(...) of how sone the fend the smell hes fund
(...) and was by the Angel after bund
(...) and his vife then rose and pray
^^^undly sleep'd together whill the day
^^^icked Sprit that slew the sevne before
^^^d thence fleem'd from Them for evvermore
(...) Raguel, for Grace thus granted Them
^^^sd and praisd the God of hosts supreme
(...)
THe moneys that from Gabel Tobie sought
The Angel Raph'el it receavv'd and brought
The mar'age feast performed Tobias makes
Him ready with his wife and journey takes
Then Raguel much favor to them shows
And half of all his Goods on them bestows
Upon the way Together going so
His Guide commands him home before to go
And tell his Father blind, both more and less
In all his ways, his prosperous success
And with the fishes Gall, to anoint his eyes
Who quickly after, as before, he sies
Than gladly dois, he Tobies wife receave
And grateful, Glore, to God for all he gave
2 Maccabees 7 Chap.
SEven Brether that Svines flesh refuisd to eat
Skin-tirrd ar tried with tortring torments great
For what the Law prohibits they refuise
And rather all, for to be chastizd chuise
By death and bid what Buchery can do
Than to that bass abomination bovv
And after other, each, there suffered more
Nor any torted, ever had before
Yet holily exhorting other all
T'incress their Courage, on the Lord they call
And full of hope when these short pains ar past
To rise again, they leave to live at last
Their mother martyred last with strokes extreme
Feareless and faithful fell and follovvd Them.
2 Maccabees.
SImon the Treasure in the Temple sealed
Spighting the Priest to Hel'dore revealed
Who by his King Seleucus charged came
And from the Treasury toock out the same
Onias then the Priest and people pray
Whill God that sacrilegious stooth did stay
And by his armed Angels shyning bright
Heliodore is whipped in Israel sight
And to the earth blind is he beaten dovne
And deadlyke Sensles lies therein swone
Whill for Onias prayer God for gives
The robrie and the man again revives
Then the Angels their directs him to declare
The almighties povv're that he proved their.
FINIS.
Prented AT MIDDELBVRGH, GERRIT MOULERT Anno 1637.


