THE GREAT FROST.

Cold doings in London, except it be at the LOTTERIE.

With News out of the Country.

A familiar talk between a Countryman and a Citizen touching this terrible
Frost and the great Lotterie, and the effects of them.

The Description of the Thames frozen over.

Londoners upon the frozen Thames

Printed at London for Henry Gosson, and are to be sold at the sign of the
(...)

A Table of the most special matters of note contained in this short Discourse.
1. A description of the Thames being frozen over. 2. The dangers that has
happened to some persons passing upon the Thames. 3. The harms that this Frost
has done to the City. 4. The misery that the Country people are driven into
by the means of this Frost. 5. The Frosts in other Kings times compapared
with this. 6. A description of the Lottery.
THE GREAT FROST. Cold doings in London. A Dialogue.
The speakers.
A Citizen. A Countryman.
Citizen. OLd Father, you are most heartily welcome to London.


Countryman. Sir, I give you most kind and hearty thanks: but you must
pardon me; I am an old man, and have those defects that go a long with old
age; I have both bad eyes to discern my friends and a weak memory to keep
their names in mind: I have quite lost the remembrance of you.


Cit. Nay Father, I am a mere stranger to you. But seeing white hairs to
cover your head as well as mine own, I make bold to reach out my hand to you:
there is honesty in your very looks, and every honest man is worthy, and
ought to be taken into acquaintance.


Coun. I am beholden to you for this curtesse: you Citizens are civil, and we
poor country fellows are plain, but albeit I walk in russet and course
gray, I have a true heart. What is your pleasure Sir?


Citt. If your haste be no greater then mine (for blessed be God, we have now
too many idle hours against our will.) I would gladly confer with you of the
state of the Country, and if I can delight you with any City news, you shall
have my bosom opened freely.


Coun. The Plough-mans hands Sir are now held in his pocket as well as the
Shopkeepers: I have as little to do as you, and therefore an hours that
shall please me well: we old men are old Chronicles, and when our tongues
go, they are not clockes to tell only the time present, but large, books
unclasped, and our speeches, like leaves turned over and over, discover wonders
that are long since past.


Cit. I am glad that I have met with an old man that has not stood still in
his life (like a poole) but like a River has run through the world to get
experience. But I pray tell me, of what Country are you?


Coun. Of Rippon in Yorkshire.


Cit. And (if it he not too much beyond the rule of good manners.) let me be
bold to inquire what drew you, dwelling so far off, to travel to London?


Coun. Marry Sir I will tell you, even that drew me to London, which draws you
out of your houses: that which makes you cry out in London, We have cold
doings, and to leave your shops to catch you heat in the streets, nay to
leave your new beautiful walks in Moore-fields, (for those I have seen at my
entering into the City) and to make newer and larger walks (though not so
safe) upon a field of glass as it were. That slippery world which I beheld (as
I remember) in the fifth year of the reign of Queen Elizabeth, (or I am sure
I am not much wide) do I come thus far to behold again in the fifth year of
our good King James, and that is (in a few cold words) thethames frozen over.


Cit. Yea Father, and frozen over and over.


Cou. I have but two ears Sir (if I had more I were a monster) but those two
ears bring me home a thousand tales in less then seven days. Some I harken
to, some I shake my head at, some I smile at, some I think true, some I know
false. But because this world is like our Millers in the Country, knauish and
hard to be trusted, though mine ears be mine own and good, yet I had rather
give credit to mine eyes: although they see but badly, yet I know they will
not cosen me, they have not these fourscore years, and that is the reason I
have made them my guides now in this journey, and they shall be my witnesses
when I get home again, and sit, as I hope I shall, turning a crab by the
fire^) of what wonders I have been a beholder.


Cit. In good sadness Father I am proud, that such a heap of years lying on
your back, you stoup no lower for them; I come short of you by more than
twenty, and me thinks I am both more unlusty, and look more aged.


Cou. Oh Sir, riots, riots, surfets, surfets stick white hairs upon young men's
chinnes, when sparing diets hold color. Your cramd Capons feed you fat here
in London, but our beef and bacon feeds us strong in the Country: long
steepes and late watchings, dry up your bloods, and wither your cheeks; we go
to bed with the lamb, and rise with the lark, which makes our bloods
healthful: you are still sending to the Apothecaries, and still crying out; to
fetch Master Doctortor to me,, but our Pottecaries shop is our garden full
of pot-hearbes, and our Doctor is, a good cloue of garlic. I am as lusty and
sound at heart (I praise my God) as my yoke of bullockes that are the servants
to my Plough.


Cit. Yet I wonder that having no more sand in the the glass of your life (for
young men may reckon years, but we old men must coumpt upon minutes,) I wonder I
say how you durst set forth, and how you could come thus far.


Coun. How I durst set forth? If King Harry were now alive again, I durst and
would (as old and stiff as I am, go with him to Bullen. We have trees in our
Town that bear fruit in winter: I am one of those winter plums, and though I
taste a little sower, yet I am sound at heart, and shall not rot yet I hope, for
all this frost.


Cittiz. It were pity so reverend an Oak should so soon be felled down, you
may stand and grow yet many a year.


Coun. Yes sir, downward, downward you and I must grow (like ears of corn
when they be ripe.) But I beseech you tell me; Is that goodly River of yours, I
call it yours, because you are a Citizen, (and that River is the Nurse that
gives milk and honey to your city: But is that Lady of fresh waters all
covered over with ice?


Cit. All over I assure you Father: the Frost has made a floor upon it, which
shows like gray Marble, roughly hewn out: it is a very pauement of glass,
but that it is more strong. The Thames now lies in, or rather is turned (as
some think) bankerupt, and dares not show her head; for all the water of it
floates up and down now like a springtide in a celler.


Coun. God help the poor Fishes; it is a hard world with them, when their
houses are taken over their heads, they use not to lie under such thick
roofes. But I pray sir, are all the arches of your famous London Bridge so damd
up with ice, that the flakes show like so many frozen gates, shut up close, and
that nothing passes through them, nay, that a man cannot look through them as
he had wont?


Cit. No such matter: the Thames with her ebbing and flowing has at sundry
times brought down hay, wintercastles of ye, which iustling against the arches
of the Bridge, and striueing (like an unruly Drunkard at a gate of the City in
the night time) to pass through, have there bin stayed and lodged so long,
till they have lain in heaps and got one upon another, but not so ambitiously
as you speak of them.


Countri. And do not the Westerne-Barges come down upon certain artificial
pullies and engines, sliding on the ice, to serve your City with fuel.


Citti. That were a wonder worth seeing, and more strange than the rowing over
steeples by land in a wherry; no I assure you, these stories shall never stand
in our Chronicles: there is no such motion.


Coun. But I hope Sir you and I may drink a pint of sack in the Tauern that
runs upon wheels on the river, as well as a thousand have done besides, may we
not? the motion of that wine-celler I am sure is to be seen, is it not?


Cit. The water-celler is, but the wine-cellers have too good doings on the
land, to leave that, and to set up Tauernes on the River; you know more in the
Country I perceive then we do in the City of these matters.


Count. Nay Sir, we hear more, but know less: we hear the lies, and you know
the truth: why law you now, had not I made this journey to London, I had died
in mis-beliefe: mine ear might thus have made me to have been called old
doting fool: for I giving credit to report, should have uttered these fables
for trueths; and I being an old man, should have been believed, (for a white
head ought not to hold a black tongue;) and so my sons and daughters (taking
a fathers word) might peradventure forty years hence, have been called
clownes, for justifying a lie so monstrous and incredible.


Citti. Bar all these rumors hereafter out of your ears, for they are false
and deceitful, and fly up and down like Lapwings, their in times being there
it is, when it is not.


Coun You Sir are a man, that by your head and beard (as well as my self)
should be one of Times Sons, and should therefore love his daughter Truth.
Make me so much beholding to you, as to receive from you the right Picture of
all this your Water-workes; and how they began, and how they have grown, and
in what fashion continued?


Citi. The Thames described as it was Frozen.
Most gladly will I satisfy your request. You shall understand therefore that
the Thames began to put on his Freeze-coote (which yet he wears) about the
week before Christmas, and has kept it on till now this latter end of
Ianuarij, how long time soever besides to come, none but God knows.


Coun. Did it never thawe in thus many weeks?


Citizen. Only three days, or four at the most, and that but weakly to
disolue so great a hardness. The Cakes of Ise (great quantity, and in great
numbers) were made and baked cold in the mouth of winter, at the least a
fortnight or three weeks, before they were crusted and creme^ted together; but
after they once joined their stre^gths in one, their backsheld out and cold not
be broken.


Coun. We may make this good use even out of this watery and transformed
element; that London vpholdeth a state; and again, that violent factions and
combinations (albeit of the basest persons) in a Commonwealth, are not easily
disolued, if once they be suffered to grow up to a head. On Sir I pray.


Cit. This cold breakfast being given to the City, and the Thames growing more
and more hard-harted, wild youths and boys were the first Marchant-venturers
that set out to discover these cold Islands of Ise upon the River. First going
over the Thames on the Ice about Cold-Harbour.
And the first path that was beaten forth, to pass to the Banck-side (with out
going over Bridge, or by Boat) was about Cold-Harbour, and in those places
near the Bridge; for the Tides still plying up the flakes of Ise one upon
another in those places of the Thames. it was held the best and the safest
traveling into our new found Freezeland, by those creekes.


Coun. But this onset prospering, and they coming offwell, hartened others to
come on Sir, did it not?


Cit. No soldiers more desperate to a skirmish: speak it Father from my mouth
for an assured truth; that there was as it were an artificial bridge of ice
reaching from one side of the River to the other, upon which infinite numbers
of people passed too and fro, iustling one an other in crowdes, when the
current of the water ran (in sight) more than half the breadth of the Thames,
on either side of ye ycecy bridge, the bridge it self being not above five
yardes broad, (if so much.)


Cou. It was strange! But it was said of your Londoners, that when you strive
to be kind, you turn into prodigals; when you are cowards, you are arrant
cowards, and when you are bold, you are too desperately venturous.


Cit. It appears so by this frost: for no danger could nip their bloods with
fear; but over some went in shoals when thousands stood gazing on and swore,
they would not follow their steps in that waterie wilderness for many
thousands of pounds: nay, even many of those that were the discouerers, and did
first venture over, would never undertake the second voyage, but protested when
they were half way, they would have lost much to have bin again on shore.


Coun. It is most likely, for perils that are not common make men foole-hardy,
but being once tasted, they tremble to come near them.


Cit. You say true Father; but the fear of this shipwreck, and of these
rocks, grew eueryday less and less, as the ice increased in hardness, so
men's hearts increased in hardiness: so that at the length, (the frost knitting
all his sinews together, and the inconstant water (by that means) being of a
floating element, changed into a firm ground as it were) What numbers of
people walked on the Thames.
both men, women, and children walked over, and up and down in such companies,
that I verily believe, and I dare almost swear it, the one half (if not three
parts) of the people in the City, have been seen going on the Thames. The
River showed not now (neither shows it yet) like a River, but like a field
where Archers shoot at pricks, whilst others play at foote-ball. It is a
place of maisterie, where some wrestle, and some run, and he that does best
is aptest to take a fall. It is an Alley to walk upon without dread, albeit
under it be most assured danger. The Gentlewomen that trembles to pass over a
Bridge in the field, does here walk boldly: the Citizens wife that looks pale
when she sits in a boat for fear of drowning, thinks that here she treades
as safe now as in her Parlour: Of all ages, of all sexes, of all professions
this is the common path: it is the road way between London and Westminster,
and between South-warke and London. Would you drink a cup of sack Father?
there stand some with Rundlets to fill it out.


Countri. Ah ha, that's the Tavern then is talked on.


Cit. Beer, Ale, wine, victuals, and fires on the Thames.
Thirst you for Beer, Ale, Vsquibath, etc. or for victuals? there you may buy
it, because you may tell an other day how you dined upon the Thames. Are you
cold with going over? you shall ere you come to the midst of the River, spy
some ready with pannes of coals to warm your fingers. If you want fruit
after you have dined, there stands Costermongers to serve you at your call. And
thus do people leave their houses and the streets, turning the goodliest
River in the whole Kingdom, into the broadest-streete to walk in.


Coun. But tell me I pray Sir, if all the merchants that undertake this voyage
to these your narrow seas, are none undone? do none of your fresh water
soldiers miscarry, and drop down in these slipperie Marshes?


Cit. Yes Sir, I have heard of many, and have been an eye witness of some: of
all which, I will be sparing in report, being rather willing to be reprehended
for telling too little, then for discovering too much.


Coun. It is a modesty well becomes any man, albeit nothing but truth sit
upon his tongue. But I pray sithence you crack the shell, let us see what
kernel there is within it: sithence you have bestowed the sweet, let me taste
the sower, let your news be as Country-folkes bringing fruit to your markets,
the bad and the good together: say, have none gone westward for smelts (as our
prouerbiall phrase is?)


Citti. The harms that have fallen on several persons going on the Thames.
Yes, it has been a kind of battle for the time, for some have fallen in
up to the knees, others to the middle, others to the arme-pittes, yea and some
have been ducked over head and ears, yet have crawled out like drowned Rats,
whiles others have suncke to the bottom that never rose again to the top:
they had a cold bed to lie in. Amongst many other misfortunes that are to be
pitied, this is one; A couple of friends shooting on the Thames with
birding-peeces, it happened they struck a Sea-pie, or some other foul, they
both ran to catch it, the one stumbled forward, his head slipped into a deep
hole, and there was he drowned: the other (in his haste) slipped backward, and by
that means saved his life. A poor fellow likewise having heated his body with
drink, thought belike to cool it on the water: but coming to walk on the
Ice, his head was too heavy for his heels, so that down he fell, and there
presently died.


Coun. Let his fall give others warning how to stand. Your City cannot choose
but be much damnified by this strange congealing of the River.


Citti. Exceeding much (Father) strangers may guess at our harms; yet none
can give the full number of them but we that are the inhabitants: The hurt
that the City has received by this Frost.
for the City by this means is cut off from all comerce: Shopkeepers may sit
and ask what do you lack, when the passengers may very well reply, what do
you lack your selves: they may sit and stare on men, but not sit and sell: it
was (before) called The dead Term, and now may we call this, The dead
Vacation, The frozen Vacation, The cold Vacation. If it be a Gentleman's life to
live idly, and do nothing, how many poor Artificers and Tradesmen have
been made Gentlemen then by this Frost? For a number of Occupations (like the
flakes of ice that lie in the Thames) are by this malice of Winter, trod clean
under foot, and will not yet be able to stir. Alas poor Watermen, you have
had cold cheer at this banquet: you that live altogether upon water, can now
scarce get water to your hands: it is a hard thing now for you to earne your
bread with the sweat of your brows.


Coun. This beating may make them wise, the want that this hard season drives
them into, may teach them to play the Ants, and in Summer to make a provision
against the wrath of Winter. There is no mischief borne alone I know;
calamities commonly are (by birth) twins: me thinks therefore, yt this drying
up of the waters, should be a deuourer up of wood: this cold Ague of the earth
must needs have warmth to help it* that warmth must come from fire, and that
fire cannot be had without cost: how then I pray you in this so general an
affliction, did poor people shift for fuel to comfort them?


Citti. The want of fire.
Their care for fire was as great as for food: nay, to want it was a worse
torment then to be without meat: the belly was now pinched to have the body
warmed: and had not the Provident Fathers of this City (carefully, charitably,
and out of a good and godly zeal) dispersed a relief to the poor, in
several parts and places about the outer bounds of the City, where poverty
most inhabiteth) by storing them before hand with Seacoale and other fiering at
a reasonable rate, I verily persuade my self, that the unconscionable and
unmerciful raising of the prices of fuel by Chandlers, Wood-mongers, etc.
(who now meant to lay the poor on the Rack) would have been the death of
many a wretched creature through the want of succor.


Coun. Not unlikely Sir.


Cit. For neither could coal be brought up the River, neither could wood be
sent down. The Western Barges might now wrap up their smoakie Sails, for
albeit they had never so lofty a gale, their voyage was spoyld, the winds was
with them, but the tide was clean against them. And not only has this frost
nipt away those comforts that should revive the outward parts of the body, but
those also that should give strength and life to the inward. Darth of victuals.
For you of the Country being not able to travel to the City with victuals,
the price of victual must of necessity be enhaunced, and victual itself
brought into a scarcity. And thus have I given you (according to your request)
a true picture of our Thames frozen over, and withal have drawn in as lively
colors as I can (to my skill) as it were in a little Table, all the miseries,
mischiefs, and inconveniences, which this hard time has thrown upon our
City.


Coun. Sir, you have satisfied me to the full, and have given unto me so good a
taste of your love, that if I should live double the years that are already
scored on my head, I cannot choose but die indebted to your kindness.


Cit. Not so Father, for you shall if you please come out of my debt presently,
and your payment shallbe in the selft-same coin, that you received of me,
(that is to say words.)


Countriman. I am glad Sir, you will take a poor country-mans word for so
round a sum as I acknowledge is owing to you: you are a merciful Creditor;
GOD send me always to deal with such Chapmen. But how will you set down my
payments?


Citi. Mary thus Father: As I have discovered unto you, what cold doings we
have had (during this Frost) in the City, so I pray let me understand from
you, what kind of world you have lived in in the Country.


Coun. News out of the Country.
The world with us of the Country, runs upon the old rotten wheels: for all
the Northern cloth that is wouen in our Country, will scarce make a Gown to
keep Charity warm, she goes so a cold. Rich men had never more money, and
Covetousness had never less pity: there was never in any age more money
stirring, nor never more stir to get money. Farmers are now slaves to racking
young prodigal la^dlords, those Landlords, are more servile slaves to their
own Riots and Luxury. But these are the common diseases of every Kingdom and
therefore are but common news. The tunes of the Nightingale are stale in the
middle of Summer, because we hear them at the coming in of the Spring, and so
these harsh notes which are sung every day in every Country, do (be custom)
grow not to be regarded. But your desire Sir is, to know how we spend the days
of this our Frozen age in the Country.


Citizen. That I would hear indeed Father.


Coun. Believe me Sir, as wickedly you must think as you can hear in your
City. It goes as hard with us as it does with you. The miseries that Country
people feel by this frost
The same cold hand of Winter is thrust into our bosoms, the same sharp air
strikes wounds into our bodies: the same Sun shines upon us, but the same
Sun does not heat us no more then it does you. The poor Plough-mans
children sit crying and blowing their nails, as lamentably as the children and
servants of your poor Artificers. Hunger pinches their cheeks as deep into
the flesh, as it does into yours here. You cry out here, you are undone for
coal, and we complain, we shall dye for want of Wood. All your care is to
provide for your Wives, children and servants, in this time of sadness: but
we go beyond you in cares; not only our wives, our children, and household
servants, are unto us a cause of sorrow, but we grieve as much to behold the
misery of our poor Cattle (in this frozen-hearted season) as it does to
look upon our own affliction. Our beasts are our faithful servants, and
do their labor truly when we set them to it, they are our Nurses that give
us milk, they are our guides in our iourneyes, they are our partners, and
help to enrich our state; yea, they are the very vp-holders of a poor
Farmers lands and livings. Alas then, what Master that loves his servant as
he ought, but would almost break his own heart-stringes with fighing, to see
these pine and mourn as they do? The ground is bare, and not worth a poor
handful of grass. The earth seems barren, and bears nothing, or if she
does, most unnaturally she kills it presently, or suffers it through cold to
perish. By which means the lusty horse abates his flesh, and hangs the head,
feeling his strength go from him: the Ox stands bellowing: the ragged Sheep
bleeting: the poor Lamb shiuering and staruing to death.

The poor Cottager that has but a Cow to live upon, must feed upon hungry
meals (God knows) when the beast her self has but a bare Commons. He that is
not able to bid all his Cattle home, and to feast them with Fodder out of his
Barnes, will scarce have Cattle at the end of Summer to fetch home his
Harvest. Which charge of feeding so many beastly mouths, is able to eat up a
Country-mans estate, if his providence before time has not bin the greater to
meet and prevent such storms. Of necessity our Sheep Oxen etc. must be in
danger of famishing, (having nothing but what our old grandam the earth will
allow them to live upon) of necessity must they pyne, scithence all the fruits
that had wont to spring out of her fertile womb, are now nipt in their birth,
and likely never to prosper. And to prove that the Ground has her very heart
(as it were) broken, and that she has not lively sap enough in her veins left
as yet to quicken her, and to raise her up to strength: behold, this one
infallible token. The Leeke, whose courage has ever binne so undaunted, that
he has borne up his lusty head in all storms; and could never be compelled
to shrink, for Hayle, Snow, Frostes, nor showers; is now by the violence and
cruelty of this Weather, beaten into the earth, being rotted, dead, disgraced
and trod upon.

And thus (Sir) if words may be taken for current payment (to a Creditor so
worthy as your self) have I tendered some part of my love in requital of
yours. You gave unto me a Map of your City as it stands now in the Frost,
and I bestowed upon you a Moddell of the Country, which I pray receive with as
friendly a hand, as that is which offers it.


Citiz. I do, with millions of thanks. The story which you told (albeit it
yet makes my heart bleed to think upon the calamities of my poor Countrymen)
yet was it uttered with so grave a judgment, and in a time so well befitting
your age, that I kept mine ears open, and my lips locked up; for I was loath
to interrupt you, till all was told: wherein you show your self to be a
careful and honest debtor, in discharging your bond all at one sum, when you
might have done it in several payments. But I pray you Father, what is your
opinion of this strange Winter? I call you Father, albeit my own head be
whitened by old age, as well as yours: and be not angry that I do so, it is
an honorable title due unto your years: for as those that are young men to
me, bestow that dignity upon my silver hairs, (and I am proud to take it) so
would I not have you disdain that attribute from my mouth, (that am a young
man to you) sithence I do it out of love and the reverence I bear to my
Elders. Tell me therefore, I pray, your judgment, of this Frost, and what (in
the school of your experience) you have read, or can remember, may be the
effects, which it may produce, or which (of consequence) are likely to follow
upon it.


Countr. The dangers that a thaw is like to bring with it.
I shall do my best to satisfy you: When these great Hills of ice shall be
dug down, and be made level with the waters; when these hard rocks shall
melt into soft rivers, and that a sudden thaw shall overcome this sharp Frost,
then is it to be feared, that the swift, violent and irresistable
Land-currents, will bear down Bridges, beat down Buildings, ouerflow our
Corne-fieldes, overrun the Pastures, drown our Cattle, and endanger the
lives both of man and beast, travailing on their way.


Cittiz. You say right: This Prognostication which yuur judgment thus looks
into, did always fall out to be too true. But what other Weather does your
Calender promise


Countr. I will not hide within me from you, that time and observation have
taught me. And albeit it may appear strange unto you, that an old Country
Penny-father, (a plain holland ruff, and a kerzie stocking) should talk thus
of the change of seasons, and the mutabilities of the world. Yet S. know I
beseech you that my education was finer then my Russet outside, and that my
parents did not only provide to leave me something, but took care (above that
tansitorie blessing) that I should taste a little of the fruit of learning and
knowledge.

It will be a pleasing and profitable journey to our countrymen though a
laborious voyage for you.

King William Ruphus
I have read how in the reign of king William Ruphus (in the fifth year as I
remember) that Rivers of this kingdom were so frozen over, that carts and
waines laden, did without danger pass over them.

King John.
In the sixth year of the reign of King John,a frost began upon the 13. of
January, and continued till the 22. of March following, the earth by means of
this being so hardened, that the plow lay still, and the ground could not be
tilled. The wounds that this frost gave the common wealth were for that present
scarce felt, they were not deep, they were thought not dangerous. But in the
summer following did they freshly begin to bleed, for then a quarter of wheat
was sold for a mark, which in the reign of Henry the second (before him) was
sold for no more then 12. pence.

king Henry
There was likewise so great a frost in the 53. year of the reign of Henry
the third, that being at Saint Andrews tide, it continued till Candelmas. So
that men and beasts went over the Thames from Lambeth to Westminster, and the
goods of Merchants not being able to be transported by water, were carried from
Sandwich and other havens, and so brought to London by land. But no
extraordinary or memorable accident following or going before this frost, I
will pass over it, and come to that frosty season in the tenth year of Edward
the first, whose violent working was so cruel, and did build such castles of
I Will upon the Thames and other Rivers, that five arches of London bridge were
borne down, and all Rochesterbridge was carried clean away, with diverse others.

K. Edw, 3.
In the seven and thirtieth year of Edward the third, a Frost began in
England, about the midst of September, and thawed not till April following, so
that it continued almost eight months.

K. Henry 4.
In the ninth year of the reign of K. Henry the fourth, was there a Frost
that lasted fifteen weeks. The like happened in the fourth year of Edward
the fourth. K. Edw. 4.


K. Henr. 8.
In the nynth year of K. Henry the eight, the Thames was frozen over, that men
with horse and carts passed upon it: And in the very next succeeding year,
dyed multitudes of people, by a strange disease, called the Sweating Sickness.

Q Elizab.
There was one great Frost more in England, (in our memory,) and that was in
the seventh year of Queen Elizabeth, which began upon the 21. of December,
and held on so extremely, that upon New years eeue following, people in
multitudes went upon the Thames from London Bridge to Westminster: Some (as you
tell me, Sir, they do now) playing at foote-ball, others shooting at pricks:
This Frost began to thaw upon the third day of January at night, and on the
fifth of the same month, was no ice to be seen between London Bridge and
Lambeth: which sudden thaw brought forth sudden harms, for houses and bridges
were ouer-turned by the Land-floudes: amongst which, Owes Bridge in Yorkshire
was borne away: many numbers of people perishing likewise by those waters.


Cittiz. You have a happy memory Father: your head I see is a very storehouse
of antiquity: you are of your self a whole volume of Chronicles: Time has
well bestowed his lessons upon you, for you are a ready scholar of his, and
do repeat his stories by heart perfectly.


Countr. And thus (as I said before) you may perceive, that these extraordinary
Feauers have always other evils attending upon them.


Cittiz. You have made it plain unto me: and I pray God, at whose command
the Sun sendes forth his heat, to comfort the earth, and the winds bitter
storms to deface the fruits of it, that in this last afflictation of waters,
which are hardened against us, all other miseries may be closed up withal: and
that the stripes of sundry plagues and calamities which for these many years
have been seen sticking in our flesh, may work in our bodies such amendment,
and in our souls such repentance, that the rod of the divine Iusticer may be
held back from scourging us any longer.


Countr. I gladly and from my heart, play the Clarke, crying Amen. I have been
bold and troublesome to you Sir.


Cittiz. You teach me what language to speak to your self in, I would neither
of us both, had ever spent an hour worse.


Countr. Indeed Time is a jewel of incomparable value, yet (as unthrifts do
by their money) we are prodigal in wasting it, and never feel the true
sweetness of inioying it, till we have lost all. But sithence I have waded
thus far into conference with you, and that it is our agreement to barter
away news one with another, (as Merchants do their commodities) I must
request one kindness more at your hands.


Cittiz. What is that, Father? I am now in your debt, and in Conference I must
see you satisfied.


Countr. I hear Sir strange report of a certain Lottery for Plate, of a great
value, here in London: Is it true?


Cittiz. It is true, that there is a Lottery, and it is set up by Strangers.


Countr. I remember, that (as I take it in the xi. year of Queen Elizabeth) a
Lottery began here in London, in which, if my memory fail not, were four
hundred thousand lots to be drawn.


Cittiz. You say right: so much still lies in my remembrance.


Count. Mary that Lotterie was only for money, and every lot was ten
shillings. It was held at the West door of Saint Paul's Church. It began upon
the eleventh of January, and continued day and night till the sixth of May
following, which was almost four Months: and the common burden of that song,
when poor prizes were drawn, was Two pence halfe-pennie.


Cittiz. That was a prize poor enough, I Will be sworn: Nay father, then was
there another gallant Lotterie about the eight and twenty year of the same
Queens reign, which began in the middle of Summer, and was for marvelous
rich and costly armors, guilt and engraven.


Countr. That Lotterie I heard of, but never saw it, for I was then in the
Country.


Cittiz. To win those armours, all the companies of the City ventured
general sums of money. But because you desire to hear some news of this
last Lotterie, that now tempts people together, I will tell you so much of it
as I certainly know for truth, referring your ear (if you would hear more) to
the great voice of the vulgar, of whom you may be sure to have more then
willingly you will carry home.


Countr. Oh sir, the wild beast with many heads, must needs have as many
tongues, and it is not possible those tongues should go true, no more then all
the clocks do but I pray you speak on.


Cittiz. The desc^^^tion of the Lottery
This Lotterie (as I said before) consists all of plate: it is a goodly
Goldsmiths shop to come into: and to behold so many guilt Spoones, Cups,
Bowls, Basins, Ewers, etc. fairly graven, and richly gilded, who would not be
tempted to venture a shilling (for that's a stake for a lot) when for that
shilling he may happily draw a piece of plate worth a hundred pound, or an
hundred and forty, fifty, or threescore pounds, if he can catch it, which he
may do if Fortune favor him.


Countr. Oh sir, that found of a hundred pound makes good music in the ear,
and draws men to hearken to it. Those are the sweet baytes: but upon what
hooks, I pray you, are those lickorish bayts hung?


Cittiz. Upon villainous long ones: for to every prize there are put in 40.
blanks, so that there are so many tricks to set a man beside the saddle, and
but one to leap in. There are 7600. prizes, and 42. mil. of Blanckes: a number
of hard choked Pears must be swallowed, before the delicate fruit can be
tasted.


Countr. And yet I hear that the people fly thither like Wild-geese.


Cittiz. You may well say like Wild-geese: for some of them prove such Goose
caps by going thither, that they leave themselves no more feathers on their
backs then a Goose has when she is plucked. I have sat there and beheld the
faces of all sorts of people, that flock to this fair of Silver
household stuff: It is better then ten Comedies to note their entrances into
the place, and their Exits: and yet in good truth I have been heartily sorry,
to see what tragical ends have fallen upon some poor housekeepers that have
come thither. About the doors multitudes still are crowding: above, the room
is continually filled with people. Every mouth is balling out for lots, and
every hand thrust out to snatch them: both hands are lifted up, the one to
deliver the Condemned shillings, the other to Receive the papers of life and
death. And when the papers are paid for (which are rolled up like Wafers)
load: what praying is there in every corner, that God would (if it be his
will) send them good fortune. How gingerly! do they open their Twelue-pennie
commodity! How leysurely? with what gaping of the mouth! with what licking of
the lips (as though they felt sweetness in it before they taste it) how the
standers by encourage him that has drawn, to open boldly, as if it were to
venture upon the mouth of a Canon, and with what strange passions and pantings
does he turn over his wast papers? But when he finds within but a pale peace
of paper, Lord, how he swears at his own folly, curses the Frenchmen, and
cries a plague on the house, and wishes all the plate were molten, and powered
down the throtes of them that owe it: Yet when he has emptied his bosom of
all this bitterness, the very casting of his eye upon a goodly fair Basin of
silver, so sweetens the remembrance of his lost money, that to it he falls
again, and never gives over so long as he can make any shift for the other
shilling. And thus do a number of poor men labor with a kind of greedines to
beggar themselves.


Countr. But amongst all these Land-Rouers, have none of them the luck of men
of war, to win rich prizes?


Cittiz. Yes, some do: and the making of one, is the undoing of an hundred:
for the sight of a standing bowl being borne openly away in triumph by some
poor fellow, so sets all their teeth on edge that are the gazers on, that many
of them are almost mad, till they have sold their pewter, in hope to change
it into a cupbbord of silver plate And so far does this frenzy lead some
(especially the baser sort of people) that this man pawnes his cloak, that man
his holliday breeches: this woman sells her brass, that gossip makes away her
linen, and all these streams meet in the end in one river. These do all
suffer shipwreck, and the sea swallows the spoil. The one goes home crying
and cursing, the other stands still tickling with laughter: the one hugs
himself for his good success, the other is ready to hang himself at his i^l
fortune. Carmen sell their horses, and give over drawing of loades, to draw
lots. There came a young wench in one day (a maid servant) that had newly
received her quarters wages, and was going to buy clothes to her back: But
this Siluer-mine standing in her way, here she vowed to dig, and to try if she
could be made for ever: she ventured all her money, and lost all. But when she
saw it gone, she sighed and swear, the loss of her maidenhead should never
have grieved her so much, as the loss of her wages.


Countr. I believe her sir:


Cittiz: Imagine how a Vintners boy having received a reckoning of his masters
guests, and they falling presently to dice, if the drawer should set his
masters money, and crying at all, should loose it al, how would that fellow
look? even so looked that poor wench.


Countr. Are there (think you sir) no deceits in this Lotterie, to cozen and
abuse the people?


Cittiz. Trust me father, I dare accuse no man of any, because I know of none:
such accions as these (how warrant able soever,) and strengthened by the best
authorities, who have wisdom to look through and through them, if there were
any iugling conceit, notwithstanding stand from the stinges of slander, if any
villainy be done, the people that swarm thither, practice it one against an
other.


Count. As how I pray sir?


Cittiz. Knauis triks done at the Lottery
For I have been told, that some one crafty knave amongst all the rest, taking
upon him to play the good Shepherd over the flock, that stands about him,
has gathered money from several men, or women, he himself likewise putting in
his own, and then keeping a crowding to pass through the press, he comes
back and delivers so many blanckes as he received shillings, which blankes
were not of the Lotterie, but cunningly made up by himself, and carried of
purpose up and down by him in his pocket.


Co. They are worthily served that will be cheted by such a doctor in the art of
knavery. If any man therefore will needs be, as the term is now, one of this
twelve penny Guls, let him hereafter set his own limetwigs, and then if he
catch no bird, no body else shall laugh at him.


Citiz. Amongst many other things upon the frosen Thames, that will in times
to follow, look to be remembered, this is one: That there were two Barkers
shops (in the fashion of Boothes with signs and other properties of that trade
belonging to them) fixed on the ice: to which many numbers of people resorted,
and (albeit they wanted no shauing) yet would they here he trimmed, because an
other day they might report, that they lost their hair between the bank side
and London. Both these shoppes werr still so full, that the workmen thought
every day had been Saturday: never had they more barbarous doings for the
time: there was both old polling and cold polling: and albeit the foundation
of their houses stood altogether upon a watery ground, yet they that were
Doctors of the barbours chair, feared no danger, for it was a hard matter
almost now for a man to find water to drown himself if he had been so
desperate

Then had they other games of nineholes and Pidgeon-holes in great numbers.
And this (father) did I observe as worthy to be remembered, that when the
watermen (who had cold doings for a long time) had by maine labor cut down
with axes, and such like instruments, a lane and open passage between Queen
Hyth, and the further bank, so that boats went surely to and fro, yet were
people in great multitudes running, walking, slyding, and playing at games and
exercises, as boldly as if they had been on the firm land (the Thames running
mainely between them) and taking Boats at Queen Hyth, or any other Stayres,
they would as fiercely leap upon the very vrim of the caked Ice, as if it had
been a strong Wharfe, or the ground it self.

And thus much father, touching the great Frost here about our City. Unto
which, upon my conference with some Merchantes my friends here in London, and
upon view of Letters from several factors out of other Countries beyond the
Seas.) I add this further report, that this Frost has not only continued in
this extremity here in England, but all or the greatest part of all the
Kingdoms in Christendom, have been pinched by the same: amongst which those
Countries Northward (as Russia, Muscouia, etc, which at these times of the
year are commonly subject to sharp, bitter and violent Frosts) were now (this
Winter) more extremely, and more extraordinarily afflicted, then usually they
have been in many years before. So that the calamities that have fallen upon
us by this cruelty of the weather, are so much to be endured with the greater
patience, and with more thanksgiving to God, because his hand has punished
neighbors and other Nations as heavily (if not more severely) then he has us.

Amongst all the serious accidents that have happened here upon our Thames, I
will now (father) quicken your heareing with one a little more merry, it was
merry to the beholders and strange, but I believe he found no great mirth in it
that was the person that performed it. But thus it was.

A Citizen happened to venture (with many others) upon the Ice: but he with a
couple of dogs that followed him, walked up and down so long, till he was in a
manner alone from the rest of the company. You must understand, that this was
now toward the end of the frost, when it either began or was likely to thaw:
so that people were not so bold upon the Ice nor in such multitudes as they
were before: but this Citizen (and his two dogs,) keeping as I said aloof from
others, it fortuned that the flake of Ice upon which he stood, was in a moment
sundred from the maine body of the frosen Thames, like an arm of a tree cut
from the body: so that he stood, or rather swomme (as he stood) upon a
floating Island: the poor man perceiving that his ground failed under him,
began to faint in his heart, repenting that now he was so ve^terous, or so
foolish to leave firm ground where he was safe, and to trust a floor that was
so deceitful, was afraid to stir, and yet unless he did lustly stir for
life, he was sure there was no way but one, and that was to be drowned. In
this extremity, and in this battle of comfort and despair, he had no means
(albeit he was a fresh water Soldier,) but to be constant in courage to
himself, and to try all paths how to get from this apparent danger: from
place to place therefore does he softly run, his two dogs following him closse
and leaping upon him: but his thoughts were more busied how to save himself
the^ to regard them following, he never hated going a hawking with his dogs
till this time: now the sport was loathsome, now was he weary of it: for in all
his hunting with his bound thus at his tail, he met one game that could
make him weary: he iustled with other huge flakes of Ice that encountered with
that whereon he stood, and gladly would have leapt upon some one of them, but
to have done so, had been to have slipped out of one peril into an other:
Nothing was before his eyes but water, mingled with huge cakes of Ice, on every
side of him was danger and death.

Innumerable multitudes of people stood looking on upon the shores, but none
were so hardy as to set out to his rescue. Being therefore thus round beset
with the horrors of so present a wrack, he fell down on his knees, uttering
such cold prayers as in this fear a man could deliver: his dogs not
understanding their masters danger, nor their own, and not knowing why he
kneeled, leaping ever and anon at his head, and an his shoulders: but his mind
being now more on his dying day then on his sports, continued praying, till the
flake of ice on which he kneeled was driven to the very Bridge, which he
perceiving, started up, and with a happy nimblenesse leaped upon one of the
Arches, his dogs leaping after as nimbly as the master, whilst the cake of ice
passed away from him, and between the two Arches was sheuered all in little
pieces. And thus did he escaped.


Countr. It was a miraculous deliverance.


City. Other abuses are there daily (amongst the worser ranks of people) put
one upon another, which being but idle, ridiculous and not worth rehersing, I
willingly am glad not to remember: but only to content your longing (good old
father) have I set thus much of our golden Lottery before you.


Countr. Sir you bind me more and more to you for these kindnesses to me being
a stranger, and a person of so homely an out side, from a Citizen so grave as
your self seems to be, I will ever rest abundantly thankful.


FINIS.
LONDON. Printed for Henry Gosson, and are to be sold at his shop at
London Bridge. 1608.


