ARTICLES TO BE INQUIRED OF IN THE ORDINARY Visitation of the Worshipful, Mr.
LAVVRENCE PAY, Archdeacon of Chichester.

Anno Domini, 1635.

engraving (...)

Printed by THOMAS COATS.

The form of the Oath to be ministered to all and every the Churchwardens and
Quest-men.
YOu shall swear, that all affection favor, hatred, hope of reward and gain,
or fear of displeasure or malice set aside, you shall upon due consideration
of the Articles given you in charge, present all and every such person of, or
within your Parish as has committed any offense mentioned in these or any of
these Articles, or which are vehemently suspected and defamed of any such
offense; wherein you shall discharge your consciences uprightly, and according
to truth; neither of malice presenting any contrary to truth, nor of corrupt
affection sparing to present any, and so conceal the truth, having in this
action God before your eyes, with an earnest zeal to maintain truth and to
suppress vice. So help you God, and his faithful promise contained in his
holy Books.

GOD save the KING.
Articles concerning RELIGION, PRAYER and SACRAMENTS.
FIrst, Heretical and Schismatic opinion.
whether there be any abiding in or resorting to your parish, that be known to
defend or maintain any Heretical or Schismatic opinions, contrary to the
holy Scriptures of God, or do openly or secretly impugn, or dislike the
public worship of God, or the Rites and ceremonies now established in the
Church of England?

2 Item, Whether all and singular the Inhabitants or dwellers within your
parish, Absence from the Church.
do diligently repair to their parish Church on every Sabbath day and
Holiday, according to the orders of the Church of England prescribed in that
behalf?

3 Item, Laborers on Sundays or holi-dayes.
Whether any person or persons within your parish have labored or wrought, or
gone to plow or cart upon any Sabbath day, or Holiday: or have profaned any
Sabbath or Holiday by unlawful Games, drinking and tippling, especially in the
time of common prayer?

4 Item, Whether all and every one in your parish being of the age of 16.
years, and of discretion, have received the holy communion, thrice at the
least this last year, whereof once at Easter or thereabouts?

5 Item, Outward behavior at prayers and Sacraments.
Whether all and every one within your parish do use due reverence in the time
of divine Service by the outward gesture of their bodies, in keeping their
heads uncovered, in kneeling, standing, and other decent behavior, as they are
enioined by the 18. Constitution, and Canon Ecclesiastical?

6 Item, Children not baptized.
Whether any children dyed within your parish unbaptized: and by whose default
was not the Sacrament of Baptism administered?

7 Item, Whether have you in your Church or Chapel, or Churchyard any
Plays, Feasts, Banquets, Suppers, Church-ales, Drinkings, Temporal Courts, or
Leets, Layiuries, Profanation of Churches.
Musters, or any other profane usage, and who are the offenders, or by whom
such abuses are suffered?

Articles concerning Ministers and Preachers of Gods holy Word.
FIrst, Observation of the form of Common Prayer.
whether does your Minister say or sing divine Service (according to the
prescript form confirmed by his Majesty's Authority) distinctly and reverently
on Sundaies and Holi-dayes, Wednesdayes and Fridayes, and the Eves of every
Sunday and holiday, and at convenient and useful times of those days, and in
such place as is meetest for the hearing of the people: and whether your
Minister do observe the Orders, Rites, and Ceremonies, prescribed in the Book
of Common prayer, as well in reading of the holy Scripture, and Prayers, as in
administration of the Sacraments, without either adding or diminishing to or
from the Book of Common Prayer?

Diligent in execution of his office.
2 Item, Whether he be diligent, and careful, faithfully to execute his
Pastoral Office and Function by reading of the holy Scriptures: and (in case
he be an allowed Preacher) whether having no lawful impediment, he does preach
ordinarily: And being not allowed, does procure Sermons in his Cure, once in
every month at the least?

Residence of the Minister.
3 Item, Is he a licened Preacher and by whom; is he resident upon his Benefice
or not: if not, then by whom is the cure served, is your Curate licensed to
serve the said Cure, if yea, then by whom: does your Curate preach, if yea,
then by whom is he licensed so to preach?

Prayer for his Majesty.
4 Item, whether your Minister before his Sermon, Lecture, or Homily, do pray
for his Majesty, giving him his lawful title, as in his just style, and
commend his Highness, and our Royal Queen and Prince, in his prayers to
Almighty God?

5 Item, Whether does your Minister admit any to the holy Communion, Notorious
offenders not Communicants. Sober conversation in Ministers.
that are known to be notorious offenders, or any malicious or openly
contentious persons, until they be reconciled?

6 Item, Whether your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, do keep any suspected woman in
his house, or be an incontinent person, given to drunkenness, or idleness, a
haunter of Tavernes, Alehouses, or suspected places, or one that does board or
lodge in any such place; a dicer, carder, tabler, swearer, or given to base or
servile labor, or otherwise does give any evil example of life, and whether
his apparel be comely and grave, as becomes his function and calling?

A Register of Christnings. Weddings and Burials. Ministers hants.
7 Item, Whether your Minister and Churchwardens keep a Register of the
Christinings, weddings, and Burialls, according to the prescript form?

8 Item, Whether your Minister in time of Divine service or ministering the
Sacraments (being a Graduate) does wear a decent and comely surplice with
sleeves, and upon it a Hood suitable to his Degree in the University: and if he
be no Graduate, then does he wear at such times such a surplice, as is above
mentioned? Perambulations.


9 Whether do your Minister and parishioners yearly in Rogation week, walk
the bounds of your parish, according to the accident custom?

10 Whether he does Catechize duly, according to the order set down in the
book of Common Prayer, and whether your parishioners do duly send their
children and servants (especially such as be no Communicants) to the
catechizing: if not, to certify the Parents and Masters names of such children
and servants, that a reformation may be had of the great defect in that
Religious exercise?

11 Whether all such houses, outhouses, barnes, stables, and other buildings
belonging to your Parson, Vicar, or curate, be kept in sufficient reparations
or no? if not, what are the decays and defects hereof?

Articles concerning the Church.
FIrst, whether have you in your Church or Chapel, Books and other
implements of the Church.
the

2 Item, Whether your Churchyard be kept sweet and clean, and swine and
other cattle kept out of the same, and whether it be well and sufficiently
repaired, fenced and maintained with walls, Railes, or Pales, as has been in
each place accustomed?

3 Item, Whether your Church or Chapel, Church to be repared.
with all parts belonging thereunto be decently kept in good and sufficient
Reparation as becomes the House of God, and are the decays thereof
prevented, so much as may be: if not, by whose default is the same hindered, or
not done?

Articles concerning the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
The choice of Churchwardens, and their accounts.
FIrst, whether your Churchwardens and Sidemen be chosen yearly in some day
of the Easter week, according to the Canon, and whether the Churchwardens and
Sidemen, at the end of the year, or within one month after, do give a just
and true account (before the Minister and the parishioners) of such money, and
other things, as they have received and disbursed?

2 Item, Whether have the Churchwardens and Sidemen been diligent and
careful in the execution of their office, to see decency and comeliness
observed in the Church, in the time of common Prayer, and administration of the
Sacraments, and that every parishioner behave himself orderly and soberly in
the Church without disturbing the Minister and Preacher: and suffered no idle
person to abide in the Churchyard, or the porch, during the time of divine
Service or Sermon?

Legacies given to godly uses, by whom detained.
3 Item, Whether, do you know of any Legacies given in the last Will and
Testament of any person deceased, out of his moveable goods, to the use of the
poor, or reparations of the Church, or to either of the Universities, Oxford
and Cambridge, or Schools of Learning, or Colleges for increase of virtue and
knowledge, or to any other charitable end? what be those bequests? by whom were
they given? and whether they have been paid (to the use aforesaid) by the
Executors of any Testators deceased? If not, in whose possession or charge they
be now remaining?


Marriage within the Leviticall Degrees forbidden Marriagge in private. Marriage
without Banes or License.
FIrst, Whether be there any in your parish that have married within the degrees
of affinity or consanguinity, by the Laws of God forbidden?

2 Item, Whether have any Matrimony been secretly celebrated or solemnized
within any private house, the banes being not three several Sundays or
holidaies (in the time of divine service) asked? or in the Parish Church, or
any private house in time prohibited, without license in that behalf obtained,
who so married them, and what are their names that were so married?

Married persons living apart without Divorce.
3 Item, Whether be there any persons coupled together in lawful manner, that
do keep apart? and live asunder without lawful divorce?

Articles concerning Schoolmasters and Curates.
FIrst, Schoolemasters not repaiing to church,
by whom is your Schoolmaster (if you have any) licenced to teach, does he
repair to his parish Church in time of Common Prayer, and instruct and teach
his scholars in the Principles of true Religion?

2 Item, Schoolemasters not to be Popish, or contemners of orders.
Whether does your Schoolmaster teach or is he suspected to teach any of his
scholars, in Popery, superstition, disobedience, or contempt of the truth and
Christian Religion, now established-within this Realm, or to contemn the
orders Ecclesiastical? and is he careful to see that his scholars do duly
and orderly frequent the Church?

Articles concerning the Parishioners, and others of the Laity. Diligence of
Churchwardens and Sidemen.

FIrst, whether be there any in your parish which do affirm, that the form of
Gods worship in the Church of England, established by the Law, and contained in
the Book of Common Prayer, is corrupt, superstitious, or unlawful, or
contemns any thing in it, and what be their names?

2 Item, Whether be there any that mislike of the Rites and Ceremonies of the
Church of England, Impugners of Rites and Ceremonies.
by authority confirmed, or do affirm them to be wicked, Antichristian,
superstitious, or such as godly and zealous men may not with a good conscience
aproue?

3 Item, whether be there any that have used themselves unreverent toward your
Minister, or any other of the Clergy, either by unreverent speeches, or other
unseemely behavior to your knowledge, as you have credibly heard?

4 Item, Whether be there any in your Parish, Contention, Drunkenness,
Uncleanness.
that be malicious, contentious, or uncharitable persons, seeking the unjust
vexation of their neighbors, common swearers, or blasphemers of the name of
God, fornicators, adulterers, incestuous persons, bawds, or receivers of such
incontinent persons, or harbourers of women with child unmarried, drunkards,
ribaulds, or any that be not of good name and fame touching crimes or faults?

5 Item, Whether be there any man or woman in your parish that uses
witch-crafts, sorceries Sorcerie.
charms, or unlawful prayer, or invocation, in Latin or English, or
otherwise, or any that resorteth to such persons for counsel or for help, and
what be their names, and who does practice Physic or Chyrurgerie in the
parish unlicensed thereunto?

6 Is there any of your Parish having a preacher to their Minister, that do
absent themselves from his sermons and resort to other places, to hear other
Preachers, or do any dwelling in your Parish communicate or baptize their
children in any other Parish?

7 Have any in your Parish administered the goods of any person dying intestate,
without lawful authority to them granted by the Ordinary, or before they have
proved the Will or Testament of any person deseased that made any Will or
Testament? Are there any Wills unproved, or goods not administered in your
Parish?

8 What persons be communicate in your Parish, for what cause were they so
excommunicate, how long have they so stood excommunicate? and do any of them
repair to your parish Church, or to any other parish Church (to your
knowledge) in time of Prayer unabsolved?

9 Have any excommunicate person or persons been buried in your Church or
Chapel, or Churchyard, if yea, what were their names so buried, by whom were
they so buried, and who were present at the same burials?

10 Do you know of any other matter worthy of presentment, or any person or
persons that have committed any fault or offense contrary to any other his
Majesty's Ecclesiastical laws, not set down or expressed in these Articles?
or do you know of any person or persons that are vehemently suspected for
committing any such fault or offense, by virtue of your oaths present the said
faults, and the names of the persons that have committed, or are vehemently
suspected for committing the same offenses?

There must be a full and several answer made to every particular Article and
branch thereof.
MEmorandum, it is lawful for every Minister (be he Parson, Vicar or Curate)
to present any enormity, or common Fame of any enormious crime that shall arise
within his Parish. And whereas it seemed by the Canon, that the Officers are
not to present oftener than twice a year: it is to be understood as in that
Canon appears; of presentiments in general. But it is lawful and meet for
every Minister, Churchwardens, and Sidemen, to make notorious Offenders
known to their Ordinaries, as often as occasion is offered, to the end that
such offenses may in due time be punished and reformed.


