THE RVLE OF THE RELIGIOUS, OF THE THIRD ORDER OF SAINT FRANCIS, both sexes,
making the three vows, and living together in Community and Cloister. With
certain other things which the leaf follovving does shevve.

IHS.

AT BRVXELLES, By Ihon Pepermans, at the golden Bible, 1624.

THE Bulle of Pope Leo the tenth, in which is declared that the professed
Sisters of the third order of S. Francis, living together in Community and
Cloister having made the three vows, are truly Religious and may enjoy the
privileges granted to the Freers Minors. THe perfectio^s of the rule The praise
of the rule. Three privileges which S^. Francis obtained of God. Three other
privileges granted him. Seave^ other privileges granted him. Certain
Indulgences granted to S. Francis Order. An examine of conscience for a
Religious person. Twelve evilles which come by venial sin. Nine ways by
which we participate of others sins. Twelve fruictes of the blessed
Sacrament. Twelve Evangelical counsels. The malediction of S. Francis. The
Litanies of our holy Father S. Francis.

QVicumque hanc Regulam secuti fuerint, pax super illos and misericordia. Gal.
6.16.

Whosoever shall follow this rule, peace upon them, and mercy. Galat. 6.16.

Regula est, qua rectum probari solet: quam si flectes, quicquid ex illa
mutaueris, iniuria est recti. Seneca Epistola 72.

A rule is, that vvherby the right uses to be proved: which if thou decline,
whatsoever thou change of it, is injury to the right. Seneca Epist. 72.

Nisi ad Regulam, praua non corriges.

Unless by rule thou can not correct the vvrong.

Epist. 11. Regulam tuam gestabis per omne tempus vitae tuae. S. Athanasius
lib. de Virginitate, tom. 3.

Thou shall bear thy rule for all the time of thy life.

Hard, great, difficult, but great are the rewards. S. Hierom. Epist. to
Rustic. the monck. THE PROLOGVE.
SAint Francis having a most fervent desire to draw al men to God of what
state or condition soever. Rested not, but having ordained for the men his
first rule, called the Rule of the Freers Minors, and his secund Rule for
women, called of S. Clare, has also written the third Rule, called of
Poenance, for retired persons remaining in the world, Ecclesiastic, and
saecular; married, and unmarried; of both sexes: confirmed by Pope Nicolas the
fowerth. In this Order very many holy persons have lived, of which a great
number are beatified, and some also Canonized in the holy church, as Saint
Elizabeth, S. Ludovic, king of France. S. Iuo Priest, S. Elzearius, Count:
through whose merits the order is very much multiplied in all parts of the
world. VVheras therefore great multitudes of persons, of both sexes, are
gathered together into several communities, holding the foresaid third rule,
and after the manner of spiritual and Religious people binding them selves with
the three vows, to wit, of obedience, Poverty, and Chastity, the same
notwithstanding has been done by permissio^ of the sea Apostolic: which has
holden it for good, and all such persons lawfully professed for true religious.
Afterward Leo the tenth Pope of that name, out of the first rule of Nicolas,
above related, drew the rule following and wrote it and confirmed it, for all
the religious of the third order, of both sexes, living in communities and
Cloisters; in the form ensuing, which he will of al to be observed. And whereas
some people have been and as yet are found, who will not acknowledge for
religious the professed of this third rule: it was necessary at the end of the
same rule, here set down, to add the Bull of the said Leo the tenth, Pope,
out of which it is manifest that even before his time they have been holden for
true Religious, and that he will also that all me^ do acknowledge and hold them
for such, and that no man do co^tradict it, and other things he forbids
therein under pain of excommunication. He has endued the fore said Religious
with all privileges given and granted to the Freers Minors.

Omnia autem honest and secundum ordinem fiant in vobis. 1. Cor. 14.40.

But let al things be done honestly and according to order among you.


IN THE NAME OF OUR Lord begins the rule of the third Order of S. Francis
called the Order of Poenance.
To our beloved children the Brethren and Sisters of the third Order of S.
Francis living in Congregation under the three essential vows. LEo the tenth
Pope.
Beloved sons, and daughters,
health, and Apostolical benediction. Among other things committed to our
charge and government, those chiefly do make us solicitous, by which, the
concupiscenses of the world and flesh being brideled, the quiet state of
innocence, and first peace given us from heaven is known to be reduced to
his original state and perfection.

Long since truly for this cause and respect, Pope Nicolas the fovverth, our
predecessor, confirmed and approved the third rule of S. Francis, which he
termed of poenance, by which the holy co^fessor of Christ, full of the
spirit of God, labored to further the salvation of al faithful Christianes.

But forasmuch as by course of time, through the inspiration of the holy
ghost, not only married persons, and such as dwell in the world, (for whom
the foresaid third rule was made by S. Francis) but also quires of
innumerable virgins taking upon them the three essential vows, and some also
that of enclosure, by our authority, and having builded very many
monasteries, not without manifold fruict and edification of the militant
church, subdevved their necks under the yoke of the foresaid third Order. And
because in the said third rule, some things to married persons accomodated,
are inserted which to single, and virginal estate, under this third Rule
serving our lord, are no vvayes convenient, for which the pure affectes of
chaste minds, are now and then auerted from entering into the said order; we
according to the vvil of our lord, separating the precious from the vile, do
confirm anew, and approve, the same third rule distinguished in manner, as
follovveth and deliver the same to you, and your successores to be kept, the
tenor vvherof follovveth, and is such.

Of the entrance of Nouices. CHAP. I.
THe Brothers, The condition of those that are to be received.
or sisters to this third Order to be received ought to be faithful
Catholics, not tied in marriage, free of debtes, sound in body, prompt in
mind, not taxed with any vulgar infamy, reconciled with their neighbores.
And of althees things, before they be received, of him who has faculty to
receive them, they are diligently to be examined.

Of the things which the Brothers and Sisters are to promiss in the profession
of this third rule. CHAP. II.
THe Brothers, and Sisters, after they have for a whole year borne the habit
of probation (which ought to be of course cloth according to the judgment of
the visitor) if their conversation shall be thought laudable in the Convent
vvherin they have borne the habit of probation, Of the habit of the Brothers
and Sisters.
by the counsel of the discreetes of the said Convent, let them be received
to the profession of the said order. Of the form of their profession.
In which profession let them promiss to keep the commandementes of God, and
to make satisfaction for the transgressions, which they shall commit against
this third Rule, when of their prelates they shall be required, living in
obedience, without propriety, and in chastity.

Of the Fast. CHAP. III.
THe Brothers, and Sisters, perpetually, on the second, fourth, sixth feries,
and the sabbath must eat no flesh except on the feast of the nativity of our
lord. And from the feast of al saints unto the resurrection of our lord
every fourth and sixth ferie, they must be tied to fast. and likevvse every
sixth ferie of the whole year. Also from the feast of S. Martin unto the
nativity of our lord let them fast every day, adjoining the lent of the
universal church, till the resurrection of our lord, which neuertheless from
quinquagesima they must begin. But on those days in which they fast not, let
them eat only twice a day. Except that from the feast of Easter unto the
month of October, those that labor in paineful, or hard work may eat thrice
aday, Of the laborers.
the days of fast alvvaies excepted. Not vvithstanding trauelers, infirm, and
vveake persons in time, of necessity may break their fast.

Of the divine office, and Prayer. CHAP. IV.
THe Brothers and Sisters must in the church keep silence, Of silence.
specially when mass is celebrated, or the word of God proposed. But in other
places, let them keep what by their superiores concerning silence shall be
ordained them, they ought also every day in the evening, between themselves,
and God, to thinck what they have done, said, Of mass to be heard for
clerckes. for lay.
or thought: And every day (if they can comodiously) they ought to hear mass.
And they must procure, that they have a religious man, who on certe in days
may propose to them the word of God, and induce them to poenance and virtues.
And he or she or they who by themselves do know to say the Canonical
hovvres, ought to fulfill the Canonical hovvres according to the use of the
holy Roman church. But those that do not know how to say the Canonical
hovvres, let them say twelve Pater nosters for matines, and for every one of
the other hovvres seaue^, adding Gloria Patri in the end of every Pater
noster, adding also Credo, and Miserere mei Deus, in the beginning of Prime and
of Complet. and who know not thees fore said things, must say three times,
the Pater noster, for poenance. And as often as they take dinner, or meat,
they ought to giuet hankes to God. but of Sacramental confession, Of Confession
and Communion.
and receiving the sacred Communion; they shall keep the ordination of Pope
Nicolas the fovverth, that thrice in the year they confess, and Communicate,
or else the statutes of their superiores here upon ordained.

Of the ordeyning of Prelates and Officers. CHAP. V.
Every house, if it shall be a Monastery of men, shall have a Superior of this
fraternity, who shall be called the Local minister. But if of women, she shall
be called the Mother: and they shall be chosen by their conuents, or instituted
by their Prouincial superiors, or General visitor^ so neuertheless, Of their
subjection to the order of Freers Minores
that none be perpetual, but for a certain time. Which Ministers, and Mothers
shall obey in all things, which belong to this present rule, to the Prouincial
ministers of the order of Minores of B. S. Francis and to the visitors deputed
by the same ministers, as long as they shall be in the said offices. But as
concerning other offices within the house, they shall keep their own
statutes.

Of the manner of Conversing within and without. CHAP. VI.
Whereas the Brothers and sisters of this fraternity are called of poena^ce, Of
the quality of their vesture.
it behooves them to abstain from al curiosity, as well in vesture, as other
things what soever. And according to the wholsome counsel of the prince of
the Aposteles Saint Peter, other vain ornaments of this world laid aside,
they ought to carry no corporal ornament, but only an humble, and necessary
tegume^t of their body. They ought also to avoid by all means access to the
courts of Princes, lords, or ladies where the delicacies of this world are
had; as our savior does witness; Of the sparing of speech.
Nor ever at onie time to be present at dances, plays, sportes, and other
vanities of players. They must also be sparing in words, and speeches which
seeldom without sin are multiplied. And above al things they must abstain
from every lie, and vvhatso ever oath, according to the commandment of our
lord, unless it be for peace, fidelity, calumny, and giving testimony. And
every day at evening among other things they ought examine themselves, if
either lie, or any oath they have made, and for every one they must say three
times Pater noster.

Of the visitation, and care of the sick. CHAP VII.
IF any Brother or sister of this fraternity shall fall into infirmity, the
Minister of the house, or Mother, once every day by themselves, or by another
person shall be bound to visit the^. And of the commun goods, they shall
diligently cause al things necessary, to be ministered unto them. let them be
bound also to move the sick person to accept poenance, and to make a true
co^version to God, by proposing the neerness of death, and the distriction of
the divine justice, and vvithal the divine mercy.

Of the visitation which the Prelates ought to make of the Brothers and
Sisters. CHAP. VIII.
THe Prouincial minister of the Freers Minores, or the visitor of the same
order, to whom he shall commit it, shall visit every year, once only in
every house, with presence of the elders, and the visitation made, he ought
not to enter into the offices, or other inward places of the Sisters. Of
entrance of the enclosure.
And let never the visitor himself remain alone and separate with any
Sister. And the Ministers, and Mothers, ought to tell the visitor, the defects
which want correction, like wise also the other Brothers, Of the
incorrigible.
and Sisters. And if any shall be incorrigible, by the judgment of the
discreetes of the house, as infectious cattle let them be cast out of the
congregation.

Of the Offices for the dead. CHAP. IX.
AFter that any Brother or Sister shall be departed out of this world, Of
making exequies
the Minister, or Mother, shall take care that their exequies be solemnly
celebrated: at which, all the Brothers, or Sisters of any house, where they
shall happen to dye, ought personally to be present, nor to depart until the
body be put into the grave. And for the soul of every one dead, within
eight days, let every Priest be bound to say one mass, And they that can the
psalter, fifty psalms, but they that can not the psalter, fifty Pater
nosters, and at the end of every one, Requiem aeternam. And at the end of
every year, or within every year, every Priest ought to say three masses
for the dead, those that can the psalter, one psalter, but those that can not
the psalter, a hundred Pater nosters with Requiem aeternam, at the end of
every one. And concerning thees offices of the dead, and other divine offices,
in this present revve annexed, the care is imposed on the Ministers, and
Mothers, that they be faithfully discharged.

Of the obligation of the things contained in the rule. CHAP. X.
AL and every thing in this present rule contained, are counsels, to sau^ more
easily the souls o^ the vvayfaring. and none o^ them are obligatorie to sin
mortal, or venial, unless, by humane or divine law any one should be out of
some other respect obliged. The Brothers and Sisters are neuertheless obliged
to do the poenances imposed upon them by their superiors, when here upon they
are required. they are obliged also, to the three essential vows, poverty,
by having nothing in special: chastity, because after the vow they cannot
contract matrimony, nor without transgression, mix them selves in vices of
the flesh: and obedience, in as much as touches those things, without which
this fraternity can not commodiously be manteined. They are also bound to keep
enclosure those Sisters which have expressly vowed to keep it, which to al
and every Convent we grant, so that the hospitality, and charity, which
they are wont to exercise with the infirm, do with reputation suffer no
detriment.

Given at Rome at Saint Peter's under the ring of the fisher, the 20. day of
January 1521. in the 8. year of our Papacy.
THE BVL OF POPE LEO THE TENTH, wherein is declared that the professed Sisters
of the third order of saint Francis living together in co^munitie and cloister,
having made the three vows are true Religious, and endued with the
privileges given to the Freers Minors.
To our well-beloved son Christopher, of the title of S. Marie of Aracoeli,
Priest Cardinal. LEO THE TENTH, POPE.
TO our beloved Son, health and Apostolical benediction.
Those things which by the sea Apostolic are knovve^ to be providently
constituted, or deined, and declared, sometimes the Roman Bishop, according as
in our lord he sees profitably to be expedient, has accustomed, (when it is
demanded of him) to approve, and of nevve to ordeine, and dispose, least the
same in success of time be subject to impugnatio^. It is true indeed that
hertofore Sixtus IV. of happy memory, our predecessor has established, and
ordained the Sisters of the third Order of S. Francis living collegially by
making the three essential vows to be true Religious, and the vow of
obedience, poverty, and chastity, by the Sisters of the third Order of S.
Francis, living collegially, then made in the hands of their Superiors, or by
them for the time hereafter to be made, to have the force, and validity of a
solemn vow, and to induce every effect, which a solemn vow does induce,
made in vvhatsouer of the Religions approved by the Apostolic sea, and to
hinder matrimony to be co^tracted, and to take away that which is already
contracted. And although we in the sacred Council of Lateran last celebrated
for co^seruing of peace and unity between Prelates and Religious persons,
the same sacred Council approving it, have profitably ordained, willed, and
decreed, that the Brothers and Sisters of the foresaid third Order, bearing the
habit thereof, and leading collegially virginal, and vidual, or continent life
by express vow, ought to enjoy all the privileges of the Freers Minores, as in
our and our foresaid predecessores letters respectively is more fully
contained. Nevertheless, as your vigilance has lately related unto us, many
Praelates and Rectors of parish, churches chiefly in France, and Germany
affirm the said sisters not to be religious, and that therefore they can not
enjoy the fore said privileges, and do not permit them to have oratories, and
places for burial, and in their oratories the Sacrament of the Eucharist, and
holy oils, and to sing masses, and make holy water, but as mere seculars do
endeavor to compel them to hear masses, and receive the Sacraments of the
church, in their parish churches, to the great troble of the sisters, and
sca^dal of very many: wherefore you who execute the office of General
minister of the said order of Freers Minors by Apostolical grant, have made
humble supplication to us that we would out of our Apostolikall Clemency
vouchsafe to approve, renew and furthermore entirely to establish the
declaration of Sixtus 4. and the brief thereupon given; hence it is that we
yielding our consent to such your desires, do by our Apostolic outhoritie, by
the tenor of thees presents approve, and renevve, and decree that the said
declaration of the forenamed Sixtus our praedecessor with al, and every
clause therein contained ought to obtain the force of perpetual stabilitie. And
moreover to al and every Praelate as well regular, as saecular and Rectores of
parish churches and al other Ecclesiastical persons, under pain of
excommunication lata sententia, we forbidd that the said Sisters (whom
according to the ordinance of our foresaid predecessor, we declare for true
Religious) they do not hear after presume to hinder in what sort so ever, but
that they according to the privileges of the said Brothers, may have freely,
and lavvefully, oratories with a low steeple and bell, and in the same
oratorie the Sacrament of the Eucharist, in a comely, and decent place, and
also holy oils for their own use only, and halovved burial in which the
bodies of the Sisters decessed by their co^fessor may be buried, and in the
same oratories holy water to be solemnly made, and masses according to their
devotion solemnly to be song and celebrated. And that to hear masses and other
divine offices in any other place then in the said oratories, or to receive
the Ecclesiastical Sacraments of an other, then the confessor secular, or
regular by their superiors to them assigned, by no means, by the said
Prelates and Rectors or any others to be compelled or any way for such
respect to be molested: and the confessor him self, if he be secular, as long
as he shall continevve in the office of confessor imposed upon him by his
superiors, cannot at al be hindered in the premises by the ordinaries of the
places. And notvvithstanding to al and every the Archbishops, Bishops, and
persons constitute in Ecclesiastical dignity, Metropolitanes also, or Canons
of Cathedral churches, who heervpon on the behalf of the said Sisters shall
be required, by thees presents we do command, that they, or two, or one of
them by himself, or another, or others assisting the said sisters, or their
houses in the premises, with safeguard of efficacious defense, do make them
to enjoy thees like privileges in peacible possession, not permitting them
heervpon by the ordinaries and Prelates and foresaid Rectors, or whosoever
else wrongfully to be molested, repressing the gayne-sayers, and disobedient
and rebellious, (al Appellation laid aside;) calling herunto also, if need shall
be, the aid of secular power: whatsoever constitutions, Apostolical
ordinances or other of any sort, to these contrary notvvithstanding. And
because it would be hard for thees present letters to be sent originally to al
provinces, we vvil, that to the copies of them subscribed by the hand of a
public Notarie, and firmed with the seal of any person constitute in
Ecclesiastical dignity, the same credit be fully given in judgment, and out
of it, as if the originals present were shevved or exhibited.

Given at Rome at Saint Peter's under the fishers ring, the last day of August
1517. in the fifth year of our Papacy.
THE PERFECTIONS OF THE RVLE CONsist in six Seraphicall Wings, to wit, in
total Obedience, in Evangelical Poverty, in immaculate Chastity, in profound
Humility, in Pacificall Simplicity, in Seraphicall Charity.
OBedience is a Virtue which has three degrees: the first is Obedience by
profession, which is when one does accomplish the commandment of God, or the
Prelate, touching the exterior. The second is Obedience by conformity, vvchich
is when the commandment is performed not alone in the exterior, but also
without murmuration, according to the intention and vvil of him that
commands. The third is Obedience by union, by which he that is truly
Obedient, has no other respect but the pleasure and will of God.

2. Evangelical Poverty is a virtue that has three degrees: the first is
Poverty by Profession, that is, to have no right nor propriety in any thing
what soever: the second, to retain only the simple use of things necessary,
and rest contented with the most vile: the third, not to have any affection,
even in things necessary, but by way of constraint to take the bare use of
them.

3. Chastity is a virtue that has three degrees: the first, Chastity of body,
by which all the exterior members are restrained from any impure or
suspicious act: the second, chastity of heart, by which the heart is preserved
from any dishonest or unclean thought: the third, Chastity of the spirit by
which we not only refrain from any dishonest love, but also from al
excessive delectation or spiritual consolation.

4. Humility is a virtue that has three degrees: the first is, Humility of
knowledge, by the which man does acknovvledge to be vile and abject in
himself: the second is Humility of exhibition, by which the interior
humility is expressed in the exterior, as by the attire, by words, and by
vvil, and abject works: the third is Humility of affection, through which a
soul does not only humble herself in the sight of God, but also in the sight
of men, desiring to be esteemed poor and abject.

5. Simplicity is a virtue which has three degrees: the first is simplicity
of thoughts, that is, not to enter into higher cogitation then the
understanding is capable of, neither of honors and worldly dignities, but to
esteem himself the most unworthy to serve God of all others: the second is,
Simplicity in words, avoiding all affected curiosity in speech, speking
plainly without superfluity, which still comes of an ill root, to wit
vanity: the third is Simplicity of works, employing our selves in no other but
such as are simple and profitable. And a general rule of this Virtue is to
have a pure; right, and simple intention: but Simplicity without Prudence is
not of value: for God loves those that walk in Prudence.

6. Charity is a virtue of three degrees: the first is to lone God not only for
his benefits, but also for that he is most worthy of it: the second, is to
love our neighbor, not only for the love of our neighbor but simply for the
love of God: the third to love our selves in laboring for virtue, our
happiness, and glory; not for our own respect but for the love of God, and to
be pleasing unto him.

Praise of the Rule.
THe holy Father S. Francis, encouraging his Religious to the observance of the
Rule, said It was the book of life: the fruit of wisdom: the marrow of the
Gospel: the hope of health: the path of salvation, the ladder by which one
ascends to heaven: the key of Paradise: and the pledge of Eternal Peace.

Three Privileges, which our holy Father Saint Francis obtained of Almighty
God.
POpe Gregory the Ninth said he had understood of the holy Father S. Francis,
that Almighty God had granted him three Privileges: the first that the more
the Religious of his order did increase, the more he would provide for them:
the second that none should ever unhappily dye in the habit; the third that
whosoever should persecute his Order should be grievously punished by Almighty
God.

Three other Privileges which he said to have received by the Seraphim, when
as he appeared unto him, in the mountain of Aluerne.
THe first, that his order should last to the day of Judgment: the second that
whosoever would live wickedly in the Order should not endure long: the third
that whosoever did love his Order although a great sinner, he should receive
and obtain mercy of Almighty God.

Seven other Privileges which by an Angel were revealed unto the holy F. S.
Francis in the Coue^t of S. Vrbane, to all that observed his Rule and dyed in
the Order.
THe first, that if their intention be good, they shall ever be governed by the
holy Ghost: the second, that in this their perigrination they shall still be
particularly defended, and in all their temptations also, from mortal sin:
the third, that the fire of Purgatory shall not detain them after their death
from the immediate inioying of everlasting glory: the fourth, that they shall
receive in themselves that promise of our Savior made unto his Apostles, of
sitting on the twelve seats to judge the tribes of Israel: the fifth that
such as love the Order Almighty God will increase his graces, and blessings
toward them in this world and the next: the sixth, that those who are
enemies to his order, and do persecute it without repenting, either their life
shall be shortened, or if it be long it shall be replenished with misery, and
after their death be eternally lost: the seaue^th that there shall ever be
Religious of good and holy life, lovers of the honor of God, and their
Religion, in this Order.

Certain Indulge^ces granted amongst many others, by the sovereign Bishops of
Rome, unto all the Religious of the Order of Saint Francis.
THe Religious both men and women shall gain a plenary both a paena and culpa,
from pain and fault, on the days of their Clothing, Profession, and article
of death: also at the article of death, the Fathers and Mothers of the said
Brothers and Sisters may have the same given them, by any lavvful Confessor.

2. All the Religious that shall receive the most holy Sacrament upon all
Sundays throughout the year, all the feasts of our Blessed Savior, and of
our Blessed Lady, of the Saints of the Order, shall gain a plenary Indulgence,
And if it happen that any could not confess and communicate these days, their
hindrance being lavvfull, they may gain the same Indulgence if after being
freed of that impediment, they confess and communicate for that intention,
notvvithstanding the day of the feast be past.

3. The Religious who shall recite the Corone of our Lord, that is 33. Pater
nosters, and Aue Maria, in honor of the 33 years he lived in the world, or
the Coronne or Rosary of the Glorious Virgin Mary, containing 72. Aues with 7.
Pater nosters and one Pater noster and Aue for the Sovereign Bishop, do gain
plenary Indulgence, Like wise the same is granted as often as they say the
seven Psalms and Letanies, the Gradual Psalms, the office of the dead, or
assist at the Letanies of every second Sunday in the month.

4. As often as the Religious either by day or night, in what place soever
they be, shall recite six Pater nosters and Aues, and Gloria Patri, five for
the necessities of the Church, and the sixth for the Popes Holiness, shall gain
the Indulgences of the Stations of Jerusalem, of Rome, of S. James, and of
Portiuncula.

5. Item reciting the Psalm Exaudiat te Dominus in die tribulationis etc.
three Pater nosters and Aues, for the Popes intention, they shallgaine all the
Indulgences granted by the Sovereign Bishops, to the Confraternity of the
Rosary, to the Churches of our Blessed Lady of Loreto, of Mont-serat, and of
saint James de Compostella.

6. Every time they say the Angelus Domini at the accustomed time when it
ringeth, a plenary Indulgence; and the like every time they communicate. As
often as they hear the Mass of the Conception of our Blessed Lady, praying
for his Holinesa^d the universal Church, is granted a Plenary indulge^ce,
Saying the divine office, or the office of our Blessed Lady, besides all other
Indulgence, they gain 100. years of pardon.

7. Saying once every day one Pater noster and Aue Maria, calling devoutly
three times upon the Holy Name of Jesus, they gain 3000. years of pardon.

8. It is granted unto the Sisters that four times a year they may have a
general absolution in full remission of their sins whatsoever, and be
restored to the estate of innocence, as fully as they could receive it from his
Holiness: and the like is granted them on every feast of our Blessed Savior,
our Blessed Lady, on the feast of S. Peter and S. Paul, S. Francis, Saint
Clare, S. Catharine Queen and Martyr, the feast of All Saints, and every day
of the holy week; yet notvvithsta^ding these graces vvil profit nothing, unto
those who should upon presumption to gain them, sin more freely. They may
apply all privileges and Indulgences granted to themselves, unto the
faithful departed. Note that for the gayning of these or any indulgences is
requisite the applying of the intention for the same.

An examen of Conscience for a Religious Person.
WHat are his evil inclinations and bad customs, whence they proceed, and
what war and exercise he uses against them.

2. What Passions most reign in him, and by what means he has hitherto
indeauoured to mortify them.

3. What are his principal, most frequent, and most troublesome temptations,
and how he has hitherto behaved himself in them.

4. If he be indifferent in accepting any employment of the holy Religion,
willingly accepting whatsoever is appointed him.

5. Whether God be the only inte^tion of all his actions, or if he seek proper
commodity or praise in his works.

6. Whether he do not prefer exterior matters, as good qualities and natural
gifts and graces, before the study of virtue and perfection.

7. If he desire, and be most contented his Superiors should have knowledge
of all his faults.

8. If he be confident and open hearted to his Superiors and confer with them
in any necessary occasion of things touching the good of his soul.

9. Whether he be truly united by affection unto his Superiors, or if he have
any auersion, and from whence it proceeds.

10. Whether he be not too familiar with some, and if that familiarity be not
hurtful to him self and the other party, and if by that occasion he loose not
time, and disedify others.

11. If he love and embrace the interior and exterior mortifications, and
rather those matters that be humble and abject, then of esteem and credit.

12. If he observe al his Rules and Constitutions, of which he makes less
esteem, and for what reason.

13. If he desire truly to be penitent for all his faults, truly confessing
them with strong purpose of amendment.

14. If he make a particular examen every day upon one imperfection and with
what preparation he receaueth the holy Sacrament: and how he frequenteth the
holy exercise of prayer.

15 If his words and discourses in Recreatio^ or other wise, as also with
secular be of edification: how he observes silence, and spends his time.

Twelve great Evils which come by Venial sins.
FIrst, they do so darken and obscure the eyes of our understanding, that they
cannot see almighty God. 2. They kill the fervor of dilection and divine
Charity. 3. They hinder our prayers and petitions from being heard by God. 4.
They defile and spotte the soul. 5. They contristate the holy Ghost, and
rejoice the enemy. 6. They deprive us of the svveet and amiable familiarity of
our Blessed Savior. 7. They are a great cause and means of our fall into more
grievous sins. 8. They cause a soul to fall into great sloth and tepidity
in all goodness. 9. They weaken exceedingly the forces of the soul, from
resisting her bad inclinatio^s. 10. They incline our affections and desires to
temporal matters. 11. They prolong and augment the pains in purgatory. 12.
They exceedingly hinder us from seeing and enjoying the presence of God.

Nine ways by which we participate of the sins of others.
BY Counsel. 2. By commandment. 3. By consent. 4. By procuration or
persuasion. 5. By flattery 6. By holding our peace of his fault of whom we
ought to have care. 7. To dissemble or not to reprehend, and hinder if we be
thereunto obliged. 8. In participating of the matter, whereof such a sin
does proceed. 9. In defending the fault of another.

Twelve fruits of the B. Sacrament.
IT not only makes possible but also most easy the forsaking and leaving of
all earthly and fading things.

2. It causes great profit and advancement in heavenly things.

3. It rayseth the soul above all things created.

4. It inforceth the spirit unto al good.

5. It illuminateth and gives light to the understanding, in the knowledge of
God.

6. It causes an inflamed feruerous possession of the pure love of God alone.

7. It is the consummation of al virtue and perfection.

8. It gives the soul possession of the treasury of all goods and riches.

9. It causes a continual interior joy.

10. It indevveth her with a happy security and assurance, in seeing him in
whom she belieueth.

11. A perfect peace beginning in this life and continuing for eternity.

12. A parfaict union with Almighty God, vvherby the soul is made participant
of all divine perfection.

Twelve Evangelical Counsayles.
Poverty, vvherby a Religious person is estranged from all terrestrial things.

2. Obedience without which no virtue is perfect.

3. Chastity which beantifieth and adorneth all other virtues.

4. Charity toward our enemies, vvherby all spiritual infection of any
sin is expelled.

5. Mansuetude, which (as says S. Ambrose) is the medicine of the heart,
vvherby the soul is illuminated by God Almighty, to know his secrets.

6. Mercy, which extends it self to the help of every one without limite,
enters sweetly into the heart with pity, and cleanses it from all sin.

7. The simple word alvvaies fructifying in God, in purity of intention, in
charity etc.

8. Shunning occasion of sin, co^ducting the soul with prudency, and
security to the purchase of virtue.

9. Right intention, which makes all works to proceed of humility, to the
edification of our neighbor.

10. Co^formity of the work unto the word, vvherby all special instruction
is seriously, and with all profit accepted.

11. Avoiding of un profitable solicitude, thereby better to attend unto
spiritual illuminations, which are obscured by earthly cares.

12. Fraternal Correction, which is a light that illuminateth the
understanding, according to that of the Apostle, saying, That which is
corrected is made apparent by the light that follovveth.

The Malediction of S. Francis.
BY thee O Eternal, and Heavenly Father, and all the celestial Court, and by
me most Unworthy, be accursed all those Brethren, who by their evil example
do ruin and destroy the things which thou have built, and ceasest not
build, by so many holy Brethren of this Order.

Cum votum voueris, etc. Deuteronomy. 23.21. WHen thou have vowed a vow to our
lord thy God, thou shall not slack to pay it: because our lord thy God
will require it. And if thou delay, it shall be reputed to thee for sin. If
thou vvilt not promiss, thou shall be without sin. But that which is once
gone out of thy lips, thou shall observe, and shall do as thou have
promised to our lord thy God, and have spoken with thy proper vvil, and thine
own mouth.

Vow ye, and render to our lord your God. Psalm. 75. They shall vow vows
to our lord, and pay them. Isaas. 19.21. Psalm. 21.26. I vvil render my vows
in the sight of them that fear him. S. Bernarde in his treaty of precept and
dispensation. PErfect obedience knovveth no law, it is not streitned within
bounds: nor content with the breadth of our profession, with larger vvil it
is carried to all the latitude of charity: and to all that is enjoined free, by
the vigor of a liberal and cheerful mind considering no mean: unto infinite
liberty is extended. Out of a treaty of S. Bernardine, to which the title is.
Qui habendi Proprietarij. They violate their vow and are proprietaries. I.
WHO vvhatsomever thing, or of vvhomsoeuer given, do hide in fraud from their
Prelate, or do not forthwith restore it, when he commands, either that it
be restored, or lent, or given to another.

2. Who change the use of things of the community into their proper use, or
give them to others, without license of the Prelate.

3. Who hide the key least the Prelate take onie thing away, or otherwise
dispose: and if onie thing be taken away, are trobled, and do murmur.

4. Who deliberately are of that mind, that if onie thing were taken away,
or called back, they would not forthwith yield.

5. Who will not spend Alms deposed or given for their necessity, but by a
kind of providence for the time to come, or treasuring, do reserve it: seeking
in the mean time more.

LITANIAE B. P. N. S. FRANCISCI.
KYrie eleison. Christ eleison. Kyrie eleison. Christ audi nos. Christ
exaudi nos. Pater de c^^^is Deus, Miserere nobis. Fili Redemptor mundi Deus
Miserere nobis. Spiritus sancte Deus, Miserere nobis. Sancta Trinitas vnus
Deus, Miserere nobis. Sancte Francisce, Pater amabilis, ora pro nobis. Pater
admirabilis. ora. Pater benign, ora. Pater venerabilis, ora. Vexillifer Jesus
Christi, ora. Eques Crucifixi, ora. Imitator filij Dei, ora. Seraphim ardens,
ora. Fornax Charitatis, ora. Arca Sanctitatis ora. Cultor pacis, ora. Vas
Puritatis, ora. Norma Iustitiae, ora. Speculum prudentiae, ora. Regula
Poenitentiae, ora. Magister Obedientiae, ora. Exemplar Virtutum, ora.
Patriarcha Pauperum, ora. Profligator Criminum, ora. Lumen tuae Patriae, ora.
Decus Morum, ora. Viuificator Mortuorum, ora. Saluator Famelicorum, ora.
Obsequium Leprosorum, or. praeco magni Regis, ora. Forma Humilitatis, ora.
Consors Sublimitatis. ora. Victor Vitiorum, ora. Dux Minorum, ora. Praedicator
Siluestrium, ora. Portans dona Gloriae, ora. Auriga militiae nostrae, ora.
Nouis vtens Prodigijs, ora. Caelum caecis aperiens, ora. Gratum gerens
obsequium, ora pro nobis. Templum Christo consecra^s, ora pro nobis. Hosts
malignos proterens, ora pro nobis. Tenens vitae brauium, ora. Spargens virtutum
munera, ora pro nobis. Amplians iter ad gloria^, ora. Agnus Dei qui tollis
peccata mundi, Parce nobis Domine. Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi, Exaudi
nos Domine. Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi, Miserere nobis.
Verse. Ora pro nobis Beat Pater Francisce.

Resp. Vt digni efficiamur promissionibus Christi.

Oremus.
DEus qui Ecclesiam tuam Beati Francisci meritis foetu nouae prolis amplificas:
tribue nobis ex eius imitatione terrena despicere, and caelestium donorum
semper participatione gaudere. Per Dominum nostrum, etc. Amen.

FINIS.
APPROBATIO
IVssu R. P. N. F. Andreae a Soto Sereniss. Infanti Hispaniarum a
Confessionibus, Commissarij Generalis, regulam hanc Tertij Ordinis S. Francisci
ex Latino in idioma nostrum Anglicanu^ versam, cum adi^cta Bulla, ad exemplaria
latina diligenter contuli, and peromnia ijsdem conformem inueni. 30. Octobris,
1624.

Ita Testor F. Bonauentura Frat. Minorum Anglorum, Duac. Guardianus.


