ARTICLES TO BE INQVIRED OF, In the Metropoliticall Visitation of the most
Reverend Father in God, RICHARD, by the providence of God, Lord Archbishop of
York, Primate of England and Metropolitan.

Jn the year of our Lord God, 1633.

LONDON, Printed by John Norton. 1633.

The Advertisement.
THe Minister and Churchwardens are to call unto them the Neighbors of the
Parish, and out of them to make choice (according to the custom of the place)
of two of the discreetest parishioners to be Sidemen, and they altogether are
to read over these Articles diverse times. Then, after they have duly
considered of them, they are to write their answer or presentment unto every
Article particularly and truly, according to their consciences. Lastly, they
are all of them to bring their presentiments to the Visitation, and there the
Churchwardens and Sidemen upon their oaths (but the Minister according to
the Canon in that behalf) are to deliver them up under their hands.

The oath to be ministered to the Churchwardens, and Sworne-men.
YOu shall swear, that all affection, favor, hatred, hope of reward and
gain, or fear of displeasure or malice set aside: You shall upon due
consideration of the Articles given you in charge, present all and every such
person of, or within your parish, as has committed any offense or fault, or
made any default mentioned in these, or any of these Articles, or which are
vehemently suspected, and defamed of any such offense, fault or default:
wherein you shall deliver uprightly, and according to truth; neither of malice
presenting any contrary to truth; nor of corrupt affection sparing to present
any, and so conceal the truth, having in this action God before your eyes with
an earnest zeal to mayntaine truth, and to suppress vice; so help you God,
and the contents of this Book.

Touching the Church, Churchyard Parsonage, and Vicarage-house.
FIrst, whether your Church, Chapel, and Chancell be well and sufficiently
repaired in the walls and roof, the Seats convenient, the floor paued, the
windows glazed, your Bells in tune, and all these cleanely kept, and the
mansion house of your Parson or Vicar, with the building thereunto belonging,
be likewise well and sufficiently repaired, and your Churchyard well fenced
with walls, rayles, or payles, and cleanely kept. 2 Whether has your Church or
Churchyard been abused and profaned by any fighting, chiding, brawling or
quarrelling, any plays, Lords of misrule, summer Lords, morris-dancers,
pedlers, bowlers, bearewards, butchers, feasts, schools, temporal courts, or
Leets, Lay Iuries, musters, or other profane usage in your Church or
Churchyard, any bells superstitiously rung on holidayes or their eeues, or at
any other time without good cause allowed by the Minister and Churchwardens:
have any trees been felled in your Churchyard, and by whom? 3 Whether are
your Almes-houses and Church-house sufficiently repaired, mayntaned, and to
godly and their right use employed? 4 Whether have you in your Church all
things necessary for common prayer, as the Bible in the largest volume, the
book of common Prayer lately authorized by his Majesty, the book of Homilies
allowed, two books of common prayer, a convenient Pulpit for the preaching, a
decent seat for the Minister to read Service in, conveniently placed, a strong
chest, with three locks and keys, one for the Minister, the other for the
Church wardens for the keeping of the Register book of the Christnings,
Marriages, and Burials, and a poor man's box, with three locks, conveniently
seated near the Church door. 5 Whether have you in your Church, a font of
stone for baptism set in the ancient usual place: a decent table for the
communion conviently placed, covered with silk, or other decent stuff in time
of divine Service, and with a fair linen cloth over that, at the
administration of the communion? 6 Whether have you all such bells, ornaments
and other vtensels as have anciently belonged to your Church, a communion-cup
o^ silver with a cover, a fair standing pot or two of pewter, or purer metal
for the wine, upon the communion table, a comely Surplesse with sleeves, a
Register book of parchment, for christnings, marriages, and burials, a book
for the names of all christnings, marriages, and burials, a book for the names
of all strange preachers, subscribed with their names, and the name of the
Bishop, or other, where they had license? 7 Whether is the Alms for the poor
duly distributed, and are the names and surnames of all persons married,
christened and buried, and of their parents, with the day and year entered in
your parchment Register book? 8 Whether are ye ten Commandments set up in
your Church or Chapel, and other chosen sentences of holy Scripture upon the
walls in convenient places, and the table of the degrees prohibited in
marriage, set forth 1563? 9 Whether have you in your Church or Chapel the
book of the Canons agreed upon in the convocation holden at London Anno Dom
1603. and confirmed by his Majesty's royal authority, and whether your
Minister have read the same in your Church or Chapel once every year,
according to his Majesty's Injunctions in that behalf?
Touching the Ministry, Service and Sacraments.
Whether is the common prayer said or sung by your Minister both morning and
evening, distinctly and reverently every Sunday and Holiday, and on there
eeues, and at convenient and usual times of those days, and in most
convenient place of the Church for the edifying of the people? 2 Whether does
your Minister observe the orders, rites, and ceremonies prescribed in the book
of common prayer, in reading holy Scriptures, prayers and administration of the
Sacraments, without diminishing (in regard of preaching or any other respect)
or adding any thing in the manner or form thereof? 3 Whether does your
Minister on wednesdaies and fridaies not being holidaies, at the accustomed
hours of service, resort to the Church, and say the ordinary prayers and
Letany prescribed? And does your Clarke or Sexton give warning before by
tolling of a bell on those days? 4 Whether any Minister leaving the use of the
Font, do in your Church or Chapel christen or baptize in any Basins, or
other profane vessels: or whether your Minister do baptize or christen any out
af the face of the Church and Congregation, without special cause, or without
Godfathers or Godmothers: And whether any person or persons be admitted to
answer as Godfathers and Godmothers at the christning of any child, except he
or she have before received the holy communion: And whether does your Minister
in ye baptizing of children, observe ye orders, rites, and ceremonies appointed
and prescribed in the book of common prayer, without addition, omission, or
other innovation? 5 Whether do you know any Parents that keep children
unchristened, or that were not christened at their own Parish Church or
Chapel, and for what cause they remain yet unchristened, or have not been
christened at their Parish Church or Chapel: or do you know have heard or
vehemently suspect any parents, whose children have been christened by any
Popish Priest, or otherwise than by the laws of the Church of England is
allowed? 6 Whether does your Minister as often as he administreth the communion,
first receive it himself: whether does he use any bread and wine newly
brought, before the word of institution be rehearsed, and the bread and wine
present on the Table: does he not deliver the bread and wine to every
communicant severally in such sort as is prescribed? 7 Whether does your
Minister give warning publicly in the Church at Morning prayer ye Sunday
before he administreth the communion, for the better preparation of the
parishoners? and whether does he administer the Sacraments so often as that
every parishione, may receive thrice in the year at the least, whereo. Easter
to be one? 8 Whether has your Minister administered the Communion to any but
such as kneel, or do you know any that refuse to kneel: has he administered
to any that are under Ecclesiastical censure, as for refusing to be present
at public Prayer, or who has depraved the Book of Common Prayer and
administration of the Sacraments, or the Rites and Ceremonies prescribed, or
the Articles of religion agreed upon, or the Book of ordering Deacons, Priests
and Bishops, or against his Majesty's Supremacy: or has committed other the
like enormities, and what be their names? 9 Whether have your Minister more
Benefices than one: if he have, how far distant are the^, how often is he
absent in the year? when he is absent from your parsonage or vicaridge, has
he a licensed Preacher for his Curate? 10 Whether your Churches or Chapels be
or have been destitute of a Curate? And how long, and by whose default? And
whether any Curate have served, or do serve without license of the Ordinary?
11 Whether do you know any Popish Priests, Seminary, Jesuit, or runnagate
persons, that do preach, say Mass, or minister any Popish Sacrament ^r
Ceremonies, or else do resort secretly or openly into your Parish: And whose
house do they resort unto, and of whom are they harbored, and what be the
names of such Popish Priests, Seminaries, Jesuits, or Runnagates, and such as
so harbor and relieve them? 12 Whether your Parson, Vicar or Curate, or any
other person in your parish be a favorer of the Romish Church or religion, or
any other Sect or Schismatic opinion, or has or does maintain or teach any
doctrine, contrary or repugnant to Gods Word, or to any of the Articles agreed
upon by the Clergy in the Convocation holden at London, An. Dom. 1562. And
whether they have taught publicly or secretly any doctrine tending to the
discredit and disprayse either of the Book of Common Prayer, or of the
Preachers, and Ministers of the Word and Sacraments, or of the received order
for government by Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, and other officers
in the Church of England, or make any other innovation? And whether have they
permitted any man so teaching or making such innovation, and not made the same
known. 13 Whether is your Minister an allowed Preacher: if he be, does he
every Sunday in your Church or some other next adjoining, where no Preacher is,
preach? 14 Whether does your Minister being no Preacher allowed, presume to
expound the Scripture in his own Cure, or elsewhere: does he procure every
month a Sermon to be preached in his cure by preachers lawfully licenced, and
on every Sunday when there is no Sermon, does he or his Curate read some one
of the Homilies prescribed? 15 Whether your Minister do openly every Sunday
after he have read the second Lesson at Morning and Evening prayer, admonish
and warn the Churchwardens, and Swornemen to look to their charge, and to
observe who offend in absenting themselves negligently or wilfully from their
Parish Church or Chapel, or irreverently use themselves in time of divine
Service? 16 Whether is your Curate allowed by the Ordinary under his hand and
seal to serve for your Cure, and whether does he serve two Churches or
chapels in one day? whether is he Deacon* at the least, and what stipend has
he for serving the Cure? 17 Whether does your Minister always in saying
public prayer and administering the Sacraments, wear a decent surplesse with
sleeves, and being a graduate, does he always wear therewith a hood by ye
order of the University, agreeable to his degree 18 Whether has your Minister
or any other Preacher in your church, preached any thing to confute or impugn
any doctrine delivered by any other Preacher, and has he and they prayed for
Christ's Catholic Church, the Kings Majesty, the Lords Archbishops and Bishops,
etc. as is prescribed, Canon 55? 19 Whether has or does any preach in your
Church, which refuses to conform himself to the Laws, Rites, and Ordinances
established, or which has not first showed a sufficient license. 20 Whether
does your Minister in his sermons four times in the year at the least, teach
and declare the Kings Majesty's power within his Realms to be the highest
power under God, to whom all within the same owe most loyalty and obedience,
and that all foreign power is justly taken away? 21 Whether does your Minister
every Sunday and Holiday half an hour before Evening prayer or more, or at
some other convenient time at Evening prayer examine and instruct the youth in
the ten Commandments, the Belief, the Lords Prayer, and the Catechism, set
forth in the Book of Common prayer, and whether do the Churchwardens assist
the Minister herein? 22 Whether has your Minister married any which have not
been three several Sundaies or Holydaies asked in your Church in the tune of
divine service, without license or without a ring: or has he with license or
without, married any, whereof neither dwelt in your Parish? 23 Whether has
your Minister with license or without, married any, at any other times than
between the hours of eight and twelve in the Forenoone, or in any private
house, or when there is no license, before the Parents and Governors (the
parties being under the age of 22. years) have testified their consents? 24
Whether has your Minister declared to the people every Sunday at the time
appointed, what Holidaies and Fastingdaies be that week following: does he
being a Preacher confer with all recusants, and persons excommunicate or
suspended? being no Preacher does he procure a sufficient Preacher to reclaim
them thereby? 25 Whether does your Minister keep a note of all persons
excommunicate, and once every six months does he denounce them which have
not obtained their absolution, on some Sunday in seruicetime, that others may
be admonished to refraiue their company? 26 Whether your Parson, Vicar, or
Curate, be diligent in visiting the sick and comforting them, and whether
they bury their dead in such christian and comely manner as is prescribed in
the Book of Common prayer, and whether any Lay man, other than a lawful
Minister, has taken upon him to bury the dead contrary to order? 27 Whether
has your Minister refused to baptize any child brought to the Church, or to
bury any corpse brought into the Church or Churchyard, or to Church any woman,
having had convenient warning thereof? 28 Whether has your Minister being
truly informed of the danger of death of any infant unbaptized, and being
desired to go to the place where the child is, to baptize it, neglected to go,
by means whereof the child has dyed unbaptized? 29 Whether does your Minister
at any time preach or administer the communion in any private house, except
when they are so impotent that they cannot go to Church, or very danger ously
sick? 30 Whether do any Chaplens in your parish preach, or administer the
Sacrament in any Chapel not consecrated, or in any house having no Chappoll
allowed by Law, and do the Lords and Masters where such Chapels are, resort
often to the Parish Church, and there receive the Communion once at the least
every year? 31 Whether has your Minister held or appointed any public fast
not appointed by Authority, or been present at such: does he or any other in
your Parish hold any lecture or exercise, or attempt by fasting, or prayer, or
otherwise, to cast out any Devils, without the priuity and allowance of the
Bishop under his hand and seal? 32 Whether has there been any secret
Conuenticles or meetings in your Parish by any priests, ministers, or others,
tending to the deprauing of the form of prayer, doctrine or government of the
Church? 33 Whether does your Minister wear decent apparel, does he in public
go in his Doublet and Hose, without a Coat, or Cassocke, or Cloak, and does
he wear any unseemly and light-coloured apparel or stockings? 34 Whether
does your Minister make accustomed resort to any Tauerns, or Alehouses, except
for his honest necessities: or does he board or lodge in any such place, does
he use any base or servile labor, or frequent drinking, riot, dice, cards,
tables, or any other unlawful games: is he contentious with his neighbors, or
a hunter, hawker, swearer, dancer, usurer, suspected of incontinency, or does
give evil example of life? 35 Whether is there in your Parish any Minister or
Deacon who has forsaken his calling, using himself in his course of life as a
mere Lay man? 36 Whether is his Majesty's declaration lately published for
quieting and silencing the controversies lately stirred up to the disturbance
of our Church with new questions, strictly observed by your Parson, Vicar, or
Curate, or whomsoever else preaches in your Church? 37 Whether does your
Parson, Vicar, Curate or Lecturer, catechize the youth of the Parish in your
Church, every Sunday after dinner by question and answer; and apply his
afternoon preaching and exhortation, to the instructing and edifying of the
congregation in that kind of catechizing? 38 Whether have you in your parish
any weekeday Lecture, or not? And if you have, by whom is the same performed;
whether by one particular man thereto licensed, or by sundry neighbor
Ministers, and whether are the public prayers always read, before such
lecture and sermons, in his surplesse and hood, according to his Majesty's
instructions lately set forth? 39 Whether are there any within your parish
(under the degree of Noblemen and men qualified by law) who do keep any
private Chaplains in their houses?
Touching Ecclesiastical Courts.
FIrst, whether the Chancellor, Commissaries, or any other using
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in this Diocese, their Registers, or Actuaries,
Apparitors or Sumners, have at any time been corrupt in their places, or taken
any excessive fees, or winked at and suffered any Adulteries, Fornications,
Incests, or other faults, or offenses to pass, and remain unpunished and
uncorrected, or have commuted any penance without special license of the
Bishop? 2 Whether do you know that there has been any commutation of
penance, allowed of by the Ordinary in your parish: and whether has your
Minister publicly signified it to his Congregation, what sums of money have
therefore been paid, and whether have the said sums of money, or part
thereof been distributed by your Minister and Churchwardens to the poor, or
otherwise employed to some such godly and charitable use, as was prescribed by
the Ordinary? 3 Whether do you know any householder, or other person
whatsoever, within your parish or Chappelry that is deceased, yt has made his
last Will and Testament, and the same not hitherto been proved, nor
administration taken from the Ordinary or other Judge competent? 4 Whether has
your Chancellor, Commissary, or other exercising Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction,
heard any matter of office privately in their chamber, without their sworn
Registers, or their Deputies presence, or in their absence, of such other
person as the Law does allow for an actuary in such a case?
Touching Schoolmasters.
FIrst, whether have you in your Parish any Schoolmasters, who teaches either
in public School, or private house, whether is he reputed to be of sound
Faith and Religion, does he resort duly to Church, and receive the Communion,
or does he give any evil example of life, is he allowed by the Ordinary under
his hand and seal: or does your Minister or Curate teach, and is he allowed in
like manner? 2 Whether does your Minister or Schoolmasters, who teaches the
Catechism by Authority set forth, does he when there is any Sermon or divine
Service, bring his scholars to Church and see them quietly and reverently
ordered, does he examine them after their return, what they have learned of
the Sermon? 3 Whether does he at other times teach them such sentences of holy
Scripture, as may induce them to all godliness, does he teach the Grammar set
forth by King Henry the eight, continued by King Edward the sixth, and Queen
Elizabeth? 4 Whether has your Schoolmasters an Usher under him, are they both
diligent, is your Usher allowed by the Ordinary, does your Schoolmaster direct
his Usher the form and manner of teaching, and does he weekly take account
of him, and the Scholars under his charge, how they have profited, and what
they have learned, and out of what Authors? 5 Whether has either of them
spoken, writ, or taught against any thing whereunto he formerly subscribed, as
the Kings Supremacy, the Articles of Religion, Book of Common prayer, or any
thing therein contained?
Touching the Parish Clarke, and Sexton.
FIrst, whether have you a parish Clarke appointed by ye Minister, sufficient
for his place, of the age of twenty years at the least, is he of honest
conversation, can he read, write, and sing, is he diligent in his office, and
serviceable to his Minister in the time of divine Service and otherwise? 2
Whether does your Clarke meddle with any thing above his office, as Churching
of women, burying the dead, reading of prayers, or such like? 3 Whether does
your Clarke or Sexton keep your Church clean, the doors safe locked, is any
thing (by his default) lost or spoiled in the Church, does he suffer any
untimely ringing, or any profane exercise to be committed in your Church? 4
Whether does your Clarke or Sexton, when any is passing out of this life,
neglect to toll a bell, having notice thereof: or ye party being dead, does he
suffer any more ringing than one short peale, and before his burial one, and
after the same another. 5 Whether does any of your parish refuse to pay unto
the parish Clarke or Sexton such wages as are unto them due, and have been
accustomably paid?
Touching Parishioners.
FIrst, whether has any in your parish spoken against, or any way impugned ye
Kings Majesty's supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical, the Truth and Doctrine of
the Church of England, the form of Gods worship contained in the book of
common prayer and administration of the Sacraments? 2 Whether there be any
person or persons known or vehemently suspected to have written, printed, or
by any means published, and dispersed, or otherwise to have, or to have had in
his or their use or keeping, any Popish books or libels, or any of those
slanderous or schismatic, and seditious libels, or other books, that impeach
the kooke of common prayer, or the Religion, and Ecclesiastical government, or
any other part thereof, established by Law in this Realm, or does impeach the
credit or estate of any Ecclesiastical person or governor within the same? 3
Whether has any in your parish spoken against or impugned the Articles of
Religion, agreede upon in Anno. Do. 1562. the rites and ceremonies established
in the Church, ye government by Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons,
and others that bear office in the same? 4 Whether has any in your Parish
spoken against or impugned the form of making and consecrating Bishops,
Priests, or Deacons, or have any separated themselves from the society of the
congregation, and combined in a new Brotherhood, or depraved the Sinods of the
Church of England held by the Kings Authority? 5 Whether has any in your
Parish maintained or defended any such Ministers or Schoolemasters as refuse to
subscribe to the order of the Church, have they affirmed that such Ministers
and adherents may make Rules and Orders in causes Ecclesiastical, without the
Kings Authority? 6 Whether does any in your Parish profane, violate or
misspend the Lords day, commonly called Sunday, or Holidayes appointed in the
Church of England, using any offensive conversation, or worldly labor in those
days, or any of them: or is there any that wilfully refuse, or negligently
has absented himself from divine prayers on Sundays or Holidayes? 7 Whether
does any in your Parish, in ye time of divine Service, use to sit with his hat
on his head: or is there any who has not reverently kneeled when the general
Confession, Letany, and other prayers are read, and which have not stood up at
the saying of the Belief. 8 Whether has any in your Parish disturbed the
Service or Sermon, by walking, talking, or any other way, or departed out of
the Church during the Service or Sermon, without some urgent cause, or loytered
about the Church or Church Porch? 9 Whether there be any in your Parish, man or
woman, being about fifteen year of age, that has not received the holy
Communion, thrice at the least every year, and namely at Easter last, or
thereabouts for once: and whether any abandoning his or their Parish Church,
have received the holy Communion in any other Parish Church or Chapel, or
private place? 10 Whether has any parent been urged to be present, or
admitted to answer as Godfather for his own child, or has any Godfather or
godmother made any other answer or speech, than is prescribed by the Book, or
have any bin admitted for Godfathers or Godmothers, at Baptism, who have not
first received the Communion? 11 Whether do all Fathers, Mothers, Masters,
Mistresses, come and cause their children, servants, and apprentices to come
duly to the Church, and according to the Ministers direction is be instructed
and catechized, or who be they that have not obeyed the Minister herein? 12
Whether have any persons married together within the Degrees of Consanguinity
or Affinity prohibited, set forth in a Table, appointed to be placed in every
Church: or have any married or contracted themselves under the age of one and
twenty years, without the consent of their Parents, or Governors, if their
parents be dead? 13 Whether have any persons, once lawfully married, forsaken
each other, or do live asunder otherwise than by Law is permitted: or do any,
being divorced or separated, marry again the former wife or husband yet
living? 14 Whether has any of your parish irreverently used your Minister, or
have any laid violent hands upon him, or disgraced his office and calling, by
word or deed? 15 Whether have you in your parish any popish recusant, or
maintayner of popish doctrine, or suspected to keep or disperce schismatic
books, or to favor any heresy or error? 16 Whether have you any common
resorters to your Church, which are not of your parish, abandoning their own
parish Church, or do any such receive the communion amongst you: what be their
names, and of what parishes are they? 17 Whether has any in the time of divine
Service upon any Sunday or Holiday opened their shops, exercised their trade,
or used any gaming, bin in any Tauern or Alehouse, or otherwise ill employed?
18 Whether are there in your Parish any adulterers, fornicators, incestuous
persons, bawds, receivers of defamed persons, close favorers, conueyers away
of such, or which suffer to depart any incontinent person unpunished, or are
there in your parish any blasphemers, common swearers, drunkards, ribawds,
usurers, malicious slanderers, scolds or sowers of discord, or any defamed of
the same crime? 19 Whether do any in your Parish administer the goods of ye
dead, without authority, or suppress their will or testament: have any
Executors neglected to perform their wills, especially in paying of Legacies
given to the Church, to the poor, or to any other charitable or godly uses? 20
Whether do any refuse to pay to the reparations, ornaments, and other things
by Law required to be in your Church, as they are seized by Law: or are any
dwelling out of your Parish, which hold land in your Parish, that refuse the
like payment or seasement? 21 Whether have any not being of your Parish been
christened, churched, buried, or received the Communion, or been married out of
your Church, both parties dwelling in your parish? 22 Whether have all women in
your Parish delivered of child, come at convenient time after to Church, to
give thanks, and have they been Churched according to the form of the Book
of common Prayer? 23 Whether has ye Perambulation of the circuit of your
Parish bin observed once every year, if not, by whose default is it? 24
Whether has any in your Parish given the Churchwardens or Sidemen or any of
them evil words for doing their duty according to their oath and conscience,
in making presentment for their default? 25 Whether there be any man or woman
in your Parish, that uses witchcraft, sorcery, charms, or unlawful prayer
or inuocations in Latin or English, or otherwise upon any Christian body or
beast, or any that resorteth to the same for counsel, or help, and what be
their names? 26 Whether there be any, that pretending themselves to be
Physicians or Surgeons, do take upon them to practice Physic, or
Surgery, not being lawfully licenced thereunto, or which refuse to show
their said license to the Minister, or Curate, and Churchwardens of your
Church or Chapel, when they shall be hereunto required?
Touching Churchwardens, and Sworne-men.
FIrst, whether do any in your Parish take upon them to be Churchwarden or
Side-man, which is not lawfully chosen by ye Minister and Parishioners,
according to ye Canon, or do any continue ye office longer than one year,
except they be chosen again, or that it be a custom of your Parish for a
Churchwarden to continue two years, and are all such officers chosen yearly in
Easter week? 2 Whether do your Churchwardens within one month at the most
after their year ended, before the Minister and Parishioners, give up a just
account of all such money, and other things as they have received and bestowed,
have they delivered all remaining in their hands belonging to their Church or
Parish, by Bill indented, to be delivered to the next Churchwardens? 3 Whether
have ye Churchwardens, with the advice of ye Minister, from time to time
provided a sufficient quantity of fine white bread, and wholesome wine for ye
number of communicants? 4 Whether do the Churchwardens and Sworne-men, before
every visitation, and at other times when there is just occasion, meet and
confer about their presentiments, and the answering of their Articles, and who
has (after notice given him of the time and place) carelessly absented
himself? 5 Whether the forfeiture of twelve pence, for absence from Church,
appointed by Statute, to ye use of the poor, be taken, and levied by the
Churchwardens, and employed according to the said Statute: and whether is the
said forfeiture taken of all persons which stand wilfully suspended or
excommunicated? 6 Whether have any Churchwardens lost, sold, or detained any
Goods, Ornaments, Bells, Rents, or Implements of the Church? 7 Whether do you
the Churchwardens and Sidemen, about the midst of divine Service, usually
walk out of y^ Church, and see who are abroad in any Alehouse, or elsewhere
absent, or euilly employed, and have you presented all such offenders to the
Ordinary? 8 Whether do you know, or have heard a fame of any offense
committed, or duty omitted by any of your Parish before your time, and
heretofore not presented by the former Churchwardens to the Ordinary, or as
yet not reformed, and have you presented the same? 9 Finally, do you know of
any matter or cause which is a breach of the laws Ecclesiastical here not
expressed, and have you presented the same?
FINIS.

