ARTICLES TO BE INQUIRED of, throughout the Whole Diocese of Chichester,
ministered and given in charge to the Churchwardens and Sidemen within the same
Diocese, by the Reverend Father in God Richard by Gods providence Bishop of
Chichester, In his first general Visitation. Holden Anno Dom. 1628.

Anno Consecrationis suae primo.

LONDON, Printed by T. P. for Tho: Bourne.

The form of the Oath which according to the 119. Canon, is to be administered
unto the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
YOu shall swear, that you, and every of you shall duly consider, and
diligently enquire of all and every of these Articles given you in charge, and
that all affection, favor, hope of reward, and gain, all fear of
displeasure, or offending any, all malice, envy, and like sinister affections
set apart, you shall present all and every such person, of, or within your
Parish, as have committed any offense, or made any default mentioned in these
or any of these Articles, wherein you shall deal uprightly, sincerely,
plainly, and fully: neither presenting, nor sparing to present any contrary
to truth: having God before your eyes, with an earnest zeal to maintain truth
and virtue, and to suppress error and vice: So help you God, and the holy
contents of this Book.

Articles concerning Religion and Doctrine.
WHETHER be there any one, or more residing, lodging or abiding in your Parish,
that hold, defend, set forth, or propose any Heresy, errors, or false
opinions, contrary to holy Scripture, the Three Creedes, the book of Thirty
nine Articles, the book of Common Prayer, the book of Consecrating and
ordayning Bishopps, Priests, and Deacons?

2 Whether there be any in your Parish, that oppose, deny, or otherwise
traduce the Kings Majesty's lawful, and established supremacy over all
persons, in all causes as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal within his
Highness Realme^s and Dominions?

3 Whether there be any that affirm, or maintain that the Church of England
is not a true Church, but Heretical, or Schismatic, and there Refuse to
come into the public Service, to receive the Sacraments, to participate in
other Divine Rites and ceremonies with the Church of England, either as Popish
Recusants, or Puritanicall separatistes and Schismatiks.

4 Whether there be any in your Parish that do or has frequented, celebrated,
or used any unlawful Assemblies, private meetings, or conventicles, under
color, or pretext of Religion, repeating of Sermons, expounding of Scripture in
private houses, or that holds such meetings to be lawful, or such as may
challenge the name of a Church.

5 Whether any in your Parish do publish, sell, disperse, or communicate to
others, any superstitious or Popish books, or writings, any Schismatic, and
Puritanicall, Libelles, treatises, or papers Derogatorie from, or contrary to
the Religion, State, Church Government of this Kingdom of England, the Laws
and Canons of the same, the Ministry and Priesthood therein? Present their
names, qualities, and conditions.

Articles concerning divine Service and administration of the Sacraments.
1 Has any of, or in your Parish spoken, or declared any thing to disgrace,
deprave, contemn or Derogate from the form of Divine Service, in the Book of
common Prayer.

2 Be there any in your Parish that either absolutely refuse to come into
Church and be present at Prayer, or ordinarily walk abroad, come not from
home, or not into the Church till Sermon begin.

3 Does your Minister read divine service according to the Injunctions in the
book of common Prayer; does he diminish, alter, exchange the form prescribed,
in part, or in all, using Prayers in steed thereof of his own devising, and
conceiving.

4 Whether does he read the Confession, and absolution thereupon to be
pronounced, or does he change the words thereof to make it a Prayer, does he in
reading the first, and second lessons, expound the Chapters, as he reads:
does he stand at the Gospel and Creed, and observe the form prescribed in
the Book, or not.

5 Whether is the Sacrament of Baptism rightly and dilly administered according
to the prescript form expressed in the Book of common Prayer, without adding,
altering, or Detracting from any part, or point therein: Does he rufuse to use
the Interrogatories prescribed, the sign of the Cross commanded: Does he use
the words, and not do the Act, has he admitted the Fathers, or Mothers in
public, or in private Baptism to be Godfathers, and Godmothers, whether does
he use to baptize the child at the Font, or in some Basin at his seat where
he reads Prayer, or is the Font translated and placed there, or near thereto
from the Church-doore, where it should stand, signifying that Baptism is our
entry into the Church of God.

6 Whether has he refused in case of necessity to baptize Children at home;
have any so dyed unbaptized, or will he not Baptize the children of Papists
being offered to baptism: such as be borne out of wedlock, Bastards, or
unless the Father will affirm it is his own child.

7 Whether is the blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper so administered as is
prescribed, viz. once every Month, or thrice at the least in the year.

8 Item in time of administration are any suffered to be present, that do not
communicate: Does your Minister in administering it use the garments, and
vestments prescribed, Does he consecrate the Bread and Wine, with those words
that are set down, if not, how and in what manner.

9 Does he first reverently upon his knees receive himself, and then
severally, and distinctly give it to the communicants, they meekely kneeling,
and not standing or sitting either at the Table, or upon some bench: Whether is
the Bread wholesome and sweet? is the wine as it should be, representing blood,
not Sack, White Wind, Water, or some other Liquor., And if more bread and wine
be afterward brought, the first not sufficing which was consecrated, does he
first use the words of consecration upon it before he give it to the
Communicants, as is prescribed Can. xxj.

10 Whether in solemnizing of Marriage, visitation of the sick, Burial of the
dead, churching of women, Does your Minister use such manner and form, such
words, rights, and ceremonies, as are prescribed: and if not, then in what
manner does he perform them.

Articles concerning the Church, the Ornaments, sacred vtensills, and
possessions of the same.
1 Whether have you in your Church, the whole Bible of the largest volumne,
and last Translation, the Book of common Prayer: the two Books of Homilies?

2 Have you a Font of Stone, for the administration of Baptism, set up in the
usual place near the Church door, with a cover to keep it from dust and
soil?

3 Have you a convenient, and decent Communion Table placed conveniently as it
ought, with a Carpet of silk, or some other comely stuff to be laid upon it
in time of divine Service, and a clean lynnen cloth for the time of Communion?

4 Is it profaned at any time, by sitting on it, casting hattes, or cloakes
upon it, writing, or casting up accounts, or any other indecent usage?

5 Have you in your Church a convenient seat for your Minister to read Divine
Service, and to preach in, a comely large, and fine Surplice, a Communion Cup
and flagon of silver or pewter; a Chest for Alms with three locks and keys,
another chest for keeping the books, ornaments, and vtensils of the Church:
Have you a Register book in parchment for Christnings, Burialls, Marriages, and
are these duly and faithfully written and recorded therein or not, and is the
same safely kept in a chest with three locks and keys according to the Canon?

6 Whether is your Church, Chapel, Chancell, sufficiently repaired, decently
and comely kept, as well within as without, be the seats maintained, the Steeple
and bells preserved, the windows glased, the floor paued, and all things in
such sort as may well beseem the house of God?

7 Whether is your Churchyard well mounded, and fenced, kept clean without
Nuisance, or soil cast into it: is it incroached upon, and by whom? do any
offensiuely keep doors, outletts, or passages into your Churchyard: do any
use to quarrel, fight, play, or make meetings, banquets, Church-ales there,
do any keep Courts, Leetes, Lawdaies, Musters there, or otherwise use it
being a consecrated place, profanely contrary to the 88. Canon?

Articles concerning Ministers and Preachers of Gods word.
1 Whether is your Minister a Preacher or not: of what degree is he in the
University, is he a licensed Preacher, does he personally reside upon his
benefice: if not, how long does he use to absent himself, how does he take
order for serving of his Cure: whether by a sufficient and honest man: what
allowance does he make him according to the proportion of his Benefice?

2 Whether is your Minister or Curate a man of honest life, fame and
reputation; a quarreller, makebate, sower of strife, sedition, dissension, or
does he commonly use Alehouses, or unlawful games, is he defamed or detected
for drunkenness, swearing, swaggering, or any indecent misbehauiour, to the
disgrace of his holy function and calling?

3 Does your Minister catechize the youth of the Parish upon Sundays in the
aftermone, half an hour before evening prayer, in that Catechism authorized
in the common book, and no other, and if any Parishioners refuse to send their
Children, or Servants to be Catechized, let them be presented?

4 Whether does your Minister admit to preach in his Cure any stranger without
requiring his License, or any inconformeable man, or suspended from Preaching,
and if yea, how often, and whom has he so admitted?

5 Has your Minister preached against, or confuted any Doctrine delivered by
any other minister, in the same, or any other Church within the Diocese,
before he has acquainted the Bishop therewith, and bin directed by him what to
do: to the disturbance of the Churches peace, or the scandal, or offense of
others?

6 Has your Minister preached or taught any new, and strange Doctrine,
contrary unto, or disagreeing from the book of Articles, and the literal
sense thereof?

7 Does your Minister use in his prayer, to pray for the King, the Queen,
Clergy, Counsel, etc. and conclude with the Lords prayer according to the 55.
Canon.

8 Have you any superinducted Preacher, or Lecturer in your Parish: does he
twice in the year at least, read Divine Service, both morning and evening two
several Sundays, days, publicly in his surplice: does he twice a year
administer the Sacraments with such Rites and Ceremonies as be prescribed in
the Communion book, according to the 56. Canon?

9 Does your Minister solemly bid holidayes, and fasting days in the week
following, does he marry any without asking the banes thrice, does he of his
own head and voluntatarie motion, appoint or keep any solemn fastes,
publicly or in private howses, other then such as by law are, or by authority
shall be appointed, or is he present at any such, in, or out of his Parish:
Does he hold, or frequent any meetings for Sermons, commonly called
Prophesyings, or Exercises in market towns or other places: Does he upon any
pretense whatsoever by Fasting and Prayer take upon him to cast out any Devil,
or Devils in any obsessed, or possessed person:

10 Does your Minister upon every Sunday when there is no sermon, read an
Homily, or some part thereof, does he once in the year read over the book of
Canons, upon some Sundays, or Holidayes, before evening prayer, according to
the Iniunction from his Majesty?

11 Does your Minister upon every Wenseday and Friday, read the Letanie in
your Parish Church, or Chapel, according to the 15. Canon?

12 Does your Minister always, and at every time both morning and evening,
reading divine service, and administering the Sacraments, and other Rites of the
Church, ware the Surplice according to the Canons, and does he never omit
wearing of the same at such times?

13 Does your Minister use in his common course of life, that decent apparel,
answerable to his calling and degree, both abroad and at home, in iournyes and
otherwise, as is ordained by the 74. Canon.

14 Has any man resyding in your Parish being a Deacon, or Priest,
relinquished his Function, and betaken himself, to a lay man's life, or
vocation?

15 Does any Person of what degree or calling soever, keep or retain in his
house any Chaplyn, or Minister, to read Prayers, Preach, instruct his Family,
who are they; how many, of what condition or degree?

16 Does your Minister reside, and dwell upon his Parsonage, and Vicarage
house, or elsewhere, does he keep it in good and sufficient reparations or not?

17 Does your Minister yearly in Rogation week, for the knowing and
distinguishing of the bounds of Parishes, and for obtaining Gods blessing upon
the fruits of the ground, walk the Perambulation, and say, or sing in
English, the Gospells, Epistles, Letanie, and other devout prayers, together
with the Letanie, the hundred and third, and hundred and fourth Psalms?

18 Whether your Minister be known to be, or is vehemently suspected to be,
an Usurer, regrator, or to use any other scandalous and difamed trade, and
course of life?

19 Does your Minister before the several times of administering the holy
Communion, especially before Easter, admonish and exhort his Parishioners, if
they have their consciences troubled, to resort unto him, or some other learned
and discreet Minister, to reveal, and open his grief, and disquietmentes,
that so he may receive such Ghostly counsel and comfort, that his conscience
may be quieted, and himself receive the benefit of Absolution?

20 If any man confess his secret and hidden sins to the Minister, for the
disburthening of his conscience and receiving consolation, does, or has the
Minister at any time revealed that thing committed to his trust and secrisie,
contrary to the 113. Canon?

Articles concerning Matrimony.
1 Have any bin married within your Parish, that were within the degrees of
affinity, or consanguinity by the law of God forbidden; if any, present their
names?

2 Have any within your Parish, been married secretly in private houses, or
without their parents, or governors consent signified, being under the age of
One and Twenty years?

3 Do any person lawfully married, live asunder, unlawfully, and in whom is
the defaulte?

4 Have any persons (there banes being not thrice published in the Church)
been married without License, who were present at such Marriages, and what
Minister married them?

5 What Popish Recusants, or their children have been married in your Parish,
in what sort was that Matrimony solemnized, when, and by whom?

Articles concerning the Churchwardens.
1 BE the Churchwardens chosen by the Minister and Parishioners, according to
the 89. Canon, and whether has any taken upon him to be Churchwarden, being
not chosen, or has any continued one year in his office without a new choice?

2 Have any Churchwardens retained any of the Church goods, and not made a
just account of what they have received, and expended?

3 Have your Churchwardens, and Sidemen been, and are they diligent in their
office, to see decency kept in the Church; and order in the time of Common
prayer, and administration of the Sacraments, and that there be noe
disturbance, but soberness and quietness in the Church. And do the
Churchwardens keep a book in your parish, wherein the Names of every strange
Preacher in your parish is set down, and have the Churchwardens suffered any
to preach not showing or having no License?

Articles concerning the Parishioners.
Do any in your Parish profane the Sunday by unlawful games, drinking, or
tippling in the time of common prayer or Sermon; and by working and doing the
ordinary works of their vocation and trades?

2 Are there any in your parish that do impugn or speak against the Rites
and ceremonies of the Church of England, or the lawful use of them; And the
government of this Church under his Majesty by Archbishops, Bishops and other
ecclesiastical officers?

3 Who in your Parish do come to Sermon only, and not to divine Service, And
who do not reverently behave themselves during the time of divine service,
devoutly kneeling, when the general confessinn of Sins, the Letany, the Ten
Commandments, and all Prayers and Collects are read, and using all duly, and
lowly reverence, when the blessed Name of the Lord Jesus is mentiened, and
standing up when the Articles of the Belief, The Magnificat, Nunc dimittis, Te
Deum, Benedictus, and Gloria Patri, etc. are read, who do cover their heads
heads in the Church during the whole time of Divine service unless it be in
ease of necessity, in which case they may wear a nightcap, or who do give
themselves to babbling, talking, or walking, and are not atentiue to hear the
word read and Preached?

4 Is there any of your parish having a Preacher to their Minister, that do
absent themselves from his sermons, and resort to other places, to hear other
preachers: Or do any in your parish communicate or baptize their children in
any other parish?

5 Are there any in your parish that refuse to have their children baptized, or
themselves to receive the Communion of your Minister, taking exception against
him: or have any wives that refuse to come to Church according to the book of
common Prayer, to give thanks to God for their safe deliverance, in a decent
habit, as has been anciently accustomed?

6 Has any in your Parish spoken slanderous and reproachful words against
your Minister, to the scandal of his vocation, or against his Neighbor,
defaming them touching any crime of Ecclesiastical cognizance?

7 Whether do any in your parish exercise any trade, or labor; buy, or sell
or keep open shops, or set out any wares to be sold upon Sundays, or
Holidayes by themselves, their Servants, or Apprentices, or have otherwise
profaned the said days?

8 Is the Fifth of November kept holy, and thanks giving made to God, according
to the order set forth in that behalf.

9 Is there any in your Parish that be, or are commonly known, or reputed to
be blasphemers of Gods holy name, Drunkards, Adulterers, Fornicators,
incestuous persons, concealors, or harbourers, of Fornicators, or Adulterers:
Have any been defected or vehemently suspected of such notorious crimes, and
what penance have they done for the same?

10 What person, or persons have dyed, and departed this mortal life since the
Second day of February last past, and whether did they make any last wills, or
Testaments, and who were their Executors, or whether dyed they intestate, and
who has the administration of their Goods; and what be the names of such
deceased, and Executors, and administrators.

11 Whether have any in your parish administered the goods of any person
deceased without lawful authority; and before he or they have proved the will
or Testament of the party deceased, or have obtained commission from the
Ordinary to dispose the said mooueable goods; or are there any Wills unproven,
or goods not administered.

12 What persons be Excommunicate within your parish and for what cause to your
knowledge, and do any of them repair to the Church, in time of prayer
vnabsolued?

13 Whether have any in your parish given to the Churchwardens or Sidemen, or
to any of them, any evil words for doing their duties according to their
Oaths and conscience, in making presentment for any fault?

14 Whether have any within your Parish harbored any woman unlawfully begotten
with child, and have suffered her to depart away unpunished.

Articles concerning Schoolemasters, Physicians, and Chirurgions and Parish
Clerks.
1 Is there any Schoolemaister in your Parish that teaches publicly or
privately, not licensed by the Ordinary, the Bishop of the Diocese. Does he
teach any Papists, or sectuaries children that come not to Church. And does he
instruct all his Scholars to learn the short Catechism, by Law established,
contained in the book of common Prayer. Is he a graduate, and sufficient to
teach.

2 What Physician or Surgeon is in your parish-vnlicensed, and being not a
Doctor of Physic, in either of the Uniuersities, does practice physic. And
what ignorant persons have left their trade, and taken upon them to profess
physic, or Surgery; and who be they that so abuse the people?

3 Have you a fit parish clarke aged Twenty years at least, of honest life,
able to read and write. Are his and the Sextons wages paid without fraud; if
not, then whose default is it. By whom is he chosen: is he diligent in his
Office, and serviceable to the Minister; Does he meddle with any thing above
his Office, does he keep the Church clean, the Doors locked. Is any thing
lost or spoiled by his default, and does he execute his Office duly?

Articles concerning Ecclesiastical officers.
1 Has any Chancellor Deputy, or Surrogate or any other exercising
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within his Diocese, or any Register, Apparitor or
other Officer belonging to the Ecclesiastical Court, exacted any extraordiuary
or greater Fees, then heretofore of late has bin accustomed, or then are
expressed in the table of fees set up in the Consistory? declaring what fees
are due?

2 Lastly do you know any other matter worthy of presentment, or any other
person or persons, which have committed any fault, or offense contrary to his
Majesty's Eccleasticall Laws, or hereof vehemently suspected, not set down or
expressed in these Articles, by virtue of your Oaths present the said faults,
and the names of the persons which have committed, or are vehemently suspected
for committing the same offenses?

THere must be a full, and several presentment, or answer made, to every
several Article.

FJNJS.
MEmorandum, it is lawful for every Minister (be he Parson, Vicar, or Curate)
to present any enormity, or common fame of any enormous crime that shall arise
within his Parish. And whereas it seems by the Canon, that the Officers are
not to present oftener than twice a year: it is to be understood, as in that
Canon appears, of presentiments in general. But it is lawful and meet for
every Minister, Churchwardens, and Sidemen to make notorious offenders known
to their Ordinaries, as often as occasion is offered, to the end that such
offenses may in due time be punished and reformed.


