ARTICLES To be enquired of by the Churchwardens and Swornmen within the
Diocese of WORCESTER. In the Visitation of the Right Reverend Father in God,
JOHN, Lord Bishop of Worcester, Holden in the year of our Lord God, 1626.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN GRISMAND, 1626.

The tenor of the Oath to be ministered to all and every the Churchwardens and
Sidemen or Assistants in the said Visitation.
YOu, and every of you shall swear by Almighty God, that all favor, fear and
affection, and all other sinister corruption whatsoever set aside, upon due
consideration of these Articles given you in charge, you will make a true,
plain, perfect, and particular answer and presentment in writing to the same
Articles, and to every branch and part thereof, presenting all and every
offenders and offenses therein mentioned, so as may stand with the glory of
God, the discharge of your consciences, and the Jurisdiction of the
Ecclesiastical Court, wherein you shall deal sincerely, faithfully, and
uprightly, as before God: So help you God in Christ Jesus.

ARTICLES Concerning Church and Churchyard.
WHether is your Church and Chancell in all respects well and sufficiently
repaired, and kept sweet and clean: have you therein the ten Commandments,
the Articles of the Belief, and other godly sentences fairly written: the
Bible of the largest volume, the books of common Prayer, the two volumes of
Homilies, the book entitled God and the King, and all other books requisite:
a seemly Pulpit, a convenient seat for the Minister at prayers, a large and
comely Surplesse whole and untorn? These things you must make enquiry of, and
present the wants, and especially the want of the Bible of the largest volume,
commanded by our late Sovereign King James to be had and used in every Church
within the Kingdom.

2 Have you in your said Church a strong chest for Alms, with a hole in the
top, and three locks and keys thereto? Is the money therein put, employed to
the use of the poor?

3 Have you a Register of Christnings, Weddings, and Burialls in a book of
parchment duly kept in a chest with three locks and keys?

4 Has any man pulled down or uncovered, or suffered to decay any parsonage
or vicarage houses, or any Church, Chancell, Chapel, Vestery, or
Church-house, in part or in all: or employed them or any of them to any
profane uses?

5 Whether are the pales, fences, enclosures, and marks of the ancient bounds
and limits of your parsonage, vicarage, or ministers house, or of the courts,
entries, gardens, backsides, or other appurtenances belonging to the same, or
any part thereof removed or altered, or taken away from their ancient places,
bounds, and limits thereof: so that in time it may grow out of knowledge, and
by some prescription become prejudicial to the Church, or succeeding Incumbent
thereof?

6 Are your Bells, Bell-ropes, and Clock in good repair, and well ordered? Is
your Churchyard well fenced and decently kept? Is it not profaned with
fighting, brawling, chiding, gaming, dancing, playing, or with unlawful
cattle, or otherwise: and how, and by whom, and by whose default?

Ministers and Curates.
7 Does he read or say the whole divine Service every Sunday and Holiday, and
administer the holy Sacraments according to the book of common Prayer: Is your
Minister a licensed preacher: does he diligently preach sound doctrine, and for
matters of government seriously teach and maintain the Kings Supremacy under
God within his Majesty's dominions, over all persons, and in causes as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil, and the abolishing of all foraigne power?

8 Has your Minister more Benefices then one? if two or more, does he reside
upon one of them himself, and maintain a licenced Preacher on the other? If
he have but one, is he resident and dwelling thereupon: is he painful in his
vocation, of sober and good conversation, and given to hospitality?

9 Does your Minister use decency of apparel, as well in the Church, as
elsewhere: and in time of divine prayers and administration of the Sacraments,
does he use to wear the Surplesse: and if he be a Graduate, such a hood as is
agreeable to his calling?

10 Is your Minister a peacemaker, and no sower of discord, or is he
suspected, famed, or noted of any notorious crime: or gives he any ill
example: or does any Minister with you forsake his calling?

11 Does any preach in your parish, that refuses to conform himself to the
laws, ordinances, and rites of the Church of England?

12 Has your Minister a Curate, and how is he licenced, does he serve two
Cures, and does he bid the Fasting days, and Holidayes commanded and allowed?

13 If your Minister be not a Preacher allowed, does he procure monthly
Sermons, and when there is no Sermon, does he read an Homily, does he take
upon him to expound any text of Scripture?

14 What Preachers have come from any other place and preached in your parish,
have you their names written in a book kept for that purpose, has such a
preacher subscribed his name thereto, and set down the day when he preached,
and by whom licenced?

15 Has your Minister obtained his Benefice by any Symonicall compact, either
directly, or indirectly?

16 Has any of your parish, or of any other Parish, irreverently used your
Minister, laid violent hands on him, or disgraced his office and function by
word or deed?

Divine Service.
17 Is divine service in due time on Sundaies, Holydaies, and at other times
appointed, reverently said or sung in your Church or Chapel, with the Letany
on Wednesdaies and Fridaies: and all other rites and ceremonies, according to
the prescript form of common prayer in the Communion Book?

18 Whether does any not being licensed (or any not ordered at least for a
Deacon) say Common prayer openly in your Church, or Chapel?

19 Do any men, young or old, use to wear their Hattes in the Church or
Chapel in the time of divine Service, or are there any that behave themselves
disorderly in the Church, Chapel, or Churchyard, or any disturbers of Divine
service or sermons?

20 Whether do any victualers (or others in your parish) suffer any drinking
or gaming in their houses on Sundaies or Holidaies, especially in time of
Divine service or sermons?

21 Whether any in your parish upon the sabbath days, or holidaies do use
their Trade, or do any other work or labor, as Brewing, Baking, Washing
Barbing, or such like, or do any Mercers, Drapers, Shomakers, Butchers, or
others whatsoever open their shops for sale of wares upon those days, or do
hedge, ditch, dig, carry, or draw burdens by themselves, their servants,
horses, or other cattle whatsoever on such days?

The holy Communion.
22 Have you a decent Communion Table on a frame, with a seemly carpet, and a
cloth of Linen, a communion cup and cover of silver, a fair Flagon of pewter
or purer mettle for the Wine, a plate for the Bread, and a Towell to lay over
it?

23 Whether is there any in your parish, which being full sixteen years of
age and upward, has not received the holy communion three several times in
the year past at least, in his or her parish church: whereof Easter to be one
of the three times?

24 Does your Minister instruct and examine his Parishioners concerning the
Sacraments at convenient times, before he administer the Communion. And does
he admit any thereto that cannot say at least the Lords prayer, the Articles of
the Christian faith, and the ten Commandments?

25 Is your Communion ministered with Bread and wine, consecrated in such order
as in the book of common prayer is appointed? And does your Minister deliver
both kinds to every several Communicant, with the blessing prescribed in the
book of common prayer?

26 Does any in your parish receive the holy Communion either sitting,
standing, or otherwise then kneeling, as is prescribed in the book of common
prayer: or do any refuse to receive the same kneeling, and does your Minister
admit any to receive the Communion otherwise then kneeling?

27 Does your Minister admit any notorious offenders, or any Schismatics to
the holy Communion, before due penance enjoined by the Ordinary, be duly
performed by them, or does he admit any notoriously known to be out of
charity: or any that has done any open wrong to his neighbor, before
reconciliation made to the party wronged?

28 Whether does your Minister appoint and observe so many Communions in one
year, as that the parishioners may conveniently receive all of them there
three several times in the year: And does he use to give public notice
thereof in the Church, the Sabbath day next going before every such Communions,
that the parishioners may prepare themselves to be partakers thereof?

Baptism.
29 Have you in your Church a convenient Font of stone, well kept, and covered,
standing in the ancient place: Does your Minister baptize therein, or in any
Basin or other thing, or with any other ceremonies then such as are allowed in
the book of common prayer: or does he omit, neglect, or not use all the
ceremonies therein prescribed: and does he use the sign of the Cross in
Baptism?

30 Does your Minister refuse to baptize any children of Christian parents,
that are brought to the Church?

31 Are Parents urged to be present at the baptising of their children: or be
any admitted to be Godfathers, or Godmothers that have not received the holy
Communion: or do any parents refuse to have their children signed with the
sign of the Cross in their Baptism?

32 Have any children that were borne in your parish been carried out of the
parish to be baptized elsewher: or have any not been baptized at all, or in
places, or by parties unknown?

33 Whether has your Minister refused, deferred, or delayed to come unto, and
to christen any child being in weakness, or in danger of death, being
thereunto required, by reason whereof such a child has (through his
negligence, or by his default) dyed unbaptized?

Catechism.
34 Does your Minister or his Curate duly Catechize according to the late Canon
every Sunday, such children and servants of both sexes, as are of convenient
age, or at least so many of them by course, as the time will permit?

35 Do parents and householders bring, or send their children and servants to
the Church every Sunday duly to be catechized, according as the late Canons
require, and who are negligent therein?

Matrimony.
36 Whether is Matrimony solemnized in your Church or chapel, according to
the book of common Prayer?

37 Have you in your church a Table of degrees of Marriage, are any married
within the degrees of consanguinity or affinity therein forbidden: or do any
children under the age of twenty one years, contract themselves, or marry
without consent of their Parents or Gardians?

38 Have any been married without Fanes thrice asked in the church three
several sundaies or Holidaies (unless by License of the Ordinary, granted
under seal) or at any time of the day, then betwixt the hours of eight and
twelve in the forenoone, or at any times prohibited, that is to say, from
Advent Sunday to the Octaues of the Epiphany, from Septuagefima Sunday to the
Octaues of Easter, from Rogation Sunday, to Trinity Sunday?

39 Have any that dwell in your parish, been married in any other parish, or any
of another parish been married in your parish: or have any bin married privately
out of the Church or face of the congregation, when, where, by whom, and who
were present at such marriages?

40 Have any women not well known to be married, been delivered of any child
in your Parish, and in whose house: or has any woman in your parish been
carnally known, or begotten with child before marriage, and by whom?

41 Have any forsaken their wives or husbands, and married others: have any
married again after they have been divorced or do any which have been
divorced, keep company still together?

42 Do any married couples live asunder, and not together, and do either of
them keep in their house, or secretly resort to any other, to the raising of
suspicion or fame of incontinency?

43 Has any in your parish for money or reward, married any woman, that
committed fornication or adultery with another man? Or has any unmarried woman
begotten with child, gone out of your parish before she has done penance
enjoined her by the Ordinary, where was she, or is she received or harbored, at
whose charge, and who converyed her away?

Visitation of the Sick.
44 Does your Minister or curate visit the sick, does he admonish them to
Repentance, comfort the penitent, and exhort them to charitable and alms deeds?

Burial of the Dead.
45 Are your Dead buried according to the form of Burial set down in the
book of common prayer: or have any been buried secretly or in the night, who
and by whom, and who were present thereat?

46 Do the Executors or Administrators, or other friends of them that are
buried in church or chancell, repair again the pauements, and give any thing
to the Church?

Churching of Women.
47 Do any Women refuse to give God thanks openly in the church or (as we
term it) to be churched at convenient times after child-byrth, or does any
Minister refuse to church them, or church them any otherwise then is prescribed
in the book of common prayer?

48 Has any Woman unlawfully begotten with child, been admitted to public
thanksgiving in the church, before she has performed such penance as was
enjoined her by the Ordinary, or at least been churched in a white sheet, and
confessed her fault penitently before sufficient witnesses, and undertaken to
stand to the censure of the Ordinary for her said offense?

Parish Clerks.
49 Have you a parish Clarke chosen by the Minister, is he of honest
conversation, has he competent skill in reading, writing, and singing: And
does any with hold or detain his wages or duties from him?

Schoolmasters.
50 Have you any School house, and how is it repaired: And have you any
Schoolmaster in your parish that teaches publicly, or privately: is he
lawfully licenced: Does he come duly to Church, and receive the holy Communion:
does he instruct his Scholars in the Catechism allowed, and in the book
entitled God and the King: causes he them to repair to divine prayers in the
Church, and to hear and note Sermons: Teaches he any other Grammar then that
which is allowed?

51 Is any Schoolmaster known or suspected, publicly or privately to read to
his Scholars, or suffer them to read any book that may confirm them in
popery, superstition or disobedience to the Kings Majesty, or to his laws
Ecclesiastical or civil, and how many either men or women do teach children
in your parish, and what be their names?

Schismatickes and Recusants of all sorts.
52 Do you know any that teach or maintain any doctrine contrary to the
Articles agreed upon in the Convocation, Anno Dom. 1562.

53 Does any preach, minister the Communion, baptize children, or church women
in private houses, or other where then in the Church, except it be in cases of
necessity?

54 Know you any that absent themselves from the Church negligently or
wilfully, how long have they so done: And of them that are absent without a
sufficient and lawful cause, is the forfeiture of xii d. taken every sunday,
and converted to the use of the poor, according to the statute Eliz. 1.

55 In your parish where there is a preacher, do any use to absent themselves
from his sermon, and resort to any other?

56 Know you any that forbear to participate with the church of England in
Prayer or Sacraments, either denying the Church to be Apostolical, or
condemning the ceremonies thereof as superstitious?

57 Have you in your parish any popish Recusants, any half Papists that come
to the church, and receive not the Communion, any church papists that come and
receive themselves, but either persuade others, or maintain their wives,
children, family or friends not to come? All such you must present by their
names and surnames, with their additions also whether Esquires, Gentlemen,
Yeomen, Husbandmen, Laborers, or of any other trade of living.

58 Does any Seminary priest or Jesuit, resort to any place within this
Diocese, or suspect you any such: or do you know any that resort to any
popish Priest or Jesuit?

59 Know you any that by writing, talk or argument, impugn the kings
supremacy: or any that have kept in their custody, that sell, disperse carry, or
deliver unto others any unlawful books against the Religion and government
established, or in defense of any foraigne power, or domestical Consistory?

Excommunicated persons.
60 Are all excommunicated persons kept out of the church from divine prayers
and receiving of the holy communion, until they be lawfully absolved: and are
there any in your parish which have stood excommunicated forty days and
upwards: are such persons as stand excommunicated once in every six months
denounced in your Church in time of divine service upon some Sunday?

61 Has any excommunicated person not absolved (at least in his extremity)
not giving any testimony of his repentance before his departure, been buried
in Christian burial, who buried him, her, or them, where and when, and who
were present at such burialls?

62 Do any retain or keep in their house or service, any person denounced
excommunicate, or do any way encourage them therein, or converse with them in
buying selling, eating, drinking, or otherwise keep company with any such
excommunicate person in any sort?

Wills, Testaments, and Administrations.
63 Do any in your parish administer the goods of the dead, or any way
intermeddle therewith without lawful authority committed unto them under the
Ordinaries seal?

64 Know you any in your parish that suppress the last Will of the dead, or
any that forge or alter any Wills, or any Executors that fulfill not the
Testators will: or any that detain Legacies given to any charitable uses?

Several Articles.
65 Do any in your parish profane the Sabbath days or not duly observe the
Holidaies appointed? Are the Ember Fasts orderly observed at the four times of
the year appointed?

66 Are the days and orders of Perambulation duly observed in the Rogation
week: if not in whose default?

67 Are the Canons, Constitutions, and Orders made and agreed upon in the
Convocation house, Anno Dom. 1603. read over once every year in your Church
upon Sundaies or Holy Days, according to his Majesty's commandment in that
behalf?

68 Does your Minister yearly present, and give up in writing to the Ordinary,
the names of all Recusants, and half Recusants* men and women, as well
soiourners, as parishioners, and common guests in your parish, above the age of
thirteen years, according to the 114 Canon, or not?

69 Do any in your parish take upon them to practice physic or surgery,
not being lawfully licenced?

70 Are any in your parish (or which were of your parish, and are now departed)
known, suspected, famed, or reported to have offended in fornication,
adultery, incest, witchcraft, sorcery, charming, usury, swearing, drunkenness,
common slandering, sowing of discord, brawling, scolding, or any other
uncleanness of life or bad manners?

71 Are any Householders in your parish (in whose house there is any one that
can read) which have not the book entitled God and the King, and who be they
which want the same?

72 Have any Apparators, or others, taken reward to compound or conceal any
offense presentable or punishable in the Ecclesiastical court let this be
manifested, and information and presentment made for every offense accordingly?

73 You shall further present whether any in your parish upon Sundaies or
holidayes, do use any dancing, plays, or other sports or pastimes whatsoever,
before all Service on those days be fully ended: And are the same used by any
of another parish, or by any which have not the same day been at divine prayers
in their own parish church, who be they that have offended in any of the
premises?

Church wardens and Sidemen.
74 Are your Churchwardens and Sidemen chosen yearly in the Easter week
according to the Canons: And do the Churchwardens yearly, truly make and
deliver up in writing their account of all their receipts and disbursments
whatsoever, by them received and laid out for the parish, and of all the Church
goods, Books and other things, as the Canons require?

75 Do your Churchwardens themselves come duly to the Church to divine
Prayers and sermons: and do they their best endeavors, especially upon Sundaies
and holidaies, to cause all Parishioners to do the like?

76 Whether is there a transcript or copy of the Register book of the Church,
of christnings, weddings and burials, yearlie exhibited and delivered up into
the Registrie of the Ordinary, or not?

77 Have the late churchwardens concealed any crime, offense or disorder in
their times and not presented the same: what be the matters so concealed: or
does any trouble, molest, or vex the Minister, Churchwardens or Sidemen for
being presented by them: and who be they that so do? and have your
churchwardens continued in that office above one year without have your
churchwardens continued in that office above one year without a new election?

78 Have you advisedly and diligently perused, read, or heard others read and
peruse this book of Articles, and every particular article and branch thereof:
and have you framed your answers and presentiments to the same accordingly?

79 Generally, whether do you know any of the Canons lately set forth and
approved by his Majesty broken, or any Ecclesiastical matter worthy to be
presented or not? and if you do, you shall truly present the same by the Oath
you have taken as well now as hereafter when it shall come to your knowledge?

80 Whether any Churchwardens, Questmen or Sidemen of any parish have been
called and enforced to present any faults committed in their parishes,
otherwise then at the Visitations, or time and* times limited in the 116 Canon?

FINIS.

