CERTAIN REASONS, Proouing the Separation, commonly called Brownists, to be
Schismatiques.

By WILLIAM GILGATE, Minister of the Word of God.

GALAT. 5.19, 20, 21. The works of the flesh are manifest, -- Seditions, --
whereof I tell you before, as I have told you before, that they that do such
things, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.

LONDON Printed by W. Stansby for Nathaniel Butter, and are to be sold at his
shop near St. Augustines gate, at the sign of the Pyde Bull. 1621.

The Preface to the Reader.
Having some years since suffered shipwreck in the gulf of Separation, and
by Gods gracious hand having been lifted out, and saved from drowning in these
waves, I think it my duty to discry to others the danger and escape of those
passages to and from Amsterdam. I left these Arguments of mine with Master
Henry Ainsworth, Preacher to the same English at Amsterdam, calling themselves
the Separation, commonly called Brownists; that he and his might see, how I
not rashly, but for just cause left them. Sithence that, I have been inwardly
moved to publish them in print, that they also who still stick in that pit,
may at length perceive on what a sandy foundation the Separation is built; and
forsaking the same with me and others, may labor to build themselves upon the
Rock Christ, so as the gates of Hell may not prevail against them, to pluck
them from the one Body, whereof he is the one only Head. Because they
persuade themselves, that their manner of separation is the same that the holy
Scriptures do warrant, I have set down their Reasons grounded on two chief
places of the same, very firmly, as they imagine: but I have showed that they
wrest them, as many other alleged to that end, for the proof of that which
they reprove. My reasons showing their Separation to be a Schism, I have set
down briefly. This I have done, not of hatred to any of their persons, or any
truth of Christ, which they hold with the true Churches of God; but of sincere
love toward them; that they might acknowledge and forsake this work of the
flesh, Schism I mean, which among other excludes men from the Kingdom of
God; which I pray God to bestow upon all his there and every where. Amen.

William Gilgate.

The reasons of the Separation, called Brownists, taken out of two chief
places of Scripture, answered.
GOD admonishes his people dwelling in Babylon, id est, Rome, Revel. 18 4.
That at length acknowledging the filthiness of that City, they forsake her:

Therefore he wills also all his people with speed to come forth from the
Parish Assemblies in England.

I deny the consequence. It follows not; there is not the same reason. In the
Church of Rome men continuing members, are partakers of their damnable errors
and sins; but it is not so in the Parish Assemblies of the Church of England.
Which is so far from being Babylon, that it is the strongest and most
flourishing enemy of Babylon: In which regard it is most deadly hated by the
Antichrist of Rome. Let the Separatists take heed lest themselves, under the
pretense of hatred to Babylon, build up a worse Babylon, or Babell of Confusion
in the Christian Church.

2. The believers in the Church of Corinth, 2. Corin. 6.17.
are forbidden to have fellowship with Infidels in Idolatry, id est, in the
holy Feasts they celebrated to the honor of Idols.

Therefore they may not communicate with the English Parish Assemblies in the
Word of God, Sacraments, Prayer.

Here also is an inconsequence: They must prove the people there to be
Infidels, and those means or helps of Gods worship to be Idols, and the using
of the same there, to be idolatry.

Separatists are Schismatiques.
NAy, the Separation seems the rather guilty of Idolatry in adhering to,
admiring, and even adoring their own dreams and newfangled fancies.

My reasons conuincing them of Schism.
Where the Son of God speaks to men by his Gospel, there we may hear him.

In the English Parish Assemblies, Christ speaks to men by his Gospel.

Therefore in those Parish Assemblies, we may hear him. And by consequence
the Separation are Schismatiques, refusing to hear him in any of the said
Assemblies.

Minor proved.
Where men that were dead in sins and trespasses, by hearing do live
spiritually, id est, do rejoice in God, tasting Gods fatherly favor toward
them in Christ, there the Son of God does speak to men by his Gospel.

In the said Assemblies, some men that were dead in sins and trespasses do
live spiritually, etc.

Therefore in the said Assemblies, at least some of them, the Son of God does
speak to men by his Gospel.

When I urged this Argument to Master Ainsworth, he could answer nothing but
that Christ does not at any time speak to any by his Gospel, in the Parish
Assemblies of the Church of England, and that none there do live by Faith.
Which uncharitable and hateful opinion of his, did make me the more to hate
their unchristian opinions.

1. Cor. 1.10.11. Iud. 19.
do nevertheless separate themselves from them as touching spiritual
communion, are Schismatiques.

The Separation do consent with others in the doctrine of salvation by Christ,
and yet do separate from them, as touching spiritual communion.

Therefore they are Schismatiques.

The Corinthians were guilty of Schism in hearing some teachers, and not
othersome, Mayor proved.
though teaching the same doctrine; and in not communicating at the Table of
the Lord with them that professed the same Faith of Christ with themselves. 1.
Cor. 11.21.


Therefore the Separation are guilty of Schism in doing the like.

The former had some show of reason for that they did: so have the latter.

Those men that Jude speaks of were Schismatiques, 2. proof of the Mayor.
for separating themselves from the godly, when they came together to the
outward worship of God.

Therefore the Separation for doing the like, are likewise Schismatiques.

Let them not falsely affirm, that they from whom they separate in the
Parish-Assemblies, are not godly; and that the outward worship there used is
not Gods worship, because of I know not what pretended defects, and because
many wicked are mixed with them.

Revel. 2.24. and 3.4.
no lawful communion can be had in things of God, and thereupon refuse to have
communion with the same, are Schismatikes.

Reasons discussed, page, 247. 249. The mayor proved.
The Separation do teach this, etc.

Therefore they are schismatiques.

Christ puts no such burden upon the faithful in Thyatira and Sardis to
separate themselves, because wicked men were tolerated in their Churches.

Therefore they are Schismatiques that lay such a burden on the faithful in
England.

Ephesians. 4.3.4.5.6.
whom they may discern to have communion with Christ, are schismatiques.

The Separation for the most part do this.

Therefore they are schismatiques.

The mayor proved.
In refusing to have communion with such, they show themselves not to be of the
same body of Christ with them, nor to be led by the same Spirit, nor to have
the same Lord, and the same God and Father; and therefore are Schismatiques.



The Separation do this.

Therefore they are Schismatiques.

Minor proved.
The Church of England is a true Church of God.

The Separation renounce spiritual communion with the Church of England in
public, and that without just cause.

Therefore they without just cause, renounce spiritual communion in public,
with a true Church.

If the Church of England be the pillar of truth, Mayor proved.
upholding the heavenly truth, 1. Tim. 3.16. 1. proof for the Church of
England.
against all heretics and the Antichrist of Rome, as pillars uphold a house,
then it is a true Church of God.

The first is true. Therefore the second.

The Gospel of our salvation is the word of truth. The antecedent proved.
Ephesians. 1.13.


The Church of England vpholdeth as a pillar, the Gospel of our salvation.

Therefore it vpholdeth the word of truth, and by consequence it is a true
Church.

Let them not here stand to show a difference between the Church of England
and Ephesus. There may be a difference between true Churches: notwithstanding
they are all true, that maintain the word of truth, the Gospel.

If the Church of England in Queen Mary's time, 2. proof for the Church of
England.
from the errors then maintained being the principal was rightly named a
false corrupted Church: then since Queen Elizabeth's time, the same Church from
the truth maintained being the principal, is to be named a true Church.

When I mention the truth as principal only, I argue out of the principles
supposed by the Separatists, namely, that there may be some inferior errors in
the Church of England: As what Church in the world is free from erring in all
things? Will the Separation boast that themselves have no errors in their
Church. This task I leave to them, both of clearing themselves from all error,
and also of accusing the Church of England of any.

Antecedent proved.
The denomination or naming of a thing is from the more principal: as it is
named a heap of wheat, though much chafe be mixed with it; and he is
called not a sinner, but righteous, whose sins are forgiven, and in whom
sin reigns not, though he has sin dwelling in him, and sometimes sins
of infirmity: and he is called a spiritual man, in whom the regenerate part
bears the sway.

The errors in Queen Maryes time were the chief and principal; the truths
were overwhelmed with the multitude of their errors.

Therefore from the same multitude of untruths and errors then maintained, it
was to be named a false or corrupt Church: and therefore also since Queen
Elizabeth's time it is to be named a true Church, the truths have prevailed,
and are the chief part.

2. proof of the Antecedent.
As the Spirits, or teachers are to be tried by that short sum of the Gospel
(Christ is come in the flesh) and thereby are to be judged true or false: so
by the same is a Church to be judged true or false. From hence I frame this
argument.

If they be to be accounted false Teachers, who holding some truths of
Christ, yet also hold some great error contrary thereunto, as Cerinthus
denying Christ's godhead; then a Church, as that of England in Queen Mary's
time, was to be accounted a false Church, which professing in word that
sentence concerning Christ's person and office, yet in the mean time defended
opinions overthrowing the truth both of his natures and offices.

The first is true. And therefore also the second.

If they are to be accounted true Teachers, 3. Proof for the now Church of
England to be a true Church.
who keep this foundation (Christ is come in the flesh) and build not upon it
any Doctrine, overthrowing the same; then a Church, as that now of England, is
to be held for a true Church, which retayneth this foundation of the Christian
Faith, and builds not upon it any Doctrines, overthrowing the same.

The first is true. Therefore the second.

The Separation have no just cause to separate as they do, from the Church of
England.


The first is true; and therefore the second.

The sincere and pure profession of Christ, Antecedent proved.
from all filth and defilements of monstrous opinions and vices, are those
garments.

A member of that Church may make there a pure profession of Christ, from all
filth and defilements of monstrous opinions and vices.

Therefore a member of that Church may there not defile his garments.

2. Proof.
A member of that Church needs not to be infected with the company of the
wicked there; he may separate himself from every of them, but not from the
Church where such are.

Therefore, a member of that Church may keep his garments undefiled.

And so the Separation have no just cause to renounce communion with the Church
of England in those means of Gods worship.



The Separation renounce spiritual communion in public with those Churches.

Therefore, they renounce spiritual communion in public with true Churches.

They have no just cause to do it, because they meet in Temples.
If the difference of places be taken away by Christ, even as the difference of
meats, that as Christians may eat any meats; so they may serve God in any
places: then the Temples they assemble in to worship God, are no just cause of
renouncing communion with them.

Coloss. 2.16.
The first is true: Therefore the second.

1. Tim. 2.8.
If they answer, the place of Paul to Timothy: Though he bids us pray for all
men, yet John excepteth one sort, 1. John 5. so though he bids men pray every
where, yet one kind of place is excepted as evil to serve God in: let them
then name one of the Apostles, who has made such an exception. I deny not that
in the old Testament, there was in force such a difference of places, but it is
taken away in the new Testament.

Nor because they read a set form of Prayer.
If in a set form of prayer read, or said by heart, all things may be put in
practice, required in acceptable prayer to God; then the using thereof by these
Churches, is no just cause of their renouncing communion with them in public.

The first is true: Therefore the second.

The things asked of God may be such as are contained

Therefore, all things required in acceptable prayer to God (except they can
show us any more) may be put in practice, in a set form of prayer, read, or
said by heart.


