ARTICLES, TO BE INQUIRED OF, AND ANSVVERED UNTO BY THE CHVRCHVVARDENS AND
SWORN MEN IN THE Visitation of the Right Worshipful the Archdeacon of
NORWICH.

Anno Domini. 163^

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by John Raworth.

The tenor of the oath of the Churchwardens, and Sworne-men.
YOu shall swear, that you, and every of you, shall diligently inquire of all
and every of these Articles given you in Charge: And that all favor,
affection, hatred, fear of displeasure, or hope of reward set aside; you shall
faithfully present to this Court all, and every such person, which now, or
lately was in your Parish, that have committed any crime or offense, or omitted
any duty mentioned in these Articles, or which are vehemently suspected, or
defamed of any such Crime, offense, or default. So help you God and the
contents of his holy Gospel.

Articles to be inquired of, and answered unto by the Churchwardens, Questmen,
or Sidemen in the visitation of the right worshipful the Archdeacon of
NORWICH. Anno Domini 163^
CHAP. 1. Concerning Religion and Doctrine.
FIrst, have any within your Parish Preached, maintained, or held any
heretical, or scismaticall opinions? impugned the Kings Majesty's supremacy
in causes Ecclesiastical? or the Articles of Religion established in the
Church of England: and is the Kings Majesty's Declaration prefixed before those
Articles, duly observed?

2. Have any person within your Parish, affirmed that the Church of England is
not a true Church, or that the form of Gods worship contained in the book of
Common Prayer, the administration of the Sacraments, and other religious duties
therein prescribed are corrupt, or contrary to the holy Scriptures; Or that the
government of the Church of England, under his Majesty's Archbishops, Bishops,
Deanes, Archdeacons and others that bear office in the Church, is
Antichristian or repugnant to Gods holy word, or that the rites and ceremonies
of the Church of England now established, are superstitious, or not to be used:
or have any such spoken against the Kings Majesty's Courts Ecclesiastical, or
the proceedings thereof?

3. Are there any in your Parish, that have been, or are vehemently suspected
to be present at Convinticles or private meetings under color or pretense of
any exercise of Religion, to repeat Sermons or expound the Scriptures; and do
any affirm that such meetings are lawful?

CHAP. 2. Concerning the Church, the Ornaments and possessions thereof.
1. IS your Church or Chapel, with the Chancell in good reparation, the
windows in no part stopped up, but well glazed the walls thereof within comely
whited and adorned with sentences of holy Scripture, the floores paved and even
the Steeple, Belles, and frames, with the Bell-rores well maintained? if
otherwise by whose default?

2. Have you in your Church or Chapel, a Bible of the largest volume, and
last translation, the book of common prayer, the two Tomes of Homilies, and
Bishop Jewels works, fair and well bound? have you a Table of the degrees of
Marriage set up in some eminent part of your Church; the Kings Majesty's arms,
and a table of the Ten Commandments of God, set up in the East end of your
Church or Chancell; have you the Prayer books appointed for the fifth of
November, and twenty seven of March; and the book of Canons or Constitutions
Ecclesiastical?

3. Have you a comely Communion Table, placed in the East end of the Chancell,
the ends thereof North and South, and upon an assent? is the same rayled in
from anoyances, or otherwise, as was lately enjoined by publque authority; have
you a comely carpet of Silk, or other decent cloth or stuff, continually laid
upon it in time of Divine Service; and a fair fine linen cloth laid on it at
the administration of the holy Communion; is it at any time profaned by
sitting, or laying of hats, leaning, or writing on it, or otherwise, and by
whom? have you a Communion cup with a cover of silver, a flagon or stoop of
silver or pewter sufficient to contain the wine used at every Communion? have
you a comely Font of Stone with a cover, set in the ancient usual place of the
Church, is it whole and clean, have you a strong and comely Biere for
burialls, and a hearse-cloth suitable?

4. Have you in your Church or Chapel, a convenient deske for your Minister
to read Divine Service, a comely Pulpit with a round bo^rd, are they so placed,
as the Minister reading the Divine Service, do not stand or kneel with his
back toward the Communion Table, as has been enjoined? have you a
convenient cloth and cushion for the Pulpit, have you a fair linners Surplesse
for your Minister, with a hood fitting his degree in the University? have you
a Register book of Parchment, wherein all Christnings, Marriages, and Burialls
within your Parish are duly recorded, and every page thereof being full
suscribed by your Minister and Churchwardens, according to the Cannon? have
you a paper book to insert the names of all strange Preathers in your Church
or Chapel, with the name of the Bishop by whom they were licenced? have you a
chest with three locks and keys for the safe keeping of the goods, books,
and ornaments of the Church? and are they so kept, and have you also a
pooremans bore, for the alms of the poor?

5. Have you a fair and comely partition between the Church and the Chancell,
are your Chancells or allies of your Church incroached upon by building of
Seats, or otherwise; have you any close Pewes or Galleries; have you any
Seats or Pewes so high to hinder the prospect of the Chancell? are they in
good repair and decent; are they planched or matted, is there any straw
brought into them, are the Parishoners conveniently placed in them according to
their ranks and qualities, and do any contend for seats in the Church or
Chancell, have any erected any new pewes, seats or monuments without authority
from the Ordinary, present the persons that have so erected them in the Church
or Churchyard?

6. Have your Church or Churchyard been at any time employed to any profane
use, by keeping of Feasts, Church-ales, Temporal Courts or Leets, Musters,
exercises of Dancing, Stooleball, Football or the like? is your Churchyard
well fenced, with stone walls, rayles or pales, as have been accustomed? have
any incroached upon your churchyard, or annoyed the same by feeding of noisome
cattle, hanging or laying of clothes, or leaving of any dust, rubbish or
filth therein, by opening their doors into it, and making by paths or ways
through it? have any person brawled, quarrelled, or fought in your Church or
Churchyard, or otherwise behaved him or herself rudely and disoredrly therein,
by profane or filthy talk or otherwise; when any grave is dug, are the
bones or corpse of the dead piously used, and have any convict, or any
excommunicated person been buried in yours Church or Churchyard; and by whom,
and who have been present at it?

7. Are your Parsonage or Vicarage Houses in good reparations; are yours Alms
Houses employed to a godly and the right holy uses; if not, by whose default?
Have you a terrier of all the houses and gleabe lands and portions of tithes
belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage, taken by the view of honest and
discreet men, is it safely kept, and a coppie brought into the Register of the
Bishop.

CHAP. 3. Concerning Ministers and Preachers.
FIrst, do your Minister or Curate distinctly and reverently read the whole
Divine Service by the book of common prayer prescribed, every forenoone and
afternoon, upon every Sunday and holiday, and their eves: and upon
wednesedayes and fridayes, and every day of the holy week next before Easter
in your Church or Chapel at fit and convenient times for the same, and also
for Preaching, and administration of the Sacraments, Marriages, Burials,
Christnings, and visiture of the sick according to the prescript form of the
said book; does he observe all the rites and ceremonies therein prescribed,
without omission, alteration, or addition? does he at all times of performing
his Priestly duties wear the Surplesse with a hood suitable to his degree,
never omitting the same? does he read the common service called the second
service at the holy Table with an audible voice unto the end of the Nicean
Creed. And does he then begin his sermon or Homely, and does he before his
sermon or Homely, read or use any other form of prayer then is prescribed by
the 55. Cannon; and does he conclude his sermon with Gloriae patri etc. and
does he or whosoever officiates proceed to read the remainder of the divine
service and conclude with the blessing called the peace of God, as he has bin
enjoined by public authority?

2. Does your Minister or Curate read all those Psalms and lessons and no
other, with the Epistle and Gospel appointed for the day, and at the end of
every Psalm do he and all the people standing, say Gloria patri, etc. and
after the lessons does he use any other Psalm or Hymn but those appointed in
the book of Common Prayer; does he read the Creed of Athanasius on all those
days prescribed, and the Commination on Ashwednesday, and the Letany on every
Sunday, Wednesday, and Friday?

3. Does your Minister or Lecturer, having a Curate under him, read Divine
Service himself upon two several Sundaies in the year publicly, and at the
usual times both forenoone and afternoon, in the Church which he possesses*
and administer the Sacraments as often in every year in such manuer and with
such observations of Rites and Ceremonies as are prescribed in the book of
Common Prayer?

4. Is your Minister resident upon his benefice? if absent, how long has he
been so and where? if he have another benefice, does he supply his absence by
a Curate lawfully licenced to Preach, and a competent allowance; if your
Minister be a licenced Preacher, does he Preach once every Sunday in his own
Church, or some other where there is no Preacher, and if he be not a licenced
Preacher, does he take upon him in his own Cure or elsewhere to Preach; and
does he upon every Sunday, when there is no Sermon, read one of the Homilies
published by authority, and procure monthly Sermons by such as are licenced?
and does your Minister or Curate serve more cures then one, if yea, how far
distant are the said Cures the one from the other? and do any take upon him to
be Curate, not being licenced by the Ordinary, or is not a Minister or Deacon,
or being but Deacon to administer the holy Communion alone in your Church or
Chapel?

5. Does your Minister or Curate every Sunday before evening prayer, standing
in his D^ske half an hour or more, Catechize the youth and ignorant persons
of your Parish in the Catechism set forth in the book of common prayer, and
is it performed by questions and answers? does your Minister go to the
administration of holy Baptism presently after the second lesson? does he
ask first whether the child be baptized or no; does he take the child in his
arms, and does he touching the child's forehead, sign it with the sign of
the Cross? or does he at any time omit the same, has he at any time
deferred or refused to baptize any infant within the Parish being in danger of
death, after notice given or request made unto him; and has any child died
unbaptized by his default; and has he before the Godfathers and Godmothers,
admonished them to bring the child to the Bishop to be confirmed, when it shall
be fitted for the same; and has he used any other vessel then the Fontonely?
has he admitted any to answer as godfather or godmother, any parents, or such
as have not received the holy communion or any more then two godfathers and one
godmother for a male child, and two goodmothers and one godfather for a female,
and has he baptized any child at home, or upon any day, but on a Sunday or
holy day without great necessity?

6. Does your Minister administer the holy Communion so often in the year as
that every Parishioner may receive thrice in the year, whereof Easter to be
one; does he first receive the same himself kneeling, or does he administer it
to any not kneeling; does he always use the words of Institution set down in
the book without alteration, at every time the bread and wine is received, and
does he repeats the words prescribed to every one severally at the delivery of
the bread and wine, and not omit any part of the words, or saying them to many
at once? and does he give public warning in the Church at morning prayer the
Sunday before every Communion to be administered, and admonish the Parishioners
to prepare themselves accordingly?

7. Has your Minister admitted to the holy Communion any notorious offenders,
or that have maliciously and openly contended with their neighbors, or to any
strangers that do commonly come to your Church from other Parishes, or does he
administer the Communion to any in private houses without great necessity?

8. Does you Minister use the form of thankesgiving for married women after
childbirth, immediately before the Communion service, does he use it to any not
being veiled according to the ancient custom of the Church, without a hat, or
that does not come and kneel near the Communion table, as has been enjoined
by public authority?

9. Has your Minister given warning for the keeping of holidays, and fasting
days happening the week following on Sunday in time of morning prayer,
immediately after the Sermon or Homily, as has been enjoined?

10. Does your Minister or Curafe resort unto such as be dangerously sick in
your Parish, notice thereof being given to him, is instruct and comfort them,
and does he earnestly exhort them to be liberal to the poor, and if any
(being sick,) desire the prayers of the congregation, is it done in the Church
according to the form in the Liturgy, at the time of divine service, and in
the reading deske?

11. Has your Minister ever refused or deferred to bury the dead of your
Parish in christian burial, does he go before the corpse to the grave, and
there say the whole service appointed, not omitting the lesson or any part of
it, does he devoutly kneel when he says the prayers and collect, or has he
admitted to Christian burial any which be excommunicated, or otherwise ought
not to be butied in Christian burial?

12. Has your Minister taken upon him to appoint hold or continue in your
Parish or elsewhere, any private fasts or meetings for Preaching or praying,
for prophesies or other religions exercises not approved; or have he at such
meetings consulted about depraving the doctrine or discipline of the Church of
England?

13. Has your Minister or Curate read the book of cannons Ecclesiastical set
forth by public authority, Anno Domini 1603. once every year as is enjoined?

14. Has your Minister at any time taken upon him in the Church, to confuse
the doctrine of any other Preacher in the same Church, without order from the
Bishop; does he (standing excommunicated or suspended by his Ordinary)
intermeddle with reading divine service preaching, administering the Sacraments,
or any other part of his Priestly office; if not, does he seek to be absolved
and desire to conform himself in obedience to the Church? Is there any that
being once admitted to the holy orders of Priest or Deacon, does voluntarily
relinquish his calling, and become as a lay man?

15. Has your Minister with the rest of your Parishoners, gone the
Peramblation of your Parish yearly upon the Regation days, viz. Monday,
Tuseday or Weddenseday before Ascension, and no other time, has he used the
prayers and thankesgivings, Psalms and sentences of Scripture at that time,
and does he return to the Church, and there read divine service as was lately
enjoined by public authority?

16. Has your Minister admitted any excommunicated or suspended person into
the Church in time of divine service, or has he read the prayers while any
such person has been present, has he deferred the publishing of any
excommunication or suspention under the seal of any Ecclesiastical Judge, the
next Sunday or holiday after the same is brought or showed unto him; does he
every six months denounce and publish in the Church by name all Recusants,
Convict, or Excommunicated persons that do persevere in that sentence and not
seek to be absolved?

17. Has your Minister solemnized the marriage of any persons under the age of
21. years without the consent of their parents or godmothers, or of such as
do not audibly say and answer in all things appointed by the Liturgy, or of
any without a Ring, or of such as have not had their banes published in their
several Churches three several Sundays or holidayes, or be married in the
times prohibited without special license from the Ordinary? and does he begin
in the body of the Church, and then go up to the table, as is appointed; and
does he as often as there is a marriage appoint to have a Communion, and does
he read all that is prescribed to be read at matrimony by the book of common
prayer?

18. Is your Minister a man of sober life and conversation? is he reputed to be
an incontinent person, a frequenter of Taverns, Innes or Alehouses, a common
gamester or player at dice and Cards, a common swearer or drunkard, or guilty
of any other scadalous crime or offense; does he use any mechanical trade or
bodily labor, soliciting of causes in law, does he use common buying and
selling, or any other employments not befitting his calling, and is he
suspected to have obtained his benifice by Simonie directly or indirectly? does
he usually wear a gown when he does officiate, and does he in his journying
use a cloak with sleeves? does he at any time go abroad in his doublet and
hose without a Coute or Cassocke, or wear any light colored stockings, or is
he or his wife any ways excessive in their apparel?

19. Lastly, does your Minister commonly upon Sundays and holidayes, after the
reading of the second lesson at morning and evening prayer, admonish the
Churchwardens and Questmen to note such as without cause do absent themselves
from divine service; or do not receive the holy Communion thrice in the year;
and if they be negligent in their office, does he present them to the Ordinary?

CHAP. 4. Concerning the Parishioners and Leyetie.
1. Has any in your Parish profaned any Sunday or Holiday, by unlawful
gaming, drinking and tippling in Tavernes, Innes or Alehouses, in the time of
divine service or sermon, by working in their trades, selling of wares, setting
open their shops, by themselves, their servants or apprentises, or any other
ways?

2. Is the fist day of November observed and kept in your Parish, with prayers
and thankesgiving unto God, as by the statute is appointed?

3. Do all and singular persons dwelling in your Parish diligently resort to
your Parish Church with their servants and children, to morning and evening
prayer upon every Sunday and holiday; do they come at the beginning of prayer,
and then with due attention do they orderly abide there the whole time of
divine service and Sermon; has any person in that time presumed to cover his
head with his hat, do they all devoutly kneel when the general confession,
the Letany, the ten Commandments, and other prayers and collects of the
Church, or at Baptism, Marriage, Burial, and visitation of the sick are
read? is there any person, that does not use lowly reverence, when the name
Jesus is mentioned, or that do not stand up when the Creed is rehearsed, and
do all the people say Amen, and make such other answers as are prescribed in
the book of common prayer?

4. Is there any in your Parish that has rudely behaved themselves in the
Church, or disturbed the Minister in time of divine service, by walking,
talking, laughing, ringing of bells, or contending for place or seats in the
Church, do any sleep in the Church in the said time, or have an^ loytered
about the Church or Churchyard in the same time, or have any brawled,
quarrelled or tought in Church or Churchyard?

5. Are there any Popish or scismaticall persons, or suspected to be popish or
scismatically affected, or that have wilfully absented themselves from the
parish Church or Chapel in time of morning and evening prayer, or do refuse
or neglect to receive the holy Communion, or that do persuade others from the
same; are there any that do leave their own Minister, and usually resort to
other Preachers or Churches, or that do cause their children to be baptized by
any other Minister, or in another Parish, and to what Parish or Church do such
usually resort?

6. Has every one in your Parish being above 16. years of age and of
discretion, received the holy Communion thrice every year, whereof once at the
feast of Easter? do all of them of what sort soever, according as the Church
expressly commands, draw near, and with all revernce come to the Lords
table, when they are to receive the holy Communion?

7. Has any woman of your Parish after childbirth, neglected to come to
Church to give God thanks for her safe deliverance, veiled in a decent manner,
without a hat as has been accustomed, and does she than kneel in some
convenient place nigh the Communion table, and if there be a Communion, does
she receive the same?

8. Is there any in your Parish that do refuse to have their children
baptized, or to receive the holy Communion of their own Minister, without just
cause approved by the Ordinary, or do any deferr the baptizing of their
children longer then the next Sunday or holyday after the birth, or do any
procure their Children to be baptized by any other Minister or Priest?

9. Do all parents, masters, and mistresses, or dames, cause their children,
servants, and apprentices to come to public catechism, to be instructed and
taught therein?

10. Do any person of what quality soever, keep any Chaplyne Schoolmaster
or Scholar in his house, to read divine service, expound the Scripture, or to
instruct his family, unless such be licenced by the Ordinary?

11. Have you any in your Parish that are commonly known or reputed to be
blasphemers of Gods holy name; common or usual swearers, common drunkards,
usurers, adulterers, incestuous persons, fornicators, bands, concealers or
abettors of any such criminous persons; receivers of women unlawfully begotten
with child, conveying or suffering them to go away from their due punishment,
attempters of women's chastity, lascivious persons, ribalds or incontinent
persons before marriage, common scoulds and such like?

12. Is there any that have unreverently used your Minister by word or deed, or
have lated violent hands upon him, or otherwise disgraced and vilified his holy
function and calling, or have any rayled upon or miscalled any of the
Churchwardens or Questmen for doing their duties?

13. Have any of the Parishioners neglected to go the perambulation or circuit
of their Parish in Rogation week?

14. Have any refused to pay to the reparations of your Church or ornaments
thereof, or other charges expended by the Churchwardens in the execution of
their office, being lawfully and indifferently rated thereunto?

15. Has any person of your Parish administered the goods of any person
deceased, without authority, or that do conceal any testament or last will,
or that do neglect to pay any legacies or somes of money bequeathed or given to
the Church, the poor, or any other charitable uses, or do any detain or
convert the goods and stooke of the Church to their private use.

16. Is there any person within your Parish that do stand excommunicated or
suspended, and how long? has such excommunicated person resorted to Church to
hear divine service or sermon, to receive the holy Communion, to be married or
churched; and you must present all persons that do keep the company or
society of any such person after notice or publication thereof in the Church,
their names qualities and conditions?

17. Are there any in your Parish that have been married, being within the
degrees of consanguinitie or affinity, prohibited by Gods laws, and the table
of the degrees of the marriage set forth by public authority, or that are
precontracted, or that are under the age of 21. years, without the consent of
their parents or governors, and without license, have any being divorced
been married again their former husband or wife living, or do any married
persons separate themselves one from the other, without lawful authority?

18. Have any person within your Parish been Clandestinely married, viz. there
banes not being first published three several Sundays or Holidayes in the
Churches where they dwell; or in the times prohibited, viz. from Advent Sunday,
until the fourteenth of January; from Septuag^sima Sunday, until the Monday
next after Low-Sunday; from the Sunday before Rogation week, until the Sunday
after Trinity Sunday; or that are married at a lawless Church, priviliged
place, or peculiar liberty, and not between the hours of Eight and Twelve of
the clock in the forenoone, or in any private house, and without license from
his Ordinary? and who have been present at any such marriages?

19 Lastly, have all new married persons the same day of their marriage,
received the holy Communion?

CHAP. 5. Concerning Churchwardens and Questmen, Schoolemasters, Physicians,
Chyrurgions, and Parish-Clarkes.
1. HAve you in your Parish, Churchwardens and Questmen Chosen in Easterweeke,
by the joint consent of the Minister and Parishioners, at least the one by the
Minister, the other by the Parishioners; have any of them continned longer then
one year, unless they be new chosen thereunto?

2. Have your Churchwardens provided sufficient fine whit Bread, and wholesome
wine for the Communicants, every Communion celebrated; have they yielded up
their accounts of what they have received and disbursed, have they or any of
them detained in their hands any of the money, stock and goods of the Church,
and have they suffered any excommunicated person to come into the Church in
time of divine service or Sermon?

3. Have your Churchwardens been diligent to see decency kept in the Church,
and all orders for divine service and administration of the Sacraments
performed by the Parishioners; if not, have they duly presented them? do they
duly upon Sundays and Holidayes in time of divine service, walk abroad to or
serve all such as are evilly employed in Alehouses or elsewhere, or idly
disposed? do they note all such as be absent from Church, or has not
received the holy Communion thrice in the year; have they and the Questmen or
Sidemen before every general Court of inquiry or visitation met together to
peruse the book of Articles, and to confer about their presentiments to be
made?

4. Is there any in your Parish that teaches any Scholars publicly or
privately without lisence from the Ordinary, does he teach to read or write
in the Church or Chancell, is he popishly or scismatically affected, does he
use to resort to Church in time of divine service, and bring his Scholars with
him; does he teach them in the Catechism set forth in the book of common
prayer, or any other Catechism, is he of honest life and conversation; a
graduate in the University, or otherwise sufficient to teach, and diligent to
teach and bring up youth committed unto him?

5. Have you any that practice Physic or Surgery without license from the
Ordinary?

6. Have you a fit Parish Clarke of honest life, able to read and write,
chosen by the Minister, is he diligent in his office; does he keep the Church
clean, and Church doors locked? does he suffer unseasonable ringing of bells,
and does he duly ring the passing bell for such as are dying, or after their
departure? and do any refuse to pay the Clerks wages accustumed, and by
authority increased?

7. Have you an Appariter within your Parish, by whom is he authorized; have he
taken any bribes directly or indirectly, to conceal any offense, or to
forbear the execution of any process against any persons from this Court or
any other?

FINIS.

