AN ENGLISH CHALLENGE AND A REPLY FROM SCOTLAND.
Question. OH how now Mars what is thy humor?
That thou on us begins to frown
What is the meaning of this rumor
Of wars that flies up and down?
Or to what end does thou intend
Twixt friend and friend to make debate,
And cause the one the other hate?

Answer. You English Poets hearken I pray
I tell why Mars does on you frown,
Because like men you will not assay you,
To pull the Romish myter down.
Since ye want hearts to act your parts,
Mars called has the valiant Scots,
To make the Bishops quite their coats.

Quest. Has Vulcane any wise displeased thee?
Or Cupid that unhappy Lad?
That Venus smyles cannot appease thee,
Or is it Bacchus makes thee mad?
What Planet darre move Jove to war?
Durst ever Luna, Sol withstand,
Or Juno Jupiter command?

Ans. We are not planets but fixed stars,
We prove not wandering from the right,
Our light with darkness is not mixed,
As yours that shines but in the night
Of Vulcanes Ire or Cupids fire
Or Venus toys no count we make,
From Bacchus we no courage take.

Quest. Then paughty Scot what does thou mean,
Presumptuously thus to attempt?
You Will better let these wars alone,
Then thus from us thy self exempt
Thou does not well for to rebel
And stand against so good a King
Whose fame throughout the world does reign.

Ans. May we not justly for our nation
Prevein all dangers may ensue,
Should we not make a separation,
When God commands from Babels crew
Then with our King against Romes offspring,
And all their trash we will stoutly fight
And to the death maintain our right.

Quest. We that together in one nation,
So long have been great Britane called
Why does thou seek a separation,
Art thou from us securely walled,
Oh do not so lest that thy woe
And sorrows more and more do bried
If once we pass the river Tweid.

Ans. We love all English loyal Subjects.
From them we'll not exempted be,
But of all Bishops popish projects
We stand no fear to make us free
Tho wales we lack to hold you bake
I wish our joys may still abide
Until you pass the river Tweid.

Quest. What does thou think the English powers
So weak, that thou can make us flee:
Who will not fuffer any Gowries,
For to perform conspiracy.
Art thou so strong to profer wrong
Seditiously to work such plots
And thus become rebellious Scots.

Ans. In vain ye boast your English powers
As if your Gyhoes and great horses
Your walled towns and fenced towers
Were able to resist our forces
While as you Blot the valiant Scot,
With treacherous doings, without reason,
You may think on the powder treason.

Quest. There Is not a coward so faint-hearted
I think which will not dar to fight,
But into valor will be converted
And stand up for his Countries right
When Canons rattle into Battle,
And Billots thick amongst us flee
St George for England still we cry.

Ans. I Am sure when any Popish faisart
For prelates quarrels dar to sight,
There is not a Scots-man but he will haizart
For to defend his Countries right
When Canons rumble and Billots tumble
And Englishmen before us flee,
The Covenant for Scots we cry.

Quest. The Welch-men in his Princes honor
Has vowed he will not be to seek,
But will display St David's banner,
And unto him present a liek-
Both men and boy that springs from Troy
Does swear if once they set upon it.
They Will make the Scots-man wail his bonnet,

Ans. The Welch-men vows he no way fears
To make the Scots-man wail his bonnet
But he performs not what he swears,
At Newburne so was seen upon it.
When Trumpets blew and billots flew
The Welsh men's courage was to seek,
Where was St David with his liek?

Quest. The French the Irish and Italian,
Also the Danes and Spaniard too,
The Persian Pagan and each alian,
Does seek rebellion to subdue.
Then seek thy peace let rumors cease
And not attempt to do such thing,
Or move to wrath so good a King.

Ans. The Irish French and Danes asist you
And Rome with all her bastard blood:
Through GOD we are able to resist you
Because our quarrel is just and good,
We wish our King ay still may reign,
While Scots prove false and papists true,
And Antichrist CHRIST'S truth subdue.

Quest. Lest paughty Scot we cry have at thee
The mark's so fair we cannot miss,
Yet never since thy Dady gat thee
Thou could have fairer play nor this
Which we will show to thee our foe
Thou can not hold us much to blame
For thou thy self have wrought the same.

Ans. Your crying will no wheit dismay us
For tho ye shoot ye may well miss,
Come when ye will ye may assay us,
To fight we will not be miss
Ye shall see Ladies got ^f Scots Dadies,
Will make the Pope curse his mishape,
And Prelates wail their ^er cap.

Q^^^^. And if the officers ^^^^esse me,
I will be ready for the (...),
And not seek any to re^ me,
But boldly fight for Countries fame,
Or if not so then will I go,
A voluntire among the ^est,
If otherwise I be not (...).

Ans. Since brain sick P^ (...) but pratle
I would advise you (...) ^ght
Lest if they press (...) the battle
You turn a volunt^^^ (...) flight
Since it is so, friend do not go,
To fight, lest ye ^en Canons rumble
With shame for ^^ar cry barlafumble.

Quest. Thus to conclude my resolution,
As willing for to fight as sing
I Will drink a health to his confusion,
That bears arms against our King,
Whom I do love and still will prove,
A loyal subject to his Grace,
In England or in any place.

Ans. Then to conclude that Poet liar,
That fayes he will not sing but fight
But Poets fighting away flees,
Except with pottles in the night.
For me I Will sing God save our King,
And drink a health to all true Scots
That loves the truth and hates false.

FINIS

