ARTICLES TO BE INQUIRED OF BY THE CHVRCHwardens in the Visitation of the Right
Worshipful, Master ROBERT JOHNSON, Bachelor in Divinity, and Archdeacon of
Leicester, In the year of our Lord God. 1622.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN GRISMAND. 1622.

The Tenor of the Oath ministered to all and every the Churchwardens and
Sworne-men, chosen for this present year.
YOu, and every of you shall swear by Almighty GOD, that all affection set
aside, you shall, upon due consideration of these Articles given you in charge,
present unto Master Robert Johnson aforesaid, and his Official, every such
person and persons, of, or within your Parish, as has committed any offense,
or made any default mentioned in the same Articles, or which are vehemently
suspected, or otherwise defamed of any such offense, fault, or default; wherein
you and every of you shall deal uprightly, as before God. So help you God.

A short Admonition to the Churchwardens, and Sidemen.
YOu which shall be sworn consider well of this Oath, and make your
Presentiments in writing, under your hands, to every Article severally in this
Book, bringing the same with you to Master Archdeacon of Leicester his
Visitation, there to be delivered upon your Oaths.

Articles concerning Churchmen, as Parsons, Vicars, Curats, etc.
INprimis, Whether your Parson, Vicar, A Preacher.
or Curate be a Preacher of Gods word, a favorer and furthered of true
Religion now established in this Realm of England by public authority, or
not?

2 Whether your Parson or Vicar have preached, or caused to be preached in your
Church, In preaching monthly Sermons, etc.
^o many Sermons as by the late Canons are required: and whether before all
Sermons, Lectures, and Homilies, uses that form of Prayer which is set down
in the late Canon, and what be the names of them, who have preached for him,
and whether he has admitted any man to preach not having sufficient license.

3 Whether any person or persons, Say Service unordered.
not being ordered at the least for a Deacon, do say Common Prayer openly in
your Church or Chapel?

4 Whether the Parson, Vicar, Serve unlicensed.
or Farmer of your Benefice, do cause or suffer any Curate or Minister to
serve your Church, before he be examined and admitted by the Ordinary, or his
Deputy, in writing, and do show his License to the Church wardens: and
whether any Curate do serve two Cures Two Cures.
at one time, or not?

5 Whether any Parson, Vicar, or Curate, Read Homilies
do every Sunday, when there is no Sermon, read distingly and plainly some
part of the Homilies, as is prescribed by the Canons: and whether any Minister,
not admitted by lawful authority, do expound any scripture, or matter of
doctrine by the way of exhortation, or otherwise, and thereby omit and leave
off the reading of the Homilies, contrary to the Canons?

6 Whether any Lectures, Conuenticles, Private Conuenticles.
or private Meetings be read or used within your parish, either publicly in
the church, or private in the house, or in any other place whatsoever, by any
person not sufficiently licensed thereunto by the Ordinary, or whether any
Ecclesiastical person do teach any doctrine of Innovation, to withdraw the
people from due obedience to the ordinances of the Church, set forth by
public authority, or cause them to forbear participating in Prayer and
Sacraments with our Church?

Catechize.
7 Whether your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, do every Sunday and Holyday, openly in
the Church, call for, hear, and instruct all children, apprentices, and
servants of both sexes, that be of convenient age within your parish, or at the
least so many of them by course as the time will serve, and as he may well hear
and instruct, for one hour at the least, before or after Evening prayer, in
the ten Commandments, the Articles of the belief, and the Lords prayer, and
diligently examine and teach them the Catechism, as is now allowed, and set
forth in the Book of Common prayer, or M. Nowels Catechism, with the
understanding thereof: and fail not to present the offender herein, together
with such as are negligent comers to the said Catechism?

8 Whether your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, or other Minister in your Church or
chapel has admitted to the holy Communion any open and notorious fornicator,
adulterer, or evil liver, by whom public offense is given, without due
Penance first done, to the satisfaction of the congregation, enjoined him by
his Ordinary: or any other malicious person, notoriously known and detected to
be out of charity, or has done any open wrong to his neighbor by word or
deed, without due reconciliation first made to the party that is wronged?

Communion with ordinary bread.
9 Whether your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, do administer the holy Communion with
any other then common bread, appointed in the Book of Common Prayer?

Ignorant persons admitted to the Communion.
10 Whether your Parson, Vicar, Curate or Minister, has admitted to the holy
Communion any of his parish that cannot say the ten Commandments, the Articles
of the Faith, the Lords Prayer in English, and whether he marry any persons
which were single before, and cannot say the Catechism, and whether he uses
to examine his Parishioners at convenient times, before he administer the
Sacrament unto them, to the intent he may know whether they can say by heart
the same which is required in that behalf, or no?

11 Whether your Preachers and Ministers be peacemakers, Ministers disturbers.
no brawlers, no sowers of discord: whether they be diligent in visiting the
sick, and comforting them, and do move them earnestly (specially when they
make their Testaments) to consider the necessity of the poor, and to give to
their box, or Church their charitable devotion and alms?

12 Whether any do preach, declare or speak any thing in derogation of the
Book of Common prayer, Impugn the Book of Common prayer.
set forth by the Laws of this Realm, dispraising the same, or any thing
therein contained, or against the Preachers or Ministers of the Word and
Sacraments?

13 Whether your Parsons, Vicars, Curates, Register Book
or Ministers, keep well their Registers of all Weddings, Burials, and
Christenings within your Parish, according the Order published lately?

14 Whether they or any of them, Ministers offend in any thing.
keep any suspected woman in their houses, or be incontinent persons, given
to drunkenness, idleness, or to be haunters of Tauernes, Alehouses, or
suspected places, or be Hunters, Hawkers, Dicers, Carders, Table-players,
Swearers, Liars, False dissemblers, Dauncers or otherwise suspected of any
notorious crime, or give any evil example of life, or use disordered or
unseemly apparel, either in colors, gards, or light fashion: or do not
observe the order prescribed in the seventy fourth Canon, touching decency in
Apparel?

15 Whether your Parson, Vicar, or Curate have married any person within the
times prohibited contrary to the Canon lately published in that behalf?

16 Whether any contention has grown among the Preachers in these parts for
any matter of Doctrine or ceremonies, Contention of Doctrine, or Pewes.
and what, and who was the cause thereof: and whether any strife has grown
about pewes or seats in the Church, and between whom it was; and whether any
new pewes have been built in your Church, and by whom, and what authority?

^ester Book.
17 Whether your Parson, Vicar, or Curat, do keep a just and perfect note of
all such as do communicate in their several Parishes?

Strangers communicate
18 Item, Whether your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, do admit to the holy Communion
any stranger, or any of the next, or any other near parish, without license of
the Ordinary, and leave of his Minister that is so admitted, or any that do not
reverently kneel upon their knees. Can. 23. or any notorious drunkard,
adulterer, and public offender, or any Churchwarden that have omitted to
present such offenders. Can. 109.

19 Item, Whether any of your parishioners having been formerly admitted a
Minister or Deacon, does now relinquish his calling, using and carrying
himself in the course of his life as a lay man. Can. 76.

Articles concerning the Church.
All books and ornaments of the Church.
WHether you have in your parish Churches and Chapels all things necessary and
requisite for Common prayer, and administration of the Sacraments, specially the
Book of Common prayer, published since his Majesty's time that now is, the
English Bible in the largest volume, the two Tomes of Homilies, the Table of
the Commandments, the Book lately set forth by his Majesty, the Book called
God and the King, the works of the right reverend Father in God, John Jewel,
late Bishop of Sarisbury, a convenient Pulpit well placed, a comely and decent
table standing on a frame for the holy Communion, with a fair linen cloth to
lay upon the same, and some covering of silk, buckram, or other such like, for
the clean keeping thereof, a fair and comely cup of silver, and a cover of
silver for the same, which may serve also for the ministration of the Communion
bread, a decent large Surplice with sleeves, a sure Coffer with two locks and
keys, for the keeping of the Register book, a strong Chest or box for the
alms of the poor, with three locks and keys to the same, and all other
things necessary in and to the premises?

Church and Churchyard in reparations.
2 Whether your Churches and chapels, with the Chancell thereof, be well and
sufficiently repaired, and kept without abuse of any thing: and whether your
Churchyards be well fenced, and cleanly kept; and if any part be in decay,
through whose default it is so?

3 Whether any man have pulled down or uncovered any Church, Chancell, or
Chapel, or any part of any of them, Sell Church goods.
any Church Porch, Vestry, or Steeple, Almes-house, or such like, or have
pulled down the Bells, Chimes, Clocks, or have felled or spoiled any wood or
timber in any Churchyard.

Articles concerning Schoolemasters.
Whether the Schoolmasters which teach within your parish, openly or
privately, Teach unlicensed.
in any Noble or Gentleman's house, or in any other place, be of good and
sincere Religion, life and conversation, and be diligent in teaching and
bringing up of Youth: and whether they have been examined, allowed, and
licenced for Schoolemasters in such order, as is required by the Statutes and
Canons in this behalf?

2 Whether your Schoolemasters do themselves come to the Church, and receive
the holy Communion as often as they ought: and whether they bring with them so
many of their Scholars, as are of knowledge, and age sufficient, to receive
the Lords Supper?

3 Whether the Schoolemasters, either private or public, Teach Novvels
Catechism.
do teach their Scholars M. Nowels Catechism or some other publicly
authorized, at the least once every week?

4 Whether any of your Schoolemasters, Teach Popery, or Seditions.
be known or suspected to read to their Scholars in private any unlawful
books, privately to instruct them in their young years, either in Popery,
superstition, disobedience, or contempt to his Majesty and his laws, either
Ecclesiastical or Temporal?

5 Item, whether any Schoolemasters do teach and instruct children in the
Book called God and the King?

Articles concerning Executors, and Administrators.
IN primis, What children under the age of 21. years, or other persons have
died in your Parish since Michaelmas last, that had any goods, rights, chattels
or legacies belonging unto them at the time of their death, and whether
administration be takers of the said goods, yea or no; and what be the names of
such persons as are so deceased?

2 Item, whether any in your Parish do meddle with any goods of any person
deceased before the will be proved, or administration be granted by the
Ordinary?

3 Item, whether any person in your parish have administered or meddled with the
goods of any deceased, by color of proouing the Will, or obtaining
administration elsewhere, having not also first taken administration from the
Ordinary of the Dioces of Lincoln, for all the goods of the said deceased
being within the said Diocese, and whose will has been so proved, or
administration granted, and by whom?

Articles concerning Ecclesiastical Officers.
IN primis, whether has any Ecclesiastical Judge, Register, Procurator,
Apparitor, or other Minister belonging to any Ecclesiastical Courts within
this Country, extorted or taken (by color of his or their Offices) any
greater fees for probate of wills, and granting Letters of Administration, or
otherwise then heretofore has been accustomed to be taken, or then are
allowed by the laws of this Realm?

2 Item, whether any of the said Officers belonging to such Ecclesiastical
Courts, do take upon them the office of Informers and Promoters? Can. 138.

3 Item, whether do you know or have heard, that any person of your parish has
paid, or promised to pay any sum of money, or other reward directly or
indirectly, by himself or others to any Officer of the said Ecclesiastical
Courts for the avoiding of punishment for Incest, adultery, fornication, or
other crime punishable in the said courts, if so, declare to whom, when and
what sums, etc.

4 Item, whether any Apparator, or other Messenger have summoned any person to
appear in any Ecclesiastical Court without a lawful process, having the
name of every person so summoned to appear expressly entered in the said
Process subscribed and sealed by the Judge or his Deputy. Can. 120.

Articles concerning Churchwardens.
IN primis, whether were you the Churchwardens and Sidemen chosen by the
consent of the Minister and Parishioners: and whether do you serve in your own
right, or as Deputies to others? Can. 90.

2 Item, whether have the Churchwardens before you given up a just and true
account of their time, and delivered unto you whatsoever money, or other goods
or stock belonging to your Church, which was in their hands? Can. 89.

3 Item, whether have you a terrar of the Gleabe lands belonging to your
Church, either such as concerns the Ministers right, or such as has been
given to any School, or other religious uses?

4 Item, whether any part of such Gleabe lands be encroached by any of the
neighbors, and by them detayned from the Church, and right uses?

5 Item, whether your Parsonage, or Vicarage houses, or any part thereof be
suffered to fall to decay, or be used and converted to common Innes, Alehouses,
or tippling houses?

6 Item, whether have you suffered any strange Preacher to preach in your
parish Church, or Chapel, but such as are licenced by lawful authority, and
whether have you a book to enter the names of such Preachers, according to the
52. Canon?

Articles concerning the Parishioners, and others of the Laity.
WHether all fathers and mothers, Receiving the Communion.
and governors of youth within your Parish, cause their children, servants,
and apprentises, both mankind and womankinde (above 7. years of age, and under
twenty) which have not learned the Catechism, to come to the Church on
Sundays and Holidays at the times appointed, and there diligently and
obediently hear and be ordered by the Minister, till such time as they have
learned the same Catechism: and what be the names of those that cause not
their children, servants and apprentises, so to come to Church to be instructed
and examined?

2 Whether you your selves, Whores depart unpunished.
or the Churchwardens in the years before you, have suffered any unmarried
woman, gotten with child, to go out of the parish before she has done penance
appointed by the Ordinary, and out of whose houses they have gone away with
child unpunished: and how many unmarried women have bin delivered of child
within your parish these 3. years last past, having gone away without doing
penance; and whether any married couples within your parish do live asunder?

Papists.
3 Whether there be any man or woman in your parish, that resorteth to any
Popish priest for shrift, or auricular confession, or receives instructions
from them for any the like cause?

4 Whether there be any person or persons, Ecclesiastical or temporal,
Popish Books
within your parish, or elsewhere within this Archdeaconry, that have retained,
or kept in their custody, or that read, sell, utter, disperse, carry, or
deliver to others, any English Books, set forth of late years in any other
place beyond the seas, by Papists, Jesuits, or Seminary Priests, either
against the Kings Majesty's supremacy in matters Ecclesiastical, or against
the true Religion and Catholic doctrine, now received and established by
common Authority within this Realm, and what their names, and surnames are?

Papists.
5 Whether there be any in your Parish that uses to pray in English, or in
Latin upon Beads, or any such like thing, or upon any superstitious Popish
Primer, or other such like Book?

Absent from Sermon.
6 Whether any of your parishioners, having a Preacher to their Parson, Vicar,
or Curate, do absent themselves from his Sermons, and resort to any other
place, to learn or follow after such innouasions as are there taught?

7 Whether the people of your parish, especially householders having no lawful
excuse to be absent, Resort to Church.
do faithfully and diligently endeavor themselves to resort with their
children and servants to their parish Church or Chapel on the Holidayes, and
chiefly on the Sundays, to Morning and Evening Prayer, at the beginning, and
not depart until the end thereof, without urgent occasion?

12. d. for absents levied.
8 Whether the forfeiture of twelve pence for every such offense, appointed by a
statute made in the first year of the late Queens Majesty's reign, be
leuyed and taken according to the same Statute, by the Churchwardens, of every
person that offends, and by them be put to the use of the poor of the
parish: if it be not, by whose default it is not levied?

Baptized in other Parishes.
9 Whether any children that be borne in your Parish, be carried forth of the
Parish to be baptized elsewhere, or with any Popish Ceremony, or otherwise then
is appointed by the Book of Common Prayer, or whether any have not been
baptized at all, or in places unknown?

10 Whether there be any Inne-keepers, Ale-wiues, Sell in Service time.
Victuallers or Tiplers, that suffer, or do admit any person or persons in
their houses, to eat, drink or play at Dice, Cards, Tables, Tennis, Bowls,
or such like Games, in the time of Common prayer, or Sermon on Sundays or
holidays: or any Butcher or other that commonly use to sell meat, or other
things in the time of Common prayer, preaching, or reading of Homilies: and
whether in any Faires, or common Markets, falling upon the Sunday, there be
any showing of wares before Morning prayer be done: and whether any Markets or
selling of wares be used or suffered in any Churchyards, by common packmen, or
Pedlers going about, to any such people either of your Parish, or not of the
same Parish?

11 Whether the late Churchwardens and Sworne-men have concealed any crime or
disorder in their time done in your parish, and have not presented the same,
Concealed offenses.
and whether they or any of them, at any such time as they should have been at
divine service on sundays or holidays, and should there have observed others
that were obsent, have been away themselves, at home, or in some Tavern, or
Alehouse, or else about some worldly business, or at bowls, cards, tables,
dice, or other gaming, without regard of their office and duty in that behalf?

12 Whether any of your Parish, being of convenient age, Receive the Communion.
has not received the holy Communion thrice this last year at the least, and
namely at Easter day last, or thereabout for once, and what their names are, or
which receiving, have not signified the same before to your Parson, Vicar, or
Curate, that he might conveniently examine them, and who have refused to come
to him to be examined: and herein you shall exhibit a scedule from your
Minister, containing all the names of the offenders within your Parish?

13 Whether there be any in your Parish that administer the goods of those that
be dead without lawful Authority, Wills.
or any that suppress the last will of the dead, or any Executors that have
not fulfilled their Testators will, especially in paying Legacies given to the
Church, or any other good and godly uses, as the relief of Orphans, or poor
Scholars, Maidens marriages, marriages, Highwayes, Schools, and such like, and
by whom they are so detained?

Married after Popish orders.
14 Whether any couples that have bin married within these two years last, have
been known or suspected to have been married without the ring, or after the
Popish order, or any other order then is appointed by the Church of England, by
reason that the one party or the other are noted to be such as refuse to come
to the Church?

Swearers, Bawdes, etc.
15 Whether there be among you any Blasphemers of the name of God, great or
often swearers, adulterers, fornicators, incestuous persons, bawds, or
receivers of naughty and incontinent persons, or harbourers of women with
child, which be unmarried, conueying or suffering them to go away before they do
any penance, or make satisfaction to the congregation: or any that be
vehemently suspected of any such faults, or that be not of good name and fame
touching any such crime and fault, any drunkards or ribauds, or any that be
malicious, contentious, or uncharitable persons, common slanderers of their
neighbors, raylers, scolds, or sowers of discord between neighbors, and
specially raylers against Ministers, and against their marriages?

Marry within degrees.
16 Whether there be any in these parts that have married within the degrees of
affinity, or consanguinity, by the laws of God forbidden, set out in an
admonition in a table appointed to be fixed in every parish Church within this
Archdeconry, whether you have the said table so fixed in your Church, or any
that being divorced or separated from the same, do yet notwithstanding cohabit
and keep company still together, or any that being married without those
degrees, have unlawfully forsaken their wives or husbands, and that being
divorced and separated asunder, have married again, and that have married and
contracted themselves without the consent of their parents, tutors, or
governors: any that have married without banes thrice solemnly asked, and out
of their own parish Church.

Marry fornicators.
17 Item, whether your Parson, Vicar or Curate, have wittingly married together
any couples, whereof the woman has been begot with child, or carnally known
before marriage: or whether the man for money or reward has married any woman
that has committed adultery with another man, without public acknowledgement
of their offenses, and reconciliation to the parish: what are the names of all
such as have bin so married in any such case and when, and by whom they were so
married together?

18 Item, whether there be any in your parish that does and has stood forty
days excommunicate: Excommunicants.
whether any does keep company, eat or drink, buy, sell, or contract with any
excommunicate person, and who they be that do so?

19 Item, whether any dying excommunicate, Dead excommunicants buried.
has been buried in Christian burial for this last year past, and who they
be that were so buried, who buried them, and who were present at their burial?

20 Whether your Register book of Christnings, Register book
Weddings and Burials, be orderly and duly kept: and whether, according to the
late Canon in that behalf made, it be put into Parchment, containing the
names and surnames of all such as have been christened, married, and buried?

21 Whether do the Minister and Churchwardens subscribe their names, or their
several marks to the end of every page of the said Register book: and whether
is the said book kept under three locks, and three keys, as by the Canon it
is required?

22 Whether all the Canons and Constitutions lately published be duly and
respectively observed on the part of the Clergy or Laity, as is in them
required, All Canons observed.
and whether you have the said Book of Canons in your Church?

23 Whether any of your parish do practice Physic or Surgery without
license, and what be their names?

24 Whether any woman in your parish execute the office of a Midwife, without
license from the Ordinary?

25 Whether any in your parish do use Sorcery, or Witchcraft, and Charming, or
such like bad practices, taking upon them to cast out devils, or any that
resort unto them for their help, and counsel?

26 Whether your Parson, Vicar, or Curate have two Benefices in this Diocese,
or one in this Diocese, and another in another?

27 Whether you have any Recusants in your Parish, and what they be?

FINIS.

