A Brief and pleasant Treatise, Entitled: Natural and Artificial
Conclusions: Written first by sundry Scholars of the University of Padua In
Italy, at the instant request of one Bartholmew a Tuscane: And now Englished
by THOMAS HILL Londoner, as well for the commoditye of sundry Artificers, as
for the matters of pleasure to recreat wits at vacant times.

a fireproofed glass vase or pot

Imprinted at London by Edward Allde. 1586.

Natural and Artificial Conclusions.
* The properties of the Adamant stone.
FIrst, if any bold the Adamant Stone in his hand, under a goblette or silver
boule, or under a table, and that the same be moved too and fro in the hand,
the^ in the like manner will the Iron or Needle lying in the goblet, or on the
table move too and fro and round about. Also the Adamant sometimes with the one
corner will draw Iron unto it, and with the other corner put the Iron from it.
Also if any annointeth this Stone with Garlic, it does then hinder the Stone
from drawing any Iron or Needle unto it, although the Needle should be laid on
the Stone. And some write that this Stone will draw Glass unto it, in like
manner as it does the Iron.

The secret properties of the Egg.
ANd First, the round Egg set under the Hen, brings forth a Hen
Chicken, and the long Egg set under the Hen, brings forth a Cock
chicken. Also the Egg with the shel laid to steep in Vinegar for three days
space, does after so often it, that any may woork the same at length like unto
Wax. And the same Egg afterward laid in water, does come again unto the
former state. Also, if an Egg be painted with sundry colors, and the same
set under a Hen to bring forth, she shall hatch a Chicken having the like
feathers, unto the colors painted on the Egg. Also the Egg laid for three
days to steep in strong Vinegar and after for one whole Month, laid to dry
again in the Son, will after come unto the hardness of a stone.

A proper conclusion of an Hasell stick.
First, take an Hasell stick of a yard long, being new cut off, and the
same cleave just in the middle, giving the one end so cleaued unto thy
companion to hold in both his hands, and the other end hold your self in
both your hands after such sort, that both the inner parts of the stick,
may look one right against the other, in the laying down on the ground, and
must also be laid a sunder unto the breadth of two fingers, in such sort that
they may touch togetherby an overthwart manner at some one place, and within a
while after you shall see them draw and join together again of themselves.
And this understand, that the stick must be new cleaued, soon after the
cutting up of it, for otherwise this stick woorketh not the proper effect.

A proper practice to make a Capon to bring up young Chickens.
FIrst, to do this take a Capon and pull the bellye bare of Feathers and after
rub the naked place with Nettles, setting young Chickens under him, and he
will then miraculouslye cherrishe them, and bring them kindelye up. And the
rather, if you accustom to use the Capon the like for a time. For by that
means he is moved the willinger to cherishe, bring up and feed, yea and to
love them so well as the Hen naturally would do. And the reason of this is in
that through the pricking of the Nettles, he is thereby the rather desirous to
touch the soft down and feathers of the young Chickens sitting under him.

To make any foul of what condition the same be: to have feathers all white.
TO do this take the Eggs and roll them in the juice of the herb called
Mouse-eare or in the herb called houseleek or other wise in oil (after the
mind of Cardanus) and after put the Eggs again in the neast, and after the
hatching: their feathers shall grow white.

To make a Candell burn in the Water.
ANd to do this: take Ware, Brimstone and Vinegar, of each a like, boil these
altogether over the fire until the vinegar appear al consumed, and then after
of that Wax remaining make a Candle, and you shall see the proper effect as
above is written.

To make a Woman that she shall not eat of the meats set upon the Table.
TO do this, take a little of the green Basil, and when one brings any
Dishes of Meat unto the table, then put the same herb secretly under one of
the platters or dishes, that she epsy it not and as long as the herb so
lies on the table, the woman shall eat nothing of that meat in the platter or
dishe, which covers the herb.

A proper secret of the Philosophers, to make a Stone to burn without fire.
AND to do this, take Calamite Brimstone, vnslecked Lyme, pitch, Ceruse, of
each of these three Drammes, of Camphora one Dram, Asphaltum, three Drammes,
all these make in powder and put the same in a strong pot, well stopped, and
after make a fire under the pot, increasing the same by little and little
until the powder in the pot become so hard as a stone, and when you will
have it burn, then rub the same well with a cloth, and it will burn
suddenly: and when you will put the same out, then spit upon it, and after set
the same in a moist place, and it will go out.

To make one to see fearful sights in his sleep.
ANd to do this, take the blood of a Lapwing, and ther-with annoint the pulses
of thy foreheade, before thy going to rest, and the^ after in thy sleep thou
shall see both marvelous and fearful sightes, as Vitalis Medicus writes.
Also he writes, that if a man eats in the Evening before his going to Bed,
of the herb named Nightshade, or Mandrake, or Henbane, shall after see in his
sleep pleasant sights.

How to turn water into wine, a proper secret.
IF thou will convert, or turn water into Wine, then fill a brass Pot with
the best Wine, setting upon the head of the Pot a Limbecke, and distill the
Wine out, and the Lees remaining after the distillation orie them, and bring
them into fine powder, which equally mixed with the water, does so cause the
water to have both the color, and taste of the same wine. And the like unto
this may be wrought and done in a Rose Limbeck. Also a loaf of Barlie bread
hot drawn out of the Oven, and broken into great pieces hot, and laid so to
soke in good wine, which pieces when they shall be well soken in the wine, let
them dry in the Sun, and after soke of that bread in fair water, and it will
after receive both the color and taste of that wine.

To make a light or Candle to endure burning without going out by any wind so
long as the substance endures.
TO do this, make a week after thy discretion, which infuse in the Oil of
Hempseede, and after into molten tallow, as you would properly make a weecke or
Cotton Candle, letting the same to hang somewhat until it be cold, which
through cold, then light it in the like sort as you do a common Candell, and
it will not after go out with no wind, so long as the substance endures and
in like sort may light be made to serve in the night time, if so be that
fine linen rags be first soked in the oil of hempseed, and after dipped into
molten Tallowe, which so bound or wrought on a staffes end, to carry about, or
otherwise on a staffes end lying in an iron plate.

How to make quarters of wood to hang so fast together, that they can not be
shaken a sunder without breaking.


TO make quarters hold and hang together thus without tying, must be done
on this wise: First, lay one of the quarters down, as these two betters A.
and B. do instruct, on the which lay the other quarter, even as these two
letters C. and D. do here represent, and on that C. and D. lay the third
quarter as the letters E. and F. do here express, and in such sort, that E.
and F. must lie under A.B. And being then thruste hard together they cannot
after fall away without breaking, in that A. and B. is stayed and held of E.
and F. and E. and F. of C. and D. and C. and D. holden of A and B. so that none
of them can fall a sunder, the one from the other. Also that place where B.D.E.
is holden or stayed together, and does the like hold together as by trial of
the same shall more manifestly appear. Also, the more and harder they be thrust
together the longer they continue so hanging together. And some suppose that a
like trial unto this, may be assaied and proved, either with three sticks
made flat for the nonce, or with three knives being a like, if they be
orderly used.

How to make a color like to gold in understanding this secret.
AND to do this, take of Aloes Hepaticke, and of salt Niter, of each six
ounces, those grind, and perfectly mixed together on a smoothe Marbell, or
other hard stone: that being so labored together, they can after be separated
by no means, and after distill the same in a Limbeck of glass well luted about,
that you may so draw out all the moist substance that will come And with this
may you gilde what you list, understanding how to draw this lycour. Also by a
shorter way and lesser pain, may you do the like, although not so perfect as
the other above said, which in deed is right marvelous. And now this is on
this wise: First take of Aloes Hepatick, three ounces, of Rosen six ounces and
of oil of Lineseed well boiled, a pint and a half, these set over the fire in
a pot, and mingle them well together, after strain the same licour through a
Linen cloth, putting it into a pot, which you must stop close, and so keep
the same until you have need to gilde any thing therewith.

To make Silver like any mettell which shall so continue a long time.
FOR to do this, take half an ounce of Aquafortis, and a scruple of
Quicksiluer, and a little of the Tarter made of the white wine, and a little
Salt: These put altogether in a Pot or earthen Pan, working and laboring the
same together over hot Imbers, which so done, you may after with this
composition make silver like any metal you list, and to continue so a long
time.

How to stick an Iron or Steel Bodkin, into the head of either Cock, Hen or
Chicken.
AOD to do this, write first these words following, that is to say Gibell,
Got, Gabell, in a Scrole, and bind the same about the Bill of the Cock, Hen,
or Chicken, to color this secret withal, which so done, then pearce the head
of the Bird, just in the middle, as you can guess, with a verrie sharp
poynted Bodkin, and after, set ye Bird down, and you shall see the Bird so
lustely run away from you, as if nothing were sticking into the head, if the
Pullet be big, unto the wonder of such as shall see the same. And now the
reason of this is, in that the head and brain of the Pullet, is divided into
two parts in the bone, and the bone also doubled in the midst, so that the
Bodkin may easily enter without danger, and of this the brain so pierced, the
Pullet nevertheless lives: which if the ignorant see, they will perhaps
believe, and think that the words only does the same which is nothing
less.

To make a Candle that will not go out until the whole substance be wasted.
AND to do this, take the best Wax and the pure Brimstone, of each a like
portion, which take and melte together, and after make a Candle thereof, which
being lighted, set the same in a Candlestick to burn. And the same Candle so
lighted, will not go out until the whole substance be spent. thus Cardanus
writes

How to make Iron soft, a proper secret.
AND to do this, take the juice of the Hemlocke, and quench the Iron in it,
being well heated three or four times, letting it there remain every time,
until it be throughlye cold. Also Cardane writes, that if you take oil
putting into it molten Lead seven times together, and after quench your Iron
read hot into that Oil, for four or five times together, and it will so
make the same soft to woork.

To make a Sword, Dagger, or Knife to cut Iron so easily as Lead.
OF this thing Hermes writes, if a Sword, Dagger or Knife, being only Iron
and fashioned, and being red hot, if the same be afterward quenched into the
juice of the Radish, mixed with the liquor of the fresh Woormes of the ground,
or rather the water of Artely distilled, being before somewhat bruised: such a
Swoorde Dagger or Knife, says he shall after have such a strange edge, if the
same red hot be quenched four or five times in it, that with the same you may
cut Iron so easily as if it were Lead. Also he writes that if Steels be often
molten in the Furnace, and be purified, until the same be so white as Silver in
a manner, and then after of the same fashion, grauing Instruements with their
edges and points, orderly like as to the art of grauing belongs, which
instruments being read here, quenched after into the juice of Radishe and the
distilled Water of the Woormes of the earth, mixed together: Or else with the
water of the Woormes, drawn through a clean Linen cloth, so that there be
so much of this water, as of the iuce of the Radishe, and then those
instruments quenched four or five times, in the above said licour. And after
will the edges and points of the instruements be so hard, that you may cut
and grave in any stone and Iron, so easily as the same were Lead.

How to keep weapons clean and fair for a long time.
ANd to do this, take Barrowes grease common Oil, new wax, Ceruse, of each a
like, these temper together very well over a soft fire, until they be thoroughly
incorporated, and after anoint the burnished weapon with this ointment, and it
shall so continue in the same brightness, In secula seculorum. And there cannot
be a greater secret invented, for the keeping bright of weapons then this is,
if these words be well understood.

How to make steel soft as paste, a proper secret.
Do thus: Take the gall of an Ox, Man's Urine, Verges and the juice of the
Nettle of each of these take a little quantity, and mix them very diligently
together, then after quench the Steel red hot in this licour, four or five
times together, and it will after become so soft as paste: and this is a right
proper and necessary secret, to be understood of all such woorkmen as do
any matters in Steel, as grauing and such like, if these words be well marked.

How to make Hens lay Eggs all the Winter through.
TO do this, take the tops of the Nettles, when they begin to come unto
Seed, and dry them: which so dried, give a little of the same with Bran and
Hempseede mingled together, to your Hens, and they shall every day after lay
you an Egg a piece.

How to make thy Chamber appear full of Snakes and Adders.
TO do this, kill a Snake, putting the same into a Pan with Wax and let it
so long boil: until the same be through dry, and of that Wax make a
Candle, lighting the same in the Chamber, and then after shall appear, as
though there were a thousand creeping in thy Chamber.

How to make letters appear of the color of Gold, Copper, or Silver.
AND to do this: take verry clear Crystal, and work the same into
marvelous fine powder, on a marble stone, and after mix the same powder with
the white of an Egg, until this be so prepared to write with all: And after
with this confectio^, write what letters you will, letting the same dry: and
after rub a gold King or any piece of Gold on the same letters, and all the
letters shall appear like gold. And in the like sort may you make the Letters
either appear like silver or copper.

How to make any piece of Iron to appear like Gold.
AND to do this take four pintes of Rain water into which put ten drammes of
Roch Alum, and ten drams of ointment, of Romain Vitrioll, and Salt Gemme, of
each one an ounce, and a scruple of Coperas: all these boil together, after
put there into a quart of Vinegar, and of Tartarre, and common Salt finely
beaten to powder of each three ounces, all these incorporate again over a
soft fire verry well, and after occupy the same: which makes a color like
unto gold.

How to have fresh Roses at all times of the year sundry ways taught.
AND First if you will have fresh Roses at any time, so well as in the Month
of May, then gather the buddes half open in a manner in the Evening, when as
the Sun is set, and touch them not with thy hand in the gathering, but with
a sharp knife properly gather them, after lay the Roses upon a board, letting
them to lie abroad in a fair night, all ye night through, and then after have
in a readiness a new earthen pot well glased within and without, into which
put the former Roses before the Sun be up in the morning and stop close the
mouth of that pot with clay, mixed with Horse dung, and flocks, all tempered
well together before, whereby no air of the Roses may pass or breathe
forth. After set the same Pot into the ground, covering it in dry Sand, and
let no moist place be near, or about the same And now on this wise may you
have fresh Roses at any time of the year.

Also take of the Rose buds in the spring time, when they begin first to open,
and put those into a green Cane yet growing, cleaving the same by little and
little, until you may handsomely put in those buddes, and after tie that place
with a thread, stopping the same about, that no air breath out, and after
cover that piece of the Cane or Reed, so bound and stopped about under the
Earth, bowing down the same stalk by little and little, that the same break
not, and cover the same well with the earth, letting it there remain so long
as you list, and when you be minded to have them forth, then cleave the Cane
by little and little, that you spoil not the buddes, and after set them in the
Sun, or in luke warm water, and they shall be open and fair in a short
space, as in the middst of Pay.

Also if you will make dry Roses to become fresh, then take a new glased pot
and wet the same within with Rose water, and after shat that pot with the Roses
very close, letting it so to stand, for five days, and they shall be fresh.

How to make Beans and other seeds grow up in four hours.
AND first, to make Beans grow up in an hours space, take the Beans and put
them in hot oil, let them there remain for eleven days and after dry them.
And when you will make the proof of them, then set the beans, and go to
dinner, and by that time you rise again from the Table, and go to look on
them, you shall find them grow up well a spanne high. And the like may you
do with the Gourds.

And now to make the Gourdes grow up in the space of four hours, both with
leaves and Flowers, take the feed of the Gourde, and let them lie in the blood
of a sanguine young man, and let them there remain for fifteen days in a
moist place and in a pot well stopped, and after take them forth, and let
them be dried well in the Sun: and when you will sow or plant them, then take
a dishe full or two of good earth, and dry the same well, after wet the same
with a little fresh water, and after have warm water pouring the same upon
this earth until it become sufficient soft, and then plant your seeds in it,
and within three or four hours after you shall have Gourdes grown up with
leanes and with flowers.

And the like may you do with the Melons, Citriones, and other green seeds.

To make a Candle of Ise to burn like unto an other Candle.
TO do this make a Candle of Brimstone, which with the Powder of a Coal
smeared about, and after in the Winter time drown the same in water, but cover
the head of it with a paper, and after hang the same at the mouth of some
gutter which droppeth fast, whereby it may so be covered with half a finger
thickness of Ise in the Morning, and after being lighted: it will then burn
unto the wondering of such as shall see the same. Also take pure Ware and fine
Brimstone purified, of each a like: mealt these together making thereof a
Candle, and after take the powder of a coal finely beaten, and brimstone the
like in powder, these sift through a Serse or linen cloth, and after heating
the Candle, smeare the Candle about so long, until it have (as it were) a thick
crust round about the same, like unto the thickness of the back of a Knife:
which after cover about ye head of it with a paper, and then hang the same at
the mouth of a Gutter, which droppeth fast, until the Ise cover it about a
finger thick, then light the same, and it will burn like as it were all wax.

To make flesh to seem to crall full of Woormes.
AND to do this, take Harp strings, and cut them into very short pieces,
which straw upon Meat, being taken hot out of the Pot, and those pieces
will then move and stir like unto woormes.

How to make a light in the night time, that all things round about thy hall or
parlour shall apeare both black and green.
TO do this, take the black juice or ink of the Fish named a Cuttle, and
the like quantitye of Verdygreace, these mix well together, putting the same
into a Lamp, and dipping a weecke in that licour, then light the same, putting
out the other lights in that room, and then shall all things round about that
place, and the walls also being white, appear both black and green unto the
marvel of such as shall see the same.

How to make Roots to have what proper form you will on them.
TO do this, take such green Roots which be big, like as be the Brionye
roots, Radishe roots, and Rape or Nauew roots, and of any of these roots
carue and cut as you list, and after put the same into the earth, letting it
there so long remain, until the same caruing be covered with a skin. And
one such wise may you make the counterfeit Mandraks in fashioning in the Briony
root, as both Mathealus and Cardane do write, form of a man with a Pen
knife, and setting the same root again into the earth, with the head of the
root turned downewarde, and a little Barley put under it, which after will cleave
and hang fast unto the head of the Root, and appear like unto hair growing
out of the same.

How to break a stone with the fiste, of the thicknes of ones hand.
AND to do this, first raise the edge of a flat stone upright from a plain
boorde, or rather from a big smoothe stone in such force that it stand of it
self without any under bearing or help, and after with thy fiste smite hastily
or quickly that part standing upright, which falling together flat on the
plain boorde or stone: does so break in so many pieces. And if the fist be
swiftlier smitten, then the end of the stone touches the boorde in the falling
then is that stroke in vain: and breaks not the same at that time. And in
the like manner may Tiles be easily broken with a small and easy stroke of the
hand, for that through the weight of the stone in the falling and help of the
quick stroke, it does of this so lightly break even as it were down with
the vehement stroke of a hammer.

To make an herb to grow which shall have many savors and tastes.
AND to do this: first take one seed of the Lettice, one seed of Endive,
one of Smallage, one of the Bassill, one of the Leeke, and of the Parslie, al
these put together in a hole in such sort, that one seed may touch an other:
but this remember that you plant these together in the dung of an Horse or an
Ox without any earth at all with them. And then after of these seeds shall
grow up one proper herb, which will have so many savors and tastes, as
there were seeds sown together.

How to make sundry devises or Arms or such like: in a Rose, Carnation, or
Flowers de luce or Lilly.
TO do this take Salt Armoniack, and grind the same on a Marble Stone, with
fine Vinegar, and a little Sugar candy, and keep the same in a narrow necked
pot or glass and after take your Rose and dress the leaves, in fastening them
with red wax: that they may so lie plain and even, which so done: then take a
fine Pensell with the licour drawing on the leaves, what proper matter or arms
you list; and after let the same dry of it self, putting upon of the leaf
gold: or the leaf silver: and after pressing it lightly or gently down with
Bombasse, and that which sticks not then fast, falls off in the doing, and
so your woork will remain trim and fair.

To write what you list on a Steel Dagger, or Knife.
HOW to do this, take an ounce of Salt Peeter, and an ounce of green
Coperesse, beat these grosely together, and after put the same into a strong
Bottle of Glass, distilling a water of it, which water use on this wise:
First, take yellow or red Wax, stretching the same upon your Dagger or Knife,
so far as you will draw or write there upon unto the thickness of a Paper
leaf and somewhat more, after draw or write therein what you list, drawing or
writing unto the Steel, and then sill that hollow drawing or holes with the
distilled water, which within a day and a night, will have eaten it
sufficiently, and the like may you draw and do in any other piece of steel.

How to break a new and big Rope, with the hands only.
TO do this, take and fasten the one end of the Cord or Rope, either with a
nail driven fast into it, or about a strong hook of Iron, and after wind the
same three or four tims or oftener about thy hand, and the other ends of the
Cord or Rope wind about by the top of the Palm between the forefinger and
thumb, that the one part of the cord may reach unto the Nail, and the head
or other end unto the bottom of the Palms, by which it must be again winded
about and after that winded again once or twice about. And this so done, then
with a vehement pluck and force assaye in the same part by which it is so over
winded or run with the Cords for that the substance of the Cord or Rope which
is under, does defend, that the hand can take no harm by the hasty and
strong pull, and take heed that the utter most fold of the Cord slide not in
thy hand. And to conclude: this conceive, that in the mighty and hasty pluck
together, the one fold of the Cord does so cut the other in sunder, and then
especially, when as that part shall be set soft which is between the hand
and the nail and that both the hand be strong, and then pluck out right and
quick. And now if you will conceive this order in the winding of the Cord
about both the hands, you may so break the same with the only strength of
the hands: yea such strong Cords or Ropes, as will well hold a Bullock or
Cow, unto the admiration or wondering of the lookers on.

How to make white Flowers like as the Lilly, white Rose and such like to be
read.
AND to do this, fill a Pint Pot of the best red Wine, unto the middle of
it, and within the mouth of the Pot hang the white flowers so deep in, that
they touch not the Wine after that cover the mouth of the pot very close, so
that no air of the Wine breath out, and then let it stand for one whole day,
and they will after became red of color. And to make such Flowers that be
naturally white, to become read, do this first take gross earth, drying the
same very well in the Sun, that you may after bring the same into verry fine
powder, and after put the same earth into a Pot or half Tubbe, where you mind
to plant your white Flowers to become read, and after they be so planted in
the Earth, then let the^ not be watered at any time with any other water then
this, which is made on this wise: Take water, putting therein certain quantity
of Brasil finely cut, and boil the same unto a third part, which water after
take, and being through cold, water by little and little the same earth, as
both at morning and evening, and water it at no time with any other water then
this, until you see that the same water first have taken effect.

How to make a hollow Ring to dance by it self, a proper secret.
AND to do this, take a Ring round about hollow, into which put Quicksiluer,
and stop the same fast that it run not forth. After heat the Ring somewhat
in the fire, or let it lie near unto the fire and being hot, lay the same on
a Table or stool, which by and by after will begin to dance of it self, until
it be cold again.

To make Glue to hold together so hard as a stone a proper secret.
AND to do this take vnsleikt Lime, and quench the same with Wine and beat
the same into fine powder, mixing therewith, both Figs and Siuines grease,
and after labor them well together for this as Plini writes passes the
hardness of a stone. Also, take Greek Pitch, Rosin, and the powder of Tyle
stones these mix together and when you will occupy of the same, then heat it
over the fire, and woork therewith: for when the same is cold, it holds them
together so hard as any Nail. Also, take of Spuma ferri one pound of Tyle
shardes, two pound of vnsleikt Lyme four pound, of Oil of Linseede, so much
as shall suffice to prepare and work them together, for this Glue is
marvelous strong, which neither fears nor yields to water nor fire.

To make an Apple move on the Table, a proper secret,
HOw to do this, take an Apple and cut the same in the midst, and in the
one half make a round hole, putting therein a black Beetle, and so lay the
same half on the Table, and it will then move.

To make Roses and other Flowers that be red, to become white.
AND to do this take Brimstone beating the same into fine powder which powder,
burn on a new tylestone, holding such red flowers or Roses over the smoke of
it, whiles it so burns, and they will after become white, and on this wise
you may make your Roses half white and half read, or one leaf white, and
another read, by a cap of paper so cut for the nonce.

How to write letters on the Egshel that the same letters may appear within on
the Egg.
AND to do this, take a little quantitye both of Galls and Allome, which
work together with Vinegar, and after write with this licour what you will
on the shell. and that dried, lay then the Egg in Urine, or else anoint the
Egg about with Ware, unto the thickenesse of a Paper or somewhat more, and
with a fine bodkin write deep letters, that the holes may be open, and the
letters apparent, into the which holes power of this lycour, and when the same
is dried on the Egg, then seethe the Egg until it be hard, and after lay
the same to soke in sharp Vinegar, through the which soking the letters will
so pass through the shell, that the letters may be seen on the Egg, after
the shell is pulled off.

How to make a Bottle or a narrow mouth pot full of water or milk not to spill
or shed forth.
TO do this: take the Bottle or narrow mouth Pot, and sill the same unto the
brimme, after cover the mouth with a Paper, and then turn the mouth downward
on ye mouth of an other Pot, and nothing shall shed forth, as by a trial in
filling the one pot with milk, and the other may be seen.

How to kill Fleas diverse ways.
ANd first, to gather all the Fleas of thy Chamber into one place, anoint a
Staff with the grease of a Fox, or Headghogge, and lay the staff again,
where you list in your chamber, and it shall so gather all the Fleas by it. Also
fill a dish with Goats blud, and set the same by the bed, and all the Fleas
will come to it round about. And the like will they do by the blood of the
Headghog. Also take the fat of a Goat, and anoint what you list therewith, and
set the same under your bed, and all the Fleas will gather unto the same. Also
take Lupines or flat Beans, and boil them in water with Woormwood, and that
water sprinkle well about the Chamber, and all the Fleas shall avoid that
chamber. Also take an Apple of Coliquintida, and infuse the same in water, and
in that water boil Woormewood, which cast about the Chamber, kills all the
Fleas. And the like does the Peache leaves, or Verueine, or Colyander boiled
in water and so cast about.

How to make a Pot of glass not to sink in the water, a proper secret.
diagram of thin-necked glass vase or pot, with letters reversed

TO do this, first fill a Glass Pot full of Water, or wine unto the brim,
for other wise it sinketh down and is drowned in the setting of it in the
water: the reason of which appears by this demonstration. Imagine that the
pot be D. whose neck is A.B.C. that vacant part of it A.B. in that A.B. does
bear above water, through the air which is contained therein: and the waighte
of the glass A.B. draws toward the Centere, and A.B.C. can not descend by
straight line down, for that it shall labor in vain. And therefore the
signifier D. boweth in that D. when as the wine is set in the water, it
resists not, and therefore A.B. does descend until it come unto the upper
face of the water, but when A.B. shall be in the upper face of the water, the
part E. is then drowned, in that it is the nether part, and all the neck of
the pot.

How to make a thin Glue, very profitable, a proper secret.
ANd to do this, take the Glue made of fishes, beating the same strongly on an
Anuell, until it be thin, which after laid to soke in water, until it become
very soft and tender, which will be within five or fix hours, and then woork it
like paste to make small roles thereof, which when it is like unto paste, stretch
it or draw it out very thin, and when you will work with it, then put of the
same into an earthen pot with a little fair water over hot embers, and skim
the same very clean, and let it so seethe a little while, after work with the
same keeping it still over the hot embers, until you have done with it, for
so it fasteneth and binds the stronger. And in such sort that it fasteneth
pieces of glass together.

How to draw a Ring off being very hard thrust on, and the finger swelled.
AND if either man or woman has thrust a Ring, so hard on their finger, that
he or she cannot draw the same off, through the swelling of the finger: then
threede a Needle, and draw the same under the Ring, and wind the thread about
the finger on the other side, and so of ten wind the thread about, and
diligently consider that the whole joint and part of the finger, lying or
being between the joint and the ring, be covered about with the thread, and
that no part be seen of the skin, through the close covering of the thread,
and even draw the Needle again under the Ring, and wind the thread like
about on the other side, and that speedilye whereby the King drawn and
removed on the thread, by little and little may so pass over the joint and
come of. But whylest you are in ye doing of this, make no taryaunce or delay,
for that the finger does so lightly swell, that without great pain the Ring
cannot be drawn off.

To make fruits as Apples, Pears, Quinces, and such like to have what proper
form you will on them.
AND to do this, counterfeit on a piece of wood, being in bigness to the
fruit which you desire, what form you will? Or else cut Romain, or other
fashion letters in it, (to express if you list) some proper words which so
done, then make a moulde with water and Chalk unto the thickness of thy
little finger, the same part into ye just half. And when this moulde is dry
which soon dries, separate then the same from the wood with oil before. And
when you have gotten off the mould from the wood, and parted it in two just
halfes, then take ye same moulde, and bind it most close unto the fruit, being
grown unto his half bigness, and let it so continue until the fruit become
unto his full bigness, and the^ take the moulde away, and you shall see the
trial of the former taught.

How to cut a Glass, a proper secret.
AND to do this, steep a threede in Oil and brimstone mixed together and
compass the Glass with the thread in ye place where you would have it parted,
and after kindle and light the same and so often do thus, until the place be
hot and after compass the same with a thread wet in cold water, and it will
part so clean a sunder, as if the same had been cut with a sharp pointed
Diamond.

How to soften Crystal, to imprint what you list therein, a proper secret.
AND to do this, take the blood of a Lamb, and the blood of a Weather, mixing
these together, after take thy Crystal Stone, heating it in the fire burning
hot, and then quench it in the blood, which after will become so soft as
paste, then with a Copper print woork therein what you list, and after set
the same abroad in the air, and it will come again unto the former hardness.

How to walk on the water a proper secret.
a man in a loincloth with a staff walks on water

FOR to do this, take two little Timbrels, and bind them under the souls of
thy feet, and at a staves end faste^ an other, and with these you may safely
walk on the water, unto the wonder of all such as shall see the same: if so be
you often exercise the same with a certain holdnesse and lightness of the
body.

To make a Candle to burn a proper secret.
FOR to do this, first make a weecke of Sylke, and infuse the same in the
Oil of Hemp seed, and when the weecke shall be sufficiently soked, role the
same in Snow, until it be of the dignesse of a great Candle, whereby it may
so be well wrought together, and after light the same, setting it in a stick,
and it will give the like light as a Wax Candle. Also make a Candle of Purpen
stone and wax together, about the which role Snow, and the Snow will burn
until it be all wasted. Also take Snow, and mix therewith the powder of
Camphire, and of the same make a Candle, and it will burn being lighted.

How to draw many Candles the one after the other being laid a foot distance
or more a sunder.
FOR to do this, take Brimstone, Orpiment, and Oil, these labor together,
and make thereof an Ointment, after take so many Candles as may well serve your
Table, which lay on the Table a large foot a sunder, and all a roe, the one
behind the other as long as you list to lay them, yea a hundred may you lay
down on this wise a length, if you lay them strait, then take a long thread,
and anoint the same in this ointment, which after lay a long on the Candles,
and after drawing the foremost, all will follow by order.

How to cut an Apple into many pieces without harming of the skin or paring.
TO do this, take a most fine Needle with a small thread, and thrust the same
by little and little under the paring, and thrust it in again right against
the place, until you have so gone round about the outside of the Apple. And
this also remember that you thrust ye needle through the paring at strait
corners one against the other of the Apple, and this so often do until you
come again unto the first place where you began.

And if so be you would divide the same in six or eight pieces, then draw the
thread again by a like distance, always taking heed to divide the Apple
under the skin and when you have thus done with the Apple, and the pieces yet
covered with the skin, then draw out the ends of the thread, and you shall
after divide the Apple within, without harming of the paring or skin into so
many pieces as you list. And when you have thus drawn out, and taken the
thread quite away, you may keep the apple so long as you think requisite.

How to make a Cup of Glass being set in the fire not to burn.
AND to do this, take what Cup or Pot of glass you list, and seethe the
same in common Oil, by the space of five hours, and after take it forth, and
it will be then made so strong that the said Cup of glass or pot, will endure
the heat of the fire.

How to make a Candle to be meruailed at, a proper secret.
a fireproofed glass vase or pot

AND to do this, take four ounces of Salt Niter, six ounces of fine
Frankensence, three ounces of brimstone, six ounces of Oil, and six ounces of
the Milk of Cataputia, all these beat fine, and mix together, after take
three ounces of Wax, and make then a Candle of altogether, in the end of which
Candlestick, stick deep a Needle, and after set the same in a narrow mouth
glass full of water, and you shall see after what the same will do.

How to make Quicksilver, in a manner so hard as Silver.
AND to do this, take the strongest Vinegar, and whites of Eggs well beaten
together, and three ounces of quicksiluer, unto one of the other these first
still together in a Limbeck well luted, and in that distilled water put the
quicksiluer and it will be after so hard, that you may woork it with ye
hammer. Also take quicksiluer, and wash it in the distilled water of man's
blood, and every time you wash the same let it dry, and in the end it will come
to be so hard as silver.

How to see many and diverse strange signs in an Vrinall.
AND to see these, take a new and clean washed Vrinall, into which power
either clean water, or other running water, after take ye white of an new laid
Egg, and a little Saffron binding it in n clean linen cloth, after that,
power a little of the water into a dish and put the cloth with ye Saffron into
it, so long until it have colored it somewhat and being on this wise, then
beat ye white of the egg with this water seven or eight times with thy finger,
and the^ power the same into the Vrinall, and you shall after see in it Towers,
Castles, Hills, and many other strange sightes.

How to catch Fowls without a Net.
TO do this, take Arsenick, putting the same in water, and in that water boil
wheat, or any other grain, and cast the same forth unto Fowls, and so many as
eat thereof, will not be able afterward to fly away. And take the juice of
Celidone, and infuse Wheat in the same, letting it there remain for three
days, after give the same unto Fowls to eat, and such as eat thereof you may
after take with the hand. Also take Wheat, putting it in wine Lees, and let
the same remain there eight days, after that put it into the juice of
Celandine and horehounds, to steep, which so done, then give of the same unto
the Fowls to eat, and such as eat thereof, cannot fly away.

How to make a loaf of bread new set upon the Table to leap off.
TO do this, take a quill, fylling the same with Quick Silver, and stopping it
cloase, thruste the same after into a hot Loaf, new drawn out of ye Oven,
and the loaf will by and by dance on the Table.

How to make an Egg fly about, a merrye conclusion.
AND to do this, take a Goose Egg, and after the opening and cleansing of it,
take a Batte that flies in the Evening, which put into the shell, then glewe
it fast about on the top, and the Batte will fly away with it, which perhaps
will be thought of some to fly about in the air of it self.

How to make Artificial fire diverse ways: and that maruailous.
AND first to make a flame of fire to pass suddenly out of the mouth of a pot
full of water, take an Egg making an hole in the head, and draw out all the
substance of the same, which so done, then fill the same with the powder of
brimstone and vnsleikt Lime mixed together, shutting the mouth with Wax, and
then let if fall to the bottom of a quart pot full of Water, taking quicklye
your hand away, and suddenly will issue forth a flame out of the mouth of the
Pot. And also if thou will spit fire out of thy mouth without pain, and to
do thee no harm, take the powder of the willowe stick, finelye beaten and
searsed, with the which join a little new Silk, making it round up like unto
a ball, into which put this powder, wrapping the Silk well about it, and after
put it within with the powder a little fine Flax, and then properly stitche it
up round about, which so done, then cut it open a little on the one side,
putting a quick coal or a light Candle unto it, to set it on fire a little,
then put it again into thy mouth, holding the same sofly with thy teeth, and
turning also the part cut inward in thy mouth, and when thou will spit fire
out, then halde the ball strongly in thy mouth and blow, and the lookers on
shall see then a great flame issue forth of thy mouth, and do there no harm
at all. Also to make a fire fly up in the air. Take Towe, and wet the same in
Aqua-vitae, and after put fire to it, and blow the same away, which after will
fly up in the air and burn.

How to know a natural precious stone from a counterfeit.
AND to do this, rub the same on Lead, and if it change the color then it
is counterfeite, if it change not, then it is a natural Stone. Also, if the
Stone have like unto a Bladder within then it is counterfeite.

How to make a man to appear on a flame burning without any harm.
TO do this, take Brimstone, Orpiment, and commun Oil, of these make an
ointment, with the which anoint thy garment all about, and thy head and hands,
and after light the same and it will burn all at once without harm. Also take
juice of Adders tongue, ye juice of March Mallows, or other Mallows, and the
white of an Egg, these mix together, anointing therewith all about thy body,
and then cast the fine powder of Brimston on the same, setting it over a fire,
and it will strangely burn, and neither harm hands nor garment anointed
therewith.

How to make the Chamber as light by night as by day.
AND to do this, take that part which shines of the night woorms, and bruise
them well, which after set in hot Horse dung in a glass stopped, and let it
there so stand for fifteen days, and after distill the same in a Limbecke of
Glass with a soft fire, the which water so drawn, stop close in a narrow
necked pot of Crystal Glass, and hang the same in the entry of the house,
and it will so give a very bright light.

How to make two Dogs fight together a proper secret.
AND to do this, take the Seclifset of the Woolfe, and cast the same between
two Dogs: and they shall so long fight together, as they lie there between
them, and when you will have them to cease fighting: then take them away.

How to make a Bitch that she shall not desire to be covered with any Dog.
TO do this, take Bees and prepare them orderly, which after give unto the
Bitch with bread, or with meat, and she will not after suffer any Dog to
touch her.

To make a blown bladder to dance and skip from place to place.
TO do this, put Quicksilver in a bladder, and lay the bladder in a hot
plcae and it will after skippe from place to place without handling.

How to cast forth any woorme or Snake entered within the body.
TO do this, boil the herb Bassill, over a soft fire in Vinegar, which so
boiled, give unto the patient to drink: and it shall cast the same up
forthwith. And if the same be a Snake entered within the body: then you may
take writing Ink, and good Wine, mixing them together, which after drink, and
it will cast up whatsoever evil be in the body.

How to make a Hen to run away with great fear.
ANd to do this, take the head of a Kite, and tie the same about a Hens neck,
and she shall never cease running here and there, until you have taken away the
same from her neck, and when you will take the same from her neck, she will
then move from you nothing at all.

How to find a person drowned, that has been sought for.
TO do this, take a white loaf, and cast the same into the water, near ye
suspected place, and it will forthwith go directly over the dead body, and
there still abide, by which you may well find the dead body.

How to deal with Iron many ways right profitable.
FIrst to make Iron as soft as paste, take Vitrioll and Salt Niter, of each a
like, beating these to powder, which after distill in a Limbecke of Glass, and
in this water lay your small pieces of Iron, for a day and a night, which after
coner in hot horsedung for fifteen days, and the same will become very soft
like unto paste, and with the same Iron you may make seals or grave, or
otherwise Imprint what you list on Iron so easily as into earth, and you may
also beat and woork the same Iron so easilye as Lead. Also make a water of
Roche Alome, as is above said, and in the same water quench your Iron seven
times and it will make the Iron so easily break as glass, and to make powder
thereof. Also quench the Iron in the dung of an Ox or Cow, tempered with Honey
oftentimes and it will become so soft, that you may work the same like
Lead, with the hammer. Also, take salt Armoniack well beaten, and mix the same
with vnsleiked lime, and temper the same with cold Water, like unto a thick
broth, and in this water temper the Iron and it shall after become white, fair,
and very strong. Also take the juice of the herb named Palma Christi, and
with the same anoint thy hands, and you may after hanele Iron fire hot
without harm. And the like may you do with the juice of Hemlocke.

Also take read Arsenich, read Alome of each like: these grind into fine
powder mixing the same with the juice of Sengreen, or Houseleeke, and the gall
of a bull and anoint thy hands with the same: and you may after handle burning
Iron, and anointing the feet: you may go on hot Grates of Iron or Coals:
without any danger.

To light a candle at the mouth of an Image painted on the wall.
TAke and put Brimstone, to ye mouth of the Image, and take a burning Candle
and blow it out. And or the weecke be out, set it to the Images mouth, and it
will burn. And so ye may do against a glass.

To take Fish by night.
TAke a lantern of glass, and put a burning Candle in it, and set the lantern
on the water, and the Fishes will come to light. Or else take Nettles and
houseleek, and make juice of them, and put it in a ponde, and all the fishes
will gather there and if your hands be anointed therewith, ye may take them.

To make that no Dog bark at you.
TAke an herb called Serpentine, and they shall not bark at you.

To make Birds come to your Culuer house.
CAst Barley steeped in Honnie, where they do feed, and they will gather to
your Culuerhouse.

To put an Apple in a Violl.
HAng the Viol on the twigge of an apple Tree, and put a young Apple in the
mouth of the Violl, and it will grow therein. And so ye may do with Grapes or
other fruit.

To put an Egg in a Violl.
Steep the Egg two days, and two nights in Vinegar, and then role it on a
table softly, and it will stretch as wax, and then may you put it in the
Violl or draw it through a Ring.

To make folk seem black.
PVT Oil Olive in a Lamp, and put thereto fine powder of ground Glass and
light it, and all that be above it, will seem black as Egiptians.

To prove if a maiden be clean.
BVrne Motherwoort, and let her take the smoke at her nose, and if she be
corrupt she shall piss, or else not. Otherwise take graye Nettles while they
be green, and let her piss on them, if she be no maiden, they will wither
forth, or else not.

To know if a sick person shall die or not.
TAke gray Netttles while they be green and put them in the patients Urine: and
if they remain green, he shall live, and if they wither not.

To make Salt water fresh.
TAke Claye, and put it into a bag and strain it through till it be clear,
and it will be fresh.

To kindle fire at the Sun.
TAke a very bright Basen, and put a new looking Glass therein, and set the
Basin in the hottest of the Sun, and lay about it very dry Towe small
chopped, and the towe will take fire with heat of the Sun.

To see by night as by day.
ANoint your eyes with the blood of a Batte.

To make flesh cleave in the pot.
TAke Dwall or Night shade, and stamp it well, and put it in the pot with
meat, and the meat will cleave together.

To take Birds.
PVt Barlie in the juice of Rue, and Viner, and cast it there as the Birds do
haunt or come, and as soon as they have eaten it, they can not fly, and then
ye may take them.

To make silk woormes.
TAke the brain of a Calfe, and put it in a pit of Mader, and let it lie
three weeks, and they will breed of the brain and ye may feed them with
Mulberies.

To take away hairs.
Anoint the rough place with the blood of a Batte, after that it is shaven:
and hair shall never grow there.

To fat Hens or Capons.
MAke a deep pit in the earth, and make therein a Bed of dung, and a bed of
nettles, and do so til it be full and there keep your Pullen, til the herbs
begin to grow, and then let them out, and within a short while, they will be
very fat.

That one shall not be drunk.
Drink the juice of Yarrowe fasting, and ye shall not be drunk for no drink
And if ye were drunk, it will sober you: or else eat the marrowe of Porke
fasting, and ye shall not be drunk.

To make a good bait for fish at all seasons of the year.
TAke Wheat flower, and Tallowe of a new slain Sheep, and the gleire of an
Egg, and beat them altogether, and bait them all therewith.

To make an Egg go up to a Spear end.
EMpty the Egg at a little hole, and fill it full of May dew, and stop the
hole close with a little Wax and Parchment glewed, that the dew go not out.
Then stick a spear in the earth in the heat of the Sun, and lay the Egg by
the Spear, and it will mount to the top thereof by the heateof the Sun.

To make Fish or Flesh seem raw.
TAke the blood of a Wat, or of a Kid, and dry it, and keep it from the the
air then cast it on fish or flesh that is hot, and it will seem raw.

To make Potage to run out of the Pot.
TAke and cast Soap in the Pot, and it will run over.

To kill Hens or Duckes.
CAst to them the seed of Henbane, and they will fall down as they were dead.

To make coals to burn a great while.
MAke powder of S. John's Woort, and when the Coals are wasted, and the fire
near out, cast it thereon and let it lie.

That a man shall not be weary of going.
Drink the juice of Mugwoorte, and bear the herb about him, with the herb
Pedilion and Crowfoote.

Ad capiendum Pisces.
REcipe luce Mulage vel scolares tortas collectum circa medium Maij. Quando
Luna sit plena distemperata cum ingro sape and serua in Olla terreo, and quando
vis occupare, vnge manus tuas and laua illa in aqua vel loco vbi sunt Pisces.

To make Yarne and Lynnen Cloth white.
TAke a Herring barrel, and fill it nigh full of good Ale dregs, and stop at
fast, but ye must have a good dish full of parched beans, and put them in a
linen bag, and very hot put them to the dreggs, til they be cool, and shut
it fast the space of a quarter of an hour. Then take two pound of Alum,
ground to subtle powder, and cast it therein, and let it lie four days
naturallye well closed, then wash your Yarne.

To make that a Horse may not go through a street.
TAke the guts of a Woolfe, and lay them overthwart the Street, and cover them
with earth or Sand, and he will not go that way, as long as the guts do lie
there Probatum est.

To know if a woman be with a man child, or not.
TAke a dish, and put water in it, and then let her milk her breast into the
water, and if it be a man child, it will flete, and if it be a woman Child,
it will sink.

To ease thy feet for going.
TAke Plantine and stamp it well, and anoint your feet with the juice
thereof, and it will do away the greef.


