AN ALARM To all Christian Princes and States of the Religion.
WRITTEN Immediately upon the first news of the death 1632.
of the King of Sweden of famous memory, and ever will be to all posterity, and
to eternity.
Which I have concealed till now, having a great reluctation within my self,
and doubtful whether to publish it at all or no. Mich. 2.3 Amos. 5.13. Luke
22.53. Ephesians. 6.12
No answers the echo, for this time is evil: It is an evil time answers
the Prophet. The very power of darkness: this is your hour, and the power of
darkness, answers the Lord Jesus, for we wrestle not, our reluctation is not,
against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers etc:
answers the Apostle. The whole legion of devils, for they are many: We are
many, answers the devil himself, with a hollow echo from hell. But too many
for one poor worm, Mark. 5.9
such a one as I am, a worm and no man, to wrestle withal: the Lord Jesus
help me. Yet considering whom I serve, even this Lord Jesus: and what an other
Apostle answers: He that knows to do good and does it not, to him it is
sin. Iam. 3.17 Matt. 25.25
And conceiving it a part of my talent committed to me of Gods grace, not to be
concealed, not to be hid, whereof one day I must give account: and for no other
reason: written I say immediately after the sorrowful news came of the death
of that renowned King: and directed (and I hope in God it is also from him, and
so will be taken, and not of any presumption at all from me) to all those
Princes and States, now upon so great consultations and treaties, whereupon
depends the whole State of Gods Church: all the reformed Churches of
Christendom, now in quaestion upon the death of that famous King whether to
stand or fall, high time therefore for all either now to speak, or for ever
hereafter to hold their peace. Wherein I make no doubt but Satan will also act
his part to the utmost, (this his last part) by his Ambassadors, and secret
Agents from all parts, Zech. 3.1.
and stand at the right hand of our high Priest Joshua to resist him: that he
and his Kingdom may stand, and our high Priest Joshua (that is Jesus) and his
Kingdom fall: I have therefore adventured in the name of this Jesus: (Jesus,
Jesus, Jesus: which were the last words that great King uttered immediately
before he gave battle: help me to fight this day to the honor of thy name. If
I die I die) Let us go and die with him. Esthe. 4.16. John 11.16.
Why live we after him? who died not for himself but for us, and for others,
(as did Jesus,) and for the name of the Lord Jesus. I say in the name of this
Jesus, our Joshua, who died both for him, and for us all, (all humane respects,
either of fear or favor, set apart) I have adventured to publish it. My name
shrouded under his name Jesus: and who dare speak against it this name Jesus?
Hoping this Satan who now thinks he stands, and presumteously takes place
at the right hand of our Joshua (this Jesus) shall fall shorthlie, and finally,
the God of peace shall tread down Satan under your feet shortly, Romans 16.20.
Luke 10.18
as in that his divine vision: I saw Satan fall down like lightening from
heaven, Amen, Amen, and let the whole Church of Christ applaud hereunto, and
say, Amen and Amen.

IHS, IHS, IHS.
Helped me to fight this day to the honor of thy name, against this Satan:
this Legioen of Devils: for we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
principallities, against powers, and against the worldly governors the Princes
of the darkness of this world, against Spiritual wickednesses which are in the
high places,

Ephesians. 6.12. AN ALARM (Upon the death of the King of SWEDEN) to all Christian
Princes, and States of the Religion, to join together in a firm, and
inviolable league in defense thereof against the common enemy.
SEEING it has pleased God for our sins to take from us that renowned, and
most victorious Prince the King of Sweden, Judges. 16 28.
victorious even in his death (as was Samson) the most courageous champion,
heathen, or Christian, that ever God raised up, or can be read of in any
History, to have acted so much in so short a time: his small beginnings, and
great oppositions considered. An other Caesar, veni, vidi, vici, A Savior, and
deliverer of Gods Church, of whom the world was not worthy, for our sins (I
say) taken from us: for the which we ought to lament (lament answers a woeful
echo, and thereby our great loss: An other Judas Machabeus: how is the valiant
man fallen that delivered Israel!) but not to lament for him, 1 Mac. 9.21.
who now triumphs most gloriously in heaven, with all the Holy Angels and
Saints (as he did on earth) over all his enemies. It were a shame, and
dishonor to God, and his anointed that is with God, and a derision to the
enemies of God (who now rejoice, and insult over his dead bones, whom living
they durst not once look in the face) to suffer these so glorious, and blessed
beginnings ( and blessed shall they be) to fall to the ground. Those great
designs, both against the Antichristian, and Mohammedan tyranny: both which
had he lived, in short time, by all lyklihood, had been thrown to the ground.
For the further managing whereof, and final acco^plishment, (in these lest
days to be accomplished, according to the Holy Prophecies) it is to be wished,
and daily prayed for, by the whole Church of Christ, that all those christian
Princes and States, who profess themselves Defenders of the true Christian
faith, would join together in a firm, and inviolable league, and union: an
Evangelical union, in the name of Jesus Christ and his Church, (all
differences of opinion in matter of Religion set apart, with those bitter names
of Luther, and Calvin etc.) as Christians, Act. 11.26.
for so were we first called in the primitive Church at Antioch: an
Evangelical union (I say) in the name of Jesus Christ and his Church, to
defend the same, and his holy Euangill, or Gospel, against all the professed
enemies thereof, both Antichristian, and Mohammedan. They that will not, will
not, answeareth, the echo, join together to prosecute the will, and directions
of that noble King, dead as well as living: yea rather now much more, who has
even sacrificed his life in their defense, and the cause of Religion: they that
will not: will not answeareth the echo again, join together in this cause,
and quarrel, which is even Gods cause, the Lord of hoasts, whereof he himself
is General, and Commander, let them be Anathema Maranatha: let the whole
Church of Christ explode the^ with this bitter curse: 1 Cor. 16.23. Iud. 5.23
Curse ye Meros, said the Angel of the Lord, curse ye bitter lie the
inhabitants thereof, because they came not to help the Lord, to help the Lord
against the mighty. Whom the Lord also himself in the end will curse, explode,
and even spue out of his mouth: for they that are not with us are against us,
Mat. 12.30.
and so to be accounted of, even as enemies. Let them declare themselves, (as
our Savior wishes) hot, or cold, for Religion, or against Religion: for the
common liberty of their conscience, and their country, Reu. 3.15
or against it: I would thou were cold, or hot, (says our Savior) but
because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold, nor hot, I will spue thee out of
my mouth. And it is to be wished, and prayed for likewise by the whole Church
of Christ (for that is all we can do, to wish and pray, and that we all ought
to do) for we are all members of that his mystical body, and every one has
an interest in the weal or woe thereof, and may freely spend his voice. We are
all Hypocrates twins, we must either, laugh together, or weep together: wept
we have a long time. I say it is to be wished, and prayed for likewise that his
Majesty of Great Britainne, who professes himself Defender of the faith,
catexochen above all other Kings and Princes, (and long may he live to
maintain it) would now declare himself by summoning, or calling (quam timeo,
how do I fear to name it? I only wish and pray for it) a Parliament: [O that
the name of a Parliament should now be so heinous, and odious, as no man dare
once name it, scarce think of it: that high court of Parliament so named, so
reverenced in times past, that great counsel of state, and of the whole Land,
assembled as one man to provide for the good of the state, and of the whole
Church of God, and oppugn the enemies thereof: which counsel had his Majesty
and royal father been pleased to have embraced and not the counsel of those
wicked Rohoboami, pravis consultoribus impulsi: impulsi answeareth the echo
again to dissolve, and break it of from time to time, one parliament after an
other: aliquam, quae nunc Buchanan in his Epist. ded. before his trag: Bapt:
Nulla in comparison of our former famous and flouwrishing estate etc.
nulla est, rempublicam haberemus: both Church and state had still flourished,
as in the days of Queen Elisabeth of famous memory: since utterly decayed,
the glory gone from Israel, and nothing prospered that we have undertaken: nor
like to do, till it please God to put into his Majesty's heart to call it
again, to bewished I say and prayed for continually.] By calling a Parliament
(I say) and cutting of the Popish, and Spanish faction: I may not name them
neither, I dare not: I need not: their characters are written in such great and
capital letters, as a man may read them running: as it is in the Prophet. That
great Gordian knot, or threefold cord not easy to be broken, nor possible to
be loosed, but cut in pieces by him that bears the sword, and (I hope) not
in vain, our Great Alexander. The Popish, Romans 13.4.
and Spanish faction (I say) with their adherents, flatterers, and time
seruers, their vassals, and creatures, of all others most base and unworthy:
creatures of creatures, vassals of vassals, worthy also to be cut off, as King
David denounces: Psa. 12.3
The Lord shall cut off all flattering lips etc. nostri fundi callamitas; the
callamitie of this our once so famous, and flourishing a Kingdom, and of the
whole Church of God, and the reformed Religion: which they have endeavored to
ruin, if it were possible, by diverting his Majesty, and Royal father King
James, Vt eos quos tutari debeant desertos esse patiantur.
from giving that countenance and assistance thereunto, which in all honor, in
respect of that royal title and in their own royal disposition otherwise
they both ought and would have don. Bound thereunto by a more particular
obligation to their own flesh, and blood, now lying a bleeding, both the one,
and the other. Both the cause of Religion, her chieffe champion slain, and
that distressed, and comfortles Lady the Queen of Bohemia, and her royal
issue, like to suffer as she has don hitherto beyond all patience: which yet
in the end will overcome all. Whereof (I say) the Popish, and Spanish faction,
which we nourish even in our own bosoms, are the cause, and in the end, like
vipers, will eat out even their own mothers bowels, and utterly ruin this
our famous Kingdom, Church and state, if they be not cut off. Now is the axe
laid, to the root of the trees. Mat. 3.10
Trees in the plural number: even the high and mighty Cedars of Lebanon,
Kings and Caisars, for with God there is no respect of persons. No respect of
persons answers the echo. 2 King. 20 1.
Set thine house in order for thou shall dye and not live, says the Lord by
his Prophet to Hezekiah King of Judah, and in him to our Hezekiah, a like
gently warned of late, and to all other Kings, and Princes. God grant they
may all repent, mourn, and lament, as he did: that so, many years may be
added to their lives here in this world, and after, eternity of glory in the
world to come. Gently warned (I say) by a like visitation, immediately after the
news came of the death of the two Kings, very remarkable. A like visitation
(I say) pestilenciall, The small pocks, pestilentiall, and inclyning to the
plague, and commonly a forerunner.
and mortal too to many, cosen german to that great visitation so called the
plague: which was (as some hold) the deadly disease of Hezekiah, sick unto
death, as it is in that place. A fair warning, if so taken, and not slighted
as an ordinary, and casual visitation, (as I fear we do) but the
circumstances make it not casual, but extraordinary, and (as I said before)
very remarkable. No occasion at all of infection precedent, but immediately
from the hand of God, and the very finger of God therein. A gentle visitation
indeed, God give us grace to make use of it, before the destroying Angel come
with his sword drawn, and cut down all before him. Now is the axe laid to the
root of the trees. Kings and Princes, they now see they are mortal, and shall
die like men. Even be sick, wounded, slain and die like other men: The words
used at the burial of the dead, in the book of common prayer.
and that they are but earth, dust, and ashes: earth to earth, ashes to ashes,
dust to dust etc. And therefore the Prophet cries unto them: earth, earth,
earth, hear the word of the Lord. Now therefore let us leave off our
revelling, and daunsing, our maskes, and plays, unseasonable (especially on
the Lords day) when the Lord calls to prayer and fasting, weeping and
mourning. When (I say) the Ark of God is in camp against the Philistims. For
fear we do not act the last part of the tragaedie already begun, 1. Pet.
4.17.
already begun answers the echo: judgment already begun at the house of God
etc. for our God is even a consuming fire. It is already kindled, and the flame
or it be long will surely break forth, if in the mean time we do not quench
it with the tears of repentance. We have had diverse faire-warnings, and
fore-warnings first and last, which have wrought very little impression in our
senseles, stony, and hard hearts. Two great plagues: one upon the first coming
of King James to the crown: The other of King Charles: many thousands
consumed as in the days of King David. God open our eyes, as he did his, 1.
Chron. 21.16 2 Samuel 24.17.
that we may see his destroying Angel standing between the earth and the
heaven with his drawn sword in his hand etc. and acknowledge our sins, as he
did: It is I that have sinned, don evil indeed, don wickedlie etc. Two great
falls: the one of King James into the river at Theobalds horse and all, where
after he died: The other of King Charles then Prince in Enfielde chase not far
off, taken up senseles, and carried into a house hard by, but came to himself
again God be praised. The same God preserve him still long to survive to his
glory. Two great fires: the one at New merket half the town almost consumed
where the Kings hunting house is: the other at Whitethall, the banqueting house
burnt and consumed. Besides many other great fires elsewhere. And even in London
it self the Kings Chamber. [Yea London bridge, one of the wonders of the world,
a great part of the houses built upon it, very lately also burnt, and
consumed.] But all these faire-warnings, and fire-warnings, fore-warnings, and
forerunners of further judgments, forgotten, or slighted, as ordinary and
casual, as the Jews did all those prodigious signs before the destruction of
Jerusalem, yea the Powder Plot, or Papists co^spiracy, as yet remaining in red
characters in our almanaks, among our other holy days celebrated yearly: but
what effect has it wrought? The Papists, and Popish faction, ever since
increassed, grown stronger, and stronger: evil men still worse and worse, 2.
Tim. 3.13.
as the Apostle prophecieth of these last days, these last times: and in the
end (as I said before) will utterly ruin both our Church and state, if they be
not cut of. I say if these faire-warnings one after an other, and gentle
visitations in great mercy sent beforehand from God to move us to repentance,
work no effect, nor make us sensible of his judgments already fallen upon
others, which our sins have likewise deserved, if not more: we may fear or it
be long, to be made examples to others, as others now are to us. And see with
fear, and trembling, Dan. 55.
the finger of that hand writing upon the wall: Mean, Mean, Tekel Vpharsin etc.
The sentence is already gone forth, long since denounced to Hezekiah: Thou shall
die, and not live, and in him to all other Kings and Princes: I have said ye
are Gods, but ye shall die like men and fall like one of the Princes. Psalm. 82.6
We see it executed before our eyes upon others, upon other Princes, and shall
we think to escape scotfree? Two lamentable examples, The 5 of November God
only threatened and forewarned by the powder plot: But the 6 paid us home, and
double by the death of these two Princes: Prince Henry, and the King of Sweden,
A great judgment upon his Church and very remarkable,
(too lamentable indeed:) two good Princes taken away, and that on the sudden
one after an other. The King of Sweden, the very same day of the month the 6
of November old style that Prince Henry died, that hopeful Prince. And the
King of Bohemia immediately after: and will God spare others? If he do, and
they do not, not, answers the echo, bring for fruits meet for repentance, as
John Baptist admonishes (which God grant we all may do) to be preserved from
one judgment, is but to be reserved to an other, a far greater, whereof then
we shall be sensible and complain, but too late, and in vain: as that
froward, and stubburne heart complains: Pr. 5.12
how have I hated instruction, and my heart despised reprooffe etc? Our
wilful, froward, and stubburne hearts, they can brook no instruction, or
reprooffe. Therefore Ps. 18.26 Mat. 14.4.
with the wilful, froward, and stubburne, will the Lord show himself wllfull,
froward, and stubburne etc. as it is in the Psalm. But indeed they that should
instruct, admonish, and reprove Kings and Princes and all persons without
respects of persons (as John the Baptist did King Herod, it is not lawful for
thee etc.) our great Bishops and clergy men, yea and States men too (with
reverence be it spoken to the better sort, which is always the least, always
excepted) they are flatterers, and timeseruers (namque hoc tempore obsequium
amicos, veritas odium parit) all seek their own, and none the things of Jesus
Christ: Amos 6.6
as the Apostle complains. They are not grieved for the afflictions of Joseph
etc: As the Prophet also complains. For the afflictions of Gods Church, and
Saints, both under the Antichristian, and Mohammedan tyranny, daily slain and
martyred, and no man considers in his heart, Whose blood will one day be
required. Let them look to it whom it concerns, Kings, Princes, or others:
for to whom much is given, Isa. 30.33
of him much shall be required. Tophet is prepared of old, even for Kings, if
they repent not. They repent not, answers the echo, that obey not Gods holy
truth, and Gospel; who either, offend, or do not defend the same, to the
utmost of their power against the enemies thereof. Cicero lib. 1, Offic.
Qui non populsat injuriam, qui non defendit nec obsistit si potest injuriae
etc. he that does not protect and defend the innocent, and oppressed, from
iuiurie and violence offered, tam est in vitio (says a heathen man) as if he
should forsake his parents, or friends, or country. And it was one of their
great commandments, pugna pro Patria: and is likewise to every true Christian:
pugna pro Ecclesia; he thou faithful unto death etc. Rev. 2.10
Much more to Christian Princes whom God has made his Lieutenants, and
chieffe-iustices here on earth, and given that honor to be nursing-fathers to
his Church, to protect and defend it, against al^ injuries and violence
whatsoever, and against all enemies whatsoever. To protect (I say) and defend
the widows, and fatherles. Now especially those two comfortles Rachels the
Queens of Bohemia and Sweden, and their fatherles children: those towardly young
Princes, and all others oppressed by that tyrannous, and ambitious house of
Austria, and help them to their right. As King David admonishes: Psalm. 82.3
defend the poor and fatherles, do justice to the afflicted and needy:
deliver the poor and needy: rid them out of the hand of the wicked etc. Be
wise now therefore O ye Kings: Psalm. 2.10
be instructed ye judges of the earth. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice
with trembling. Kiss the son lest he be angry, and ye perish etc. Repent
(as John the Baptist likewise admonishes) for the Kingdom of heaven is at
hand. Mat. 3.2.
Now is the axe laid to the root of the trees. And let us all repent, even
from the highest to the Lowest, as did the Ninevites at the preaching, of
Jonas: Jonah. 3.4
yet forty days and Nineue shall be overthrown. And mourn, not only
outwardly, but inwardly for our sins, which indeed are the chieffe cause of all
these disasters, which have fallen upon our neighbor churches and countries,
yea Princes, and great personages, and may likewise fall upon us, how soon we
know not. Luke 13.4
For were they only sinners above all others upon whom the tower in Silo
fell, and slew them? I tell you nay (says our Savior) but except ye repent ye
shall all likewise perish. And yet not to be lamented, but our sins and great
loss thereby as before. 1 Pet. 4.7.
And was that ever renowned, and never sufficiently lamented King of Sweden,
that died in battle (as did Josiah:) The King of Bohemia, that died
immediately after: And that hopeful young Prince his son that was drowned
before; sinners above other Kings, and Princes their neighbors? I tell you
nay, but except ye repent, ye shall likewise perish. Two Kings at once so
sodainle to be taken away one after another, (the circumstance of time also
before mentioned considered) we must needs acknowledge the very finger of God,
and judgment of God therein to be admired, and feared of all others. For when
judgment begineth at the house of God (as now it does, the house of Sued for
Sued is Deus, Gods house,) what shall be the end of them that obey not the
Gospel of God? They obey not the Gospel of God, answeareth the eeho again,
who either, offend, or do not defend the Gospel of God, to the utmost of
their power: qui non propulsant iniuriam etc. Or was the German nation, or
other our Neighbor nations, upon whom Gods heavy judgments, of war, and other
miseries are fallen, greater sinners than we? I tell you nay, but except we
repent we shall all likewise perish. Isa. 60.12 1. Sam. 12 25.
Regnum quod non servierit Deo peribit: that Kingdom which will not serve the
Lord shall perish: for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. Repent therefore
for the Kingdom of heaven is at hand, at hand answers the echo again. And
so I conclude, praying God to forgive our sins, which have caused these
judgments, and upon our repentance to raise up Saviors, and deliuerers of his
Church (as I hope he will) more and more to his glory, and the final confusion
of his enemies both open, and secret, Gog and Magog, now in these last days,
Reu. 20.8
before the end of the world very near approaching, to be utterly destroyed,
utterly destroyed answers the echo again Amen, Amen.

IHS, IHS, IHS.
Help us to fight this day to the honor of thy name, against these enemies of
thy Church and Kingdom: this legion of devils, devils incarnat, Psalm. 3.1.
for they are many: many, answers the echo, that rise op against us, etc.
Many and mighty: And open our eyes, the eyes of all those who are to fight
thy battles, as thou did the eyes of that servant of Elisha, at his prayer: 2
King. 6 16.
Lord I pray thee open his eyes that he may see etc. That we may see the
mountain full of horses, and charets of fire round about Elisha, and say as he
did: 1 Chro. 32 7.
as did also Hezekiah, encouraging one an other: fear not, for they that be
with us are more than they that be with them. With them, answers an echo from
heaven, is an arm of flesh, but with us the Lord our God, to help us, and to
fight our battles. And if God be with us who can be against us? And O Lord our
God, show a difference betwixt us and them, as thou did betwixt thine own
people the Jsraelites and the Egyptians: and say to us, as thou did to thine
own people by thy servant Moses: Eeare ye not, stand still and see the
salvation of the Lord which he will show to you this day: Exodus 14.13.
for the Egyptians whom ye have seen this day, ye shall see them again no
more for ever. The Lord shall fight for you hold you your peace. And O Lord
open the eyes of all Christian Princes, and States, more and more, to see and
detest, the nakedness, and filthiness of that menstruous, Rev. 17.2
and monstrous whore of Babylon, with whom the Kings of the (...) have
committed fornication etc. spiritual fornication: and put into their hearts
with one consent to fulfill thy will, to hate the whore, make her desolate and
naked, to eat her flesh, and burn her with fire: and dash her children
against the stones. O daughter of Babylon who art to be destroyed, Psalm. 137.8.
happy shall he be that rewards thee as thou have served us: happy shall he
be that takes, and dasheth thy little ones, against the stones: both the open,
and secret enemies before mentioned. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

