Hereafter follows the knowledge, properties, and the virtues of Herbs.

Of the knowledge and virtues of herbs, and the first letter begyn^eth with.A.
Agnus castus.
AGnus castus is a herb that men call Tutsayne or Park leaves, and it has
leaves somdele red: like to the leaves of Orage, and it has signs in his leaves,
as it were leaves of Plantayne, and he has yelow flowers as great as a penny,
and this herb beryth above at the crope black beryes when they ben ripe, and
if they be not ripe they ben yelowe as the flower of it is. And this herb
grows much in woods and in dry ground. The virtue of this herb is, that
he will keep man and woman chaste, for as Dracolidon and Placius says that
this herb is called Agnus castus for this skyl, for the use and the savor
thereof makes men chaste. Also he will open the poores, and let out wicked
humors, and spyces of the body. This herb distroyeth ye moisture of man's
sede. Also Authors seyne, let this herb be well sod with fenell sede, and a
little eysell is good to dystroy cold dropsy. Also let him be sod with
Smalledge and Sauge in salt water, and than wasshe the hinder party of a
man's head, he helps an evil that men call Litargia. Also this distroyeth
ye foul lust of lecherye and it be drunk, but men use to lay it on them
slepyng. And therefore some men eat this herb roasted, for if men eat it raw
he will lightly ge^dre head ache. This herb is good to dystroy the hardness and
the stoppyng of the liver, and of the mylt. Also a plaster of this herb is
good to do away the ache of a man's head that is gendred of wicked humors,
this herb is hot and dry and there be three spyces of her. etc.

Apium.
APium is an herb men call Smaledge or March, this herb has leaves like to
Louage: but the leaves be not so long, also it is not so strong of savor as
Louage, and it has sede as it were Percely, and it is like to Percely sede.
The virtue of him is that he will make a man to make water, and this herb
opens the stoppynge of the liver. Also the sede thereof hardeth a man's
womb. Also the propertye of him is to draw all the wicked humors of the body
unto the head and to the stomach, and the womb, and therefore it is forbode
to women that be with child, or that keeps suckynge children to eat of this
herb lest they be mad, and take thereof the falling evil. This herb is hot
and dry, and has five spyces of her. etc.

Auetum.
AVetu^ is an herb that is called Auete otherwise Dyll, this has leaves like
to Fenel, and the same savor and bears her sede as Fenell, but ye sede of
this is somewhat broad as the sede of Orage. The virtue of this herb is that he
will make a man to pysse. Also he swageth the ro^bulling and the wicked wind in
a man's womb. Also it distroyeth the pox, and if the sede of this herb be
brende and strawed upon a wound it heleth soon that wound, and namely if a
man be scalded on his me^bres, or on his yerde, it shall be hole in the same
manner. Also a plaster made of this herb, and laid to the Emerawdes heleth
them soon, this herb is hot and dry.

Apumerisus.
APumerisus is an herb called Cerfoyle or Cheruyle, this herb has small
leaves like to the leaves of Hemeloke, but this herb is good in sauoure, and
has a white flower and long sede like to otes. The virtue is if that he be
drunk with wine it shall make a man well to make water. Also he delyuereth of
the reins and of the bladder, and if he be drunk with wine, he lets out
and unbinds the wicked wind fro the sides and the stoppynge of the womb,
and of the liver, and of all other wounds, and this herb withholdeth
casting. Also a plaster made of the herb and tempered with eysell distroyeth
wild fire, and heleth the canker, this herb is one of the spyces of Smaledge,
it is hot and dry.

Absinthium.
ABsinthium is an herb that men call worm wood, this herb has leaves as
Mugworte, and the leaves be somdele white under, and he has a great more, and
of the more comes out many branches, and bears flowers as Mugworte. The
virtue thereof is to comfort the stomach and cleanses the heart. Galien says
that if this herb be given to an evil, of the which evil the matter is not
fully defied it shall hard the stomach and let the digestyo^, and if the
matter of the evil be ryped, the herb shall make a man laxatyfe. This herb is
to put away dronke^nes, also if this herb be drunk with spiconarde, it
swageth the ache of the stomach and of the womb. Also if this herb be
tempred with ho^ny and drunk, it heleth the swellyng of a man's mouth, and
puts away the blackenes by a man's iye, and clereth the iyen. Also if the
joyce of this herb be stylled in to a man's nostrylles, it dries up the
moisture that renneth out of him. Also it keeps clothes from mothes and thou
put it in thy press, also it keeps books from eating of worms, this herb
is dry and hot and has two spyces.

Archemesia.
ARchemesia is an herb that men call Mugworte, it is like to wormwood in
leaves, but they be not fully so round, and it has a longer stalk, and many
coming out of one, and it bears flowers as does wormwood. The virtue of this
herb is if a man take a Journey, and bears this herb with him, he shall not
be weary ne have no travail in his way, also if this herb be in a house,
there shall no wicked spyryte dwell there, Also this herb puned with talowe
helps the akynge and sorenes of a man's fete, also the powder of this herb
drunk with luke warm water helps the akynge of a man's guts, it is hot
and dry.

Affodillus.
AFfodillus is an herb that men calls Affadyll like to leke, and he has
yelowe flowers, and at the top he has round coddes, when the flowers be
falling they has sede like to an oynyon. The virtue of this herb is that ye
branches of this herb is good to hele the dropsy. Also the flowers thereof
drunk with wine, it heleth the bytynge of venymous worms. Also ye joyce with
the more with a little myrre, and a little sapheron sodde and meddled with sweet
wine and strayned, it heleth re^nynge iyen, also the moore thereof burned in to
powder put in to iyen that have lost her here shall make here to grow, and
also a hard sharp clothe be wette in the joyce of this herb, and therewith
the morfewe or a place that much bow is, be anointed with the cloth in the
son, the morfewe and the bow shall fall away, this herb is hot and dry.

Astrologia longa.
AStrologia longa is an herb called Mader, it has leaves like to Mader, and
has a branch the length of a cubyte, and many branches coming out of the
more, the branches of this herb has many knottes right as has Mader, and
some what white flowers. The virtue is it will unbind the stoppyng of the
liver, and let pass wicked wyndes. Also if this herb be drunk with wine he
purges venym in a man's body, or without in the veins, wou^des, that be
touching. This herb is hot and dry, and shall be gathered in harvest.

Abrotanum.
ABrotanu^ is an herb that men calls Sothernwoode, and this herb has a
stalk as it were rewe, and so he is brau^ched, save this herb has strayter
leaves then has Rewe. The virtue of this herb is that if the sede thereof be
broken and dronken with water it helps the men that has the stone, and the
palsy, and if the herb be drunk with wine it helps him that is bitten with
any venymous worms. Also the powder of this herb breaks hard postumes.
Also if this herb be brent, and the ashes be meddled with old Oil, and put
to the place where lacked here, and it shall grow again, this herb is hot
and dry.

Aristologia rotunda.
ARistologia rotu^da is an herb that is called Astrologe or Galyngale, this
herb has leaves like to a purse, and has but one branche and grene leaves
above, and under ben white, and it flowreth as it were betayn save the flowers
ben white. The virtue as ypocras says is, if that he be dronken with hot
water, it is medycynable for men that been stopped in the breast, and for the
falling evil, and for the potagre, this herb is hot and dry, and shall be
gathered in harvest, and this is a spyce of red mader.

Ameos.
AMeos is an herb called Amee, this has leaves like to Elderne, but they ben
less and a long branch and flowreth, and sedeth as it were persely, and the
sede is like to the sede of Persely. The virtue of this herb is if it be
drunk with ho^ny it sleeth worms in a man's womb, and unbinds great
stoppynge of wicked wyndes in a man's womb, he breketh the stone, he heals
a man's stomach if it be cold, he cleanses the liver and the reins and
wou^des, he helps the bytynge of venymous beestes, and it is hot and dry.

Alleluya.
ALleluya is a herb called woodsore or stubworte, this herb has.iii. leaves
of the which.ii. ben rownde and a little departed above and it has a white
flower, but no long stalk. The virtue of this herb is if it be roasted upon
the coals in leaves of the red docke, then he shall frete away dead flesh,
and it is hot and dry.

Agrimonia.
AGrimonia is an herb called Egrimonye, and the leaves be like to Tansey, but
the leaves of this ben greatter, and he has a blewe flower, and when the flower
is fall he has sede that will hang in a man's clothes, this grows by
dyches, or hedges, and woods. The virtue is if he be eten grene with the rote
he heleth ye akynge of the womb. Also this herb tempered with eysyl will
heal a sore hurted with iron. Also if it be used in meats it will hele the
sorenes of the mylte, and it is hot and dry.

Auancia.
AVancia is an herb called Auendre, it has leaves like to an hare foot, this
herb is called harefote, and he has a yelowe flower as it were Turmentyll.
The virtue is if he be dried and made in powder, and put in a little wine or
hot water and given to a man that has the Fevers to drink, it shall help
him soon. Also it helps much wounds, and the canker if it be drunk.

Altea.
ALtea is an herb called the Holyhocke or wild malowe, it has leaves as it
were malowe and has a long branch, he sedeth as does malowe. The virtue is
if it be shreded with telow, and taken to a man that has the potagre, he shall
be hole within three days. Also if this herb be soden with vynegre and with
lynsede, and laid unto a man's sides it departs wicked gatheryng that been
gendred together in a man's body it grows in feldes and hot places.

Amarista.
AMarista is an herb called Mawthen or docter fenel, this herb is much like
to Camamyll, and flowreth as Camamyll, for it has white flowers, and this
herb stynketh as it grows in the field, and in corn. The virtue of this
herb is that the joyce thereof drunk is good for the canker. Also to hele the
pypes of the Emerawdes and there be two spyces of the herb, one has a white
flower, the other a yelowe flower.

Anisum.
ANisu^ is an herb called Annies, it has leaves as Comen or Fenel, but the
sede is more than Fenell sede. The virtue of this herb is that he unbinds
wicked wyndes and great humors, and he opens the stoppynge of the liver.
Also he makes woma^nes milk to wax. Also he styrreth man and woman to works
of kind. Also it makes a man to make water and to sweet. Also it makes the
womb hard if it be laxe, this herb or else the sede should be take moist,
and roasted or perched in manner of medycyne this herb is hot and dry.

Alleum.
ALleu^ is an herb called Garlyke, this herb is common. The virtue of him is
that he will unbind all great stoppynges and wicked wyndes in a man's body.
Also he helps a man to make water, but nevertheless he greueth a man's iyen
for the great vnbyndyng and drawyng that he veriuously draws the sight. Also
he dystroyeth a venym within a man. Also he heals cold sores as it were
Tryacle. Also he does a way the morfewe of bladders in what place that they ben
of the body if it be well rubbed therewith, and it is hot and dry.

Astarton.
AStarton is an herb called Lunarye, this herb grows among stones or hye
places, this herb shyneth by night, this herb has his moisture yfounde by
shepherdes in the field, and it has yelowe flowers hole and rownde as
cokobell, or flowers of Floxgloue, the leaves of this herb ben zende blewe, and
they have the marcke of the Moon in the mids as it were.iii. leued grass,
and the leaves ben more then.iii. leued grass, and ben rownde as a penny, it
has a stalk and that is red, it smells as it were Musk, and the joyce is
yelowe, this grows in the new with Moon without leaves, and every day waxes
a new lefe.xv. days, and after.xv. days he leseth a lefe as the Moon wexeth
and wayneth, and where soever this herb be he grows in great qua^tyte. The
virtue of this herb is that who so eteth his bayns or else of the herb in ye
waynynge of the Moon when he is in signo virginis, if he have the falling
evil he shallbe hole. Also who so has the falling evil bear this herb
about his neck and he shall be hole. And it has many mo virtues than I can
tell at this time.

The.ii. letter begins with.B.
Betonia.
BEtonia is an herb called Betayne or byschope pysworte, this herb has hole
leaves, but they be ende^ted by the sides without, and it has a red flower in
the croppe of the stalk. The virtue of this herb is if he be pune and put to
the wound in the head that is smytten with a stroke, he shall hele the wound
fair and well, and the better if it be fresshe. Also this herb will draw out
broken bones of wou^des as some Auctours sayen. Also take the water of Betayne,
or else break the leaves and take the joyce and put it in to thine iyes, than
shall you find yt it is is good for akynge or sorenes of ye iyen. Also take of
Betayn a dragma and pune it and meddle it with water that is warm, and drink
it.iiii. times fasting and it will break the web about the iyen, and cleanse
them well and fair. Also if thou have waterynge iyen eat every day a little
Betayne and it cleanses them. Also if thou have akynge iyen, take the leaves of
Betayne fresshe by them self, or else with a little water, and then wrynge out
the joyce, and put thereto a little rose water, warm them well to gyther, and
still it in to thine iyen, and afterward put above wolle, and so thou shall be
hole. Also if thou blede much at the nose take Betayne and pune it with a
little salt, and do it to thine nosethyrlles, as much as thou may with thy
thombe and thy meddle finger, and than hold thy nosethyrlle with the same
fyngers, and the bsode shall stau^che. Also if thou have sore tethe, take
Betayne and seth it in old wine, or in eyfyll till it be sodde to the third
part, and hold it in thy mouth, and thou shall amend. Also if thou have the
cowghe take two ounces of the powder of Betayne and a little ho^ny, and seth it
with esy fire, and use it.ix. days. Also if a man's yard be swollen or else
sore, take Betayne and pune it with little wine, and after lay to the yard
and he shallbe hole. Also if a man may not hold his mete within him,
take.iiii. dragmes of the powder of Betayn and meddle it with ho^ny that is
sodde, and make pellettes as great as a walsche note, and give him.iiii. days
each day a pellet, and do him to drink.ii. sponefull of that water, and than
he shall be hole. Also if a man be potagre, take Betayne and pune it and lay it
to his feet, and he shall be amended. Also take a little Betayne or the powder
and eat it erely, and it shall help the fro dronke^nes that day, these
medycynes ben proved. This herb grows in woods and holly places among
busshes in derke places, this herb is hot and dry.

Balsaminta.
BAlsaminta is an herb that men call horsemynt, this herb has leaves like unto
other myntes, and some men calls it water mynt, it grows much by the
water, but it has a stronger sauer then has another mynt. The virtue is that
he will comfort the stomach, and make a man well to defy his meat. Also this
herb purges a man within the body, and makes him well to speak. Also the
joyce of this herb meddled with ho^ny and a little wine does away the schylke of
a man's stomach, and other wicked wyndes of him. Also ye joyce of this herb
drunk with wine ysode makes a woman with child esely to bear her child, and
soon to be delivered, this is hot and dry, and has two spyces.

Beta.
BEta is an herb called Beat, this herb is common, and grows in Gardaynes,
and there be two spyces thereof, and Diacolides says, one is white another
black.

The virtue of this herb is that the joyce of this herb put it in to the
nosethyrlles, it cleanses a man's heed. Also this herb swageth the akynge of a
man's heed. Also it cleanses the heed from nyttes, and from other vermyn. Also
it repayreth and keeps the here of a man's heed. Also this herb dystroyeth
botches and byles. Also Diacolides says, that upon the rote of this herb
may be planted a graffe that will afterward bear fruit, as upon the cole
rote.

Borago domestices.
BOrago Domestices is an herb called Borage, this grows in Gardaynes, and he
has short leaves and a blewe flower. The virtue of this herb is yt he will
cleanse the red color of man. Also this herb meddled with wine makes a man
glade and merry, and it is hot and dry.

Bigula.
BIgula is an herb called Brom Bugle this has leaves some what round, and some
what tournynge to black, and he has a blew flower and somewhat boystous. The
virtue of this herb is that he will hele wounds in a man's head. Also it
breketh and dystroyeth the rewme in a man's head and the akynge, he grows in
woods, and he is hot and dry, and there ben.ii. spyces of him.

Burneta.
BVrneta is an herb called Burnet, and it has a blewe flower as has Hayhoue,
and leaves like to Tansey, but they be not so great. The virtue of this herb is
that he will distroy the great humors and the laxa tyue within a man. Also he
heals and opens the stoppynge of the liver, and makes a man to pysse. Also
he heals a man of the yelow evil. Also the joyce meddled with ho^ny and
drunk, unbinds and heals the sore of the rybbes and pappes, and there
be.ii. spyces of this herb one grows in hard land and has little leaves,
another grows in meadows and have more leaves.

Bursa pastoris.
BUrsa pastoris is an herb called shepardes purs or tocheworte, this has
leaves departed somdele as Burnet, and has a white flower, and when he has
lost his flower, he has the manner of a purs, in the which is sede. The virtue
of this herb is he will soon staunche blood if he be drunk, it grows in
feldes and gardaynes well nyghe al about, and he is hot and dry.

The.iii. letter begins with.C.
Camamilla.
CAmamilla is an herb called Camamyl, this herb has leaves like to the mauthe
and white flowers but he smells sote, and the maw the stynketh.

The virtue is if he be drunk with wine he breketh the stone. Also he stroyeth
the yelowe evil. Also he heals the akynge of the liver. Also if he be chewed
he heleth the sore of the mouth, this is hot and dry, and grows most in
gardaynes.

Calamintum.
CAlamintum is an herb yt is called Calamynt, this herb has leaves like unto
Mynt, but the leaves ben whyter and rou^der then the leaves of Mynt, and more
stronger of savor, and it has a white stalk. The virtue of this herb is
that he will distroy a man's talent as ypocras says, and there be three spices
of this herb, one that is stony, another that is hery, another that is
waterye, and they be hot and dry, and he that is hery makes a man moist, he
that is stony if he be drunk he makes a man that has drunk venym hole. Also
this herb made in plaster and laid to any venymous sore, it draws the
venym from within outward. Also who so drynketh this herb.iii. days, it
heleth the yelow evil, he that is herye it helps from the lepour, the joyce
of this herb put in to a man's ears, it kylleth the worms therein, it
comfort the stomach and helps to defye, and it withdraws casting.

Crassula mayor.
CRassula mayor, is an herb called Orpyn or Ormale, this herb has somewhat
thycke leaves as it were Penny worte.

The virtue of this herb is if it be laid to a wound, he shall hele it
without any help, this herb grows in gardaynes.

Crassula minor.
CRassula minor is an herb called Stonor or Stonecrope, it has little leaves
like to Orpin, and it grows upon howses and walls and grows somewhat
hanging. The virtue of this herb is, he will make a man to live chaste, and
is dronke for the ague.

Cituca.
CItuca is an herb called Hembloke or herb Benet, it has leaves like to
Persely, and so he flowreth and sedeth as does Persely, but this herb
stynketh. The virtue is he keeps may dens pappes from great waxynge. Also if
the joyce of this herb be drunk he distroyeth the great appetite of lechery.
Also the joyce of this with the spume of silver and swynes greece distroyeth the
hot potagre, and swageth the swellyng, this herb is cold and dry.

Centuaria mayor.
CEntuaria mayor is an herb that me^ calls the more centory or earth gell,
this has leaves like to the less ce^tory, but they be more whyter, and has a
stalk and yelowe flowers, and flowreth not but in the topps. The virtue of
this herb is if it be sodden with good wine and given a man to drink, it
heals the syckenes of the liver. Also this herb sodden in wine and drunk,
dries up wild humors of a man's mylt, this has been often proved. Also the
joyce of this herb sodden in water is good to hele a wound of another place
that is smytten with a canker if he be anointed therewith, it is hot and dry,
and grows in dry ground.

Centuaria minor.
CEntuaria minor is an herb called the less Centory or cristus lader, this
has leaves like to the more Centory, but the leaves ben more grener, and he has
three branches coming out of the more, and the flower somewhat red. The virtue
is if the powder or the joyce be meddled with old wine and drink is good to
hele the styngynge of an adder, or any other venymous be. Also if you have
sore iyen, take the joyce and anoynte your iyen and thou shalt be hole. Also
if thou have any venym within the, take and pune this herb and tempre it with
Aysell and drink it and you shall cast up all the venym, and it grows in
dry places.

Carin.
CArin is a herb called caraway, it has leaves like somewhat to Fenell, and a
long stalk and round sede, more then the sede of Persely. The virtue of him
is that he dystroyeth wicked wyndes and the coughe, and heleth men that has
the frensy, and bytyng with venymous beestes. Also this herb meddled with
ayselheleth scabbes and tetters, and restores here there it falls away, this
herb is hot and dry, and grows in gardaynes.

Celodonia.
CElodonia is an herb called Celondyn or Deten wort, this has leaves that been
grene and yelowe flowers, and when he is broke he droppeth milk, and the leaves
be somewhat like to Columbyne. The virtue of this herb as Plinius says, if a
swalowes bird be hurt the da^m^ fetches of this herb and heals him
again. Also it heals the ache of ye tethe. Also it elenseth a man's heed.
Also it heals the canker and other sores in the month, this is hot and dry.

Cidamu^.
CIdamu^ is an herb called Hertnote, or Dylnote, or Flete, or Haleworte, this
has leaves like to Fenel, and white flowers and small stalks, and grows in
woods and meadows. The virtue is yt he will fetch away dead flesh. Also
this herb put on a fore, or on a place that lacked here, it heleth it and
restores here, this is hot and dry.

Caulis.
CAulis is an herb called Coleworte, this herb is common to you. The virtue
of him is that he will cleanse fresshe wou^des, and the canker, and hele sore
iyen that have almost lost their syghte. Also it makes woman's milk to wax,
and he comfort the stomach. Also ye joyce of this herb tempred with alym
and eysell swageth ye lepre. Also it is good for dro^kenes, and grows in
gardaynes.

Coriandrum.
COriandrum is an herb called Cetriander, he has leaves like to erthenote
somdele, and has a little white flower and round sede somewhat white, and he is
stronger in savor. The virtue is if the joyce be drunk with honnye, it sleeth
all the worms in a man's body, and also hardeth a man's womb. Also if the
sede of this herb be ete it drives away the Fevers that come the third day,
this herb is hot and dry.

Capillus veneris.
CApillus veneris is called maiden here or water wortes, this has leaves like
to Fern, but the leaves ben small, and grows upon stones and walls, and in
the myddle of the leaves is as it were a black here. The virtue of this herb
is that he will break the stone. Also if it be drunk with wine it dystroyeth
the venym, he is cold and dry.

Crocus.
CRocus is an herb called Saffron, this has little leaves as it were grass,
and blewe flowers. The virtue of him is that he will dystroy all manner of
abhomynacyon of ye stomach. Also he makes a man to sleep. Also ye flower is
good for many medicyns, and namely for cokes co color their potage and it is
hot and dry.

Centinodium.
CEntinodium is an herb called Centinodi or swyngrasse, this herb grows
welnye over all. The virtue of this herb is that he will break ye stone, this
herb is hot and dry, and may be gathered at all times.

Caprifolium.
CAprifoliu^ is an herb called woodbynde or withwynde, this grows in hedges
or in woods, and it will beclyp a tree in her growing, as does yuye, and has
white flowers. The virtue of this herb is that he will hele cankers, and
wounds, and blanders, and akynge of the teth, and sores in a man's toen. Also
it is good to hele swellynge yt is smyt with venym, this is hot and dry.

Canabaria.
CAnabaria is an herb called wild hemp, this has leaves like to hemp.

The virtue of this herb is that he is good for the Fever, and grows much
by water.

Costus.
COstus is an herb called Cost or less Detayne, this has leaves as Detayne,
but they be not so much, and the leaves be more whyter then the leaves of
Detayne. Also it is sote in so^mer. The virtue of this herb is that he heleth
the syckenes of ye breast and of the longes, and also he will break the postume.
Also he draws ye humors of man's iyen. Also he is good for the stomach, and
this herb is hot and dry.

Cepe.
CEpe is an herb called a Onyon, this is common ynowe. The virtue of this is
that he will greatly comfort the stomach. Also he nessheth ye womb. Also
this herb with ho^ny and eysell, and drunk is good to hell the bytyng of a
mad dog. Also this herb meddled with woman's milk heleth the akyng of eeren.
Also the joyce of this drunk with any lycour, is good for a man that has soft
suddenly his speech. Also the joyce put to a man's nosethyrlses breketh out
the rewme or any other wicked stoppynge, this herb is hot and dry.

Columbina.
COlumbina is an herb called Columbayne or Tockefote, or Coluerfote, or
Sawnardes, this herb has leaves somewhat like to Cesidony, but he droppeth no
milk. The virtue is yt he is good for a man that has ye quinsy, and should be
gathered in august.

Cominum.
COminum is an herb Called Co^myn, this has leaves like to Coryandre, and he
has many branches coming out of the stalk, and he has a strong sauoure.
The virtue is that he dystroyeth wicked wyndes and other euylles of the
stomach. Also he helps a man to make water, this herb is hot and dry.

Cardiaca.
CArdiaca is an herb called Cardyake, or Assper, this herb has leaves somewhat
like to blind nettell, and he prycketh somewhat upon the tongue, and he has
little coddes and therein his sede is. The virtue is that he is good for men
that has the falling evil. Also he is good for sauces.

Cisera.
CIsera is an herb called French peyse he has leaves like a more payse, and
also coddes, he has not so great leaves, nor so long coddes as has ye other
peyse, and he has spices of her white and red, and he grows in gardynes, and
her sede in schaps as it were a peyse.

Camelion.
CAmelion is an herb called wosuesthestell or a white the stell, this herb
has white leaves great and broad, and has a red flower and grows in ways.
The virtue of this herb is great, that if ye take this herb when the son is
in Caprycorne with the new moon, if ye bear it with the, or upon the there
shall no myschefe fall on the.

Consolida mayor.
COnsolida mayor is an herb called confery, this has leaves like to horshelme
but they be not so white, and grows in watery places, and has two spyces on
her, the one has a white flower, the other a red, and like they ben of one
virtue. The virtue is if a man be brosed within him or broke, take the rote of
this herb, and roast him well among ashes, and take him to the sick fasting
with ho^ny, and let him eat it and he shall be hole. Also this herb has
broken seues, and he is hot and moist, and bears black sede.

Consolida minor.
COnsolida minor is called Daysye or Browswort, and he has leaves like to the
less centory and a white flower. The virtue is that he is good to break
botches, if he be puned and laid thereto, this is a spyce of Confery, and he
grows welny over all.

Consolida media.
COnsolida media is called white Bothyn or white Goldes, this herb has leaves
somewhat long, and they ben intended a little without, and has a white flower
that is some what like to dayse, and it grows in meadows and lees.

The.iiii. letter begins with.D.
Dragancia.
DRaga^tia is an herb called Dragance or Elderwort or Cerpentyne, this herb
has.iii. leaves in each brau^che, and they be some what sharp as an nedder. The
virtue is and he be puned with wine he puts away all manner of venym. Also he
heals akynge of earen, and they be anointed therewith. Also if the powder of
this herb be blown in a man's nose, it cleanses ye nose from re^nyng. Also it
is good to distroy the gowte, and the canker, and the festerynge of wounds,
this herb grows in woods and hills, and he is hot and moist, and must be
gathered in the month of June and July.

Diptanum.
DIptanum is called Detayne or detandre, this herb has leaves like to Cost
but they be grener than ye leaves of Cost, and it has a little white flower.
The virtue is if a woman be with a deed body it will deliver her thereof, this
herb will draw out an thorn, or iron out of a man's foot, or other places,
and it is hot and dry.

Daucus asinius.
DAucus asinius is an herb called birdesnest or Tanke, this herb has leaves
like to Hemlocke, and has a white flower. The virtue is that he is good to
hele the dropsey and bytynge of venymous beestes. Also he opens the stoppynge
of the lever, and of the mylt. Also he vubyndeth a man's womb, and makes him
laxatyue, this herb grows in feldes, and bears his flower like to a
byrdesneste, and this herb is hot and dry.

Daucus creticus.
DAucus creticus is an herb called the less tanke, this has leaves like to
wild Popy, but the leaves ben more whyter, and he has a flower that is purpull
color, this grows in wete, and it is hot and dry.

Dens leonis.
DEns leonis is an herb called daundelyon or lions toth, this has leaves like
to houndestoth, and he has a yelow flower, and he has no branch but as each
flower spryngeth out of the more with a little brau^che, and it droppeth milk
when it is broke. The virtue is that the moore of it is good to hele the Fever
cotydyan, and it be drunk with wine, it grows all about.

Dragancia faminea.
DRagancia feminea is an herb called Dragaunce female, it has leaves like to
yuy, but they have white speckes, and it has a yelow stalk the length of two
cubytz, other while as it were a crooked staf, and like to a snake, and she
bears her sede as it were a cluster of grapes, and when the sede is ripe it
is yelowe, this herb grows in dark places. The virtue of this is that if
the sede thereof be puned with oil and put to a man's iyen, it heals the
akynge of iyen. Also the joyce of this herb with a little wolle put to the
nosethyrle, cleanses ye nose from all fylth. Also the rote of this herb puned
with white wine and ho^ny heleth all wounds, and the canker arysed in. Also he
yt froteth his hand well with the rote of this herb, he may take edders
without any parell. Also the joyce of this rote dystroyeth the darkness of the
iyen, if they be anointed therewith. Also if this herb be drunk with wine, he
sterith a man unto lechery.

The.v. letter begins with.E.
Elena campana.
ELena ca^pana is an herb called Enule ca^payne or horseldron, this herb has
leaves as it were Comfery, but they be more whyter then the leaves of Comfery,
and he has a long stalk and a yelow flower. The virtue is if a man have
waggynge teth and ete thereof fasting, it will fastyn his tethe. Also if a man
drink this herb it heals him from the stone, and helps him to make water.
Also if it be dronke, it delyuereth a woman of a dead child. Also it
hardyneth a man's womb if it be laxatyue, this herb heleth a man of the
coughe this herb is hot and moist, it grows in woods and feldes.

Endiua.
ENdiua is an herb called endyfe or horse thestyll, this herb has leaves like
sowthystel, this has pykes in the rygge and a yelowe flower. The virtue of
this herb is thet the joyce thereof meddled with hot water, and drunk heleth
the stoppynge of the mylt and of the liver. Also it is good to hele the yelowe
evil, and the fever tercyan, and the hot postume. Also this herb swageth ye
great hete of the liver, and of the stomach, and it is cold and moist.

Eruca.
ERuca is an herb called skyrwhyte, this has leaves like to bylre, but they be
not so long, and it has a great rote. The virtue is that the joyce of the
leaves wrong out, hold in a man's mouth heleth all the sorenes of the mouth.
Also it breketh the stone. Also the joyce of this herb sodde and drunk
dystroyeth black color. Also it stereth a man much to lechery, and he use
it. Also it helps a man to make water. Also the joyce of this herb cleanses
a man if he be anointed therewith. Also the joyce of this herb delyuereth men
and children from the cowghe, this herb is hot and dry.

Eufragia.
EVfragia is an herb called Eufrasse: this herb has little leaves like to her
color but they be not somoch as he, and he has a white flower. The virtue is
yt he is good to hele sore iyen, he grows i^ meadows and hills.

Ebulus.
EBulus is an herb called walworte, it has leaves somdele like Erderen and he
has a long stalk and grows in feldes.

The virtue is that he is good to dystroye the dropsy, and scabbes, or tetters.
Also this herb draws wicked humors out of a man this herb is hot and dry.

Edera.
EDera is an herb called yue, this is common it is called howsys, and towrys,
and has leaves like to an herb called bryan, and it bears fruit as it were
bays. The virtue thereof is if it be sod and laid on a botche it heals it
soon. Also if thy head ache take the joyce of this herb with oil of roses,
and seth them together in wine, and anoint thy head therewith, and thou shall be
hole. Also if thou will keep thy head from akynge in the son, take the leaves
of this herb, and pune them small, and then tempre them with cysell and the
oil of Roses, and then anoynte thy forheade therewith.

Edera terrestris.
EDera terrestris is an herb called orpyn, or heyhoue, this has leaves like to
Carmynt, but they be not so much, and has in the croppe a red flower. The
virtue is if it be put in potage among flesh, he will make the flesh
tender and nesshe.

Eborus.
EBorus is an herb called long wort, or Pelyder of spain, this is like to
Pedelion, but the leaves of this herb be not so much slytte without, and he
has a flower as it were a pasnepe. The virtue is that he will hele scabbes, the
morfewe, and tetters. Also he heleth the emerawdes, if it be laid to the place
there it bledeth. Also he purges the color of the fleume. Also he helps the
from the tothache if it be sod with eysell, and hold a quantyte in your mouth.
Also this herb purges well the stomach and the womb. Also the powder of
this herb meddled with a little growell shall slay worms. Also the joyce of
this herb meddled with milk shall slay fleese, this herb is hot and dry.

Elabrus.
ELabrus is an herb called Clouentonge, or Pedelyon, this herb is much like
to long worte, but not so flat as be the leaves of this herb, and he has
somdele a broad flower, more than a penny, he has a black rote and he is
horrible in sight. The virtue of this herb is that if the powder thereof be
meddled with growel or with meele it will slay rattes and if a be pysse blood,
give him this herb and he is hole.

Epatica.
EPatica is an herb called liuerwort, this herb grows in brymmes of waters,
and in wells, and it will join to stones, and he grows much in walls of
stone, and it has another stalk, not her flower but small to wnde leaves, and
the more the leaves be better to medycynes. The virtue is yt he will dystroy and
cleanse the hardenes of the liver. Also the leaves thereof medeled with swynes
greece will hele wounds. Also it is good to hele the Fever quartayne.

The.vi. letter begins with.F.
Famula.
FAmula is an herb called sperworte, or la^secle, this has leaves like to a
spear head, it has a stalk, and in the top coming out many small stalks, and
it has a white flower, and it grows in waters. The virtue thereof is that he
is good to hele the fevers, and also for to break botches and byles, and it is
hot and dry.

Fumus terre.
FUmus terre is an herb called fumeterry this herb has leaves that been
somewhat white under, and they ben small, and it has a flower of purpul color,
and this herb grows in stalks, but not fullonge. The virtue is that he
comfort the stomach. Also he makes a man to have appetyde to mete, it
helps a man to make water, and it opens the stoppynge of the liver, and
clereth a man's blood. Also if the joyce thereof be drunk it distroyeth
scabbes and ytchynge, and bladders that been gendred of wicked humors, and it
is hot and dry.

Fragra.
FRagra is an herb called strawbery, and this herb is common. The virtue
thereof is that he is good to dystroye a web in the lain. Also it is good to
hele wounds. Also the joyce medeled with ho^ny, and drunk heleth the akynge
of a man's mylte, this grows in clean and dark places.

Fabaria mayor.
FAbaria mayor is an herb called brokeleues, this herb has rownde leaves and
much like to myntes. The virtue thereof is, if he be puned with shepes talowe,
and made hot in manner of a plaster, and laid to any swellynge it will hele
it, this herb grows in small brokes, and most among belton.

Filex.
FIlex is an herb called Fern, this herb is common, and there be.iii. spyces
thereof, one is called Fern, and another is called polipode, another called
Osmonde, and that is the.ii. spyces, another is called verrew and that is
the.iii. spyce, polipode is good to make a man laxatyue, and he grows in
trees, Osmonde is good to hele broken bones, and it grows in dyches and
woods, the.iii. that me^ call ever verrew grows on walls, and is good to
hele the potagre, and he makes strong a man's senewes, and he grows in
woods, dyches, and feldes.

Filipendula.
FIlipendula is an herb that men calls Filipendull or dropworte, this is
like to yaron, and he grows next the ground, the leaves be more than the
leaves of yaron, it has a small stalk, and a flower somdele white, and in the
more small pelettes like yshape as it were small pelettes rownde. The virtue is
yt he will dystroy wicked wyndes about the liver and the mylte. Also he
helps to distroy the stone, it grows in holowe places, and dry, and it is
hot and dry.

Feniculum.
FEnicnlum is an herb that men calls Fenell, this herb is common enough.

The virtue is, the sede when it is dry, it distroyeth wind in the stomach.
Also it comforts a man's stomach. Also he opens the stoppynge of the
reins and of the bladder. Also ye joyce of this herb stilled in to a man's iye
does away the web. Also if it be drunk with wine, it dystroyeth all manner of
venym. Also the joyce dropped in to the eres sleeth worms, that been within.
Also if it be drunk with wine it heleth the dropsy. Also it heleth all manner
of swellynges. Also if he be drunk with wine or water, it makes a woman's
milk to wax. Also if he be drunk with wine, it keeps from castyng. Also if
he be meddled with oil it will hele ye swellynge of a man's yerde. Also if thou
will be steryed to lecherye, take and drink the sede thereof with good wine.

Faxmus.
FAxmus is an herb called hertwort or odobrame, this has leaves yshape as a
heart and has a flower as were bugle, and a short stalk. The virtue is if he
be broke and laid to a sore it heleth anon, this grows in feldes and
meadows.

Finiculus porcinus.
FIniculus porcinus is an herb called swynes fenel or worm sede, this herb
has small leaves like to yaron, and of a stalk coming many branches it
grows upon walls, and has small coddes and small red sede. The virtue of
this herb is, if a man ete the sede thereof, it distroyeth and sleyeth the
worms within the womb, and it is hot and dry.

Febrifuga.
FEbrifuga is called fetherfoy or vethut foye, this herb has many stalks
coming out of one stalk, and it has a white flower as it were Mayes. The
virtue is that he will comfort the stomach. Also it swageth the fever
cotydyan. Also it is good to hele the crampe that comes of a cold stomach.
Also if this herb be puned and laid to a sore that is bytten with a venymous
worm or be it shall be hole. Also this herb tempered with eysell does
away the morfew. Also if this be puned and laid to a wound, in the which is
broken bones, it shall hele the bones. Also the rote of this herb is good to
staunche the blodymenson, this is hot and dry.

Filago.
FIlago is an herb called feldewort, this herb has leaves a little enlong,
and it is like to horehound, it is a little herb and it grows in wete.

Fla^mula minor.
FLa^mula minor is an herb called the less sperwort, it has leaves as it were
grass, but it is sharp as it were a spear. The virtue of this herb is if it
be puned and laid to a hand that is byte, it shallbe hole anon.

The.vii. letter begins with.G.
Granum.
GRanum is an herb called Gromell, or lytelwale, this has leaves that been
part enlonge, and has a little white sede shape as a stone that men call
mariery perle. The virtue of this herb is that he is good to hele the stone,
and the evil of the bledder, this herb makes a man to make water, and this is
hot and dry.

Genescula.
GEnescula is an herb called Genestre, or brom, this has leaves like to
Spygurnell, and they ben a little longer, and it has a yelowe flower. The
virtue is yt he is good to knyt bones and synewes together.

Genciana.
GEnciana is an herb called bladmoyne or field wort. The virtue of this herb
is that he cleanses the stoppynge of the stomach, the liver and the mylte, and
it be drunk with ho^ny and water. Also it heals the bytynge of venymous
beestes. Alfs;o it delyuereth a woman of a dead child, and this herb is hot
and dry.

Galanga.
GAlanga is an herb that men call Galyngale. The virtue of this herb is that
he comfort the stomach, and it makes a man to defye his meat. Also it
unbinds and lets out wicked wyndes out of a man's body. Also it makes a
man's mouth sweet. Also it heals the reins. Also it makes a man to have
appetyte to a woman, and it is hot and dry.

Granum solis.
GRanum solis is an herb called wild Gromell, this has leaves somdele like to
Gromell, and his sede is like somdele to that other gromell sede. Also he has
somdele such a flower, nevertheless they dyffereth in the stalk, for the
stalk of this herb is sharp and it grows much in wete.

Gladiolus.
GLadiolus is an herb called Gladyoll, or Gladur, this herb has leaves like
to an herb called Getus, but it is not so grene, it has a yelow flower and a
long stalk, and it grows in water.

Graciadei.
GRaciadei is an herb called graciadei, this has leaves somdele like to dens
delion, but the leaves of this be somewhat sharp, and it has yelowe flowers, and
it grows in dry land.

Graciadei mayor.
GRaciadei mayor is an herb called graciadei the more, this has leaves like to
cokyll, and it has a white flower, it grows in dry ground, and when that
it is broke it droppeth milk.

The.viii. letter begins with.H.
Hastula regia.
HAstula regia is an herb called wodrofe, it has leaves like to croyes wort,
and this herb is sote in savor, and a woman smell much thereto it makes her
head to ache. The virtue thereof is if the more of it be puned with wine it
shall hele sores of the mouth. Also take the sede of this herb and pune it
and tempre it with the sowrest eysel that ye can find and drink it, and it
shall staunche the flyxe and hard the womb.

Herba crucita.
HErba crucita is an herb called Croys worte or Exean, this has little leaves
and a small stalk, and also a white flower. The virtue of this herb is that
he will hele well wounds.

Herba christofori.
HErba christofori masculus is an herb called herb christofer male, this
herb has leaves much like to less crowesape, but they ben more white and not
fully so long, and it grows in dry ground, and also in watery places, and
it has a yelowe flower. The virtue of this herb is that he is good to hele
the pestylence.

Herba walteri.
HErba walteri is an herb called herb water, this has leaves like to the
leaves of Persely, and the leaves be thycke, fat, and tender. The virtue of this
herb is that he will cleanse wounds and hele them.

Herba Roberti.
HErba Roberti is an herb called herb Robert, this has leaves like to herb
Genet, it has a small flower that is somdelred, it grows in feldes and in
hedges, and in walls. The virtue of this herb is that he will hele wounds,
and also the powder will slay the Canker.

Herba martis.
HErba martis is an herb called mortagon, this herb has leaves like to a
letter. M. when he is a capytall letter, and in some brau^che ht has.ix.
leaves, and some more, and some fewer, and brings forth her leaves and sede
together, this herb has many wonderful virtues.

Herba Iohannis.
HErba Ioha^nis is an herb called saint Iohanes worte, it has leaves like to
the less Centory, it has a yelow flower and a long stalk, and many stalks
coming of one. The virtue is if he be in a house, he suffers no wicked spryte
dwell therein.

Herba Petri.
HErba Petri is an herb called cowslop this herb has leaves like to herb
xp^o for femall, but they be more whyter, and it grows in meadows.

The.ix. letter begins with.I.
Iusquiamus.
IVsquianus is an herb called Henbane or He^nebel, this herb has leaves
somewhat white under, and the leaves be flat a little without as it were
sowthistel, it has a flower somewhat white, and it has a great stalk, and
many branches coming out of one more, and it grows in hye ways. The
virtue of this herb is that the oil made thereof is good to dystroye all manner
of gowtes, and namely that that comes of melancolye. Also the sede of this
herb laid on a slayte stone and hete with the fire, and let it smoke in the
man's mouth, it sleeth worms of the teth. Also he swageth the cough and hot
postume and hot potegre. Also the more is good for the tothache, and the joyce
of this is good for all manner of wounds, and the sede thereof should be
gathered in August. Also if thou cast the sede thereof in the fire, all the
he^nes that been over the fire shall fall in to the fire, and it is cold and
dry.

Isopus.
ISopus is an herb called Isope, it has leaves like to Sauery, but they be not
so broad, and he flowreth as does sauery. The virtue thereof is that the joyce
thereof meddled with eysell, and put in a sore mouth heleth it. Also it sleeth
worms in the womb and makes the womb nesshe. Also if it be drunk grene or
else the powder, it makes a man well colowred, it is hot and dry.

Ireose.
IReose is an herb called Save, and his leaves be like to flowerdelyce, and it
has a white flower, and grows in water.

The virtue thereof is that he will hele the akynge of the senewes. Also it
distroyeth the coughe. Also if it be drunk with wine it dystroyeth the wicked
humors of the breest. Also it helps the bytyng of venymous beestes or
worms. Also it distroyeth the crampe Also it delyuereth a woman of a dead
child, this herb is hot and dry.

Iris.
IRis is an herb called flowerdelyse and it is like to Save almost in all
manner fetures, but this herb has a flower almost of purpull color, this
grows in waters and gardaynes, and he has the same virtues that Save has.

Iua.
IUa is an herb called Iue, this herb has a rote even down to the ground
growing, and it has small leaves growyng even by the ground. The virtue is if
a man have a sore swellyng about his eres, take this her be cumbonfitatibus of
her in wine and oil and co^myn, and than make a plaster thereof, and lay to
the ears and it shall hele them. Also take the knobbes of the rote and dry
them and cleanse them, and they have virtue to maste the laxatyue, and it is
hot and dry.

Iasia alba.
IAsia alba is an herb called wild Tan sey or gose grass, but they be more
whyter, and it has a yesowe flower, and it grows down by the grownde, as
does the strawberyes. The virtue of this herb is good for the clensyng of a
man's lymmes, it grows in meadows, sees, wodes, and ways.

Iasia nigra.
IAsia nigra is an herb yt men call matfeson, or bulwede, or yrenhard, or
knoppe wede, this has leaves like to scabyous, and it has a purpull color.

Ippia mayor.
IPpia mayor is an herb called pympernel, or sefehele, or wayworte, or more
croppe, this has leaves like to chyckewede, but the seues of this ben less,
and it has a flower of purpull color, and it grows in wete. The virtue of
this herb is that he is good to hele wou^des, and so dystroy venym, and is
good for the postume, and to hele the sore iyen.

Ipia minor.
IPia minor is an herb that men call cheke wede, this herb has leaves like to
pymper nell, and it has a white flower, and it grows in gardaynes and in
feldes. The virtue of this herb is, sethe it in ro^nynge water and wasshe your
scabey hands therein often times, and they shall be hole.

The.x. letter begins with.L.
Lanisticum.
LAnisticum is an herb called louage, this herb has leaves like to Louage,
but they be somdele more, and it has a long stalk, and it is strong in
savor. The virtue is in the sede of her. Also ye morys thereof dronke with
wine, is good for the stomach, and for good dygestyng, this is hot and dry.

Lingua ceruina.
LIngua ceruina is an herb called hertes tongue, this has leaves like to the
tongue of a heart, and it grows in walls and dry places, and has no sede,
nor flower, nor stalk.

The virtue of this herb is that he will type ye postume and break it, if it be
sode with oil of Roses. Also if it be drunk with old wine, it hardyneth the
womb. Also it heals a man of the coughe, this is hot and dry.

Lilium.
LIlium is an herb that men call Lylye. The virtue of this herb is that if
thou pune it with talowe, and sethe it with oil, and lay it to the place
there as the cold postume is, it shall ripe him and break him. Also take the
rotes of lylye, and the rotes of the red docke, and the more of louage, and put
all these in wine and oil, the space of.ii. days and afterward let it seth
and cleanse it, and do thereto wax and oil, and make anoyntme^t and that is
good to hele the sores and hardenes of a man's mylte. Also take the knobbes of
the rotes of the Lylye and roast them among the coals, and take oil Olyue and
anoynte there as the sore is.

Ligustrum.
LIgustrum is an herb called prymerose. The virtue of this herb is good for
to make potage. Also the joyce put in a man's nose will dystroy the Megrym.
Also the water that the rote is soden in is good to unstop the conduytes of
vryne.

Lingua bouis.
LIngua bouis is an herb called Langde^ befe. The virtue of this herb is good
to do away the red color of a man. Also if it be dronken it does away the
cardyacle and other wicked humors in a man's lunges. Also the joyce of this
herb drunk with hot water, makes a man to have a good mind and good wit,
this must be gathered in June or in July, and this is hot and dry.

Lingua serpentis mayor.
LIngua serpe^ris mayor is an herb called Adder tongue, this herb has leaves
like to Affodyll, but they be more grene, and also more sharp in the end, this
must be gathered in the month of Apryll.

Lingua serpentis minor.
LIngua serpe^tis minor is an herb called the less Adder tongue, this herb
has leaves somewhat like to Pygyll, and it has a yelowe flower, and out of the
stalk comes many branches, and it grows in woods.

The virtue of this herb is good to lay to a cut, if it be bruised and laid
thereto.

Lingua canis.
LIngua canis is an herb called hounds tongue. The virtue of this herb is
good to dystroy the coughe and the postume, and it will ripe a botche. Also
this herb eaten is good for shaking of the heed, and makes the throat and
the breath smothe and souple. Also for the flux of the womb if thy fete be
washed in the water that it is soden in.

Lingua hircina.
LIngua hircina is an herb called Bucke shorn, or swyneskerce, this herb
has leaves flatred as it were an hertes horn, and it grows crepynge by the
grownde, and it has a little white flower, it grows in watery places. The
virtue is that is cleanses ye stomach and refreyneth the great hete, and
heals the brennynge of fire, if that it be soden and laid thereto.

Lupinus.
LUpinus is an herb called Lupyne, this herb has leaves like to five leued
gras, the Lupyne has.vi. leaves, and it has a white flower, and a white sede
that is somewhat brother, and it bears coddes somewhat like to benecoddes. The
virtue of this herb is, if a man have worms in his womb, take the sede and
make meele thereof, and the joyce of worm wode and ho^ny, and make a cake thereof
and ete it, and it unbinds the stoppynge of the liver and of the mylte. Also
it is good to dystroy the dropsy. Also take the same meele and the joyce of
arsmert, and make thereof paste and lay it to thy eres, and it shall kyl the
worms within them or if thou make a cake thereof and hete it, it will do the
same. Also if thou will take the joyce of Lekes, and tempre it with the meele,
and put it in thy eres, it shall cleanse them from all wicked humors and
stynkyng. Also take the same meele and tempre it with oil, and it will break
and ripe all manner of postumes. And this herb is hot and dry.

Labrum veneris.
LAbrum veneris is an herb that men calls Sowthystell. The virtue of this
herb is this, if a man have a hot fever, take the joyce thereof and tempre it
with hot water, and let him drink it and he shall be hole. Also if a man have
venym within him, take this herb and dry it and make powder thereof, and do
the powder in good wine, and let him drink it, and it will cast up all the
venym, this herb is hot and dry.

Lauendula.
LAuendula is an herb called lauander, if this be soden in water, and given to
a man that has the palsye, it will hele him, and this herb is hot and dry.

Lactuca.
LActuca is a herb that is called Lettyse or slope worte. The virtue of this
herb is this, if it be eten raw or soden it engenders good blood. Also this
herb soden with a little eysel and Saffron and than dronken, it helps a man
that is stopped in the liver and in the mylt. Also if a man may not sleep, take
the sede of this herb and stamp it to powder, and tempre it with woman's milk
and make a plaster thereof on lynt, and lay it to the temples of thy head, and
thou shall sleep well, or else drink the powder thereof with milk. Also take
the sede and tempre it with oil of roses, and make a plaster and lay it to
thy stomach, and it is good to distroy the hot postume. Also drink the joyce
of this herb, or powder the sede for it is good to hele ye flyx, but who that
uses this herb ouermoche, it will dystroy their sight, this herb is cold
and somewhat moist.

Lactuca siluatica.
LActuca siluatica is an herb called wild Lettyse, this herb has leaves like
to the thistel, and they be sharp and kene, and it has a flower of purpull
color, and it grows in feldes and in whete, this herb is hot and dry. The
virtue of this herb is that it takes away the dymnes of the iyes, meddle ye
joyce of this herb with wine or ho^ny, and the gall of an Austour, or other
foul of pray, and put it all meddled in a glass, and put it in thy iyes.iii.
times in a day or more, and in short space thy iyes shallbe clear, for it is a
sovereign medicyne. And because this herb is good for to clear the sight, some
say that the Egle cateth this herb when that he will flee hye.

Lactuca leporica.
LActuca leporica is an herb called Hate thystel, this herb has leaves like
unto Sowthystel, but the leaves be not so endented, it droppeth milk. The
virtue of this herb is thus if a hare cate of this herb in so^mer when he is
mad, he shallbe hole.

Also take this herb and lay it to a man's side when he slepeth, or else
that he know not thereof, and it will hele him of the fevers.

Lollium.
LOllium is an herb that men call cokle. The virtue of this herb is thus, if
it be dronken with Radysshe, and a little salt, it is good to hele the Canker,
or other wou^des in peril. Also it is good to comfort the stomach and ye
liver. Also it will unbind the worms in a man's stomach. Also it helps a
man to make water, and it is good for sore iyes. Also subfumygacyon thereof will
make a woman to bear her child without any peril or harm. Also it will
assuage the great pains of akynge of ye lypur, it is hot and dry.

Laparium rubeum.
LAparium rubeum is an herb called red docke, if that a man take the joyce
thereof and hold it in his mouth, it will assuage the tothache. Also if a man
have the kings evil take this herb and seth it in wine, and strain it and
give it him to drink, and he shallbe hole if he use it often. Also if yt a man
rub him with the joyce, it does away evil ytchynges. Also this herb is good
to deliver wyndes that be stopped in a man's stomach by balkyng. Also this
herb is good to make scabbes and botches ripe. Also it is good to make a man
to have a hard womb, and this herb is hot and dry.

Linum.
LInum is an herb that men call flex, and it is good if a man take the sede
thereof, and sethe it in water, it makes a man laxatyue, and it is good to make
a plaster thereof for akynge sores. Also there is another spyce thereof that is
called Custula, and it is named in english Dodure, and it grows among
flex. The virtue of this herb is that he is good to purge a man of the color.
Also if a great quantyte thereof be taken, and soden in Myrre and oil together,
and a plaster made thereof, it is good for ye raynes and for the breest, and
for other akynge lymbes.

Lauriola.
LAuriola is a herb called laurel. The virtue of this herb is that it will
make a man laxatyue, and it is good to purge a man of flewme and of color, it
is good for a man that may not cate, for if the joyce thereof be put in his
eres, or if the said herb be stamped, and a suppository be made thereof and
said on cotton, it will hele it. Also for them that here not well, put the
joyce in to his eres, and if there be any rotten humors it will dry them, and
it is hot and dry.

Licorisa.
LIcorisa is an herb that men call lycoryse the rote of this herb is sweet,
and it moysteth the kyndly hete of a man, and it is good for the coughe. Also
if it be soden in water, it will dystroy a man's thirst. Also it makes a
man's breast, his throat, and his lunges moist, and in good tempre. Also the
water that lycoryse is soden in is good against all syckenes of ye breest, and
for y^ a postume of the rybbes called pleuresy, it is cold and moist.

The.xi. letter begins with.M.
Millefolio minor.
MIllefolio minor is an herb that is called the less Mylfoyle, there is no
dyfference of kind nor virtue between mylfoyle the less, and Mylfoyle the
more, save the more grows in gardaynes, and the less in wild places, they
be both of one strength.

The virtue of this herb shallbe declared in Mylfoyle the more following by
lettre.

Mercurialis.
MErcurialis is an herb yt men call Mercurye. The virtue of this herb is that
he is good if a man have akynge in his womb, give him to drink ye joyce and
he shallbe hole, it will cleanse the stomach, and the sede will do the same.
Also the joyce tempred with white wine is good to hele sore iyes, and if a
worm or other vermyn have bytten a man, take the joyce and warm it, and
wasshe it. Also if there be any worms crope^ in to a man's eres, take the joyce
and warm it and put it in to his ears, and he shallbe hole, this is hot and
dry.

Menta.
MEnta is an herb that men call mynte. The virtue of this herb is that if it
be often eaten, it will slay the worms in a man's womb. Also if a man have
botches or other rennynges or swellynges in his head, take this herb and
stamp it, and lay it to the sore, and it will hele it. Also if a man's toth or
the flesh of ye toth ache or stynke: take this herb and seth it in white wine
and in eysel, and take that lycour and wasshe his mouth therewith, than take
the powder of the herb and rub well his teth therewith, and he shall have a
sweet smelling mouth. Also take thou this herb and eysell and make sauce,
and it will make the to have a talent to thy mete. Also when there shall be given
any medicyne to distroy venym, it wylbe good to be given with the joyce of this
herb, for it has many virtues, and namely for venym, there be many spyces
thereof, and it is hot and dry.

Menta romana.
MEnta romana is an herb that me^ call white mynte. The virtue of this herb
is that the joyce thereof will sle worms in a man's womb. Also the joyce will
sle worms in the nose thyrsses of a man. Also the powder thereof cast in a
man's mete, shall make him well to defye his meat. Also the joyce drunk sleeth
the worms of ye womb, if it be dropped in ye eres, it sleeth ye worms.

Malua.
MAlua is an herb that me^ call malowe. The virtue of this herb is good if the
leaves be stamped and laid to a man's stomach, it will break a hot postume in
the begyn^ynge, or else meddle this herb with fresshe swynes greece, and lay it
on a hot tyle, and lay it all hot to the postume, and it shall ripe it, and
break it. Also it is good to distroy ye hardness of a man's liver and mylte. Also
it will make a man laxatyue, and it is good for playsters, it is cold and
moist.

Morell or nyghtshadowe.
MOrell is an herb that men call night shadow, this herb is cold and dry
in the.ii. degree, the leaves, the branches, and the fruytes thereof be right
good and best when they be grene. The virtue is they be good for stoppynge of
the splen and the liver, and best for the Iaundesse to drink the joyce of it
with a little Ruberbe. Also it is good for a postume in the stomach, in the
bowels, or in the liver, seth the joyce thereof with barley water and drink it.

Mastyke.
MAstyke is an herb that me^ call gu^me, and it is hot and dry in the.ii.
degree, and it is a gu^me of a tree growing in a part of the country of Greece,
in the latter end of Vcre the men of that country slytte the trees, and than
make the grownde clean all abouts and lay clothes round about the trees, or
some other co^nynge to keep ye gu^me from the ground in choosing of it, to
know which is best, to take the best is white and clear, the white color is
next ye best, and yt is meddled with carth and somewhat dark, the best mastyke
has virtue of constraynynge, comfortynge, clensyng, and losing of humors
discendyng from the head above to the iyes and to the teth, and for the disease
of the tempses made of an ascendynge wind from the stomach to the heed. Take
powder of mastyke with white sweet wine, and the white of an egg, and meddle
them well together, and ye will ye may put in frankensence, and plaster it to
the temples. Also sethe Mastyke in water and drink it, and it will comfort well
the stomach and make good degestyon, and it comfort and relaxeth the
stomach, and put to it fenes sede, and it puts out wind out of the
stomach. Also a plaster made of Mastyke and bole armonyake, and the white of
an egg and vynegre, and lay it on the forke of ye stomach or breast, it will
constrayne well the coloryke vanyte. Also seth mastyke in rain water and drink
it warm, and this medycyne is very good for ye flux of the womb that comes
of a sharp lax that was taken before to stop him. Also boil mastyke in rain
water, or Rose water, with two or three cloves, and drink it warm, and that
comfort the vomyte, and ye flux of the womb that comes of sharpnes and
vyolence of the medycyne. Also mastyke must have but little boylynge for
hurtynge of his virtue, and it should be given warm, for it constrayneth the
more when that it is given warm, than when it is over much hot.

Magerum.
MAgerum is an herb that is hot and dry in the second degree, the flowers and
leaves be used in medycynes, and it should be gathered in so^mer when it
flowreth, and dry it in the shadow, and it may be kept a year. The virtue of
this herb is good in comfortynge, losing, consumynge, and of clensynge, if
the powder of it be dronken in wine, or else boil the powder of it in wine, and
it will hete well a stomach. Also it comfort the degestyon. Also take the
leaves and flowers of magerum, and pune them a little, and make them hot in a
pa^ne, and lay it to the greuau^ce, and it takes away the disease in the
stomach yt comes of wind. Also for the re^^me in the head, take this herb
and bind it warm about thy head. Also it dries the mother and consumes
the superfluyte of it.

Millefolium mayor.
MIllefolium mayor or yarow is an herb yt king Achylles did find, and
therewith heled his men yt were wounded with iron. The virtue of this herb is
good for wounds, stamp this herb with swynes greece, and plaster it to the
wound, and it shall hele it, and the same is good for an ache in the breast or
side, it is good for him that may not pysse, take the joyce of this herb and
vinegre and drink it, and merueylously it helps a wound that has taken
cold, stamp this herb in butter, and lay it to the wound, and it will hele
it well. Also to degest ye stomach or that lies therein, take the joyce of it,
and meddle it with water and ho^nye, and drink it warm. Also it is good for
dyseases in the body, take the powder and meddle it with wine or with good ale,
and drink it and it helps much. Also it is good for the heart brennynge.
Also for ye heedache stamp this herb, and plaster it to ye head. Also for
bytynge of a wood dog, stamp this herb with the graynes of wete, and it
heals it. Also for him that may not hold his meat, take and stamp this
herb with wine, and drink it warm.

Motherworte.
MOtherworte or mogwort, this herb is called in latin Artemesia, and it is
hot and dry in the third degree, this herb helps a woman to conceive a
child, cleanses the mother, and makes a woman to have her flowers, and it
dystroyeth the emerawdes on this manner. First it must be gathered, than take
the powder of motherwort, and of Horehounde together, and straw it on the
pappes. Also if a child be deed in the mothers womb, take motherwort, and
stamp it small, and make a plaster thereof and lay it to her womb all cold,
and with the grace of God she shall have delyuetaunce without parell, it is
good for the stone and the gravel in the raynes of a man or of a woman, if a
man bear this herb upon him, there shall no venymous be grieve him. It is
good for the yelowe Iaundes and it be dronken with wine, for it conforteth the
stomach, and makes a man or woman to have a good color. Against ache of ye
bowels, powdre of mugwort dronken with ho^ny eases greatly, and is good
against many other syckenesses.

Maces.
MAces is a spyce that is called Mace, this spyce is hot and dry in the
second degree, maces is the tynde or husk that grows about the Nutmege, as
ye rynde grows about the hasell nutte, it may be kept.x, year in his
virtue, it is comfortyng, dyssosuyng, and consumyng, the knowledge of fine
maces is thus, it should be in color like to fine gold, or else like to
gold that silver is gift with, the which has a sharp ^alage with a
bytternes, and it soketh like to earth, and it is to be refused, for it has no
sharp savor, for a cold stomach that may not defye nor degeste well, take
maces and boil them in wine and drink it. Also a good plaster the which is
best for a feeble stomach, and make powdre of mastyke and of maces, and meddle
them with oil of Roses and wexe, and make a plaster thereof and say it on the
stomach of the sick parson. Also to cleanse the brain of superfluous
humors, take a quantyte of maces, and chewe them well in thy mouth, and
hold them there a while, and that shall lose the feumosyte of humors that
rise up to the brain, and purge the superfluite of it. Also for feblenesse of
the stomach and the liver of a cold cause, and for the colyke, and for the
dyseases of the spyrytuall members, or flewme, boil maces in the joyce of
fenell, and in the end of the boyfynge put in a little wine, than strain it
and drink it, for it is the best remedy for the foresaid dyseases. Also for
the ache of the heart, use powdre of maces in thy meats and drynkes.

Menta.
MEnta is an herb yt is called red mynt, it is hot and dry in the second
degree, and there be two other myntes, but I mean house myntes, the which
properly is said gardayne myntes, for that most commonly is in medycynes both
grene and dry, for great holsu^nes it should be dried in a shadow place, and
so it will be kept a year in great virtue, to dyssolue or lose, to consume, of
his proper qualyte, and to comfort of his sweet sauoure. The virtue is this,
for the stynkyng of the mouth and fylthe of the gu^mes and of the teth, wasshe
thy mouth and gu^mes with vynegre that myntes be sodden in, and after rub him
with ye powder of myntes, or with dry myntes to provoke the appetyte when a
impedyme^t of ye stomach comes of cold humors being in the mouth of the
stomach, make a salve of myntes and vynegre with a little synamum and peper,
and use it well against vo mytes that comes of feebleness of ye stomach or of
cold causes, sethe myntes in sauge water and vynegre, and deep it in and lay
it on the mouth of the stomach with the myntes that be soden therein. Also
give to the pacient to eat of the same myntes for the sincopyne, and
feblenesse in fevers, and without fevers, or of medycyne, or of what cause it
be, stamp myntes with vynegre, and a little wine if the pacyent be without
fever, and if he be with fever, stamp myntes with vynegre alone, than make a
toste of sour bread, and toste it well till it be almost brent, then put it in
that licour, and let it lie therein till it be well soked, than put it in to his
nose and rub his lyppes, and gu^mes, tethe, and temples therewith, and bind it
to the poulse veins of his arms, and let the pacyent eat the moystnes that
is left and swalowe it in. For to cleanse the mother, take the tender croppes of
myntes, and sethe them in water or wine, and plaster it to the share, and to
the raynes. Against the congylynge in a woman's breast, take the small stalks
of myntes and seth them in wine and oil, and plaster it about the teates.
Also be it known that when any medycyne should be given against venym, it
should be given with the joyce of myntes, for myntes have a manner of strength
of drawing out venym, or else it should be given with wine that myntes have be
soden in. For stoppynge of the splen and the liver, and of the ways of the
vryne of a cold humor and a hot without fever, take the joyce of myntes
alone, or myntes so den in wine, or the joyce of myntes meddled with ho^ny, and
give it to the pacyent. To slay worms in the belly, take the joyce of myntes
and drink it, and thou shalt be hole. Also the joyce of myntes sleeth worms
in the ears. For a tetter take the joyce of myntes, and put thereto brymstone
and vynegre, and meddle them well together, and anoint the tetter therewith and
thou shalt be hole. For a wound in the head, stamp myntes and lay on the
wound. etc. For pain in the side, take myntes and seth them in old wine or
ale, and with it stamp. xviii. graynes of peper, and drink it in the night,
and it will ease the of thy pain.

The.xii. letter begins with.N.
Nux muscata.
NVx muscata is a herb the which is called a nutmeg, it is hot and dry in
the second degree, the best grows in ynde, and in the time of his rypynge it
is gathered, and seven year it may be kept, they that be plain and heavy after
their kind, be best to be chosen. And when they be broken they fall not to
powder, but they have a sweet and sharp savor, if they lack any of these
aforesaid, they be not good for medycyne. The virtue is of comfortynge by his
sweet sauoure. For coldness and feebleness of degestion of the stomach, take in
the morning half a nutmeg or a hole nutmeg, and eat it. Also for a cold
stomach that is feeble of degestion, and for the liver, give him wine that
nutmeges is boiled in. Also for ye same boil nutmeges and mastyke in wine and
drink it, this is good for the dyseases in the stomach, and in the bowels to
break wind. Also in the recouerynge of a syckenes to comfort the spyrytuall
members, boil nutmeges and mastyke in wine, and drink it. Also take a nutmeg
and smell to it, and it will comfort the spyrytuall members.

Napo.
NApo this is named Nauew, it desires ground that is fatty, and sandy, it
grows best in such ground, the properte of the Nauewe is, he changes and
tourneth in to rape, and after that it tourneth in to nauew, the best does
grow in ground well dunged and turned. Also it proves well in places that
stubble of corn has been in ye same year, if they grow to thycke, pluck some
up here and there, so that the other may prove the better, and those that ye
pluck up, set them in void places. They should be sown in ye end of July,
and in August, the best sauoured Nauewes be they that be long and strayghte,
and not over great, nor branches in the rotes, but a strayghte rote. Also of
Nauewes may be made a passing good mete with a little salt and vynegre, honny
and mustarde, and with sweet spyces, and it may be made without spices,
Nauewes be hot in the second degree, and they norysshe much, but they be
hard of degestyon, they make the flesh soft and wyndy, but less wind the^
rapes. Therefore when ye seth them in water, cast that water away, and sethe
them in another water, and so his hard substance is tempred by that, and so
menely between good and evil they gendre norysshyng, for they that be thus
well soden be not hard of degestio^, they make one wyndy, and they make
stoppynge of veins and of poores, but yet they be profitable if they be soden
twyse, and both the waters to be cast away, and they to be soden in the third
water with fat flesh.

The.xiii. letter begins with.O.
Olibanum.
OLibanum is called Frankensence, this is hot and dry in the third degree, it
is a gu^me of a tree in ynde, the clenest is the best. Also there be trees of
that kind growyng in Damask, but not so clear nor good for it is darker of
color, therefore it is to be refused in medycyne. The virtue is of comfortynge
by his sweet savor. Also of closing and constraynynge, for the tothache that
comes of superfluyte of humors of ye heed, and specially by the veins, make
a plaster of the powder of Frankensence with wine, and the white of an egg,
and meddle them to gyther, and plaster* them about the temples. Also to stop
the ways of the veins above, take Frankensence, and chewe it well in thy
mouth, and that shall stop and let the flux of humors coming down to the
nosthyrles, take pylles of Frankensence, and swalowe them down in ye morning,
than boil frankensence in wine, and at even drink that when thou go to
bed. Also these pylles be good to help the degestyon of the stomach, and good
against sore balkynges. Also to the comfortynge and clensynge of the matryce,
and helping of concepcyon in the receyuynge the fume of Frankensence byndeth.
Also boil powder of it in wine, and when it is metely warm dyp a cloth in it,
and lay it so warm to the share of the pacyent, and greatly it comfort the
matryce.

The.xiiii. lettre begins with.P.
Plumeus.
PLu^mes be cold and moist some be white, and some be black, and some be red.
They that be black and somewhat hard be the best, they be called Damsons, and
wlan they be ripe gather them, and slyt them, and spring vynegre upon them,
and so they may be kept in a vessel of wood a year, and first when they be
cut they must be laid in the son.xv. days to dry. The virtue of these
Damsons have coldness and clensyng of the inward parts, wherefore they be good
in fevers that be sharp, and for costyfnes of belly* that comes of drynes, or
of coloryke humors dryynge, if it be new give it him to eat, if it be dry
boil it in water, and give it the pacyent to drink thereof, this is good for
the fever tercian, for stoppyng of the liver, for the Iau^des and sharp fevers,
it softeth the belly, it is good for defaute of appetyte, and also for many
other dyseases.

Piper.
PIper this is called Peper, it is hot and dry in the fourth degree. There be
three manner of Pepers, black, white, and long Peper. Diascorides and
Constantyne say, that they be fruytes of trees growyng in ynde, and some say
that Peper is made black with brennyng in the fire, for when it is gathered
there be great multitude of serpents about it, and therefore they put it in
the fire to brenne the serpents that be a boute it, the Sarasyns dry it in an
oven, because it shall not increase in an other land, but of all the Pepers
the black is best, and the most wholesome. The virtue is, take Peper and put it
in to thy nose thyrlles, and it will make the to nese, and seth Peper and
fygges in wine, and drink it, and it will cleanse the spyrytuall members of
toughe humors, and it is good for the pose that is taken of cold. Also for
the same cate powder of Peper with Fygges. Also powder of Peper put in a man's
meat comfort the degestion of ye stomach. Also put long Peper in a roasted
apple, and ete it, and it shall comfort the degestyo^. Also powdre of Peper
will frete away deed flesh or proud flesh, and long Peper comfort more
the^ black. Also black Peper has virtue of losyng, comfortynge, and of
drawing, it cleanses the spyrytual members of cold flewme, and vycyous
humors, and best when the powder of it is eaten with fygges, for he has great
strength of hetyng and comfortyng the stomach, provoking appetyte, but to
sanguyne and coloryke persons it is not good to use Peper, for it dries and
bre^neth blood, and it engenders lepre, and other evil syckenes. Pluto says,
that Peper is foul to s^ insyght without black, and within white, a sharp
sauoure and a sweet odor, little in quantyte, and much in virtue.

Pympernell.
PYmpernell is an herb that grows in sandy places at the foot of the hills.

The virtue is he is good for ye fystula and canker, and he be puned and laid
thereon. Also it is good for dymnes of iyen, if that they be washed with the
water that it is sodden in. Also the joyce of this herb dronken will put away
all venym from the body. Also this herb is good to hele wounds.

Pulegium.
PUlegium is a herb called Pulyol royal it is hot and dry in the third
degree, in the time of flowerynge it should be gathered, and it may be kept in
his virtue a year, when it shall be used in medycynes, take the leaves with the
flowers and strype them fro the stalks. The virtue is of losing and
consumynge. For a cold humor in the heed, take powder of it and hete it well
in a skyllet, and all hot bind it to the greuaunce without any lycoure. Also
for a great cold taken in the heed, and for a toughe humor or a watery
humor, make a gargarysme, seth Pulyol royal, and dry fygges in tarte vynegre,
and take a good sponful thereof as hot as ye may sustre it, and hold it in thy
mouth till it be almost cold, than put it out and take as much more, and do
so three or four times, and that shall spurge thy heed well of flew me Also seth
it in wine and drink it, and it is good for the dyseases in the stomach in
guts, and for cold causes, or for wind in the stomach. Also it is good for
toughe flewme in ye breast, if thou take powdre of it, and meddle it with
claryfyde ho^ny, and make a lectuary thereof, and use to ete thereof, or take the
herb thereof and boil it with wine, ho^ny, or water, and use to drink thereof.
Also for ye black color drink ye joyce of it, but boil it with wine, and
thou shalt be hole. Also for a ytchynge byle, lay this herb in water, and use
to wasshe the ytchyng therein warm, and thou shall be hole. Also for ache take
this herb all grene, and stamp it and plaster it to the ache, and it will
ease it. Also against the coughe boil this herb in wine, and drink it luke
warm, and this will make one pysse well. For the disease in the belly, stamp
this herb with co^myn and water, and lay it hot to the nauel, and lightly it
shallbe hole. For the disease in the liver, stamp this herb and tempre it
with water and vynegre, and drink the joyce thereof and thou shall be hole. For
an ache in the legs or arms, take the leaves of elder and Pulyall royal of
eueryche alyke much, and stamp them together well, and plaster it to the
greuaunce, and it is good for the fever tercyan, if thou take the branches of
this herb, and wrappe it in a good lock of woll, and give it to the pacyent,
and lethym smell thereto before the fyuer come on him, and that shall do him
great ease. For the heedache, take this herb and bind it fast round about
thy heed, and anon it seaseth the ache. Also if a woman have a deed child in
her womb, stamp this herb, and give it her to drink with old wine, and she
shallbe delivered of it by the grace of god. For the crampe drink the joyce
with vynegre fasting, and it will put it away.

Pencedanum vel Feniculus Porcinus.
PEncedanum, this herb is called mayth hogs fenell, or maiden wede, this
herb is hot and dry in the third degree, when this herb is gathered for
medicynes, the rote is better then the herb, when the rotes be gathered they
may be kept all a year. The virtue is he purges, it is good for the
strangulyon or the flyxe, and good for stoppynge of the splen and the liver,
Boil this herb in wine or water, and give it to the pacyent to drink. Also
seth it in oil and wine, and plaster it to the share, and it will help the
strangulion or the flyxe. Also the same plaster is good for hardenes of the
splen, it molyfyeth that. Also against the cold humors of the spyrytuall
members, give him to drink water with barley, and this herb soden together,
and if it be a fervent cold humor, then seth the barley and the herb in wine,
and give it to the pacyent to drink with lycoryce.

Petrocilium.
PEtrocilium, this is called persley, this is hot and moist in the third
degree. The virtue is it multyplyeth greatly man's blood and does away the
tysyke. It helps well to dystroy the Fever tertian. It is good for the side
and the dropsye. It comfort the heart and the stomach. And it is good in
potage, and to stop chekyns.

Peritorium.
PEritorium, this herb is called Peritory, and it is hot and dry. The virtue
of this herb is thus, if a man have an evil stomach or else akynge within
him, take this herb and seth it in thy potage, and ete thereof and thou shall do
well. Also this herb is good to hele one of ye stone, if he be bathed with it.

Plastinaca.
PLastinaca, this is called a Pasnep, it is hot and moist in the second
degree, there be two manner of Pasneppes, the one is the Pasnep of the gardayne,
and the other is the wild Pasneppe, they be more used to meat than to
medycyne. The virtue is to gendre thycke blood and much, wherefore it styrreth
the lust of the body if it be much used, therefore it is good for a man that is
newly recovered out of his great syckenes to use to eat of it a while. Also
they be good to be eten raw, or soden for the melancoly humors grene and not
dry. To make a syrope to stir the lust of the body, and for to comfort
the degestion, take rotes of Pas;neppes, and seth them well in water, than take
them out and cast away the water, and the rotes that be in gobettes boil them
again in water, than put thereto ho^ny well claryfyed, and let them boil unto
the thyckenes of ho^ny, and co^tynually stir it that it cleue not to the
vessel and in the mydle of the boylynge, put in Almondes if ye have them, and
in the end of the boylynge put in Gynger, Galyngale, and a little Peper,
Nutmeg, and other sweet sauoured spyces. Also Pasneppes may be sown in
Decembre, January, and March, in fat ground and deep doluen, and lose
ground, and best dygged, and they be somewhat wyndy, boil them in two waters,
but cast away the first water. Also there is a Pasney yt is somewhat red, the
which may be eaten both raw and soden, and with them and Nauewes together ye
may make a very good meat, and fair and red in color, the which be soden as
Pasneppes be.

Plantago.
PLantago, this is called Playntayne, it is cold and dry in the second degree.

The virtue is this, for hedache take Plantayne and bind it about thy neck,
and the ache shall go out of the heed. Also for diseases in the body, seth this
herb in good lycoure in what ye will, and use to drink it, and it shall cleanse
the mawe, and the other inwardes. Also for him that bledeth at the nose, give
him to drink the joyce of it, and it shall sease lightly. Also if yt the body
of any man be wexen hard, stamp this herb with greece and make a plaster of
it, and lay it on the hardness, and lightly it shall be soft and make it hole.
Also for bytynge of a serpent, take this herb and drink it with wine. Also
for the disease in the mouth, take the joyce of this herb, and hold it long
in thy mouth, and ete the leaves of this herb. For him that may not well pysse,
sethe this herb and drink it. Also for a rotten humor in the breast, and
about the heart, take the joyce of this herb ye wayght of.x. d. and meddle it
with ho^ny, and give him to ete a sponefull at one time, and that shall spurge
the breast. For ache i^ fete, take this herb with vynegre, and drink it. Also
it heleth wounds, and cleanses the fylthe out of wounds. Also it swageth
rankelynge, and stauncheth the mencions both with drink and with playsters
made with powdre of Armonyake, and of sankdragone, and barley mele, with the
white of eggs made in a plaster, and laid to the sore. For the canker and
the pain in the gu^mes, take the joyce thereof and meddle it with ho^ny and
vynegre, and powdre of Alume, and that shall slay the Canker in the mouth.
Also for the fevers stamp three rotes of Plantayne, and tempre it with water,
and give it him to drink that has the Fevers, and he shall be hole. For the
Iaundes stamp Plantayne and Letuse together, and tempre them with vynegre, and
make a plaster thereof, and lay it to the right side, and use it till thou be
hole, and it is good for the bytyng of an adder, drink the joyce of it, and
lay the substance of the herb to the sore. For the same hang the rote of
plantayne about the neck of the pacye^t, and meruaylously it helps. For the
potagre, and for the disease in the synowes, stamp the leaves of it with a little
salt, and plaster it well thereto, and meruaylously it helps.

Porrum.
POrru^, this is called a leke, it is hot and dry in the third degree, it
desires lose ground and fat, and well donged, in that they shall best profit
in hot places and temperat, they may be sown in Decembre in temperet places,
and cold. They may be sown in January, February and March, when the ground
is well dygged and dyght, and it may be sown by it self, or meddled with
other seeds of herbs in good fat ground well dygged, and turned above it
with good donge, this sede would be sown somewhat thycke, and when they be
somewhat spronge, take up the greattest lekes, and plant them in forowes, but
take away none of their rotes when ye set them in the forowes, but when ye set
them with a dybble cut away the rotes almost up to the leke heed, and cut
away the uppermost of the leaves, they may be planted in July, August,
Septembre, and Octobre, they be much profitable in March, and in Apryll next
following, but in your plantyng you shall not seek after fat soft ground, for
menely ground that is best, and that ground that is almost dry is best,
there is two manner of setting of Lekes, one is in forowes as is the manner in
Bonony, and the forowe must be fro the other a spa^ne large, and the lekes
must be set in the forowe.iiii. fyngers bread each fro other, and when ye make
the next forowe cast the earth on the lekes, and trede it down softely with
thy foot. The second manner is thus, when the ground is well dygged and raked,
then make holes with a great dybble, and every hole fro other a large spanne
and more, in which the lekes must be set in, but fyl not thy holes, nor put
earth on them, but let them be void. iii. wekes, when wedes grow among them
pull them up, and keep them clean fro wedes. Diverse Auctours say that the lekes
that be thus planted be better then any other, or they may wellbe planted
among great onyons, and when the onyons be taken away, wede the lekes and you
shall find them fair and good, and when ye pluck up leave some in a place,
leave some for sede, the which sede may be kept three year, and it be hanged up
in the hulles, lekes be best soden, or three times washed before they be eaten.
The virtue is for a wound, take lekes and stamp them well with ho^ny, and lay
it to the wound, and it will hele it. For the coughe take the joyce of lekes
and use to drink it. For the same, take the joyce of Lekes, and meddle it with
woman's milk, and use to drink it, and it will cleanse the longes of all vices.

Fracturas solidat: duritasque relaxat
Vulnusque appositum: cito cum sale claudit.
Piretrum.
PIretrum, this is called Pelleter, it is hot and dry in the third degree,
the rote is used in medycynes, five year he may be kept in his virtue, and
know ye well that his sharpnes is not known anon, it should be puned and
holden in the mouth. The virtue is of losyng, and drawing, and of consumynge.
To make a gargarysme, take pelleter and fygges, and boil them in vynegre or in
sweet wine, and it will cleanse the brain of superfluyte of flewme. Also if it
be chewed in the mouth, it helps the palsy in the tongue. Also for the palsy
and ye potagre, stamp it and sethe it in wine and oil, and plaster it to the
greuaunce, this plaster helps much therefore, if thou may have grene pelyter
stamp it, and lay it sokynge in wine xv. days, and after boil it well and put
there to wexe and oil, for this is the best oyntement for all the foresaid
dyseases.

Papauer.
PApauer, this is called Popy, it is cold and dry. There is two manners of
them, the wit Popy is cold and moist, and it is good to cause one to sleep,
ye sede thereof well gathered may be kept.x. year. The virtue is of clensyng,
it is put in medycynes with a determynacyon as the sede may be received of
white Popy or black. For to provoke a sleep, make a plaster of each of them,
or one of them with woman's milk, and the white an egg, and lay it to the
temples. The women of Salerne gave to young children the Popy, but they would
give them no black Popy, for it made them much heavy. Also for a hot postume
in the beginning, and for chafynge of the liver, take the sede of white Popy,
or else the herb of it, and stamp it and meddle it with oil of Roses, and
plaster it to the greuau^ce. Also for drynes in fever etyke and in other
fevers, take and het^ oil of vyolet meddled with powder of Popy sede, and
anoint the small of the back therewith.

Polipodium.
POlipodium, this is called Polypodye, it is hot in the third degree, and dry
in the second degree. This Polypody is a fern that grows upon oaks, or on
walls, or stones, but the Polypody that grows on Oaks is the best, gather
the rotes of it and lay it a day in the son, chose that is grene, and that
which appears dry, when it is broken it is to be refused. The virtue is of
dyssoluynge, of drawyng, of purgynge flewme, and specially of melancoly,
wherefore commonly he is put in boylyng, and to flewmatyk, and melancolyous hole
men, he is given to preserve their health, and know well that in the boylynge of
Polypody should be put in some thing to exclude and put out ventuosyte as Anyse
sede, Fenel sede, for they exclude out much wind, and unbinds humors. Also
for the cotydyan, and for Illica passio, and to keep a man's health, do thus
stamp half an ounce of Polipody or an ounce, if ye will have it much laxatyue,
than boil it with prunes and vyolettes in fenell water or anyse, in a great
quantyte, than strain it and give it the pacyent at euenyng and at morning.
Also stamp it and seth it in water with fenell sede, and make a good brothe
thereof with a Chekyn therein, with sweet sauoured spyces, and give the pacyent
to eat. Also make a drink thereof after this manner, stamp it and boil it in
wine and after put more wine thereto, and so make up your drink with sweet
sauoured spyces.

Pienium.
PIenium, this is called Pyeny, it is hot and dry in the second degree, so
says Ypocras and Galien the good philosophers say that the rote thereof goth
to diverse medycynes, and it will last.x. year, and it is cold. The virtue is
good for the palsy, dry the rote and drink powdre with Caster soden in wine.
Also the same is good for the stone. Also if a man be costyue and may not go to
draught, take and straw the powdre thereof on cotton, and put in to his
fundement, and drink the powder in white wine. Also for a man or woman that
has the falling evil, ete it and drink it in wine. Also hang the rote
about his neck, and it will save him without doubt within.xv. days. Also it
helps the sores in the mouth. Also if thou seth it in wine, it helps the
splen. Also drink Pyeny with water and ho^ny, and do thereto powdre of
Colyandre, and this is good for the stomach, for the mylt, and for grauel in
the raynes. Also it is good for women for diverse dyseases, and seth it in white
wine, and give a woman to drink thereof, and it will hele here blader, and make
here to pysse the stone, and it will hele her of the matry^. Also Pyeny sede
when it is black, it makes delyueraunce of the bed of the child in her
womb, and at every time when she shall use to drink it, she must drink.xv.
seeds at one time.

The.xv. letter begins with.Q.
Quinquefolio.
QVinquefolio, this is called Quynckefoyle, it is cold and dry in the second
degree, this herb is good for ache in a man's lymbes and for ache of the heed,
mouth, tongue, and throat that is sore, take and seth this herb in wine, and
give the pacient to drink thereof three days first and last, and he shall be
hole. Also stamp it and drink ye joyce of it in ale, and it will seace the
akynge and gnawynge of a man or woman. Also if a man blede sore at the nose
give him to drink the joyce of it with wine, and anoint his heed well with the
joyce of this herb, and anon the blood shall staunche. For to slay a canker,
seth it in wine with the greece of a swyne, and make a plaster thereof, and lay
it on the canker, and it shall slay it. Also take powdre of Quynckefoyle, and
meddle it with ho^nyl and therewith rub thy mouth, tongue, throat, and the
chekes with in, and it will spurge it well. Also for poison or bytyng of a
serpent, take ye joyce of quynckfoyle, and drink it with wine, and
merueylously it resysteth venym.

The.xvi. letter begins with.R.
Rybbeworte.
RYbbeworte is an herb that grows in gardaynes. The virtue is good for ye
fever quartayne, take the joyce of this herb, and drink it two hours before
that ye think ye disease shall come to you, and by the grace of God it shall go
fro you. For them that here not well, put in to their eres the joyce, and if
there be any rotten humors it will dry them.

Rednetle.
REdnetle is called a palyfe of ye greeks, it is hot of virtue, for it
bre^neth them that touch it. The virtue is good for the Iaundes if it be soden
in wine and drunk, it cleanses the color meruaylously. For the old coughe
seth thesedes in water, and put honny thereto, and drink it, and it will hele
the coughe, and take away the coldness of the lunges, and swellyng of the belly.
Also vynegre that the sede of netels is soden in is good against scurfe in the
head, if the head be washed therewith.ii. or.iii. times, and then rynsed with
fair water.

Rosa.
ROsa, this is called red Rose, it is cold in the first degree, and dry in the
second degree, dry Roses and grene roses be used in medicynes, and of grene
roses be made many confeccyons. Also dry roses be put in medycynes, when a
receyte of Roses is made, for they be soon made i^ powdre, of roses is made
mell roset, sugre roset, syrop of roses, a lectuary of roses, water of roses,
and oil of roses. Melroset is made thus, take fair puryfyed ho^ny, and new
red roses, the white ends of them clyped a way, then chop them small, and put
them in to the ho^ny, and boil them menely together, to know when it is
boiled enough, ye shall know it by the sweet odor and the color rufe, five
year he may be kept in his virtue. The virtue of the roses be of comfortynge,
and by the ho^ny he has virtue of clensyng. In winter and in so^mer it may be
given competently to feeble, sick, flumatyke, melancolye, and coloryke people.
Also Mulsa is made of water and mele roset, and it may be given after the
third day that it comes out of the bathe. For to cleanse the stomach of
cold humor, give him melroset with water that fenell sede is boiled in
putting therein.iii. graynes of salt, if the sick may take it, this should be
the quantyte of Roses and honny. In.vii. pound of ho^ny put a pound of roses.
Sugre roset is made thus, take new gathered Roses, and stamp them right small
with sugre, than put it in a glass and.xxx. days let it stand in the son,
and stir it well and meddle it well together, and so it may be kept three year
in his virtue. The quantyte of sugre and Roses should be thus in.iiii. pound
of sugre a pound of Roses, he has virtue of constraynynge, and comfortynge of
the flux in the womb, take sugre roset and powder of mastyke, of every one a
dragma, and medse them well together and give it to the sick, after that give
him rose water that Mastyke and cloves be soden in. Syrop of Roses is made
thus, some do take roses dyght as it is beforesayde, and boil them in water,
and i^ that water strayned they put sugre and make a syrope thereof, and some do
make it better, for they put Roses in a vessel having a straight mouth, and
they put to the roses hot water, and they let it stand a day and a night, and
of that water puttyng to it sugre they make syrop, and some do put more of
roses in the foresaid vessel, and more of hot water, and let it stand as is
beforsayd, and so they make a red water, and make there of a syrope, and some do
stamp new roses, and they strain out ye joyce of it, and sugre therewith they
make syrope, and this is the best making of syrope, and know well that syrope
made of fresshe and new roses, some what meanly they be laxe, in the end they
bind, but syrope made of dry roses, first and last they bind. Syrope of
Roses has virtue of comfortynge, and constraynyng against the flux of the
womb, and he vomyte give it him with rain water, or with Rose water in a
fever. After lettynge of blood, give it to him with cold water. Also the same
for the syncopyne. Oil of roses is made thus, some boil roses in oil and
keep it. Some do fill a glass with roses and oil, and they boil it in a
cawdron full of water, and this oil is good. Some stamp fresshe roses with
oil, and they put it in a vessel of glass, and set it in the son.l. days,
and this oil is good against chafynge of the liver, if it be anointed
therewith. Also it is good for the disease in the head that comes of hete,
anoynte the forheed, and the temples with oil of roses, the water of roses
has virtue of comfortynge, and constraynynge against the flux of the womb,
and vomyte. Also give him rose water to drink, or else Rose water boiled with
Mastyke and cloves, it is best against the flux and feebleness of virtue if it
come of a flux by a sharp medycyne. Also rose water is good for the
syncopyne, and the cardyacle, give it him to drink, and spryncle the water on
his face, and the water is good for iyes, and in oyntementes for the face, for
it takes away the wembes and the superfluite and strayneth the skin. Also
dry roses put to the nose to smell, do comfort the brain, and heart, and
quenches the spyryte. Also against the flux of the womb, and color, give
him roses boiled in rain water. Also a plaster made of Roses, and the white
of eggs and vynegre, and dyp a sponge in it, and lay it on thy mouth of the
stomach, against the Syncopyne, give him to drink water that Roses have be
boiled in, and give him powdre of roses in a rere egg, to make oil of roses,
take.ii. pound of oil, and a pound and an half of roses, and put all in a
glass, and put the glass in a cawderon full of water, and hang it therein,
and boil it till the third part be wasted, and after strain it through a
lynen clothe, and keep it for your use, for this oil is losing, and serves
for many things. Some do put Rose water in a glass, and they put Roses with
their dew thereto, and they make it to boil in water, then they set it in the
son till it be red, and this water is best, this has virtue of comfortynge,
and constraynynge, and for the flux of the womb, and against vomyte.

Rosemary.
ROsemarye is an herb that is hot and dry. The virtue is good against al
euylles in the body, take the flowers and put them in a lynnen clothe, and so
boil them in fair clean water to the half, and cool it and drink it. Take
the flowers and make powdre thereof, and bind it to the right arm in a lynen
cloth, and it shall make the light and merry. Also ete the flowers with ho^ny
fasting with sour bread, and there shall rise in the none evil swellynges.
Also take ye flowers, and put them in a chest among your clothes or among
books, and mothes shall not hurt them, boil the flowers in gotes milk, and
than let them stand all a night under the air fair covered, and after
that give him to drink thereof that has the tysyke, and it shall deliver him.
Boil ye leaves in white wine, and wasshe thy face therewith, thy berde, and thy
brows, and there shall no corns grow out, but thou shall have a fair face,
put the leaves under thy beds heed, and thou shall be delivered of all evil
dremes. Break the leaves small to powdre, and lay them on a canker, and it
shall slay it. Take the leaves and put them in to a vessel of wine, and it
shall preserve it fro tartnes and evil savor, and if thou sell that wine, thou
shall have good luck in the sale. if thou be feeble with unkindly sweet, take
and boil the leaves in clean water, and when the water is cold, do thereto as
much of white wine, and the^ make therein soppes, and eat well thereof, and
thou shalt recover appetyte. If thou have the flux, boil the leaves in
strong aysell, and bind them in a lynen clothe, and bind it to thy womb,
and anon the flux shall withdraw. If thy legs be blown with the gout,
boil the leaves in water, and then take the leaves and bind them in a lynen
cloth about thy legs, and it shall do the good. Take the leaves and boil them
in strong Aysell, and bind them in a cloth to thy stomach, and it shall
deliver the of all euyls. If thou have the coughe, drink the water of ye leaves
boiled in white wine, and it will hele the. Take the rynde of Rosemary, and
make powdre thereof, and drink it for the pose, and it shall help the. Take the
tymbre thereof, and brene it to cooles, and make powdre thereof, and the^ put it
in a lynen cloth and rub thy tethe therewith, and if there be any worms
therein it shall slay them, and keep thy teth from all euyls. Also make the a
box of the wood and smell to it, and it shall preserve thy youth. Also put
thereof in thy doors, or in thy house, and thou shall be without danger of
adders and other venymous serpe^tes, make the a barell thereof, and drink thou
of the drink that stands therein, and thou needs to fere no poison that shall
hurt the. And if thou set it in thy gardayne, keep it honestly, for it is
much profitable. Also if a man have lost his smellyng of the air, or else he
may not draw his breath, make a fire of ye wode, and take his breath therewith,
and give it him to eat, and he shallbe hole.

Ruta.
RVta, this is called Rewe, this is hot and dry in the second degree, the
leaves and the seeds be used in medicynes, the seeds may be kept. x. year, and
the leaves a year. The virtue is of purgynge, dyssoluynge, and consumynge. For
the heedache, take the joyce of rewe, and hete it, and put it in to his nose
thyrlles, for it spurgeth out flewme and cleanses the brain, the joyce soden
with wine is good for ye same. For feebleness of sight, put rewe in a pot with
ale, and let the pacyent use to drink of it. For stoppynge of the splen and
liver, the strangury and the flux, seth Rewe in wine with rotes of Fenell, or
powdre of rewe with the joyce of Fenel and drink it warm. Also for an ache or
fretynge, stamp rewe with powdre of co^myn, and plaster it to the greuaunce.
Also against venym, drink the joyce of rewe. For bytynge of a venymous best or
worm, plaster rewe to the bytynge. For feeble iye sight, still water of rewe
and roses together, and put thereof in your iyes. Also an oyntement for sore
iyes, stamp rewe and fenell together of each like much by weight, and meddle
them with ho^ny and Eufrose, and it is a good oyntement for sore iyes. Take
Rewe, Common, and Peper, of each a like much by weight, and grynde them small
together, and meddle them with ho^ny and vynegre, and it is good for ye ache in
the breast, and in the raynes.

The.xvii. letter begins with.S.
Sinapium.
SInapium, it is called Mustarde, it is hot and dry in the mydle of the.iiii.
degree, and not the herb but the sede is put in medycynes. Five year he may be
kept i^ his virtue. The virtue is of losing, of drawing, of making thyn, and
of consumynge. For the palsye of the tongue, take and chewe the sede in your
mouth, and hold it under the tongue, and it shall do you good. Also for the
palsy in other me^bres, seth the sede in wine, and lay it to the sore place,
and it is best in the beginning of the disease. Also take the powdre of it,
and put it in to your nose thyrlles, and it will make you to nese, and it
cleanses the brain, and superfluyte of flume. Also seth it in wine and fygges,
and hold it warm in your mouth till it be almost cold, then take as much
more, and do so. v. or. vi. times a day, and as much another day, and this is
good for an old pose of toughe and flumy humor in the heed. Also for
stoppynge of the splen and the liver, seth the sede in water with rotes of
fenell, then strain it, and put thereto honny, and give it to the sick to
drink. For hardness of the splen, seth the herb of it in wine, and plaster it
to the greuaunce. For to ripe and break a postume, stamp this herb well with
hogs greece, and lay it to the postume. Also for the strangury, take this
herb, and sethe it in oil and wine, and plaster it to the greuaunce, and it
will lose it. Also for the Ciatica, and for old sores, take mustarde sede, and
the third part of cro^mes of white bread, and fygges, ho^ny, and vynegre,
after as the ache of the sore requires, the more of the fygges and honny, that
is there the more sharper is the strength of the sede, and ye more bread and
vynegre that is in it, the more weker is the sede, but I say not that ye shall
put this confeccyon to all sores, but to great and old sores, his virtue is if
he be eaten, it sharpeth a man's wit, it cleanses ye belly, it breketh the stone,
it purges the vryne, menstruosyte and comfort the stomach.

Smalage.
SMalage is an herb that grows in gardaynes, it is hot and dry in the
beginning of the third degree, and dry in the mids of ye same. The virtue
is good for cold and wicked humors in the stomach, and comfort the
stomach, the liver, and the lunges, and it is good for wounds, take Smalage
sede, rue sede, Peper, and salt, and grynde them well together, and tempre
them with wine and drink it. For ranklynges and to cease the brennynge and
akynge, and to bring them to their kind again. Also it is good to drink for
the fever tercyan.

Saluia.
SAluia is called Sage, and it is hot in the first degree, and dry in the
second degree, the leaves only be taken in medycynes, both grene and dry, he
may be kept a year. There be two manner of Sages, the gardayne and the wild
Sage, if thou will have Sage for medycynes, take the leaves of gardayne Sage.
The virtue is it consumes more, and comfort more then the other does. For
the palsy seth the leaves of Sage i^ wine, and use to drink it, for the same
seth ye leaves in wine, and plaster it to the greuaunce. Also it is good to put
in sauce, for the strangury, the flux, and the matryce it cleanses, seth the
leaves in water, and let the pacient sit over it, and receive the hot fume of
it, and it shall do him much good. Also it is good for venym or poison, seth
Sage in ale or wine, and use to drink it.iii. days, and thou shall be hole by
the grace of god. For the stomach drink the joyce of sage with water and
honny, and it is good to cleanse a man's body to use it both ripe and grene, it
will make a man's body clean, therefore who that uses to eat of this herb or
drink it, it is mernayle that any inconuenyent should grieve them that use it.
If ye have an ytchynge on you, wasshe it well with the joyce of this herb, and
it shall slay the ytchyng. Also drink Sage with wine, and a little wormwode,
and it shall cease the ache under the sides, the womb, and the stomach, it is
good for the palsy and dropsy.

Satureia.
SAtureia is called Sauery, it is hot and dry in the.iiii. degree. The virtue
of this is it purges the body, seth it in wine or water and drink it, and it
purges the raynes, the bladder, the menstruosyte in the bowels, it purges the
lu^ges and loses great humors, and compels and puts him our by the
mouth by spyttynge, therefore he is brennynge and styrreth him that uses
lechery, therefore it is forbid to use it much in meats. Soke it in vynegre or
wine, and drink it, and it shall make the have a meke stomach. Also when it
flowreth, it should be gathered and dried, and powdre made thereof. Also take
the powdre of Sauery, and boil it with claryfyed ho^ny, and use to eat
thereof, or boil it in wine and drink it, and it will lose toughe flewme in
the breast. Also for fretynge in the belly drink powdre of it in warm wine,
and thou shall be hole. Also if ye take the less Sauery, it has the same
virtue and strength that the other Sauery has. Also make grewell with water
and flower, and powdre of Sauery, and ete thereof, and that shall cleanse all the
spyrytuall members of a man.

Saxfrage.
SAxfrage is hot and dry in the third degree. The virtue is good for ye
stone, seth the rote of it in wine, and drink it. Also it is good for the
disease of colyke and the strangury, and the powdre of it be eaten with an
egg, it is good for the same. It may be kept in his virtue. iii. year.

Scabiosa.
SCabiosa is called Scabias, it is hot and dry in the third degree, to dry it
there is no profit in it. The virtue is good for the scabbes, take the joyce
of it, vynegre, and oil, and boil them together till they wax thycke and keep
it for it is good for scabbes. For the Emerawdes seth them in water, the^ sit
over it, and take the fume of it and use it, and thou shall be hole. Stamp it
and seth it in wine, and the drink is good to dystroye humors in the
stomach, and drink it every day fasting with Eurose, and thou shall be
hole, and thou shall never have the Pestylence bredynge within ye while thou do
use it. For the liver stamp it and seth it in wine, and drink it.

Sothernwood.
SOthernwood is an herb that grows in the field. The virtue of it is good
for the coughe, and for byndynge in the belly, and in the breast, and for disease
in the bones, and good for them that may not well pysse, take the sede of this
herb and stamp it, and drink it with water, and it is good for all the
aforesaid. Also for the dyseases in the side, stamp this herb with betayne
and drink it, and it helps well. Also for the bytynge of a serpent, and for
venym, stamp this herb and drink it with wine, and it is good. Also for the
cold fever, stamp this herb with wine, and drink it, and thou shall be hole.

Syngrene.
SYngrene is cold and moist in the.iii. degree. The virtue of this herb, and
also the joyce of the same herb is necessary for many dyseases, stamp this
herb with greece and plaster it to the disease, and meruaylously it helps.
For dyseases and darkness of the iyes, stamp this herb and put of the joyce
in the sore iyes. For chafynge of the lyner, take the joyce of it and vynegre,
and dyp a clothe therein, and plaster it to the greuaunce. For bytynge or
scaldynge, make an ointment of the joyce of this herb, and oil of roses and
wax, but lay it not to till after the three first days, but first anoint it
with greece and such other. Also for a disease of a hot cause, this is good to
be laid thereto.

Stytche worte.
STytche worte or byrdestonge, this is hot and moist in the first degree. The
virtue of this herb is this, it is good to hele stytches, wounds, and also
the sore iyes.

Scamony.
SCamony is hot and dry in the.iii. degree, the leaves only be best in
medycynes, it may be kept a year in his virtue or two for need. The virtue is
good for the disease in the stomach, boil the leaves of it in wine, and drink
it. Also the aforesaid drink is good for the belly. For the strangury and flux,
also a stewe made with boylynge of it in water or wine, is good for the fore
said, if it be boiled in oil, and plaster it to the same aforesaid, it is
better.

Seen.
Seen is hot and dry in the.iiii. degree it grows on the other side the sea,
and most about Babylon, the best be the flowers and the branches of it. The
virtue is good for many dyseases, as the falling evil, for the synecop, for
the splen, for the Emerawdes, and for the quartayne, syrope made of it boiled
in water, and sugre is good for all the aforesaid, syrope made with the joyce
of Borage is good for the aforesaid. Also Dyascorides commands to make
Exmell of the aforesaid with boylyng of vynegre and ho^ny, and it will be good
for the aforesaid. And this herb may be kept.x. year in his strength and
virtue.

Selondyne.
SElondyne is hot and dry in the.iiii. degree, and Galyen says that it is
good for sore iyes. The virtue is good for sore iyes, take the joyce of
selondyne, and ye rote boil it well together in a pa^ne, and when it is cold
anoint thy iyes therewith. Take selondyne and wring out the joyce, and meddle it
with white wine, and anoint thy vysage therewith, and it shall do away frakles
of the vysage. The joyce of selondyne and gotes donge meddled together small in
a mortar, then if thou lay it to a canker in a woman's pappe, it shall slay the
canker. Also take the joyce of selondyne, and powdre of brym stone, and meddle
them well together, and it will help to do away the morfewe, and seth the
rote in wine, and when the pot is taken down, let him hold his mouth open
over it, that the brethe may go in to his body, and that shall slay the canker
in the mouth, it is good for him that has dronken venym with his own stale,
and that will save him.

Sauayne.
SAuayne is hot and dry in the second degree. The virtue is good to slay
worms in the womb, and to bring them out if it be soden in wine, and give to
the pacyent to drink. It is good with butter or greece to make an ointment for
the scabbe that re^neth to hele it and dry it up, and it is good for the
hedache, if it be stamped and tempered with vynegre, and make a plaster
thereof, and lay it to thy temples and upon the molde of thy heed.

Scabiose.
SCabiose is cold and moist in the.ii. degree. The virtue of this herb is
good for the liver, stamp it and sethe it in wine. And it will dystroy wicked
humors in the stomach, and drink it every day fasting with Eurose, and
thou shall* never have postume bredynge within the, as long as thou do use
this medycyne.

The.xviii. lettre begins with.T.
Townecresses.
TOwnecresses, is hot and dry in the third degree, the sede will endure
good.v. year. The virtue is good to stau^che the flux and the mensyon, if thou
take the sede and brose it in a mortar of brass, and give the sick to drink
thereof three days every day a penny wayght at ones with red wine warmed, and in
these.iii. days he shall be staunched, or else he shall dye of that evil, it is
good for the palsy, and for the maleflanke, take the sede and seth it with wine
and do it in a poket, and bind it to the side there as the greuaunce is. Also
it is good for him that may not pysse, take the sede and seth it in wine and
oil Olyue, and bind it to thy share. It is good for a man's fundament that
goes out, if it be taken of cold, then it must be put in again, and straw
the powdre on the foundement, thy raynes with ho^ny, and then straw the powdre
above with the powdre of Comen, or powdre of Calafine, for all these be kyndly
for it. Also take the stalks of Townecresses, and bren them, and there shall no
venymous be, ne worm abide the savor, nor smell thereof, but he shall dye
or else fly away.

Tapsubarbesto.
TApsubarbesto is called Melon, it is cold and dry. The virtue of it is good
for the Emerawdes, and it be soden in wine and sco^med clean. Also it is good
to wasshe the greuaunce therewith. It is good also for the flux in the belie.
To provoke vomyte, take two dragmes of the powdre of the rote of Melon, and
drink it in wine, and it will provoke vomyte. Also the seeds provoke vryne
and causes the to pysse, and cleanses the raynes and the bladder of gravel
and stones.

The.xix. letter begins with.V.
Vyolet.
VYolet is cold in ye first degree, and moist in the second. The virtue of
it is good for a blast in ye iyes, take the rotes of vyolettes, and stamp the^
with myrre and saffron, and at night lay it to the sore iyes. Also for a wound
in the head, stamp the leaves of Vyolettes with honny and vynegre, and plaster
it to the wound, and it shall hele it. Also for them that may not sleep for
syckenes, sethe this herb in water, and at even let him soke well his fete in
the water to the ancles, when he goth to bed, bind of this herb to his
temples, and he shall sleep well by the grace of Gad. Take Vyolettes, Myrre,
and Saffron, and make a plaster, and lay it to the sore iyes that be swolen,
and it shall cease akynge, and bate the swellynge.

Vua suauis.
VVa suauis, this is called the sweet raysyn, it is hot and moist. The virtue
is of clensynge, scowryng, or smothynge. Raysynges eaten or boiled in wine is
good for the cold coughe. Also seth them in wine and they be good to plaster
on the cold postume, and also good for the cold stomach.

Veruayne.
VEruayne, this is hot and dry in the second degree. The virtue is good for
all manner of euylles of venym, if the pacyent drink it tempred with wine, and
stamp the herb, and lay it on every manner of bytynge of venymous be, and
it will drawout the venym and save the sore, who that uses it, it will make
good breath, and do away the stynke of the mouth. Also who that has the Fever
tercyan, take.iii. rotes and.iii. croppes of the same herb, and stamp them and
tempre them with fair clean water, and give it to the pacient to drink. Also
who that has the fever quartayn, let him take the same drink. Also it is good
for the stomach, the liver, and the lunges. Also take Veruayne, Betayne, and
Saxfrage, of every of them a like much, and stamp them with white wine
tempred, and this is good for them that has the stone. Also they that bear
Veruayne upon them, they shall have love and grace of great masters, and they
shall also grant him his asking, if that his askyng be good and ryghtfull,
this herb is hot and dry.

The.xx. lettre begins with.w.
watercresses.
WAtercresses be hot and dry in the second degree. The virtue of this herb
is good if ye sethe them in water by them self, and drink it, or seth it i^
flesh and sup of the brothe, and it will cleanse well the inward me^bres.
Also it is good against the strangulyon and the flux.

wild neppe or woodbynde.
Wild neppe or woodbynde, this herb bears a flower like to the hop, and
after the flower he bears a grene bery, and it has a great root. The virtue
of this herb is most in the rote, it is good for synowes that be shronken, or
cut to make them souple, and to have their own course i^ their propre kind.
Go to ye rote of wild Neppe, that is like woodbynde, and make a hole in the
mids of the rote, then cover it well again yt no air go out, nor yt no
rain go in, nor water, powdre, nor the son come not to much to it, let it
stand so all a night and a day, then after that go to it, and thou shall
find therein a certain lycour, take out yt licour with a spone, and put it in
to a clean glass, and do so every day as long as thou fyndest ought in ye
hole, and this must be done in ye month of Apryl, or May, the^ anoint the sore
with it against the fire, then wete a lynen clothe in the same lycour, and lap
it about the sore, and it shall be hole in short space on warantyse, by the
grace of god. For the gowte a sovereign medycyne, take the rote of wild Nep,
and the rote of the wild docke soden by it self, and cut them in thyn pieces,
and part away the utter rynde, and cut them in quarters, then boil them in
clean water. ii. or. iii. hours, then stamp them in a mortar as small as can
be, then put thereto a quantyte of sote of a chymny, and tempre them with the
milk of a kowe that the here is of one color, then take the pysse of a man
that is fasting, and make a plaster thereof, and boil it together, and as hot
as ye may suffer it, lay it to the greuaunce a day and a night, and so do.
ix. times, and it shall, hele the on warantyse by the grace of God.

wormwood.
WOrmwood is hot and dry in the second degree. The virtue is good for worms
in the womb, if it be stamped and the joyce wrong out, and myngled with sweet
milk, and give to the pacye^t to drink, and sethe this herb in wine, and
make a plaster to ye womb, make powdre of worm wood, Centory, betayne, of
each a like much by wayght, and meddle all well together, and the powdre will
slay worms in the womb, both when it is eaten in potage and dronken. Also for
the mylte that is swollen of a cold matter, seth it in wine and let the sick
drink thereof, and that shall hele him, and make a plaster of the substance of
the herb, and say it all hot to thy womb against the greuau^ce. Also stamp
wormwood and tempre it with vynegre, and with tosted sour breed grou^den
therewith, and the joyce of myntes, and the joyce of plantayne, of each a like
much, and frye them well together, then make a plaster and lay it to the
mouth of the stomach, and this shall staunche brekynge or castyng, For worms
in a man's eres be it serpent or erewygge, take ye joyce of wormwood, and put it
in the ere. Also for the dropsye seth it in wine, and give the sick to drink
at morning and at evening, and it shall help him.

FINIS.
Hereafter follows the virtue of the Oken tree.
IN the Oak be.iiij. things beside the lefe the which be right profitable to
the health of man, that is to wete the Acorne, and the cup that it grows in,
the galls and the lyme. The carnels in powdre be profitable against the
feebleness of the vertiuer of retentyfe, yt is to say against feebleness of brain,
and against the passyo^ called diabetican, and against the strangurye, and
against the sickness called dissenturian, and against the stone in the raynes,
and the bladder, and it is good for them yt may not hold their water. The
cup of the Acornes is good against vomytes of color, and against nesyng, and
it dries, and consumes flewme in the mouth of the stomach. The gall after
the opinion of Albert, so that they be not greatly holowe be good against the
flux, and against slydynge and slypernes of guts, and against the flowers of
women, and that powdre helps them of many infyrmytyes. etc. Also by
experyence of Gardyners, and planters, the powdre of the gall mynged with
honny, perce a hole in a tree, and put it therein, and the fruit shall be black.
Now with the lyme of the Oak, Physycyons, and Surgyans do many cures therewith,
and of it is made an ointment for the palsy, and of a man's yard, and against
an infyrmyte called deabetan^. Also thereof is made a syrop for the dropsy that
comes of cold called yposarco, and it consumes watery humors. And also men
be cured by the fruit of axes quartayne, tercian, and cotidyan. Also in the
tree is a thing growyng, which women know by experyence it makes them hastily
to be delivered of child, which dowche men call it Archemsel, and thereof is
made bedes. The last conclusyon of this Oken leaves, of this leaves is distylled
a water, which heals all the flux of the womb called dyssentuaryan,
lauaryan, and dyaryan. Also it is good for the flowers of women, and for the
Emeraudes. Also this lefe in powdre put in the nose, stau^cheth the bledynge
thereof, and spyttyng of blood. Also this lefe is wholesome against the ache of
the heart, against the epilacion of the liver, and of the splen, and against
the nesyng, and against the coughe, and the head ache, and against the ache of
the stomach, and the wind of the stomach, and against the colyke, and the
ache of the womb, and the fla^kes, and it breketh the stone of the raynes, and
the bladder, and also women that be cold, it dysposeth them to be able to
conceive, it is wholesome to all manner of creatures of all manner ages, and for
all dyseases to be taken at all times of ye year. etc. wherefore surgyans
knowing the truth leyth Oken leaves upon wounds, and that done they need
none other oyntme^t, it heleth all manner of wou^des, the canker, the fystula,
and saint Anthonies fire, a vain made in the water of the Oak heleth the
dropsy, and all sepournesse. Also who soever ones in the weke eteth one of the
leaves, he shall never have stynkynge breath, nor the toth ache, nor putrefaccyon
in his gu^mes. etc. nor of his eres.

This is the making of Aqua vite perfectissima.
TAke the rote of Saxfrage, and Parcely, Alyssau^der, Fenell, Time, ysope,
Pynyryall, Rosemary, Laueder, Prymerose, Mynt, Origan, Sauge, Calamynt, Auence,
Bittayn, Saueyn, of each half a quartron, Galynga le, black Peper, white
Peper, long Peper, Cloves, Nutmegges, of each an ounce, Camel, Maces,
Quylybes, of each two ounces, Setwale, Peletre of spain, tree of Aloes, of each
an ounce and an half, and stamp thine herbs, and powdre thy spyces, and put
them together in the wine, and let them stand all night, and on the morrow
dystyl them through a serpentory, this water has many virtues, and it is
better at the first dystyllacyon of the Canon, then at the third distyllacyon
of the Serpentorye. etc.

To graffe and plant.
TO graffe fruit yt they shall have no core. Take a graffe and bow it in both
ends combyng, and cut both ends graftwyse, and so fasten them into ye
stock. And if it grow so with the tree cut away the great end, and let ye
smaller end grow, and his fruit shall have no core * if thou wylt graffe
diverse fruytes upon one stock, that has as many branches as thou will have
graffes on, and in every branch set a graffe in manner and form as it is
said before, and evermore chose thy graffe on the son side of the tree that
bears it, and next the top if you may, and then may thou graffe diverse
fruytes in one clift, but none of them may be thycker the^ other as thy reason
will tell the in that workyng. It is to be noted ye graffers say, that every
tree yt is set on saint Lambardes day, shall prove and come to profit.

Finis.
Here begins the table of this present book.
A.
Agnus castus. Apium. Auctum. Apium risus. Absinthium. Archemesia. Affodillus.
Astrologia longa. Abrotanum. Astrologia rotunda. Ameos. Alleluya. Agrimonia.
Auancia. Altea. Amarista. Anisum. Alleum. Astarton.
B
Betonia. Balsaminta. Beta. Borago domestices. Bigula. Burneta. Bursa postoris.
C
Camamilla. Calamintum. Crassula mayor. Crassula minor. Cituca. Centuaria
mayor. Centuaria minor. Carin. Celodonia. Cidamum. Causis. Cortandrum. Capillus
veneris. Crocus. Centinodium. Caprifolium. Canabaria. Costus. Cepe. Columbina.
Cominum. Cardiaca. Cisera. Camelion. Consolida mayor. Consolida minor.
Consolida media.
D
Dragancia. Diptanum. Daucus asinius. Daucus creticus. Dens leonis. Dragancia
feminea.
E
Elena campana. Endiua. Eruca. Eufragia. Ebulus. Edera. Edera terestris.
Eborus. Esabrus. Epatica.
F
Famula. Fumus terre. Fragra. Fabaria mayor. Filex. Filipendula. Feniculum.
Faxmus. Finiculus porcinus. Febrifuga. Filago. Flammula minor.
G
Granum. Genescula. Genciana. Galanga. Granum solis. Gladiolus. Gracia dei.
Gracia dei mayor.
H
Herba cruciata. Herba christofori. Herba walteri. Herba Roberti. Herba martis.
Hastula regia. Herba Iohannis. Herba Petri.
I
Iusquiamus. Isopus. Ireose. Iris. Iua. Iacia alba. Iasia nigra. Ippia mayor.
Ippia minor.
L
Lanesticum. Lingua ceruina. Lilium. Ligustrum. Lingua bouis. Lingua Serpe^tis
ma. Lingua Serpe^tis mi. Lingua canis. Lingua hircina. Lupinus. Labrum veneris.
Lauendula. Lactuca. Lactuca siluatica. Lactuca leporica. Lollium. Laparium
rubeum. Linum. Lauriola. Licorisa.
M
Millefolio minor. Mercurialis. Menta. Menta romana. Malua. Morell or night
shadow. Mastyke. Magerum. Millefolium mayor. Motherworte, or Mugworte. Maces.
Menta.
N
Nux muscata. Napo.
O
Olibanum.
P
Plumeus. Piper. Pympernell. Pulegium. Pencedamum vel Feniculus porcinus.
Petrocilium. Peritorium. Plastinaca. Plantago. Porrum. Piretrum. Papauer.
Polipodium. Pienium.
Q
Quinquefolio.
R
Rybbeworte. Rednetell. Rosa. Rosemary. Ruta.
S
Sinapium. Smalege. Saluia. Satureia. Saxfrage. Scabiosa. Sothernwood.
Syngrene. Stytcheworte. Scamony. Seen. Selyndyne. Sauayne. Scabiose.
T
Townecresses. Tapsubarbesto.
V
Vyolet. Vua suauis. Veruayne.
W
watercresses wild neppe or woodbynde. wormwood.
The virtue of the Oken tree. The Oken lefe. The making of Aqua vite
perfectissima. Graffynge and plantynge.
Finis Tabule.
Imprynted by me Robert wyer, dwelling in saint Martyns parysshe, at the sign
of saint John^ Euangelyst, beside Charynge Cross.

printer's device of Robert Wyer: McKerrow 69 ROBERT WYER.



