A PIECE OF THE WORLD, Painted in proper Colors.

Presented to the Illusterous Majesty of our most gracious Queen Mary.

By FRANCIS LENTON gent Her Majesty's Poet.

Dum vivio video, and Dum video rideo. LONDON, Printed by John Raworth 1640.

To his most loved friend Mr. FRANCIS LENTON.
IF love, not Learning
May my lines prefer,
To front, not grace
thy well writ Character;
Or if a willing mind
May plead the excuse
Of my unable,
More unworthy Muse;
Then take me with thee Frank;
I mean as well
As he, whose lines
but few can parallel.
And tho my approbation
Cannot add
Least luster to thy book,
Or mak't be had
In more esteem:
Or free it from the mew
of Simon Simple,
Or the senseless Crew:
Who finding more
New Characters, will ask,
What Is he dares undertake
So blunt a task?
Then Master Critic
Comes, and seems to snarle,
Saying this work
Only becomes an Earl,
Yet this I know,
Thine are so witty, merry,
As Would have bin
Allowed by Overberry,
Had he e're seene' em:
Boldly then go on,
Well to enlarge, what
Thou have well begun.
For in despite of
Black-mouthed Calumny
Thy lines shall live
Unto posterity:
And aftertimes may
With delightful pleasures
Find sportive mirth
In reading Lentons leisures.
Thine ever, JOHN COYSE.

The Contents.
A State Politician. 1 A gallant Courtier. 2 A young Barrister. 3 A Commissary.
4 A Parasite or Flatterer. 5 An Vnorious man. 6. A Country Widow: 7 A
Chambermaid. 8 A Broken Citizen. 9 A Bawd. 10 A Pander. 11 A Darling, 12 A
Lawyers Clarke. 13 A Farmer Tenant. 14 A Double benefic't Parson. 15 A
Schoolmasters. 16 A Country Alewife, 17 An Aldermans daughter. 18 A
Prodigal. 19 An Vusurer. 20 A Broker. 21 A Bragadotio. 22 A Sempster. 23 A
Prostitute or Whore. 24 A Gamester. 25 An Host. 26 A Common Drunkard. 27 An
Elder Brother. 28 An Innes a Court Gentleman. 29 A Low Country Soldier. 30 A
Gentleman Usher. 31 A Cuckold. 32 An Informer. 33 A Bachelour. 34 An
Vndersheriffe. 35 A Drawer. 36 A good Husband. 37 A constant man. 38 A jealous
man. 39 A desparate man. 40 A True friend. 41
TO The Illustrious Majesty OF Great Britains Monarchesse, Our most Gracious
Queen, MARIE.
MADAM.
MInerva now has lent a Birth,
In waggish Prose to give your Grace some Mirth,
In which both Iuvenall and Martial,
Meet, and do mix their honey with their gall;
Here I adventured to cut a Sluice
Into the Times enormious abuse,
I point at no Man single, but Truth knows
That horse is galled that winches as he goes:
Laugh then (blessed Lady) and amongst the rest,
Protect this Pamphlet peeping out in jest.
Your Graces servant, Fran: Lenton.

Characters.
1. A State Politician,
IS a great man deeply read in the mysteries of iniquity; who being well
grounded in the Theoricke, assumes the Practique is an Effect of the Cause:
One, whose much study has called him to more Care than Conscience, that
whatsoever by Power and Project he atchieves and accumulates to himself; his
pretense is still for the good of the Commonweal: For the safety whereof he
watches as a Fox for his prey. Foreign estates are as familier with him as
his own, for the knowledge whereof, he spends much, and gets more. The vulgar
honor him more for fear than love, and either bark, or are silent, as his
distance is from them. Their popular applause he esteems not, but laughes at
their Envy in his higher Sphere, soaring above their Capacities by the sides
of Princes, and seriously contemplating how to carry himself in the next
Charge, being never troubled with any alteration, having his several Postures
for all; for his Gravity, his looks, and his language are near allide, this
austere, that severe; for his Habit, he is all over furred, but seldom or
never foxt, except at a Coronation. In a word, he climes up with much cost,
staggers there with many cares, and commonly falls with more fears, And those
that never durst libell him, living, dare cowardly throw one of Iuvenals stones
at his Grave.

2. A Gallant Courtier.
IS the out side of a Statesman, a little more gayly trimd up, and as he is
repleat with internal endowments, so this is complete with external
Complement. He is a man so covetous, that he cannot deny you any thing, and so
careless after his grant, that he will perform nothing. One whom your Tailor
is much bound to for his new fashion (which is his p^ime study) and he
reciprocally for his Tailors faith, (which never goes without works (both which
concur together till the day of account, and then he is deferred till doomes
day, or else presently paid with Privilege. He has more devices upon a new
Doublet, than Ovid had verses, and those as Geometrical, as his natural: He
spares for no cost whilst he may be credited; and when that fails, he falls
upon some full-mouthed Lady, whose mark has been long out; where he still
prays but seld, or never prays for ought but her death. He is composed only of
two Elements, Air and Fire, Levity and Choler, having the predominance,
wanting water and earth, humidity and solidity, and holds nothing more ignoble
than the defect of formality, His Barber and his beard do hold a fair and even
Correspondency, and agree as well as his head with its Perriwig, of which, how
careful he is, the doffing his Beaver will discover, even from Ludgate Hill
(if he dares come so nigh it) to Chairing Cross, his more secure walk. His
Congees are so common, that few care for them, and his bodye's most lowly, when
his mind's most lofty: Cupid is his key, Venus his devotion, and Mercury his
messenger, whilst he cornutes lame Vulcan: You may smell him before you see
him, and see him long enough before you know him. He is oftentimes his own
admirer, and thinks himself the only object of others, whilst they think
him their abject. In brief, his tongue and his heart are most commonly as
great strangers, as his hands and his actions, or his large promises and lame
performances.

3. A young Barrester.
IS one called to it by Reading, though he never read for it, and has taken his
leave of Littleton before he was well acquainted with him. At his first entrance
he has a very good Conscience, and therefore loves the Chancery better than
the Common Law, as well for the effect of the one, as the defect of the other;
where he lives by perpetual motion (as not yet ripened, for those more harsh
and ambiguous Demurres, and arguments) and subsists by the same, till by
stratagem in Law, he has surprised some Aldermans daughter, by putting the
Case rightly, who through the greenness of her youth and face, is horn mad
for a man of his profession. His very calling writes him Esquire, though his
Scutchion sometimes cannot speak him Gentleman, except by way of admittance. He
is very openhanded till his fee has clutcht it, and then he is open mouthed,
and will be sure to speak more than to th'purpose, whilst his silly Client
rejoices as much in the very tone of his tongue, as the substance of his
talk, being both coequall to his capacity. His Clients are his Soul, and when
they fail, he expires, only here is the difference, he provides not for his
soul, but his soul for him. He Will speak more in a moment, than do in a month,
and warrant your Cause according to his reading; till your hearings prove his
holy days, and your Trials his experience. His ambition is to climb to the
seat of Justice, but is loath to be blind in the place, lest he should not see
those pictures his soul takes pleasure in, but in the mean time, he is
striving to be put in Commission, where perhaps you may see him the next
Quarter Sessions.

4. A Commissary,
IS a man much given to libels, or rather libels to him, and (which is much) is
priviledg'd to receive them, and proves a gainer by the hand. He trades much
in Will and Inventory (the Relics of the dead) which he files with much
felicity, and however the Executour speeds, he is still of the taking hand: He
looks not so much to the performance of the Will, as the payment of his Fees,
and Visits the wife of the next Vicarage. He has many foul cases laid open
before him, and he as soundly canvasses them; by the which he acquires a fair
purse, and a foul Conscience Barsterdy and Bawdery are his chief rents, and
incontinency and whoredom his Farmers; and (which is strange) he lives by
that, for which all men die, (Sin.) He has many Visitations, which he
bears very patiently, in regard of the sweet Cordials accrewing thereby. He is
your hasty youths, and and younger Scollers Oracle, who daily worship him for
his speedy license, that they may both presently enter into their Pulpets, and
he into their purses. He is one that shall excommunicate you, ipso facto, for
five shillings, and absolve you immediately, ex officio, for three shillings
four pence. In brief, He is the Bishops mouth, the Bawds ear, the Sinners
absolution, the Whores purgatory, the Dioces^n Mou^tebanke, the Church wardens
terror the Parsonages friend, and the Parsons supervi^or, with whose wife I now
leave him till the next Visitation.

5 A Parasite or Flatterer,
IS Solomon's abject, debarred every wise man's Table, not so much for his
gluttony, as his glozing. He is engendered by Pride, hatched up by arrogance, and
perpetually fostred by fools (the Anvils on which he still beats) who by
reason of their insensibility observes not his insinuation, but are presently
puffed up with those Peacockestailes he sticks in their foreheads. Greatness
never goes without this applausive Puppet, and goodness never can abide him,
there being a kind of Antipathy between them, His tongue is in the Ear of
every affectator, and then never further from his own heart. Folly and
popularity are his prime objects, and he is still present where they
predominate. He cannot be truly generous, for he is a slave to other men's
humors, a thing contrary to a true birth, or a true heart. His greatest pride
is, that he only thinks other men believe him: his greatest pleasure that he
can laugh at them in's sleeve; and his greatest profit is picking of thanks:
he has more wit than wisdom, and more garrulity than grace. He is a great
observer of men's fancy, that he may fit his lyre to that tune. All men in the
end hate him, and he goes out like a snuff. His Conscience accuses him that
he has praised men more than God, and consequen^ly got praise of neither;
which has so dejected him, that he drops off like a green apple in a great
wind, and by his bruise grows rotten at Core, and so cozens the next
Costardmonger.

6. An unxorious man.
IS one who has left all the world for a woman, and all women for a thing
called a wife, with which idol, he is so effeminately bewitched, that he
forgets his annual worship at Jerusalem, and is tied up with a golden Calfe at
home. This Dal lah is his Devotion, this Ruler his religion, this Eve, the
only edge to his appetite, and he will taste any fruit she tempts him to
(though sower graps) This man is never his own man, but in thought, for his
actions intended, are either diverted and writhed by her simple will, or else
wholly violated and broken by her supposed wisdom; He can be no good common
wealth man, he is so confinde to her cannopy, nor a good church man, he is so
tide to her cannons, nor a wise man, to be vanquished with her wilfullnes: He
thinks himself as safe in her favors as Adam in his first form, and hopes to
merit Olympus, by making a Goddess of Diana; the which he is assured by his
faith in her fair promises, and his obedience to her sacred Oracles: In fine,
he is good for nothing but to multiply mankind, and consequently, Sin, and
(which is fittest for him) not when he purposes, but when she pleases. He
cares for no body but her, nor any body at all for him; so that he may live
quietly without company, and dye in his own folly without funeral.

7. A country Widow.
IS a broken ribbe of Adam, turned loose into the world again, and is
searching for a new Bone-setter, and newly polishing her self for a second
edition, or more fair impression. She has la^ely been somewhat mortified in
memory of her deceased, but has suddenly gathered up her crummes, and given
her self out a brace of hundreds more than ere his estat was worth, besides
his debts and legacies, whereas her validity proportionable can scarce absolve
those. She carries her self smooth, demure, and familiar, yet at a certain
distance, lest too much familiarity should breed contempt, and then she may
cough long enough for one to court her. If she be young she is capable of
copulation, and the sooner caught in that conjunct^ve Ceremony; if past the
prime, the more libidinous, subtle, and dangerous, having a double will, the
one from her deceased the other from her widdowhood, by the last of which you
may perhaps buy a pigge in a poke; if she be wealthy, all your comfort is, she
is her own woman, and not subject to the avaricious counsel of peevish
parents, who care not though the girl cuckold him, so the carle be scraping.
She is an object to many: and it is well if but one light on her. She has
already tasted of Mandraks; and likes the fruits so well, that she longs to
graft more imps upon that stock. She is now trimmed up for the next fair,
where if you can bargain for her, you may ride her home with a twinde thread,
and then make the best of an ill bargain.

8. A Chambermaid.
Has her proper denomination from the Place where she is most conversant and
couchant (the Chamber) and is the careful polisher thereof, the obsequious
pinner of her Lady, and the true lover of her Tailor, ever since the curious
cutting of her last Wastecoate, who (with his goose) has made such impression
in her, that her Ladies Closet is thereby impoverisht, and her Marmelet melted
in his mischievous mouth. The beds and she are a kind of Relatives, where by
reason of her near alliance and familiarity, she catches many a fall (to which
she is subject) but is seldom hurt by it in regard of their softness. She is
the instrumental cause of her Ladies Curiosity, and Pride, the original as
also the secret and soft shutter of the Portall, when her Lady would be
private. Sowing and starching is her prime occupation, and the Close-stoole her
greatest slavery. She is a creature commonly very courteous and may prove an
honest woman, if she be not puffed up in the place. She is the patient endurer of
her Ladies peevishness, which perhaps may purchase her a pair of old silk
stocking, which she providently lays up till the next Summer, and then dernes
them for the wedding day. Watching and warming of clothes in a short time
wrinkcles her, and the blossom once blasted, the fruit fails. The best she
can acquire is but Mistress of the Maids, and the worst that can befall her is
but footing of Stockings.

9. A broken Citizen.
IS one whose horns are grown so great, that he is ashamed they should be
seen, and is therefore glad the Gates are wide enough to give may to his
passage, of which he takes his vale for a certain season to some sinister
Sanctuary; where he lies at rack and manger, whilst his too credulous
Creditors are gnawing their Thumbes. By his subtle carriage he wrought
himself into their Credit, of set purpose, shortly to be out of their company;
which, with acute language he has at last accommplisht; and now they may go
look this Bushlane needle in a bottle of hay. He absents himself so cunningly,
that they shall not so much as hear of him, till they have spent their galls,
and then by degrees he gives way to their inquiry with a letter from Ireland,
or some place far remote, whilst, (though disguised) he is at the next
Tavern to them; observing how like so many Kites they lay wait for the Chicken
in the Wood-pile. He has been a man of a large tongue, and short hair,
which two have been great helps to his game. He is a man now so well ly'nd
with the coin acquired by his former impostures, that he is in a quandary
whether to give them a desired Composition of twelve pence in the pound, or to
abjure the City for ever. His Conscience (as false as the light he once
deceived by) tells him, they that lost it may spare it, and he that winnes
ought may wear it, whilst he spends it worse than he got it, and must
certainly pay for it, he knows not how soon. He now discovers the secrets of
filly Tradesmen, and laughs at his slight in his higher Sphere. He has now
admitted himself amongst the multitude of Man-slayers, and feeds them for
fear, and his own folly for fashion. Milford lane, and Ram-ally are his
Castles, Casheerd Captains, his companions; Soldiers his Conductors; and
Sergeants and Bailiffs, his perpetual dream and Terror; and in that little
ease I Will leave him, till he has spent that he has stolen, and then his last
Refuge is Ludgate, where his doleful voice gives more delight than pity to his
repining Creditors.

10 An old Bawd.
IS a menstrous beast, engendered of diverse most filthy excrements, by the
stench of whose breath the Air is so infected, that her presence is an
inevitable contagion, her eyes more poisonous than the Basilisk; her nose (if
any) most pestilent pocky, her tongue more subtle than the Hyena, who still
howles in some fained voice for the devouring of innocents, one who has
damnably destroyed her own soul, and is divellishly devising the destruction of
others. She is the mother of impudency, the Dungeon of diseases, the daughter
of lust, and the most obscene sister of scurrilous and lascivious delights. And
excellent Astronomer, for by the rattling of her bones she can discover the
alteration of the weather; Fools have fatted her up to the day of slaughter,
and Knaves are ready to cut her throat for it. Marshals, Beadles, and
Constables are her continual terror, whom by much silver, she persuades to
silence; silly maids, untamed youths, and sullen wives are her chief
marchandizes, and she sells sin on both hands at a high rate. Adulterate
beauties, and counterfeit complexions, are her alluring baits to deceive the
simple, and all is fish that comes to net with her; All the credit she has got
by her abomination, is carting without co^miseration and casting of loathsome
things at her defiled Carcass. Diseases at last dry up her marrow, and
rottenness so shivers her, that she drops asunder on a sudden, and wretchedly
dies without pity; for whom, a Christian burial is too courteous.

11. A Pander.
IS the Spaniell of a Bawd, who fetches and carries at her pleasure, and is
the most servile slave of baseness. For half a crown he will be your servant
all day, and for the whole cut your throat at night. His looks are commonly
silly and dejected, but you will find his heart deceitful, and his actions
damnable. He will fawn upon those he fears, and roughly misuse those he can
master. He lives at all distances and postures, one while Tapster, or
Tobacco-seller, otherwise Strumphusher; now brother, then Cozen; sometimes
master of the house; yet all this while, Rogue, Thief, and Pimpe. He is
impudency it self, for if the officer approaches, he swears and forsweareth,
as the case shall require. He is much subject to Kicking, and is often basted,
together with his Bawd. He walks in perpetual darkness, and is still in
danger of the Watch, and cannot be otherwise than the abortive issue of some
Adulteress, his nature is so consonant to theirs. He is spurred out of all
honest company, and fostred with none but fornicators. Helives thus till
Bridewell has possessed his Bitches, and the Pox possessed him. And then with a
meagre countenance, and creeping thread bare Cloak, he creepes from Bawd to
Bawd for a crust to comfort his crazy Carcass, and at last in his own ordure,
most desperately and distractedly dies in a ditch, a grave already dug for
him.

12. A Country Girl or Darling.
IS a raw, young, and green maid, newly arrived at the Haven of discretion, and
yet far from the Port thereof, one that thinks more than she speaks, speaks
more than she understands, and understands more than she dares express. She
is prankt up like a Peacocke by her doting Parents, and is the precious pearl
of her mothers Pride, for the Crow thinks his own bird the fairest, and they
think their Goose a Swan. She is a babby trimmed up for every feast and fair,
where the Plough-drag salutes her with two kisses, two pennyworth of pears,
and a two-penny red ribbon, which has so ravished the Girl, that she gads
after him with much greediness, and presently puts finger in the eye for his
absence. She is very towardly and tractable, the cause that her father so
fears his horse-keeper, lest he should steal her and his horse together. She
is one whom no desert can gain, nor Gentry obtain, except he can first plough
with that Heiffer, and then he may find out the Riddle, for she is fallen in
love with an Acrestaffe, and longs to handle it. She is her fathers hope, and
her mothers happiness, the Paragon of that Progeny, though the coursest in
that Country. If they dare trust her, she is sent to be sold at the next
Market, together with her Basket of Butter, where at the Cross her simpring
will scarce give her leave to tell the price on it. And thus I leave her still
longing for something that her friends like not, and in that only consists her
wisdom, that she will please her fancy sooner than her friends.

13. A Lawyers Clarke.
IS a spruce youth somewhat above the degree of a Scrivener, much conversant
amongst sheets and skins, Subjects he works upon much, and is a kind of Jugler,
who by slight of hand, will suddenly make a cleanly conveyance of your estate,
that you shall not afterward need to study how you may prodigally spend it; and
he will so contrive it by president, that he will make you an example whilst
you live. He is one that will do more with a gray Goose wing, than ever Robin
Hood could do, and is very dangerous, if once he puts his hand to it. Four
pence a sheet has furnished him with a new Suit, and he sometimes executes the
place of a Gentleman Usher upon his Mistress. He is a man generally of no
solidity, except by his much costivenes with continual sitting, yet a man of
great study, insomuch it has so stupefied him, that he looks for his pen when
it sticks in's ear. Littleton is too obscure for his capacity; and not one
amongst forty of them can read Law French. He is commonly a good fellow, and
loves to gain no more than he means to spend. He has a piece of Judas his
office, (the Carriage of the Bag) which were it full of Pieces, as it is of
Papers, he might chance to show his Master a trick fort't. He aspiers
sometimes to his Masters daughter, but being stav'd off there, he choppes upon
the Chambermaid, and there sticks fast. he has looked for preferment till age
has dimmed his eyesight, and is now endeavoring to go Clarke of a Band in
the next voluntary Voyage; which if he speed, the Leagre so belouzeth him,
that he returns with much Humility, and poorly prostrates himself for a
halfe-penny a sheet. He is a mere Clarke without any other quality, and has
seldom any commendation, but he writes a fair hand.

14. A Carle, or Farmers Tenant.
IS a kind of a Mole, perpetually delving in the earth for his dinner; and is
of as great judgment as Aesops Cock, esteeming his corn more than precious
stones. He is a fellow of a very great stomach, which his Landlord can quail,
sooner than his poor dinner pacify. And is somewhat of the natures of a
Hog, looking still downward whilst he chawes and gathers the Acornes, not
knowing the Tree whence they fell: and seldom looks up, but for a shower. He
is the wretched Model of our forefathers misery, and that which was Adams
curse, is his calling; Sorrow, the sweat of his face, and a barren field, are
his wrackt rents and revenewes, and a griping Landlord his intolerable grief.
Yet he rises early with the Lark, and whistles (as he thinks) to the tune
she sing, when his broken notes demonstrate nothing but Music for a horse,
and according to that whistle is his singing of Psalms (the cause of so much
discord in the Country Quire) When he tils the earth, he tallowes it with his
own grease, and endures it the better for the dunging of his ground. His
harvest is his greatest happiness, which is more welcome to him then the
Sabbath, and in reaping time he wishes none, lest he should loose more in
that one day, than get in the other six: for though he acknowledges
godliness to be great gain, yet his greatest is his grain. He is the soil
on which all Citizens and Idle folk feed, the very drudge and doghorse of the
world, one that dares not eat the fruit of his labor lest his rent should
fall short, and he be turned forth of his toylesome Vineyard. His hands are his
lands, his pleasures real pains, his Crops carking Cares; his food, the bread
of sorrow, his clothes the skins of his outworne Cattle, and taglocks of
his travel: his whole life a continual toil, and his work an endless
warfare. His greatest comfort is his lawful Calling, and his moyling in the
earth, a means of his mortification. Every Clodde he turns over is the
emblem of his misery. And his Colter and Share the emblemes of his grave, the
which he is always digging.

15 A double benefic't Parson.
IS a Master of Arts or Crafts, who by favor and coin, has caught a degree a
year too soon, and now lies for all the livings he can lay hold of. He has
already rung his Bells for two Parsonages, and not sufficiently preferred by
those, is putting in for a Prebend or two to make himself more complete in his
Taffeta Tippet, and more curious Cassacke. Simony and he are Correlatives, and
that which he obtaines by Simony, he retains by Subtilty. His Degrees give him
a Doctor (tho a very dunce) and his device is now for the next Deanery, to
which Music, money must be the master of the Organs, if he means to sing in
that Quire. He has two Pulpits and one Sermon, which he preaches at both his
Parishes at his primer induction, and then a couple of silly Curates read out
the rest of his Incumbrency for the twentieth part of his Parsonages. He is one
who has the cure of others souls, and yet (by his account) cares not for his
own; and (the more's the pity, is clad with the fleece, without feeding the
flock. His Pulpets and he are so fallen out, that they hate one another, and
'twere no matter if he had fallen out of them long ago. His greatest study is
how he may wrack his Tithes to a higher Rate, and then feed at ease like a
Boar in a Frank. He Is very fearful of another Parliament, lest one of his
Livings should fall short of his reckoning. He has fisht till he has filled
his bag, then sits down to fill's belly, and lends little or naught to the
distressed. He is one whom God has fallen out with for his two little
teaching, and his Neighbors for too much Tything: He will sooner convert the
Gleabe into a pasture, than a soul to his Master, and is of this opinion, that
if he hires one, his duty is performed. He is the cause of so many poor
Scholars, and his over-bidding, the debarring of their gifts, or forestaller
of their Markets: and yet he is so ill inclined, that he curses the Laity who
possess impropriations, and is now grown so fat with pleasure and pride, that
nothing will satisfy him but a Bishopric, or a Grave; in the last of which,
he is daily wished, that some man of more deserts, might climb to that place
he so seldom came near, (the Pulpit.)

16. A young Schoolmaster,
IS a new Commenced Bachelour, who has sucked so long at the paps of his Nurse
(the University) that she has almost pined him: and therefore his fortunes
denying him the degree of Master, in a resolution leaves the Nurse to rock the
Cradle her self, and boldly adventures into the broad world, (like a Lapwing
with it is shell o'th Crown) with Lilly in's head, and Ramus in's hand, where
in some small Village he first exercises the Art of a Pedegogue, for
instruction of infants. Two pence a week, by the Rurals, is proffered him at
his first entrance, for the literature of little Primmer Boys, and four pence
a week for Accidences, besides his Sundays dinner, by turn, together with
the plain gifts of some of their plainer mothers; by the which, he atchieveth
to the annual Pension of ten pound Sterling He is one still exercising the rod
of correction, and the greatest part of his Revenue, is the fees of tender
mothers for sparing his rod, and hating their Children. He does all things in
order, for he has now taken orders, and begins to peep into a Pulpit with a
pocket-Sermon; and as that takes, is either animated or discouraged, to proceed
to a Vicarage. He is one commonly of more desert than respect, and often, for
his good parts, surpasses their lazy Parson. If he scapes a Free-Schoole, he
may light upon a Freeholders daughter, and her love may procure him a Library.
A Lecture read to her may enlarge his Patrimony, and a license confirm. Hope
and patience are his props, and his persuasion is still, that the Seven
Liberal Sciences will not see him want. A Free-Schoole Lecture or Vicarage is
his next aim, and if all these fail, a Scholar, by his industry, may soon
be fit for any thing.

17. A Country Alewife,
IS a subtle Creature, who seeming to be clad with simplicity, and to be as
plain as her poorer Petticote, by her short Courtsies and rural carriage, will
draw till both you and her Barrel be both dry together; and may be termed the
Water work of iniquity, or the Unctious Engine of sophisticate and adulterate
Ale. Tossing of Jugs, Pots, and Cans are her joy, and the froth the best part
of her gain. The Assise of bread and beer is a hateful to her as a Promoter,
and yet all is not well except he be in with her; and (which is worse) she is
forced to make the Disners drunk once a month to conceal her cunning. She is
the Receptacle for all comers, and whatsoever be the company, their coin
shall be alike to her. Her Purse fills as their bellies, but empties not so
soon, for it seldom exonerats its self till the Maulster appears, and then
farwell forty pence. Misreckoning and she are sworn sisters, and her own
daughter is forced to lie for it. Druunkennesse and quarrellings are her daily
guests, and mischiefs, oft-times, the murderer of her sign; and then the
barrels are ill entreated for their so liberal contribution. Forlorn
swaggerers are her greatest sorrow, for they will score against her will, and
then wipe't out with a wet finger. She has filled her Purse by forfeiting her
Recognizance, (which the Clarke of the Peace will empty with his fees.) As
Drunkards increase, so does her Tipping; and the Tap and she are tossed up
together. She loves Tinkers and Pedlers for their true payment of her, and
hates nothing more than a Puritan, or a Parson that persuades from drinking.
She is annually forced to purchase a new license, that her launted liquor may
run more warrantable. Oaths, Idleness, and infinite absurdities are
begotten and fostered at her Alebench, and poor Ale-knights wives and children
do perpetually curse her.

18. An Aldermans daughter.
IS the peevish Spawne of a peremptory Citizen; now ready at the point of
preferment, and is heighted up for that purpose, and is the purer mettle of the
miser her father; who, not long since, descended from the loins of some
lubbardly Farmer, and is now by giddy fortune furd all over, and in the vanity
of his spirit looks asconce if you miss the title of Master Alderman. This
Peacocke, his daughter, is one of the painted Pageans of the City, who dares
not look upon her splea-foot for crushing the sets of her Ruff with her
Chinne, and wears her coat the longer to conceal them, yet (such is her
pride) cannot forbear the holding them up for her silk stockings sake. She is
grown to that height, that she scorns to know her fathers courser kindred; nay
more, longs so for honor, (the Idol of fools) that she disdaines a bird of
her own feather (a Cockney) though a foolish Knight; and ambitiously (through
the conception of her coin) aspires to the Court, and thinks a Lord little
enough for her. And though she be crooked both in mind and body, yet
confidently maintains, that Gold makes all things strait, for which she knows
strait, for which she knows her father has not stretched his Conscience in
vain. She is the prettiest Parrat her mother has hatched, and in her
discourse (which is never solid) will speak nonsense with much celerity, and
will pass by it without blushing, or notice of it. She with the French-hood
her mother, do pace with much pomp and equipage to the Spittle, and to the
Rehearsal Sermons, where she retains only two senses, a wandering eye, and a
liquorish Palate; seeing of strange objects, and tasting of sweetmeats, with
which, her purl'd handkerche is repleat. Her mind is much set upon Court
Masks, the cause of her sleighting the City, where sometimes she has
participated of such curious Cates, that the pleasure of the will not yet out
of her Palate, which makes her in pensive sort solicit her parents to give
her her own choice; and however, she will be a Lady, though she lose all
for it. If her mother once call her Madam, she is made for ever, for it is the
height of her ambition to be the top of her kindred, lest her betters should
take place of her. Her Title and Attire are her only Idols, with which she is
hurried in a Coach with six horses, to the height of her pride, (which must
have a fall) and then perhaps she may be left with a Litter.

19. A Prodigal,
IS a profuse fellow puffed up with affectation, and nusled in the same by vain
glory (the final end his smaller wit and thinner skull aims at) toward which
all his untowards which all his untoward actions tend. He deemes all his
equals, his inferiors, especially those he most accompanies, amongst which he
thinks himself the best man for paying all the reckoning, which they
incontine^tly without grudging grant him, lest their very offer should provoke
him to indignation, at least to oaths, to which he is very apt. He is never in
love with money but when he wants it, and when he has it, he sleights it. He is
one of a very yielding nature, insomuch, that if you praise ought of his that
he affects, he presently bestows it on you, scorning to be so base as to stand
a begging. Nothing troubles his soul so much as to be last in a new fashion,
or the least in company when he is so accoutred. His carriage is very
courteous, yet somewhat quilted with singularity (the secret pride of
Prodigals,) fools are his admirers, and knaves his foothers, whilst he
forgets himself to remember them, and never thinks of shutting the stabledoore
till the steed be stolen. His greatest brag is, he hates covetousness, not
dreaming how in the mean time he imbraceth the contrary extreme vice. He
spends with such confusion, that his supposed friends and associates do
willingly forget his Courtesies, and is of such sublimity of spirit, that he
never looks so low as hogs, til he eats husks with them, and then the Trough
proves his Touchstone. All men behold him with an (alas! it is pity) whilst few
or none supply his poverty which pursues him like an armed man. He is at last
o'retane like a Butterfly in a storm, and left by all those that seemed to
love, and (methinks) in anguish of Spirit I hear him cross the Proverb and
say, Better is a penny in one's purse, than a Courtly friend.

20. An Usurer,
IS an old Fox clad in a lamb skin, who has preyed so long abroad, the he
has feathered his nest for hi^ time, and now sits close in hi^ Den, and
feeds securely upon his former stealths, And though the Proverb says Ill
gotten goods never prosper yet it fails with him, for hi^ golden tree
flourishes and croppe increases what weathersoever comes. And if ol^ Time
lends him but yeere^ and days still, he cares not though he give time to
others, as if he had it to spare. Gold and silver are his Idols or Images,
which he hides as close as Rachel did her fathers; he keeps them prisoners
under lock and key, till Bills and Bonds give security for their safe return,
with another petty impersonall Idol, called Interest. His greatest mystery is the
particular knowledge of each petitioners estate, who solicit him for money,
which by secret intelligence he knew better sometimes than the borrowers
themselves, which if he fears, he falls off till they find security to fill
up his mouth. His perpetual meditation is upon the futur^ days of payment,
which h^ punctually observes, hoping the missing of a day may make a
forfeiture, and having law fort, let conscienc^ go to the devil. He is grown
very subtle in his trade, prying into the possessions o^ young heirs, whose
parent^ by debts and legacies have impoverisht; and if he can bu^ catch them in
a Calfe-skin he is cock-sure; for by such mortgages his money so eats, that
thereby he soon atchieves Fee-simple, for by many such Calfe-skins, he i^
able to cloathe himself in Sables. He seldom furnishes men at the first
entreaty, though the security be sufficient, but will procrastinate you for a
weeks intermission, pretending in the mean time to borrow it for you; which
borrowing, attracts Brokage (the younger brat of Usury) In his trade above all
others, you must both pray and pay, and yet nere have thanks for your custom:
commonly he dares scarce eat of his abundance for diminishing the stock; and
but for cold, would go naked, to save cost: his very habit will discover him
from top to toe, and his leaner chaps, his pinched carcass. He is still
counting his chickins before they are hatched, whilst his own day of account
befalls him unawares. He never sang the fifteenth Psalm with a true heart,
which troubles his conscience on his deathbed, and may justly make him fear
he has lost more Treasure then ere he traded for.

21. A Broker.
IS a forlorn, or bankrupt Tradesman, who has dived into diverse sorts of
mercatory deceits, and finds none so sweet as this mischievous mystery of
Brokery, (the black Art of dishonesty) He is the receptacle for Theevery, and
a vent for much Villainy. There is a reciprocal kindness betwixt him and a
Rogue, and were not for filshing, his Trade would fail. Rather than not be
trading, he will descend to petty Larceny, or any knavery to gain a penny.
Pawns are his perpetual practice, for which (of what kind soever) he never
lends above half the value, setting a peremptory day for their redemption,
with six pence for the bill, and interest treble the Statute in the hundred,
upon their redemption, which he seldom fears, for he knows the parties of
be no such pay-masters. He works much upon Poverty and necessity, and by his
unlawful interest, oft-times eats out the price of that they were full sorry
to part with. He confidently walks by his old remnants, for all comers,
sitting at the receipt of all ill custom. Coozeners are a great part of his
Customers, and Cut-purses his Coadjutors. His chiefest knavery is the
alteration of the property, that the description of the deceived, may not find
out the deceit. He is a back friend to the City, the scum of Tradesmen, a
fosterer of Theft, and a palpable stain of the Suburbs. Long-lane and
London-wall may yet embrace him, (to the great wrong of Newgate) till some
further Law reform it, for the Receiver is as bad as the Thief, and the
enticing cause of stealth, of which many accuse him; and if he be so impudent
as to deny it, Tiburne may shortly prove it, which dispatcheth many more
deserving.

22. A Thraso or Braggadotia,
IS a boisterous fellow in a Buffe-Coat, swelling like Eolus, in windy words,
whose tongue is still applauding himself, and detracting from others; and by
grim looks and stern language idolizeth his own ignominious actions. One
that makes all his frayes with his unctious Tongue, and then is forced
sometimes (unwillingly) to maintain and defend them by his timorous hands, or
to avoid them by her treacherous feet. His valor is daring and affrighting
words, which he foameth out with such a forced fury, that you would think him
^n earnest, and so he would be, save that his heart gives his tongue the lie,
which it ^s obediently puts up, as he will your blows; for hold ^ut his
fained Choler up to ^s feeble height, and begin but where he ends, and he will
quake like an Aspen leaf, or grow so flegmaticke and cool, that he will take
your kickes for courtesies, and your corrections for good mis-constructions,
yet by his rough-way he often carries the conquest amongst Cowards, whose
smallest satisfaction, upon any cause of duel he suddenly entertains with
inward joy, lest persisting in his peremptorinesse he should force them but to
offer defense, of which he is very fearful. And if contrary to his intent, he
chances by his austerity, to incur a quarrel (of which h^ is very
cautelous) it is enough to put him into a quartaine ague, and his temerity is
suddenly turned to timidity. That little valor which he has, I must needs
confess is true, because it is linked with discretion, for I Will warrant you,
he will strike none but those he knows will not resist: he is a School boy
well learnt in this, that he knows who he can master. In brief, he is one
that would be valiant, but for beating; and being beaten, esteems himself the
better man, in that he adventured it And may be compared to a Tempest, that
blusters a while, and is suddenly silent; or to a blazing Candle, that flutters
till it extinguisheth, and then stands there stinking.

23. A Sempster Shopkeeper,
IS a feminine Creature, furnished with the finest Ware, making her greatest
gain of Sindon, or fine linen; transforming it into several shapes for that
purpose, and may be called the Needleworke purle of prettiness. She is very
neatly spruc'd up, and placed in the fronti-spice of her shop, of purpose, (by
her curious habit) to allure some Custom, which still increases and
decreaseth, as her beauty is in the full, or the wane. She has a pretty
faculty in presenting her self to the view of Passengers, by her roling eyes,
glancing through the hangings of Tiffany and Cobweb-lawne, that the Travelers
are suddenly surprised, and cannot but look back, though but to view babbies
in her face, and in affection to her comeliness, must needs cheapen her
commodity, where they are wrapped into a bargain by her beauty, and do kiss
the Nurse for the child's sake, which she kindly accepts, and desires them as
they like that, she may have more of their Custom. In her trade she is much
troubled with stitches; amongst which backe-stich is the most ordinary, easy,
and pleasant to her; and if you cannot bargain for her Ruffes in her shop, she
will fit you with choice at your Chamber, so you pay her well for her pains:
She is well acquainted with hemming too, which sometimes makes her leave her
Needle to drink a cup of Canary, to break her stitch; nor is she ignorant of
Cutwork and Pursework, but has her particular patterns for them too. Her
smile, in asking what you lack, will force you to want somewhat (though but a
pair of sockes) and by your buying of them, she may draw you to a shirt, and
warm it for you too the next morning. She is the pattern of cleanliness, the
Barbary Button of bravery, an Exchanger or City Barterer, who cannot want
custom so long as her ware's good She love not those that lie naked, to save
linen and hopes to grow fat by coining new fashions. And thus I leave her
stitching till her thread be cut, that some younger of her faculty may trade in
her turn.

24. A Prostitute or Common Whore,
IS a Creature in the form and shape of our mother Eve, but of far more
impudency, for as Eve desired to hide her nakedness, this covets to discover
it, making a Trade of lust, and a pastime of incontinence. A painted Iesabell
peeping out at her polluted windows, with a nod or beckon to allure the
simple; and shamelesly saluting those she never saw; and may be compared to a
Jakes, which every rogue uses for necessity, and then abhorres it. She is the
very Compendium and abstract of al baseness, nor is there any abomination to
which she is unapt. She is hell it self whilst she lives upon earth, and her
fire burns as hot as Etna; to whose flames none can approach without either
scorching or consuming. And (which is inexcusable and inexpiable) she makes a
calling of accursed Copulation, and justifies it lawful for her lively hood.
She is both menstruous and mercenary: Lust and Murder are her professions, and
she cares not who knows it. Her veins are filled with several sorts of
poisons, which swell till they burst out into some loathsome excrement; and
then, all that know her, hate her; and all that lusted after her, now loath
her. As she is an actor of any mischief, so, at last, she becomes the
Emblem of most extreme misery, who with half a nose, and one eye, is making
her fatal end, and is happy if her torment end here.

25. An ordinary Gamester.
IS one that has used many tricks and devices to pick up a base living, but
finds no deceit so fair, quaint, and gentle as this slight of hand, this
nimble god Mercury, this cunning trip of a Dye. He is never idle, nor ever
well employed for he is still thinking, plotting, and devising to find out some
fool to coozen. He is more covetous than any Usurer, for he desires but his
principal with certain interest, but this Youth cries. Have at all; and is
perpetually shuffling and cutting for advantage. He is somewhat too prodigal
of other men's purses, especially in his habit, which is commonly neat, if not
brave and gallant; for his clothes are his greatest stock, of which he ought
to have four suits, two to wear, and two to pawn. The first makes him fit
for his betters society; the second, for supply to his game, if he chance to be
spent: yet he is very seldom but on the gaining hand, especially when he
meets with some profuse young Prentice, or some young Innes a Court Man that has
lately received his quarteridge, for by these devices he dives into the
pockets of the dissolute, and as he gets it from fools, so he spends it on
Queanes. Cursing, swearing, and quarrellings, are his Nocturnall attendance,
which arise from Choler, and the loss of Coin, mixed with want of sleep.
He preposterously alters the course of Nature, as he alters the Cards, sleeps
all day, and plays all night, only he will spare some time to eat and drink
drunk upon a lucky hand, so that he has no leisure to pray, except to blind
fortune. He never thinks on his sins, till he has lost all his substance,
and then (if he has but grace a little to pause on them) they flock so fast
from his memory to his mind, that he cannot endure their grim looks, and
therefore chops them and his Dice together into his Box, and cries, Hang sorrow,
care will kill a Cat. He is one that seldom thrives in his By-path to his end,
but his goddess Fortune, at last; plays the whore with him, and leaves him in
his greatest extremity: And when he has neither to pawn nor sell, he is
forced to borrow twelve pence to pay for his Ordinary, and sometimes lies a
week together at the mercy of the Ordinary. He ebbes and flows as the tide,
and nothing makes him hope any good of himself, but his daily change, which
perhaps may put him in mind of his last, that death may not catch him dicing,
at hazard, nor Time (whom he has much abused) in fury break his hour
glass, and so justly by Catastrophe coozen him without care, that has cheated
so many without Conscience.

26. An Host,
IS most commonly a Corpulent fellow, so puffed up with the unctious Element of
Ale, that his wicket is not wide enough for his passage, and therefore his
gates are daily open, lest they should prejudice his guts. His chiefest
livelihood is by the commings in of others, and not of his own. He is as greedy
of guests, as the Devil of souls, and as loath to part with them; which makes
him so often go gaping to the Gate, with a Tapster or Oastler in's mouth,
gaping for new guests. His thredbare Salutation is always welcome Gentlemen,
which very words do wind in the Tapster, and consequently a frothy Jugge; and
it is ten to one, but ere you have ended that, he is entered into some strange
tale, perhaps collected out of his last nights dream, and as true too, for
herein consists his best faculty, in ministering cause of mirth and news to his
weary and welcome Travelers, (things to which he knows man's Nature is much
addicted) for he reads more men than Books, and should be wise, but that his
head's too little for his body: yet if he catch your horse in arrerages, you will
find him cunning enough, for he will raise his Crest so hye, that he will mak^ the
door too little for him* He is a great husband in hi^ drinking, for he is
never drunk at his own cost, which makes my Ostesse bear with the bestowers the
better, and perhaps may requite them with a nights lodging for in a time of
need. He cannot subsist without company tho he be Cuckold for it, and is never
melancholy but when Gallants pass by his gates without tarrying, or tarry
till he is forced to trust them; and then he mournes in the Chine for a month
after. His greatest trouble is, that Physicians tell him, he is subject to the
Dropsy, which he will not believe till he sees it, and then he and his purse
are purged together of some of their sinister and superfluous gain.
Drunkenness and gluttony are his best guests, of which he is both entertainer
and partaker; and grows fat by profusenes, and rich by riotous revellings,
which tho it sometimes disturbs the peace of his little commonwealth, yet the
payment of the reckoning works his pacification, with an (all is well that ends
well) His trade cannot fail so long as men have mouths and money, which he
knows will be till both his lease and he expire. He is a man of little or no
faith, the cause he doubts his salvation, yet bezils up and down, till he
waddles into his winding sheet, and then goes a journey he knows not whither;
and it is well for him, if at the end of his travel, he finds an Inn not
worse than his own.

27 A common Drunkard,
IS a reasonable beast, and a sensitive man: a strange Monster, half man,
half beast, swimming in the Ocean of Bacchus, and like the Whale belching and
foming out of his mouth and nostrils abundance of that frothy and unsavory
Element he so lately ingurgitated and swallowed, to the amazement of those
smaller fishes that flock together about him, and is drowned in his own orb.
One whose essential parts are so obscured, his sense so dulled, his eyes so
dazeled, his face so distorted, his Countenance so deformed, his joints so
enfeebled, and his whole body and mind so transformed, that he is become the
child of folly, the derision of the world, and is led like the Ox to the
slaughter, as his own executioner; yet in all this, his head bears the
greater sway, and his feet are not swift to do mischief. His belly is his god,
the which he over-cloyes with drink offerings, and he is always indebted to my
Ostesse, and his belly to him, but he never to that, so long as his Purse,
Credit, or shame can make even with it. He is one that either spues himself
out, or gives occasion to be spurned out of all civil company. Apt to any
thing he can stand to execute (except Virtue) a mere stranger to him. Noddy is
his usual game, and for Ale too; till he grows so stunified, that he nods
his Nose upon the Noddy-boord, and in revenge strikes his opposite for the
wrong offered, and there the game ends, and fray begins, and then calls for
drink to drink himself friends with them, which friendly cup gives occasion
of a second quarrel. He is the Mault-worme of the Commonwealth, that suckes
in the juice of the poor laborer, and leaves his own family so dry, that they
are either parcht with famine, or burnt with thirst. In brief, he is the
off-scumme of the kingdom, and fit for naught but to set in the front of some
vain and voluntary voyage, lest he should run away in the Rere, and rob his
own parish for ever after.

28 An Elder Brother,
IS often times the heir of Fortune, and folly, both together, and will still
maintain the Proverb, Fortuna favet fatuos: and as he is heir, so is he
often executor to his fathers ill husbandry, which sometimes gripes him so,
that it grindes his estate into a smaller quantity, to the diminishing of the
Manor, with the apurtenances. He is so encumbered with such a Letany of
Legacies for the smaller Infants, that his wit is almost confounded with the
very Catalogue of their names, if not wholly distracted in the discharge of
their portions; for his brain generally is but shallow, and consequently is
soon empty, and as soon runs over. He is not given to travel (the Ambition
of sharper wits) for he is in perpetual travel at home, whose staidness his
Low Country brother takes advantage of, by strong stratagems and designs of
war, till (besides his Legacy) he has angled himself into coin enough to
purchase him a Company, which he dissolves into Dutch Ale, and dries it up
with more dull Tobacco. His Lady with her Coach, have run themselves out of
their way, her out of wits, and him out of his money, to uphold her fancy, and
the new fashion both together, till the Mercer for his money gathers into his
estate by morgage; which, he is as well able to redeem, as to build Paul's, or
rule his wife. His ambition is still to raise his house, though he sels his
land, and live upon the Lease at the rate of the Purcha^e. He sometimes has
wit or wealth enough to be made a Justice for the Peace, where his looks
bewray his learning, and he never speaks, but to some or no purpose.

The Fates in Mercy made such for the relief of younger Mercuries; and they
make the best living and worst use on it. And thus I leave him, that often
leaves many behind him to the Tyranny of Fortune, whilst he is studying his
Pedigree.

29. A young Innes a Court Gentleman.
IS an Infant, newly crept from the Cradle of learning, to the Court of
liberty, from logic to law (both grounded on reason) from his Tutor to the
Touchstone of wits, where he is now admitted amongst the brave imps of the
Kingdom, to grow Pillars of their Country. He is his own man now, and left
to the view of fair virtue, and foul vice, the last of which lays siege to
his tender Walls, and often makes a shrewd Battery, if not quite scales it. He
is one that for the most part forgets his errand, and studies Poetry in stead
of Perkins. His greatest care now, is how to carry himself according to the
Dancing Art, and holds it a greater disgrace to be Nonsuit with a Lady, than
Nonplus in the Law. He tramples upon the Terms often, and holds it a base
language, about which to busy his more high and transcende^t thoughts. When he
aspires once to be a Reveller, he then reveals himself to the full, and when
he should be mooting in the Hall, he is perhaps mounting in the Chamber, as if
his father had only sent him to cut Capers, and turn in the Air till his
brains be adled, and makes things merely for ornament, matters of special
use. His Recreations and loose expense of time, are his only studies (as Plays
Dancing, Fencing, Taverns, Tobacco) and Dalliance, (which if it be with Time,
is irrevocable) and are the alluring baits of ill disposed extravagants. He is
roaring when he should be reading, and feasting when he should be fasting, for
his Friday-night supper does usually equalize his weekly Commons, and it is to
be feared, he will exceed two meals in the week besides, with lac't Mutton,
for whosoever pays for his Commons, he will fall aboard. He is a youth very apt
to be wrought upon at his first entrance, and there are Fishers of purpose for
such young fry. He atchieves much experience before he arrives at the Bar, and
then (if ever) begins to study, when (for his time) he should begin to plead.
Amorous Sonnets, warbled to the Vyoll, are his Celestial Harmony, and if you
put a Case between, you make a great discord. He loves sense bettert than
reason, and consequently not so fit to make a Lawyer. Wherefore I could wish
his friends to cause him to retire, before he be too far spent, and to marry
him before he be stark mad, or a worse mischief (if possible) befall him.

30. A Low Country Common Soldier.
IS an idle fellow, as weary of his own Country, as that is of him; and lest
he should be pressed some worser Voyage, goes voluntary thither to avoid it. One
that has tired al his friends here, and is now transported thither to trouble
the Boares there, where he is now admitted amongst a multitude of mischievous
fellows, to learn all his postures; the first of which, is to double his
Dutch Can till his Tongue doubles between his teeth, and then to fall out
till he be beaten into a stomach. And when that small quantity of coin he
carried with him, is exhausted, he simply settles himself to four shillings
for eight days, which he politikely poures down his gullet in a day, and then
lives by Virginian vapor a week after, till his stomach so wambles, that he
is forced to lumber his upper Garment to supply his guts, reserving still the
Emblem of a Soldier (his Sword) and a Plimmouth Cloak, otherwise called a
Battoone. By this time he is well entered, and will madly strike upon the least
occasion, which his School-fellows perceiving, grow as mild now, as heretofore
they were malapert; and will rather entreat him to drink away his Choler or
belt, than force him to the field. He is now grown to that height of valor,
that he runs over a Dutch Froken, or else falls foul upon her, to the
endangering of her firkin of Butter, and more solid Cheese, with no small
effusion of tears from her fatter Ale-tub. These, with many other postures,
he has achieved too by Stratagem, and thinks himself a Sergeant Major in
these designs. As for his Pike and Musket, he seldom troubles the^, except
sometimes upon mere compulsion to fill up a Company. Half a year has so
qualified him, that for want of supply, he begges for a Furlow, and then legs
with it, till he arrives at his own Shore, with two hempteere napkins pined
together at his shoulders for a shirt, or else none at all. Thus having spent
his spirits, he pensively creepes home with many creepers about him: where,
having gathred up his crumbs, tells such loud stories of the leagers he lay in,
and discourses so superficially of the discipline of War, that he amazeth
some Country Traine-Captaine, insomuch that he courteously takes him to the
Alehouse, and gives him a Colors for it, which he gratefully acceps, and vows
hereafter rather to be hanged in his own Country, than to be abused by
Belgicke Counterbuffes. And though he has not yet left his swearing, yet he
hates lying Per dieu abominably. And has gained so much wit there, that he
thinks the name of a Soldier makes a man valiant, rather than valor makes
him a Soldier, which he has already forsworn.

31. A Gentleman Usher,
IS a spruce fellow, belonging to a gay Lady, whose foot step, in times of
Yore, his Lady followed, for he went before. But now he is grown so familiar
with her, that they go arm in arm, the cause sometimes that he sleights the
Gentlewoman, and yet, upon better advice, pleases her again in secret. He is
a man whose goings and standings ought to be upright, except his Lady be
crooked, and then it is no matter though he stoop a little to please her
humor. His greatest vexation is going upon sleevelesse errands, to know
whether some Lady slept well last night, or how her Physic worked
i'th'morning, things that savor not well with him; the reason that often times
he goes but to the next Tavern, and then very discreetly brings her home a
tale of a Tubbe. His is still forced to stand bare, which would urge him to
impatience, but for the hope of being covered, or rather the delight he takes
in showing his new Crisp't hair, which his Barber has caused to stand like a
print hedge, in equal proportion. He has one Commendation amongst the rest, A
neat Carver) and will quaintly administer a Trencher in due season. His wages
is not much, except his quality exceeds, but his vailes are great; insomuch
that he totally possesses the Gentlewoman, and commands the Chambermaid to
starch him into the bargain. The smalnesse of his legs bewrayes his
profession, and feeds much upon Veale, to increase his Calfe. His grea^est ease
is, he may lie long in bed, and when he is up, may call for his breake-fast,
and go without it. A Twelve-moneth has almost worn out his habit, which his
annual pension will scarcely supply. Yet if his Lady likes the carriage of
him, she increases his Annuity. And though she saves it out o'th'Kitchin,
she will fill up her Closet.

32. A Cuckold,
IS a harmless horned creature, but they hang not in his eyes, as your Wittals
do the reason of his honesty and the others knavery. He confidently gleans after
the reapers, not thinking of stealing, and kindly embraces the leavings of his
neighbors, and is as well satisfied as if he had the first cut, verifying the old
Proverb, That the eye sees not, the heart grieves not He is very indulgent to
his spouse, giving her her own way in all things lest she should take it;
knowing that women are most apt to forbidden fruit. There is a special
Sympathy, by instinct, betwixt him and his Corrivall or Cuckolder, for he
always loves him best, his wife likes best (a special token of a patient and
true husband.) He never grieves at his keeping of other men's children, for he
is very charitable that way; and (being filled with blind zeal) loves them
as well as if they were his own. He palpably possesses his place in his Pew,
without the least conceit of pointing at him, and welcomes him to dinner that
is i'th'dish before him, which his wife passes by without blushing, praying
the Gentleman to be his own Carver, whilst the silly man nere dreams of her
intent, after his decease, or his then departure. He lives a very contented
life, and is not troubled with Jealousy (the torment of the mind) but takes
all in good part, so she be pleased. He spends his time thus till he becomes
one of the head-broughs of his Parish, and holds his Velvet horns as high as
the best of them, he minds his own affairs more than his wives actions; and
if he dies not a Pricket, he may live to be an old Stagge, a very Lordly
beast.

33. An Informer,
IS a spy or Knave errant, that peepes into the breaches of penal Statues,
not for love to the Commonwealth, as his own lucre, amongst which Assisa panis
and cervitia, th'assize of Bread and beer are his greatest Revenues, for
winking at small faults, and coozening the King and Subjects both at once: for
though the pretense of his profession be for the fulfilling of the Statutes yet
his Roguish mystery aims at his own ends. He transformes himself into
several shapes to avoid suspicion of Inn-holders, and inwardly joys at the
sight of a black Pot or Judge, knovving that their sale by sealed quarts,
spoils his Market, and abates his mercinary Coozenage. As he is an Informer,
so he should be a Reformer, but for his quarterly fees from Taphouses, for
connivance; which fees, are the cause of so much froth in the Tapster to
recover that again of which he was cheated. He sneakes like a Sergeant into
every corner to take advantage, and drinks up men's drink, and makes them pay
for it. As he loves no man, so he is hated of all, and is very near hell when
he is drunk in the Celler. He is the scum of Rascality, and the abuser of
the King and his Exchequer both together; yet he seldom thrives in his
impostures, in regard of his greater sharers, whose vassal and slave he is.
All men behold him with indignation, and point him out knave in every Parish,
which he willingly puts up, in hope, one day, to avenge himself upon their
purses. His gain is extortion, which may in time pull both his ears from his
head, or dig him a grave under the Gallows, which he has already deserved.

34. A Batchelour.
IS one that carries a great burden about him, Concupisence; to which he is
either given over, or in perpetual combat betwixt the flesh and the spirit;
He is never quiet in his mind, for he is continually choosing, and commonly
as soon dislikes his own choice: a great point of folly in him to be provoked
to any thing either by opinion or purblind Passion. He is one whose honesty
cannot shelter him from suspicion, and imputation of his next neighbor, by
reason of his supposed vigor. He dreams away his best time, and sowes his
seed in other men's gardens, (which they reap and are no gainers by it) whilst
he has scarce any left to sow in his own. He thinks himself happy in that
he has none to care for but himself, whilst he cares not at all for his
Nobler self, his Soul, and dies without Vine to his house side, or an Olive
plant to his Table, so that posterity shall not behold any of his Progeny. He
courts each handsome object, his veins being full of Venus, and his heart of
Cupids darts, which in short time so sting him, that happily ere long, he
salutes Hymen, and proves an honest man: for the obtaining whereof in his
former estate he was far out of his way, except made an Eunuch, and
consequently been hated by the softer Sex for ever after.

35 An under-Sheriffe.
IS an active fellow, begot by the Statute for a year, and then his Name
extinguisheth, though he be sharer in another, the next year after. He is the
fear and terror of all debtors, as also the free entertainer of the Creditour,
who daily solicites him with coin, to be expeditious in his Catching, which
he discreetly entertaines with protestation of performance, whilst a fee on
the contrary forces him to neglect, knowing that though delays prove
dangerous, yet all makes for his advantage in the end. He is the birth, life,
and death of the Law. The birth is the first process; the life the execution,
and the death the stopping the breath of the execution, by giving notice to
those that never requite him with nothing. He is one subject to much danger,
and ought to have both wit and valor, the one to defend his purse, the other
his carcass, lest the Exchequer cut the one, and the Country Rebel the other.
He understands more than the high Sheriff his Master, and may well, for he
buys his wit of him (which is ever the best) and sells it again at a treble
value, proving a great gainer, if his Quietus est does not too much gripe him.
He is outwardly respected more for fear than love, and as little esteemed
when he is out of his office, which will be next Michaelmas Term, and then
you may trade with him for ten groats (an Attourneys fee) his Collateral
profession.

36. A Drawer.
IS one deeply read in the mysteries of the Celler, diving into the secrets of
Hogsheads, and is much conversant in the mingling of his ware. He is of such
celerity, that he ascends the Stairs in a moment, and descends them as
suddenly, especially when he is thrown down He is one that trusts all
comers (for he only cries score it) but he trusts them no further than he
sees them, and when their brains and bellies are full, he looks they should
empty their purses. He is subject to many ill words, which he as patiently
bears, as they are like to do his blows, if they want the Reckoning. He
should be very wise by the continual sight of so many several humors, and
would be so, but for the fumigation of the Celler, which elevates his wits, and
makes them fly so high, that they sometimes catch a fall. He is always a good
fellow, and loves a Gentleman, for that he is sometimes one himself. He
drinks the best drink, which breeds the best blood, the cause he commonly
loves a Wench, for he is a man of great trading. I cannot tell whether his
Master serves him, or he his Master, but I am sure they cannot well live
asunder. He is now casting about for some Merchants Credit, to set up for
himself, that his wife may keep the Bar, to attract Custom, and he leave
his journey-worke, and become as free to her, as she may be to others.

37. A good Husband,
IS a man who steeres all his course in a right line, and weighes all his
actions in an equal balance; a very good Mathematician, for he is always
within his Compass, but never runs circle so long as to make himself giddy.
He cuts out every into a Geometrical proportion to this Rule and estate; nor
does his Sense too much overruled his Reason. He drinks only for thirst, and
eats only for hunger, knowing superfluity to be the heir of prodigality, and
liberality the daughter of good husbandry, and Medium betwixt two extremes. He
is the sole happiness of a good wife, and the torment of a Waster. His
children never live to have cause to curse him, nor his servants to accuse him
for their want of wages. He seriously viewes the folly of Profuseness, and is
inwardly sorry to see the fall of any. He is not so niggardly as to grudge
himself or his friend a good meal, but tastes freely (though temperately) of
that God has lent him, and thinks himself no loser by lending a little to
the needy. His moderate diet gives him longer days, and his care in his
calling frees him from idleness (the bait of his greatest enemy) for in doing
nothing men learn to do ill. He loves not stolen waters, (though never so
sweet) but is satisfied with the breasts of his own bedfellow. He educates his
children in a Grace cannot want goods. And thus he passes his pilgrimage with
a peaceful Conscience, and leaves the world with all goods men's applause, so
that his name dies not with his nature. His tything in his life time was so
true and conscionable, that the Parson preaches his Funeral praise, and
perhaps gives him gratis his burial in the Chancell.

38. A Constant man.
IS one who has limited his Passions, and set certain bounds to his
affections, loving still in his course to hold the bridle firm in his hand,
lest carelessly letting the reins loose, he either stumbles dangerously, or
falls very foul. His actions are solid, not phantastike, and he is very wary of
promising any thing that he either thinks or knows he cannot perform; for
he still casts beyond chance, knowing a possibility, and seeing a probability
before he passes his protestation. He is one that keeps his mind within him,
the reason why he thinks and speaks both together, without any jarre between
his tongue and his heart. His word is as good as his bond, and his conscience
the best debtor. His love (if possible) is without lust or jealousy, fixed on
virtue, where it stands firm as a rock. Truth has bound up his Temples and
discretion has so knit the knot, that he seldom makes his choice so bad as
to refuse it, his word so large as to revoke it, or his time so short as to
piece it with delays at its period. He must needs be very patient too, else
his constancy could not continue, for impatiency breaks the fence of hope and
stability, and lets in despair and levity, a couple of wild Cattle that may
spoil a well grown field. The wife that possesses him is happy, for there is
sure hold of his word. She finds him at his appointed hour, which debarres
her of many feats, and she never eats her meat cold, by staying for his
coming. He has wealth enough, if he has but this one Virtue, for all men
believe him, and dare trust him. Time and experience have wrought him into
every man's good opinion, and he stands unmoved in all his dealings. He hates a
liar as a thief, and is the greatest friend where he once professes. The
world is now grown so wild, that few men are of his mind, and fewer women,
the cause of so many cuckolds, perjured persons, and dying lovers.

39. A jealous man,
IS one so strangely and strongly possessed with the yellow Jaundis, that he
thinks all things of yellow color, which mistake proceeds from the defect of the
eye, not the object. He is one whose mind is in a continual labyrinth, the
further it goes, the further perplexed; the more it looks, the more tormented,
and yet sees nothing, but by imagination, which foolish fancy lies so heavy in
his forehead, that he takes it for a horn, though it be but a pimple
i'th'flesh. He consumes himself and his wives reputation both together, by his
too often causeles suspicio^ and thinks a kiss (tho before him) a sufficient
cause of divorce. He is the scoff of his neighbors, and the bait that causes
many to nibble in jest, that he might vex in good earnest. He commonly
dreams of his wife, though never so broad awake and would keep her in a Chest
but for fear of picking the lock, which sets the greater edge to her
appetite, and the greater madness to his misbeliefe. His brains are in
perpetual agitation, and in his fantafie (being a kind of frenzy) fees so many
loose passages in her, and lascivious embraces by his supposed Corrivals, that
he is stark mad at last with melancholy musing. He lives in hell upon earth,
and is so besotted, that he cannot see when he is well. He is so far gone
in his disease, that all Physicians have given him over, knowing there is but
one medicine (amongst all) to cure him of this malady; which is, to see that
really acted, which he so steadfastly supposed; which (no doubt) will shortly
be effected, to the full recovery of the coxcombe, and the manifestation of
his error in s forehead, (an ornament fit for him.)

40. A desperate man,
IS one who has forgot God, the world, the devils his Neighbor and himself,
and runs with precipitation into any danger. All his actions are violent, and
therefore cannot be permanent. He is a man of no faith at all, the reason he
can apprehend no mercy from his Maker, but all Justice. He still goes with
Cain's fear about him, whilst he himself makes a trade of murdering; nor
scarce touched for it till his fatal, and then it falls so heavy, that he cannot
bear it. He is a man of no staidness, for he leaves a Rock to build upon the
Sand. Some thinner sculs think him valiant, because he dares stab, or do any
sudden mischief: but the Schools deny it, approving valor to be mixed with
discretion (which a desparate man altogether wants) besides, valor is virtue,
springing from fortitude, but rashness a vice arising from passion. He is one
no way fit for any place, either in Church or Commonweal, for he that cannot
guide himself, is most unfit to govern others. He is a man of small or no
hope, for he is left to himself, and then scarce a man. He does all things
without premeditation, the reason why so many disasters attend the end of his
actions, which he commonly feels before he sees. All that know him shun his
society, not so much for fear of him, as the law, knowing that his fury will
force them to some further inconvenience. He is settled and vested in this
villainy, and takes a pride to be talked of for his treachery, and is still
glorifying in his own shame. Newgate or a worse place, will shortly take
possession of him, if he mend not his manners, for a graceless man is good for
naught but a Gallows.

FINIS.
A true friend,
IS a Fountain that cannot be drawn dry, but always affords some fresh and
sweet waters to him whose necessities and extremities enforce him to fetch it.
He is a man's second self, as dear as a good wife, more dear than a brother,
else the wisest King had been mistaken: but our times justify his Proverb
true, which he knew before. He is Solamen in miserijs, a Copartner in
distresses with you, and inwardly (not fainedly) bear half the burden. Love
and you that it is a question reciprocally answering each other in affection,
and are equally sensible of each others defects or disturbances. He is no
Meteor or Comet, no nine days wonder, or wandering Planet but a fixed star,
by whose operative influence, his needy is nourished. For he is not composed of
words, but actions, always ready at a dead lift, to draw Dun out of the mire.
Not only a bare Counselor to goodness, and so leave you without means of
prosecution (the niggardly wisdom of these times) but an assister in the way,
and goes on the first mile with you for company, and looks after you in the
rest of your journey, if he does not travel throughout the same. He never
aims at any of his own ends in doing courtesies, but does them freely and
quickly; not drownding his good deeds in the dull performance; for, Qui cito
dat, bis dat; He that gives timely, gives twice. He Is a certain perpetuity,
that cannot be lost by nonpayment of Rent, and ought to be loved above
fee-simple. He is the pillar of constancy, and the very touchstone of Truth.
One that looks upon men with the eye of Religion, and is not rounded in the
ear with worldly applause for it. Hypocrisy and vainglory are as far from
his hearths, as the contrary Poles are from each other, for his right hand
shall not know what his left hand does. He is (in these iron days) Rara avis
in terra; a black Swan, or a white Crow, as rare as the Phoenix, and such a
precious Jewel as the Indies cannot afford his parallel. He is most happy
that has him, and I advise him to make much of him, for he has great fortune
indeed, if he finds a second.

FINIS.

