THE CONTINVATION of our weekly Avisoes, since the 16. of May to the 4. of
June, containing amongst many other matters,

These Particulars following.

The late Deplorable loss of the famous City of Magdenburgh, taken by the
Imperialists, with the utter Devastation thereof, by Killing, Fiering, and
taking Prisoner of most of the Inhabitants, wherein were Butchered and Burned
above 20000. Souls, the like miserable, bloody and inhumaine Cruelty never
committed (since the Seidge of Jerusalem) in so short a space.

The proceeding of the King of SWEDEN.

The state of Transylvania and Hungary, with the present estate of Italy, and
Germany.

The late proceeding of the Prince of Orange and the business of the
Low Countries, as now it stands.

Together with diverse other matters of Moment.

LONDON. Printed for NATH: BVTTER and NICHOLAS BOVRNE. 1631.

The Continuation of our Weekly Avisoes.
From Venice the 23. of April. 1631.
FRom Piemont we have intelligence, that the Diet at Cherasco is ended, and the
peacefully concluded. Mantua is certainly to be restored to the Duke of
Nivers, the 8. of May. Also diverse places shall be incorporated in Montferat
for the Duke de Guastala, and the Duke of Savoy, Susa, Avigliano and Pignarola,
are delivered up to the Switzers until the Passage into Bunten be fully
restored and the forces withdrawn. Picollemmi has charge given him to employ
the Dutch forces against the King of Sweden, but many of them are fled away.

The Governor of Milaine has much furthered this treaty for peace. The Marquis
Sancta Croce is marched toward Flaunders, and his forces follow him.

From Vienna the 26. of April.
Here is great fear conceived, and men are much perplexed for fear of the
King of Sweden, but yet we hope that since the Peace is concluded in Italy, and
the forces on both sides are withdrawn, that the King of Sweden will meet with
more opposition than formerly he has done. The Peace at Sevenbergen is also
contracted. And 1000. Dragonners are already marched toward Silesia under the
Command of Den Balthazar. The Commander Dona is also to depart hence with
certain forces to Silesia. Their intent is to prevent the King of Swedens
intention, and to stop his proceedings, that he may not make an inroad into
Silesia.

Here come messengers daily which are posted from General Tilly, to solicit
for aid and more forces against the subtle and powerful enemy who is now
far fallen into the Empire. His Imperial Ma: gathers as much money as
possibly he can compass and raises new forces. Here are diverse warlike
Officers with Patents to leavie men. Many Dragonners and other Regiments out of
Silesia, are now marching against the King of Sweden.

From Prague the 28. of April.
The Peace in Italy is certainly now concluded, and the Duke of Niuers is
shortly to have Mantua. All the Emperors forces in those parts are to be
employed against his Majesty of Sweden. Men are in great perplexity and fear
in all parts, of the King of Sweden. Every man's name is taken here by the
Magistrate, and all the Citizens commanded to be in a readiness and are to be
Mustered with all expedition.

From Prague the 5. of May.
We are certified, that the peace between the Turk and the Persian is agreed
upon. And that Ragotzi has pursued the Hungarian Palatyne even to New-Heusel,
and encompassed the same. The walls and Moates about this City are carefully
provided and fortified, and great forces are daily levied in this Kingdom.

The Duke of Friendland is again arrived here, it is supposed that he will
be employed in warlike service.

At this present comes tidings, that the Commander Papenheym is slain.

From Nurenburgh the 30. of April.
The next week, here shall be held a Creytz-dyet of all the Frankish-Peeres.
To resolve what every one ought to Contribute these troublesome times, and what
force shall be levied.

In the Earldom of Marck, great force are already up in Arms.

The Duke of Bauaria, and other Catholic Princes leuy daily. And their intent
is to raise an Army, and take their Rendevous by Tonnewerdt and Ginsburgh.
Insomuch that the whole Empire is in Combustion.

From Francford Oder the 1. of May
Whereas the strong City Lantsbergen has long been beseidged by the King of
Sweden, and could in no wise be relieved, nor delivered (especially since this
City Francfort was brought under the Kings subjection) after they had manfully
defended themselves, but could no longer subsist they yielded upon agreement.
And the 26. of April marched forth of the City being 4000. strong with their
Ensigns displayed, matches burning, and 4. pieces of Ordnance, toward
Groot-Glogau. This City being taken, all passage into Silesia, all Cities of
Brandenburgh from Silesia to this side of the Sprew and all back Pomerania,
are in the command and subjection of the King of Sweden.

To morrow the King is expected here and will betake himself toward
Old-Brandenburgh. Baudis and the Rhyngraef are with certain thousand men in
Silefia, and have taken Crossen with agreement. Now let Groot-Glogau look to
it self that is like to suffer next. At Berling men labor stoutly about the
fortification of the same City and 600. Citizens watch themselves Continually.

From Overlandt. the 3. of May.
The Commissarie Ossa upon Thursday last, demanded contribution of the City
Vlm. Which City with many more denied to pay the same. And furthermore
declared that they would suffer no more thorough-fares through their Countries,
unless all things be paid according to the constitution of the Empire. Which
did very much move him, and thereupon before his departure summoned the chief
of the Citizens to appear before the Magistrates, and there caused the
agreement which was concluded at Leypsich, and sent to the Catholic Princes,
to be read before them. And afterward questioned of them whether or no they
were unanimously resolved to maintain the same. Whereunto they answered. Yea.
And that for the performance and execution of what had been concluded by that
Noble and Princely Assembly, they would wage goods and lives, and spend their
very last drop of blood. The said Commissary Ossa presently dispatched a
Messenger of purpose to the Emperor: and certified him of their strong
resolution. And also sent another Post with all speed into Jtalie; to hasten
those Forces downward with expedition to be employed against the King of
Sweden.

From Prague the 16. of May.
The Imperial Court-Chaplaine named Pater Weyngartener, a Jesuit, has lately
in one of his Sermons exhorted the Superiors to that same (as he termed it)
sweet and wished peace. Which he very highly commended unto them, admonishing
them to turn their swords into Mattocks, and their Spears and Pikes into
Plow-sheares, etc. To the end they might enjoy land and liberty, and every man
walk quietly in his own Field, and sit peaceably under his own Vineyard.

All this week they have continued mustering in this City, and the drum beats
throughout this whole Realm. A general Assembly shall be held next Week in
this City for the raising of Contribution toward these great warlike
preparations. The Jews shall be compelled to contribute if so be they will not
voluntarily.

From Francford at Mayn, the 7. of May.
There passed lately many ships with Neapolitan soldiers to the Low Countries,
and 6000. men more will shortly follow them. The Bishop of Mentz does also
begin to raise forces, and has sent the Archdeacon of the Cathedral, to
Dunkel-Spiell at the Assembly of the Catholic Prices, to consult with them of
the means for raising of an Army against the King of Sweden. Forces also are
leuyed for the Lords of the Dutch-Order. Whereof 150. men passed by here
yesterday, they have their Rendevous at Mergendael.

Extract of a certain letter written from Magdenburgh, the 23. of April.
Wherein may appear how far Tilly had then proceeded against that City.
THe 12. of this Month, the General John of Tilly presented himself in full
Battle a Mile from this City, and seemed as if he would have assaulted this
City with his whole Army with maine violence. But he effected nothing, only
he chased some of our soldiers out of their Radoubts which they guarded, but
never meddled with the great Starresconce, which is built by the Old Elve.

The 13. the General planted 12. Ordnance upon the bank of the River Elve,
and with the same made 568, shot upon the bridge of this City, intending to
ruin the same, and separate it from the City* To the end he might thereby
prevent us from seconding the Toll-house, and the Sconce, but with his vehement
shooting he prevailed not much. The Marshall Diderick Valckenburgh, gave order
that certain pieces of Ordnance should be planted upon the Toll-house,
wherewith we so played upon the enemies Ordnance, that they were constrained to
remove them from the Battery.

In the mean while, the General with a great fury and a crying noise, brought
his Army dejectedly upon the Toll-Sconce, and all the day, as also most part of
the night following assaulted the same with 8. several assaults. Intending
also to press through the out-workes, to which end the foot soldiers were
pricked on by the horse with rigor and violence, but were feign to retire. For
the Marshall Valkerburgh had charged the 4. Ordnance double, with stones, lead,
and iron, and set the Soldiers and Citizens in good order, and brought them
against the enemy: insomuch that the Enemies that night about twelve of the
clock retired. Many of them being slain. Next morning, our soldiers horse
and soote fell out of the City, and brought in many of them Prisoners and many
maimed, who declare that in this encounter 2000. men were slain.

By reason of this success and deliverance which it has pleased God to
afford, we have some time of breathing. The General seems as if he tended
another way, but God knows his enterprise: We know not what will become of us,
only we pray God (if it be his will) to deliver us, as hitherto, out of the
hands of our bloody enemies.

From Leipsich, the first of May.
Three days since our Prince Elector caused the Drum to beat, and the
Trumpets to sound, for the leuying of 12000. foot, and 3000. horse. There come
to him a great confluxe of people, and many of the Emperors soldiers. The
King of Sweden as we are credibly informed, has taken Lantzbergen.

The Contents in brief of what has been concluded in the Diet at Leypsich,
which Articles were sent to his Imperial Majesty, from the Duke of Saxony.
1 FIrst, that the Ruins of the Empire shall be repaired: And the warlike
Annoyances removed, also that the Protestant Princes shall again incorporate
their own, and re-establish all things as formerly they were before the wars
in Germany: Especially, the state of the City Augsburgh. And that all
requisite means for the effecting of the same are to be embraced.

2. That the Edict concerning the appropriating of Byshoprickes and Cloisters,
by the Protestant Princes shall at a general Assembly by a friendly means be
decised, and so cut off and removed.

3. That all Warlike troops and soldiers shall be driven out of the Empire.

4. That all and each shall labor to free himself of that yoke, and rid those
aggrievances which ever have been laid upon any of the Protestant Princes, and
frame all according to the constitution of the Empire.

5. Lastly, that in the mean while none of the Protestant Princes shall in any
wise alter his opinion, or break his promise, or exempt himself from this
defensive work begun, and undertaken by them. But constantly proceed, with
vehement power to shake off those contributions and impositions, laid upon
them, and so defend themselves and their Countries from that intolerable
tyranny which hitherto they have suffered.

From Statyn the 7. of May.
We are informed here, that the King of Sweden is come before Old-Brandenburgh
with his Army, and demanded of the Garrison by a Trumpetter, whether they would
surrender the City and depart willingly, or whether they would stand to the
rigor and extremity? Whereupon they desired three days respite for
consultation, but his Majesty of Sweden would not permit them so long time, but
wished them to resolve speedily. What effect this has taken we shall in time
learn, and hereafter acquaint you.

From Mentz the 8. of May.
We understand from Leypsich, that the Protestant Princes in all parts make
great preparation for war, and raise great forces. The Commander Sihwalbath,
Tauben Bindtauff, and the Duke of Aldenburgh, and received Patents from the
Prince Elector of Saxony, and received money to leuy men Upon the charges of
2000. Horse, and three Regiments of foot, each of 3000. men. Besides other
forces which are to be raised for the said Elector. In the behalf of
Brandenburgh 1000. horse, 4000. foot. The Franckish and Swedish Oreytz, 3000.
horse, and 12000. foot. The Rhyn Gretz 1000. horse and 4000. foot besides those
of Hessen. All these to be used for the defense of their liberties, and the
Protestant Religion. At Nurenburgh or Dresden shall be held a general
assembly, to choose a Counsel of War to the Duke of Saxony, who is General,
and a Lieutenant.

The Bishop of Oeulin is intended to levy 1000. horse, and the Duke of Bauaria
diverse forces to oppose the Protestant Princes in this their intention.

At Hall are expected 2000. horsemen, but weeknow not to what end: the Duke of
Hawre is iournied to the Emperor to consult with him concerning the affairs
of the Archdutchchesse at Bruxels. Whereas many of the Emperors forces did
roaue about Hal and Meresburgh, and some of them enquartered there, the same
Duke even the Commander Swalbach came thitherwith a company of horsemen, to
enquirewhat their intent was, who answered that they should not need to fear
them.

The General Tilly had made diverse assaults upon the outworkes of Magdenburgh,
and taken some of them. It is coniectured that that City will not hold out
long, for the General Tilly is furiously bent against the same.

From Desren the 4. of May.
General Tilly continues with his siege before Magdenburgh, and it is thought
he will take the same, for the better effecting of the same, he has now cast a
Bridge over the Elue.

Captain Capo who was embarked with 300. Musketeers, did light upon the
sands and the bounds where most of his Barks burst in pieces and sunk. 100.
of the soldiers are taken prisoners by a Captain of the Holsteyn Regiment,
for they thought to save themselves, butwere taken by those of the Sconce, as
soon as they came on shore.

From Frankeford Oder the 7. of May.
The 26. of the last month, the King of Sweden took in Laxtzbergh with
agreement, the Garrison within the City consisted of 4000. men, horse and foot,
these marched out of the City with bag and baggage, their colors displayed,
with all their Arms, and 4. Pieces of Ordnance and so much powder to each
piece, as would discharge them four times. The King of Sweden in this siege
lost 600. men.

From Antwerpe the 12. of May.
This week here arrived an Ordinary Post from Spain, and an extraordinary one
at Bruxels with Letters from Lisbon, and Madrill the 25. of April these relate
that the King of Spain through instigation of the Portugals, has given order
to make ready the Armado against the 20. or 30. of June, and that the same
should then depart for Brasil. Unto this Armado are diverse strong ships of
Dunkerke adjoined. The whole fleet is above 40. sail, but by reason of the
scarceness as dearth in these times, the fleet is victualled but for 6.
months. By this Messenger his Majesty did make over by exchange 700000. Ducats
for the pay for the Soldiers, he sent Order also, that the Marquis Sancta
Cruce should be chosen field General. His Majesty has also sent a great sum
of money into Italy.

Concerning the affairs of war, the preparation continues still. Count John
of Nassan with his troops is departed, Count Henry Vanden Bergh shall command
between Maes and the Rhine, and over those troops came from Italy.

The Marquis S. Cruce with Aytona are now at Dunkerke, and depart thence to
Ostend, Graueling, and other places to set order in all things. Don Carolo de
Columba with Monsieur Bagilion commands the troops of the country of Waes and
thereabouts. Maistra del Campo Zapata marches with his Regiment toward
Walchin, the Regiments of the Earl of Grimbergh, Fresin, and Grobbendonek are
gone toward little Brabant, and all other Officers are departed with their
order and Commission from Bruxels.

The two Walloon Regiments and seven Companies of horse are now made up
complete. The new forces newly armed and mustered are come along the Shield
from Doormick Ruppelmond.

The Regiment of Monsieur Celado marches to Damine, and those out of
Bourgoigne being 5000. strong march to Breda, Maes, and Rhyn, more forces are
levied with all possible speed.

The King of Spain has given order that the Armado at Dunkerke shall be
strengthened, and the fleet under the Lord of Wackenen.

From Bergen up zome the 16. of May.
Upon the River Net, near Dussel, Waclem and Runst, are embarked 4000.
unarmed Soldiers, most of them are Italians, Walons, Germans and English men.

At Mecchelen is great diligence used for the making ready of Wagons, Ordnance,
and all warlike preparations, also many drawing and Wagon horses.

Within this City are arrived six Companies, and seven other Companies went
forth in lieu of those that came in, there went also out of this City for the
Army many Inginers, Myners, Gunners, etc.

By reason that many Spanish forces shall be enquartered at Balaex, the Country
people inhabiting about Mecchelen and Lain for fear of them transport their
goods into the Cities.

Diverse passages lately happened in the Low Countries and other parts.
Those of Breda do much fear lest they should be besieged, and therefore have
well provided that City. Many women for fear are departed thence into
Antwerpe.

The States of Holland have made proclamation at Bergen up zome, wherein they
prohibit all their subjects thereabouts, as also Steenbergen and other places
to pay any contribution to the Archdutchesse, upon penalty of paying of four
times as much to the States.

The Prinnace called the Moor, departed from Fernambuco the last of January,
and arrived in Zealand, lately laden with 75. Chests of Sugar, Comfites, and
other good Commodities. These that came thence report, that all was well and
safe with the Hollanders. That the Portugals do oftentimes come and show
themselves before the City, and slay all those they can get within their
reach. The Colonel Waerdenbergh and the Counsel of War, they have caused a
Sconce to be built on the otherside of the Land called Verge, by which means
they can the better keep the Inhabitants in awe, and visit them. They certify
also that diverse ships of the General Pater were arrived there, and he
himself with the rest of his fleet is daily expected, and then they intend to
enterprise some notable exploite.

By this time the Army of his Excellence is ready, being a huge and great
Army. The guard of his Excellence on Sunday departed from the Hage, three other
Companies presently followed them, to wit Lokerem, Witsen, and Grave Lodewicke.
All other Companies and Troops are marched each to their designed places. His
Excellence departs himselse this day being the 17. of May.

It is admirable as also delightful to see the multitude of ships, barks and
boats which daily pass by Dort toward the Leager, and down again waiting his
Excellences leisure where their Rendevous shall be.

This week happened a great mischance at Dort, through Gunpowder which blew up
a whole house, and did endammage two other houses very much, four people were
killed through this mishap, and many more bruised and burnt, and sorely hurt.

It is confirmed for a certain from Spain, that the Admiral of the late
silver fleet of Hauana, (which was taken for the authorized West India
Company, by the Captain Oret: Heyn) was beheaded for his good service in
Spain. The fourth day of the month of March last past.

A true Information in what manner the City of Magdenburgh was overcome by the
Lord John Tilly, General of the forces of the Emperor, upon Tuesday the 10.
of May, 1631.
Together with the woeful and lamentable present estate and condition thereof.
AFter that the said General had, as is reported, many times offered the City
conditions of peace, yea, and upon the Monday the ninth of May, being the day
before he took it. But the Citizens would not harken thereunto, no nor in the
least manner would so much as take it into their consideration or
understandings, though he threatened them, it would otherwise fall very heavy
upon them, and being further admonished by the Burgomaster, even upon the
Tuesday morning before it was taken. A writing was read upon the wall of the
City, expressing a peace then offered to have been ratified, with the said
City, the Archdukes of Saxon, Brandenburgh, and the house of Stattene,
conditionally that they would be subject to the Popish siege, the which they
in no wise would consent unto, but willingly they would much rather lose their
lives and goods.

The Citizens waited and attended with certain hope, not daily but hourly to
be succored by the King of Sweden, and in the mean time the Citizens saw
that Tilly raised his forces, and removed his Leiger, and carried away bag and
baggage, and so marched for half a league from them, in which time the King of
Sweden, for want of horses at hand could not come forward with his Artillery,
whereupon the Emperors forces on the Tuesday morning early, turned their
forces, and after it was too manifest the Empereours forces had so filled a
Ditch near a gate of the City, called the Heyecker. Then with green grass or
weeds that the Soldiers could wade through, though it was deep to their
middles, and so carried scaling ladders on their backs, and so entered the
Town whilst the Burgers were in their Churches at prayer and thankesgiving to
God for the departure of their enemies, which so seemed to do the day before,
in which time the watch on the walls were 2000. Soldiers, 18. companies of
Burgers being in all near 4000. fighting men, the enemy assaulted and entered,
the Citizens places together, and at an instant two Cornets of horsemen in blue
harness, with the rest of the enemies which plundered over them, out to pieces
and murdered all there, and this continued three hours, in which time the
City was set on fire in four or five places, and it is yet unknown whether
it was done by Treason, or by the immediate hand of God, but the sudden
increase and fierceness thereof was such by reason of a wonderful wind, that
in a short time all the fires met, and the spoylets that plundered were forced
to leave the most part of the women, maids, and children were smothered and
stifled in Vaults and Sellers, where they had hid themselves. Some part of them
driven into the fire by violence, many others thrown into the fire, and part
of the beautifullest young women and maids carried into the Camp, there forced,
spoiled and carried away in the meanwhile, yea, even on that very day was the
whole City, with all the in habitants so wasted by the fire and sword, that on
the wednesday morning their remained no more standing but the Cathedral Church
and a very few houses standing about it. All the rest both men and beasts
consumed to ashes, that the sword left. And none escaped except some very small
number that were here and there, which with very great peril ran away, and it
is manifest that above 20. thousand were murdered and consumed by fire, of
men, women and children. And also above 1500. husbandmen of the Country
dwellers thereby, with their wives and children, with many others Gentlemen of
great sort suffered with the Citizens which were gotten into the City for
their defense.

Also diverse Inhabitants of several Villages within the Bishopric and parts
adjoining: brought in their ancient Deeds and Records of the Lands and Estates
which suffered as the Citizens, and none had quarter or deliverance, except one
company of Soldiers which desired and had quarter promised them.

The Lord Feeld Martial Falkenburge a most valiant Soldier sent by the King
of Sweden for the defense of the City: was offered pardon and quarter by his
enemies, but he and his valiantly despised it, and rather chose to fight and
die manfully, and pressing into the market place, fought until he and his had
slain 400. but being ouer-matched by the whole multitude of his enemies that
seconded each other against him, was shot to death, and so left by a house
wholly set on fire, and so left.

The Lord Administrator or Bishop of the City and Confines, having in the
flight received a wound on his head, was amongst other prime men taken, carried
away prisoner to Wulfonbuttell a fort of the Enemies: having before he was
taken desired his own Servant to have killed him, but he would not.

In this manner as is set down that brave City of Magdenburgh, by fire and
sword, was in one day consumed with many thousands of Christian poor souls
therein as is mentioned. Besides an infinite of riches utterly brought to
nothing, that doubtless since the destruction of Jerusalem, scarce any the
like woeful spectacle of the great and sudden devastation of so famous a
City, and the loss of so much Christian blood has been heard of. God of his
mercy save and deliver all Christian people their Countries, Lands, and Cities
from any the like woeful mishap, and that for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

FINIS.

