March 6.

Numb. 14.

THE CONTINVATION OF OUR FOREIGN AVISOES, since the 27th of the last.

Containing many remarkable late passages out of the High Dutch, out of
private Letters, and out of the Low Dutch: some part do follow.

The first meeting of the King of Bohemia with his Majesty of Sweden at Soest,
not far from Franckford, with their mutual Embracements, and affectionate
entertainment; together with the joyful acclamations of his Subjects upon
sight of their natural Prince.

The truth of that which passed betwixt the forces (which passed over the
Mosell) under Count John of Nassaw, and the Rhinegraue, near Franckendale.

The taking of diverse Towns, especially that of the Bishop of Bambergh, by
Gustavus Horn in Franconia.

The great fear and distraction of the people of Austria and Vienna, by reason
of the forces of the King of Sweden, and the Duke of Saxony.

The fear at Vienna, of being besieged, being ill provided to defend
themselves.

The proceeding of the Duke of Lunenberg, and Swedish near Stoad.

Many more particulars included in the Book.

LONDON. Printed for Nath: Butter and Nicolas Bourne. 1632.

The Continuation of our Weekly NEWS.
From Rome the 14. and 24. of January, 1631.
WE hear from Naples, that processions are holden there, to give God thanks,
that that City is now free of the danger of the ashes from the Mountain Soma,
which were so carried by the force of the wind, that they appeared like
Clouds. In Appuleia much Cattle are dead for want of fodder, which the ashes
spoiled. On monday it was here concluded in the Consistory, that the
Spirituality should contribute a sum of money unto the Emperor toward the
war in Germany: To which end also the great Duke will maintain 6000.
Soldiers for his Imperial Majesty.

From Spain we understand that his Majesty bends all his forces for Italy
and Germany; And, that he may be nearer those Affairs, will take up his
Residence at Barcelona. He has also appointed four Millions of Gold to be
paid in Italy and Germany.

From Venice 20. and 30. of January.
From Piemont we hear that more Frenchmen do still daily come into the
borders of Montferat and Millan, to whom the Duke of Savoy gives Passes. Also
we ^eare that the Duke of Lorraine has not only prepared diverse places for
the K. of France, that he may have the passage into the Elsas, but also has
given unto him diverse men and provision.

From Zurich the 31. of January, 1631.
Monsieur Mennie Ambassador from the Duke of Roan is arrived here, he desires
2000. men for defense of the passages, to which there will be answer given
this next week.

From Berlin 23. of January, Feb. 2.
The Wismarish Garrison is now in their March, there are above 3000. gone out.
Amongst which arose a great difference between the Swedish General Todt, and
Colonel Gram, for that Gram shot a servant of Todts, under pretense that he was
a Spy; And, as some say, Gram took with him twelve great pieces and three
hundred Muskets, more then was agreed on. Whereupon the said March is stayed
and hindered, 500. men are slain and dispersed, 2000. men have submitted
themselves, and Colonel Gram is carried to Gripswald till he makes
satisfaction. In the mean time, the rest are marched toward Prignitz. There
are 300. men at Perleberg, if money and necessaries be not ready, not one man,
save only the Officers, will come into Silesia.

From Lions we hear, that the Duke of Loraine has been with the King at
Metz. But when he understood that the King would take his journey to Nanzi to
view the City, the Duke was intended to travail thither before to entertain
the King, but the King would not suffer him, but commanded him to wait upon
him. Whereupon the King, together with the Duke, and one Regiment travailed
toward Nanzi; Wherefore it is thought that he will take possession of it, and
not so soon quit it.

The King of France has sent an Ambassador to the Archduke Leopold, to cease
treaty with the Switzers, and to lead away his Soldiers that lie in those
parts, and that he should be more earnest in the affair, seeing the Switzers
are entertained upon the King of France his pay.

At Schorndorff the Ordnance and Munition, are taken away and carried to
Dionsburg, also the Emperors Garrison is shortly to depart from thence, from
which many Soldiers ran away, and betook themselves to the Swedes. It is
said that the Swedes have taken in Elwang, and the Garrison therein removed to
Dunkelspiel, whether the Swedes are also presently to March.

From Minden the 5 of January.
The Duke of Weymar, Collonell Bannier, and Hamilton, are joined together, they
are about 20000. strong, and draw near to the Weser, they have fallen upon six
Companies of foot, that lay in Damitts, and slain forty of them, the rest,
except only the Colors, are taken prisoners. The Lord Marshall of Papenheim,
remains still with his Soldiers at the Weser, about Hammeln and Hexter. Those
of Brimen have taken Verden again, and besieged Long Wesel, and as some say,
taken it.

The Swedish troops that lay in the Province of Pinnenberg, are come over the
Elbe, and are joined with Duke George of Luneberg, who blocked up Nienburg.

Papenheym lies in the Bishopric of Hildesheim, Landgraue Wilhelme waits for
him behind, and General Banier before, Eisfeld is again, especially
Duderstat, and Russenberg is fast blockt up, and it is hoped they will
presently yield.

From Hamborough the 28. of February.
The Duke of Lunenburg, who lately took in Buxtehuid for the King of Sweden,
now besieges Stoad with 15000. men; giving the Town but two days to consider
of the terms of yielding. And whereas the Prince of Denmark (the second
brother) had with a Fleet taken the Fort of Friburg at the mouth of the Elbe,
built by the Imperialists; the Duke sending to him to know whether he did it
for the King of Sweden, or not: the Prince the next day quit the place, which
the said Duke immediately took in.

From Regenspurgh the 10. of February.
This day 1000. Bavarian Soldiers are come over toward Amburg, they make
themselves exceeding strong on this side, where 6000. men are to meet.

The Drum is beaten here for his Imperial Majesty, but few resort to be
enterteined. The Duke of Friedland also makes himself strong. And the Saxons
may have enough to do.

From Gravenhage the 10. of February.
A few days ago an Ambassador from the King of Sweden, called Oxenstern
arrived here; He had audience three days since, and to day is to have another,
what he comes about about is kept secret, yet it is reported that, amongst
other things, he admonished and put the Lords States in mind, that they should
be timely in the field with their forces, that upon all occasions they might
the better join one with another. This Ambassador was enterteined at the
charges of the Lords States, and lodged in their Palace.

It is supposed that his Excellence, about the middle of March will be in the
field with his Arms, for there are great warlike preparations as well by Sea
as by Land.

Those that would have betrayed Schencken-sconce are most of them brought to
Halft, a short dispute shall serve them.

From Colen 15. of February.
There are here at this present Count Mansfield, Count Gronsfeld, the Lord of
Nersen, and many other Commanders and it is thought there will be a great new
Levy of Soldiers on their side.

From Nurenberg the 29, of January.
Here the Suburbs called Gossenhofft is broken down to build Sconces there,
the most part whereof, as also all the other Outworks are almost finished;
Field Marsh: Gustavus Horn, who has lately been here, has viewed them,
which pleased him very well, and he has given command speedily to make an end
of the rest, for that they should without doubt have need of them.

From Vienna the 28. of January.
Here is great lamentation, as likewise all the Country over; For although the
Officers of the Country have yielded to his Imperial Majesty half the
Contribution required, yet is his Majesty not therewith content, but will have
the whole; albeit the Commonaltie is agrieved and cannot pay the half. A siege
is much feared here: and the people already begin to betake themselves into
Hungaria; and his Imperial Majesty is removed to Gratz and Clagenfurt, to
make a Court-Leaguer there, to the end he may make use of it upon occasion.

Whereas his Majesty of Sweden has sent out Patents into all Countries, that
all Merchants should be safe and free without question of Religion, to trade
and commerce this next Lent Mart. The Emperor on the other side, has caused a
Contra-Mandate to be published, that every Merchant whosoever he be that shall
trade to Franckfort in the said Mart, shall be proclaimed a Rebel of the
Empire.

From Nurenberg the 3. of February.
At the end of the Truce, Gustavus Horn with his Army of about 18000 men went
toward Bamburg, he sent a Company of foot before toward Hochstat; but were
in the way driven back by those of Bamburg, that lay in a Village neere-by
upon advantage, being about 50. men: but as soon as succors came, they did
not only fall upon the Bamburgers, and beat them back into Foreheim, but
also assaulted Hochstat with 9. pieces of Ordnance, which the next day yielded
it self: which when the Garrison in Bamburg understood, they pillaged the
Town, and forsook it.

Horn still gathers more men together, with intent to fall into the Upper
Pfaltz, or into Bohemia.

Prince Ernest of Anhalt with 8000. of the Saxon Forces is risen from Eger. It
is supposed he will lead them against the Emperor, who does much mischief in
the Upper Pfaltz, having this day burnt to ashes a fine Village called
Mitterteich, and took away from thence about 2000. head of Cattle toward
Weiden.

His Majesty of Sweden, has given the Count of Solms, that rescued Nurenburg,
the Earldom of Swertzenburg, and all that there unto belongs; and has made
him General overa flying Army.

The Bishop of Bamberg has made suite unto Lieutenant General
Schlammersdorff, to make intercession for him; but it is thought it will little
avail him.

The States of the Empire are to assemble at Hailbrun, and the Nurenburgers,
Strasburgers, with the half of Wurtenburgers, are to make more provision for
their safety.

From Augsburg the 4. of January.
The spiritual Catholics here, have taken away all the Church ornaments of
gold and silver. They must now make a shift with wooden Idols.

Tilly has taken 13. pieces of Ordnance from the Fort of Wilsberg, and caused
them to be carried to Costnitz and Lindaw, which will not please the Switzers.
Dunckelspill is now also yielded to the Swedes.

From Franckford February the 11, 1631.
Ten thousand Spaniards came lately up from Brussells to Triers, and there had
passed two Regiments over the Mosell. Upon the rumor whereof, the King of
Sweden was marching toward them with his Army: but the Rhinegraue had
encountered them before he came to Mentz, defeated one whole Regiment, caused
the other to retire into a wood, and sent 7. of their Colors in triumph to the
King at Mentz. Since this they have again passed over the Mosell, and caused
the Rhine-graue to retreat; but without any considerable loss, and hearing
that the Kings Army was coming toward them, are gone back once more. The King
of Bohemia arrived on Friday about ten a clock; is received with great joy and
acclamations of the people wheresoever he passes.

From Delfe the 10. of March.
The King of Sweden goes well on; the French King has let the Duke of Bavaria
and the three great Bishops and others know, that if they do not renounce the
house of Austria, and their league, restore all honors, lands, and towns to
the late distressed and oppressed Princes, and others: quit their Armies to the
King of Sweden, and pay them; and render such Towns and Forts as he shall
demand; he will not only leave mediating for them, but will assist the King
of Sweden against them.

The said King of Sweden has called an Assembly of the States of Germany at
Franckford on the Maine, instantly after he will be in action some where; he is
making three Bridges one over the Main, one over the Rhyne, and the other over
the Mosell.

The King of Spain (our good Friend) is much startled he may find too much to
do at home, that he may leave others to themselves.

From Overland the 12. of February.
The Imperial Army is still at Gingen in the jurisdiction of Heydenheym, is
about to march (as the rumor goes) to Franconia. To this end the Commissary
Ossa is broke up from Augsburg, and causes all the Ordnance and Munition, to
be convayed from Augspurgh to Donaweert. The Army which still goes under the
name of Tilly, will also break up ere long, and abandon the whole Country of
Wurtzburg: in which Country, they are much terrified for, fear of the Swedish
forces. Many of the Inhabitants fly thence, and transport their movables and
goods into Switzerland. As present tidings relate, the Swedish have also taken
Elwang, and convoyd the Guarrison to Dunekenspill, whither the Swedish are now
marching to assault the same Town also.

From Franconia the 14. Dito.
The 8. of this Month, the Field-Marshall Gustavus Hoorn, did incorporate
Hooghstadt, at the taking whereof, the Major was wounded, and some of the
soldiers slain, 300. of the Garrison have betaken themselves into the said
Field-marshals service. While this place was besieged, the Imperialists 500.
foot, and 500. horse, under the command of the Commander Despagni, came out of
Forcheim, and on the other side of the Eysch, they came toward the horsemen of
Solms, which were thereabou^^ thinking to relieve Hooghstadt. But the Solmish
forces being but three companies in all, they called upon the Commander
Rochetzky, for aid and pursued the Imperialists: but they could not get them to
battle until they came within a mile from Forchiem, where the foot-forces of
the Imperialists were constrained to stand, whereupon there some of them lay in
ambush near unto a Village, the rest betook themselves upon the Churchyard
in the Village, by which advantageous means, they waited for the coming of
the Swedish, and fought with them very stoutly. In this skirmish besides some
ordinary soldiers were slain two Lieutenants, and 3. Cornets, forty or fifty
horsemen sorely wounded, and two Ritmasters of the Swedish.

In this encounter it fell out worse for the Swedish at the first, but
afterward they gained the better of it, for after the Rochtezky (who was shot
in one of his arms) was rescued by his Lieutenant, they fell on with a renewed
courage, and utterly defeated the Imperialists, chased them out of the Village,
and slew abundance of them both horse and foot.. By reason of this defeat the
Imperialists presently pillaged Bambergh and forsook the same, notwithstanding
that they were 2000. strong. Forcheym must also yield ere it be long, for they
are already providing for their departure,

The whole Bishopric of Bambergh were hereupon constrained to come to an
agreement with the said fieldmarshall Gustauus Horn, and to yield him 400000.
Ryxdollers.

We do at this instant understand that Forcheym is yielded, there remains no
more now but only Crouniach in that Bishopric which is not yet taken, but
doubtless will be ere long.

From Berlin the 16. Dito.
The Commander Gram who was Governor of Wismar by reason of his infidelity and
treachery is carried prisosoner to Gripswald, his troops are most of them
scattered and dispersed, 300. of them are now about Pereleborgh.

From Francfort the 19. of February.
His Majesty of Sweden departed hence upon Monday last to Hnxe, and as yet
resides there. Captain Marara with his Ancient-bearer, who were taken prisoner
at the taking of Manheym, and afterward ransomeds were brought to Heydelbergh,
and there beheaded through the command of the Governor by reason of the loss
of Manheym.

Since the last great skirmish about the Honserugh in which encounter the
Regiment of Torpaert, and the Regiment of Count John of Nassau only sustained
the loss, the Rhyne-grave with 600. horse has again fought with some Spanish
forces

But whereas the Spanish were 1800. strong of Horse and a whole Regiment of
Spanish lay in ambush. the said Rhyne-Graue was constrained to retire with some
loss, leaving behind him the young Earl of Serbruggen who was wounded and
taken prisoner.

His Maj: of Sweden causes two new bridges to be made: the one over the river
Rhyne at Meinz; and the other over the River Maine at Costum. All his forces
both horse and foot are now marching to Mems.

At Heydelburgh very lately happened a most greuious and terrible fire which
was palbably seen three leagues off. The same has done much mischeife in the
City, has ruinated and burnt down to the very ground some of the Chief
buildings, especially has the same done great harm in the Tower named
Glazenen-sael and the buildings of Otthenrycks.

At Spiers are 600. men under the Commander Horneck, who requiers more forces
under his command, and does daily a ugment his troops. 2000. soldiers lately
made an excursions out of Franckendale, their intent was to attempt something
against Worms, but they were driven back into Franckendale by the horsemen of
Worms. The besieged here sent all their women and children our of Frankendael,
notwithstanding they report that they are well provided with corn and wine.
But the Plague is very hot amongst them.

Upon the 16. day of this month February, a Regiment of soldiers marched from
hence to Ments. whether all the Swedish forces must resort. In the City of
Ments a certain Captain is imprisoned who had held some correspondencie with
the Spanish.

The Commander Dubalt armed his Regiment here in this City upon the 16. of
this month, being 12. Companies of the said Regiment.

Upon Yesterday being the 18 of February, Frederick the Prince Elector
Palatine arrived at Hanaw where he wsa worthylie received.

Copy of a Letter written by Phillippus Christopher, Archbishop of Trier, and
one of the Princes Electors, sent unto the City Trier, and rest of his
subjects from Hermersteyn.
I cannot conceal from your Honors, how graciously it has pleased Almighty
God to deliver us and our Byshopricke, from the apparent, cruel, and fearful
destruction, by our terrible enemy the King of Sweden, as also from the
lamentable and unchristian percecution of the Spanish. By means of the Prince
Elector of Bauaria, who through the faithful, well meaning, and Heroicell
meditation, interposition and assistance of his Maj of France with the King of
Sweden, has not only for himselse but also for others, concluded and agreed
upon a Neutrality with the said King of Sweden. In which matter we have not
been slack or negligent, but with the Godly and Religious assiststance of the
said his Majesty of France, obtained so much, that the said King of Sweden
has declared us and our Archbishoppricks to be neutrall. By which means, the
Peers, of the whole Romish Empire, and all the allied Christian Potentates,
and Republics, if they please may live together with more peace and
contentment then ever they have done formerly, and you and they may as well by
the Swedish as the Spanish hold your selves excused.

Now to the end that this Neutralitie may remain inviolable for us and ours,
and that by that means no encumbrance nor misery may befall us and our poor
subjects, the said his Maj: of France as interponent, has proffered his Royal
assistance to us and all other Catholics, yea (if need be) the King of Spain
himself also. And promised us, to afford us all help and assistance and to
take away and remove all difficulties, and come with their Armies into the
Empire to this end.

With these things you may comfort and help your solues, and give thanks to
God for the same. And withal pray, that the deed may follow so favorable a
promise, and so this great punishment which now lays upon us, cease. And in
the mean time it must be your care, that al Spanish Insolences daily
committed, and the persecutions amongst us may be shaken off effectually,
wherefore you shall publish and declare in all places the said Neutrality, and
withal: make known that the glory thereof must no^t be ascribed to us, but
only to God, and the Prince Elector of Bauaria, who has been the means to
obtain this Neutrality for himself and others.

If now then after all this procurement, any will notwithstanding persecute us,
or (as it happened at Mentz) if hereafter under pretense of Spanish assistance,
our whole Archbyshopricke should chance to fall into the Swedish hands, by
murdering, burning and pillaging, which God deliver us from, and the Catholic
Religion, should be exterminated; we shall remain guiltless, and the
occasioners thereof shall he bound to answer for the same to God, the Popes
Holiness, and all Christian Princes and Potentates.

Under neath Philippus Christoper.


These Articles following were delivered up at Trier, the 24. day of January.
1. The passage at Cobelenitz over the bridge to be granted. 2. The strong hold
Hermerstein, with all the Ordnance, to be delivered up to his Maj. of Sweden.
3. The soldiers which lay in Garrison there shall take the oath of fidelity to
his said Maj. 4. A reasonable competent sum of money to be contributed
toward the payment of his soldiers.
But the City Trier would in no wise condescend nor yield to these Articles.
And therefore have taken the Spanish to assist them, who do incorporate the
whole Country, so that all the subjects, and the whole Country does oppose the
Elector.

From Minden the 17.
The Armies of the Duke of Wymeren, Bannier, and my Lord Hamelton are now at
the Weser, their forces have in the jurisdiction of Wieckesen surprised six
Companies of foot forces, which formerly were in Garrison at Damnitz, they slew
forty of them and took, the rest Prisoners with their Ensigns.

The Bremash have again taken Verden, and blockqued up Langeuell. The Swedish
troops which lately came from Pienenberg over the river Elve, are joined to
the Duke of Lunenburg his forces to block up Nieuburg.

From Cullen the 16. of February.
Our Lords are still at Franckfort, they will doubtless obtain the
neutrality, if they will but subscribe to these Articles following, propounded
to them by his Majesty of Sweden.

1. A Church to be allowed for those of the Confession, of Auspurg, and one for
the Reformed Religion. 2. To desist from and renounce the League. 3. To afford
his Majesty free egresse and regresse with his Army, and to yield him provision
for his money. 4. To contribute 200000. Ryxdollars to his said Maj.
But this City will in no wise agree to the said Articles, they will rather see
what shall be the uttermost.

Our Prince Elector has caused Proclamations to be published throughout his
whole jurisdiction, that the Country people should bring their goods and
victuals into the City.

The Earl of Papenheim is at Paterborne, 6. of his Regiments are near unto
Bielveldt. As we understand he will enquarter his forces again in the Country
of Berg and Gulick, wherefore his troops are already come to Ham.

The Regiment of Giles de Haze, which was marching toward the said Earl of
Papenheym, is beaten back by the Boores in Marckland.

Although those of the Protestant Religion in this City, thought that by reason
of the great and successful progress of his Majj. of Sweden, no such
vigilant eye should be held over them, yet they are not so secure as they made
account they were. For but a few days ago, complaint was made of one whose
servants did but sing Psalms. Wherefore a great mulct of money was impo^ed upon
him, and whereas he refused to pay the penalty enjoined, his goods were carried
away out of his house by an Officer.

From Paris the 14. Dito.
The Kings Maj. has divided his Army into two parts, the one being nearer to
Elsatia, under the command of Monsier de la Force: and the other toward
Piccardien; under the command of Marshall de Scomberg, which two Armies, are
strengthened with 30000. men. The Marquis de Fiat, is gone toward their
Armies, with 40. tun of gold, and ten tun more are sent to Italy, to the Duke
of Rohan.

From Munster is written that the General Papenheym caused two Burgemasters at
Lemgo to be hanged at the Gates of the said City, because they did not
speedily at his demand, open the said gates for him. He is departed thence to
Reda, where he received the woeful tidings, that two of his Regiments were
defeated by the Weser.

The 16. of this month, most of the companies in Breda, marched to Herentalls,
they were convoyd with 8. Cornet of horse. In lieu of these, some other new
levied troops are brought for Garrison into the said City.

From Vienna the 6. of February.
Here are certain Commissioners ordained, who go about from house to house, to
enquire what kind of people lurk in this City, and all those that do not
shelter under some good Lord and master, are taken up for soldiers; for the
Army of the Duke of Freedlandt is not yet raised, wherefore the levying of
soldiers continues very strongly. The Commander Diepenbach has yielded up his
forces to the said Duke, so that his Army hegius to be very strong. He has
given a strict charge to all his Officers, to have all their Companies complete
against the latter end of March.

The Turk has again done great mischief by an incursion about Presburg,
whence he has taken away captive above 200. Christians.

From Vlm the 18: Dito.
The Imperial troops pass by here daily toward Bunten, to open the passage,
and to bring an aid of 8000. men, through the same into Germany. But the
French keep the said passage strongly, so that there is no possibility the
same shall be obtained without the spilling of much blood.

From Brunswick the 20. Dito.
The Duke of Wymeren has taken Goslaer, with an extraordinary stratagem, which
City he required to pay 100000. Ryxdollars, to be freed from pillaging. Where
upon, the Council in all haste laid down 10000. Ryxdollars and proffered all
manner of good love and usage, so that they escaped the pillage. The Duke and
General Bannier, presently left the City, and laid a thousand soul diers in
Garrison.

From Franconia the 23.
The Bishop of Bambergh assembles some thousands of men together in the upper
Palatinate, to relieve Forcheim. The Duke of Bavaria, gets also many forces
together, to hinder the proceedings of the Duke of Saxony, in those parts.

From Hildesheim the 19.
All these parts are taken up with Swedish troops, insomuch, that the
Imperialists for very fear have left and abandoned Boeckelen, Toesken,
Bronnau, Lawensteyn, Allefeldt, Pladsen, Patenes, and Saesteden. Levenberg is
also yielded up by agreement, and yesterday, the City Pynes was also rendered.
But the Castle holds out still, whence they cast fireballes continually, and
are resolved to defend themselves to the last cast. To morrow let Marienburg
and Steurwalat look to themselves for they must either suffer or come to
composition.

All places hereabouts are full of fugitive Popish Priests, Moukes, Friars,
etc. For they are banished by the Duke of Brunswick, who places Protestant
Preachers in their rooms.

The Swedish in the last noted expedition, took at least 400. Prisoners, of
Papenheyms soldiers, and many Ensigns with very rich booty.

FINIS.

