Axiochus.

A most excellent Dialogue, written in Greek by Plato the Philosopher:
concerning the shortness and uncertainty of this life, with the contrary ends
of the good and wicked.

Translated out of Greek by Edw. Spenser.

Heereto is annexed a sweet speech or Oration, spoken at the Tryumphe at
White Hall before her Majesty, by the Page to the right noble Earl of
Oxenforde.

CB.
SEMPER EADEM printer's or publisher's device

AT LONDON, Printed for Cuthbert Burbie, and are to be sold at the middle shop
in the Poultry, under S. Mildreds Church. Anno. 1592.

To the Right Worshipful Master Benedic Barnam, Esquire, Alderman and
Sheriff of this honorable City of London: health and happiness.
Worshipful Sir, I am bold (by way of dedication) to give ye this excellent
Dialogue of Plato the Philosopher, for two reasons. The first, that so singular
a work, done by a Heathen man, might as well flourish in our vulgar speech, as
of long time it has done both in Greek and Latin.

The second, that your countenance might shaddowe it from reprochefull
slanders, which common censures too lightly bolt out against the best
endeavors. But concerning the special matter, to wit, my presumption, without
first acquainting ye heere-with: thus I protect my self. My familiarity with
ye in your younger years, when sometimes we were Scholars together, and my
present joy, to see ye so happy a succeeder both in your Fathers virtues,
place, and Office: imboldened me to show a remembrance of the one, yet
reverently, and gladness of the other as well becomes me.

If in this small gift, ye make acceptance both of the one and other, ye shall
declare no less then each one well discernes in ye, and joy him that every way
is at your command.

To the Reader.
THis Dialogue of Axiochus, gentle Reader, was translated out of Greek, by
that worthy Scholar and Poet, Master Edward Spenser, whose studies have and
do carry no mean commendation, because their deserts are of so great esteem.

If herein thou find not the delightful pleasures his verses yields, yet
shall thou receive matter of as high contentment: to wit, comfort in the very
latest extremity. For his sake then be kind in acceptance hereof, and do him
the right he very well deserves.

Axiochus of Plato, or a Dialogue of Death, being both short and very Elegant.
Socrates. Clinias. Axiochus. AS I went one day to my common school
Lynosargus, and being in the way by Elizeus, I might hear the voice of one
calling aloude to me, Socrates. And turning me about to see whence it came, I
saw Clinias Axiochus his son, together with Damon the Musician and Charmides,
the son of Glauco running hastily toward Callirrhoe, whereof the one was a
Master and professor of the Art of Music, and the other by means of great
familiarity and acquaintance, did both love him, and also was of him beloved;
whereupon I thought good, leaving my ready way, to go meet them, that I might
the sooner understand his meaning. Then Clinias bursting out in tears, O
Socrates (quod he) now is the time when thou may show forth thy long fostered
and famous wisdom, for my father is even now taken with a grievous disease,
and drawing near (as it seems) to his end, is therwithall grievously
troubled, and greatly disquieted. Howbeit, heretofore he was so far from
the fear of death, as that he was wont pleasantly to scoff and scorn at
those which used to portraict the Image of death, painting him with a dreadful
countenance and a griesly face. Wherefore I beseech thee O Socrates, to go and
comfort my father as you were wont to do: for so the rather being strengthened
with your good counsel, he shall be able without any grudging or fainting to
pass through the way of all flesh, and I with the rest of his friends and
kinsmen will maintain the yearly memory of that his good end.

Socrates. O Clinias I will not deny thy so reasonable a request, specially
concerning such a matter, as to deny it were great unkindness and discourtesie:
to grant it, perteyneth both to godliness and charity. Let us therefore
speed us to him: for if thy father be in so sore taking, there needs
speedines and great have.


Clinias. O Socrates, I am sure that my father, as soon as he but beholds
you, will be much better at ease: for his fit and panges of his sickness use
oftentimes to surcease and be assuaged.


Socrates. But that we might the sooner come to him, we took the way, which
lies beside the town wall by the Gardens) for his dwelling was hard by the
gates which lies toward the Amazons pillar: whither we coming, found
Axiochus (which by this time was come to himself again) being indeed somewhat
strong in his body, but very weak and feeble in his mind, and resting
altogether comfortless: often tossing him, and tumbling up and down in his
bed, fetching deep and doleful sighs, with abundant streams of trickling
tears, and wailefull wringing of his hands: whom beholding, O Axiochus quoth
I, what means this? where be now those haughty and courageous words,
wherewith thou wast wont to scorn and despise death? where be those thy daily
and continual praises of virtue and goodness vanished? where also is now that
thy unspeakable stoutnesse, wherewith thou wast wont to confirm thy self
and strengthen others: for like as a cowardly champion, which at the first
coming forth as to the skirmish, with stately steps and a vaunting visage,
does soon after cast away his Target, and takes him to flight: even so
seem thou now, when there is need most of al to flinch. Have thou no more
regard of thy divine and excellent nature, that sometime wast a man of so good
life and calling, so obedient to reasons rule? and if there were nothing else,
yet should it be sufficient to move thee, that thou art an Athenian borne: and
lastly should move thee that common saying, which is worn in all men's mouths;
That this our life is a Pilgrimage, which when we have ended with perfect
measure and steadfast travel: it behooves us with like constancy of mind, and
ioyfulnes of spirit, and as it were singing a merry Paean, to enter into the
purposed place of rest. But thus to languish in despair and tender hearted
outcries, behauing thy self like a froward Babe, in thee is neither regard of
thy wisdom, nor respect of thy age.


Axiochus. True indeed O Socrates, and that which thou say, me seems
right: But it comes to pass I know not how, that when I draw near unto
present danger, than those great and stout-hearted words which I was wont to
cast at death, do closely flit away and down are trodden underfoot. And then
that Torment or fear, the messenger of dreaded dangers, does sundry ways
wound and gall my grieved mind, whispering continually in mine ear that if I
be once deprived of this worldly light, and bereft of goods: I shall like a
rotten block lie in the darkesome deapth, neither seen nor heard of any,
being resolved into dust and worms.


Socrates. O Axiochus thy talk is very foolish, for reasoning thus without
reason, and seeking to make some sense of senceles words, thou both do and
say clean contrary to thy self, not marking, how at one time thou do
both complain for the lack of sense which thou shall have: and also art
greatly vexed for the rotting of thy carrion Carcass, and despoyling of thy
former delights: as if by this death thou should not pass into another
life, or should be so despoyled of all sense and feeling, as thou were
before thou wast first brought into this world. For even as in those years
when Draco and Callisthenes governed the common wealth of Athens, thou then
wast vexed with no evil, for in the beginning thou wast no such as to whom
evil might chance: so likewise when thou have ended this state of mortalitye
thou shall no more be afflicted, for thou shall not be in such case as that any
evil can touch thee. Wherefore shake off and castaway all these trifles and
worldly baggage, thus waying in thy mind, that when the frame of this earthly
building is dissolved, and the soul being singled, is restored to his natural
place: this body which is then left an earthly mass and an unreasonable
substance, is then no more a man. For we are a soul, that is to say, an
immortal creature, being shut up and enclosed in an earthly dungeon.
VVherewithall nature has clothed us, and charged us with many miseries, so
that even those things which seem pleasant to us and joyful, are indeed but
vain and shadowed, being mingled and wrapped in many thousand sorrows, and
those also which use to breed us sorrow and heaviness, are both sudden, and
therefore more hardely avoided, and also perdurable, and therefore the more
painful and wearisome. Such be diseases and inflammation of the senses: Such
be inward griefs and sickenesses, through which it cannot choose but that the
soul must be also diseased, since that being scattered and spread through
the powers and passages of the body, it coueteth the use of that open and kind
heaven out of which it was derived, and thirsts for the wonted company and
surpassing delights of that aerernall fellowship; whereby it is evident, that
the passage from life, is a change from much evil to great good.


Axiochus. Since therefore O Socrates thou deemest this life so tedious and
troublesome, why do thou still abide in the same? being as thou art a man
of so great wisdom and experience, whose knowledge reaches far above our
common sense, and beyond the usual reason of most men.


Socrates. Thou Axiochus do not report rightly of me: for thou iudgest as
the common people of Athens, that because you see I am given to seek and
search out many things, therefore I know somewhat. But to say the truth, I
would heartily wish, and would the same account in great part of happiness, if
I knew but these common and customable matters: so far am I from the
knowledge of those high and excellent things. For these things which I now
declare, are the sayings of Prodicus the wise man: some of them being bought
for a pennye: some for two groats, and other some for four: For that same
notable man used to teach none without wages, having always in his mouth that
saying of Epicharmus, One hand rubbeth another: give somewhat, and somewhat
take. And it is not long sithence, that he making a discourse of Philosophye in
the house of Callias the son of Hipponicus, such and so many things he spoke
against the state of life: that I also account life in the number of those
things which be of less weight. And ever since that time O Axiochus, my soul
gaspeth after death, daily longing to die.


Axiochus. What then was said of Prodicus?


Socrates. Marry I will tell you, as they come to my mind. For what parcel
(quod he) of our life is not full of wretchedness? does not the babie even
taken from the mothers womb, power out plenty of tears, beginning the first
step of life with grief? neither afterward has it once any breathing or
resting time from sorrow, being either distressed with poverty, or pinched
with cold, or scortched with heat, or payned with stripes: and whatsoever it
suffers, utter once it cannot, but only with crying does show his mind,
having no voice but that alone to bewray his grief: and having through many
woes waded to seven years of age, he is yet afflicted with greater griefs,
being subject to the tyranny of the Schoolemaister and Tutor. And as his years
increased, so is the number of his guides and governors increased, being
afterward in the hands of Censors, Philosophers and Capitaines. Soon after
being waxen a stripling he is hemmed in with greater fear, namely of Lyceum,
of the Academie, of the School of games, of Rulers, of Rods: and to shut up
all in one word, of infinite miseries. And all the time of his youth is spent
under ouer-seers which are set over him by the Areopagits from which labors
young men being once freed, are yet ouer-layde with greater cares and more
weighty thoughts, touching the ordering of his state and trade of life: which
also if they be compared with those that follow, all these former troubles may
seem but childish and indeed babish trifles. For hereupon does a troop of
evils accrue, as be the exploites of warfare, the bitterness of wounds, the
continual labor, skirmishes: and then closely creeps on old Age, in which
are heaped all the harms that pertain to mankind, whether of weakness as
natural, or of pain as being external. And but if one betimes restore his
life as a dew debt to death: Nature ever waiting as a greedy usurer, takes
pains aforehand, snatching and pulling from this man his sight, from that his
hearing, from some both two senses. And if any fortune longer then commonly is
seen in this life to linger, Nature weakening her powers, does loose, lame,
and bow down all parts of his body, but they whose bodies in old age long
flourishes in mind, as the saying is, become twice children. And therefore the
gods, knowing what is most expedient for men, those whom they most dearly
love, do soonest take out of this vale of wretchedness. And for this cause
Agamedes and Trophonius, when they had built a Temple to Pythius Apollo,
desiring of the god therefore to grant them the best reward that might be
given, soon after when they laid them down to rest, never rose again.

Likewise Cleobis and Biton, the sons of the Argiue Nun, when their mother
had made her prayer to Juno, that to her sons for their great godliness might
be given some singular gift (for that they when her yoke of Oxen were not
readily to be found at the time of sacrifice, themselves being yoaked in the
chariot, drew their mother to the Temple) upon this their mothers request, the
two sons the next morning were found dead. It were too long in this place to
rehearse the testimonies of Poets which in their divine poesies do divinely
bewail and lament the miseries of man's life, I will now only in place of
many, recite the witness of one, being most worthy of memory, which thus
says, How wretched a thread of life have the gods spun,
To mortal men that in this race of life do run*


And again: Of all that in the earth are ordained by nature,
Than man, is not to be found
a more wretched creature.


But of Amphiaraus what says the Poet?

Him loved highest Jupiter and Apollo dear,
yet could he not reach to his eldest year.
What think thou of him
that taught the child to cry:
When first the Sun bright day,
he sees with tender eye.
But I will let them pass, least contrary to promise, I seem to discourse at
large, and that in the alleging of foreign witnesses. What trade of life I
pray you is there, or what occupation, of which you shall not find many that
complain and greatly mislike of their present affairs. Let us ouerrunne the
companies of Artificers and craftsmen, which continually labor from night to
night, and yet hardly able to find them necessaries to live, by bewayling their
bare estate, and filling their nightwatchings with sorrow and tears. Let us
else suruew the life of Mariners and Seafaring men, which make a hole through
so many dangers, and which as Bias said, are neither in the number of the
living nor yet of the dead, for man being borne to abide upon the earth, does
as it were a creature of a double kind, thrust himself into the maine sea,
and wholly put his life into the hands of fortune. But the life of husbandmen
will some say is pleasant, and so in deed it is: but have they not a continual
ranckling gall, ever breeding new cause of grief and disquiet, sometime by
reason of drought, sometime because of rain, otherwhile for scortching, often
through blasting, which parcheth the untimely ear oftentimes, because of
importunate heat or unmeasurable cold, miserably weeping and complaining. But
above all, that honorable state of government and principallitie (for I let
pass many other things and wrap them up in silence) through how many dangers
is it tossed and turmoiled, for if at any time it have any cause of joy, it is
like unto a blown blister or a swelling sore, soon up, and sooner down:
oftentime suffering a foul repulse, which seems a thousand times worse then
death it self. For who at any time can be blessed, that hangs upon the
wavering will of the witless many? And albeit the Magistrate deserve favor
and praise, yet is he but a mocking stock and scoff of the comminalty, being
soon after, outcast, hissed at, condemned, and delivered to a miserable death.
For where I pray thee O Axiochus, (thee I ask that art in office in the
commonwealth) dyed that mighty Miltiades? where that victorious Themistocles?
where that valiant Ephialtes? where finally thse noble kings and glorious
Emperors, which not long a go flourished in the common wealth. As for my
self, I could never be brought to bear office in the City: for I never
accounted it as a worthy and lawdable thing to be in authority together with
the madding multitude.

But Theramenes and Calixenus of late memory appointing under them certain
Magistrates, condemned certain guiltless men, not hearing their causes to
undeserved death. Only withstood them you, and Triptolemus, of thirty
thousand men which were gathered in the assembly.


Axiochus. It is as thou say Socrates, and since that time I have refrained
my self from the stage: neither has any thing ever to me seemed of greater
waighte, then the governing of the commonwealth, and that is well known to
them which are in the same office. For thou speak these things, as having
out of some high loft only ouerlooked the troubles and tempests of the
commonwealth, but we know the same more assuredly, having made proof
therefore in ourselves, for the common people indeed our friends Socrates is
unthankful, disdainefull, cruel, envious, and unlearned, as that is gathered
together of the scumme and dregs of the rascal route, and a sort of idle
losels: whom he that flattereth and feeds is much worse himself than they.


Socrates. Since therefore O Axiochus, thou do so greatly disallow that
opinion, which of all other, is counted most honest and liberal; what shall we
judge of the other trades of life? shall we not think that they are likewise
to be shunned: I remember that I once heard Prodicus say; that death
pertayneth neither to the living nor to the dead.


Axiochus. How mean you that, Socrates?


Socrates. Mary thus; that death touches not them that are, and as for those
that are departed out of this life, are now no more, and therefore death now
touches them not: for thou art not yet dead, neither if thou decease, shall it
concern thee, for thou shall then have no more. Therefore, most vain is that
sorrow which Axiochus makes, for the thing which neither is present, nor shall
ever touch Axiochus himself. And even as foolish is it, as if one should
complain and be afraid of Scylla, or the Centaures, which were monsters, of
Poets brood, which neither now belong to thee, nor to thy lives end shall
appertain; for fear is conceived of such things as be: but of such things as
be not, what fear can there be?


Axiochus. Truly Socrates, you have fetched these things, out of the rich and
most abundant Storehouse of your wonderful wisdom: And thereof rises that
your mildness and lightness of speech, which you use to allure the minds of
young men to virtue. But the loss of these worldly commodities, does not a
little vex and disquiet my mind; albeit these reasons, which now to my great
good liking you have alleged, seem to me much more allowable, than those
which late you used; for my mind is not carried away with error through the
entisement of your words, but perceives them well, neither do those things
greatly move my mind, which only have a color and shadowed show of truth,
being set out with flanting pride, and glory of words, but yet truth have they
none.


Socrates. Thou art far wide Axiochus, and reasonest unskillfully, joining the
feeling of evil, with the want of good things, forgetting thy self that then
thou shall be in the number of the senseless dead. For him indeed which is
bereft of all good things, does the contrary force of evil things greatly
vex. But he which has no being, can take nor feel nothing, in place of those
things whereof he is despoiled. Then by what reason can any grief be
conceived of that thing, which breeds no sense nor perseverance of any thing
which hurts. For if in the beginning O Axiochus, thou did not, though
indeed in vain, join sense and feeling to death, most unwisely, thou
should never had cause to fear death. But now thou do confound thy
self, and speak contrary to thy self, often fearing that thou shall be
deprived of soul and sense together, and often thinking, that with thy sense
thou shall feel that thing, whereof there is no sense nor feeling. And to this
purpose do all those excellent and notable reasons of the souls immortality
tend.

For it is not the weak nature of mortal man, to raise himself to the
fulfilling of such high and haughtye matters, as to despise the ramping rage of
wild beasts, to ieopard himself in the wastefull sea, to build Cities, and
them with laws and policy to establish: to look up into heaven, and mark
the course of the Stars; and the ways of the Sun and Moon, with their
risings and setting, to consider their eclipses, their spaces, their making of
the nights and days alike, their double conuersions, to behold the order of
the winds, the seven watrie stars, of winter, of summer, of storms, with
the violent rage of whirlewindes, and as it were these labors of the world, to
deliver to posterity, unless in our minds there were a certain divine
spirit and understanding, which could comprehend and reach unto the
supernatural knowledge of so great matters.

Wherefore now O Axiochus, thou art not in the way to death, but to
immortality, neither shall thou (as thou did seem right now to fear) be
bereft of all good, but shall hereby enjoy true and perfect good: Neither shall
thou perceive such durty pleasures as are these, being mingled with the puddle
of this sinful body, but most pure and perfect delight being deuoid of all
contagious trouble. For being loosed and delivered out of the darkesome
dungeons of this body, thou shall pass to that place where is no lack nor
complaint, but all things full of rest, and deuoid of evil. Moreover there is
calm and quiet living without all knowledge of unrest, peaceable and still
occupied in beholding the course and frame of Nature, and studying Philosophy,
not to please the idle ignorant and common sort, but with upright and
undeceivable truth.


Axiochus. O Socrates with this thy gladsome speech thou have now brought me
into a clean contrary mind, for so far am I now from dread of death, that
I am even set on fire and burn with desire thereof. And that I may stay my
self in the steps of them which are counted workemasters of speech, I will
say thus much more excellently, Now I begin to behold those high matters, and
do ouerlooke that aeternall and heavenly course of things, having now raised
up my self out of my weakness, and being as it were renewed and refreshed of my
former malady.


Socrates. If you demand of me another reason, and sign of the souls
immortality, I will tell you what the wise man Gobrias showed me: He said that
at what time Xerxes conuayed his huge Army into Greece, his Grandfather which
was of the same name, was sent into Delos to defend that Island in which were
two Gods borne. In the same Island that his Grandfather learned out of certain
brazen Tables which Opis and Hecuergus had brought out of the Northern
Countries, That the soul aftertime it is dissolved from the body passes into
a certain darkesome place, a Coast that lies under the earth wherein is
Plutoes Palace no less than Jupiters kingdom: For the earth being equally
balanced in the midst of the world, and the compass thereof being round as
a ball, that the one half Sphere thereof is allotted to the higher Gods, and
the other half to the infernal powers; betwixt whom there is such kindred and
alliance, that some be brothers, and other some brothers children. But the
entry of the way which leads to Plutoes kingdom is fenced with iron gates,
and fastened with brazen bolts: which when a man has opened, he is entertained
of the River Acheron; next which is Cocytus: which floods being ouerpassed, he
must come before Minos and Rhadamanthus, the merciles Judges: which place is
called the plain of Truth where the Judges sit examining every one that comes
thither how he has lived, and with what trade or manner of life he has
inhabited his mortal body, with whom there is no place for lies; nor refuge
for excuses. Then they which in their life time were inspired and led with a
good Angel, are received into the household of the blessed, where all seasons
flow with abundance of all fruits, where from the silver springs do calmely
run the Crystal streams, where the flourishing meadows are clothed with
chaungeable Mantles of glorious colors, where are famous Schools of renowned
Philosophers, goodly companies of divine Poets, trim sorts of Dauncers,
heavenly Music, great banquets furnished with costly cates, Tables abounding
with all bounty, delights without all care, and pleasures without all pain:
For the Inhabitants thereof are neither touched with force of cold, nor payned
with excess of heat, but the moderate Air breaths on them mildly and
calmely, being, lightened with the gentle Sunnebeames.

In this place, and in the Elysian fields, they which have taken holy orders
are highly advanced and reverenced, daily ministering the unsearchable rytes of
Religion. Wherefore then should thou doubt but to be made partaker of the
same honor, being one of the seed of that heavenly race: It is an old saying
and rightly reported, that Hercules and Bacchus going down to hell, they were
instituted in holly orders, and that they were emboldned to go thither of the
Goddess Eleusina. But they which being wrapped in wickedness have led an
ungodly life, are snatched up by the Furies, and by them carried through the
lowest hell into deep darkness and utter confusion, where the place and abode
of the wicked is, and where the three score daughters of Danaus dwell, whose
punishment is continually to fill a sort of bottomless vessels, where also is
to be seen the unquenchable thirst of Tantalus, the gnawen Entrails of
Titius, and the endless stone of Sisip^us, whose end begins a new labor.
There be they rent of wild beasts, continually scorched with burning Lamps,
pained with all kind of torments, and afflicted with endless penance. These
things I remember that I have heard Gobrias tell; but you Axiochus may judge
of them as you list. Only this I know and assuredly hold fast, that every man's
mind is immortal and passing out of this life feels no grief nor sorrow.
Wherefore O Axiochus whether thou be carried into those highest Palaces or
lower Vawts, needs must it be that thou shall be blessed because thou have
lived well and godly.


Axiochus. Minding to have said something unto thee (O Socrates) I am impeached
with bashful shame: For so far am I now from the horror and dread of death,
that I continually covet the time thereof: So has thy heavenly and comfortable
speeches pierced and relieved my faint heart. And now loath I this life, and
scorn the delights thereof, as that shall from henceforth pass into a better
abode. And now by my self alone will I recount these thy notable sayings, but
I pray thee (O Socrates) after noone resort to me again.


Socrates. I will do as you say, and now will I return to walk in my school
Lynosargus from whence I was hither called.


FINIS.
A speech spoken at the Triumph before the Queens most excellent Majesty, by
the Page to the right noble Champion, the Earl of Oxenford.
By the Tilt stood a stately Tent of Orange tawny Taffata, curiously
imbroydered with Silver, and pendents on the Pinacles very sightly to behold.
From forth this Tent came the noble Earl of Oxenford in rich gilt Armor, and
sat down under a great high Bay Tree, the whole stock, branches and leaves
whereof, were all gilded over, that nothing but Gold could be discerned. By the
Tree stood twelve tilting staves, all which likewise were gilded clean over.
After a solemn sound of most sweet Music, he mounted on his Courser, very
richly caparasond, when his page ascending the stairs where her Highness
stood in the window, delivered to her by speech this Oration following.

THIS Knight (most fair and fortunate Princess) living of a long time in a
Grove, where every graft being green, he thought every root to be precious,
found at the last as great diversity of troubles as of Trees: the Oak to be so
stubborn that nothing could cause it to bend; the Reed so shaking, that every
blast made it to bow; the Juniper sweet, but too low for succor; the
Cipresse fair, but without fruit; the Walnut tree to be as unwholesome to lie
under, as the bud of the Fig Tree unpleasant to taste; the Tree that bore the
best fruit, to be fullest of Caterpillars, and all to be infected with worms;
the Ash for Ravens to breed; the Elm to build; the Elder to be full of pith
and no perfection, and all Trees that were not fertile, to be fit for fuel,
and they that were fruitful, but for the time to please the fancy. Which
trying, he forsook the wood, and lived a while in the plain Champion: where,
how he was tormented, it were too long to tell, but let this suffice, that he
was troubled, when every Moate fell in his eye in the day, and every Ant
disquieted him in the night: where, if the wind blew, he had nothing to shield
him but head and shoulders, if the Sun blazed, he could find the shadow of
nothing but himself, when seeing himself so destitute of help, he becam
desperate of hope.

Thus wandering a vvearie way, he espied at the last a Tree so beautiful, that
his eyes were daseled with the brightness, which as he was going unto, he met
by good fortune a Pilgrim or Hermit, he knew not well, who being apparelled as
though he were to travail into all Countries, but so aged as though he were
to live continually in a Cave. Of this old Sire he demanded what Tree it was,
who taking this Knight by the hand, began in these words both to utter the name
and nature of the Tree.

This Tree fair Knight is called the Tree of the Sun, whose nature is
always to stand alone, not suffering a companion, being it self without
comparison: of which kind, there are no more in the earth then Suns in the
Element. The world can hold but one Phoenix, one Alexander, one Sun-Tree, in
top contrary to all Trees: it is strongest, and so stately to behold, that
the more other shrubs shrink for duty, the higher it exalts it self in
Majesty.

For as the clear beams of the Sun, cause all the stars to lose their
light, so the brightness of this golden Tree, eclipseth the commendation of
all other Plants. The leaves of pure Gold, the bark no worse, the buddes
pearls, the body Chrisocolla, the sap Nectar, the root so noble as it
springs from two Turkeies, both so perfect, as neither can stain the other,
each contending once for superiority, and now both constrained to be equals.
Vestas bird sits in the midst, whereat Cupid is ever drawing, but dares not
shoot, being amazed at that princely and perfect Majesty.

The shadows has as strange properties as contrarieties, cooling those that
be hot with a temperate calm, and heating those that be cold with a moderate
warmth, not unlike that Sun whereof it takes the name, which melts Wax,
and hardens Clay, or pure fire, which causes the gold to shine, and the
straw to smother, or sweet perfumes, which feeds the Be, and kylleth the
Betell.

No poison comes near it, nor any vermin that has a sting. Who so goes
about to loppe it, launceth himself, and the Sun will not shine on that
creature that casts a false eye on that Tree, no wind can so much as wagge a
leaf, it springs in spite of Autumnus, and continues all the year as it
were Ver.

If Sir Knight you demand what fruit it bears, I answer, such, as the
elder it is, the younger it seems, always ripe, yet ever green. Virtue Sir
Knight, more nourishing to honest thoughts, then the beauty delightful to
amorous eyes; Where the Graces are as thick in virtue, as the Grapes are on
the Vine.

This fruit fatteth, but never feeds, wherewith this Tree is so laden, as you
cannot touch that place which virtue has not tempered. If you enquire whether
any grafts may be gotten, it were as much as to crave slyppes of the Sun, or
a Moulde to cast a new Moon. To conclude, such a Tree it is, as he that has
longest known it, can sooner marvel at it, then discribe it, for the further
he wadeth in the praise, the shorter he comes of the perfection.

This old man having ended, seeming to want words to express such
worthiness, he went to his home, and the Knight to his Sun Tree, where
kissing the ground with humility, the princely tree seemed with (...) to
bid him welcome. But the more (...) ^^zed on the beauty, the less able he
w^^ (...) ^^dure the brightness, like unto those (...) ^^king with a steadfast
eye to behold the (...) bring a dark dazeling over their sight.

At the last, resting under the shaddowe, he felt such content, as nothing
could be more comfortable. The days he spent in virtuous delights, the night
slypped away in golden Dreams, he was never annoyed with venomous enemies,
nor disquieted with idle cogitations.

In so much, that finding all felicity in that shade, and all security in that
Sun: he made a sollemne vow, to incorporate his heart into that Tree, and
ingraft his thoughts upon those virtues. Swearing, that as there is but one
Sun to shine over it, one root to give life unto it, one top to maintain
Majesty: so there should be but one Knight, either to live or die for the
defense thereof.

Where-vppon, he swore himself only to be the Knight of the Tree of the
Sun, whose life should end before his loyalty.

Thus cloyed with content, he fell into a sweet slumber, whose smyling
countenance showed him void of all care. But his eyes were scarce close, d
when he seemed to see dy^^^ (...) ^^^ermining the Tree behind him, that (...)
suspecting the Knight to give the (...), might have punished him in her (...)
failing of their pretense, and seeing (...) ^^we they struck to light upon
their ^wne brains, they threatened him by violence, whom they could not match
in virtue.

But he clasping the Tree, as the only Anchor of his trust, they could not so
much as move him from his cause, whom they determined to martyr without
color. Whereupon, they made a challenge to win the Tree by right, and to
make it good by Arms. At which saying, the Knight being glad to have his
truth tried with his valor, for joy awaked.

And now (most virtuous and excellent Princess) seeing such tumults toward
for his Tree, such an Honorable presence to judge, such worthy Knights to
Just: I cannot tell whether his perplexity or his pleasure be the greater. But
this he will avouch at all assayes, himself to be the most loyal Knight of
the Sun-tree, which who so gaine-sayeth, he is here pressed, either to make him
recant it before he run, or repent it after. Offering rather to die upon
the points of a thousand Lances, then to yield a jot in constant loyalty.

FINIS. The speech being ended, with great honor he ran, and valiantly brake
all the twelve staves. And after the finishing of the sports: both the rich
Bay Tree, and the beautiful Tent, were by the standers by, torn and rent in
more pieces then can be numbered.

