The 25. of September. NEWS FROM MOST PARTS OF CHRISTENDOM.

Especially from Rome, Italy, Spain, France, the Palatinate, the Low
Countries, and diverse other places.

Wherein is contained a full and certain relation, of the last Battle fought
at Bergen Vp-zome, and the great overthrow which SPINOLAES Forces received from
those of the Town.

With the lamentable loss of the City of Heidlebergh, after many brave
repulses given to the Enemy: and the names of some principal Leaders, as were
slain in defense of the town.

And diverse other special matters, continued from the last printed News of
the twentieth, to this present.

LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Butter, and William Sheffard. 1622.

royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

From Rome the 27. of August. 1622.
THe King of Spain has increased the pension of the Duke of Zagarola, with
500. Crowns yearly, and commanded him to levy a Regiment of foot, and to
conduct them into Veltolina. Likewise there are sent to the Spanish Ambassador
here resident 30000. crowns, besides his yearly allowance: The Galleys of
Naples which sailed, with the regiment of the Marquess of Terrariso toward
Spain, have taken a Pirat in the Haven of Saint Maria, and made 350. of the
Pirates slaves.

From Prague the 1. of September.
YEsternight is the Lord Michna at the command of the Emperor by post gone to
Vienna. Next Sunday the Lord of Walstein, and the Lord Andrew Hanniball are to
do the same upon like command: the said Hanniball shall receive a new
Commission for some which are to be called in question, so that Smetsianski is
here only at this time of all the Commissioners or Deputies.

From Venice the 2. of September.
FRom Chur we have understood that there were arrived diverse Soldiers, and
abundance of Corn seeing the Switsers will besiege the Fort of Saint Maria and
Parmio. In the mean time has the Governor of Millaine given charge that the
Castle of Garduno should be pulled down because it should not be taken by the
Switsers or Grisons, and came from thence upon Cleue, which lies but two legues
from thence.

From Naples we learn that at Pauia are taken diverse Soldiers which were
fled, and afterward conveyed to Millane, where shall be erected a Regiment of
Neapolitanes. The Count of Sulty with his Regiment, besides Batteuille and his
Company, besides other more are to come from Alsatia, and to set upon the
Grisons.

From Spier the 6. of September.
AT Heidelberg it is as yet still, but the Bauarians plant 24. pieces to
discharge them suddenly against the City. The Boores of the Palatinate, and the
Bishoppricks thereabout aid to make the Sconses before the same. Last Saturday
was the Captain Bohun being shot before Heidelberg in his head, carried to
Vdenheim to be buried there. The Colonel Truchses is likewise shot in his
leg, and his Lieutenant in his foot.

Few days ago the Garrison of Heidelberg made a sally, but did no matter of
moment, and lost 18. men which were taken Prisoners. The next day they shot
fiercely without, and the Bauarians did likewise into the City.

From Vienna the 7. of September.
THe 2. of this Month is here arrived the Prince Charles of Lichtenstain in a
Litter, and is lodged in the Lords street, the Cardinal of Didrichstein is
likewise come here, and they consult daily together. Powell Michna who was
Secretary at Prague, is created a Baron by the Emperor, and is received
amongst the ancient Lords of the Kingdom of Bohemia.

From Brussels.
WE do further understand that Heidleberg is rendered, the manner of which is
as follows.

There were many assaults made upon the same by the enemy, and the town very
valiantly defended it self, till the enemy in a most furious manner with
multitudes ouer-charged them; notwithstanding they still maintained the same
for many days together, till at last the Suburbs were lost, afterward the
Town held out four days, in which many were lost on both sides, amongst
which the Governor is supposed to be one, who behaved himself most valiantly,
and brake through the enemies Pikes, but most unfortunately he was by the enemy
shot with a Musket in the breast, afterward the Castle was assailed by the
enemy, and did hold out for 4. days longer, but was forced to yield for want
of supply of Victuals and other necessaries.

The Deane of Paris having consent of the King to succeed his Brother the
Cardinal, De Rhetz, in his Bishoprike of Paris, being upon his way to Rome, to
be confirmed by the Pope, fell sick and dyed. Paris 18. Sept. 1622.

From Madril the 13. of August.
FEw days ago is deceased the Duke of Monleon, who was a privy Counselor of
the (...) death the Emperor, the King of Spain, and all Christendom have
sustained a great loss, and departing with the grief of many, he has left
this world, going to the everlasting joy, his death has been so memorable
that it is put in print.

Last night is Don Ferdinando Piemontel, brother to the late Count of
Benevente, whom the King of Spain did intend to make a Cardinal, slain
traitorously by his Uncle Don Diego Henriques in the street being jealous of a
Lady: the murderer went the next day to condole to the Brother of the
deceased, but he was presently taken by the Justice, and carried away, what
will become of him, the time will show.

From Rome the 20. of August.
FRom Naples is mentioned, that the Captain Menero Antonio de Santi, has
offered to send to the city 25000. bushels of corn from Abbruzzo. Likewise
the Prince Philiberto Viceroy in Sicilia, has offered unto the same 50000.
bushels of Corn. The Kings Attorney having ceased upon the goods of Don Geo.
Baptista Santi, which he had in that Kingdom, being a Merchant of Genua,
because he had transported great sums of money out of that Kingdom, he offers
to give 100000. Crowns to clear himself.

From Spain is made over a million of gold for Naples to leuy new soldiers.

At Bolingna is a Low Country man put in prison, which with 2. of his
Companions had made a Libell against our Lady.

From Siria we understand that the King of Persia by the aid of the English,
and Hollandish ships has taken the City and Country of Ormus.

From Venice the 26 of August.
At Genua are arrived two Galleys with many chests with Ryals for the Merchants.

Letters from Millan makes mention, that Doctor Peribello, who from Veltolina
was gone to the Court of Spain, is returned back with a Golden Chain of 1000
Crowns, and has brought a yearly assignation of 20000 Crowns for Veltolina,
which are to be paid to the Grisons, if the King of Spain keeps Veltolina.

We understand from Bundten, that the Engadiner, and Bundtner with the aid of
the forces of Zurich have invaded Spi^sse, and slain 80 men, and taken 15
prisoners, and gotten moreover 95 Oxen, 300 Goats, 200 Sheep, 20 Hoggs, and
200 Muskets, besides other provision; and afterward fired the two Villages,
the upper and the lower Spiesse; and since they surprised the Village Drafft,
and took 80 Oxen, and having pillaged the same, they burnt it likewise. From
the Alps about Veltkirchen, they have also driven away 600 Oxen in Bundten.
The Abbot of Pfeffers is fled, fearing the Bundtner would surprise him.

From Vienna the 26 of August.
We look here daily for the Prince of Lichtensteyn, who lies down at ^gla,
being molested of the Gout: but he is according to his Majesty's desire to
be broug^t here in a Litter.

From Prage the 30 of August.
The Siege of Glats is now earnestly to be taken in hand; to which purpose
there is sent a great deal of munition out of Saxony, but the Garrisons
sallies still daily out, and kills many Imperialls; and has taken lately
diverse Prisoners, besides a Captain of a Troop of Horse.

From Brussels the 4 of September.
Upon the 29 of August, Don Gonzales de Cordua arrived early in the morning
with his Army betwixt the Abbey of Viliers, and the Lordship of Tilly, near
unto Flury in Walshbrabant, about four leagues from hence, Count Mansfeild is
likewise resolutely marched on, notwithstanding Don Corduas approches, and sent
a Trumpet unto him, to know whether he would fight with him, or grant him free
passage. Whereupon Don Cordua answered, that he would stay his passage, and
would resist him unto the last man. Upon this answer, Mansfeild caused our
Horse (which were few and weary) first to be assaulted by a 1300 of his Horse,
and afterward with a 1000 of his Horse, and afterward with a 1000 more; and
last of all compassed them with all his forces, which were ordered as a half
Moon, and they set so fiercely upon our, that it seemed the Enemy had the
Victory; and they got at the same instant one of our Pieces, a great deal of
our Baggage, besides great store of money. But afterward when our Foot
succored our Horse, they set so bravely upon our enemies, that they drove them
back again, and played with our Ordnance amongst them, so that they had enough
to do to beat themselves through our forces, and are so by strong hand past
through our Country. Duke Christian of Brunswick is shot in his Arm; which
because he was infected of a burning cold, is cut afterward off, the young
Duke of Weyman, besides diverse Lords, Gentlemen, Captains, and Commanders are
slain upon the place, and amongst many prisoners, there is taken a
Rhyne-graue. At our side are killd the Spanish Collonell Don Francisco de
Gueuarra, besides five of his Captains. The Count of Isenburg has but two
Captains left serviceable in health, tha other are all slain or wounded. The
enemy has lost about 2500, and we about 700. We have gotten seven Cornets,
and one Ensign of the enemies, and the same have been presented to day to the
Infanta. Many wounded soldiers are brought hither, and as many to Namur, the
greatest part of them being of Mansfetlds forces, they are through the command
of our holy and pious Princess, cured with all care, whereof some are healed,
but they die for the most part. When the enemy was past by, Don Cordua
commanded the Colonel Gauchier to follow him with the Horse. The next day he
incountred with the enemies betwixt Saint Truyden and Turgem, and slew certain
thousands of them. And because they thought that our forces had strengthened
themselves, or that Count Henry of the Berg was near at hand, they made al
have to come away, and left both their, and our Baggage behind, and saved
themselves by flight.

From Venice the 20 of August, 1622.
The commotion raised betwixt the great, will not cease as yet, and it seems
that the new Turkish Emperor has many secret enemies. The Soldiers have
sworn a new, that they will dine and die with him, and promised to massacre all
those that will oppose themselves against him.

The Ambassador of Hungary was departed from the same Court at Constantinople
homeward with the usual presents for his King.

The Ambassador of the King of Polonia sent to the great Turk, has dispacht
a Gentleman to his Court, desiring to have a pasport and safe conduct for
himself and all his suits, that in case the peace be not confirmed, he may
safely return into Polonia: but he has been flatly denied, by reason that it
is not usual, nor ever any Ambassador had requested the like. Many think,
that the King of Polonta will make use of the present dissentions in Turkey, and
will not confirm the Peace made with the late great Turk.

From Prage the 26 of August.
From Vienna we hear, that 10000 Soldiers, besides 6000 Cossacks are marching
toward the Siege of Glatz, where the Garrison has made lately a great sally
again, and pillaged, and fired three Villages belonging to the Abbot of
Kements. It was still rumored, that the old Count of Thurne was upon the way
with 1000 Soldiers to rescue the Town of Glatz. And that there were Letters
intercepted of the said Count to his Son, whereby he went about to persuade
his Son not to leave the Town, but to defend it valiantly, promising him
moreover that they should be soon rescued.

At Vienna likewise there is brought a Post of Bethlem Gabor Prisoner, being
sent by him to the King of Bohemia with Letters.

Letters from Trier make mention, that there were arrived 4000 Cossacks, which
went to the Low countries to serve the King of Spain.

The Crabats do great damage about Franckfort, and yesterday, and the day
before, they drove all the Cattle away that was about the said City.

From Collen the 10. of September.
We have here certain news, That certain thousand Cossackes are marching
toward the Low Countries, to aid the King of Spain, and are already arrived
in the Bishopric of Trier.

The Battery which was sunk before Papemutz, is raised again, and made
somewhat thicker. In the mean time they spare their shot on both sides.

From Breda the 9. of September.
Count Mansfield is here received with great pomp and state; and at his
arrival, the shot was bravely discharged. Certain Commissioners of the States
being accompanied with our Horse, went to meet him, and to bid him welcome.
Duke Christian of Brunswicke is still of a good courage; so that we hope, that
he is in no danger of his life. His Forces lie here in the Laughstrate and
Waelwyck, to refresh themselves; where they are relieved sufficiently. They
shall all be mounted, as our Foot and Horse are.

From the Grave the 9. of September.
Although here come daily diverse, that have been with Count Man field in his
late Journey; nevertheless, we cannot understand the certainty of all that
which happened in the same, seeing they differ so much in their Relations: but
they agree almost all in this, That not above half his Camp is come into this
Country: Not that they have been slain by the Enemy, but that many have
forsaken the Camp through weariness, sickness, or hunger, seeing there were
many which had seen no Bread in the space of ten days. First of all, they
were encountered by certain thousand Boores: but as soon as they had
discharged two Fieldpieces upon them, they retired, and suffered Mansfields
Forces to pass. Whereupon they marched on for the space of eight days; and
finding no where any meat or drink, they fired by the way very near two
hundred Villages. And being very weary, and almost starued they were met by
Don Cordua, who would stop their passage. But seeing that there was no other
remedy, they set valiantly upon his Forces, and beat through the same, and the
Enemy opening the passage, they got two Pieces of Ordnance from them. They
have had three or four Encounters with the Enemy; in which, on both sides,
diverse were slain. The Duke of Brunswickes Horsemen perceiving that he was
hurt, fainted, and would have otherwise quite overthrown the Enemies Camp:
but nevertheless, his Forces have sustained the greater damage.

From Berghen up Zome the 10. of September.
Since my arrival here, there is little past, worth the writing, although
there passes never a day nor night, but they bestow some Bullets one upon
another. The last night there was a great fire in a corner of the Enemies Camp
toward Roosendall; whereupon three Pieces of Ordnance were discharged. What
this betokens, we cannot tell. Don Cordua is two or three days ago arrived
with his Forces in Spinola's Camp, whereupon the Ordenance of the Town plays
fiercely. It is not only strange, but likewise incredible, to believe, how
many sundry and new Works here are daily made to defend the City; as
likewise, what rare Weapons here are invented to be used. When the Enemies
assault our Works, as strange Trushes to knock the Climbers down, and Hooks
to pierce their Bodies, and draw them upon the Walls suddenly. To be brief,
unless God be disposed to punish our sins, the Town has no reason to fear
the Siege. Likewise, to drive the Enemies from thence, there is but small hope,
unless their Conuoyes be kept back, that they may get no Victuals from
Antwerpe, and then the Cook will make them to retire.

A TRVE DELINEATION AND Description of the great Fight or Battle fought the
29. of August, 1622. betwixt Count Mansfield and the Duke of Brunswick on the
one side, and Don Gonzales de Cordua on the other side; betwixt Gemblours and
Flory.
THe King of Bohemia hoping, that by the intercession and intermedling of his
Majesty of Great Britain, an agreement should be made betwixt the Emperor,
the King of Spain, and him; he retired with his Army out of the Palatinate:
and passing through Alsatia, Strasburg, and Lotteringia, arrived at last at
Sedan, where he dismissed the same, staying himself by his Uncle, the Duke
of Bouillon. Whereupon the Army being set at liberty, resolved to serve the
States of the United Provinces, and to march thither through the Provinces
belonging unto the King of Spain, being conducted by Count Mansfield and the
Duke Christian of Brunswick. The Infanta having notice of this Design,
commanded Don Cordua in all haste to come with his Forces out of the
Palatinate, to resist this Army; and caused likewise, to the same purpose, a
great number of Boores to be in Arms. Count Mansfield perceiving certain
Boores upon the way, at his first entry of the Low Countries, would not meddle
with them, saying, That it would be no credit for him to fight with Boores.
But sone after, we met with twelve Companies of Boores, which would stop our
passage. Whereupon Duke Christian commanded a field-Piece with small Bullets to
be discharged against them; whereupon they fled, and retired into a Wood. And
Count Mansfield, as likewise the Duke Christian of Brunswick commanded the
Villages thereabouts to be fired; which was also performed. This was ten
Leagues from Gemblours; where we received Don Cordua's Letter, declaring, that
he was resolved to fight with us. Whereupon we espying afterward Don
Gonzales Camp, we set our Forces in Battell-array. Duke Christian assaulted
the enemy first with 600. horse: The Count of Styrum followed presently with
his Regiment; the like did Count Harman, and diverse other Counts and Lords:
afterward Count Mansfield, the Count of Ottenburg, the Rhinegraue, and Colonel
Ploech, every one with their several Regiments came to second the other; as
likewise the Regiment of the Duke of Saxon, Weymar, and the Landgraue of
Hessen; and they fell so valiantly upon the enemy, that they caused him to
retire. At the first encounter, the Horse of the enemy fled, whereupon we
assaulted his Foot; and Count Mansfield, and Count Harman, went to take the
Ordnance of the enemy: which they did, and caused them twice to be discharged
upon our enemies, hoping that our Foot would have come on, but did not; so that
we were forced afterward to leave them again: Nevertheless, our two Pieces
played upon the enemies Foot without missing; and their Ordnance did not annoy
us, because it stood too high, and shot over our Camp. In the mean time, the
Count of Mansfield, the Duke Christian, and the Count of Ottenburg rode about
the Army, encouraging the Soldiers to fight valiantly, and did themselves the
like; by reason whereof, diverse Lords and Officers on our side are hurt, but
few slain. Duke Christian had on his back a White Satin Doublet, and a Blew
Feather upon his head; and having his sleeves drawn up, he slashed bravely
among the enemies with his Sword, but was afterward hurt with a shot in his
Arm. On the enemies side, there are diverse Commanders, and a great number of
the common Soldiers slain, and notwithstanding we have lost many, they have
lost more, and (God be praised) we have gotten the victory.

The Battle being ended, we were so weary, that we could not pursue our
victory, and our Horses could not stand almost any longer upon their legs;
which caused us to rest for a while, and to refresh our selves: and the Duke
being yet in heat, was conducted out of the Camp at the same time by the Count
of Styrum, and two Gentlemen. But afterward, we marching again in
Battell-array were within the space of a League encountered with diverse Boores,
and others, which would stop our passage: but we set upon them, and slew
four hundred of the same; the rest we berest the next Morning of their
Apparel and Arms. And from thence we went straight on, taking our way
toward Tongeren, where we strengthened our selves a little, and tarryed a
while for the Horse and Foot which were behind; and our Horse being well
accompanied, marched the same Night within six Leagues of Breda.

This is set down by one which has been in the Battle himself.

Printed at Vtrecht by Ian Amelisson, for Crispin de Pas.

From Rome the 22 of August. 1622.
In Spain is sent a Million over into Sicilia for the Fleet in the said
Kingdom. There are six Galleys sailed from thence to invade Pisserta, and to
endomage the Turks.

From Marsilia are departed six, and from Malta seven Galleys, besides the
great Galleon or Ship, to aid the Kings Navy before Rochell.

From Venice the 28 of August.
The King of Spain has appointed 28000 Crowns for the maintenance of the
war in Veltolina, and to keep his forces true unto him. He has given order
likewise, that it should be told to the French Ambassador, That his King should
first appease the Commotions in his own Kingdom, before he should meddle with
those which are risen in Veltolina.

At Constantinople is the house of the Primo Vizier pillaged; as likewise the
houses of four other Bashaes, because they would have deposed the new
confirmed Emperor Mustapha, and were only opposed by the Aga, or Collonell of
the Ianisaries. Whereupon there is a new Primo Vizier chosen, and Mustapha
aforesaid is confirmed in his Empire for 6 years; after the expiration
whereof, a Brother of the late Osman, is to succeed him.

Likewise at Constantinople the Secretary of the Polonian Ambassador is put to
death, because the Cossacks do great hurt upon the black Sea.

From Vienna the 31 of August.
Few days ago there is sent an Imperial Post to the Lantgraue Mauritius of
Hessen, with a command that he should dismiss his forces, and accommodate
himself better then he has done here before, or that otherwise his Ambassador
should not be invested and installed in his name.

The 27 of this month is the Electorall and Princely house of Brandenberg
invested and installed by the Emperor.

Here are likewise arrived Ambassadors of the Imperial Town of Nurenberg, and
have had speedily audience. The Electorall day at Regensburg shall begin the 17
of September.

From Prage the first of September.
The Siege of Glatz shall now with earnest be taken in hand: in the mean time
the Garrison makes diverse sallies, and of late they have defeated and scattred
three Imperial troops of Horse, and taken certain prisoners, and amongst
them a Receiver.

The Judgments uttered at Brin against the Prisoners are sent to the Emperor,
to understand his pleasure touching the same. What the Judgments are, and when
they shall be executed, time will reveal.

From Turingen the 4 of September.
The meeting of the Electors of Saxen and Brandenberg shall be at Sutderback
the 18 of this month. The Duke of Saxony is shortly to dismiss his forces;
and to the same purpose there is sent already great store of money from
Leypsich to Dresden.

From Collen the 10 of September.
The Fort Papemutz is still besieged, and the Garrison within the same have
almost quite destroyed with their Ordnance the Fort which was made at this
side, so that they are about to make it stronger then it was before: but in the
mean time the Garrison within Papemutz does great violence with her shot.

A Ship coming from Diepe, and another from Rochel, brings news in Holland,
that there is a Treaty betwixt the French King, and the Protestants, to see
whether they can come to an agreement; and as is hoped (by the grace of God)
they shall.

Letters from Riga advise, that there is at last concluded a Truce betwixt the
Kings of Polonia and Sweden respectively, for the space of nine months, to see
whether before the expiration of the same they can make an absolute Peace.

The King of Sweden was resolved very speedily to return to Stockholm.

The Enemy has broke up his Siege before Sluys, and keeps only the Fort of
Saint Donaes, and two other Sconses beset.

The Forces that came with Count Mansfield, lie for the most part in the
Laughstraet, and thereabout, and are daily relieved, diverse ships being sent
to Gertruydenberg with Arms, and Munition, besides Bread, Cheese, Butter,
Beer, and Herring, which is good provision for his and the Duke of Brunswickes
Soldiers. It is thought, that they are sworn this Week to the high and
mighty Lords, and States General of the United Provinces, and the Prince of
Orange.

There were likewise arrived certain Commissioners of the States General with
good sums of Money, to set them in order.

It is reported, That the Lord of Dort is coming from Bremen with certain
thousand men, to aid the States.

FINIS.

