MEDITATIONS Concerning prayers to Almighty God, for the safety of ENGLAND,
when the Spaniards were come into the narrow Seas, August 1588.

As also other meditations concerning thanksgiving, for delivering England
from the cruelty of the Spaniards, and for their marvelous confusion and
overthrow.

By O. Pygge.

With a spiritual song of praises by P. Turner Doctor of physic.

Psalm, 145.18. The Lord is near to all that call upon him: yea, to all that
call upon him in truth.

Psalm, 126.2.3. Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with
joy: then said they among the Heathen, the Lord has done great things for
them.

The Lord has done great things for us, whereof we rejoice.

Printed at London by R. R. for Thomas Man. 1589.

TO THE READER.
Many are the ways, by the which our most merciful God, has sought to bring
us of England unto true repentance. Who is able to reckon up all the
benefits, spiritual and temporal, that we have received at his hands? As,
the light of the Gospel shining in the midst of us, and the marvelous
preservation of our gracious Prince, to our special comfort, notwithstanding
the manifold wretched practices of the wicked against her Highness person, and
the state, which he from time to time has discovered, and brought many of the
principal authors to their deserved confusion. He has also chastised us
sundry times, and in diverse manners threatened us more plagues, than as yet he
has brought upon us. Among other warninges, this ought specially to be
remembered for ever, Jsa. 7.18.
that this last Su^mer, hissing for the Spaniards, he brought the^ so far from
their own Country, and so nere unto our coasts, with resolute minds to have
made havoc of us. It was not without him, as blaspheming Rabsache spoke of
his masters forces coming against Jerusalem, Jsa. 36, 10.
no doubt more truly then he was ware of. True it is, their purpose was not
to do that which the Lord meant, but rather in the pride of their hearts to
have made manifest breaches of his commandments, in seeking the suppressing
of his truth here professed, and the conquest of a land, whereunto they can
make no just claim or title. Howbeit, we ought to look into the Lords
secret purpose ouer-ruling all, and carrying men to that which they know not,
yea, clean contrary to that which they purpose, Jsa. 10.6.7.
even in the self same action.

Therefore whatsoever they intended, the Lord in them shook his rod over us,
to draw us to repentance, that so in deed he might not strike. He put us in
great fear, that so he might drive us to fly to him, where only comfort is,
by earnest prayers. At that time many prayed and confessed sins: and blessed
be his name, that for his own honor, heard the cries of his poor servants,
so bearing witness, that it is no vain thing, in the time of distress, to
humble our selves before him. How blessed the event hitherto has bin, is
generally known amongnst us, and the comfort thereof what true English heart
is there, that does not feel and rejoice therein? It remains that the
danger then imminent being escaped, we of this Natian do not only with our
mouths, continually give God praises: but that also by the rod thus shaken
over us, and as it were ready to have been laid upon our shoulders, we learn
to turn to him, forsaking our evil ways, least not profiting thus, as the
Lord calls for at our hands, in the end he bring upon us deserved
destruction. Against this destruction as it is my part always to pray, and by
Gods assistance I hope to pray: so I should have great cause to be glad, if by
any means the Lord would vouchsafe to use me as his instrument, to stir up,
though never so few, to such a serious consideration of these things as ought
to be in all. For the which purpose I present unto thee (Christian Reader)
this little treatise here following, containing certain meditations of
prayers and thanksgiuings. Those that be of prayers, I wrote at such time as
the Spaniardes were come into the narrow seas, and then there were some copies
written to the use of some friends. True it is, in the confession of sins,
upon some occasion there is some thing altered from that which was then
written: but in the rest, J remember little otherwise than was then set
down, as the copies then given forth can bear witness. Since our wonderful
deliverance, I wrote the other meditations concerning thanksgiving, Both
joined together in some vritten books, I have sithence presented to some of
good calling, to whom J was bounden to wish all good, as well for their
profession of the truth, as for special kindenesses toward me. And to more J
had some purpose, that way to have made them common. Howbeit being read over
by some learned and godly men of good judgment, which thought they might be
profitable if they were put in print: I was content in that behalf to yield
unto their judgment, and accordingly do here offer them to thy view. J
hope thou may make some use unto thy self of either of them, if thou read
them with a sanctified mind. For, although the Meditations concerning Prayers
may seem unto some to no great purpose, because that occasion for that time
is now removed. Yet the sins of England do still remain, with which no doubt
God is highly displeased. These thou may there see in some sort confessed, as
also how by thy self, from a feeling heart thou may confess both them and
thine own, and humbly crave pardon. Moreover, the hatred and malice of the
Spaniard and his partakers, is not yet quenched, but rather we may be assured,
much more increased, so as they will but wait opportunity to set upon us
again. Besides, other Churches, as those of France and of the low Countries,
whose case we ought to tender, have many deadly enemies, which thirste after
blood. So as still necessarily there is required an employing of our and their
forces, against such common adversaries. I hope that from those meditations,
thou may have some help, to further thee with comfort in thy prayers for the
one, and against the other. The meditations for thanksgiving, J trust to every
indifferent reader, will seem to be of some use. My purpose is not, to require
that either of them be used, as an ordinary form of prayer or thanksgiving,
but that by reading of them, and exercising thy self sometimes in them, thou
should help thy self, toward a serious accomplishme^t of those duties,
though thou do it more shortly and in other words. Jf for these ends, this my
poor travail, may any way further thee, I pray thee give the praise to God,
to whom alone it is due, and remember to pray most earnestly for me, and for
all the rest, whom it pleases him to use in any sort for thy comfort. This
one thing I desire to have remembered, that many of the things specially
mentioned in the prayers, have been graciously performed of the Lord, and
accordingly they be acknowledged in the tha^ksgiuing: to assure us (as was said
before) that prayers specially joined with true fasting, be not in vain, but
to singular purpose. And yet, J desire not to be so mistaken, as if J arrogated
any thing to my poor and weak prayers, made by me in my public ministry,
or private exercise. No, I do unfeignedly from my heart acknowledge mine own
unworthiness, to be heard crying for my self, much more for the Church and
this state. J am persuaded, that the things which I then meditated, and which
the Lord directed me to write, were also thought upon, and remembered with more
feruencie of spirit and singleness of heart, by other the faithful servants
of God, Preachers and professors, of our own Nation, and of other Countries.
They stood up in the gap, they cried to the Lord, Exo. 17.11.
they held up their hands, and England has prevailed. They in deed were
chariots, horsemen, and forces by sea and land, as to that purpose Elisha spoke
of Elias, and Ioash of him. 2. Reg. 2.12. and 13.14.
Their prayers made in the bitter mourning of their souls, for their own and
our sins, did the Lord hear, blessing the worthy service of our valiant
Countrymen imploide in those affairs, and without means, doing wonderfully
for us: not for any worthiness in themselves, or in their prayers, but for the
worthiness of Christ Jesus, and for the honor of his own name.

It does remain that thou thy self be careful, wisely to apply the
fearful warning of the Lord, in the enemies coming against us, and his
unspeakable mercy in our wonderful deliverance, to stir thee up to
unfeigned conscience of pleasing him, in thy self, and such as be of thy
special charge. As also to pray, that whatsoever is amiss in the land, and
so displeases our most merciful God, may be amended. Whatsoever thou art, I
exhort thee earnestly to call upon the Lord, that the controversies risen up
amongst our selves, may christianlie and brotherly be compounded. That so the
peace of our worthy Church being procured: we may all, whether we be
Preachers or professors, proceed one way according to the truth, to bestow
whatsoever gift we have, to the rooting out of all sin, and to the
establishment of the kingdom of Christ Jesus, in the hearts of all those, that
be under any of our charges. Specially, because the harvest is great, Math. 9.
and the laborers in comparison be but few, pray the Lord of the harvest,
that such men whom he has sanctified in life and learning, so as it were,
separating them, Gal. 1.15.
from their mothers wombes, to the work of the ministry, may be thrust out
into his harvest, and continue in the same with much comfort to do their
duty. As also that such as be altogether unfit for so great a burden, may
have nothing to do in the most holy ministry of the Lord. Those whom these
causes do any way concern, most humbly and with all reverence, upon the
knees of heart, even in the bowels of Christ Jesus I do entreat, to show
their zeal to his honor, which shed his most precious blood for their sins,
and their compassion upon their dear brethren and Country men his members, in
many places of the Realm yet wallowing in ignorance, and other sins, in doing
what they can, that all the people of the land may be instructed in the
everlasting truth of God, that so they may walk in the obedience of his
blessed majesty, and in all duty to our gracious Prince, and all such as
under her govern the state. If these causes of so great importance be not
looked unto as they ought, but that iniquity be still suffered to grow and to
abound, notwithstanding all that which the Lord has said to us from his
word, and wonderfully done for us; I will wish to weep in secret, and that
mine eyes may drop down tears, for what else may we look for, but the
captivity of the Lords flock. And thus do I commend thee (Christian
Reader,) to the Lord, and my self to be remembered of thee, in thy most
earnest prayers. March. 7. 1588. the marvelous year, in respect of the Lord
his wonderful deliverance of us, and the confusion brought upon our enemies,
and the enemies of his Church, he make us always thankful, Amen.

Oliver Pygge.

Meditations concerning Prayers to almighty God, for the safety of England,
when the Spaniards were come into the narrow Seas, August. 1588.
O Lord God almighty, terrible, and fearful God, thou Lord of Hosts, judge
of the world, which hate sin, and visitest the transgressions of the
Fathers upon the children, to the third and fourth generation of them that
hate thee; We most miserable sinners do in most humble manner throw our
selves down before thy majesty: acknowledging that we are not worthy of the
least of thy mercies, no, not so much as to go upon the ground, or to look up
unto heaven: much more unworthy are we to have this favor, to call upon thy
name, with any hope to be heard, and to find favor in thine eyes, for the
obtaining of our requests, for our selves, and the rest of thy people, for whom
we are bound to pray. Psa. 50.15
Yet, because it is thy commandment, that we should call upon thee in our
troubles, Psa. 145.18
and further thou have promised to be near those that call upon thee in
truth: In some measure of conscience to obey thy commandment, and trusting
unto thy great mercy, we do humble our selves before thee. Praying thee, that
we may not be of the number of them, whose prayers be abominable in thy
sight (according as it is with them that regard wickedness in their hearts, and
turn their ears from thy law: Psa. 66.18.
) but that we may so pray unto thee in sorrow for our sins past, Pro. 28.9.
in unfeigned desire to please thee for the time to come, in a true persuasion
of thy favor to us in Christ, and in such a love of thy Church, that our
service may be allowed of thee, and our selves and all they for whom we are to
make suit, may receive much comfort, of our performing this duty, even to the
honor of thy name.

And because it is our sins only, Jsa. 59.2.
that make separation between thee and us, keeping away the good blessings,
which thou else would give, and pulling upon us the plagues, which thou art
not easily drawn to power upon thy children; We do first of all in most
humble manner confess, that as we were conceived in sin and brought forth in
iniquity: so we have besides, yielded most cursed fruits of that our corrupt
nature in rebellion against thee, and breaking thy commandments, in our
thoughts, words, and deeds, in doing evil, and leaving good things undone, and
doing good things very weakly and imperfectlie. And that not only in the
days of our youth, and in the time of our ignorance, but also since we came
to more years, and have been instructed in the knowledge of thy blessed will.
O we have sinned, we have sinned hainously, in neglecting thy service, and
our duty to our brethren in our callinges. We have sinned openly and
secretelie, alone and in company, yea, oftentimes wilfully and against our
consciences, when we knew thy commandment was, that we should have done
otherwise.

Yea, we do not only thus confess our own sins, but also after the
example of thy worthy servants, Dan, 9.1^. Nehe. 1.6 and 9.34.
Daniel and Nehemiah, we confess the sins of our whole land, acknowledging,
that we, our forefathers, our princes, our governors, our whole
Ecclesiastical state, and all the people of the Realm, have fearfully sinned
against thee. If we were guilty of no other sins before thy majesty, the
idolatry and bloodshed in the former times, yet not revenged, nor repented of
as they ought, were sufficient to bring utter desolation upon a land, wherein
such abominations were committed, as thy servant Jeremy in his time, Jere.
15.4.
threatened the Jews for the sins of Manasse. But (O Lord) what have been
the iniquities committed since our deliverance from that yoke, and thy
bestowing upon us the light of thy Gospel? O, have we not all from the highest
to the lowest damnably sinned against thee? yes verily. If we would deny it,
our iniquities would testify against us. For, which of thy commandementes have
we not broken? If we look to those four of the first table, which teach us
our duty toward thee, or those six of the second table, which teach us how
to walk in our callinges toward men: O we shall be found meruailously
faulty before thy majesty. And that, not only some of the people, but even
every sort, state, and condition: not in some part of the land alone, but
every where, in every quarter and corner, yea, in every house and family. For
(O Lord) we have loved the vain things of the world, more than thee and thy
word: we have been more loath to displease men than thy majesty: we have made
flesh our arm, putting our trust in man, and withdrawn our hearts from thee.
Jere. 17.5.
How seldom and cold have our prayers bin? And how sparing our thanks to
thee for the innumerable benefits bestowed upon us and our nation? What
idolatry has bin committed here by Papists in corners, and by strangers of
other countries? There has wanted care to amend things thoroughly, according
to the rule of thy word. Thy name has infinitely bin blasphemed: for where
almost can we come, in the house or in the street, but we shall hear this
most shamefully, by the greater, and by the meaner, by the elder and by the
younger sort, which take thy glorious name in vain, speaking of thee rashly and
irreverently, yea, swearing without cause, forswearing, cursing, and such like.
O thy Sabothes, there is scarce one among many, which makes conscience
according to thy law, to dedicate the^ wholly unto thy service publikelie and
privately, but as if they were any other days, so they be bestowed: yea,
many think it lawful to follow a riotous and profane course then, which
upon other days they would think unfit for them. And how fearful examples
hereof, have we had from the great places and personages of the land? The
superiors in the common wealth, in the Church, and in the house, have not done
their duty to their inferiors. The inferiors likewise have been marvelous
undutiful to their Prince, and the rest which thou in thy wisdom did set
over them. The land has abounded with murders, slaughters, quarrels,
fightinges and contentions, with incests, adulteries, whordomes, dronkennes,
excessive pride in apparel: filthy stage plays have been suffered even in
our chiefest city, and upon the Saboths. Thefts be common, oppressions,
deceits, vsuries, lying, false witness bearing, and such like. O we are not able
to reckon up the innumerable sins, of the which we and the whole land may
justly be indicted and araigned before thy majesty. They which have been in
place to punish sin, and to maintain well doing, have dealt too too favorably
with sinners, on the other side not cherishing the godly as was their duty.
The ministers which should boldly have reproved these corruptions in all sorts
and states, have for the most part been unable to do this, and many of them
corrupt in their conversation, they have winked at disorders, daubing with
untempered mortar, Ezec. 21.28
that will not hold, as if nothing had been amiss, and no danger toward, when
as iniquity mightily prevailed amongst us, and thou in thy high displeasure
did threaten war. Just is the complaint of thy servant Jeremy in his time
against such Ministers. Lame. 2.14.
They have looked out vain and foolish things for us, they have not
discovered our iniquities, to turn away our captivity, but have looked out for
us false prophesies and causes of banishment. True it is, we have had some
desirous to do their duty, who also accordingly have labored, but even
diverse of them have been evil entreated, by wicked and ungodly men, which
could not abide to hear their faults reproved. Whereas in the mean time, they
have liked well of such, which seeking themselves only and their own ease,
have been unable to instruct them in thy ways, by occasion whereof, many of
the people of the land have been kept in ignorance of thy majesty, and
suffered to go on in their other sins.

And although thou (O Lord our God) in tender care of us, have warned us of
these great sins, by our Preachers in their Sermons, and some of their
books, which have been gravely and dutifullie written: yea, although thou
have sought to move our hard hearts by thy benefits, so as we have inioyd thy
gospel, outward peace and plenty, when as the Nations about us have been
meruailously distressed, even as until this time their wounds be bleeding
new, and remain uncured. And further, we have had many wonderful
deliueraunces of our Prince, to our great comfort: and moreover thou have
threatened us by insurrection in our own land, by unseasonable times of too
much drought, or too much rain, by destroying some fruits of the earth, by
scarsitie, by the pestilence, by signs in heaven, and by a fearful
earthquake, not many years past: yet have not we of this nation profited by
any of these, to bewail our sins, and to turn unto thee, as it did become
us. But have despised thy Prophets, which spoke to us in thy name, and have
still gone away from thee, multiplying our transgressions against thy majesty.
So as now most justly there belongs to us, to our Princes, governors,
teachers, and to all the people of the land, Dan. 9.7:8.
nothing but shame and confusion of face, yea, utter destruction of our Nation
and state: whereof, when we look into our great sins, we may fear, that
thou have prepared the Spaniard, and such as take his part, to be thy
executioners. Wherein also we do confess, that thou shall be most just, if
thou give us and our kingdom over into their hands.

Notwithstanding, because thou art a God full of mercy and infinite in
compassion, Ezec. 18.23.
and have always showed thy self so to be, not delighting in the destruction
of sinners, but rather desiring their repentance, that they might live and
enjoy thy favor. Jere. 18.7.8
Who have said by thy servant Jeremy, that when thou speak against a
nation, threatening to root it up, and to destroy it, yet thou will spare it,
if they turn from their wickedness, according as we see it in the example of
the Ninevites. Jonah.
Trusting unto these, and such other promises in thy word, that we do judge
our selves and our nation worthy of all misery, do notwithstanding pray thee,
for our Lord Jesus Christ his sake, to have mercy upon us, to forgive us and
our land, all the sins, whereof we be guilty before thee. O pursue us not with
thy judgments, as we have given thee cause, for then we must needs perish
eternally. Among other plagues, from the which we pray thee to be delivered,
preserve us we beseech thee from the hands of the Spaniards and other
idolaters, which have conspired against our nation, to root out thy religion
from hence, to place Papistry again, and to dispossess us of that part of the
earth, which it seemed good unto thee to allow us to dwell in, and where also
through thy goodness, we and our forefathers have inhabited now many years. We
confess, that for our unworthy walking of thy Gospel, and ill behauing of
our selves in this pleasant land, it may justly spue us out, and thou may
suffer the enemies to prevail. But remember (O Lord) that these men be not
behind us in sins (for they be a most wicked generation) neither is it our
sins that they do so much look unto in coming against us, as thy religion
among us professed, and our renouncing the man of sin, the Bishop of Rome
thine enemy, and the enemy of thy Christ. So as now whatsoever we be that do
defend it, or howsoever we do defend it, the cause is thine own, therefore
look unto it we desire thee for the glory of thy name, and for Jesus Christ's
sake. O why should such wicked men as these blaspheme thy name, Psalm. 79.10.
saying, where is their God, and the religion they have so long professed? As
though the religion were not good, which we have received from thy word, or as
if thou would not defend those that profess the same. O remember thy
ancient mercies showed to this Nation many years, break not off till thou
have finished them, by giving yet further helps to thy Church and religion
here, for the better subduing of all the people under thy government. Deliver
us (O Lord) we pray thee at this time. Try us yet once more, that our
magistrates and ministers may in their callinges reform whatsoever is amiss,
and endeavor to bring the whole land into better order, that thou may
delight to favor us for ever. That these thy blessings may be obtained, O
drive away from our hearts the marvelous security wherein we have slept these
many years, imagining that our ways did please thee, and that no plague
should come near unto us, when we lived very sinfully in all sorts and
states, and so provoked thee to displeasure. Grant that by these thy fearful
warnings, we may at length be moved to confess our sins, to lament them, to
humble our selves before thee in fasting and prayer, to turn from our wicked
ways, to enter into a new course, and to make a sure covenant, for ever
hereafter in our callinges to do our duties better, that thou may spare
us, and stay thy hand from our destruction. And howsoever we have means for
our defense by sea and land, Psa. 20.7.
yet keep us we pray thee, from trusting in them: though others put their
trust in their horses, Psalm. 6.4. 1. Sam. 17 45.
in their ships and multitude of men. O show the light of thy countenance upon
us, and grant that in thy name only, trusting to thy mercy, and in thy
strength, we may come forth against these our adversaries. And as for them that
thus boil in malice against thy religion, and us thy most unworthy servants:
O turn their hearts if they belong to thee, open their eyes to see thy truth,
that they may with us depart from that Antichrist of Room, love thy Gospel,
our nation, and all the professors of thy truth. Or else (Lord) as thou have
begun (for the which we do in most humble manner give thanks unto thee) so we
pray thee to go forward, to curse them in all their actions by sea and by
land. Let their table be a snare before them, Psalm 69.22 23
and their prosperity their ruin. Let their eyes be blinded that they may not
see, and make their loins always to tremble. Strike the^ with such fear, that
the sound of a leaf shaken may make them to quake, and that as wicked men they
may fly, Leuit. 26.36
when no man pursues them. Pro. 28.1.
Scatter their counsels, overthrow their forces, turn their own swords one
against another, and so provide by thy mighty power, that the things which
they have prepared for our destruction, may be used in thy justice, for the
execution of thy long deserved wrath upon themselves. And so bring them to
naught, that they may not any longer trouble us and other of thy Churches, as
a long time they have done, and even now do. Psalm. 79.10.
O let the blood of thy Saints, which they have cruelly shed, come before thee,
to pull vengeance upon them. Hear the cries of the women whom they have made
widows, and of the children whom they have made fatherless. Hearken to the
pitiful complaints of such as they keep in prison for thy truth, and
deliver such as they have appointed to death. Let them be upon the seas, Exo.
14.
as was Pharao and his company pursuing thy Israel: let them be upon the
land, Jud. cap. 4.7.8.
as Sisera and Iabin, as the Madianites, Oreb, Zeb, Zebah, and Zalmana, the
enemies of thy people, whom thou destroyedst in the time of the Judges. O make
them like a wheel, Psalm. 83.13
and as the stubble before the wind, as the fire burns the forests, so
persecute them with thy tempests, and make them afraid with thy storms. Fill
their faces with shame, that they may seek thee (O Lord.) Let them be
confounded and troubled for ever. Fight against them from heaven, Jud. 5.20.
and render into their bosom seuenfolde, all the reproaches and injuries, which
they have done to thy Church, that they may know that thou art God, and that
it is thy truth, which we have learned from thy word, though we have walked
most unworthy of the same.

Concerning our selves, we do first of all pray thee for our sovereign
Prince, that notwithstanding all the trecheries of the adversaries, she may
still be preserved, to finish her course in thy fear and in peace, even to the
salvation of her soul. We beseech thee so direct her, and such as under her
highness govern the state, that in these evil and most dangerous times, they
may see what is for thine honor and our common saftie, accordingly to advise,
command, and take order. Give conscience to our Ministers now to stand in the
gap, Ezekiel. 22.30 Joel. 2.17.
earnestly to cry unto thee to spare this thy people, and stir them up, with
all feruencie to call us unto repentance. Give all the subjects in the land
grace, to carry themselves dutifully and loyally to her Majesty, and the
state, to be ready to do service in their persons, and by whatsoever else they
have, that so they may be helping against the common adversaries. And as for
our countrymen, or any other that are now employed, or hereafter to be employed
in these services by sea or by land for our defense: O Lord so pass by their
sins, that they may not hinder thy work, in these causes of so much
importance. O so guide them with thy spirit, that repenting of their sins,
and being thoroughly persuaded of thy favor for a better life, they may
cheerfullie fight thy battles, without fearing the faces of the enemies, Be
thou unto them a pillar of a cloud by day and a pillar of fire by night, Exo.
13.21 22.
as thou were to the Israelites in their coming from Egypt. Grant that each
of them may know their several places, in the same to carry themselves
faithfully without envy, or murmuring. O Lord be with them, and so go forth
with our armies, that one of our fighting men may chase a thousand of theirs,
Deuteronomy. 31.3^
and two may put ten thousand to flight. Give them such good success by sea
and by land, that we may have new occasions to praise thy name, and to fear
thee more than we have done. Yea, that many other nations hearing of it, may
thereupon be moved to seek after thy truth. We know, it is all one with
thee, to save with many, or with no power. 2. Cro. 14.1.
There were but three hundred of Israel with Gideon, against the huge army of
the Madianites. Asa the King of Judah, Judge. 7.6.
did overcome the host of the Aethiopians, being ten hundred thousand, 2. Cro.
1.4
when as himself had not six hundred thousand. Yea, thou without any man,
did in one night destroy the mighty army of the Assirians in the days
of Ezekiah. Isa. 37.36.
We know that thine arm is not shortened, but that thou art now also able to
help us in like manner, if we had no means at all for our defense. And
although the forces of our adversaries be come something near unto us, yet as
thou did drown Pharao and the Egyptians, when they were not far off from
thy people Israel, Exodus 14.
and ouerthrowedst the Aethiopians and Assirians, 2. Cro. 14.9. and 32.1.
being with their armies entered into the land of Canaan: so do we assure our
selves, that thou art still able to preserve us, and to deliver these our
adversaries into our hands, although their powers were more than they are, and
nearer unto us than yet they be. Psalm. 79.8.
Help us therefore we pray thee (O God of our salvation:) remember not against
us, nor against our nation the former iniquities, but make have, and let thy
tender mercies prevent us. Suffer not thine enemies to rail upon thy truth and
thy children any longer. Let it appear that thou only art God, and that the
Idols whom they have served, be unable to help them. Give not over thy
faithful servants of this nation, and of other Countries fled hither for
thy truths sake, into the hands of these miserable men, Psa. 79.2.3
to spill their blood in the streets like water, to give their bodies to the
beasts of the field, and their flesh to the fowls of heaven. Thou that
promisest to spare Sodom, Genesis 18.
if there might have been ten righteous found there, spare this Nation we
pray thee, where there be many times ten, that unfeignedly desire to serve
thee. Thou that pitiedst Niniuie having in it six score thousand young
children, Jonah. 4.
pity we beseech thee this populous Nation, and give it not over to be
laid wast and desolate. O let not the Churches, where thy faithful servants
have assembled to worship thee, by prayer, fasting, preaching, and the use of
thy Sacraments, be turned into cages of unclean beasts, and synagogues of
Satan, to have the mass and other damnable Idolatries in them again. For the
glory of thy name, turn these great evils far from us, although we be most
worthy to taste of them all. If thou will not be entreated to spare this sinful
nation, which has so much abused thy patience, and so often and many ways
provoked thee to wrath: O correct us yet thy self, by some other of thy rods,
that we may be brought unto repentance, but leave us not as a pray to these
merciles and bloody men. Whatsoever shall fall out, grant (we beseech thee) that
we may take al thy chastisments patiently, acknowledge thy justice therein, and
never depart from thy truth, but that we may hold on in the profession of
the same even to ye end notwithstanding all the torments we may be brought
unto. Comforting our selves always, with the feeling of thy love in Christ,
and with looking for his blessed coming to judgment, Phil. 3.21.
when he shall change our vile bodies, and make them like his own glorious
body, by his mighty power, whereby he is able to do all things. O Lord hear
us thus calling upon thee, and for every other grace, for thy Church in the
world, for this land, for all sorts and states in the same, and for all other
for whom we ought to pray. Receive also (we beseech thee) our most humble
thanks for all thy former benefits upon our selves, and upon this nation, for
thy Gospel, the safety and preservation of our Queen hitherto, the
discovery and overthrow of treasons, and the doers of them, thy patience to
our realm, our peace thus long, and plenty of outward blessings, as also for
the good success against our enemies given unto us, by sea or by land, of late
or before times. O we do most humbly praise thy holy name, praieng thee to
go forward to do us good still, and so we call upon thee as we are taught.

Our Father which art in, etc. MEDITATIONS concerning thanksgiving to Almighty
God, for delivering England from the cruelty of the Spaniards, and for their
marvelous confusion and overthrow. 1588.
Psalm. 50.15
O Lord most merciful father, thou dooest command us to call upon thee in
the time of our trouble, thou promisest to hear and to deliver us, requiring
that we should then glorify thee, and offer thee sacrifice of praise. How true
thou art in this thy promise, as we have many examples in the Scriptures, so
we of this land ought to know it in our own experience. For we were in great
trouble and not without fear, when the Spaniards, a bloody and cruel nation,
in their rage came forth against us, with a purpose so to root us out, that
we should no more be a people. And indeed there was just cause, why we should
have been much astonished. For, if we look to our sins, and the abominations of
our whole nation, what could we else in thy justice have looked for, Hos. 9.7.
but that the day of visitaon, and the time of recompense was come, wherein
thy purpose was, to have done execution upon us for our transgressions? And, if
we look upon our enemies, they were many in number, and their forces great
both by sea and land, so as they thought themselves, as it were sure of the
victory, as if they had been able to have swallowed us up quick, and to have
run over us, as the proud and swelling waters ouerflow the valleies of the
field. In that our perplexity, we did now and then sigh unto thee for help,
we powered forth prayers, though in great weakness. Thy faithful servant in
the ministry, were more earnest with thee in our behalf, humbling themselves
in fasting, and calling the people thereunto, even as it became them in a
matter of so great weight. So as the cries of them were many, which sued unto
thy majesty to spare this Nation, and not to give over this part of thine
inheritance, into the hands of the wicked. And now have thou most graciously
fulfilled thy promise. For whatsoever want was in our prayers, yet have you
heard us in that for which we cried. For, notwithstanding the enemy approached
very near, so as we might have looked for an attempt of la^ding in our coast:
yet so miraculously and in diverse sorts, did thou set thy self against
them, blessing our means, and without means pursuing the^ with thine own
hand, yt their snare is broken, and we be escaped, Psalm. 124
even as ye bird out of the grin of the fouler. The sword, the sea, and famine,
have devoured a great part of them, others he returned with such dishonor, as
became them that would not learn to honor thee. Many of their fathers have
thus lost their children, many children are made fatherles, and many of their
wives are become widows. Thou have in thy justice rendered into their bosom, a
just reward of their cruelty in other cuntries, and have served them, as they
meant to do to us thy people. And now (O Lord) was this for our worthiness, or
because we had deserved any such thing at thy hands? No verily, for we be a
most sinful people, al sorts and states had corrupted their ways, and
hainously trespassed. But for their unworthiness did thou deny them ye
conquest over us, and for their innumerable abominations, have thou brought
upon them this deserved destruction. For the glory of thine own name,
mainteining thine own cause, in defending such as professed thy true religion,
although in that behalf we are far short of that we ought to be. Whatsoever we
be, thou have performed thy promise, hearing us in our fear, and doing more
for us, than we could almost have hoped for. And now it remains, yt according
to thy commandment we yield unto thy Majesty, the duty of continual thanks
and obedience, which thou call for at ye hands of such, whom thou deliuerest
so wonderfully as we have bin delivered, O that we could therefore confess before
thee, this thy loving kindness, and speak of al these thy wonderful works
before the sons of men, as it does become us. The least benefit that we
receive from thee, deserves infinite thanks from us. For, what are we of
England, that thou should consider us, or who were our forefathers, that
thou should regard us? Surely we are exceedingly sinful, Genesis 32.10.
and descended from such as had highly provoked thy displeasure. We are not
worthy of the least of thy mercies, yea, it is thy mercy that long ago we
were not utterly confounded. Lame. 3.22.
O then such rare and singular mercies as this, wherein miraculouslie thou have
showed thy self for our safety, and for the confusion of our adversaries, how
much should they move us to magnify thy name, and to sound forth continually
thy everlasting praises, which have vouchsafed such favor to those that be so
unworthy? For the greater the unworthiness of the Nation is, whereunto thou
have done this great good, the more worthy art thou to be praised for ever. If
such a benefit as this had been bestowed upon the Churches of France, Geneua,
Germany, or of the low Countries, great had been our sin, if we had not
offered to thee a bountiful sacrifice of the calves of our lips, Hos, 14.2
for such a mercy showed unto them. For as their miseries ought to be to us
as our own, and therefore we should weep with them when they Romans 12.15.
weep. So their deliverance should have been, as if we our selves had been
delivered, in respect whereof, we ouhht to have reioiced with them in their
joy. The heavenly spirits are carried with such a zeal to thine honor,
Apoc. 19.1.2.3.
and inflamed with such love to that part of thy Church which is here upon the
earth, that with a loud voice, they sing praises to thee, for judging the
whore of Room, and revenging the blood of thy Saints, although she could
not have hurt them, or in any sort have diminished their glory. How much
more therefore by their example, are we bound to praise thee, because in this
our deliverance, and confusion of our enemies, thou have not only showed thy
power, mercy, and justice, so getting thy self a glorious name, in defending
the unworthy professors of thy truth, and the strangers here banished for
the same? But also by this means we our selves be preserved from great
miseries. and all the faithful subjects of the land inioie their sovereign
Prince, to their singular comfort, and under her gracious government, we have
the use of the public exercises of thy word and Sacraments, things that should
be unto us more dear than our own lives: Moreover, we may each of us sit
peaceably under our own vines and fig trees, inioieng our wives, our
children, our friends, our liberty, and many other blessings yielded to us,
in this most fruitful and pleasant land: If we do compare these benefits,
with the desolation brought upon our enemies, and with the calamities that we
should have tasted of in our souls and bodies, if they had prevailed:
(according as we have examples of their beastly cruelty in the Indians, and
others whom trecherouslie they have brought into their bondage.) O then our
hearts must needs be more hard than flint, and we our selves altogether
without feeling, except the consideration of these things, fill our spirits
with joy, our mouths with laughter, and stir us up to sing new songs of
praises unto thee.

Exo. 15.
Moses, Miriam, and the children of Israel having passed through the red sea,
and seen the destruction of their enemies, presently do acknowledge thy
mercy, and sing to the honor of thy name.

Deborah and Barach do the like, Judge. 5
the self same day that thou gave thy people that notable victory over
Sisera.

Iehoshaphat seeing the confusion, 2. Cro. 20.26
which thou broughtest upon the Moabites, the Ammonites, and them of mount
Seir, whom before he feared, after that he and his company had pursued them
and the spoil three days, the fourth day they give thanks, with such
feruencie and zeal, that the place it self has a name of their blessing God
there, as it may appear by the history.

Hester, Mordecay, and other of the Jews, in token of thankfulness and joy,
Heb. 9.
keep a feast the next day, after the kings decree was frustrated, which Haman
had procured for their destruction. Yea, they take order to have that their
deliverance solemnlie remembered every year.

Did their deliverance from mighty and cruel enemies provoke them to this? Did
the escaping of present dangers, draw from them these praises of thy name?
Did the overthrow of such as rose up against them, move them thus to honor
thee? O then we have cause to do the like. Our enemies which thus thought in
their hearts: We will pursue, we will divide the spoil, our lust shall be
satisfied upon them, we will draw out our swords, our hands shall destroy
them (according as it is recorded that Pharao spoke in his pride: Exo. 15.9.
) even these with him are sunk in the deep seas like lead. Judge. 4.21.
Iael a woman has stricken a nail into Siseraes head, Judge. 5.28.29.
even then when his mother and her wise Ladies persuaded themselves that he had
gotten the victory, and was dividing the spoils. The subjects of thy servant
Elizabeth, (a woman) by thy good blessing, have stricken a terror into the hearts
of the mighty, yea, partly by their means, as thine instruments, and partly
by thine own immediate power (ye stars in their course, and the seas in their
order fighting against them) they have then fearfully perished, Judge. 5.20.
when there was not only an assured persuasion in themselves, not to be
overcome (as may appear, in that they called their Navy invincible) but also
a certain expectation of the victory, yea, reports given and written, as if
they had prevailed.

Thou turnedst the swords of such as came forth on their side as they
thought, Jn one of their galleys.
against themselves: The ship fired by one of their Gonners.
And the fire which was kindled, to send their shot against us, was a mean of
delivering one of their ships, and some of their company into our hands: even
as thou armedst Moab, 2. Cro. 20.22 23.
Ammon, and them of mount Seir one against another in Iehoshaphats time.

The cursed agreement so many years ago at the council of Trent, for rooting
out the professors of thy truth, (whereof this attempt of the Spaniardes may
seem to be intended as an execution in respect of us) is now turned to the
destruction of these that favored it: so as we may not unfitly say, that Haman
and his be hanged upon the gallows, which he caused to be set up for Mordecay
the Jew. That is, thou have rewarded these proud men, that which they thought
to have done to others. Thou only indeed we must say. For notwithstanding,
thou wentest forth with our ships, prospering them so long as they incountred,
wherein sensibly it appeared to be thy work, in the great losses of the
adversaries both of men and Ships, and so little of ours, as it may worthily
be reckoned among thy merueilous works: yet seeing so great wrackes followed
them, when we had left them, how else can we think it but thine own hand?
Therefore, not withstanding we have much cause to rejoice in the wise care,
foresight, and provision of our Prince, the honorable counsel and the state:
as also in the faithfulness of our countrymen, so willingly and courageously
offering themselves, to spend their goods, and to hazard their lives by sea and
land in this case: Jude. 5.2.
so as we curse such, even by the sentence of thine own Angel, which were not
willing to help, Chap. 5.23.
as it is in the Judges: Yet (O Lord our God) forasmuch as the one were gifts
of thine, given to such as govern us, and the other were but thy instruments
to work by: To thee, yea to thee alone, O Father, Son, and holy spirit,
three persons and one God, do we ascribe all the glory, honor, praise, and
thanks for ever. For thou only have done this, Exodus 15.2.
thou indeed have showed thy self to be a man of war, that salvation is from
thee, and that there is no trust in horses and chariots. Pro. 21.31.
For, the horse and the rider have thou overthrown, the Spaniards ships have
thou cast into the seas, Exo. 15.21.
his chosen captains also be drowned in the sea, the depthes have covered
them, Exo. 15.6.7.
they be sunk to the bottom as a stone. Thy right hand (O Lord) is glorious
in power, thy right hand (O Lord) has bruised the enemy. And in thy great
glory, thou have overthrown them, that rose up against thee, thou sentest
forth thy wrath, which consumed them as stubble. Who can express these thy
noble acts? who can show forth all thy praise? Psalm. 106.^ 2.
If we had the tongs of al men and Angels, we could not sufficiently do it:
such praises as by thy grace we be able to offer, we pray thee in Christ to
accept. O our souls praise ye ye Lord, and whatsoever is within us praise ye
his holy name, and see that ye never forget this his benefit, praise the Lord
ye his angels, Psalm. 103.12.
that excel in strength, that do his commandment, in obeieng the voice of his
word. Praise the Lord all ye his hosts, Psalm. 103.20.22.23
ye his servants that do his pleasure, praise the Lord all ye his works in
all places of his dominion.

Yea, we beseech thee, that not only we, but the whole land also may give thy
majesty the whole glory of this, so as it may never come into any of our
minds, to think that by our worthiness, or by our own strength this is come
to pass. Grant that it be not only once every year, publicly and
solemnly remembered, after the worthy example, of that which was appointed to
be done of the Jews, for their deliverance from the cruelty of Haman: Hest. 9.
But that also daily and continually, we may stir up our selves to
thankfulness, and to speak of it to our children, and they to their childrens
children, that so the memory of this thy glorious fact, may be continued from
generation to generation even for ever. But above all things be herein
merciful unto us, that this marvelous benefit powered upon this nation, added
to the rest of thy woonderful mercies toward us, may be an occasion to lead
all sorts and states to true repentance, and to a through reformation of
whatsoever is amiss: least if we hold on in our evils, thou make a change,
and give our enemies cause to rejoice over us, as we do now over them. For,
notwithstanding they be marueilouslie weakened, yet such is thy power, that
thou art able to arm wounded and famished men to our destruction, Iere. 37.10
if we continue to sin against thee, as thou did threaten the Jews with
the Chaldeans in Ieremies time. We were delivered that we should sin no more,
John. 5.14.
as our Lord Jesus said to the man whom he had made whole. Our faithful
ministers, when they were most earnest in suing for us with fasting and
prayers, was it upon any other condition, but that being spared longer, we
should yield better fruits, according as the dresser of the vinyard entreats
for the figtree, Luke 13.7.8.
which the owner commanded to cut up? Now if speedily even this present year
this be not done by us, who shall hereafter entreat any more, or what is he
that crieng for us is like to be heard? Nay, we may fear that thou will say
to our most faithful prophets, Iere. 7.16.
as sometime thou saidest to Jeremy: Pray no more for this people, neither
lift up cry or prayer for them, neither entreat me, for I will not hear thee.
Or as in another place thou sayedst: Though Moses and Samuel stood before me,
yet mine affection could not be toward this people. Cast them out of my sight,
Iere. 15.1.
and let them depart, such as are appointed to death to death, and such as are
for the sword to the sword, and such as are for the famine to ye famine, and
such as are for captivity to captivity. And I will appoint over them four
kinds, says the Lord: the sword to slay, the dogs to tear in pieces, the
fowls of the heaven, and the beasts of the earth to devour and destroy. Or as
it is in Ezekiel: Ezekiel. 14.24
though these three me^, Noah, Daniel, and Job, were among them, they should
deliver but their own souls. For although by thy singular goodness we have
gotten this victory, yet are we not past al danger, as if carelessly we might
do what we list. Nay we see, that Asa the king of Judah triumphing most
gloriously, over the ten hundred thousand Ethiopians that came forth against
him, is notwithstanding met with by the Prophet Azariah, and by him certified
from ye Lord, that he might no otherwise look for the continuance of his
favor, to himself, and to his people, but as they should continue to do their
duty, and therefore says unto them after this manner. 2. Cr^. 15.2.
O Asa and all Judah and Benjamin hear ye me. The Lord is with you while you
be with him, and if you seek him, he will be found of you, but if you forsake
him, he will forsake you. The same people of Israel, for whom thou wroughtest
so many great works in Egypt, and after leaddest through the red sea,
destroying their enemies which assaied to follow the^, were afterward fearfully
destroyed in ye wilderness for their sins. Exo. 12.37 Nu. 14.30
So as of six hundred thousand that were numbered, only two persons Caleb and
Joshua entered into the promised Canaan. Thy servant Jude puts us in
remembrance of this in these words: For as much (says he) as ye once knew
this, Verse. 5.
how that the Lord after that he had delivered the people out of Egypt,
destroyed them that believed not. And the same nation of the Jews, though
oftentimes thou did marueilously fight for them and deliver them, so as
among the heathen it might be justly said: God has done great things for them,
and they on the other side had just cause to answer them, as with an echo: He
has done great things for us, whereof we rejoice, as it is in the Psalm. Even
these notwithstanding when they neglected their duty, Psalm. 126 2.3.
were most sharply punished, and given over as a pray unto their enemies, as
may appear in the history of their Judges and Kings. And at length when
nothing would reclaim them, but that they continued in their disobedience,
mocking and il entreating the faithful prophets which called them to
repentance: then thou broughtest upon them ye Chaldeans, who wasted their land,
took their chief city even Jerusalem and their king, put out his eyes, slew
his children and nobles before his face, Ier. 39.6.7.
and dishonorablie led him captive unto Babylon, leaving that fruitful and
populous country, as it were a desolate and forsaken wilderness, and bringing
scorn, reproach, confusion and shame upon that city and nation, which
sometimes were (as a Queen above al others) admired for their prosperity, as
if they had been the only praise of the world.

1. Cor. 10.6.7.8.
Their example do thou set before our eyes, as a glass to look into, whereby
we may see, what remains for such people, as be like them in thy blessings,
and not unlike them in their sins. We therefore of this nation, whom thou
have thus marueilouslie preserved, and defended in peace, prosperity, plenty,
and with the use of thy holy religion, under the reign of our sovereign
prince now these whole thirty years, and for whom of late thou have done
these great things: what else may we look for but the like destruction with
the Jews, except with all speed we do turn to thee, and reform our selves
according to thy word? Therefore (O Lord our God) we do most humbly crave of
thee, pardon for all our sins past, committed by us, and by our whole land,
either before this our deliverance, or since we were delivered: beseeching
thee in ye blood and obedience of Christ Jesus and for the honor of thy name,
not to bring upon us the destruction, which for our unthankfulness for this thy
great mercy, and for other our transgressions we have most justly deserved.
And grant, that for all the time to come, all sorts and states, civil and
ecclesiastical, from the highest to the lowest may be careful in all things
to seek thy will, and to have the same obeyed, as well in matters for the
Church, as the commonweal, and each of them for the direction of their
several families, and particular conuersations. That they may all join
together in their callinges as one man, for the reformation of the ministry,
that so the preaching of the Gospel may be established, and settled in all the
quarters of the land, whereby all the subjects may be subdued unto thee, and
taught holy obedience to her Maieiestie, and the rest that under her govern
the state. That godliness and godly men, may more and more be cherished and
maintained, and idolatry, papistrie, blasphemy, profanation of the holy
Saboths, and all other wickedness and wicked men, may be punished and
suppressed. O teach us to know and believe, that in these things stands the
blessedness and safety of our state, and realm, that that nation is only
happy, Psa. 144.15
whose God is the Lord, and that thou art a God and savior to such only as
walk in thy ways, and with all their hearts, seek to do thy commandments.
If this course be thought upon, and yielded unto by us, then we may assure our
selves of thy protection, for ever: Then we shall still to our comfort enjoy
our gracious Prince, and her highness the comfort of the dutiful service, and
obedience of us her subjects. Our wise counsailours shall be able to give
advise for our good, and our worthy valiant countrymen with honor to execute
that, which is appointed for our safety. Thy Gospel shall shine among us yet
in more excellent beauty, we shall have our peace and our plenty still, we
shall prosper in our affairs by sea and by land, we shall see our desire upon
our bloody enemies, Deuteronomy. 26.7.
they shall come forth against us one way, and shall fly seven ways. Leuit.
26.8.
One of us shall chase an hundred of them, and an hundred of us, shall put ten
thousand to flight. Psalm. 144.12.13
The voice of mirth and gladness shall be heard in our streets, our sons
shall be as plants growing up in their youth, and our daughters as the corner
stones, graven after the similitude of a palace. Our corners shall be full and
abounding with diverse sorts, our sheep shall bring forth thousands, even
ten thousands in our streets. Our oxen shall be strong to labor, there shall
be no invasion or going out, nor crieng in our Cities: the murrain of beasts
and the pestilence devouring men shall not come near us. Thus shall we then
be blessed, Psa. 144.15
for so is the people blessed, whose God is ye Lord. O Lord let our nation be
thus blessed for ever, we do pray thee even for ye honor of thine own name. So
we thy peeple and sheep of thy pasture shall praise thee for ever, Psalm.
79.13.
and from generation to generation we will set forth thy praise. And, for as
much as this work of thine is such, that it should not only move us, to
whom the comfort thereof does specially appertain, but even they also should
be touched with it, that dissent from us in religion, and desired to have seen
our ruin (as well the Papists of our own nation, as those that be in
foreign countries:) because, besides the other miracles recorded in thy
word, wrought by thy son Jesus Christ, and his holy Apostles, for the
confirmation of thy truth, thou have also by this our wonderful deliverance,
and confusion of our enemies, sealed this to be thy truth, which we have
learned from the same word, and whereof we make profession. We beseech thee
even for these, that so many of them as belong to thee, may by this occasion
the rather be brought to see, how detestable a thing in thy sight, Romish and
superstitious religion is, and how thou set thy self against such as would
uphold the same: that so they may not stand a far off, gazing upon this thy
great work, Apoc. 18.9.10.11. Apoc. 18, 4. and 19.20.
and bewailing this fall of the whore, but that indeed they may come forth of
Babylon, utterly renouncing the worship of the beast and his image, abhorring
to carry the least of his marks in their hands or forheads, Apoc, 17.2.
and no longer to be drunk, with the cup of her spiritual fornications. Yea,
we beseech thee that having the mistes and darkness of their minds chased
away, they may at length, see the clear light of thy gospel, so to join with
us in one holy profession grounded upon thy word, that together we may be glad
of this fall of Babylon, and join all forces as it were into one, to give her
according as she has done to thy Saints. Apoc. 18.6.
That in the end, the may have the judgment of an harlot executed upon her,
even to be rooted out for ever. That to their further condemnation, they be
not subject to the reproof, which thy spirit gives to such as they be, that
amended not by the vengeance powered upon others, according as it is said in
the Apocalips, Apoc. 9.20.21.
The remnant of the men which were not killed by these plagues, repented not of
the works of their hands, that they should not worship devils, and Idols of
gold and silver, and of brass, and of stone, and of wood, which neither can
see, neither can hear, nor go. Also they repented not of their murders and
their sorceries, neither of their fornication, nor of their theft. For their
obstinacy shall be greater, and their sin the more heinous in thy sight, if
so sensible a judgment as this is, provoke them not to give thee glory and to
seek after thy truth. If there be any of them so desperately hardened, that
in steed of repenting, they shall presume more and more, to set themselves
against thy holy ones, and to blaspheme thy name, Apoc. 16.9.
which have power over these plagues: We beseech thee go forward with this
thy excellent work persecute them so continually, that they may know
themselves to be but men, and the Idols whom they serve, not to be God. Turn
all their devises upon their own heads, and bring them to such miseble
confusion, that they may for sorrow gnash their teeth, and at last be enforced
to acknowledge thy power and justice in their ruin, to whom they will not now
stoop, to serve thee according to thy word, that they might be saved.

Yea, we beseech thee, that all the nations of the heathen, to whom the
reports of these thy great acts shall come, may by this means be moved to
inquire after thee, and to seek to know thee, and thy good pleasure in Christ
Jesus, whom thou have sent to their salvation, if they believe. That so
departing from their superstitions and Idolatries, wherein they do dishonor
thee, they may honor thy name in the knowledge of thy truth. That we our
selves beholding these things, and the utter confusion of all such as rise up
against thee, and thy Christ, Apoc. 20.10
may be assured that that time approaches apace, when the devil by whom they
are led, the beast whom his favorers have worshipped, and the false
Prophets, by whom they have been seduced, not being able to hurt any more,
because their time is expired, shall be cast into the lake of fire and
brimstone, Apoc. 10.10.15.
where also they shall be tormented day and night world without end, and with
them every one not found in the book of life. When likewise the Church being
freed from all their tyranny, shall come forth as a bride prepared for her
husband, Apoc. 21.2.
to be joined with ye lamb Jesus Christ for ever: Where she shall hunger,
thirst, nor sorrow any more, but having all tears wiped from her eyes, Apoc.
7.16.
she shall enjoy perfect blessedness, in that heavenly city whose gates be
of pearl, Apoc. 21.2. Apoc. 21.18
whose walls be precious stones, and the city it self, with the streat
thereof pure gold, like clear or shining glass. Apoc. 22.1.2
Wherein there is a river of water of life, clear as crystal, proceeding out
of the throne of God and of the lamb, having of either side the tree of life,
bearing twelve manner of fruits, and giving fruit every month, Apoc. 22.20
whose leaves are saving medicines for the heathen. O Lord Jesus which so long
ago said I come quickly, even so Lord Jesus come, Amen. Amen.

TO THE READER.
THou have (Christian Reader) which thou had not in the first impression, a
godly hymn or song of thanksgiving, concerning our deliverance, penned by my
reverend and good friend in Christ M. Doctor Turner, who understanding of my
poor travail in this argument, wished thou had also been partaker of that
his labor with mine, and has been since content, that I should publish it
for thy profit. The benefit of our safety is such, and so wonderful, that it
deserves an often and most serious remembrance. If my meditations seem too
long or not such as content thee, I pray thee, use the help of this song,
shorter, and commended unto thee, in respect of the writer, and the sweet
manner of delivering that taste, the remembrance whereof should every way be
most pleasant to thee. Forget not the goodness of God helping thee so many
ways, and offering thee one dish of meat diversely dressed, that if it like
thee not the one way, it may please thine appetite the other. If thou and thy
family learn to sing it (which I pray thee may be oftentimes done) I hope
thou will find it comfortable to thy soul. And so I pray thee to give God
praise, and help such with thy prayers, that desire to help thee.

A spiritual song to the praise of Almighty God, for delivering ENGLAND from
the Spaniards.
By P. Turner Doctor of Physic.
^ Had you not watched (o lord) our coasts to keep,
^ And had not thou well warded al our bounds,
^ Our cruel foes had caught us all a sleep,
^ And sonck our ships and sacked our haven towns.
All laud therefore, from heart we yield to thee,
That hidest not thy face from thine at need,
But do still stand by them as now we see,
When bloody foes do think them out to weed.
Had thou not bin our Queen had bin no more,
And slavish yoke had all our necks oppressed,
None should have taught, or followed thy lore,
Had thou not bin who could have this redrest.
All laud therefore that heart can think or yield.
Be unto thee O Father dear for aie,
That wast to us so strong a fence and shield,
And of thy goodness kept us from decaie.
Had thou not bin, then had the man of sin,
Set up himself, thy Church to overthrow,
And then what case had all thy saints bin in?
But thou O Lord would not let it be so.
O all the powers both of our soul and mind,
Sing laud and praise both now and evermore,
To our good God that was and is so kind,
And has repeld the Lion from our door.
Had thou not made thy winds for us to fight,
Had thou not stretched forth for us thy hand,
Had thou not put our proud foes all to flight,
O what should then have come to this our land.
All praise therefore to thee O Lord our God,
That let thus thy mercies great appear,
In saving us from cruel foreign rod,
The Spanish Fleet and force that was so near.
Had thou not ouerwhelmde our foes with floods,
Had thou not causde the seas to be their graves,
Then had our streets bin died with our bloods,
And all our babes bin marked for their slaves.
Most humble thanks therefore unto thy grace,
With one accord we give O God above,
Who thus have kept us from the Spanish race,
And let us taste thy mercies and thy love.
And had not thou us saved from our fears,
And heard the cries that strangers made to thee,
In steed of Psalms we had now offered tears,
And slain at once had bin both they and we.
For saving us therefore from all these wrongs,
All laud to thee O our most holy King,
Who thus did turn our fastings into songs,
With all our hearts we all unto thee sing.
From high to low we must and do confess,
If thou had let those plagues on us to light,
Such are our sins, and such our wickedness,
Thou had done well, and we had had but right.
But Lord what thanks can sinful man devise,
(whose thoghts and deeds ca^ stand him in no steed)
To offer thee, but thou may them despise?
None none O God as of our selves indeed.
But therefore Lord, as at thy sons request,
Thou have us kept, and saved from all woe,
So for his sake whom thou acceptest best,
Accept the thanks which we do yield also.
FINIS.

