EX LIBRIS

FARE FAC

FAIRFAX OF CAMERON

bookplate engraving of Fairfax coat of arms

A WONDERFVL AND LAMENTABLE ACCIdent lately happened in the Low Countries, of a
maiden through her extreme pride personally deceived by the Devil, who
afterward ended her life most miserably.

And likewise what untimely end both her Parents and her Spouse, who was but
newly married, came to.

No less admirable then certain and remarkable, especially that this
Kingdom of England may hereby take example of this heinous sin.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Archer, and are to be sold at his shop in
Pope's Head alley, over against the sign of the Horse-shooe. 1624.

A pitiful Relation of the miserable end which a woman made with her Spouse to
whom she was promised,
IT is manifest that mankind is of its own nature wicked and given to ill,
rejecting all manner of good instructions which are made by the teachers of the
Gospel; and amongst diverse other vices, we perceive by daily experience, that
both the rich and poor are bent to pride, although it be repugnant to the holy
Scriptures, and forbidden in the same. It is true, I must confess, that many
of us read sometimes the Scriptures, and harken the Ministers of the Word of
God, with an intention to amend our lives; but alas, we let those instructions
more commonly pass through our ears as a wind that comes at the one door
in, and flies again out by another door or window: we see not sooner a
wanton eye, or any other wickedness, but fall again to our former sin, and
think no more upon that which has bin taught unto us. And by reason of this
it happens, that God sends daily many plagues upon us, to punish our
sins, and visits us especially with war, pestilence and famine. Our
mortal Enemy, who runs continually as a roaring Lion after us, knowing our
wicked inclinations, and that we make too much of the flesh, seeks to bring
us into temptations, hoping thereupon to destroy both our bodies and souls:
and especially he enticeth us to pride and vain glory, which are none of the
lesser sins, and a net to catch us. For we observe daily, that many which will
fly higher then their wings are able to carry them, come not only to shame
and discredit, but bring their souls also into great miseries and vexations;
as amongst other examples may appear by this following, which happened lately
near the town of Hoey (lying upon the frontiers of Brabant) on the person of
a daughter of one Aert Claessen an Jnne-keeper, who dwelled without the gate of
the same town at the sign of the black horse, and had no other children than
this daughter, of which he made therefore very much, and spared no cost to
adorn her most beautiful body with such gay and rich apparel as she
required. She then being apparelled far above her fathers estate, and set
forth as if she were an Earls daughter, grew very proud, and despised all
young men and suitors that came to see her. And it happened afterward, that
both her beauty and spightfulnesse or scorn being made known to the world by
them which had lodged at her fathers house, some three rich Merchants of
Antwerpe taking their way toward Francford, baited at her fathers house. One
of them being yet a bachelor, and a very handsome man, was even at the first
sight that he had of her inflamed to love such a rare beauty:

And not long afterward, having at several times been a suitor unto her, he
got at last her good will, and took the fruits of love upon great oaths and
promises made before hand; and went thereupon to her father to get his good
liking to the marriage, and spoke in this manner: It is now come so far betwixt
your daughter and me, that if it pleases you we shall be two souls in one
body: the father liking the Merchant very well, said thereupon, None ought to
separate them whom God has conjoined, and therefore if God has appointed her
for you, you shall not want my good will; and added moreover, that if he would,
he might in the presence of his two friends that came with him, make the
spousalls sure both by hand and mouth: He liking this motion very well, took
presently a ring with a Diamond from his finger, and gave it to her saying,
Take my most beloved, and receive my faithful promise. This being done, her
father made a fore-meale of the wedding to feast the Bridegroom (as is usual
in those parts) and his friends. The other two Merchants having daily urged the
Bridegroom to dispatch his affairs about the wedding, that they might advance
their journey; he took his leave from his spouse, and went thereupon to her
father and mother to do the like, and desired them that they would take great
care both for their daughter and her fruit, if she got any; and promised them
again, that at his return from Franckford he would come to them back again,
with an intention to marry their daughter, and to carry her afterward to
Antwerpe. After his departure came many strange cogitations in the mind of his
dearest, and considered by her self that if the young Merchant her spouse came
not back again, that she should be contemned, and blamed all the days of her
life, and that the people would point at her with their fingers and say, look,
there she goes who is now paid for her great pride and spitefulness: But
especially she troubled her mind, with these and such like cogitations. When
she saw that the time was expired which he had appointed for his return, and
would not be appeased by her Parents, who sought to comfort her, saying, Be of
a good mind, do not mistrust your spouse, he is an honest man, and will
surely come back again, as soon as his affairs will give him leave. She
growing then daily more and more desperate, it happened that she rising early
on a Monday, put on her best apparel, and told to her parents with a smiling
countenance, that she had but little rest the night before, and that she
conceived in her first slumbring, that the Merchant should not come back
again; but afterward being again fallen into a slumber, her mind gave her
that she should shortly see her spouse, and I think surely that it shall
happen, and am therefore now resolved to walk a little abroad to recreate my
self. Going abroad she went toward a wood that lay not far from her
fathers house, and espied there a young man coming to her with his rapier on
his side, and she thought that he was her spouse: (But alas she was mightily
deceived, for it was the wicked spirit, who appeared unto her in his shape and
apparel) and bade him welcome with a cheerful mind: and received thereupon
a rich scarpe which he said that he had brought with him to bestow upon her;
and desired thereupon that she would yield unto him her young and delicate
body, for which he had longed a great while. She easily yielding to his suit,
went hand in hand with him toward the wood (in which she yielded afterward
the use of her body unto him) and protested by the way, that in his absence
she had fetched many heavy groans for his sake. But he not being contented
with her body, made her also to yield her soul unto him; and wrung her head
from her neck, (as soon as she had granted his request) making the whole
wood to tremble and shake: and so made this poor wretch a most miserable end
of her life, being destituted of the fear of God, and only given to pride,
vanity, and worldly care. The father, and mother, longing for the return of
their daughter, learned afterward by a swineheard what was become of her, for
he knew her, and had partly heard and seen this miserable tragedy. They were
both at the hearing of this news much discomforted, and the mother fell
presently into a trance. The next day, the young Merchant coming back again
found the Parents of his dear beloved in this heaviness, and asked them where
she was; who told him thereupon as well as they could this History, and told
him that for his loves sake she had been tempted and murdered by the Devil:
he being full of sorrow and grief, went thereupon out of their house and hung
himself out of a desperate mind. The Magistrate having heard that which was
happened, sent presently the hangman to fetch the body of the Merchant, and
caused it to be hanged on a gibbet, as is there the custom of the land.
Concerning her body it was buried under the gallows. Her parents died likewise
within the space of few days, being not able to bear such a heavy grief.
This example may move us to pray to God that he will give us better minds, and
preserve us from all temptation of the wicked.

Translated according to the Low Dutch copy printed at Dordrecht by John Canin.

