Merton College Case.
THe Manor of Malden in Surrey was the ancient seat of Merton College, which
was there founded by Walter Merton temp: Edw. 3.10 years before the removing
of it to Oxford, being the Manor of best value left unto the College by the
Founder.

Of this Manor a Lease for 5000 years was drawn from the College by undue
courses Eliz. 21. This Lease was made in show only to the Queen, it being
never entered into her receipts; and within less then two months assigned over
to Henry Lord Fitz Allen, Earl of Arundell without any consideration: by him
it was given within a month to John Lord Lumley, who married his daughter. From
whom Ione Good, the mother of the present Tenant John Good Esquire did
purchase it for 1800l, within less then three years after the first grant
from the College.

This Lease was questioned by the College in the Kings Bench, about two years
since. But the Tenant wauing the Common Law, before he had put in his answer
to the declaration, called the Plaintiffes into the Chancery: Where upon
opening of the cause before the Lord Keeper, his Lordsh. desiring rather to
compound the business, then finally to decide it, and the College not
accepting the composition offered by the Tenant, his Lordship did order that
the College should prosequute this cause in no other Court, but the High Court
of Parliament.

The exceptions against this Lease are these.
1 It is utterly void in Law. 1 By the Stat: of 13 Eliz. which restrains
Colleges from letting Leases for longer then 21 years, or three lives. 2 By
the Stat: of 18 Eliz: cap. 20. No rent corn being reserved upon this Lease. 3
By the Stat: of 18 Eliz: cap. 10. Because the Leases in being were not
determinable within three years.


2 It was never contracted for, nor any conditions agreed upon by the College,
but it was drawn at London, and the Counterpart sent ready sealed under the
broad seal of England with a part ready engrossed to be sealed by the College,
not alterable in a syllable.

3 It was made without impeachment of waste.

4 It comprehends the advouson of the Church, Fines, and profirs of Copyholds,
and above 500 Acres of Wood, never demised before with the demaines. Besides a
stock of grain, and cattle to a great value, the restitution whereof at the
end of 5000 years is couenanted, excepting such Cattle as should die of the
murraine.

5 It was made without one penny consideration more then the Rent.

6 It was unduly drawn from the College. 1 By threats and violence offered to
the person of Dr. Bickley the then Warden. 2 By terror used at the College,
affrighting the Fellows with the presence of three Purseuants, sent thither to
seize upon such as should dissent. 3 By admitting Sr Arthur Atey, who had no
right of voice to give a voice as fellow, by which voice only the Granters
became the major part.


Allegations of the Adverse part, together with the answers.
That the Lease is made good by the Statute of 18 Eliz: of Confirmations.

Resp: 1 The very point upon solemn argument was judged to the contrary. 2
Their wauing of the Common Law is a sufficient argument, that they distrust
their cause in point of Law.


That it was the concurrent opinion of the best Lawyers of those times, that
such Leases and Estates were good in Law: and in this particular, Baron Altham,
and Serieant Crook delivered their opinions in Parliament 4o Jacob: that the
Lease in question was good.

Resp: 1 Who were the best Lawyers of those times, were an envious thing to
determine, and what their opinions were in this point, cannot be proved. 2 The
opinion of Popham, and Anderson, Chief Justices in Parliament 43o Elizab: was,
that the Queen was bound by the Statute of 13o Eliz: And the like opinion was
resolved by the Judges assisting in Parliament 1o Jacob: And for that cause,
Colleges, and the like were left out of the Bill, which restrained Bishops from
granting to the King. 3 What Baron Althams opinion was, it does not appear.
But 13o Jacob: Serieant Crook, with the rest of the Judges determined that
such Leases were not made good by the Statute of 18o Eliz:


That the College had a consideration sufficient in the improuement of their
Rent; for the Manor was in Lease for 23 year to come at nine pound Rent per
Ann: And the Woods in Lease for seven years without Rent, whereas upon the
long Lease 40l per Ann: was reserved.

Resp. 1 That the Lease of 23 years was in it self void, of which, if the
College had taken the same advantage, which afterward the Lord Lumly did, the
improuement of the old Rent of the Demaines by virtue of the Statute of
Provision, would have amounted very near to that sum of 40l per Annum. 2 For
the Woods there was 90l (the Remainder of a former Fine) due at that time to
the College: for which the Queen couenanted to pay 100l, but not one pe^ny
was paid. Whence it appears that those 7 years remaining in the Lease of the
Woods, were not to pass without some profit to the College


That Mistress Good 24o Eliz: paid 1800l for the purchase of the premises, that
she was at charge of diverse reparations, new built a Farm house and Barnes.
That the present Tenant has bestowed in new building the Manor house, in
Gardens, Hop-grounds, improuing, fencing, and enclosing the Lands 2700l

Resp. 1 That none of that 1800l paid for the purchase, came to the College,
but wholly to the Lord Lumly. All the money that came to the College, was only
some small sum sent down to buy voices under hand. 2 Mistress Good was not at
the charge of new building the Farm house, and Barnes but it was by an
vnder-tenant at his own charge, for his own benefit. 3 That the charges in
improuing, fencing, and enclosing the Lands, was yearly rewarded with the
Cropp: and was no more then Tenants upon racked Rents do perform for their
own benefit and advantage. 4 That his charges of building the Manor house is
no improuement to the Land, for a Farm house had been proportionable enough
to the Land, especially as it is undervalued by them. 5 That Master Good had of
his Majesty in recompense of 22 Acres (part of this Manor, taken into the
Kings great Park at Nonsuch) lands amounting to 10l -- 10s -- 4d per Annum old
Rent, which in true value may be worth 120l per Annum. or more. 6 That since
the time of the purchase, there has been felled upon the premises in Timber
(besides Coppicewoods) 10000 timber trees, worth ten shillings a tree, which
comes to 5000l. And the present Tenant in his time has felled 5000 Timber
trees, to the value of 2500l. 7 That the Tenant has a Recognisance of 4000l of
the Lord Lumly for his indemnitie. That the premises contain 860 Acres, and
are worth per An. 440l, whereof they have received the profit 42 years and
upwards.


5 If this Lease should be overthrown, it would open a gappe to the
disturbance of many quiet and settled estates, of the like nature with this in
question.

Resp. 1 That there is not, nor has been any Lease parallel to this in all
circumstances, the difference whereof may justly vary the decision of the
cause. For example.


It is no good consequence. 1 Because a Lease of 5000 years is voided,
therefore a Lease of 100 years, or thereabouts, ought to be overthrown. 2
Because a Lease gotten by undue courses, by threats, and menaces, against the
consent of the mayor part is voided, therefore a Lease fairly gotten with the
free consent of the Leasors ought to be overthrown. 3 Because a Lease gotten
without any consideration given for it, is voided, therefore a Lease taken upon
valuable consideration ought to be overthrown. 4 Because a weak title to such
land, as for a long time of it self has yielded extraordinary profit to the
Tenant, is voided, the refore a weak title to Land in itself of little value,
and improued only by the excessive charge of the Tenant, ought to be
overthrown.



