A true Discourse concerning the certain possession and dispossession of 7
persons in one family in Lancashire, which also may serve as part of an
Answer to a feigned and false Discovery which speaks very much evil, as well
of this, as of the rest of those great and mighty works of God which be of
the like excellent nature.

By George More, Minister and Preacher of the word of God, and now (for
bearing witness unto this, and for justifying the rest) a prisoner in the
Clinke, where he has continued almost for the space of two years.

Remember thou magnify the work of God which men behold. Job. 36.24.

We speak that we know, and testify that which we have seen: but ye receive
not our testimony. Job. 3.11.

1600.

To the Christian READER.
FOrasmuch good Reader as it is the manner of men that set forth any story,
though it be but short, to give a Reason of their purpose therein, least they
should seem either rashly to attempt that which is not convenient, or
otherwise busy them selves to bring forth that which is not necessary, for
this cause I have thought good to prefixe these Reasons ensuing to this
discourse, that so the weighing of them might make the matter something more
worth in their conceit, with whom nothing (though of it self it be never so
savorie) tastes well, except it be rare and excellent, neither can they digest
that, which is very good and wholesome, except it be of great consequence and
expectation: this sort may mislike the handling of this strange story in this
harshe manner, whiles they affecte great and high things: yet the mooving
causes of setting it out being considered, may overcome that curiosity, and
work some contentement.

First then in respect that both the Story of the possession and dispossession
of Thomas Darling, and also many things concerning the strange handling of
William Su^mers to second the same, are both put in print, and though the
truth of both be sufficie^tlie cleared therein, yet there is great opposition
both by word and writing offered of set purpose to hinder the crediting of
either: I thought it fit to add to these two the story of those in
Lancashire, as famous as the rest, both in that they were 7 in one family all
possessed at once, as also that they were all 7 dispossessed within two days
by prayer and fasting: that this also being published as the third glorious
witness of the wonderful works of God wrought and seen in 3 several Shires
of our land, all men might be the more moved to believe the truth of these
things: seeing at the mouth of 3 such sufficient witnesses, it is so surely
sealed up and confirmed.

Secondly, in respect of the papists who do more malign this particular of
Lancashire then any of the rest, laboring mightily and by many means both to
discredit and disannull it; whereupon some of them have given it out, that
those 7 were not possessed: other say, that they were all 7 possessed but never yet
dispossessed: and some others of them affirm, that they were all dispossessed,
yet not by Preachers of the Gospel, but by their Seminaries, and
masse-priestes: and this last runs for currante among them.

For there being 8 or 9 Seminaries in the Clincke, diverse of them stood out
against me to my face, and told me, that what soever was done in Lancashire by
us, was done by coniuring and knaverie: And though M. Starkie him self did
justify the whole matter, and cleared it from all their slanders, and that
before the chiefest of them in the Clincke, yet they received not his
testimony, but told him, they had received the report of this from a
Gentleman in that country, whom they would credit before him in this case. And
no marvel, for if the Church of England have this power to cast out devils,
then the Church of Rome is a false Church, for there can be but one true
Church, the principal mark whereof (as they say) is to work miracles, and of
them this is the greatest, namely to cast out Devils. And hereupon conferring
at another time with two of them, they brought out this bold protestation, that
if we could prove any such power to be in our Church, and show them an
infallible instance or example to justify the practice thereof, then would
they join them selves to your Church assemblies, and freely embrace our
religion.

Thirdly, in respect of that gross and great error, which is a common and
received opinion among the most, namely, that we do challenge to our selves
some special gift to cast out Devils above other men, which though we have
utterly disclaymed, yet many do ignorantly ascribe the effect of the work
wrought, rather to some extraordinary power in us, then to the ordinance of
Christ, which in no case ought so to be.

But chiefly J have taken in hand this brief discourse for the better
clearing both of Ma. Darrell and my self, from those accusations and slanders
of cosinage and counterfeiting, werwithall we are charged both by word and
writing, as if we were guilty thereof, even in this particular of Lancashire.

For there is a book of a large volume lately come out under the name of S.
H. crosshing and contradicting the whole course of proceeding for May. Darrels
clearing, Discover. book 1. chap 5. page 29.
yoaking me also with him in this develish legerdemaine (as they term it)
calling us a couple of cousining hipocrites, using also many other badde
terms.

The title of this book is termed, A discovery of fraud^lent practices
concerning pretended possessions. It contained 5 books, the firct whereof
does more concern me, and the matter of fact for Lanca^hire, then the rest
do: so much therefore as I can convenientlie for the clearing of both, I will
answer unto, and leave the rest unto him who has just occasion offered, to use
his best defense in that behalf.

Lastly for that this discouerer, Discover^ book 1. chap. 3. page 17. book
^. chap. 10. page 58. book 5. chap. 8. pa. 324.
whosoever he be, finds great fault with some of our friends, for that they
spoke so much of the dispossession of Summers in a little treatise or two, but
nothing of the dispossessio^ of these 7 in Lancashire and of some others: And
seems sometimes to challe^ge us to make our answer, if we have any more to
say, and to speak for our selves what we can.

Upon these just occasions, I have undertaken this short discourse, hoping here
by to detect the falsehoode of this discovery concerning this particular
fact, by clearing it, and in it the rest which are like unto it, of such
malicious slanders as are raised against it: that so all things being
faithfully described from point to point, appertayning to this matter, all men
may see, both what great cause J have above any other to defend this, as the
wonderful work of God, as also that it might better appear, whether we or
they that have written and dealt against us, be deepest in this dissimulation,
and who be greatest cousiners and decey^^ers.

A brief and true discourse containing the certain possession and
dispossession of 7 persons in one family in Lancashire, as namely of John
Starkie, Anne Starkie, Margret Hurdman, Ellynor Hurdman, Ell^^ Hollande,
Margret Byrom, and Jane Ashton, which may serve (as an interim) for a piece of
an answer to that fraudulent discovery lately come out, which depraveth
these, as well as the rest of those great and mighty works of God, which be of
the same kind.
IN this discourse, I mean not to meddle with that deceitful and depraving
discovery, further then concerns this matter of fact for Lancashire only,
reserving all matters of opinion, and the answering of all their obi^ctions, to
a more full and fitter time. And so avoiding all tediousnes as near as I can,
I will endeavor fully and plainly to reveile the truth, that I may quickly
dispatch the story.

And because the drift of this desperate detractour is to detecte our dealing
with the 7 to be a deceivable practice, as well as the rest which are (by him)
pretended so to be: And that this chiefest opposition unto this work
consists in 5. principal things, which bring sore urged, and easily
received, will endanger greatly the credit of the Story. In respect hereof. I
will digest this whole discourse into 5 principal heads or chief places;
which may serve fitly, both to give more light to the story, and for a more
direct answer to the discovery.

In the first place, I will as truly as I can describe the state of these
persons and of their strange and troublesome afflictions, together with the
outward causes and occasions thereof, which also continued for the most part,
for the space of two years and a half, before we came unto them.

Secondly, I will set down the strange signs showed forth by them, both
generally and particularly, to prove that they were truly and actually
possessed.

In the 3 place I will show the causes and occasions of our coming into
Lancashire, and what beginning and proceeding we made in performing that great
work which we took in hand.

Fourthly, I will manifest the means, and clear the manner of their
deliverance.

And lastly, I will briefly mention the signs of their dispest s^^o^, which
may serve to clear it from all suspuion.

These points I purpose briefly to touch, and not to handle the at large
according to the worthiness of the matter, which indeed is such as does deserve
both a more full discourse, and also a more pregnant faculty to commend it,
then I am able to afforde.

In the first place, order requires, that we show^ the state of these 7
persons afflicted, before we come unto them, which was most strange and fea^
full, and how it came so to pass, and of the coutinuance of it for the space
of two years and more: all which may plainly appear by this which follows.

At Cl^worth in Lancashire within the parish of Leigh, there dwells one
Nicholas Starkie gentleman, who married a gentle woman that was an inheretrix,
and of whose kindred some were papists, of whom some partly for Religion, and
partly for that the land descended not to the heirs male, wished and vowed
still to pray for the perishing of her issue, and accordingly 4 of her children
(though at their birth likely to lin^) yet afterward pined away in most strange
manner.

Some of Mrs Starkies kindred observing how one child pined away after another,
moved with compassion, told Mistrers Starkie of the said unnatural vow, she
here upon conceived such a grief, that she made an estate of her land to her
husband and his heirs, (all issue failing her self.) After which conveyance
made, Mistres Starkie had two children, a son and a daughter, both which
prospered well, till they came to 10 or 12 years of age, but the^ with sieve
more in her family, they were possessed and vexed with evil spirits, as the
sequel does declare.

In the beginning of February 1594: first Anne the daughter was taken with a
dumpishe heavy countenance, and with a certain fearful starting and pulling
together of her-bodie. About a week after, John Starkie the son was taken as
he was going to schole, and was compelled to showte vehemently, not being able
to stay him self. After this they waxed worse and worse, falling into often
strange and extreme fittes.

Wherewith M. Starkie grieved and having bin at charges 200 lb. or therabouts,
soght remedy without due regard, (for to speak of no more) he went to a
Seminary Priest, who could do no good, because (forsooth) he had not then his
books, whereupon M. Starkie continued still seeking for help: and heard of one
Edmond Hartley a witch whom he made acquainted with the state of his children,
and with large offers craved his help: in the end Hartley consented to come.
Who being there, and having used certain popish charms and herbs, by
degrees, the children were at quiet, and so continued, seeming to be well
almost a year and a half; All which time Hartley came often to visit the^, at
length he feigned as though he would go into another country, but whither M.
Starkie might not know, and when he began to go his way, John Starkie fell a
bleeding, and Hartley coming to him, said, if he had been but 40 roodes from
him, none could have staunched him, and thus it fell out at other times.

M. Starkie then fearing least his children would be much troubled in his
absence, and he uncertain where to find him, offered to give 40. shillings a
year pention for his assistance in time of need, which offer at the first he
consented to accept, but afterward not satisfied, he coueted more (house and
ground:) which when M. Starkie refused to give, he threatened in a fume in the
absence of M. Sta^kie, but in the hearing of many, that if he would not fulfill
his mind, he would m^^k such a shower at Clew^rth, as never was heard, which
was also ^ffected in such a hideous and fearful manner, as the like in England
has not been heard.

After this May. Sta^kie going to his Fathers house, this Hartley went with
him, who being there after he was in bed, was tormented sore all night long:
the next day being recovered, he went into a little wood not far off from the
house where he made a Circle the compass of a yard and half, with many crosses
and partitions, which being finished he came back to call M. Starkie, telling
him what he had done, and desired him to go and tread out his circle, for he
said he might not do it him self. This being also dispatched, well quoth
he, now I shall trouble him that troubled me, and be meet with him that
sought my death.

When M. Starkie perceived this, and many other bad qualities in this fellow,
he wared weatie of him, especially seeing no amendment in his children but that
they rather became worse and worse, he then sought (though secretly) for
other help to the Physicians: after that to one Doctor Dee at Manchester, who
wished Man Starkie to crave the help and assistance of some godly Preacher,
with whom he should join in prayer and fasting, for the help of his children.

He procured also the said Hartley the Witch to come before him, whom he so
sharply reprooved, that the children had better rest for some 3 weeks after.

But then they began their accustomed fittes: first John Starkie about the 4 of
January 96. as he was reading of a book, something gave him such a thumpe in
the neck, that he was suddenly stricken down with a most horrible skrike, and
said that Satan had broken his neck, lying there pitifully tormented for the
space of two hours.

At night on the same day being in bed, he leapt out on a sudden with such a
terrible outcry, that amazed them all, being tossed and tumbled a long time,
being exceeding fierce and strong like a mad man, or rather like a madd dog,
that I may so speak, snatching at and biring every body that laid hold on
him, not sparing in that fit^ his own mother: sm^ing furiously all that came
near him, hu^ling the bed staves at their heads, and throwing the pillowes
into the fire.

His sister Anne likewise began again to be troubled, and three other young
girls in the house, of whom May. Starkie had the education, with their
portions committed unto him by their parents. The first was Margret Hurdman of
14 years age: the second Ellinor her sister of 10 years: the third Ellen
Holland of 12 years, these all had many strange and sore fittes being
possessed by this witches means: His manner was when he meant them a mischief,
then he would kiss them if he could, and therewith breathe the Devil into
their bodies: he kissed John Starkie, and all the maids that were possessed,
Margret Byrom, Jane Ashton, and all: he strugled much with one Joan Smith to
have kissed her, but with much a do she escaped his hands, so that of all the
maid servants, she only was preserved and not once troubled at al. Whereupon
Ellinor said in one of her fits, that if Edmond had kissed her, three men could
not have held her.

Margret Byrom of 33 years, a kinswoman to Mistres Starky, coming to.
Cleworth to see her friends, in her continuance there began to be troubled
like the rest, and by the same means; for Hartley the Witch being in a sore
fit in the night, she in a desire to comfort him, went into his chamber and
sat down by his bed side, and began to speak unto him, and it was not long
before he rose up, and sitting upon his bed, he leaned his head down to the
maid who satt just underneath him, whereupon she was suddenly taken that she
could neither stand nor speak; when she endeavored to arise, she could not;
when others held her up, she sunk down and became senceles: but Edmond the
Witch left her and went to another rowme, and he had no more fittes after while
he was at Cleworth, though he had diverse before he met with this maid.

Jane Ashton of the age of xxx years, being the last that was possessed,
confessed, that once crossing of Edmond, he told her, she had best be
content, or else he would anger the best vain in her heart: at other times
she said, he offered great kindness and large promises in the way of marriage,
and had kissed her also: the like loving affections he sometimes showed to
Margret Byrom, as she confessed, and had kissed her also as it was thought.

About the 14 of lanuarie, the 5 youngest sort began the renewing of their
strange fitts, entering ordinarily thereinto by a very sudden and fearful
skriking, barking and howling, in such a hideous noise, as can not be expressed.

Shortly after this time, Margret Byrom hasted homeward to her mothers house
at Salford near Manchester, hoping to find some more ease and release from
her fittes then she did at Cleworth: she taking her leave, Edmond the witch
said he would go with her home though he never came again, so she went
accompanied with him and another: in the way being 7 miles, she had 10 fittes:
when she was recovered, she desired Edmond to tell her how she might be helped;
he told her plainly, that both she and the rest were past his hands, and
that no one man could do them any good, it was too great a work, but they must
be 3, or 2 at the least with fervent and hearty prayer.

After she came home, her fittes doubled and still increased, Edmond came to
her every day: so soon as she saw him she fell straight into a fit, and
therein sorer handled then ever she was before. There came in diverse to see
her, and some Preachers, who found Edmond with her, and suspecting him by some
signs, asked himwhat he did with the maid, he said that he came to pray with
her. Pray! quoth one, why man thou can not pray: yes but I can, quoth he: say
then the Lords prayer, said the Preacher: and he began to fumble about it
very ilfavouredlie; but could not for his life say it to the end. They then
thought him to be a witch, and caused him presently to be apprehended, and
brought before 2 Justices of peace, where he was examined, and after diverse
witnesses had come against him, the Justices sent him back to Margret Byrom,
that she might accuse him to his face; but so soon as she saw him, straightway
she fell down backwards and became speechles, this was tried the second time,
yea 5 times was he brought to her, and she was ever cast down, and stricken
dumb, so that she could not speak one word against him.

Yet when he was taken away, and set behind the backs of the people, she
recovered her self, began to speak to him, and to charge him with many
things, upon which accusations of hers, and many other testimonies taken
against him for witcherie, he was by the Justices sent to Lancaster Iayle. In
the way thitherward, he came by Cleworth to fetch his clothes to carry with
him: the 2 of February 1597. and all the children seeming to be well before he
came, presently they fell into very violent and outrageous fittes; they made
at him al at once, offering to strike him; It was much a do for two strong men
to hold the least of them; and if they had not been forcibly restrained, the
witch had been in great danger, for they were so fierce and furious against
him, as if they would have pulled him in pieces.

After this, about ye beginning of March, when Ma. Hopwood Justice of peace
came of purpose to take the testimony of these 5 children against Edmonde the
witch, to carry to Lancaster at the Assizes to further his indictment, the^
these 5 every one became speachles, and being called for one after another,
they fell and sunk down by the way, not being able to go, nor to stand, nor
speak one word. After the Justice was gone, they complained that Edmond had
stopped their mouths, and would not suffer them to speak.

At the same time Jane Ashton began to howl, and to bark, when she should be
brought in for a witness against Edmond, whereupon one of the younger girls
said then in her fit: Ah Edmond, do thou trouble her now, when she should
testify against thee.

Margret Byrom also two nights before her examination against Edmond, had
diverse apparitions, wherein she was sore terrified by the Devil in Edmonds
likeness, charging her deeply to take heed what she said against him, for now
the time was come.

And when the Assizes came, Edmonde was brought forth, arraigned, and
convicted: May. Starkie having charged him with bewitching his children, which
he proved sufficiently, and made it evident to the whole bench: howbeit (for
that) they could find no law to hang him, whereupon M. Starkie called to
mind the making of the circle (whereof we have already spoken) which being
delivered upon his oath, was received. Yet Edmond stiflie denied it, and stood
out against him, and told him to his face, that he should not hang him, let
him do what he could, (for the Devil had promised him, that no halter should
hang him) yet the Jury cast him; the Judge condemned him, Hartley was hanged
and the halter brake, whereupon he penitentlie confessed, that he had deserved
that punishment, and that all which M. Starkie had charged him with, was true,
and so he was hanged out the second time.

Now this being so, as you have heard, how detestable then is that Discovery
which is come out, fraught with so many fraudulent accusations against this
cause, specially charging these 7 persons to be al counterfaits, and that M.
Darrel had taught them that deceitful trade, coupling me equally with him in
that crafty iuglinge (as they call it,) making us bewitching mates, and joint
companions, working together in that cousinage. Against which infamous
sclaunder, that which hitherto has been observed, is sufficient to clear us.
For herein we have seen the parties proved to be bewitched. Secondly the
parties bewitching every one of them. Third lie, the causes thereof mentioned in
the beginning. Fourthly, diverse and sundry witnesses. Fifthly, his
apprehe^ding, examining, imprisoning, indighting, condemning, and executing,
are upon record. Moreover, the Jury, the Judge, and the Bench, together with
the whole Assizes holde^ at Lancaster, about the 6 of March Anno 1597: do all
bear witness to our innocence and do justify us to be just men, concerning
this matter, and with great indignation, do detest and defy all detecting
discoueries to the contrary whatsoever: And last of all, that memorable
execution of Edmond Hartley the coniurer and witch, who was hanged with a
witness: the gallows, the halter, and his dubble hanging, together with that
last and famous confession out of his own mouth, that he was the man that had
done the deed, and only guilty of bewitching these 7 several parties, and
of sending evil spirits into them. This famous champion does chaleng this
discouerer to be but a deceivable detractour, and a false accuser of the
brethren: And is also most sufficient to clear us in this matter, against all
Atheistes and Papists, and the whole world. And thus much shall suffice for
the first point.

The second part.
THe second thing that must be cleared in this Discourse, is the possession of
these 7 persons, to which purposel will proceed to show the strange signs
acted by every one of the^ in particular first, and after contract them more
briefly in the general, by which I hope it will appear to the indifferent
Reader, that such great things were done by the^, as be very hard and vnvsual
quite beyond the nature of things, and such as neither by art, nor any human
skill could be cou^terfaited: that as the first part of this Discourse has
cleared us from counterfaiting; so this may be sufficient to prove the truth of
their possession, contrary to that overbolde, and confident confutation made
by the discouerer, who laboreth both toth and nail, to cross and contradict
the same.

Frist John Starkie son and heir of M. Nicholas Starkie, among sundry fitts
had some very rare and strange, wherein he showed very extraordinary knowledge,
for he being but of the age of 12 years, or there abouts, did in his trance
declare the strange sins of this land committed in all estates and degrees
of people, denounced the fearful judgments of God due unto them. He the^
exhorted his parents, and the people there present to repent, that they might
avoid all those grievous plagues, and wished that all the whole land might do
the like. After this he made a most excellent prayer, first for the whole
church, then for the Queens Majesty for the subduing of her enemies, for the
continuance of her life, and peaceable government, for the upholding of the
Gospel, and for all the true Ministers of Christ, for those that have
Authority, for his parents, and all the people of God. In this exhortation and
prayer, he continued above two hours performing the same so excellently both
for the matter and manner of handling and uttering the same, as they that heard
it did admire it, and thought that a good preacher could very hardly have done
the like, this being done, he sunge a good piece of the 4 Psalm in a most
sweet and heavenly tune, as ever might be heard. All this was done in a
trance, his eyes being closed up, and neither knew what he said nor did; In
this long and continued speech, his father wished him to lie still, and to
speak no more: saying unto him, son, thou marrest thy head, and can not
tell what thou say: yes father, quoth he, I know well what I say: then said
his father, thou can tell me how many persons be in this chamber and what be
their names: thereupon he reckoned them, and told the names of every one of
them, to the number of 18 or 19 his eyes being close shut up, as they had been
all the morning before, the neighbors, and some strangers having come in
after he begun his fit, and in the end he said unto his father, there is now
one of your Tenau^ts newly come into the chamber, he told him his name, and
that he dwelt far of in the peak, let him come said he, and take me by the
hand, and I shall see and be well for this time, and so it came to pass, at
which they all marveilled, and asked him whether he remembered what he had said
all that long time: and he denied flatly, that he had spoken any thing at all.

Secondly, Margret Hurdma^, of the age of xiij. years, being in a trau^ce of 3
hours long, and possessed at that time, as it seemed, with a spirit of pride,
did most lively express both by words and gestures, the proud women of our
times: who can not content themselves with any sober or modest attire, but are
ever ready to follow every new and disguised fashion, and yet never think
them selves fine enough: whereupon she said, come on my lad, for so she
called the spirit that stood before her in that likeness, to teach her all the
tricks of pride, come on and set my partlet on the one side as I do on the
other: and as she was a setting of it, she said unto him, thus, my lad, I will
have a fine smock of silk, it shall be finer then thine. I will have a peticote
of silk, not of redd, but of the best silk that is: it shall be guarded a foot
high; it shall be laid on with gold lace; it shall have a french body, not of
Whalebone, for that is not stiff enough, but of horn, for that will hold it
our; it shall come low before, to keep in my belly: my lad, I will have a
French fardingale, it shall be finer then thine; I will have it low before and
high behind, and broad on either side, that I may lay my arms upon it. My
lad, thy gown is crimson satin, but mine shall be of black wrought velvet, it
shall be finer the^ thine, I will have my sleeves set out with wire, for sticks
will break, and are not stiff enough. I will have my perwincle so fine, finer
the^ thine. I will have my cappe of black velvet with a feather in it, with
slewes of gold, and my hayres shall be set with pearls, finer then thine. I
will have my partlet set with a rebater, and starcht with blew starch, and
pinned with a row or two of pinnes. With this she snatched the partlet from
her neck and threw at him, saying: Take it thou, for I can not make it so fine
as thine. I pray thee come and help me to set it as fine as thine. My ladde, I
will have a buske of Whale-bone, it shall be tied with two silk points, and I
will have a drawn wrought stomacher imboste with gold, and a girdle of gold
finer then thine. I will have my hose of orange color, this is in request, and
my cork shoes of redd spanish leather, finer then thine. I will have a skarfe
of red silk, with a gold lace about the edge. I will have a fan, with a
silver steal and a glass set in it, finer then thine. My lad, thou must
bring me a pair of gloves of the finest leather, that may be, with two gold
laces about the thumb, and a fringe on the top with flewes and red silk
underneath, that I may draw them through a gold ringe, or else I will none of
them.

My lad, I will have my basine and ewer of silver, and my towel of silk, finer
then thine: I will have my gelding and saddle and furniture fit, my
footstool also fine and brave, or else I will not ride, I will have my cloak
and savegarde laid with lace most fine and brave, and finer then thine, and
presently after this, she said, I defye thee Satan and thy pride, for this is
thy illusion and deceit, I will none of it, and then reverting said, Jesus
bless me, but remembered nothing that she had either said or done.

At another time in her fit she went to the maids as they were washing of
clothes, and began to wash with them, and though they were two lusty women,
and she but a young girl, yet she washed more for the space of an hour so
quick and so fine, that they could not come near her.

The; is Margret Byron, of whom there be many things worthy to be observed:
She being at May. Starkies house about the end of January, was for the space
of a whole day and a night grievouslie molested and sore frighted with a
terrible vision which appeared unto her lying in bed, (swelling and tumbling)
like a foul black dwarf, with half a face, long shagged hair, black broad
hands, and black cloven feet; she ever fearing least he came to carry her
away: and when she began to pray, he threatened that if she did pray, he would
carry her away: she was in such a strait, that she knew notwhat to do,
whether to pray or not to pray: yet in the end she resolved that she would
pray to the Lord, for her help was only in him, who indeed gave her strength
and courage to call earnestly unto him; presenthe Satan removed and vanished
away.

At her mothers house at Salforde, six times within 6 weeks Satan sought to
pine her, in not suffering her to eat nor drink for diverse days together:
and if at the earnest request of her friends she did offer to drink, he
would cast both her and the drink down together. And again at other times
she would eat up all, were it never so much: with such snatching and
greedines, like a hungry d^gge: all was fish that came to net; she spared
nothing, devouring all that came, and yet still crying that she had nothing:
she thought she could have eaten up half a calfe: and yet after that great
abundance of meat and drink, her belly seemed as empty as at the first, so
that they all wondered at that which she had eaten, and marveiled also which
way it went.

Sometimes also the spirit would appear unto her in the likeness of a great
black dog, with ope^mouth, and the greatestchaine that ever she saw, being
very thick and long, drawing it after him, wherewith he did cross her, and
took her legs from under her; she had little rest for the space of 6
weeks, either day or night: yea inanie times when the people stood round about
her, she was taken suddenly and violently cast headlong sometimes under the
bed, sometimes under the cofers, and sometimes thrown to the bars of the
fire, and there aid as if Satan m^nt to roast her. When she sat upon a stool,
he would suddenly throw het quite back ward, as if he meant to have broken
her neck.

After this he appeared in ^^e likeness of a big black Cat, with very fen^full
broad eyes, which came staring her in the face, running by her and about her,
and chrowing her down, and leaving her senseles, departed. And about half an
hour after that fi^t, the spirit came like a big Mouse, leaping upon her knee,
and cast her down backwarde, as before, her senses being taken from her; her
eyes close shurt up, her tongue plucked duble into her throat, her mouth open,
her chawes set, and all her whole body stretched out as stiff as iron: And
thus she lay many times for the spaed of an hour as a spectacle very fearful
to behold.

It was usual also with the spirit to come unto her in the night in the
likeness of a black man with half a face, which took her just as she was going
to bed, and would be sure to pick her backwarde: and she being recovered and
got into her bed, it would come and sit upon the top of her head, holding his
4 fingers upon her forehead very heavy, holding her very strait, that she
could not see nor stir, yet for all that was her kirchefe and headgeare
pulled of, and though they had tied it up, and bound it on very fast, yet
suddenly in a moment he plucked all a sunder, and her hair that was so fast
tied up, was broken loose, and brought about her ears, and this was tried
twice or thrice in a night, that when they had done the best they could to
keep it on, yet in the twinke of an eye, it was all undone, he marred their
work in that point, and they lost all their labor: and ever when he took his
leave and departed, his manner was to give her great thumpe on the hinder part
of her head, insomuch that with those thumpes she felt her head sore a good
while after. She at another time, learned; very excellent graces by the
apparition and instruction of the spirit: she never could read, nor ever heard
the before in all her life, as she protested, yet she learned them upon the
sudden, and did rehearse them all three very perfectly, and so it is like
she can do till it is day.

About the 10 of Febrn. and at some other times before, she felt (as she
thought) some great thing roll up and down in her belly, like a calfe; it
pricked as if the head and nose thereof had been full of nails (as she thought)
wherewith being sore payned she was compelled to skrike, she was exceedingly
swollen by it, and sometimes it pulled her as she thought in a hundred pieces, it
made a loud noise in her belly, like that in the belly of a great trotting
horse; it caused her to bark and houle: then it would plumpe down into her
body, like a cold long whetstone on her left side, whereupon the rest of her
body was benumed with an extreme cold, wherewith she fell a quaking, her
teeth also chattering in her head, and if then she offered to warm her self at
the fire, she was presently picked backward; after these fitts her breath
stanke so ill, that her neighbors came not near her for the space of a day
and a night, yea it was so exceeding noisome that after the fit, she her self
could perceive it and could very hardly endure it.

Further to finishe this particular, six several times in her fits at
Cleworth, every time six spirits appeared to her: 5 of them very black, fowler
then blackmores, marveylous ugly to behold: these she ^^^eiued shoueing and
thrusting into her great nails to torment her (as she thought) wringing and
bending of her, as if they would break her back bone: the other spirit was
in her eyes, like a very fair little child, so fine and comely as ever might
be seen, (which she said) sat ever next her, and would say unto her, fear not,
for thou shall have no harm: and for that it was so amiable, she was ever
catching and coveting to take it, but her hand being stayed by some that stood
by, straight she was sorer troubled, and fell a tossing and tumbling, as at
other times.

Ellen Holland and Ellinor Hurdman, the one being 10, the other 12 years of
age, were both of them (by the malice of Satan) kept fasting for the space of 3
days and 3 nights, for so long time they remained senceles, and did neither
eat nor drink any thing: wherein he labored they might both of them perish
and pine away. And when the third night was come, Eilen Hollande called for the
hour glass, and told them, she must now have a fit, and must not come out
of it for the space of four hours, she then called for a distaffe and a
spindle, and bad them turn the glass, for thee would spinne an hour and a
half of that time. And though she was but a child, and as it were but
beginning to learn to spinne, yet she did it at that time so finely and with
such expedition, as was thought impossible for a very skilful woman to do the
like, and gave over just at the end of the appointed time, and then had she
most cruel and terrible fittes, till the glass had run out the rest of the
time, and reverted just at the four hours end, as before she had said: but
what she had said or done in all this time, that she remembered not.

Likewise Ellinor Hurdman told them that she must have a fit of 3 hours
long, she called for the hour glass, bad them turn it and mark it well,
she presenthe with the turning of the glass fell into a trance, her eyes
close shut up, and her face turned quite from the glass, the other way:
Notwithstanding she measured the time most distinctly as the glass did run
deviding the hour into 4 quarters, by very just and equal proportions,
according as it was most duly observed, she reckonod it her self, and named
every quarter as it had run out: saying thus, a quarter run, half hour
run, 3 quarters run, and the fourth time, turn the glass: even just when
it had run out; and so did she the second time and missed not; and the 3
likewise till it was out, and then just with the very time she reverted and
said, Jesus bless me, and so was restored for that time. Among all the
strange things acted by them, there was none better marked then this, it was
done in the day, in the presence of many witnesses, M. Starkie himself the man
that did chiefly observe it, and to the best aim he could give, the quarters
were most equally divided, and the proportion most just in the measure: At
which they all marueiled greatly, and could not choose but impute this
supernatural skill to the work of Satan, who as well by his straung and cunning
suggestions, as by other enforced signs, does make it evident, that that
working subject is in his power, and possession.

Furthermore John Starkie, Anne Starkie, Ellen Holland, and Ellinor Hurdman,
these 4 had the use of their legs taken from them, for the space of 7 hours,
and being so, all that time, they went upon their hands and their knees only,
out of one chamber into an other, and that as fast, as if they had had the use
of their feet: they could rest in no place, but went without ceasing all that
while, they could leap up from the flore to the bed, and down from the bed to
the flore, hopping so up and down, as lightly, like froggs, and so continued
for the space of 7 hours, at the least.

This time being out, they were restored to the use of their feet, but yet
still remained both senseless and speachles, in which case they all 4 went
into the garden, and forthwith every one of them gathered one leaf of every
kind of herb that grew therein, from the greatest to the least, they missed
not one even to the very grass: which being done, they came again into the
house, and then they went first into the hall, then into the parlour, and then
into every chamber in the house, excepting one which was locked, and there in
the windows of these several rowmes, every one of them laid down one leaf,
of the same kind of herb which they had gathered, for look where any one of
them did lay down one, there all the rest would lay down another of the same
sort, and no more nor no other.

Now mark the straungnes of this act, which howsoever it seem in it self to
be but a trifle, yet in the trial of it, it will prove a wonder, if the
circumstances be duly considered: for first, the herbs were many, seeing the
garden is large. Secondly, the rowmes were many, for it is a gentleman's house,
and it is of good receipte. Thirdly, they were 4, and they were but children,
the eldest was not above 12 years old, and yet that they should gather of
every sort, one leaf only and no more. Fourthly, that the herbs being
mingled altogether in their hands, yet that every one did most quickly, and
readily, without any searching at all, lay down the right herb, so that in
every place there where ever 4 just of one and the same kind. Lastly, and that
which is the chiefest of all, that all this (as was duly observed) was done
and dispatched within less then one hour, in so diverse rowmes and sundry
places, yea upon the stayres and thresholds of these rowmes, and in their own
chamber where they lay themselves, not only in every window, but against every
staunch of the window were these herbs thus laid down in manner aforesaid.

This was searched and found to be thus speedly and exactly done, as is
abouseaid, which thing if it should have been performed by other 4 of good
discretion, the circumstances considered, it would have bin the work of a whole
day, and yet not so excellently performed, as it was by these: which when they
did it, were all out of their right minds, not knowing at all what they did,
in so much that when they came out of their trance, they merveiled where they
had been, and could not be persuaded that they had done this strange thing,
though it was showed unto them by plain demonstration.

These 4 also in another trance, did dance so finely, as if they had come out
of the dancing schole, one of the youngest playing with her mouth as cunningly
for the present, as if she had been a minstrell.

It was further observed, that in those times when these were so subject to
have their fits very often and very thick, and to before vexed, and tormented,
yet for all that if they went ^o cards or other games they were not troubled
at all, during the whole time of their playing and gaming and though they went
from home being requested to a gentleman's house to hear a play, yet all that
while, they were not troubled, nor one whitte disquieted, but contrariwise if
either scriptures were read, or prayers used for them, or exhortations applied
unto them, then ordinarily they fell into their fitts, and were very fearfully
tormented. Insomuch that for the space of two years or there-abouts, till they
were delivered, they never came to the church, only for fear to increase their
torments.

Moreover the 4 youngest girls being possessed with scorning spirits in the day
of their dispossession, and in the time of the last sermon did show the same:
for when the word was applied unto them, showing what strange things Satan
works in the children of disobedience, as grining and gnashing of teeth,
staring with their eyes, making mowes with their lips, thrusting out their
tongues, and drawing their mouths awrye very ugly, etc. It is most certain
that as these particulars were named, one after another, so they all four did
in actio^ answer the word of God which was spoken, showing such unseemly
gestures, fearful looks, and ugly cou^tenances in every particular, and in
the very same instant and point of time when they were named. And though not
one of them did see what another did, yet for all that, they did iumpe so right
in showing and setting out these unseemly signs, as that it could very hardly
be discerned, which of them all 4 was first or last in performing of the same.
Further such was the great and extraordinary strength that were in these 4 in
the time of their fitts, that though some of the^ were but of the age of x or
xj years, yet two or three strong men, could hardly hold one of them.

And that these two youngest and some of the rest, though they were vnlearnd and
never went to schole, yet in their fitts they were able to make answer to latin
questions propounded unto them, so truly and readily, as if they had soundly
understood them. And herein were they tried sundry times. And if now they
should be examined therein, they can neither answer nor understand one word.

There be also many other very strange things acted by every one of these in
particular, which if they should be set down every one, they would fill a
large volume, for brevities sake therefore the most things be omitted. And this
also is most certain, that very many strange things, and as wonderful as
any that here have been spoken of, were lost, and let slip for want of
heed, and good observation.

Now it is worthy to be marked, that though these possessed persons, had
every one, some things peculiar to them selves which none of the rest did
show, and that so rare and strange, that all the people were forced to
confess it was the work of an evil spirit within them: so had they also
many things in common one with another, and were in their fittes for the most
part handled alike.

1 They had all and every one of them very strange visions, and fearful
apparitions, whereupon they would say: look where Satan is: look where
Beelzebub is: look where Lucifer is look where a great black dog is, with a
firebrand in his mouth: see how Satan runs at me with a spear in his hand
to stick me to the heart, but God will defend me.

2 They had every one of them two spirits at the least, one to torment them
inwardly, with all the torments of hell, as i^ were, for the present, and
either one o^ more to stand before their faces, most ugly and terrible to
behold, to drive them into all fear and astonishment.

3 They heard very hideous and fearful voices of the spirits sundry times,
and did make marveillous aunsweres back again unto them very directly and
stranglie.

4 They were in their fittes ordinarily holden in that captivity and bondage,
that for an hour, two, or three, and longer time they should neither see nor
hear nor taste, nor feel nothing but the Devils, they employing them wholly
for them selves, vexing and tormenting them so extremely, as that for the
present they could feel no other pain or torture that could be offered unto
them; no not though you should pluck an ear from the head, or an arm from
the body.

5 They all of them were taken suddenly, with a very fearful schriking, and
a marveilous strange howling and showting, making a noise, as it were to call
on, and to waken one another, that so the spirits being raised up, might go
to their work, and proceed to torment their subjects according to their
custom; when one began, they all followed after in order, observing time and
tune, as it had bin the ringing of vij. Bells, and such was the straungnes of
these voices, that the uttering and framing of them, exceeded all cunning
invention, or the skill of any counterfaite imitation, and the effect also so
fearful, that it was both terrible and troublesome to the whole Country, and
wrought a wonderful astonishment in all that heard it.

6 Further they all of them had their bodies swollen to a wonderful huge
bigness, and almost incredible, if there had not bin many eyewitnesses unto it.

7 They had also a marveilous sore heaving and lifting, as if their hearts
would burst, so that with violent strayning of the^ selves, some of them
vomited much blood many times.

8 They had their faces dissigured, and turned toward their backs, a
fearful thrusting out of their tougues with a most ugly distorting of their
mouths, being drawn up, as it were unto their ears.

9 They were all of them very fierce, offering violence both to them selves
and others, wherein also they showed very great and extraordinary strength.

10 They blasphemed God, and the Bible; they reviled the Preachers; rayled upon
such as feared God; scorned all holy prayers, and wholesome exhortations,
which being offered and applied unto them, they ever became much worse.

11 They for the most part delighted in filthy and unsavory speeches, very
aggteable to the nature of that unclean spirit which then dwelled within
them; in so much as in the very sermon time, when such unseemly behavior was
spoken against, the evil spirit wrought most maliciously and spitefully
against the grace of God, and forced one of them (though she was a maid) to
utter ope^lie in the hearing of the people, such filthy uncleanness, as is not
to be named.

12 The most of them were both blind, deaf, and dumb, for diverse days
together.

13 They were out of their right minds, without the use of the senses,
especially void of feeling; as much sense in a stock as in one of them: or as
possible in a manner to quicken a dead man, as to alter or change them in
their traunces, or fittes, in any thing that they either said or did.

14 They were kept fasting a long time, and diverse of them for the space of
three days and 3 nights, did neither eat, nor drink any thing, Satan
purposing thereby to procure their pining away.

15 They in their fitts had diverse parts and members of their bodies so stiff
and stretched out, as were inflexible, or very hard to be bended.

16 They showed very great and extraordinary knowledge, as may appear by the
strange things said and done by them, according to that which we have already
set down in the particulars.

17 They all in the end of every sit, said ever thus JESUS bless me, yea
though they had 40 or a 100 fittes in one day, as it is certain some of them
had, yet they never missed to say thus, but as sure as they had a fit,
whether it were short, or long, so sure it was, that it should be ended, with
this prayer, JESUS bless me, this was ever a sure sign, that they were
restored to the use of their senses for that time, which never failed.

18 They ever after their fits, were as well as might be, an felt very little
or no hurt at all; although they had been never so sore tormented immediately
before.

Now this harmony and consent in signs and actions, both for the matter and
manner of strange handling of all these in their several fits, does make it
evident, that they were all really and corporally possessed.

Notwithstanding that is true, which is objected, namely, that sundry of these
signs, may be in one that is not possessed: for one may see very fearful
sights, and straung apparitions, and may be haunted with evil spirits, and
driven into great fears and frights, and yet not be possessed.

Another may be both lame and blind, and dumb and deaf.

The third may be very fierce, offering violence, both to themselves and
others.

The fourth may gnash and foam, and stare with his eyes, and fall down
fearfullie, and suddenly, and lie as if he were dead.

And so it may be said of diverse others, which may many other ways be very
strangly handled, and yet not one of them truly possessed.

The reason is because that when sundry of these signs, are severed from the
rest, and go alone by them selves, or else are found but two or three, or some
few together, then such signs may arise, as effects from some other workinge
cause in the subject, or from the immediate hand of God, or some other way.

But when all these signs shall concur and meet together in one man, or the
most of these, being joined with any one act above the power of nature, as
supernatural knowledge, and extraordinary strength, or any such impossible
work, then if it shall be examined, either according to the scriptures, or
histories, or reason it self, it will prove a very sound and corporal
possession: And so by consequence the great variety of strange signs and
supernatural acts, performed by these 7. and showed as well in every
particular, as in those things which they had in common one with another, does
easily conclude a very true and sound possession.

The third part.
The 3 part of this discourse co^cernes our coming to May. Starkies house, and
the occasion thereof, how we came to have to deal with these 7 persons; our
entrance into, and our whole carriage in that action; which being truly set
down, may serve to discharge us of those grievous calumniations contained in
the discovery: charging upon us both the names and practice of cousiners,
juglers, exorcistes, imposters, etc.

FIRST then the continuance of these troubles in May. Starkies house: the
remembrance of Doct. Dees counsel, to send for some Preachers: the imprisoning
of Edmond the Witch in Lancaster Iayle: the hearing of the Boy of Burton, who
being strangely afflicted, received help and deliverance by M. Darrells
advise: upon these occasions, Mr. Starkie sent for M. Darrell 3 several times
before he came, he ever imparted the news unto the brethren as it came to his
hand, because he would attempt nothing in those cases without very good
advisement, and lawful consent. In the end it was concluded, that he should
go: and thought fit, that I also should go with him, as a companion in the
journey, and a witness to all his proceedings according to his own request.

This being done, M. Darr: wrote his letter to M. Starkie, wherein he promised
that aftter some present and important business was dispatched, he would come,
and visit him; desiring with all, the assistance of some faithful Ministers
about M. Starkie, especially his Pastor to join with us.

This letter M. Starkie read in the presence of John Starkie his son, and
some other: after which time, he, the said John, had no fit at all, till the
day of our coming thither; the rest had some little fitts, but not so grievous
as before: in which fitts they would say to the spirit, thou naughty lad, thou
make us sick, for thou know the Preachers will come shortly.

So we having prepared our selves for this journey, at the time appointed, wen^
toward Lancashire, where we never came in our lives before. And upon Wednesday
the xvjth of March, about one of the clock we came to May. Starkies house at
Cleworth, who hearing that we were come Mistres Starkie with John Star. her
son, and Ann her daughter with some other of the family came forth to meet
us, and enterteyned us with great joy, and brought us into the hall, where we
found M. Star. himself, being then ready to rise from dinner, who after our
welcome to him, commanded the meat to be brought again, and desired us to
sirt down at table, and so we did: Presently after praising of God, we began
to enquire of M. Starkie, the state of his family, and asked him how they did:
He answered, he thanked God, they were all much better then they had been, but
specially John Starkie had been well for a fortnight together, and not so much
as once troubled, and Anne Star. his daughter had bin well diverse days before
our coming, without any firt at all, and the rest began to mend now since
Edmond the witch was hanged; And both he and his wife doubted not, but that
they should now do well. Which when we heard, we suspected greatly Satan's
lurking in them: And desired to see those that were still troubled, which were
especially three, who were all in the kitchen quiet; he called for them to come
up into the hall, and so they came: first the eldest came near unto the table
and made low courtesy, and presenthe in a moment was trowen into a chair,
about 3 yardes distant from the place where she stood, where she reared
backward in the chair as though she had been a sleep, her body stretched out
to the furthest, and as stife as iron: This being done, in comes the second,
who did like the first, and was suddenly cast to a table side, just opposite
against the other: Afterward comes in the last, with both her hands closed to
her face, and uttered these words, I am come to counsel before I be called,
and straight way while the word was in her mouth, she was stricken backward to
the forme-side, where she satt all agaste like the rest. Hereupon we arose
from the table, being much amassed at the strangnes of the sight, and came to
behold them, and see in what manner they were visited. And after we had vewed
them well, within a quarter of an hour, they al stood up. And among many odd
pleasant, though unusual speeches, one of these three spoke thus merrily (about
the hanging of Hartley the witch, who was newly executed) do they think that
they could hang the Devil: I whish no, they might hang Edmond, but they
could not hang the Devil, for they were two, Edmond and the Devil. And after
they began to rail and revile and to strike both with hands and with feet,
and could not be ruled till they were removed into an upper chamber, where they
continued together, talking one to another, mocking and scorning such as held
them down, or said, or did any good vno them: And so they remained, deprived
of the right use of their senses, both speaking, and doing much evil, and yet
utterly ignorant and senceles in all that passed from them, so continuing from
that hour being 2 a clock on the Wednesday till 6 at night upon Thursday, when
it pleased God to deliver them and the rest.

Then we went into the garden, consulting with M. Starkie, what was best to be
done. We agreed upon this course, namely to take in hand the exercise of
fasting and prayer the next day, considering with our selves where we might
have some other Godly Preacher to join with us, to assist us in that work, We
thought of diverse, but in the end we made choice of one M. Dickoms, the
minister at Leigh, which is the Parish Church to M. Starkie. Whereupon we sent
for him.

In the mean time we purposed to prepare the whole family against the next
day, to make them all as fit as we could for that holy work: and chiefly that
they might be truly humbled, and sanctified, that so we might with the more
courage and comfort join with them the next day in fasting and prayer. But
when some of the possessed were tried, they were found incapable of all good
counsel and instruction, and yet had ability and power to resist and scorn
the same. After some half hour spent this way with some of the^, the rest of
the possessed were all come into the chamber: Margret Byrom was newly come from
Manchester, whom Ma. Starkie had caused to be sent for, and Jane Ashton also,
which before our coming was not much suspected: Though ye Devil had dissembled
and hid him self in both these, yet now the word finds him out, and he can
dissemble no longer, but must needs show him self.
Yet she that day in the morning had her belly swelled as big as a woman
with child, and straight upon our coming, a strange skriking and howling, as
the rest had. So May. Starkie holding his son John, and Mistress Starkie her
daughter Anna fast in their arms, Ma. Darrell began to exhort them. Presently
John Starkie and Anne, cried out mightily, with such outrageous roaring and
belling, that they could not of a long time be restreyned. And John Starkie
being cast and holden down upon a bed, was most fearfullie tormented, and so
payned in his stomach, and pulled in his belly, heaving and lifting, as if his
heart would burst, whereupon he shedd many bitter tears, and so continued,
sometimes crying out exceeding loud, and sometimes in these torme^ting fitts,
to the great grief of the beholders. And while we labored to comfort them by
exhortations, we were scorned by the first three that lay by upon beds in
every good word that we spoke, and they would take it into their mouths, and
mock it: When we called for the Bible, they fell a laughing at it, and said,
reach them the Bibble babble, bibble babbell, it went so round in their mouths
from one to another, and continued with many other scorninges and filthy
speeches, that we could not bereave them of it. Thereupon we purposed to leave
them for a while, exhorting again John Statkie to trust in the Lord; to be
patient in that affliction; to pray to God, and desired him to say after us,
the Lords prayer: but he was the more tormented a great deal, and not a word
could he speak, but that scorner that lay next him, said after us, nicknaming
every word in the Lords prayer, so far as we went in it. For when we
perceived such horrible blasphemy, we durst not proceed but gave over or ever
we came to the end, being exceedingly grieved, that they had despised such
holy things as dogs and swine, that would if they could have turned again,
and all to rent us: whereupon we were forced to give place to the Devil, who
indeed at this time bestirred him self, working mightily in all the possessed
such torments and such troubles, with such outrageous spite and contempt, as I
am persuaded was seldom or never seen the like, and all of purpose to
discourage us in that skirmish, and to drive us out of the field, and if it
were possible not to dale to set upon him any more.

The truth is, we were greatly discouraged at that time, not knowing well what
to do: we left them so, and went into a garden tor^efresh our selves, having
spent a good while with them, it grew toward supper time; we were requested
to come in, and being set at supper, May. Dickoms (whom we had sent for) came
in. We told him what strange things had fallen out, since our coming thither,
and of our purpose to fast and pray with the family, if he would join with
us; which thing he was very ready to do. And having purposed also to prepare
the family thereunto, we went about it. Having the whole family together,
and diverse honest neighbors for the holding and tending of the possessed, we
made entrance into the preparation, which was by way of exhortation. We found
the^ very loud, froward and rough to deal withal, that we could hardly get
any audience: but perceaving the great malice and spite of the Devil, that
wrought against us, laboring violently to trouble us, that we might again
give over the work as we had done before, We were provoked in this respect
with great zeal to pray against him, and with all the desires of our souls,
to entreat the Lord to put the Devil to silence, and that he would charge,
and command the evil spirits to hold their peace; The prayer was not sooner
made but presently they held their peace every one, praised be God.
that so we might both have good audience in praying and speaking the Word,
and also perform all other duties profitably without let: which came to
pass accordingly, for we found the Lord near and ready to hear us: who
presently showed his power in commanding Satan to silence, and to be still,
and they obeyed him, for there followed a great calm. So we went forward
performing that service which remay n^^ with much comfort. This preparation
being finished, by this time it drew towa^^ midnight, we went all to bed,
to tak^ some rest, that being thereby refreshed, (...) might be the better
able to perform (...) greater service the next day, which we ha^ bound our
selves unto, being exceeding (...) encouraged to set upon it with sure ho^ of
the victory, in that the Lord had p^^ the pawn and pledge of it into our hand
over night, giving us such plain experience both of his presence and of his
power by reason whereof our faith gathered great strength, that seeing the Lord
had blesse^ our endeavor thus far in the entrance an^ given us such good
success in the prep^ration, that he would not fail to be present with us in
the bataille it self, to she^ his power, and to work with us till we had
trodden Satan under our feet. There fore when the morning came, we prepare our
selves after the best manner we could that that holy exercise of fasting and
pray^ might be performed both by our selves all that should join with us
therein, wi^ most fruit, that we might attain to the mark that we set
before us: namely, the confounding of Satan and the full deliverance of the
possessed. There was also great preparation in the family to set all things
in good order, that we might not be troubled in the work. And having a fair
large parlour already trimmed, they brought in thither certain beds or
couches, upon which they laid the 7 sick possessed persons. All this while
the honest neighbors near about, coming in, the room filled apace, some
holding and tending the sick possessed, and some sitting by. It being now
about 7 a clock, and all things made ready, the parties being still troubled,
their torments still increasing, and their fits doubling upon them, sometimes
either howling or crying, or else lifting, heaving, or vomitting, or else
scorning, or railing, or cast into a trance, which was ever at the end of
their fits, being as a breathing time to refresh them by, and then too it
again. The sight and hearing of these things was so wonderful that a man can
not possibly come near it in describing of it, neither was ever such a thing
seen in our days, nor in the days of our fathers, such a number in one
place, lying in such a fearful manner so miserably vexed by the Devil. We
could not choose but be exceedingly affected with great sorrow and grief (...)
compassion of their miseries, which provoked us to offer up our prays wi^^
strong crying and tears unto God that w^^able to hear, and to save us from
th^^ which we feared.

We then with such reverence as wa^ meet, began the exercise of humbli^^
our souls unto God, in the mediation (...) Jesus Christ, and by the direction
of the holy Ghost proceeded in the work till (...) was finished. In which
proceeding it is (...) to observe diverse strange eventes which happened. For
the possessed being of diuer^ kinds, we had more ado with them: for^ of the
were possessed with skorning spirit^^^ and quite bereaved of the right use of
the^^ senses, with whom we were much mo^^ troubled then with the other three
which were ever very sober, though they were very sore tormented. And yet
through the great mercy of God, after we had made a^ entrance, God bridled the
rage of Satan and so restrained his fury, that after h^^ had made his flourish
in the beginning (...) and showed his power (as then he will d^ the worst he
can) it pleased God as before in our preparation ouer-night, (...) the exercise
it self, where many were assembled together, to make them all quiet, and to
keep them all in such order, that to^ 7 a clock in the morning till 3 a clock
(...) the afternoon, we went forward without any great interruption, save that
now and then, some of them had some sudden ^^tt for the space of half a
quarter of an hour; which being ended, we went on still perceauing the Lord
working with us, giding us oftentimes sundry signs of the victory, whereby we
were much encouraged. Forin the first Sermon whilst Master Dickoms was
preaching, Margret Hurdman, who was the principal and chief of the scorners,
was plainly heard, both by some of the Preachers and of the people, to use
these words oftentimes: J must be gone, I must be gone, whether shall I go?
whether shall I go? I will nor dye, I will not dye. Repeating over again and
again the same thing half a dozen times at the least, in a sine low voice
and in the tune of singing.

After this there appeared no great distraction till three of the clock in the
afternoon: and toward the end of my sermon (as the Discouerer has reveyled)
when the abouenamed Margret Hurdman was heard again to utter these words, I
cannot tarry: I cannot tarry: I am too hoote: am too hoote: let me go: let me
go. Whi^^ words gave us this comfort, that Satan would not long keep his
hold, he was heated by fasting and prayer, and by t^^ word of God so
zealouslie and powerful applied, as if fire were put into his ho^^ to burn
him out: for hereupon before (...) sermon was or could be ended, she wi^^ all
the rest brake out into exceeding loud cries, all seven roaring, and belling
in su^^ extreme and fearful manner that the troubled us al, being so violent
and outrageous that they had much ado to be holden. For Satan then being ready
to depart did first vex all the veins of their hart^ and did so torment them,
that they we^ forced to lay about them with both hand and feet, to pull their
hair, and to re^ their clothes, to knock their heads, an to strike
themselves, crying out with open mouths, and roaring as if they were mad^ Then
was there such struggling and striuin^ between us and those seven Devils,
cr^ing out so loud with such violence a^ extention of voice, laboring who
shou^ be loudest, till our voices were spent a^ no strength almost left in us.
This battay continued very near the space of i^ hours, till we were
exceedingly weakened with long and loud crying up unto heaven, but it
pleased God toweaken Satan's power much more, and to tread the evil spirits
under our feet. And thus much may serve to show, what beginning we made into
this work, and how we proceeded therein, and that our whole course and
cariadge held in this cause thus far may clear us, that we neither sought
work, nor set our selves to work, though we be charged so to do, by this
Discovery, as may appear by the scope of the whole last chapter of the first
book: neither in dealing with these strange afflietions, have we used either
delusions, iuglings, exorcismes, or any such vain and ridiculous fooleries as
they have detected in the popish Priests, nor yet any such lightness as should
be condemned by men that meddle with matters of such moment.

The fourth part.
NOw; it follows in the fourth plac^ to describe briefly the means a^ manner
of the dispossession of these 7 persons, that so it may appear that May.
Darell was neither the only, nor yet the principal agent therein; contrary to
that whi^^ the Discoverer does falsely report of him Chap. 1. page 2. namely,
That though he had gloried in 2 exploites, yet his name w^ not so famous, till
he had dispossessed 7 persons in Master Starkies house, at one cla^ And for
proof hereof they allege the story of the boy of Burton, in the ende^
which book, it is thus written viz. Shortly you shall have the true story
come foor^ of those 7 in Lancashire, that were possessed with unclean
spirits, and all 7 delivered at one time by this man. And the more to confirm
this, they allege May. Darrels own testimony, in his answer to the 6
artic. of his exam. (quoted in the marg) therevppon inferring thus: By this
man, meaning May. Darrell, as he himself has confessed: I will therefore
first set down the truth concerning their deliverance, and after prove that
May. Darrell is made the principal in this action by this Discouerer, but
under a pretense only, and for a further fetch.

For the truth first you have heard already, that we were three Preachers that
exercised that day, of whom I was the last; and indeed in the latter end of my
sermon (as the Discouerer has reveyled) they grew to be so strong, that they
could very hardly be holden down upon their beds, though they had lain
before reasonably quiet.

But chiefly one of them namely Jane Ashton, being both the strongest and
worst of all the rest, was also more violently vexed, having her fittes so
sore and so thick, that we feared, she would either have fainted and fallen
down, orells have yielded unto Satan, who labored mightily to make her
workeable to his purpose: whereupon May. Darrell and May. Dickoms the other
Preacher that joined with us, being much affected with her misery, as by force
of her fittes she was violently carried aside from the rest, they two attended
upon her, striving with all their power to uphold and strengthen her.

In the mean time the other 6 being sore tormented, and struggling with those
th^^ kept them, were got from them, and being tumbled from their pallets to the
flo^^ and near to the fire side, where by the good providence of God, I was
brough^ even into the midst of them: and the^ being assisted with the prayer
of their p^rents and the people, we earnestly entre^ted the Lord for them,
with strong an^ mighty cries: And it pleased God to hea^ us at that instant
for those 6. who were a upon a sudden straungelie and fearful cast down
before us, where they lay all along one by another, altogether fencles, their
bodies stiff and stretched out, a if they had been stark dead, for the spa^^
of half a quarter of an hour.

In which time, May. Dickoms came^ me, and saw all of them, laid as dead, at
how they rose up again one after another, in order as they fell, acknowledgit
that they were freed from the evil spi^^ and that he was departed from them.

Whereupon every one of them selue with great joy and gladness of heart, ga^^
thanks to God for that benefit.

All this while May. Darr. was with t^^ other maid standing at a great wind^^
in another part of the parlour, which (...) both long and large, so that he
neither saw, nor heard, of the deliverance of these 6. he neither knew, when
they were cast down, nor when they rose up, nor once suspected any such
thing, until such time as they being perfectly restored, stood upon their
feet, leaping and daunsing and praising God: when also we were all filled with
exceeding joy, which was testified by showting and clapping of hands, so that
the earth range with the praises of God, and the whole house was filled with
the sound thereof.

Now the diligent observing of the state and condition of these 6 persons in
one hour, what violent passions, and extreme outrage they were in for the
beginning of the hour, driven and drawn to cry and roar with all madness and
fury, and to do they knew not what. And then secondly in the last part of the
hour, to be quite changed into another condition, carried as it were with all
force and violence into other contrary extremities of unspeakable and
excessive joys, the best way: to be so suddenly brought from the bondage and
torture of Satan, into the glorious liberty of the sons and daughters of
God. By these signs and suddayne change, it is most evident, that the first
estate is so manifest the work of Satan, and the 2 so cleared to be the work
of God, that it cannot possibly be the work of flesh and blood, neither could
it be counterfayted by any man. For I am persuaded that if 6 of the
cunningest wits that be in the world, should join their heads together to
make such another work: yet they could not deceive the senses of such men, as
had seen by experience, and had made some trial of these strange and great
works, for they could quickly discern, their close iugling and sleightie
conveyance to be but delusions and hypocrisy, and so would their wickedness be
manifested to all men.

By this it may appear that Ma. Darrell was not the principal or chief
Actour in their dispossession, neither can he in deed be so accounted, seeing
that at the very time whiles we were crying unto the Lord for these 6: he was
separated to another work, and busily employed another way, namely,
instructing, comfortinge, and strengthening the Maid, who remained all this
while miserably vexed by the Devil.

Whereupon at our being there he complained unto me concerning the
dispossession of these 6, and told me that he saw never a one of them when
they were delivered, which he said grieved him exceedingly.

After this also I confess that to be true which the discouerer has disclosed
book 1. chap. 10. page 56. namely, that I took all these 6 unto me, and
exhorted them to continue in the fear of God: telling them that Satan would
seek to enter into them again, whom I admonished to resist by faith and
prayer, and by putting on all the whole armor of God, encouraging them by all
means to stand fast, saying thus unto them: If you do manfully resist, no
doubt but you shall see that Satan will fly, not being able to do you any
harm. And as they regarded well this counsel, so it pleased God to bless it
accordingly, for he gave them such strength and courage, though five of them
were but children, that they did most strongly resist him, so that though his
assautes were usually very fierce and importunate for the present, yet could
he not prevail with the least to yield unto him. And so hitherto they have
all 6 been preserved both safe and sound, without any further molestation, to
the great praise and glory of God.

Now whiles I was thus employed about those 6. May. Darrell took great pains
with the Maid, hoping still that she would have been dispossessed that night
also, but it came not so to pass. Whereupon thorough the deceitfulnes of
Satan, who had drawn her to dissemble, and brought her to an impudent
outfacing of the truth, we were driven to give over for that time, purposing in
the morning to renew the exercise of fasting and prayer in the behalf of that
maid only: which when we had entered into, she was sorer vexed and tormented
then ever she was before, till it was about noone or one of the clock, about
which time, she also through the great mercy of God, received help and
deliverance.

For when we had all three in order performed this duty of prayer, she
having wrought us all one after another till we were weary, the last time as
it came to my course I having continued some time, desired another to take my
rowme: which when the maid heard, she suddenl^ caught me by the hand, held
me fast, and said unto me: Nay for Gods sake leave me not yet, stick to it a
little longer, and you shall see he will depart shortly.

Hereupon receiving this good encouragement, I continued still, and with the
joint assistance of the rest, we earnestly entreated the Lord for her, so it
was not long before she was cast into a trance, lying as if she had been fast
a sleep, anon she burst out into weeping that the tears trickled down her
cheeks apace in a very extraordinary manner; after which she presently rose
up, and thanked God that the evil spirit was departed from her.

She also being violently assaulted by the Devil, resisted ma^fully, as the
rest did, and likewise prevayled, and so was by the mercy of God preserved,
during all the time she was in her mistres house, but afterward she departed
thence, and dwelt with her Uncle, a papist, in the furthest part of
Lancashire, where there resorted unto her certain Seminary priests, by whose
co^iurations and magical inchauntments, (as it is reported) the evil spirit was
brought into her again, since which time she has been exceedingly tormented,
and so still continues like So^mers repossessed.

As therefore the good providence of God may be discerned in the disposing of
all things, so also it shows it self most clearelie in the well ordering of
this whole action, if it be well observed.

First in sending me with May. Darrells be a witness of those strange and
vnwo^ted works of God.

Secondly, in not using May. Darrells the chief instrument, neither for the
dispossessing of the six the first day, nor y^ for the deliverance of the
seventh on the second day.

Thirdly, in that without his labor the were prepared by faith and prayer and
other spiritual armor to resist the evil spirit, by means whereof they were
preserved from Repossession. For if May. Darre^ had been the chiefest in
dispossessinge (...) these 7. and of Thomas Darling, as he w^^ of other two,
namely of Katherine Wrigh^ and of William Summers: then surelie^ would have
been thought that he had h^^ some special gift that way above other men, and
this discouerer might have ha^ the greater show of advantage in chargin^ him so
deeply and so often with the matter.

For which cause questionles it please^ God to prevent him in these 7. And as
s^ Thomas Darling, May. Darrell only ga^ advise to his friends to fast and
pray, an^ humble them selves on his behalf, and (...) they did, neither he nor
any other Preacher being present, it pleased God at their Prayers, being but 9
or 10 simple people to be entreated, and to deliver the party from that
possession, that so by diverse and sundry experimentes, it might appear to all
the world that this is no extraordinary gift, peculiar to any one man, but
common to all the faithful, as well to one as to another, and that the mean
and simple people may have as great privilege and power to cast out Satan, by
their faith and fasting and fervent prayer, as either he, or I, or the best and
chiefest Preacher.

Out of the premissed then it may be collected that if there be any evil in
this work, it is rather to be imputed unto me then unto Ma. Darrel: for in
truth (as the Lord lives) there is no occasion of evil in him concerning
this matter; for if he had wrought craftily at other times, and practiced
deceyte: why should it not have appeared and broken out as well in dealing with
these 7 as in other places; but I am persuaded (such is his simplicity) that
he is as clear, and was ever as free from cou^terfayting, as I my self am.
And I dare boldly protest even before the Lord, that such a thought came never
once into my mind.

Now howsoever it might seem more expedient for me to be silent in these
things least I should seem, or be taken even as a fool in boasting my self:
yet herein I may say with the Apostle, you have even compelled me: for indeed
so great is the inco^venience that has come by the misconceyuing and
misreporting of this matter of fact, as that it has enforced a necessity of
manifesting the truth thereof in the plainest manner which yet hitherto for
modesties sake, has been suppressed for the space of 3 years, and likely
never to have come to light, if our innocence could have been cleared without
it.

But now I must return to the Discouerer, and proceed to perform my promise,
which is, to prove, that the purpose of the Detectour, to make May. Darrell the
principal agent in this dispossessio^, is only under a pretense and not that
he is so persuaded, my reasons are these: First to pretend May. Darrell to be
principal, in this, as well as in all the rest, is great policy: for under
this pretense, all that they charge him with concerning teaching of Summers,
has the greater color of truth. Secondly, by enforcing this, as they do
much in their book, it does more easily persuade men to believe, that he is
a very common and lewd practizer and deceiuer. Thirdly, by this title of
principal, and in all places where he comes to be the chiefest, it
presupposes an extraordinary iugling skill, and a singular cunning in
legerdemaine, as they term it: whereupon they say that when he began with
Katherine Wright, then he dealt but rudely and vnskilfullie: but after he had
practiced with Thomas Darling and the 7 of Lancashire, then he was his crafts
master. Fourthlie, It helps to justify that accusation of vain glory, and
that he desires to have a great name, and to make him self famous, or else
that he is the only man that has a peculiar prerogative to cast out Devils
above all men, seeing that where-soeuer he comes, he bears a way the bell (as
they say) and that no body can do the feate but he. Fiftlie, under this
pretense they may with less prejudice proceed against him; seeing that in
four several actions, though they find some accessories, yet they find none
principal but him self. And thus policy has preferred him to be
principal, when in deed they know he is not; so of purpose to do him a
mischief, and to dishonor the cause it self, even the great work of God.

And that they are not persuaded, that he is the principal in this work, it
may thus appear: Because they have the story of this matter of Lancashire
penned by May. Dickoms, as is plainly confessed and proved in the Discovery,
wherein the dispossession of these 7 is most plainly described, with the
circumstances thereof, according to that which I have here se^^ down. And
therein May. Darr. (except that he was the man that was sent for to come, and
principally aimed at) is made equal. Concerning this book I speak that
which I know, for I was examined, in that whole story out of it, from the
beginning to the end: and yet the Discouerer will take no knowledge of this
matter, which is written there, (though it be most sure and certain) because
it makes against him, and takes the rash testimony of the printer, which spoke
onclie as he heard, that May. Darrell was the man: and as for May. Darrell
him self in his testimony, it was either mistaken or misreported: for^ dare
say, that he would not say, that those 7 were delivered or dispossessed by him
principally: yet the discovery urges both these testimonies to the full,
because they seem much to make for him in all the former respects.

If then, this may be received for the truth, as in deed it is, I doubt not
but that all suspicion of counterfayting and coniuring, and of all other bad
dealing wherewith we have been most unjustly charged, may be removed; as also
that gross error which is tootoo common, of ascribing any gift or
extraordinary power of casting out of Devils, to any one man, more then to
another, may be both convinced and suppressed: for herein all men may most
clearlie see, that the good hand of God, (in blessing his own ordinance, and
the poor endeavors of his servants) is the only inward, and efficient cause
of this great work of dispossessio^, that so all the glory thereof, may wholly
and only be ascribed unto him, who works all things, according to the
pleasure of his own will, to whom be praise for ever.

The last part.
NOw it follows last of all, to set dow^ the signs of disposs. showed forth
b^ these 7 immediately before their deliverance, in, and after the same: and
therwit^ also briefly to show the return of the spirits being cast out:
how sundry time and diverse ways by many strange and fea^ full assaults, they
seek to reenter: whi^^ also may serve, as an answer to that proof of the
Discovery, contained in the 9 an^ 10. chap. touching those points, that (...)
these signs being conferred according^ divine and historical observation,
th^^ that be indifferently minded, may be able to judge what cause they have
to sco^^ these signs, and to sport them selves wit^ them, as they do.

The first sign to manifest these dispos^ was, that the spirits did rent, and
tea^^ the possessed, insomuch that they were s^rer vexed and tormented
immediately before they left them, and even as it were (...) their departure,
then ever they were at a^nie time before: so it is said, when Christ charged
the spirit to come out of the the child, then the spirit rent him sore, and
after came out, Mark 9.26.

The second sign is that they cried out with loud voices, and roared out
exceedingly, after the manner of beasts, most fearful and lamentable to
hear, being never so fierce and outrageous in any of their fittes, as even
then when the spirits were forced and compelled to come out of them. And of
this sign it is thus written, f. that unclean spirits, crying with a loud
voice, came out of many that were possessed, Act. 8.7.

Thirdly, they were cast down suddenly, and lay all along stretched out as
if they had been dead, and so leaving them as dead, the evil spirits departed
from the^. And thus it is written of the child whom Christ dispossessed: when
the unclean spirit came out, he was as one dead, insomuch that many said, he
is dead, Mark 9.26.

Fourthlie, the evil spirits departed out of the possessed in the likeness of
some ugly creature: and every one of the 7 saw and perceived the spirits to
depart out in a several likeness: one, in the likeness of a crows head, round,
which when it was our, went and satt in a corner of the parlour, with darkness
about it a while, then went it out of the window with such a flash of
lightning, that all the parlour seemed to her to be on a light fire: It left
also behind it in the maid a soar throat, Margree ^yrom.
and a most fill thie smell, in so much that het meat was very unsavory for a
week after.

Another said, John Starkie.
it went out like a man with a great bulche on his back, as big as a man:
very evill-favoured and ugly to behold.

The third saw him go out like an vrchine or hedgehogge, Ellyno^ Hurdman
and crept as she thought, out at a very little hole of the window.

The fourth like a foul ugly man, Anne Starkie.
with a white beard, and a great bulch on his breast, bigger then a man's head.

The fifte like a black man, ^lle^ Ho^land
or like the fourth, as before said.

The sixth perceived it to go out in the likeness of a great breath ugly like a
toad, Jane Ashton.
and round like a ball.

The last like an ugly man with a great bunch on his back, Margret Hurdman
etc.

Fiftlie, the evil spirits did presently teturne unto them again in the same
likeness that they went out, and sought to reenter, and, being resisted, they
departed, and then returned after in other likenesses seeking still both by
promises and threatenings to prevail: sometimes coming in the likeness of a man
profering bags of gold and silver, and showing them all manner of costly and
sumptuous things: tempting them thereby to yield unto him, and to let him in:
enforcing his temptations by promising of honors and pleasures, and great
preferments, of the return of the spirit, when he is cast out, and his
seeking to reenter, we read in Mat. 12. Luke 11. And for his diversity of
temptations and large offers to prevail, it is evident in his dealing against
Christ, Math. 4. In these assaults to reenter, the spirits appeared sometimes
in the likeness of a bear with open mouth, sometimes of an ape, sometimes of a
big black dog, sometimes of a black Raven, with a gellow bill, sometimes of a
flame of fire, sometimes of diverse whelps, but most usually in the likeness of
Edmond Hartley a coniurer, who had bewitched them, and was hanged also at
Lancaster, for that fact, and for coniuring. In these apparitions, if he
could not prevail with his large offers, and fair promises, then would he
terrify them with very fearful threatenings: As that he would cast them into
pitts, or break their necks, or some other way to plague them, saying the they
should never prosper.

Whereupon when he saw, that in assa^ting of them, he lost al his labor and
prevailed not, he labored at the length (...) be revenged of them, for
resisting of him to which purpose he did trouble them i^ all the parts of
their bodies: in their eye with many uncomfortable sights, to te^rifie them:
he tied their tongues that they could not pray, nor speak as they should he
pinched them in their arms, that the^ could not lift them up, nor stir them
for a good space: he pricket them in the^ knees, and in their legs that they
could not go, or yet if they did go, that the^ they went lame and limping for
an hou^^ or two together, and could not possibli^ go up right: they had pain
also in their feet, and in their head: thus they we^^ molested, but they still
so resisted tha^ they gave him the foil, so that in the en^ he was forced to
leave them and to fle^ away.

Sixthly they being all dispossessed by fasting and prayer, according to the
ordinance of Christ, since that time, all their swellings and torments have
ceased, neither have they bin troubled or vexed with any more fitts: Only Jane
Ashton being repossessed, has manifested the same by sundry fearful signs,
and is now become worse then she was, every way: but as for the rest, they have
continued now for the space of two years and a half very peaceable and quiet,
neither have they showed forth any sign of possession, nor any suspicion
thereof.

Lastly they all gave great thanks to God, for their deliverance, and that of
themselves so freely and cherefully in so excellent and heavenly manner, as that
they could never do the like, neither before, nor since: they are also so
changed in their conditions, and their manners so well reformed, that a man
shall hear no evil come from them, nor any unseemly behavior: and now they
can pray, and take delight in praising God. They go to church, to hear the
word, and continue there with much comfort, and are every way better then they
were before.

And thus I have finished this discourse, wherein I have dealt faithfully to my
power, and whereby I have detected this discouerer to be a great deceyuer: like
a Traveyler that takes upon him to discover diverse countries, wherein he never
came, and to describe the state and people of certain newfound lands, the
situation whereof he never knew or heard of, on^^ a mere fiction of his own
invention. Thus has this detractour dealt with us; (...) with this most
honorable and famo^^ fact of Lancashire: In describing it to be^ vain and
ridiculous practice, detecting therein great deceit, and much legerde^ main:
and yet for all that, he never sa^ the practice of it with his eyes, neither
di^^ he ever hear any evil detected, or decei^^ used therein. This work was
never y^^ called in question nor ever examined by way of trial, as is plainly
confessed in the Discovery: and hitherto there has no^ been found any one
witness to bring i^ any evidence to prove it counterfaite, no^ any Christian
ever yet heard to open his mouth to speak any evil against it.

The Reader therefore may much wonder at the intolerable boldness of this
malicious Accuser, that dare undertake to discover men and their dealings,
especially Preachers of the Gospel to be lewd cousiners, and most notorious
deceyvers, and yet never saw nor knew any evil by them, or any sure and
certain signs of any suspision thereof. And may also see how injurious they
are, to this unblameable work, that in an insatiable desire to discredit it,
they have cast an evil name upon it, defaming it for a fraudulent practice,
though ^t was never tried, nor yet ever detected to have decey^e or bad dealing
in it, by any in the world besides themselves: which yet being mere
strangers to the cause, will needs condemn it before they hear it, and
punish the parties that have practiced in it, as most impious, before they know
what evil they have done: And now having thus wronged us being just men, yea
both robbed and wounded us, as I may say: We must be bound to the peace, and
must promise neither to publish nor practice these matters: or else remain
prisoners still, with expectation of further punishment, which we are willing
to endure, seeing we cannot choose but speak those things, which we have both
heard and seen.

This discourse good Reader was dispatched in December last. The difficulty of
printing has hindered the publishing of it thus long.


