THE BLACK BASTEL, OR, A LAMENTATION IN NAME of the Kirk of SSCOTLAND, composed
by M. James Melvil, when he was confined at Berwick anno 1611. Abridged by N.

Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first
works, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy candlestick
out of his place, except thou repent. Rev. 2.5. Fear none of those things which
thou shall suffer: behold, the devil shall cast some of you into prison, that
ye may be tried, and ye shall have tribulation ten days, be thou faithful
unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life. Verse. 10. But I have a few
things against thee, because thou have there them that hold the doctrine of
Balaam, who taught Balac to cast a stumbling block before the children of
Israel, to eat things sacrificed unto idols, and to commit fornication. Verse.
14. THE BLACK BASTEL.
THe thousand year, six hundred and eleven.
When as the Sun entered in Sagittarie,
Orion rising in the east of heaven,
Diana's court then Gemini did carry,
And Jove in the Meridian did tarry,
Saturn severely rolling over the night,
Mars, Venus, Hermes bringing home the light.
The air was cold, but calm, no cloud in sky,
The fields all white, and the great Ocean still;
Yet the hard frost making the ground as dry,
I quickly stirred my self to walk at will
Along the shore; at length I came until
A brave white place, where had been built a castle,
And commonly is called, the Black Bastell.
I took me to a cave where was some hay,
The mouth whereof lay open to the Sun,
There did I rest me warm, as into May:
And after some deep meditation,
I stepped, and thought I saw a vision,
A sight which grieved me at the heart right sore,
And unto death will ever more and more.
A woman of most comely countenance*
With farded face, and garish in attire,
A crown of glass upon her head did glance,
Her clothes were colored contrare her desire*
A heavy yoke upon her neck and lyre,
Of Reed a scepter in her hand she boore,
Rich in attire, yet silly, lean, and poor.
Raised up on high upon a royal Throne,
Did awful sit above the woman's head,
Commanding every thing for to be done,
As pleased him, a rampand Lion red:
This Lion crafty Foxes two did lead,
^ow 14.
And round about him thirteen wolves did dance
To keep her sheep, whom he was to advance.
Her sheepheards all in hundreds stood near by,
With dog and staff, who sometime bold had been,
But now were careless, though they heard her cry,
And used just like to a captive Queen;
Her heavy case some few in heart did mien,
But could not help, so many couched for fear
Of Wolf and Lion, or were snared with gear.
Her Torches, Tapers, Candles were put out,
And none there was that durst renew their light:
Great flocks of sheep lay folded round about,
Well plucked and clipped bare into my sight,
If once on them she cast her eyes full bright,
The Wolves to yell, the Lion fell to roar,
Which did affright that Ladies heart full sore.
Upon a table spr^^^ (...) green,
Did lie two books, all (...) gilt, but closed,
That not one word within them might be seen:
For men's conceits were then to be imposed,
And that no good occasion might be losed,
Me thought assembly summoned was and called, Glasgow assembly 1610.

Of huble buble sheepheards hired and thralled.
Apes, horses, hounds met there, with many a rod,
The Leopard with aromatic smell, Du^bar.

As Lions great Lieutenant with his nod,
And mangled speech, the Lions will could tell,
Fenced the court, threatened if any mell
With matters there, but as he had directed,
That they should rue, and soundly be corrected.
Then stood there up a Wolf all clad in silk, Spois^^^

A Wolf indeed, yet lisping like a Lamb,
And made a sermon all of wool and milk,
To move the sheepheards hired for the same,
Consent the Lion there should win the game.
Causing all beasts and sheep for to believe,
Naught could be done without the lions leave.
And then forsooth the Wolfs must be advanced,
Seeing it was the Lions will and pleasure:
To sheep no greater curse there could have chance^
Yet did the Lion like them out of measure,
His royal crown, his dignity and treasure,
Without such statesmen could not stable stand,
Nor could he freely reign within the land.
With one consent the beasts about applauded,
None of the sheepheards there would co^tradict,
For hirelings rents the Lion was collauded,
No limitation, threatening was so thick:
Some for to say intended sick and sick,
But fear and gear, and falsehood all convoyed,
And so the Lion what he would enjoyed.
The dogs shall have their wonted cotes in cure,
The wolfs above the dogs high shall be placed,
To make the Lions crown stand firm and sure.
This being done, and wolfs thus greatly graced,
Reeled to and fro till they had all defaced.
The woeful woman in her bitter passion,
Powered out with tears this heavy lamentation.
I was of late a Queen of great renown,
My fame was spread abroad all Europe through,
In every province, and in every town,
I was well served both in land and Burgh.
No person high or low, so rude, so rough,
My laws or precepts rashly vilipended.
All stood such aw that I should be offended.
Through all the land my congregations
For to behold it was an heavenly sight,
The like whereof was not in other nations,
Such lively force, and such a lamp of light,
Such evidence of all spiritual might,
By divine doctrine throwing down the proud,
And feeding hungry souls with healthful food
A thunderbolt from pulpit, as from heaven,
You should have heard a fearful noise to make,
By force whereof a hard heart rent and riven,
The stubburn sinners stallward stomach quake,
The members tremble, and the head to ache.
With such a shout when doctrine was applied,
As would have made the stoutest courage flied.
Thus knocked first my Knox, and terrified
The Zanzummins, and all the hounds of hell,
My Lowson, Craig, and Durie magnified
That message which did scarre all fiendes fell,
My Bruce, my Rollock with a heavenly smell
Of fervent zeal and true sanctification,
Perfumed the hearts of many in that nation.
My Presbytries had such a comely order,
That all light Levits, and the lewdest limmer,
Either in Hieland, or the utmost border,
Did them regard: yet was it not far trimmer,
When Synods met in winter and in summer?
Tried Presbytries, and if peradventure,
Ought was amiss, redrest it by their censure.
My general assemblies terrible,
Like to an army with displayed Banners.
Controlled all were incorrigible
In lower Synods for their vicious manners,
With care suppressed all corrupt explainers
Of Scriptures; Papists, and all heretics
Were curbed, and contending Schismatickes.
With wine and honey did my Schools ore-flow.
When Melvil and his fellows had the charge,
Then did the youth in zeal and learning grow,
From thence I had Barjona and Boanerge,
When shepherds stipe^ds were not half so large,
Such were preferred as rightly were affected,
But Dogs and Swine, if known, were all rejected.
That lownes are now made Lords my heart it galls,
Worthies exiled, and the worst rewarded,
To see false knaves to govern, sore me thralls,
The grave and godly not to be regarded:
I mocked am while they me thus have farded,
My gold in glass, my searge is turned in scarlet,
Not like my self, but like to Babels harlot.
My crown and solid scepter they have re^t me,
And dressed me up in bruckle glass and reed,
And rest the rights wherewith my king infe^t me
Without the which my flock I cannot feed
As it becomes, with that heavenly bread.
They have upon me laid this heavy yoke
Of bite-sheep Bishops, as I were a stock.
This stu^bling-block has made from heaven to tumble
Some seeming stars, and made the^ change their tongue,
My weakling hogs and lambs are made to stu^ble,
Pastors to hear from point to point impugn,
That which before as truth from pulpits rung,
Are so offended, that in their hearts they murn,
Cast so in doubt, they know not where to turn.
Never was nation so solemnly sworn,
Under the pain of fearful condemnation,
To discipline defend, which now with scorn,
Is tramped under foot with fierce oppression.
For perfidie, and for such foul defection,
I am so stonisht that I cannot stand
For horror, but do tremble foot and hand.
Prayer and preaching are they not profaned,
And hireling pastors love to live at ease,
Sincerity and zeal all where disdained,
Who is not lukewarm nick-nam'd is precise,
Or not conform unto the Kirks decrees.
Say libertines, although their cause be wrongous,
The rod is rent wherewith before they dang us.
O that my people their apostasy
Would yet perceive, and seek to God their guide,
Would yet confess their vile hypocrisy,
Foresee at last what shall at length betide,
Flourish shall popery in its greatest pride.
This is but doubt the foretold day of trial:
Lord save thine own from filthy foul denial.
Consider, Lord, with pity, my complaint,
My glore is gone, I mourn for Elies fall,
And captive ark, I wish my life were spent.
Gone are the great assemblies general,
And few, or none, for their return do call.
The holy vessels are carried far away,
Wolf, hog and dog do what they please or may.
Me to comfort there is none of my lovers,
My friends are fled, and look to me a far;
Yea many of them are become reprovers,
They turn aside, and glance on me a skarre,
And some, like barking dogs, begin to gnarre,
By craft, by coin, by Kings authority,
What pleases men, is brought to pass on me.
I cry as if I felt some sharp incision,
When I behold the present misery,
I cry as if there were some great division
Into my bones, with pain to torment me.
Wild Boars and swine dwell in the sanctuary
Even bastard Bishops, worse than Moabites.
And more malicious than the Ammonites.
Like subtle foxes they have entered in.
Pretending me to honor and enrich,
Wild wolfs well wrapped in a weathers skin,
Have dealt by craft till I fell in the ditch:
Now on my belly they their tents do pitch,
And reign like lions over my sheep and hogs.
Convert them Lord, or let them die like dogs.
My candlestick is like to be removed
For sins of Pastors and of Congregations,
Which thee, o Lord, have unto wrath co^moved;
And have brought on these fearful desolations,
Pastors for gain and glore have left their stations.
Their wealth and honor is not worth a louse,
If Christ with grace be banished from the house.
Are these the fruits, O Scotland, of thy field?
Are these the grapes of such a glorious vine?
Are these the captains cast away their shields?
Are these the soldiers vowed their lives to tine?
I am ashamed that they are called mine.
They feeble are, I cannot say bewitched,
That thus do faint and flee, when scarsly touched
It is well seen the dastard spirit of slaverie
Has made thee for to quite thy liberty,
It is well seen the crafty spirit of knaverie
Has spoyld thee of thy magnanimity,
And brought thee under this servilitie.
No Kirk so glorious was in any land,
But now it seems it builded was on sand.
Will thou return to beastly Babylon?
Will thou return again to Egypt land?
Will thou forsake thy holy mount Sion?
And join thy self unto that cursed band?
Shall Antichrist thus have the upper hand,
And all my faithful servants never see
Return again their late captivity?
Then wish I Lord, that thou should make my head
A running well, whose waters ever grow,
Or that mine eyes were zetting spouts of lead,
Wherout my gushing tears may ever flow;
Yea some great flood, where barges great may row
That aye the earth may drink my tears as rain,
And aye my eyes may make it moist again.
O that I had the wings of some fair Dove,
That I might flee forth to the wilderness,
Lest I should seem their doings to approve,
Or bear with such professed wickedness;
But since (alas) I can it not redress,
I will go hence, and hide me in some hill,
Or in some hole where I may weep my fill.
Nor will I cease from sighs, O Lord, each day,
Till of my pains thou have compassion,
And do repair the breach and great decay
Of Sion, and her desolation,
And to my mourners send some consolation:
For I cannot permit an earthly King,
Or paughtie Prelates over my head to reign.
CONCLUSION.
Now certainly I thought she would have spended
More days and nights into her lamentation,
If that a fiery dragon had not ended
Her mournful moan in a most ugly fashion,
With horrible and fearful perturbation,
He spouted flames, and troubled all the air,
That she noght spoke, and I could hear na mair.
But suddenly down with a mighty host
Come MICHAEL with all his Angels clear.
And beat him down for all his fearful boast.
And carried thence with him his Lady dear.
Sure I was put into a fellon fear,
I found me faint, come home, and yet the vision
Made in my mind and heart a deep impression.
FINIS
ANOTHER DEPLORING of late the case of our Kirk.
NO pleasure of my pleasures all,
can pleasant be to me,
O dearest mother chaste, and all
for shame and skaith of thee.
Mine eyes power out salt streams of tears,
thy thraldom to deplore,
Mine heart does bleed, my lungs do leap,
and all my bowels roar,
My Diadem of gold and gemmes,
which did thy head adorn,
Is thrown to ground, in place whereof
thou crowned art with thorn.
Thy costly chains bestowed on thee,
by thy dear Spouse and Lord,
Are quite bereft, and thy fair neck
now compast with a cord.
Thy royal robe embroidered fair,
and lined with Lucerve,
Is turned to sack, which to behold
does make my flesh to sterve.
Thy bracelets rich, which did of late
decore thy comely hands,
Are rent from them, and fettered fast
into hard iron bands.
Thy golden rod changed in a reed.
by humane art compiled,
Thine holy Seals with papal stamp,
and Romish rites defiled.
Where faithful preachers with Christ's voice,
were wont to sound before,
Now bite-sheepe wolves into thine ears
with uncouth howlings roar.
Arminianisme and Papistrie,
now in thy pulpits sound,
Which like a daggers deadly dint,
does cause my stomach stound.
I and my mates sometime refresht
with dew from heaven that rained,
Now poisoned are with these foul dregs,
from Romish Bitch are strained.
Prince, People, Peers, and Prelates all,
awake, awake in time,
With tears, and sighs, and sobbes strive still
to expiate this crime.
Mr. ANDREW MELVINS EPIGRAMME upon the English Altar in Latin, and translated.
CVr stant clausi Anglis libri duo regia in ara
lumina caeca duo, pellubra sicca duo.
Number sensum cultumque Dei tenet Anglia clausum
Lumine caeca suo sorde sepulta sua
Romano ac ritu dum regalem instruit (...)
Purpuream pingit religiosa lupam.
The same in English.
ON Kingly Chapels altar stand,
blind candlestickes, closed books,
Dry silver basins, two of each.
Wherefore? says he who looks,
The mind and worship of the Lord
Dorh England so keep close
Blind in her sight, and buried in
her filthiness and dross.
And while with Roman rites she does
Her kingly altar dress,
Religiously the purpled whore,
to trim she does profess.
FINIS.

