THE CATHOLICS SVPPLICATION UNTO THE KINGS MAJESTY; FOR TOLERATION OF
Catholic Religion in England:

WITH SHORT NOTES OR Animaduersions in the margin.

Whereunto is annexed Parallel-wise, a Supplicatorie Counterpoyse of the
Protestants, unto the same most excellent Majesty.

Together with the reasons of both sides, for and against toleration of diverse
Religions.

BY WISDOM PEACE BY PEACE PLENTY
printer's or publisher's device

AT LONDON Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, for Edmund Weauer, and are to be sold
at his shop, at the great North door of Paul's Church. 1603.

THE CATHOLICS SVPPLICATION.
Most puissant Prince, and orient Monarch,
1SVch are the rare perfections and admirable gifts of wisdom, prudence,
valor and justice, wherewith the bountiful hand of Gods divine Majesty has
endued your Majesty, as in the depth of your provident judgment, we doubt not
but you foresee what concerns both the spiritual and temporal government of
all your kingdoms and dominions.

2 Notwithstanding your Graces most afflicted subjects and devoted servants,
the Catholics of England, partly to prevent sinister informations, which
happily may possess your sacred ears, before our answer be heard; partly
almost as men Impudent fellows! A manifest untruth, as all the world knows.
overwhelmed with persecutions for our consciences, we are enforced to have
speedy recourse in hope of present redress from your Highness, and to
present these humble lines unto your royal person to plead for us some
commiseration and favor.

3. What allegiance or duty What duty? Fidelity and loyalty: which the
Papists (by virtue of their Religion) can afford no potentate but the Pope.
can any These men hold that no temporal Prince ought to desire or expect any
thing at their hands which may prejudice the Pope.
temporal Prince desire or expect at his vassals hands, which we are not
addressed to True, conditionally if they think it be not prejudicial to the
Pope.
perform? How many Noblemen and worthy Gentlemen, most zealous in the
Catholic Religion, have endured, some loss of lands and livings, some exile,
others imprisonment, some the effusion of blood and life for the advancement
of your blessed Mothers The Papists judged Queen Elizabeth heretical and
justly deposed by the Bull of Pius V. and therefore thought themselves free
from their allegiance unto her; and so traitorously gave away her right unto
another. Otherwise how could any pretend RIGHT unto the scepter of Albion,
Queen Elizabeth being yet living? and there is great difference between RIGHT
and TITLE.
right unto the scepter of Albion? Nay, whose finger did ever ache, but
Catholics, for your What loyal hearts Papists bear the Kings Majesty,
appears by their sundry conspiracies against his sacred person from time to
time: especially by that in the year 1591, recorded in public print.
Majesty's present title and dominion?

4 How many If any so fled it was not for their good behavior: and wise
Princes do well know how to esteem of such men's offers.
fled to your Court offering themselves as hostages for their friends, to live
and die in your Graces quarrel, if ever Adversary had opposed himself against
the Who forged and furthered the Jnfantaes pretended title, but Papists? yet
now they acknowledge Gods right and their own madness.
equity of your cause? If this they attempted with their Good and loyal
subjects forsooth, unto their own Prince in the mean while. Can traiterous
hearts unto Queen Elizabeth, be good subjects unto King James?
Princes disgrace, to obtain your Majesty's grace; what will they do? nay,
what will they not do, to live without disgrace in your Graces favor?

5 The maine of this Realm, if we respect Religion (setting petty sects
aside) consists upon A manifest slander of our Christian Church and S^a^^.
four parts: Protestants, who have dominiered all the former Queens days:
Puritanes, who have crept up apace among them: Atheists or Politicians, who
were bred upon their brawles and contentions in A flat untruth: the dissension
between them is only concerning external matters of discipline and
ceremonies, which belong rather to the policy of the Church, then to faith and
doctrine.
matters of faith: And Catholics, who as they are opposite to all, so are they
detested of all, An argument from the staff to the corner.
because Error was ever an enemy to Truth.

6 Hardly al, or any of the first, two three can be They would feign suppress
the Kings Majesty also among other Protestants, if they could tell how. God
preserve his grace from such subjects, Amen.
suppressed: and therefore we beseech your Majesty to yield us as much favor,
as Will you have as much favor as the Atheists have? Like lips, like lettuce.
others of contrary religion (to that which shall be publicly professed in
England) shall obtain at your hands. For if our fault be No likeness at all.
Protestants are loyal subjects; so are not Papists. Atheists we have none, at
least none that profess themselves so to be: so would God we had no Papists.
Puritan, is a name proper unto the Anabaptists and Famelians, whom our state
does no way favor.
like, or less, or none at all; in equity, our punishment ought to be like,
or less, or none at all.

7 The Gates, Arches, and Pyramides of France proclaimed the present King Pater
patriae and pacis restitutor, because that kingdom being well nigh torn in
pieces with civil wars, and made a pray to foreign foes, was by his
provident wisdom and valor acquitted in it self, and hostile strangers
expelled; the which he principally effected Non causa pro causa. Read the
Counterpoyse.
by condescending to tolerate them of an adverse religion, to that was openly
professed.

8 Questionless, dread Sovereign, the kingdom of England, by cruel An
impudent lie.
persecution of Catholics, has been almost odious to all Christian Nations:
Trade and traffic is And all by reason of Catholics treason, rebellion, and
other disloyal practices and stratagems.
decayed, wars and blood has seldom ceased, Subsidies and taxes never so
many, discontented minds innumerable; all which your Majesty's princely If the
Papists have practiced treason and rebellion in time of their restraint; what
will they not dare to attempt, having further liberty?
conniuencie to your humble Suppliants, the afflicted Catholics, will easily
redress, especially at your Highness ingresse. 3. Reg. 12.7.
Si loquaris ad eos verba lenia, erunt tibi serui cunctis diebus, said the sage
Counselors of Solomon to The Kings Majesty is not such an infant in
government, but he knows, No subject can faithfully serve two masters, the
Pope and his liege King.
Rehoboam. For enlargement after affliction resembles a pleasant gale after a
vehement tempest: and a benefit in distress doubleth the value thereof.

9 How grateful will it be to all Syrenicall fond suggestions, as if his
Highness cared what account the Turk or Pope should make of him.
Catholic Princes abroad, and honorable to your Majesty, to understand how
Queen Causeless complaints, as his Majesty well knows.
Elizabeth's severity is changed into your royal clemency: and that the
lenity of a man reedified that which the misinformed anger of a woman
destroyed: That the Lion rampant is passant, whereas the passant had been
rampant? How acceptable shall all your subjects be to all Catholic countries,
who are now almost abhorred Of none but of the wicked.
of all, when they shall perceive your Highness prepares not pikes and prisons
for the professors of their faith, but permits them Temples and Altars for
the use of their Religion? Then shall we see with our eyes and touch with our
fingers that happy benediction of Esaias in this land, Esaias 2.4.
that A plain non sequitur; for you speak by contraries.
swords are changed into ploughs, and lances in to sithes. And all Nations
admiring us will say, Hi sunt semen cui benedixit Dominus.

10 We request no more favor at your Graces hands, then that we may securely
Yea, but the Magistrate is keeper of the whole Decalogue; whereby Idolatry is
flatly forbidden.
profess that Catholic Religion, which all your happy Predecessors
professed, from Popery was not hatched in Donaldus his days.
Donaldus the first converted, unto your Majesty's peerless Mother last
martyred.

11 A Religion Woe be to them that call darkness light, Esaias 5.20. This whole
section is a plain begging of the Question.
venerable for antiquity, maiesticall for So is Turcisme and Paganism.
amplitude, constant for continuance, irreprehensible for doctrine, inducing to
all kind of You would say Treason and Rebellion against lawful Princes.
virtue and piety, dissuading from all sin and wickedness. A Religion beloved
by all primitive Pastors, established by all Oecumenicall Councels, vpheld by
all ancient Doctors, maintained by the first and most Christian Emperors,
recorded almost alone in all Ecclesiastical Histories, sealed with the blood
of millions of Martyrs, adorned with the virtues of so many Confessors,
beautified with the purity of thousands of Virgins, so A fit commendation for
Papistrie, to be nothing but mere sensuality. Malum ouum mali corui.
conformable to natural sense and reason, and finally so agreeable to the
sacred text of Gods word and Gospel. The free use of this Religion we
request, if not in public Churches, at least in private houses; if not with
approbation, yet with toleration, without molestation.

12 Assure your Grace that howsoever some Mutato nomine, de te, o Papista,
Fabula narratur.
Protestants or Puritanes, incited by moral honesty of life, or innated
instinct of nature, or for fear of some temporal punishment, pretend obedience
unto your Highness laws; yet certainly the only Catholics for conscience sake
observe them. For they defending that Princes precepts and statutes oblige no
subject under the A gross calumniation: as if we defended that the wicked for
disobedience should feel no penalty, but only should be disquieted with the
guilt of sin: and not rather that penalty is an infallible consequence of
the guilt, if both be not taken away by Christ.
penalty of sin, will little care in conscience to transgress them which
principally are tormented with the guilt of sin. But Catholics confessing
merit in True, in obeying the Popes decrees and commandments, but not Princes
precepts, except it stand with the Popes good liking.
obeying, and demerite in transgressing, cannot but in soul be grievously Yea,
but all these tortures will soon be alaied, even by one breath of a Babylonian
Bull.
tortured, at the least preuarication thereof.

13 Wherefore most merciful Sovereign, we your long afflicted subjects, in
all dutiful submission, Timeas Danaos, vel dona ferentes. As if the Pope by
one word were not able to dispense with all this: and to cause any Papist to
do any thing even at a beck under pain of the greater curse and eternal
damnation of body and soul, in case of refusal. O Lord open the eyes of
these men.
protest before the Majesty of God and all his holy Angels, as loyal
obedience and as immaculate allegiance unto your Grace, as ever did faithful
subjects in England or Scotland unto your Highness progenitors; and intend as
sincerely with our goods and lives to serve you, as ever did the loyallest
Israelites King David, or the trusty legions the Roman Emperors.

14 And thus expecting your Majesty customarie favor and gracious bounty,
we rest your devoted Suppliants to him whose hands do manage the hearts of
Kings, and with reciprocate mercy will requite the merciful.

Your sacred Majesty's most devoted Servants, The Catholics of England.

THE PROTESTANTS COVNTERPOYSE.
Most puissant Prince and mighty Monarch,
1SVch are the rare perfections and admirable gifts of wisdom, prudence,
valor, justice, religion and godliness, wherewith the bountiful hand of Gods
divine Majesty has endued your Majesty, as in the depth of your provident
judgment, we doubt not but you foresee what concerns both the spiritual and
temporal government of al your kingdoms and dominions.

2 Notwithstanding your Graces most faithful subjects and devoted servants,
the Protestants of England, partly to prevent sinister suggestions against the
peace of our Church and Commonwealth, which happily might importune your
sacred Majesty: partly almost (not long sithence) as men in danger to be
exposed as a pray unto the enemy, to be overwhelmed with persecutions for our
consciences, we are enforced to have speedy recourse for present redress from
your Highness, and to present these humble lines unto your royal person, to
plead for us your Majesty's gracious favor and princely patronage.

3 What allegiance or duty can any King or earthly Prince desire or expect at
his vassals hands, which we either do not presently yield, or are not
addressed to perform? How many Noblemen and worthy Gentlemen, most zealous
in the true Christian Religion, have ever specially respected your Majesty's
sacred person? How many have most carefully and religiously, for conscience
sake, in our late sovereign Queen Elizabeth, of blessed memory, her happy
days, for the satisfying of their own duty, and the establishing of the
ignorant and doubtful minds of their friends and favorites, privately
without contention, breach of law, or disloyalty to their Prince, conferred
together and explicated your Highness just and lawful title, for the
advancement of your successiue right unto the Scepter of Albion? Nay, who ever
trauersed, but For all Papists intended to set up some one of their sect and
faction: especially the Infanta of Spain.
Protestants, for your Majesty's present title and dominion?

4 If this they did in the life of our late Sovereign, not to flatter and
dissemble with your Grace, but for justice and equity, for truth and
conscience cause: what will they do? nay, what will they not do, to live in
grace, without molestation or disgrace in your Graces favor? Now therefore the
hereditarie right of the Scepter, being lawfully deuolued unto your Majesty,
who is he amongst us, that will not fly unto your Court offering himself as
See the Edict of the Peers of England Martij 24. 1603.
hostage for his friends, to lose lands and livings, to the effusion of his
dearest blood, to live and die in your Graces quarrel, if ever adversary
shall once dare to oppose himself against the equity of your cause?

5 The maine of this Realm, if we respect Religion, consists upon two parts:
Papists, who in the latter years of our late Queens time, See the Queens
edict, Nouemb. 5. 1602. Anno Reg. Regin. Eliz. 44.
by general neglect in executing of good laws and the slumber of justice,
have crept up apace amongst us: And Protestants, who as they are opposite to the
Papists; so are they detested of them: because Error was ever an enemy to
Truth.

6 These two cannot possibly stand together: 2. Cor. 6.14. and 15.
For what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? And what communion
has light with darkness? what concord has Christ with Belial? or what part
has the believer with the Infidel; the Christian Protestant, with the Popish
Idolatour? And therefore we beseech your Majesty to afford us as much favor,
as other Princes of contrary religion (to that which is publicly professed in
England) do yield unto their Subjects. Other Princes tolerate no Protestants
to live and serve their God in spirit and Truth, amongst their Popish Subjects:
And we hope your Majesty will tolerate no Papists to live and to blaspheme our
God with Idolatry and false worship among your Christian Subjects: For if our
case be like, or better then theirs is; in equity, our usage ought to be like,
or better then theirs is.

7 The Gates, arches, and pyramides of France proclaimed the present King
Pater patriae and pacis restitutor, because that kingdom being welnigh torn
in pieces with civil wars, and made a pray to foreign foes, was by his
provident wisdom and valor, acquitted in it self, and hostile strangers
expelled; the which he principally effected, by Vide Ant. Arnaldi actionem
contr. Jesuit. Et, Orationem ingenua^ and veram ad Regem Galliae de Restitut.
Iesuitarum. Lugdun. an. 1602.
adiudging the Jesuits, the firebrands of sedition and rebellion, to
perpetual exile out of his kingdom. So shall your Highness be truly called
Pater patriae and fidei defensor, if you vindicate your own sacred Person from
the treacherous attempts of hollow hearted Subjects, your Realms from the
invasions and assaults of foreign foes, and the Majesty of the everliving
God, from being blasphemed and profaned by vile Idolatours: all which you shall
wisely and valorously effect, by adiudging seditious Jesuits, treacherous
Priests, and all their Scholars the stirrers up of commotions and broils, to
perpetual banishment out of your kingdoms and dominions.

8 Questionless, dread Sovereign, the kingdoms of England and Ireland, by
unnatural, disloyal and traitorous practices of cruel Romish Catholics, Who
rebelled at any time sithence the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign but
Papists? Who were rebels, compartners, abbettors and favorites, but Papists?
and consequently who were the cause of so many subsidies and taxes, but the
same men?
have been almost wasted, and made a spectacle to all Christian Nations. Trade
and traffike is much decayed, wars and blood has seldom ceased, subsidies
and taxes never so many, discontented minds innumerable; all which your
Majesty's princely regard of the humble suit of your devoted Suppliants, the
faithful Protestants, will easily redress, especially at your Highness See
(...), lib. 2. page 29.
ingresse. 1. King. 18.21.
Si Jehovah sit Deus ipse, sequere eum; sin autem istorum Baal, sequere eum,
was the wise counsel of holy Eliah unto the people of Israel. But to admit of
two contrary Religions, were to halt between two opinions.

9 How grateful will it be to all Christian Princes abroad, and honorable to
your Majesty, to understand how Queen Elizabeth's sincerity is continued by
your royal constancy, and that the courage of a man reedified that which the
not- informed Justice of a woman winked at? That the Lion rampant trampleth
under foot the enemies of God and his truth, of their Prince and Country;
whereas the passant had been nothing less then rampant? How acceptable shall
all your subjects be to all Christian countries, who lately feared the
apostasy of your kingdoms, when they shall perceive your highness still
maintains true Religion, and See (...), Lib. 1. page 19.
permits not Idolatrous Papists to perturbe and molest the sincere
professors of the true faith, or to profane the worship of God, by profession
and use of their superstition. Then shall we see with our eyes, and touch with
our fingers that happy benediction of Esaias in this land, that Esaias. 2.4.
swords are changed into ploughes, and lances into sithes: And all Nations
admiring us will say, Hisunt semen, cui benedixit dominus.

10 We request no more favor at your Graces hands, then that you would compel
all your Subjects to seek the Lord and his face continually; that you would
See (...), Lib. 1. page 19.
prohibit Idolatry, repress blasphemy, abolish false worship, and cause all,
within your dominions, to embrace that only true religion which your happy
predecessors King Edward the sixth, and Queen Elizabeth of blessed and famous
memory, constantly maintained; yea which also your sacred Majesty has ever
hitherto with singular See (...), Lib. 1. page 5. 20. and 21.
constancy, and does now zealously and sincerely profess.

11 A Religion venerable for antiquity, maiesticall for comely order,
admirable for power and virtue, certain for truth, irreprehensible for
Doctrine, inducing to all kind of virtue and piety, dissuading from all sin
and wickedness. A religion approved by God himself, allowed by his wisdom,
and confirmed by his holy spirit, rooted in the elect, beloved of all primitive
pastors, established by the best Oecumenicall councels, vpheld by all ancient
Doctors, maintained by the first and most christian Emperors, recorded in the
holy Scriptures, sealed with the blood of millions of Martyrs, and constantly
professed by all holy confessors, that never was doubted of but by her enemies,
never saw change but of Heretics, being the only Religion that is taught in
Gods sacred word and Gospel. Popish Idolatry it is that we crave to be
repressed, if not by a new decree, at leastwise by strict execution of such
good laws that in such cases are already enacted.

12 Assure your Grace that howsoever some Papists incited by moral honesty of
life, or innated instinct of nature, or for fear of some temporal punishment,
pretend obedience unto your highness laws; yet certainly the only Protestants
for conscience sake observe them. For they defending these dangerous and
damnable Vide Orat. ad Reg. Galliae de Restit. Jesuit. and Eman. Sa. in
aphorism. Confessariorum. and Bellarm. lib. de Exempt. Clericorum.
propositions, 1. That the Pope has power to excommunicate Kings, 2. That he
has power to absolve subjects from their faith and allegiance, 3. That the
Pope may depose Princes from their Scepter and Crown, and give the same unto
another, 4. That any private man may be made executioner to murder or to
poison the excommunicated King, 5. That faith must not be kept with Heretics,
6. That whosoever is not within the communion of the Romish Church is an
Heretic, and consequently that your highness is such a one, 7. That no
Cleargie-man can commit treason against any temporal King, because he is not
the Kings subject, but the Popes; and such like: care not in conscience, at the
Popes beck, nay think it high merit, if he so command, not only to
transgress your laws, but also to lay violent hands and to murder your sacred
person, which God forbid. But Protestants, having learned to Matthew. 22.21
give unto Caesar the things of Caesar, and to God the things of God; and to
obey the Romans 13.1.
higher powers, which are the ordinance of God, cannot but in soul be
grievously tortured for the least preuarication of the Magistrates just,
necessary, or convenient laws.

13 Wherefore most gracious Sovereign, we your euer-faithfull subjects, in
all dutiful submission, vow and protest before the Majesty of God and all his
holy Angels, as loyal obedience and as immaculate allegiance unto your Grace,
as ever did faithful subjects in England or Scotland unto your Highness
progenitors and predecessors; and intend as sincerely with our goods and lives
to serve you, as ever did the loyallest Israelites King David, or the trusty
legions the Roman Emperors.

14 And thus, not doubting of your Majesty's constant profession of true
Religion, and godly care for the rooting out of all Idolatry, we rest your
devoted suppliants to him whose hands do manage the hearts of Kings, and with
reciprocate Honor, will honor them that honor him.

Your sacred Majesty's most faithful Servants, The Protestants of England.

A BRIEF CONSIDERATION OF THE CATHOLICS REASONS FOR TOLERATION OF THEIR
Religion in England, intimated in their Supplication to his Highness.
I. REASON.
The Catholics are ready to perform any allegiance or duty that the King
can desire or expect at their hands. Out of the 3. Section of the Supplication.


Ergo, It may please his Majesty to grant them a toleration of their Religion.

ANSWER.
I. To the Antecedent.
1 The Antecedent must be understood conditionally, vid. If the King will
grant a toleration, then the Papists say they will be dutiful; else they will
not: but will run on the old bias again for practice and treachery against
his Royal Person and the State, as they were wont in Queen Elizabeth's time.
But if they will not be dutiful Subjects for conscience sake, as they are
bound to be: Our dread Sovereign (in my opinion) shall have small good of
their mercenarie service.

2 Popish Religion in the Articles thereof, is treason against the lawful
authority and state of our King. See the Counterpoyse, Sect. 12. Therefore
whatsoever the Papists, either protest or pretend, it skilles not, they can be
no loyal Subjects, so long as the Pope may discharge them from allegiance to
their Prince. See note. 35.

3 By virtue of Popish Religion, the Ecclesiastical state challenges
immunitie and exemption from his Highness power, judicial courts, and in case
of ordinary contributions; they withdraw their allegiance from the King, unto
the obedience of a foreign Potentate, denying him an absolute power in his
own Dominions.

II. To the Consequence.
1 Howsoever his Majesty, in policy, might wish all Papists within his
Dominions, to be dutiful and obedient Subjects: yet cannot his Highness allow
and accept of the course leading thereunto, unless he find it warranted by
the law of God; such as toleration of Popish Idolatry can never be.

2 The practices of the Papists being uncertain, it fits not the deep reach
of a Prince, to remedy uncertain and lesser accidents, by opening free
passage to more assured and greater perils.

II. REASON.
Out of the third and fourth section.
The Catholics have been very forward in maintaining and defending the Kings
just and lawful title to the Scepter of Albion.

Ergo, His Majesty might do well to gratify them with a toleration.

ANSWER.
I. To the Antecedent.
1 If the Papists were so firm (as now they say) for the Kings lawful title:
they would not have been so forward for the Infantaes pretended title, as they
have.

2 Grant they were so forward for his Majesty's title: yet it is very credible
that they were but mercenarie Iudases, for Quid vultis mihi dare, and ego
tradam etc. They would do somewhat upon hope of toleration, else just nothing
for conscience and equity.

3 This which they pretend should seem to be in Queen Elizabeth's days, which
(if it were so) on their part, was great disloyalty to their Prince. And it
may well be thought that traitorous hearts to Queen Elizabeth, can be none of
the faithfullest Subjects to King James.

II. To the Consequence.
1 Suppose it lawful in Queen Elizabeth's days for Catholics to fly from
their country, and to be factiously forward for the Kings lawful title; they
did but their duty. Yet is it not lawful for his Majesty to permit the free
exercise of Idolatry, which were plain impiety.

2 If this also were lawful in it self, yet were it no policy to grant the
Papists a toleration, considering their intention and aim for alteration,
their number, dependencie, confederacy foreign and domestike, and other
correspondent abilities, strong and to be suspected.

III. REASON.
Puritanes and Atheists, being of contrary Religion to the Protestants, are
tolerated in England. Out of the 6. Section.


Ergo, His Majesty may, with like reason, tolerate the free exercise of the
Catholic Religion.

ANSWER.
I. To the Antecedent.
1 Such as do scandalouslie or schismaticallie withdraw themselves from our
public congregations, and refuse to serve the Lord together with us, are not
permitted but punished by our laws.

2 Puritanes (as they term them) are not contrary to the Protestants in
Religion. See before note 11.

3 As for Atheism, it is not publicly professed in England, and therefore
there can be no permission thereof. See note 15.

II. To the Consequence.
1 Upon supposed toleration of the factious and schismatic Puritan, there
is no reason for toleration of the Papist; for diverse causes, videl.

I. The Puritan holds no opinion directly opposite either to the Majesty of
God, or his Highness Sovereignty: But the Papist does. II. If the Puritaine did
offend any of these ways, yet should not the Papist be admitted: for so the
number of bad subjects should be increased.
2 The Papist is more dangerous then the Puritaine or Atheist, by reason of
his opinion of learning, of his disloyal carriage, of his number and
dependencie at home and abroad.

IIII. REASON.
The French King has granted a toleration of both Religions, Out of the 7.
Section.
which is the cause of quietness in his kingdom.

Ergo, The King of England may do so likewise.

ANSWER.
I. To the Antecedent.
1 The cause of quietness in France was not toleration, but the banishment of
the Jesuits. See the Counterpoyse Sect. 7.

2 The contrary religion in France is tolerated of necessity and disabilitie
of the Catholics part to expugne and ruin the other, as it was in the time of
Charles the ninth, and Henry the third.

3 Such as the French King does tolerate, do in opinion derogate nothing from
his Sovereignty, nor in action attempt any thing against his person: But it is
and ever was otherwise with Papists in England.

II. To the Consequence.
1 Men live by the rule of Reason and law, not by examples.

2 The French King holds correspondence in religion with the Pope; therefore
in a question of the worship and service of the Lord, he cannot be a fit
president to a Christian Prince professing the Gospel.

3 Though the French King permits the free exercise of the Gospel, a
doctrine lawful in it self and holy, which derogateth nothing from Princes
sovereignty: yet may not the King of England permit Papistrie, the doctrine
being Antichristian and unlawful in it self, joined also with dishonor and
peril.

4 The French King allows toleration to such who acknowledge him for their
lawful Sovereign, who never plotted against his Crown and life, nor can be
induced upon any suggestion so to do: whereas his Majesty of England is
solicited to yield it to such who hold that he is an Heretic, that he may be
diuested, by the Popes Bull, of his imperial Crown and regalities; who have
disposed of their allegiance to a foreign Prince; who never cease from
proiects and practices for alteration; who in fittest opportunity, upon mandate
from the Pope, are ready to take arms for the subversion of his Scepter and
state, of his royal person, and of the Gospel.

V. REASON.
Upon grant of toleration England will not be odious to all Christian Nations
for cruel persecution of Catholics, Out of the 8. Section.
as now they are.

Ergo, Toleration should in good reason be allowed and maintained.

ANSWER.
I. To the Antecedent.
1 England is not odious to all Christian Nations, neither did it ever (within
the supposed time) persecute Catholics, but punish Traitors.

Toleration being admitted, yet will not such as hate England cease to hate her
still, because of the disgrace that must rely upon Popery; his Majesty, the
State and almosy all the subjects professing the Gospel.

II. To the Consequence.
1 To grant toleration that England might not be slaundered for proceedings
against Papists, and hated by those of that faction, were for curing of the
headache, to knock out the brains.

If we consider the parties that hate us, the insufficient ground they have for
their hating us, the little measure of prejudice or damage that comes
thereof: and on the other side the inevitable dishonor, the danger and
mischief of toleration; we shall see that the former is not worthy any
regard, when there is question of the latter.

3 The surcease of Catholike-hate being altogether uncertain and accidentarie,
it cannot be in policy a sufficient ground for embracing of dangerous
toleration.

VI REASON.
Toleration will stay hostile attempts of Catholics against the Realm; and so
Traffic will be free, Out of the 8. Section.
Subsidies and Taxes shall not be so many, etc.

Ergo, Toleration is to be embraced.

ANSWER.
I. To the Antecedent.
1 It is not the cause of Religion (though it has been some part of their
pretense) that embarked enemies against this land: But violent humors of
ambition to a Monarchy, of malice and revenge upon supposed indignities; the
securing of their own greatness by impayring their Neighbors, etc. therefore
toleration cannot redress hostility.

2 Suppose Religion the cause, yet it is not toleration, but alteration that
they aim at, and therefore their hostile practices and machinations are
unlikely to cease for toleration.

3 Hostile attempts may cease without toleration; as by disabilitie on the
adverse part, necessity, compulsion, etc.

II. To the Consequence.
1 Evil must not be done that good may come thereof: Toleration of Idolatry
cannot be denied to be evil.

2 Of two evils the lesser is to be chosen. Hostile attempts may endaunger the
body: Toleration damneth the soul.

VII. REASON.
Toleration will be grateful to all Catholic Princes abroad. Out of the 9.
Section.


Ergo, It ought to be granted.

ANSWER.
I. To the Antecedent.
1 Alteration would be more grateful unto Catholic Princes, then toleration:
should alteration therefore be granted?

II. To the Consequence.
1 Should his royal Majesty grant an impiety, and hazard his royal estate
and person, yea his subjects and the Gospel, to gratify Catholic Princes?

2 Whether it be right in the sight of God, to obey you rather then God,
iudgeye, Act. 4.19.

3 If I should please men, I were not the servant of Christ, says the Apostle,
Galat. 1.10. (...)

VII. REASON.
Out of the 9. Section.
All English subjects would be acceptable to all Catholic countries, who are
now almost abhorred of all, if toleration were granted.

Ergo, Toleration is not to be denied.

ANSWER.
I. To the Antecedent.
1 It is false that Englishmen are abhorred of all Catholic countries,
otherwise then for their religion, as all other Protestants be.

2 Suppose a toleration; yet dissension in religion extinguisheth acceptance
in affection: therefore it is not probable that English subjects being
Protestants in religion, should be esteemed and accepted among such as are of a
contrary faction.

3 Nullus est fidus eorum affectus quorum est diuersa fides: says Hierome.

4 Not toleration, but plain alteration would (peradventure) make English
subjects acceptable.

II. To the consequence.
1 No sin must be committed against God for gaining of particular advantage.

2 It is a gross error in policy, in hope of idle and accidentarie
reputation, to make choice of certain mischief.

IX. REASON.
Out of the 9. Section.
Upon toleration of Catholic Religion, we shall enjoy assured peace; Swords
shall be changed into ploughes and lances into sithes.

Ergo, Toleration is to be admitted.

ANSWER.
I. To the Antecedent.
1 Religion is not the cause of disturbance of peace and hostile attempts
against this kingdom: as has been said already.

2 If it were the cause: yet the Gospel, which is the thing they would
extirpate, should remain still for all toleration; so that wars are not
likely to cease.

3 Toleration would hatch simultation, iarres, discord, dissension, and at last
deadly war, rather then peace.

4 If Papists still attempted treasons in time of their restraint in Queen
Elizabeth's days: is it not probable, that having more liberty, they would be
more treacherous? especially the Popes malice against the Gospel being still
the same, and their obedience to him not renounced?

II. To the Consequence.
1 Upon supposition of peace ensuing upon toleration, which is not likely: yet
cursed be that peace, when it cannot be procured, but by sinning against God.

2 Maledicta sit omnis concordia, destituta sinceritate veritatis; says
Irenaeus.

X. REASON.
Out of the 10. Section.
All the Kings happy predecessors professed the Catholic Religion.

Ergo, His Majesty ought (at least) to grant a toleration.

ANSWER.
I. To the Antecedent.
1 The Antecedent is false: Popery was hatched but of late times.

2 Henry the eight, Edward the sixth, and Queen Elizabeth of happy memory,
(to speak of no other) were the Kings predecessors, yet they professed not the
Popish Religion.

II. To the Consequence.
1 If his Majesty's predecessors had professed Popery, yet that can be no
warrant for his Highness so to do; because we must not live by examples, but by
laws and reason.

2 It is not antiquity, nor custom that makes a thing lawful in it self;
neither must we so much regard the ancient way, as the good way. See Matthew.
15.2. to the 12. Act. 7.51.52.1. Pet. 1.18.

3 Our Fathers must not be followed in evil. Be ye not as your fathers, Zach.
1.4. Walk not in the ordinances of your fathers, neither observe their
manners, nor defile your selves with their Idols. Ezech. 20.18. See also Psalm.
78.8. Psalm. 95.9. Amos. 2.4.

XI. REASON.
Out of the 11. Section.
The Catholic Religion is ancient, irreprehensible in doctrine, agreeable to
Gods word, etc.

Ergo, Catholic Religion ought to be tolerated.

ANSWER.
The Antecedent is an impudent begging of the question, and can never be
proved: therefore the Consequence falls of it self.

XII. REASON.
Out of the 12. Section.
The Catholics only serve the King, and observe his laws for conscience.

Ergo, Catholics ought to be tolerated.

ANSWER.
Thy reason is of the same nature with the first reason and is there answered.
See also the Counterpoyse Setion 12.

So much for the Catholics reasons for toleration: Now w^ will consider the
Protestants reasons against it.

THE PROTESTANTS REASONS AGAINST TOLERATION OF POPERY in England.
THe reasons against toleration of Papisticall religion in this land, are of
two sorts: 1. Theological, drawn from the scriptures either expressly, or by
necessary consequence. 2. Politic, taken from consideration of the particular
state of this kingdom, or from the religion and persons of the Papists.

I. REASON.
Whatsoever is offensive unto God, is not to be admitted.

Toleration of Papistrie is an offense unto God.

Ergo, Toleration is not to be admitted.

Only the assumption comes in question, which I prove by this Prosyllogisme.

Toleration of Idolatry is offensive unto God.

Toleration of Papistrie is toleration of Idolarie.

Ergo, Toleration of Papistrie is offensive vno God.

The proposition is manifest, because Id^latrie it self is offensive unto God;
and consequently the exercise and permission of the same. A C^ristian Prince
being the keeper of both tables of he Decalogue, should not suffer Idolators t^
defile the worship of God within his dominions.

The assumption no Protestant can deny; seeing popish worship of God is
Idolatrous worship: wherefore it needs no proof. Neither have I penned these
reasons for Papists.

II. REASON.
Whatsoever the good Kings of Judah and other godly Princes are commended for
in the scriptures, that Christian Princes ought to imitate.

But the good Kings of Judah were commended for expelling of contrary
worshippers, and repressing of Idolatry.

Ergo, Christian Princes ought to expel contrary worshippers, and to repress
Idolatry in like manner.

The proposition is manifest, for whatsoever is written, is written for our
instruction.

The assumption is proved by induction: Asa brake down the altars and images
of strange Gods, 2. Chron. 14.3. Iehoshaphat removed the high places and
groves, 2. Chron. 17.6. Josiah put down the Chemarims, that were Idolatrous
Priests, 2. King. 23.5. Jacob would not suffer Idolatry to be committed in his
house, but buried all the Images under an Oak, Genes. 35.5. All which were
commended for so doing.

III. REASON.
Whatsoever is discommended in other Kings, is to be eschewed of Christian
Princes.

Toleration of contrary worshippers and permission of Idolatry is
discommended in other Kings.

Ergo, Toleration is to be eschewed of Christian Princes.

The assumption is proved by the examples of such Kings as had not taken away
the high places; as Iehoash, 2. King. 12.3. and Azariah, 2. King. 15.4.

IIII. REASON.
Halting between two opinions is not lawful.

Toleration of two contrary religions, is halting between two opinions.

Ergo, Toleration of two contrary religions is unlawful.

The proposition is clear out of the words of Eliah, How long will ye halt
between two opinions? If the Lord be God, follow him: But if Baal be, go
after him, 1. King. 18.21. And also out of Zephan. 1.5. I will stretch out mine
hand upon them that worship and swear by the Lord, and swear by Malcham.

The Assumption is manifest, for whosoever causes another to sin, is said to
commit that sin himself; so David is said to murder Vriah.

V. REASON.
That which would be a means to obdurate and harden Papists in their
superstition, is to be avoided.

Toleration of their religion, is a means to harden them, whereas otherwise
there might be hope of them, etc.

Ergo, Toleration of Popish religion is to be avoided.

VI. REASON.
That which would be offensive unto all Christian Princes and people, is not to
be admitted.

Toleration of Popery in England, would be offensive to all Christian Princes
and people.

Ergo, Toleration is not to be admitted.

VII. REASON.
Whatsoever would be dishonorable unto his excellent Majesty, is not to be
admitted.

Toleration of popery, would be very dishonorable unto his Highness. For he
has ever hitherunto constantly professed the Gospel; and now enjoys a
kingdom wherein the Gospel is established; besides that the glory of a King
proceeds from intertaining such constitutions and decrees in religion, as God
himself has enacted and delivered.

Ergo, Toleration is not to be admitted.

VIII. REASON.
Whatsoever is not for his Majesty's saftie, nor for the safety of his
kingdom, that is not to be admitted.

Toleration of Papists is not for his Majesty's safety, nor for the safety of
his kingdom; because it is impossible for Papists to be loyal subjects to any
Protestant Prince, as has been often declared before.

Ergo, Fie upon toleration of disloyal Papists.

IX. REASON.
Whatsoever would breed confusion and disquietnes in the land, that is to be
avoided.

Toleration of Papistrie would breed confusion and vprores in the land. For it
would tend to the antiquating and repealing of diverse profitable laws already
enacted against Popish practices; and harten the Papists to perpetrate any
villainy, etc.

Ergo, Toleration of Popery is to be avoided.

X. REASON.
That which in Papists will double their allegiance and devotion to the Pope,
is not to be tolerated.

Toleration of Popery will double the Papists allegiance and devotion unto
the Pope. For immunitie and freedom of profession will draw on more followers,
and obdurate them in their blindness.

Ergo, Out upon toleration of Popery.

XI. REASON.
Whatsoever will treble the Papists detestation of our religion, and raise
their desires of a full and entire reestablishment, that is to be abandoned.

Toleration of Popery will treble the Papists detestation of our religion, and
raise up their desires of a full and entire reestablishment, as is manifest.

Ergo, Toleration of Popery is to be abandoned.

XII. REASON.
If the Pope in none of his territories, nor where he has absolute
jurisdiction, does grant any liberty to Protestants, but tolerateth rather
Jews and Turks; and persecuteth Protestants with fire and sword: neither is
it any reason that his Popish Caterpillars should receive any such toleration
in any Protestants dominions. For what measure they meat unto others, the same
should others meat unto them.

But the Antecedent is true: otherwise they would repeal their Edicts and
decrees against Protestants; cancel and frustrate the power of the bloody
Inquisition; spare all search after their Persons; surcease their confiscations
and all criminal process against them.

Ergo, The Consequent is true also, videl. That there is no reason to grant
the Papists any toleration of their religion.

XIII. REASON.
If the Papists themselves do hold that King to be a stark Atheist and to
have no sense of religion, which admits contrary worshippers and mixture of
religions: then do they intolerable injury unto our King in soliciting his
Highness to permit such freedom and mixture of religions.

But the Antecedent is true; VVestonus de Triplici Hominis officio, lib. 3.
cap. 14. page 186.
as may be proved out of their own writings; Religio promiscua principem
ostendit Atheum. And again, Qui magistratus liberum suis facit promiscuum vsum
and coalitionem religionum, existimatur inde velle religionem omnem eneruare
paulatim ac sensim, neque animo ac ingenue vlla^ colere, aut magnopere curare.
Siquidem cordi si modo Principi esset Religio, nequaqua^ impune permitteret
vagare ritus adscititios, prophanos, aut cultum diuinae religioni prorsus
contrarium. Weston. Ibid. p. 187.

Ergo, The Consequence is true also. Wherefore toleration of Popery, is not to
be admitted.

XIIII. REASON.
If the Papists themselves know in their own consciences and acknowledge in
their writings, that amongst contrary worshippers, it is impossible for the
King to live in safety; then are they wicked traitors against his royal
Majesty, for importuning his grace to admit a toleration which they know to be
so dangerous unto his person.

But the Antecedent is true. For so they write. Inter omnes minus tutus videtur
Princeps, VVestonus ibid. lib. 3. cap. 14. page 191.
nec sane bone protectus, qui arbitrarias hasce religiones in republica
permittit. Nam aut in alteram partem propendet, velin medio, and quasi
aequilibrio suspensus consistit. Si aliquo inclinet, aduersaria factio eum pro
host habebit cum Dei ipsius tum sacrorum and suarum rerum. Si neutro vergat,
ab omnibus pro Atheo habebitur. Et sane orthodoxi cognoscentes haeresim adeo
esse Deo exosam, ac hominib. pestifera^, videntesque Principem haereticis
colludentem, ac illis indulgentem, haereticum ducent animo aut Atheum. Quod si
fecerint, quid sacri aut tuti supererit in diademate, imo quid politici? etc.

Ergo, The Consequent is true also. videl. That the Papists are wicked
traitors to his Majesty, for supplicating for Toleration.

XV. REASON.
If all Christian Princes be bound in conscience to persecute, afflict and
torment the great Whore of Babylon: then ought they not to grant her a seat
within their dominions.

But the Antecedent is true. Revel. 28.6.
For it is Gods express commandment; Reward her even as she has rewarded
you; and give her double according to her works: in that cup that she has
filled to you, fill her the double. In as much as she has glorified her self,
and lived in pleasure, so much give you to her torment and sorrow.

Ergo, No Christian Prince ought to tolerate popery, or to suffer the Romish
beast to roost within his territories. But is bound in conscience, by virtue of
the Lords express charge, given specially unto Kings and Princes who have
renounced Antichrist, to plague and torment all Papists, to give them double
payment, to antiquate and abolish all Romish and Popish abomination.

Reuelat. 7.12. Amen. Praise, and glory, and wisdom, and thanks, and honor,
and power, and might, be unto our God for ever more. Amen.


FINIS.

