A PROCLAMATION against the Home-loyterers, Recusants to the common Cause,
within the College of Justice, as follows,
WE blameless Beauty, badges bright of peace,
White shining smyles of Lady Justice face;
And glory of that pomp expecting Train,
Whose aims by us, are honor now to gain.
For as much as that fleeing herald Fame,
Does still by her eare-batring voice proclaim
Each where; that for our Crown and Faiths defense,
Our present progress keeps a residence;
Here in Dunglasse, where now our curious Eyes,
With long-worne looks, as waking watchmen lies
Still in await: as pleasing to be deigned
Here to attend those unto us assigned,
By Truths blew Flags, our sister in degree,
Both sprung from noble Justice pedigree:
As als our patience did not yet disdain,
To wait the lurking fragments of our Train
That yet remains: as our assured supply,
Bought long ago by love, and clemency:
Albeit to them heavens helping hand has been
Most liberal, as mortal eyes has seen:
Whose prodigal usher Lady Providence.
Fraught their desires with a right large expense,
Of golden strength, by nursing Virtues hand,
And made them strong in our just Cause to stand;
Under the shelter of our famous Name,
Which by the right of thankfulness we claim:
Aye due by them, and that for their supply
Of true Religion, and our Liberty:
That so our sight might terrify our foe,
As did our noble Name a year a-goe.
But O! those hopes were blasted long ere Time
Could bring these blossoms to an happy prime.
Whose fruits (deceit's, Nay, rather) in respect,
They nothing bring but shows, of mere neglect.
Which all men knows, did spring from servile fear,
Or churlish-mindes, that now the swey does bear.
Yet whilst we did, sweet smylling Peace enjoy,
Then seemed they ready Subjects to employ;
And traced the Streets with such a gallent grace,
As if their worth consisted in their pace:
But when proud Mars once show his angry brow,
Their fainting hearts then seemed for fear to bow.
Their courage which their tongues some times did keep
Now in their secret Cells does soundly sleep.
With gaping gried they glory in their gain,
Which lurking they achieved with honors stain
They care not for their Faith, nor Countries good,
So they buy ease with their own Brethrens blood.
Thus then (we see) their Faith, and courage cold,
Now make their feeble breasts in nothing bold,
Except it be a Venus to embrace,
Much more esteemed, than brave Bellonas face:
Then lo, what cause we have so to proclaim,
Them wanting brains to under-prop our Name.
HErefore since threats, nor our persuasions fair,
Nothing avails, We will, and we declare
That this afore-nam'd home delighting Crew,
As well of White, as of the colors Blew,
Be from henceforth, and by all humane laws,
Esteemed Recusants, to our noble Cause.
And als we find, and think expedient,
That they, and every one of them be rent:
And cut clean off, with shames infamous strock,
As withred Boughs from blooming Justice stock.
And we command, that this our will be shown,
And in each place, that Fame do make it known.
Which we here stamp with Truth fair Justice seal,
That never died: nor ever yet shall fail.
Daited from Dunglasse 26. of July, 1640. This Proclamation's sealed that now I
bring,
With great Apollo's hand adorning Reign.
Tho. Plain Clerk.




