BON-ACORDS DECOREMENT.

OR, News from the North. Wherein is truly expressed the form (or situation)
of the famous City of new Aberdeene, the virtues of the honorable and
renowned governors thereof, together with these Grampians Anagrames.

Wherewith is adjoined the proof, and praise of chaste Beauty, and the scorn
of Idols.

By William Mercer.

Printed Anno DOM. 16^^.

Upon the Author.
THryse happy Abria, to whose lasting Fame,
Right valiant Mercers Muse has undergone:
To gild, in rich encomiums each man's name,
Like Mars, and Maro, both combynd in one,
For to your praise what he has pend in word,
He bravely vows for to maintain by sword.
W. Dow.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE TRVELY RENOWNED, AND WORTHILY RESPECTED PAVL
MEINZIES of Kinmoundie. Lord Provest, Mr. VEDAST LOWSON, PATRICK LESLIE,
GILBERT COLINSONE, and Mr. THOMAS GRAY, Baillies, Mr. Matthew Lomsden, Dean of
Gild, Charles Keillo Thesaurer, and to the renowned Counselors and members of
the Counsel of Aberdene, wishes Grace, Honor, Promotion, and Peace in this
life, and everlasting glory in the life to come. W. M.
REnowned Rulers of this sacred seat,
Wherein all goodness, graciously abound,
Whose fames for worth, whose virtues are complete
Whose lives are lights, whose learnings are profound*
Amongst all these, who love your virtues best,
And they whose works unfeigned witness bear,
I Am loath to be, the last, albeit the least,
Who would approve, how I your worth admeare.
Therefore let this invention of my Muse,
(Which though not worthy, boldly wears the ba
Of these your names, even for its worthiest chus
Obtain your love, its errors to inhedge:
And let it please you, these my Lines to take
Into good part, and do my pains approve:
If naught for else, yet for affections sake,
And for assurance hereby of my love:
And since I know your generous minds admit,
A sign of love, as were more worth therein:
Heerefore am bold to beat my brains and wit,
To see if I can to your virtues win:
For lo for love, on my part of your worth,
And through desire for to ingraue your glore,
I have imployde my pen, for to set forth,
Your just deserts, by men admyrde before.
And that my Lines may ever witness be,
For to impart a portion of your praise,
Although such knowledge not consists in me,
To write your worth, or dignities to raise:
Yet though my words* should render but a view,
And not attain, the full to testify,
This I profess to be your proper due,
Ye are of the superlatiue degree.
And as the Arcadians, gave to Pales bot
A fleece of woole to testify their love:
The Athenians lo, to Pallas did alot,
A dish of O lives, duty to approve,
So likewise I, have with these two nothing
To give, but these unpolished lines of mine:
Which I confess not worthy is to bring
(...) such Patrones, for my first propyne.
(...) Minerva, did an Owl defend,
(...) under covert of her Targ at save:
(...) did her lively arms extend,
(...) the deformde Cyclops might perceive.
(...) Apollo by his heavenly Lute,
(...), night-raven, under it did hyde:
(...) please you, to supply my suit,
(...) ^eerein keep my errors vnespyde:
(...) I find the secreet of my thought,
(...) can know, till they the same shall view,
(...) perfection fully brought,
(...) love was firmly fixed on you:
And though sometimes I secreetly did send,
Some lines abroad, or yet to public eye,
My aim was ay, but that I might amend,
The same to you, your worth to testify.
Considering then, the worthiness of you,
I did determine, as the truth requyrde,
Ye were the only object whom I knew,
My Muse of duty ought to have aspyrde.
Therefore at last these Lines I did compose,
Which being done, I do present them here,
To crave your aid, to keep them from their foes,
Which if they find, they shall not fret for fear.
And I who pend them, shall your praise proclaim,
And still procure your honors rest on hie:
Your several names, and actions conquese fame,
Which by all ages may admeered be:
Then in the balance of affection, prove
And try my labors, if they equal are,
Unto one motion, of my matchless love,
And ye shall find my favor pass them far:
And though I can no protestations make,
Yet for your honor, I shall always pray,
Unto such time, as I occasion take,
To prove more largely I am yours for ay.
Thus you entreating, ye will pleased be,
Them to receive, and love them for the Art,
Whence in some manner, they proceed ye see,
And do receive resemblance in apart:
So of you all, what is divine as due,
I to the three united powers commend,
And what is subject unto change of you
I know your valor always will defend
As for my part, what power I can afford,
To death I shall still honor Bon-acord.
And rests Your Worships and Wisdoms most obsequious and truly affectionated
serviture at power William Mercer.

SONNET.
Acrostick.
W With Manhood, Music, and a Poets mind,
I In strength, in mirth, and lines of verse I vow,
L Love has a cord, of threefold links combynd,
L Like one whose worth no violence can bow:
(...) In, and whereby, I do present to you,
(...) A lively Lantern of my loyal love,
(...) More have I not, and less shall not seem due,
(...) My faithful favor plainly to approve.
(...) therefore no less of me then I
(...) hereby, for to deserve to death,
(...) rather use some strategem to try,
(...) if my words proceed from fixed faith,
(...) also, that this threefold band,
(...) Can ser^e three uses, as you please command.
W. M.

To the general Reader.
REader, remembering that my lines must be,
Of force to all presented publicly:
And that they are not decked with dainty phrase,
Whereby they always do not merit praise:
I, as a Soldier, who defense would make,
Whose part sometimes, I honor had to act:
Considering that this work of mine but dout,
Must be with foes, envyrond round about,
Would feign erect a fort, to keep it free
From carping of the curious enemy:
And therefore strives this much (in thee) to move,
That as thou reads, thou censure me in love.
Which as I wish, I having once obtainde,
Hereby my lines, shall hence forth be maintainde:
And (as a friend) if thou will not refuse,
Thou's conquish kindness, and advance my Muse.
Or if thou prove a Momus through envy,
Then in that case, thy malice I defy:
A curious Critic, if thou strive to be,
To carpe, I then contemn thy cruelty:
Because thou frets, and foolishly does prease,
To wrong my work, but does thy self disgrace.
Therefore, before thou further on proceed,
Spare what amiss is, and mantaine the good:
And if perchance, thou errors shall perceive,
Let these of mine, by thee a mends* receive:
Which from thy hands, I will be glad to take
Albeit for naught, but for my matters sake:
That all the honor, may (as due) increase,
To Bon-acord, whose worth deserves no less:
But this I fear if so thou think of me:
That I lack skill, thy wit shall weaker be,
Because the basest and the naughtiest mind,
Do always malice, against true virtue find^.
Therefore resolve to read, to think and swear,
That all is true that is enclosed here.
W. M.

SONNET.
THE learned, and unlearned, both these two,
Wise, and unworthy I apeall them fro:
The learned wise, because no doubt their skill,
Will soon perceive some errors heerein-till:
The ignorant unworthy, I appaile,
Because albeit they cannot judge, they will rail,
Wherefore I wish, it please them but to choose,
Some other subject, nor to wrong my Muse.
The wise may well by learning, see me hault,
And yet perchance they cannot mend my fault:
(...) also may the ignorant blaze forth
(...) will, their words I reckon of no worth.
(...) therefore their best is both, as would appear,
(...) That having read, vnchallengde they reteare.
TO THE FAMOVS, AND FLOVRISHING City of ABERDEINE.
New ABERDEINS Anagramme.
We debar sin.
Verse. Sin we debar, as ye perceive, and faithfully afford,
Both love and peace, from whence we have our diton Bon-acord.
Acrostick.
IN ME,
A generous Meinzies, bears governament,
But by the worthy Colinsens consent,
Even so, the loyal Lowsons honors me,
Renouned Leslies aids courageously.
Does not the ancient Iohnstons grace me ay
Esteemd I am, for Collen, Rutherford, Gray
Is not brave Meldrum mine, me to defend,
No less the Iaffrayes, Robertsons, so I end,
And many more, whose names though I suppress
Makes me renounde by virtues I confess.
Wherefore then Reader, thus much of me record,
More famous worth, no City can afford.
BON-ACORDS DECOREMENT.
MNemosine, the Muses nine I crave,
Send forth from thee that I their aid may have,
Because a Work so rare I here intend,
Which though begun by me, these nine must end
Go on, says she, they shall assist thy Muse,
I know thy work does merit no refuse,
Rowse up thy spirits: the rarest of those nine,
I shall advance to grace that work of thine;
By whose assistance, which I pleased to ask,
Who lykes to hear, lo I begin my task.
GReat Babylons building was ordainde for ease,
To be the seat of these three Monarchies,
The Assyrian, Greek, and Persian, and did bear
Rule over all Nations many thousand year.
Within whose power all princes did repare,
All Potentates, and Kings resorted there:
(...) to admire, for to adore, and see
(...) state, the grandeur and magnificencie
(...) such a seat, wherein all pomp appearde,
(...)se glore and splendor greatly was admired.
(...) ^ikewise Rome, fame does record to be
(...) ^only seat of the fourth Monarchy.
(...) next to Babel did all worth afford,
(...)de all earthly Kingdoms by her sword:
(...) frown, the World was forced to quake,
(...)aptiues in triumph did take.
(...)iters in hudge volumes strive,
(...) the same for to descrive.
(...) glorious works abundantly,
(...) the same to testify.
Of Athens also, hence what should I say,
Where worthiest Romans in their state did stay,
And in the same, was not ashamde you see,
To learn all science, and civilitie:
And who for grave governament and wit,
No city she, for second would admit:
And like as Sparta, was approvde and praisde,
For Martial worth, and over all others raisde.
Likewise their lyves, and virtues wrapped in store,
Did far exceed these cities told before:
Which was to Mars a seminary fit,
For many warlike sprits were bred in it:
And who with force of sword, did conquish fame,
By Martial deeds, to eternize their name:
As did appear in many more then these,
Lysander, Ages, and Clyomines,
With others diverse fashious to rehearse,
Whose worth is viewd, throughout the universe:
And who for fame, all ages does agree,
Unto all Nations for to testify,
Which heretofore might be examples rare,
For valor, worth, and virtues but compare:
Whose gifts most glorious, never yet has been
Once paraleld, or equalized seen.
Till now by force, these foretold towns ye see
To Bon-acord yields by necessity:
Since to them all, what did belong of old,
This City claims most justly uncontrolled:
For lo, more worth then all of these I mean,
It does afford as is apparent seen:
Since Athens no ways herewith could compare
In learning, or civilitie most rare:
And since that Sparta, for her valorous fame.
Of force must fly, and heereto quyte her name:
And seeing Babell, nor that Rome indeed,
For virtues no ways could the same exceed:
But as the heavens does over reach the earth,
So in like sort, it does surpass their worth;
And like as since, is nothing unto faith,
Or who would life, likewise compare to death:
Or like to man, by reason who is blessed,
Whose true perfection does in grace consist:
Or as a beast is naught, to man as far
This Cities virtues, does these Cities war:
For they had but an outward show of glore,
But this in sacred substance pass them more:
And though their greatness were more gross then it
They all must yield hereto, for virtuous wit:
And look wherein these gloried most, save ill,
This has more cause to glory therintill:
Which once such Bishops blessed of memory had,
Who does lie secreet now in earthen bed:
Of famous race, by whom brave buildings stand
In water some, some does decore the land:
By Chein and Lichtoun, builded were alone,
Sanct Machers Church, likewise the bridge of Done:
With other two rare buildings as ye see,
The Old town College, and the bridge of Die:
One Elphinstone, began them as is told,
And both were finished by Dumbar of old:
The one is builded upon Pillars seven,
The other holds a Crown, up toward heaven;
One Steward famous, for his learning lovde,
As also Gordon, for his gifts approvde:
One Cunningham, the mirror of his days,
and Blackburne, likewise worthy of all praise,
(...) Forbes then, and now a Forbes more,
(...) first most rare, but this not matched before,
(...) bygon Bishops, treasures were of faith,
(...) now in grave, yet triumphs over death:
(...) of late, such provests there has been,
(...) famous Town of Aberdeene*
Whose generous sprits, whose ancient fame and worth,
My Pen can not impart, nor lines set forth,
So passing many, whom I could not know,
Of some into my time, I here will show.
A Cheine much worth, for grace and great renown,
With linkes of love, combyned to the Town:
A prudent Provest, in this famous place,
And who likewise, was one of ancient race:
Then Colinson their third fold confidence,
Of virtues, who was very quintessence:
The Cities comfort, who increast in grace,
And when but young, was Provest in that place:
Of ancient stem and standard, even whereon
The town relyde, as their chief corner stone:
As borne so bred, as livde so died, and lo,
Of all, this all, we conquest but a show:
Admeerde by men, for wisdom, faith and grace
A lantern, fortres, favored in his place:
Who dead yet lives, and who by fame shall lest,
In number one, ay of the worthiest:
Who past his pryme, even full of honors shynd
When death in grave of silence him inshrynde.
Wherefore with gold most permanent impose,
Above his bones, this stone all worth enclose.
As likewise for their learning they had two,
One lives in Heaven, the other lives below:
The one namde Gray, which though gray was his name,
This Gray does glance in very glorious fame,
The other Dun, so does his name declare,
Whose knowledge in two sciences is rare.
And as this Dun is much esteemde by you,
This Dun does yield a dainty colored hew,
Since where pale death, would make your count
Ye are revivde by virtue of this man,
Even Principals both, so does their place import
Lives both by fame although (...)
And gracious Gray, whose learning was admeerd,
Who livde not long till soon to earth reteerd,
With whom as due, a third I here admit,
For learning rare, for Physic wondrous fit:
Which I, on stone, ingravd does wish to see,
Thereby this Iohnstons worth to testify:
Who does that place, which Liddell left supply
Whose name I here express most worthily
And who professed the Mathematics airt,
Which in his absence Iohnston does impart,
And many mo, whom I can not express,
Who by just merit did deserve no less.
As is confirmde in Chronicles for ay,
Whose names, nor fames, shall never find decay:
But by their worth, yet recent bears record,
What ancient honor's due to Bon-acord.
And more you see of all, what can be wished,
But in this famous city does consist:
For in within its curious corners stand,
A town which seems of force for to command
All cities else, to hyde them under sloughes,
Since she is the matchless method of al brughes
And whence apeare for points, which does arise
Whose worth ascending, seem to pierce the skies
Upon whose tops such fethered fixions stand,
As only change at Eolus command,
And always aims, as they anon would fly:
To sound abroad their burghs nobility:
Which turning and considering where they sit,
They do resolve, they will not pass from it:
But rather glories for to glance thereon,
(...) ^ince each of them, possess such sacred throne:
(...) by their yielding all at once, to prove,
(...) smallest motion, rules them all in love:
(...) hereby that they may a cause afford,
(...) ^o maintain their title Bon-acord.
And since of them, each one a place possess,
Whose walls are full of upright holvnesse:
They think it is their best, for to abide,
Se'ing love, and good agreement is their guide.
For under one does stand the treasury,
From whence does flow, means of felicity:
The other is on judgment grounded sure,
Repressing vices, virtues to procure:
The third springs up from charity and love,
As those within its corners can aproue:
The last all learning, as the time relates,
Affords within the compass of its gates:
So that these four; are precious points you see,
As Mercy, Justice, Learning, Charity:
Which though most rare, if three of these should lake,
But one, it should great imperfection make:
Wherefore all four, on faith are founded sure,
To make the name of Bon-acord endure:
The which though they antiquity allege,
Are much advanced in this present age.
For they a Prouest have of pregnant wit,
Whose worth to rule, it is approved fit:
Whose skill, whose knowledge, and whose deeds each day
Gravely preserues, the City from decay:
Whose noble, wise, pregenitors of old,
Bore always swey, most savely uncontrolled:
So that by birth, this honor is his own,
Since his ancestors brookt it as is known:
He by whose works in this illustrous place,
Does always aim, for amity and peace:
And by his actions, who does still approve,
To Bon-acord, his kyndly constant love.
And in whose time, has so decord the same,
That by his worth, it has attaind much fame:
First and as best, then to record his care,
He heereto bears, may be accounted rare*
For in their charge Ecclesiastical,
His aim can no ways be reputed small:
Since in his time such Prelate has appearde,
As for his worth and learning is admeerd:
Who in this Kingdom, to the Church has been,
The gravest guide, that heretofore was seen:
Whose Pastors likewise do appear for worth,
The rarest men, which nature has sent forth:
1 A Forbes, who one letter more you see,
Does prove his worth, For-best of all to be:
2 A Barron blessed, whose learned works decore,
The earth, which can yield none such Barron more.
3 A Sibbald, who may well be bold indeed,
His boldness brings the starving souls true food,
4 A Guild, whose goodness is more worth I vow,
Then gold, and all the goods which ever grew,
5 A Rosse likewise, some lend me but one vowell,
I's make this Roise more worth then precious Jewel:
Whilks, Forbest, Barron, Sibbald, Guild, and Roise,
Confirms the faithful, and confounds Church foes.
And whence does spring as from five fountains fine,
Renowned knowledge, doctrine most divine:
A Famous, Blessed, Sacred, Glorious, Rare,
Religion, always, does they witness there.
In preaching, praying, and these men ye hear,
In Bon-acord, a Bon-acord they bear,
To prove how heaven, and earth, and men all three,
In rendering praise to Bon-acord agree,
And for to show, that Bon-acord has been,
And is a diton due to Aberdene
^ince all these foresaids, and things low and steep,
^oncurres in one, a Bon-acord to keep,
(...) of their persons, and some certain parts,
(...) aimde, to act their rare deserts:
(...) cease, till I have wrought a view,
(...) ^peciall what belongs to them as due,
And yet suspecting that my Muse or merits
Should prove but weak, to write of such brave spirits,
Because I cannot paint their virtues forth,
Who all are called the quintessence of worth,
I will not prease to penin poesy,
Nothing at all of them particularly:
But will breakefoorth, to witness to all eyes
In general what the open Universe sees,
For lo, they all have this attaind alone,
Their Town does stand by Gentlemen eachone.
Likewise this Burgh it is decor'de you see,
With Rivers two, its bounds to beautify,
And as a Lover does approach his love,
Who filde with pleasure, does at last remove,
He stands a far, and ravished looks aback,
Because in her such pleasure he does take,
Yet rests not long but rages still you see,
Till in her arms full soon he thrown be,
Whose beauty then he does embrace even till,
He of his love has love attainde his fill.
And so being served, and satiat with desire,
He from his Mistress does at last retire.
Even so, these floods, or roaring Rivers swells,
Delyting daily to embrace her walls,
And blythlie beats till they themselves retires,
By Neptunes course, who on her worth admires.
And there as fraught with love astonished stands,
In furious form, seeming to wring their hands.
And then anon they do pursue so nigh,
On either side, till they advanced be:
And so do wash her walls, and seeks no more,
Which they account to be their greatest glore,
Unto which Town, men scarslie can atteine
To come, but by two bridges as is seen,
Which they did build to benefit by those,
Such Passeugers, as thereby hastily goes,
And to expede the poor perchance by lot,
Who have not money to command a boat,
As also for defense, to be two forts,
For to hold off invasions from their Ports.
And who by force can equal power afford
For to defend the worth of Bon-accord.
In which, for Music, Latin, Writing, they
Have three, whose fames for Art shall last for ay
Wedderburne, Davidsone, and one Leslie,
Nor can be pend, makes up this number three,
And as in it these virtues all abound,
I mean true honor, learning most profound.
Likewise the Muses here a meeting have,
That they may still the name of Music save:
Since as a Fountain it all Music yields,
And conduit like convoyes it through the fields,
So that albeit it general now be come,
Were not this Town, they shortly would sing dumb.
For here so long its residence has been,
That whence comes Music but from Aberdene.
And in its self so much it does abound:
That even the bells ring music when they sound
As Likewise, what is by rare men invented,
Within themselves by Raban is imprinted:
Which Rabans skill does soar and so arise,
That in his works, he does surmount the skies
And in whose Person, does appear these three,
A Poet, Printer, one for Prophecy.
So I will cease, albeit I more could say,
because their virtues do increase each day,
(...) since I can not, write even what I will,
(...) unto perfection heereintill:
(...) ^rofesse and heerewithall will rest,
(...) ^owne does much triumph, these men are blessed,
(...) ^^erefore who reads in reverence, this record,
(...) ^ee the doubtless due of Bon-acord.
The Counsel Table of New Aberdene.
1. 3. 5. 7. 9. 11. 13. 15. 17. B. B. D. T. C. M. M. C. T. G. M. I. C. 16 P. M.
P. BON-ACORD 33 M. M. B. B. K. C. C. H. C. C. C. 2. 4. 6. 8. 10. 12. 14. 16.
18.

Behold the Counsel seat of Bon-acord,
How it with reverent Senators is stord,
Let Meinzies remain, as governor fit,
Let Lowson likewise a counselor sit:
Let Leslie live also a ruler still there,
Let Colinson likewise, for virtues most rare,
Let Gray in governing, as worthy be had,
Let Lomsdena Dean, if no more be read:
Let Forquhare still master of Kirk work be kend,
Let Keillo be Treasaurer, ay to the end,
Let Colinson, Meinzies, and Stewart all three,
Let Cochrum as also still Counselors be,
Let Duvie, and Paipe, and Duffe be no less,
Let Ramsay and Clarke their knowledge express,
Let Gairdin be Deacon convener as due,
Because his assistance, gives aid unto you:
Let Robertson, Clarke, for cunningnessr be,
Let Ingrem his actions, in absence supply,
And so from the Provest, where first I began,
The Cities soll comfort, that generous man,
I here have expressed, the Baillies and lo,
The Counselors likewise, whose wisdoms I know:
Which number, no question by their actions show out*
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE RIGHT Worthy, and truly Religious, Paul
Meinzies of Kilmoundie, Lord Provest.
1. Anag.
Pleis me in zeal:
2. Anag.
I spy ye ev'll man.
Verse. Pleis me in zeal, of sin I Am grieved when,
Within my place, I spy the ev'll man.
Verse. Pleas me in ze'll in vice do not debord,
I cannot suffer sin in Bon-acord.
Acrostick.
P Praisde worthy Timoleon, generous, mylde, and grave
A A Grecian borne, whose virtues are inrolde,
W Whose valor did a Puisant Prince, and brave,
L Lead captive, called Dionisius, uncontrolled,
M Most worthy Chiftan, whom the earth could clame
E Even he whose acts, the universe does view,
I Is not to be more eternizde by fame,
N Nor thou for worth (to witness) who thee knew:
Z Zeal is thy glory, still thou aims for peace,
E Eternal praise, thy labors shall adore:
I In thee true honor dignifies thy place,
S Since in thy breast, all virtues rest in store.
And as Timoleon, Cicil did maintain,
Likewise thy wisdom rules Aberdene.
Ad Eundem.
SONNET.
By name1, by place2, by birth3, by fame4, thou art5,
A Paul1, a Provest2, noble3, wise4, expert5,
The Towns triumph, a governor most fit,
For conscience, knowledge, carriage, faith, and wit.
Belovd1, approvd2, admeerd3, reteerd4, and thou5,
By all1, for all2, in all3, from ill4, art true5,
Procleamd1, esteemde2, unstained3, and treasure4 sure5,
For worth1, in life3, for faith2, which shall4, endure5.
The head1, the hope2, the help3, who does afford4,
The sense1, they have2, each day3, in Bon-acord4.
Who as a jewel, richt with those gifts so rare,
Decores the Town, still while thou rulest there.
And as thy worth, has conquisht great renown,
Even so thy head, deserves a Laurel crown.
To the right honorable Gilbert Meinzies of Petfodels.
Anag. Ye se I afford most gudnes, le'st ill.
Verse. Ye see most gudnes, daily I afford,
Likewise le'st il, for ill by me is abhord.
Acrostick.
G Give Ages and Cleomines, were praisde,
I In Sparta, two young Princes, valorous, wise
L Likewise is Gaius and Tiberius raisde:
B Brave hopeful Princes, to the worlds eyes,
E Even since and as, their fortune past their years,
R Renownde their worth is, over their fottunes far:
T That naught till now, as all beholders sees,
M Might any match be found, their worth to war:
E Establish therefore, I thy valor would,
I In due compare these Princes to exceed,
N No less in noble virtues manyfold,
Y Yen are these gifts in thee which nature breed,
E Especial since these foresaid four here pend,
I In all external gifts, were not more rare,
S Since also over them do thy praise extend,
And since thy prudence scarce can find compare,
Thou by whose name, and fame we plainly see,
Both noble birth, and lives in liberty.
To Mr. VIDAST LOWSONE.
Anag. Lou's ay set down, Lou's eldast son.
Verse. Lous ay set down, where thou do sit, and lo,
Thy name near says, Lou's eldest son, also.
Acrostick.
W Wise Cato minor, noble Roman he,
E Even in his time, most grave was thought to be:
D Do we not of Pericles likewise read,
A As one unto whose praise, all Greece agreed:
S Since at his death, he gloried and did say,
T That he offended no man to that day:
L Likewise that he had no occasion wrought,
O Of mourning when, he to his grave was brought:
W Was rather for his wisdom much admeerde,
S Since from all vice, his virtues war reteerd:
O Only there is equal now appears by thee,
N No less in wisdom, grace and gravitie:
For in thy time, where vice would work awry,
Thou it reclaimes most conscienciously.
Ad Eundem.
Mylde wisdom, virtue, knowledge power, and place,
Religion, justice equity and peace:
All full of faith, united are in one,
To make thy self a map of worth alone:
Not that I feign, but rather stands in fear,
Least in thy praise deficient I appear:
Because no bud, or brybrie can bereave,
These of true justice, who thy aid does crave:
Then in few words, this to thy praise I pen,
You Are loud by GOD, and much admeerd by men:
For proof, because you are first preferred by God
And men (for worth) acconts thy virtues od.
To PATRICK LESLIE Baillie.
Anag. I pertack les il.
Verse. I pertack les il, nor many who would clame,
To be called good, for so imports my name.
Acrostick.
P Preferrd was valorous Alcibiades,
A And still esteemde the sword of Greece to be,
T That in his time, to no man would give place,
R Rulling regions, most courageously,
I Into whose praise, this likewise is approvde,
C Continually that he did pain sustain:
K Knowing his native country to be movde,
L Least in defense, his service was not seen:
E Even he whose power did diverse times overcome,
S Such Persian Emperor, greatest in his days,
L Lays down his sword to thee, as one to whom,
I Into thy actions, merits endless praise,
E Eternally that thou the sword may brook,
Since in thy favors, he the same forsook.
Ad Eundem.
True courage, valor, worth and manhood mixed,
Wherewith are kindness, love and faith prefixed:
Though young, yet wise, though stout, yet wondrous loath,
To execute thy humor being wroth.
Of ancient stem, and yet no pride appears,
But proves so modest as the earth admeeres,
By same most faithful, and in promise true,
And who does strive, all vice for to eschew,
One of thy self, even of more worth than I
Have skill to write, or yet to versifie,
Therefore concludes thy virtues who envyes.
Courageous Leslie all his foes defyes.
To GILBERT COLENSONE Baillie.
Anag. No cruel sin begotin.
Verse. No cruel sin begotin, is in thee,
But rather merits Pompeyes praise truly.
Acrostick.
G Gif Pompey was amongst the Romans lovde,
I In so far as his carriage was most myld:
L Likewise his valor makes his worth approvde,
B Because by blame his deeds were vndefyld:
E Even who subdude, full many kingdoms then,
R Renownd was by the Romans for his wit,
T That in his time was much esteemde by men,
C Confessed likewise to be a ruler fit.
O Only till now no second has been seen,
L Like to this Pompey, but thy self I swear,
I Into whose praise most duly appertain,
N No less then all, that is included here.
S Such as are these, true favor free from ill,
O One modest, wise, both myld and grave also,
N Not that its said, but signifide intill,
Thy actions, which in substance yield a show,
And as the Romans Pompeys praise approvde,
No less thy ways in Bon-acord are lovde.
Ad Eundem.
If it should not be partial thought in me,
Because of friendship or affinity:
I would my Muse, as worthy not admit,
For to descryue thy virtue, worth, and wit:
Since that no city, nor no country can,
Produce, afford, or yield more wise young man,
So young I say, because more days has July,
Nor thou has years, thy age who reckons truly:
And look what year do maniest minutes move,
They can not match the number who thee love:
Whose worth no view, as years or minutes yield,
But where professed in love, lasts as a sheeld.
Since neither endless time, nor sudden change,
Thy loyal love, or friendship can estrainge.
To Mr, THOMAS GRAY, Baillie.
Anag, I go arayt ma'st rair.
Verse. He go's arayt ma'st rair, with gifts of mind
Wherewith all outward virtues are combynd.
Sonnet Acrostick.
Master
T That Brutus, whom a Roman was by birth,
H Heroic, and yet modest in his mind,
O One whom by Caesar, was esteemde for worth,
M Man in his time, for second he could find.
A Albeit by birth, he was brought forth again,
S Should not be thought but equal unto thee,
G Grave, modest, wise, whose worth shall ay remain,
R Renownde for prudence, and humility.
A A man most meet in public place to stand,
Y Yea, peerless offspring, or the pattern rather,
Of such a parent, presently at hand,
Who is thought worthy of such faithful father:
Or who should be, if Caesar, liud to day,
A help to him, since Brutus made but way.
Ad Eundem.
It is a wonder to perceive and see,
A man so youthful, decked with modesty:
As thou art seen, and as thy deeds approve,
Each day, which does proceed from faithful love.
And yet if we consider will aright,
It shall appear no wonder in our sight,
Since we may surely apprehend, that God.
Ingraft these gifts in thee which are most od
To show how he, his benefits impart,
To thee whose worth, them merit by desert,
(...) for to prove how he appears each day,
(...) to procure thy fame, may last for ay.
To Mr. MATTHEW LOMSDEN, Dean of Gild.
Anag. All the town des'rs me mast.
Verse. All the town des'rs me mast to be
Theirs: and of truth, the same is wished by me
Sonnet Acrostick.
Master
M Most worthy, forward Philophemenes,
A A Grecian borne, and man of ancient race,
T That in his pryme, or as his grandor rose
H Had much envy by many Romish foes,
E Even for his care his country to preserve,
W Wherefore at last he was content to starve:
L Like to this man, thou doubtless art I mean,
O Only except, invyde, thou art not seen,
M Most careful for thy town and country, and
S So forward therefore, thou decores the land,
D Due praise pertaines therefore to thee and maire,
E Esteemd to be, nor Philopemenes here:
N Not for thy care alone, but likewise love,
Which still the town as they employ approve,
Ad Eundem.
Thy conscience, knowledge, and thy pregnant wit,
Makes thee be thought a counselor most fit:
Thy faithful forward friendship to the town,
Affords just cause to conquish thee renown.
The care and love which thereintill thou bears,
Makes all therein, that they thy worth admeeres:
Thou art most meet, a general charge to have,
Since thou can render justice where they crave:
And to be brief, my burden is too great,
To praise thy worth, and virtues most perfyte:
Who as in all things, so in learning thou,
Was first a Master, now a Dean I vow.
To Master ROBERT FARWHAIRS.
Anag. My rest rests far above.
Verse. My Anagramme says, albeit on earth I move,
From earthly sense: My rest rests far above.
Sonnet Acrostick.
Renound Lucullus, he of whom its told,
Over Mithridates domineered still,
Brought likewise low Tigranes uncontrolled,
Even that Armenian King took in his will.
Reteirde at last, when he these tropheis ended
To live at home where he was first brought forth,
Full peaceably his private state defended
And waxt in wealth to extraordinar worth
Regrating that I could no second see,
Qho might herein Lucullus match be made:
When I inquirde I trial found of thee,
How for thy virtues he an equal had.
A just acquyrer of thy means, and lo,
Renound for wise governament also.
To CHARLES KEILO, Thesaurer,
Anag. Lo yis rech Arc.
Verse. Lo yis rich Arc, contains much substance, and
Grace does govern, what this man takes in hand.
Sonnet Acrostick.
Crassus, so much in wisdom did abound,
His equal scarcely theirin could be found:
A man whose knowledge did great wealth attain,
Renounde likewise for virtues as is seen,
Even he who did govern his own estate,
Like as his second does no time relate,
Surely whose substance safely could uphold,
Keep, and maintain great Armies manifold.
Into whose absence I imput thy name,
Likewise to last with his in endless fame:
Looking most duly to thy virtues rare,
^r to thy actions scarce which finds compare.
And who for worth, is chosen now we see,
The Thesaurer of this brave Town to be.
To GEORGE MEINYEIS.
Anag. Ye see me in no rage:
Sonnet.
Grace guides my goings, errors I abhor,
Esteemd is virtue by me evermore:
Of pride no partner I desire to be.
Reteired I am from vile idolatry.
God is the author each day of my aim,
Man shall by me receive no public shame:
Even what is good in general I allow,
I love the upright, vicious I eshew,
No wrong I work, my acts by faith aspyre,
Ye see in me no rage, and I desire,
Eternal truth to be the treasure still,
Into the which my hopes may rest intill.
Say not I speak as that proud Pharisee,
I speak but truth, as shall approved be
To ALEXANDER STVARTE.
Anag. and render reward at last.
Sonnet.
And for to render (just) reward, must be
Like to a Stuarte of sincerity:
Even one whose actions merits no suspect,
X and in whose charge is viewed no neglect:
All those in one accomplished here do stand,
No less in worth, then virtues rarest band,
Demanding good of him, thou shall receive
Even for instruction what thy heart would crave,
Renounde he is: a Stuarte upright, just
Safely defending what is rendered in his trust,
Therefore to speak to thee of him I Will end
Without offense, and let my Muse commend
All what see I into this Stuarts face
Remembering how he does decore his place.
To thee therefore I tell thee, Stuarte, truly
I have expressed thy properties most duly.
To ALEXANDER COLINSONE.
Anag. And I excel in all reason.
Verse. With spiritual gifts, in reason to excel,,
Makes thee accomplished, so thy name does tell
Acrostick.
Albeit Marcellus, that brave Roman rare,
Lives yet by fame, for virtues but compare
Even he, who was thought in his time to be,
Xceeding valorous, all the world may see.
A man whose worth did vantage first attain,
No less then of brave Hanib all I mean,
Doubtless of whom this Hanib all confessed,
Even victor, nor yet vanquished could he rest,
Renownd abroad for valor, and by grace,
Called to his Friends, a comfort and solace
Of thee he now, a second shall receive,
Like to himself, both active, wise, and grave*
Into whose person, did appear as provde,
No error, but by all men is belovde,
Surely abroad thy worth is viewd and seen,
O but at home a comfort thou have been,
No more then shall Marcellus be I vow,
Esteemde or praisde, more righteously then thou.
To GWALTER COCHRVME Master of the mortified monyes.
Anag. Trwlee much grace.
Sonnet.
Give, truly much grace, in thy name is red,
What to thy praise more can be wished or had?
And if the same were not approvde in thee,
Lovd as thou art, by all thou would not be:
That place whose charge, does in thy power consist,
Esteemde is more, for thy cause by the rest,
Renownd thou art, for truth but treachery:
Composde of earthly immortality,
Of all belovde, and doubtless who does stand,
^ontrold by none, of what lies in thy hand,
(...) forth therefore my Muse shall ever aim,
(...) thy praise in poems to proclaim:
(...) and what, I here of thee have (...)
^

And (...)
Thy aid (...) labors leanes,
Remembrin^ (...) help proceeds from thee.
Indeed as du^ thy worth they testify,
Keeps it likewise in store where they remain,
Doubtless their prayers shall win a place to thee,
In heaven where thou shall live apart from pain.
Vhat to thy praise then shall I pen but this,
Eternally thous live in heavenly bless.
To THOMAS PAIPE, master of the imposts.
Anag. Most happ'e ay.
Verse. Most happ'e ay, may we account thy fame,
Since naught but that, is found into thy name.
Sonnet Acrostick.
Though Guido Pape was for wisdom thought,
He in his time whom natures best had wrought:
Of wit so rare, he rulled always then,
Most faithfully, his friends and country men,
And by his counsels, subtle, grave, and sure,
Shynd as a light whose labors yet endure,
Praise him I would with thee, and thee with him,
Albeit I can to none your virtues clim,
If I could but for thy cause praise him duly,
Praisde he should be, in praising thee most truly,
But I to praise you both may do my best,
And yet vnpraisde sufficiently must rest.
Only of him this much his worth is told,
And thine each day most vively we behold.
^

Lo scarce sufficient shall it seem (...)
Even who for worth is wondered in thy
Xceeding wise and full of verity:
And who does walk in true sincerity,
No ways offensive, or molesting none:
Doubtless therefore, abroad proclaimde may be
Eternal praises duly thereupon.
Rest not, then Fame in haste, but be thou gone,
Direct thy course, whence, where thou never flew,
Vith faith confirm, that thou do tell of one.
Far more praise worth, than thou do yield a view.
Desiring all where e're thou may be hard
His praise for Prudence never be debarde.
To ROBERT RAMSEY.
Anag. My rests bettar.
Receive this brief Encomium, or praise
Of thy just merit, though in low-styld phrase:
But weigh heerewith, that where the streeme seems still
Even that the ground is deepest therintill
Remember then, and let them all who read
These lines of mine, give true attentive head.
Recording hereby that thy worth may stand.
As due amongst these worthy honored band:
My Muse may prease, for to import a part,
She surely cannot more of thy desert:
Establish therefore, I these lines will now
(...) all who reads them may thy praise avow.
To THOMAS GAIRDINE: Deacon conveener.
Anag. Samsons guard in thee:
Samsons guard in thee, since thou by votes commands,
What would the Town, such powerlyes in thy hands.
Sonnet
These worthy forsaides, when in doubt they musde,
How, or by whom they might assistance crave.
Of, and by all consents, thy self they chusde.
Most meet in general, and did thee receave.
A man, unto whose knowledge does consist,
Such parts, as public are by all approvde:
Gainde by consent these worthies to assist,
And for thy fame, who is duly now promovde.
Remembering how thy virtues are esteemde,
Doubtless I may, this to thy praise maintain:
Into thy place thy prudence is proclaimde,
Not 'lone by me, but by all Aberdeene:
Since therein when their worthiest aims would fail,
Vpstands thy power, and does by votes prevail.
To THOMAS CLARK.
Anag. A most cle'r Ark.
Acrostick.
Think not the worse though I do not impairt,
Here what thou merits, or thy just desert:
Of force I must confess my task too much,
My Muse likewise too weak to write of such.
And yet least that my weakness should appear,
Surely as due I must say something here:
Considering with my Muse, this I must say,
Like as those worthies, thou shall live for ay,
A man renound, by fame, for faith and grace,
Religious likewise known in this place:
Keep then thy rowme, or rather be thou raisde
For as thou art thou merits to be praisde,
To GWALTER ROBERTSONE, Clerk,
Anag. Lo, Aberdons wretter.
Sonnet.
Give for assistance, I would come to see,
Who would concur unto thy praise with me:
Assuredly each day I should perceive,
Love to send forth more help than I can crave
These famous forsaids truly would attest,
Even endless knowledge in thy labors lest:
Renounde likewise into thy charge for wit,
Recording all the actions, past in it.
Of all the bygones, in this Burgh they stand,
Bound up in lines accomplished by thy hand,
Even such a charge, as if thou were not rare,
R Ruled in order, it scarce could well be there:
Therefore thy Name for aye shall last indeed,
So long as all posterities shall read.
Or if that men should bygone things forget,
No doubt but they shall in thy lines seem late.
Especial since thy deeds, as due record,
The ancient, endless worth of Bona-cord
To JOAN INGREME.
Anag I agree in one.
Sonnet.
Into thy name I find a faithful word
Only it says, agreement I afford:
A word of truth, for so imports thy place,
Now while you are conjunct with the Clerk a space:
In general when the Counsel does conveene.
No doubt, in number thou mustay be one:
Gif like wise that the Clark should absent be,
Remain then must his charge (as due) on thee.
Even for thy knowledge and thy worth approved,
Most duly, which in Bona-cord is loved
Wherefore, for praise this much of thee I verse,
Who reads my lines, shall still thy worth rehearse,
THE HISTORY OF SUSANNA.
The Argument.
THis Story tells Susanna's chaste, though fair,
As likewise does these Judges false declare:
Her constant mind, for to control their aim,
And for their fault what happened unto them,
They with false judgment her condemnde to die,
Gods Sprite appears, convicts them, sets her free:
Her Parents, Husband, and her kinsfolk all,
Praise God, who red Susanna out of thrall.
Whereby Gods power, these Judges two disgrace,
And Daniels prudence, kytheth in this place:
As likewise more this story lets you see,
Susannas beauties buskt with chastity.
IN Babylon resided one by name,
Called Ioacim, yet eternizde by fame,
Who did espouse, and for his match receive,
Susanna, whom no courting could deceive,
Who doubtless was Chelchias blessed borne child,
Since twofold fire, nor love, nor hate defyld:
One wondrous fair, whose beauty was so brave,
It did grave ^udges, of their senses reaue:
Whose Parents whence, by nature she did spring,
Her in the Law of Moses did up bring,
Which Ioachim, so richly did abound
In wealth* that scarce his equal could be found:
Unto whose Palace, was ajoynde full near,
An Orchard, which for pleasure had no pear:
To whom the Jews by custom did repare,
Because of all he most was honored there,
Now was prescrivde, two ancient Judges then,
For to reclaim the vicious ways of men;
Who most frequented, and remainde at will,
In Ioacims house, the law for to fufill:
Whence when the folk, at noone tide did reteare,
Susanna in her Orchard did appear,
Who was perceavde by these two Elders ay,
As she resorted therein every day:
On whom their lust, inflaming ho^e as fire,
Sought to accomplish their unchaste desire:
Withdrew their eyes, perverted so their mind,
Heaven not to see, whence they should judgment find
And though they both, with love were tortoured so,
The one durst not, this to the other sho,
For of their lust, they both possessed such shame,
That hereof they, would not express their aim,
But always watched each hour, and did awake,
Till subtly they could occasion take,
Whereby they might their piercing pain express,
And have the means whereby to find redress,
So when the time aproacht, when they should eat,
Their stomachs starving, more for love then meat,
The one did say, thus to the other, Lo,
Now is the time we must to dinner go:
Therefore farewell each to another said,
For they in mind a private paction had,
And being parted, both returned anon.
Unto that place, from whence they straight were gone
So they began betwixt them both to try,
They both were vrgd by one extremity:
Then through one love, or lust, both did agree,
How they should find fit opportunity:
Or when by fortune she alone should stand,
So that they thought they should her love command,
Who watching always, found a time wherein,
She with her maids, the Orchard entered in:
Whose bounds were buskt and decked with flowers most fair,
And bordered brave with ornaments most rare:
Wherein she thought her self to bath and bide,
A while unseen, till thus they her espyde,
She sent her maids to bring her Balm and Ball,
For to anoint her body therewithal,
Commanding them they should the door make fast,
As they from her forth of the Garden past,
Who did according, as she them desirde,
^^utting the door while they themselves retirde:
^^d went from thence in private, even as she*
But did the Elders not perceive, for they
Were hid and quiet, in some corner lay*
Who when these maids, were absent as ye hear,
The Elders to Susanna did appear:
And said, Behold the Garden doors you see,
Are shut, and we are fnard in love with thee,
Therefore consent to lie with us full soon,
Or else thy life and honor is undone:
For if thou will not, but thou will deny,
We shall approve we saw one with thee ly:
And that thou sent thy maids away to choose,
A time alone, thy body to abuse,
Thus chaste Susanna, sighing said alace,
On both the sides I Am burthend in this place,
For it is death to grant their ill demands,
And to refuse I cannot escape their hands:
Yet in this doubt, thus I resolve to be,
Killed rather, then an adulteress to die,
Thus then this chastest, calde aloud, and lo,
These Elders did, extend their voice also,
And ran in rage, and opned up the door,
To make the matter to appear the more:
For when the solke, this purpose did perceive,
They rusht in haste, and curiously did crave,
What was the cause, and why she calde so hie,
Or of her grief from whence the ground might be:
The Elders then, thus their devise did show,
Whereby they might Susanna overthrow:
Which when the servants hearing were ashamde,
And made Susannas fame be far proclaimde,
And on the day ensuing as is said,
When Ioachim a public meating made,
These Elders came, with minds mischivously,
Disposde for to perceive Susanna die:
And in the presence of the people sought,
That they might have this chaste Susanna brought,
Helcias daughter as I understand,
Ioachims spouse, a rich man in the land,
So she compeared with her parents two,
Her children and her kinds-folke came also:
Thus was Susanna wondrous fair to see,
Th^^ ^^ ^^^ ^^^ (...) could more beauteous be*
Whom when she stood before these Judges tway,
They causd her cast her cover quyte away:
For as her mind was maskt with woeful moan,
Her unstained face, a veil she put upon,
Which these two unjust Judges causde remove,
With seeing* somewhat to content their love:
Wherefore her friends, and all her kin also,
Waxt wondrous sad, to see Susanna so:
These Judges two stood up in have indeed,
And laid their hands on her unspotted heed,
Who holding up her face, calde to the Lord,
Iu whom she trusted, he would help afford,
The Elders then, said this to her anon,
Into the Garden, as we walked alone:
We saw Susanna, with her maidens two,
Come in, and then in haste she let them go:
Made fast the doors, and with a stranger lay,
Whom we perceavde in their adulterous play,
And ran most fiercely, aiming for to take
Them, as they were in their adulterous act:
But this young man was strong by nature, so
That he leapt forth, and from our hands did go:
And when we asked this woman, who was he,
She would not tell, and this we testify:
The assembly then, these judges having heard,
Believing them, Susanna straight debard,
And did command, that she the death should die,
For her reward, of unchaste villainy:
Then did anon this innocent out call,
To God for help, whose power is over all,
And said, O LORD, thou lives and all things know,
Therefore alace my innocence show:
And since they falsely now have me accusde,
Because by them I would not be abusde,
And seeing that of force I needs must die,
Lord, now proclaim my upright chastity,
And let this malice which they now have wrought,
Soon unto knowledge* by thy power be brought:
Thus then behold, this jugde great over all,
(...) her request, and set her free from thrall:
(...) when she was to dying pain exposde,
(...) for faith she fully was rei^^^^^^
For as she prayde, a spirit did appear,
Namde Daniel, who commanded them reteare.
And with a voice extended wondrous hie,
Did say, I always from this blood am free:
Then all the people as amazde did stand,
And did the meaning of these words demand,
Who stood, as if his power could them compel,
And said, O foolish sons of Israel,
Who would without examination so,
An innocent thus to the death let go:
Convert your course, to judgment go and hear,
And you shall find, they did false witness bear,
Against Susanna, who is truly chaste,
Upon the which the people turnde in haste,
To whom the Elders said, sit down here bye,
And show us what thou hereof more can try:
And since that God has sent thee here to be
A judge, come let us of thy judgment see,
Then Daniel causde these two be set asunder,
So that his wit hereby procurde a wonder:
For he did call the one, and to him say,
O thou whose hairs are waxed old and gray,
And thou whose years, have now attaind such hight,
Thy forepast faults, shall now appear in sight:
For thou false judgment has pronuncde, and so
Condemnde the just, and let the guilty go,
Albeit the Lord says, that thou shall these tway,
The righteous and the innocent not slay:
Yet if thou saw them, tell me by what tree,
Thou saw these two together company:
Who answered, I a Lentick tree did spy,
Beneath the which I saw these persons ly:
Then did the Prophet say, thou lied and lo,
God has ordaind that thou be cut in two:
So that shall be, of thy intent the hyre,
Since thou against Susanna did conspyre:
And he was placde a part. where to remain,
Even till the other was called in again:
Who when the prophet, saw him there to stand,
He then of him this question did demand,
And said, O thou Chanans sinful seed,
And not of Judah, as appears indeed,
Chaste beauty has allured thee to ly,
And lust thine heart perverted has I see,
For thus ye dealt with Israel and did use,
Them by constraint, for they durst not refuse,
But lo the daughters of just Judah they,
Could neither would your wickedness obey:
Now therefore tell, in what place did thou see
Them ly, he said, beneath an Oaken tree,
Then Daniel answered, saying, Thou have lied,
As I perceive, against thine own head,
And lo Gods angel does a sword convoy,
By just desert, thee quyte for to destroy,
Upon the which the people praisde with trust,
God for his goodness, who preserues the just:
And then arose, against these elders two*
Who by themselves were thus convicted so,
And did conform, to their own law ordain,
They should be pind, with their appointed pain,
That thereby might the innocent be savde,
The guilty punished, and their plots deceavde:
Therefore Chelchias, and his wife did sing,
Praise unto God, their great and glorious King:
And Ioachim her Husband sang that day,
Glore to Hosanna, for Susanna ay:
And all their kindred, as we plainly see,
Sang endless honor, to the Trinity:
Even so do we, likewise let all who move,
Unto this God all glory, power, approve:
Who does condemn the guilty, and does raise,
The innocent, to render always praise:
To whom I mean this Essence one in three,
Let men and Angels sing continually.
Amen.
To ALEXANDER SETONE of Petmedden.
Anag. One ex'eland rest.
Verse. One ex'eland rest, for such as needs relief,
And who to all, yields comfort in their grief,
Acrostick.
As in the volum, hereof which you hold,
Lies reverend Rulers virtues, manyfold:
Even so my Muse thinks I amiss commit*
Xcept I show thy praises unto it:
And that thy splendour, may more bright appear,
Now with these worthies, thus enrolled here:
Doubtless as many Diamonds decore,
Enamled rich, where they are set in store
Rare jewels. Even so these foresaids flow in fame,
So much the more since thou art joynde with them,
Even thou whose stem, has intertaind such worth,
That I in lines cannot their praise set forth,
Only I say, thy parents pompes expressed,
No less in thee then actions manifest,
Thus to thy praise then, I subjoyne these three,
Of ancient stock, worth, self nobility.
To D. ARTHVRE IONSTOVNE,
Anag. An vert'ous herti on.
Verse. An vert'ous herti on, whom grace decore,
With gifts of airt, and natural gifts in store.
Sonnet Acrostick.
As I have found by knowledge of my Muse,
Remembering on thy far renowned name)
Though all the ancients worth I do pervse,
Here I approve thy praise surpasses them:
Vhat shall I say then, of thy endless same*
Red in the rareness of thy learned lines,
I Into whose life and labors is no blame,
Or who for worth pass Poets praist ingynes,
No Virgill, Galen, Cicero, or such
Shall be extold more worthily I vow,
They in their times excelled, but not so much,
Of worth, in sundry sciences as thou,
Vhence I conclude, though these in use be had,
No less shall thou as worthy now be red,
THE HISTORY OF BELL, AND DRAGON. OR, The scorn of Idols.
ASTYAGES, the Babylonian King
Being dead: the Persian Cyrus fell to reign:
And Daniel who in prophecy not erred
The King for worth over all his friends preferrde.
These Babylonians likewise did invent
An Idol, whom they servde with one consent:
Whose name was Bell: A breathless brazen beast,
Whom for their god they did sincerely feast,
With finest flower, with flocks of sheep and wine,
And thought this service sacrifice divine:
Believing blindly what they set before,
This counterfeit it did the same devore:
O mad bereavers of the divine right!
Who durst devise such errors in his sight.
As to delude the peoples minds so much,
And make them think Iehovahs grossenes such,
As could be gript, or that his Godhead might
Be seen by men, who had but earthly sight:
And they who then were callde for Kings to be,
Should thus consent to such Idolatry.
For they this idol did adore each day,
Although in substance naught but brass and clay:
As likewise then, this Cyrus Persian King
With Daniel dealt most earnestly to bring
To Bell, the beast that worship which he ought
To give to God: but he obeyde him naught,
But did reply, and publicly profess,
He would not worship gods of carved brass,
But that eternal God, whose power he knows,
Such senseless idols always overthrowes,
And who has strength their pride for to suppress,
Who through such boldness does his will transgress,
Then said the King, whose blindness was not small,
Thinks thou not Bell a living god at all?
And see thou not what he devores each day
For to preserve his godhead from decay,
But then the Prophet presently did smyle,
And said, O King, they do thee much beguile,
For this is naught but mixture made with hands,
Which cannot eat, nor answer thy demands,
Which made the King to be offended so,
That he did urge the Priests to let him know,
Whom it should be did these expenses spend,
Or else by death he should abridge their end:
But on the contraire, if you can make clear,
That Bell destroys what is presented here,
Then doubtless Daniel shall be made to die,
For he has vttred blasphemy to me:
Unto the which the Prophet thought it right,
To have this doubt resolvde in Cyrus sight.
Now all the Priests of Bell were known then,
To be of number seven times surely ten
Without their wives, which them increst the more,
By birth of bairnes, their boldness to deplore:
Then went the Persian King with Daniel hence,
And callde the Priests for to prepare defense,
Into the Temple for their idol Bell,
And thought thereby the Prophet to compel
To serve their god: but he then did deface
Their feigned follies, by their Bells disgrace.
For lo the Priests did boldly say behold,
We will depart that you be not controld,
Therefore your meat see that ye set before
Our Bell, whose belly can the same devore:
And let the veshells full of wine be fillde,
The door shutfast, and with your signet sealde,
And when to morrow thou shall come to see
The victuals thou shall find devored be
By Bell, or else the burden we shall bear
Of death, or Daniel who bees found a liar*
For with themselves they thought they were secure,
Because they had an entresse in the floor,
Wherein they came by secreet in the night,
These things removd from out the peoples sight.
So when they were forth of the Temple gone,
The King causde set these meats by Bell alone.
Young Daniel then whose knowledge was profound,
Did wisely cause strew ashes on the ground,
Before the King, who causde the door be locked,
Sealed with his sign, that Bell should not be mocked,
For they believde their God whom they did serve,
Did eat so much, that he could never sterve.
But as the one was false, whereas they thought,
That he devorde what they him daily brought,
So was the last, not much to be admirde,
He could not starve because he never steirde:
Yet he for strength of truth I must confess,
Much meat might hold, his belly was of brass,
But he could neither smell, nor see, nor eat,
So that the Priests devored all the meat.
O hellish thieves! Idolaters indeed,
Who durst devise to say our Maker feed
As does a beast, or any earthly thing:
But lives in heaven, invisible a King:
Or for their lust to intertaine their lives,
Would lose their souls, their childrens and their wives.
O beasts not men! O belly-gods profane,
For Bell, in hell ye always shall remain:
And then that Idol whom ye servde in brass,
Shall be a means to make your woes incresse,
For in the morning when the King arose,
He straight with Daniel to the Temple goes,
And did inquyre this Prophet, if the seal
Which he had signet yet remained heal,
Who answerde truly as he saw it hing,
And said, as yet it whole remains O King,
So then the King causde make a patent door,
And entering in perceivde the meat no more,
Upon the which he boldly blazed forth,
How great is Bell? a god of wondrous worth.
Who has devorde in this one night, more meat
Than could an hundredth men and children eat.
Then Daniel laughing, did the King demand,
Most reverently, he would be pleased to stand,
And not go in till he considered right
From whence these footsteps came upon the night.
The King beholding vively in his face,
There had been sundry walking in that place,
He waxed wroth, and did the Priests conveene,
Who did confess, they there themselves had been.
Revealed then their villainy at last,
And shewde the doors where they in private past:
Therefore King Cyrus then confounded all,
The Priests, their wives, their children great and small,
And unto Daniel rendered Bell to be
By him consumde, the Story testify.
As likewise, then there did a Dragon stand,
Whom they did worship all throughout the land,
Then did the King this unto Daniel say
Thou can not vow that this is brass or clay,
And though thou movde our idol Bell be broken,
Our Dragon fear, let no blaspheme be spoken.
We do not care although that Bell be gone,
We Will serve the Dragon for our god alone,
For this thou see he lets no meats remain,
But eats up all, and renders naught again:
To prove his power must be a gods indeed,
Since he so strangely every day does feed,
Therefore thy faith resolve for to renew,
And to our Dragon render homage due,
But divine Daniel answered the King,
I Will serve my God, and not thy earthly thing,
Which if thou will permit me uncontrolled,
Thou shall the Dragons weakness soon behold:
For I not using weapon, fword nor staff,
Shall slay the Dragon as he were but chafe.
Upon the which, the King did say, behold
I give thee leave, do if thou dare, be bold.
Then Daniel took materials not to fight,
And thereof made such things as he had hight,
Such as was pitch and fatt and hair all three,
Made lumps thereof, his skill to testify.
And gave the Dragon wherewith it to slay,
Which did in sunder burst and fall in tway,
Then when the Prophet had these wonders wrought,
Upon their gods the Babylonians sought,
By public convent to make Cyrus rue,
Because they saw he was become a lew:
For he, said they, our great God Bell did first
Confound, and then our Dragon made to burst.
He has our Priests likewise with death oppressed,
So that our selves henceforth shall find no rest:
Upon the which, these wicked people said,
To us in haste let Daniel soon be had,
Or else but doubt, we will destroy by death,
Thee and thine house, since thou have changd thy faith,
So when the King perceivde they vrgde him so,
He was constrainde the Prophet to let go:
Whom when they did receive, they set him then
Six days and more within the Lions den,
Into the which by common course remaind,
Seven Lions, whom by hunger they constraind
To roar and rage, their prey for to perceive,
VVhereon some help for hunger they might have,
And to the end that when they Daniel saw,
For lack of food they should him overthrow.
Yet there remainde one Abacuk by name,
In Jury who a Prophet was by fame,
Who had made sundry vessels full of meat,
Even that the reapers of the same might eat,
To whom the Angel of the Lord did call,
Take these to Daniel to remead his thrall;
For they have cast him in a den of dreed,
Where Lions live, not looking for remead,
Then Abacuk said to the Lord anon,
I never knew nor saw I Babylon,
Nor know I surely where that den does ly,
Wherefore of force thy suit I must deny,
But then the Lord who has a kindly care,
Of all his servants thrown in dispare,
Took Abacuk and bare him by the crown,
Where Daniel lay, and thereby set him down.
Then Abacuk did thus his voice extend,
Come take such meat, as thee the Lord has send,
Unto the which did Daniel answer make,
O God, who never does thy Saints forsake,
Nor never fails them who do trust in thee,
A special care thou have had toward me,
So he arose, his hunger stainchd in haste,
And Abacuk by God at home was placed.
Who made his Angel him for to transport,
So that he thought his journey was but short:
Then not long hence, the King came to bewail,
With grievous moan the loss of Daniel,
Whom he perceivde amongst the Lions stand,
So that he seemd their force for to command.
Then called King Cyrus with a voice most hie,
Thy God O Daniel, great of power must be.
And I perceive on earth there is not one.
But even that God, whom thou do serve alone.
Wherefore he causde draw him out of the den,
And therein threw all these malicious men,
Who sought to be the cause of his disgrace,
And they were rent into a moments space.
The use therefore which here of we should make,
Should move us all such idols to forsake:
Which are naught else but beasts of equal worth
Unto themselves who seeks to set them forth.
For they their Bel-god daily gave such meat,
As servde at large these belly-gods to eat,
Who did not care, if they their stomachs served,
Although their souls for lack of food even sterved
Let us therefore who walk in perfect light,
Go on with courage, Christ has clensde our sight:
And let us not such fictions false approve,
But only God whose essence is above,
For you may see their ignorance so great,
That they to serve these idols took delight,
But when our God Jehovah once they knew,
They then began their wickedness to rue,
And did lament that they had run so long,
In sin as slaves, still wandering always wrong.
And ye may see what vengeance they receivde,
For their reward who had them long deceivde,
For they were rent with Lions in their rages,
Which shall be red to all succeeding ages.
In recompense of their idolatry,
Therefore to us let this example be,
That we be not with doctrine false deluded,
Which may procure we be from heaven secluded.
FINIS.
To THOMAS COLENSONE of Auchlownes,
Anag. 1. Lo, I canthol no shame.
2. Set on hol'e comlines.
Verse Thy name I see does thus express, Lo I canthol no shame
Wherefore, in hol'e comlines, thou'le brook a diadem
Acrostick.
Though Scipio major, still was I confess,
Held by the Romans rudder of their state
Of years but young, to whom did acquiesce
Most mighty trowpes, as ancient times relate,
A man whose valor, actions force and strength,
Subdude, o'rethrew, great Haniball but doubt,
Controld, bare down, as also who at length,
O'recame and wan all Africa throughout:
Lo, he who was both learned, wise and grave,
Likewise but whom the Romans could do naught:
Into whose worth, they knowledge did receive,
No less in word, then many virtues wrought,
Shall I therefore, since hereof were but tway,
Over pass thy part, who merits all their praise,
No I will not but something here will say,
Since you are admeerd for wisdom in thy days,
And since their praise does from thy name flow forth,
I Will cease heerefra, and hence forth show thy worth,
Ad Eundem.
To thee I come as one of worthiest choose,
And for this purpose, does exalt my Muse,
To aid my aim, to dignifie thy due,
And to thy praise, to pen some lines most true.
Since where to justlye, can I equal be,
But to such one wherein all worth we see,
Belovde by all, and who in all things can,
Prove prudent, pregnant, and a righteous man,
And like as Scipio, did adopt to be,
Brave Scipio minor, for his son you see,
So thou succeeds unto thy famous father,
For worth, or else unto those Scipios rather,
And as the Romans but their aid did naught,
So where thou lives thy aid is always sought:
Wherefore of force I this of thee must say,
Thou shall be praisde beyond all date or day,
To M. ALEXANDER IAFFREY.
Anag. Al sin is fardar frae me, ay,
Verse. Al sin is farther frae me ay, then those,
Who in religions outward sho rejoice.
Acrostick.
A midst the number of these worthies here,
Lo, I must make thy worthiness appear,
Even in these true encomiums thus set down,
X tolling truly this much honored town:
And to express thy pregnant wit and skill,
No less in worth then ruling thereintill:
Demanding of my Muse how I should praise,
Eevn thy admeered virtues in thy days,
Rest not said she over all for to set forth,
In verse such words, as may advance his worth,
A man whose mind still meditates on grace,
Full kyndly aims at equity and peace,
Faith is the ground, whereon thy travels stand,
Renownd therefore thou shall be in this land,
Estraingde from vice, whence well I may allege,
Y at thou appears a pattern in this age.
To ANDREW* MELDRVME,
Anag. Ver'e demure and m'ld.
Verse. Thy name declares thee, both demur and m'ld,
Likewise thy fame proclaims thee vndefilde.
Sonnet Acrostick.
As Cato major, is renowned yet,
No less in wisdom, then in actions fit,
Declaird he is, likewise for public skill,
Rare, and recorded wondrous thereintill:
Even in governiug Commonwealths, and lo,
Wise in the ruling of his house also:
Much volums whereof he has pend to be,
Eternal proofs, to all posterity:
Likewise thy worth of his contains a view,
Decord no less with virtues rare and true,
Renownd in general, for thy ways but hate,
Vise also in governing thy estate,
Most duly therefore may I change the fame,
GEORGE IOANSTONS
Anag. An gorgious stone.
Verse. Ane gorgious stone, which stone is set in grace,
And in whose heart for error is no place.
Acrostick.
Give such ane gorgeous stone be set in grace,
Everlasting glory shall decore his face:
Or if this place wherein this stone does stand,
Record the worth which does this stone command:
Great shall that praise which heereon shall be told,
Even one whose splendour shall all eyes behold,
Into whose heart or inward parts appear,
Of all the stones on earth, a stone but peer:
And if that men would ask me of this stone,
No doubt but I would send to thee anon:
Such glorious Joan stone who does glance most rare,
Through Bon-acord while gorgeous George is there,
Of due this stone deserves much renown,
Vith stones of state, or rather stately crown,
No more then can this stone be hence expressed,
Since that this stone a stone of staits confessed,
To GEORGE MORISONNE.
Anag. None moir gorgeos.
Ver. None moir gorgeos, whose worth shall shine in glore
So says thy name, first, then says, Sin no more.
Give these two virtues merits to be praisde,
Eternally these two in thee are raisde,
O fall in grace, moir gorgeos none then thou,
Renownde for outward gorgeousness as due,
Grave gracious goodness, gorgeous in thy mind,
Most gorgeous virtues likewise are combynde:
Of grace more gorgeous then I can extol,
Richer in wisdom, then I can inroll:
Indude with all these gorgeous gifts and maire,
Sententious knowledge, then I can declare;
Of all whom of into my time I read,
None moir gorgeous then thy self indeed:
Not that I mean thou gorgeos art in ill,
But what is generous, gorgeos thereintill,
What should I say then? this which I defend,
Thy gorgeos life* shall make a glorious end*
To IOANN LESLIE old Thesaurer.
Anag. Al lies in one.
Sonnet.
Into three charges, thou was chosen, and
Of all these three, the power was in thy hand:
A Thesaurer, which did the same contain,
No less in worth, then honored Aberdeine,
Likewise without thy license for a space,
Even these departed, scarce receavde a place,
Since in thy power, that honor which them cled,
Lay that convoyde them to their funeral bed:
Into thy power this likewise knew I maire,
Even all the monyes mortified there:
No doubt three charges, worth renown* which must,
Esteemd we more, while rendered in thy trust,
And as before these three were ay in one,
So since from thee these three are several gone,
To ROBERT SKEENE,
Anag. Seek no beterr.
Sonnet.
Remembering how for to express thy praise,
Or with my self considering what to say,
Behold how reason would extol my phrase,
Even for thy virtues viewed every day:
Remain therefore thy worthiness shall ay,
That thou to all, a pattern may be sure,
Since that thy fame shall never find decay,
Knowing thy worth, all shall thy praise procure:
Eternally, that all may testify,
Into thy self, such properties appear,
No less in actions then civilitie,
Esteemd by all, whose wisdom men admeere.
And wherefore now, thou chosen art to sit,
A Counselor in Bon-acord most fit:
To M. WILLIAME MOIRE,
Anag. Lo me I may rule.
Sonnet.
Master
With all those worthies Moir thou art belovde,
In number whereof thou thy self art one,
Likewise thy worth in Bon-acords approvde,
Long which shall last, when endless time is gone,
If Fame had force Moir, then it has to flee,
All it would sound would be in praise of thee,
Moir is thy name, and thou in worth is Moir,
Esteemde Moir duly, for thy gifts in store,
Meek in thy life and moir I cannot say,
Of thee those parts approved every day:
In youth well bred, the which thou do declare.
R Ruling by wisdom in the counsel there,
Wherefore though I, thee Moire might much commend
More I Will not say, but Moire I might defend.
To JOHN LOWSONE.
I love no sin.
If Poets pens have parted praises often,
Or praise exposde unto the Worlds view,
How much are they then bound to raise aloft,
Not simple sayings, but of thee most true,
Let then my lines impart a public view,
Of all thy praise to be approved rare,
Vith Romans, Grecians rendering them their due,
Since that their name with thine stands in compare:
Or to be brief, behold its said of me,
No praise is lost that is applyde to thee,
To THOMAS MOWET.
There was amongst the Romans many lovde
Hopeful in youth, and for their worth approvde,
Of all in general, whom I read I see,
Most duly thou for worth comparde may be.
As hopeful always, and no less belovde,
Suchlike for wo^h in Bon-acord approvde,
May I not therefore, thus enroll thy name,
Of due desert comprable with them,
Vnchallengd truly may I thee impose,
Even amongst these worthies, to be red with those,
That in these lines by me which are inverst,
To ALEXANDER RAMESEY,
Anag. Se I randar al mercy.
Acrostick.
And if thou randar mercy, then be sure,
Life endless thereby, shall thy self procure,
Even thou whose worth is viewed every day,
Xceeding rare in wisdom thought always:
A man of mercy, wherefore thou art meet,
Now where thou rules into that judgment seat.
Decorde with grace, and virtues of the mind,
Into the which all blessings are combynd,
Remain therefore, for ever shall thy fame,
Red in those lines, which does import thy name,
Admeerd for mercy since thy life began,
Much lovd for grace, and grace does make the man:
Eternally therefore, I will my Muse,
Should fing thy praise, amongst my worthiest choose,
Esteemde thou art, for mercy grace and faith,
Yairefore thy worth shall long live after death.
To WILLIAME GRAY.
Anag: Age may ruill.
Sonnet
What should be sought into a ruler more,
If he has knowledge (for to rule) in store,
Likewise, if that his age has conquisht wit,
Like one whose worth is thought in counsel fit,
I know in thee, these one, the other yields,
Accomplished both, most like two faithful shields:
More age to rule, most surely none can crave,
Even so more skill to rule, needs no man have,
Grave years of youth, in thee does now appear,
Rare virtues likewise which may breed admeere:
Age to rule, and ruler in thy age,
Yat may a match to any be I'lledg.
Unto thy praise therefore I fix my name,
Maintaining truly this thy endless same.
To GEORG MELDRVM,
Anag. Go mild rumer.
Sonnet
Give virtue crownde with conscience, merits love,
Even in thy station thou deserves esteem,
Or if grave carriage, due respect can move,
Rich are these parts in thee, as fame proclaim:
Grace does govern them, companide with faith,
Meek wisdom also rules in thy ways:
Eternal praise shall prove thee after death,
Like one whose worth shall suffer no decays:
Doubtless and rather evermore thy fame.
Remain it shall in Bon-acord as due,
Vhen thou art dead, to eternize thy name,
Men shall each day, thy dignities renew,
And for their aid myld rumer forth shall go,
And with my Muse sound forth thy praise also.
FINIS.
For Apology.
It Is said, a Prophet shall reap honor, save
He it unto his native country crave:
A saying sad, to such as would aspyre,
Since Friends at home to them as foes conspyre.
For my part I, nor Prophet, Poet, am I,
Yet from your bounds, by birth of parents came I.
Therefore that proverb, let me not approve,
As for reward, of this my sign of love,
I have done something on your names I know,
Though not so much, as I of duty owe:
And since not lofty in my phraise am glad,
Ye know how I was educat and bred:
Which is of learning, I no part profess,
And has by use or reading rather less,
Whence comes a sign, of serious mind in me:
To show your worth in strained Poesy:
Yet your Acrosticks claims to me no praise,
Because the letters does the sentence raise:
I by my weakness, rather did omit,
For to express, those praises which were fit:
And so in me the sault consists as due,
Since what is right, and more belongs to you,
But since I grant, what wrong is done by me,
Let me of you obtain this courtesy,
That ye in love my lines receive, and then,
Yele show your selves brave courteous gentle men.
Sonnet.
LO now my Muse, I have betrothed twyse,
And rewes of none the matches she did make:
But does contemn all such as me envyes:
And of my Patrons do protection take
Her maidinhead: My Muse did first direct
To Edinburgh, for her first favored choice,
Her wedowhead she yielded by respect,
To Bon-acord, whose worth the same injoyes,
The first's a famous, and a glorious Town,
And is for virtues wondrous much admeerde,
The other soars by sovereign due renown,
And has all vice forth from her streets reteerde:
And though I found the first a match most rare,
So now I think for worth this may compare.
Sonnet.
I Swear its not to show the thing I have not,
What I have verst within this volume here,
Likewise I vow, part of thy praise I crave not,
Nor of thy censure do I stand in fear,
I write in love, and labors to allot,
My lines to be a witness of the same.
And does not care the carping of no sot,
Because there is no courtesy in them,
The rarest lines that ever yet were pend,
Must bide the censure of some curious eye:
Therefore resolves my Muse* to recommend,
Unto thy murder, or thy modesty.
She was a Maid, but now twyse married stands,
If wronged by thee, betwixt a knaves two hands.
FINIS.

