A PIL To purge Melancholy: OR, A PREPRATIVE TO A PVRGATION: or, Topping,
Copping, and Capping: take either or whether: or, Mash them, and squash them,
and dash them, and diddle come derrie come daw them, all together.

In laudem implaudim.
This worthy Work may printed be,
For ought therein that I can see:
For the gave Author nothing says
Contrary to the Catholic faith;
Nor ought therein that does agree
With learning, wit, or good morality.
His od vain.

To M. Bavv-vvavv Health, with increase of mirth and merry conceits.
Master Baw-waw, as one unknown, yet moved through affection, as also
hearing of your arrival into England, I have made bold to dedicate this my
simple labor unto you; to be shrouded, sheilded, and defended by your
indifferent censure, you being a Spirit all compoz'de of mirth and merry
conceit: And although it may seem but a toy, yet being read, may refrigerate
your senses tossed and weeried with the tedious travel of foreign Countries,
as also stir up a heart plunged in melancholy, and add alacrity to a mind
disposed to mirth. Thus, not knowing how I may well commend it, I refer it
(as before) by you to be censured.

Yours his blue vain,

A Pill to purge Melancholy.
I Cannot but malign, and with dyre execrations bellow forth the gorgonian
dieresis of your late co^mensed misprision, whereby you do vnkennell your
Goatish affections, and let loose the fiery codpeece-humor, and Sparrow-like
dominations calcio^ated with the modul^tion of your supposed Arcadian
sprightlinesse, to serenize my metaphisicall parts. But I wonder how this
crooknosd conceit of yours, came snayling it self into the diurnall
revolution of your Iadelike, plunging, durtie, and scauenger-like, sweeping and
rakeing together the rubbish and outcast of your Herringcobs inventions: But
to shape my invention to your Tailors wit, and my tilting style to your
Noddiships understanding, now I come to it. I hear that you mean (Oh scuruie
louzie meaning) to betrate unto the world the untimely birth, or the addle
egg of your late long ill lobored lines, which you have like ill commodities
so often thrust upon my hands, continually soliciting me with them; which I
casheere: and yet me thinks you should not be so inconsideratly foolish, as to
be the Bellows to puff abroad thine own disgraces: and I have almost perished
my brains with continual retrograding them, how thou durst presume to call my
unstained name in question, with thy scattring Papers like half penny gigges:
but I command thee by thy Pumpes and Pantables to desist from printing them,
or I do asseuerate my bath unto thee, that I will cause thee to be most
dangerously exulcerated. Had thou none to theorize thy halting barbarism^
and wit-wanting Howliglas upon, but me, and then to print it for every
trencher-waighting foolish knave to slauer on it As God ketch me, either down
upon your knees erectis manibus, and yell for mercy at the portall grates of
my compassion, or I will so castice thee inflicting dismal coratiues upon thy
fainting soul, that thou shall be enforced to vilify thy Rotundities, the
only storehouse for thy Bread and Cheese. Therefore, presently turn the
hower-glasse of your determination, or look for Rods.

She that skornes thee and thy puffie stuff: Snuff.

A Pill to purge Melancholy.
I Have double dd. received your Letter, written in a fidling style: which I
have answered with a crowding spirit. I have been diverse times at the Portal
grates of your compassion, to ask forgiveness for my sins, but by reason of
your absence, I remain as yet still a wicked sinner, because you are not there
to give me absolution. I do perseueere in my scuruie louzie meaning, to beray
and betray the world with my flattring Papers like six penny gigges, and to
have them printed: and to confirm my resolution, I have sworn by my Pumpes
and Pantables, Boots, Slippers, and Shoes, it shall be performed with as much
expedition as may be. Your scuruie lofty louzie Letter, with my crabbed
crooked answer to be printed amongst the rest, to your praise and my shame:
and if you will send me twenty more such snuffes, they shall be answered, but
how: I will not promise you in an Arcadian spirit, but rather with some Lenton
relictes, or with some drunken drouzie draffie durtie dounghill style, or
scauenger like kind of writing and inditing, fit for such driueling scribbling
sniueling filthy fidling stuff: Therefore I countermaund you, presently to
aucrt your heavy displeasure and indignation conceived and intended against me,
or look for no favor at my hands.

He that loves thee and thy snuffie stuff, Snipsnap.

To all skorners, skoffers, mockers, iybers, and deriders: And to all foul
knaves, fine knaves, fair knaves, proud knaves, pretty knaves, prating
knaves, foolish knaves, flattring knaves, fliering knaves, cogging knaves,
deceitful knaves, soothing knaves, smoothing knaves, dissembling knaves, mad^e
knaves, merry knaves, drouzie knaves, dronken knaves, harm hatch knaves,
warm watch knaves* cold catch knaves, harm watch knaves, and harm catch
knaves: and to all other inferior knaves, of what quality and property
soever; together with all lackes, whipiackes, and skipiacks; Dawes, Woodcocks,
Peacocks, and Weathercocks: and to all and singular flat knaves and very
knaves, Tapsters, tilters and tylers; diggers, ditchers and deluers; plotters,
workers, deuizers and contriuers of Roagrie, knauerie, and villainy: long cut,
short cut, pinch cut, and pluck cut; the writer hereof sends greazing and
greeting, raking, shooueling, swapping, loading, threshing and sweeping; with
salting, seazoning and savoring, powdring, spiceing and favoring; brushing,
blouzing and blazing, with blowing, fyring, and flaming.
YOur Letter (fair Mistress) was delivered, and received, according to the
direction: but being written in a lofty style, it may require some
extraordinary deliberation to answer your fooliships abomination: but because
it may not seem altogether t^ ^^^se h^^ ^race and majesty, I thought I would
hit ye and wit ye, and scant ye and want ye, and lack ye and lot ye, and get
ye and have ye, and lose ye. Then feel ye and find ye, and fire ye and flint
ye, and flame ye, and tiler ye and tailor ye, and trifle ye and trash ye, and
tilt ye and tinke ye and tile ye, and tinker ye and moyle ye and toil ye, and
thimble ye, and thatch ye and thresh ye, and sheep ye and sith ye and sheare
ye, and shape ye and sowter ye and shoe ye and size ye and saaw ye and seame
ye, and quiver ye and quauer ye and quake ye, and mould ye and crust ye and
knead ye, and brew ye and bake ye and kake ye, and wake ye and crum ye and cram
ye, and shinke ye and shanke ye, and sise ye and sink ye, and shiuerye and
shackle ye and shake ye, and quip ye and quirke ye and quilt ye, and firm ye
and farm ye, and iron ye and press ye and fit ye. Then tit ye and lip ye and
tap ye, and heel ye and halt ye, and hop ye and top ye and cop ye, and lip ye
and lap ye and lop ye, and hick ye and hack ye and hew ye, and hood ye and heart
ye and hind ye, and horn ye and hammer ye and stammer ye, and stunnie and head
ye. Then hip ye and nip ye and skip ye, and trim ye and try ye, and tard ye
and trace ye and trip ye. Then nettle ye and tickle ye and prickle ye, and
taint ye and tempt ye and turue ye, and wind ye and paintye and burn ye, and
color ye and tart ye and tinckt ye, and mouze ye and touze ye, and tugg ye and
touch ye and taste ye. Then snaile ye and slow ye and slime ye, and snake ye
and snig ye and lime ye, and spider ye and thread ye and spin ye, and weaue ye
and wave ye, and web ye and wirpe ye and warpe ye, and wriggle ye and wrangle
ye and wrap ye, and friske ye and fringe ye and fold ye, and nicke ye and nit
ye and net ye, and scramble ye and scrawle ye and crawle ye, and mount ye and
creep ye and clime ye. Then train ye and tail ye, and trill ye and trowle
and traile ye, and trap ye and clacke ye and clap ye, and fish ye and she ye
and flap ye, and nibble ye and worm ye and bayte yt, and angle ye and hook ye
and hinge ye. Then snare ye and snarle ye and snatch ye, and grippell ye and
grappell ye and gripe ye, and snaffle ye and snuff ye and sniffe ye, and snip
ye and snap ye, and clip ye and cap ye, and crispe ye and cripp and crop ye,
and sniuell ye and snout ye, and snift ye and snieze ye, and snit ye and snat
ye and snot ye. Then trick ye and prick ye and pranke ye, and span ye and
spew ye and spit ye, and trampe ye and tracke ye and tread ye, and goat ye and
butt ye and bucke ye, and hunch ye and punch ye, ann kibe ye and kidd ye and
kit ye, and sparrow ye and spurn ye and kick ye. Then curb ye and knife ye
and cut ye, and wound ye and ulcer ye and hurt ye. Then honor ye and hour ye
and sower ye, and sipp ye and sopp ye, and sauce ye and sowse ye, and salt ye
and seazou ye and sauer ye, and powder ye and spice ye and favor ye, and sugar
ye and swaue ye, and hounie ye and bitter ye and sweet ye. Then carue ye and
serve ye and salve ye, and plaster ye and heal ye and cure ye, and alter ye
and palter ye, and pinder ye and pander ye and peddler ye, and plume ye and
feather ye and fiddler ye. Then crook ye and cukold ye and corn ye, and knit
ye and knot ye and knag ye, and snig ye and snag ye and crag ye, and kricke ye
and kracke and krancke ye, and bind ye and fast ye and lose, and knave ye and
crampe ye and knacke ye. Then hinch ye and wrinch ye, and twinch ye and pinzer
ye and pinch ye, and wring ye and wrest ye and writh ye, and catch ye and cozen
ye, and klinke ye and claspe ye and clinch ye. Then owl ye and gloze ye and
glaze ye, and gander ye and goose ye and gaze ye, and glass ye and glimse ye
and glance ye, and glaunder ye and glade ye and glyde ye, and pumpe ye and
slipper ye and slide ye, and glitter ye and gull ye and gleeke ye. Then stagger
ye and stumble ye and strip ye, and straddle ye and strap ye and stride ye, and
stifle ye and style ye and steel ye, and fillip ye and fiddle ye and firke ye,
and crowde ye and finger ye and fyle ye. Then fine ye and foul ye and fair
ye, and clatter ye and claw ye and scratch ye, and harbor ye and hoouer ye and
hide ye, and hatch ye and harrow ye and hoord ye, and store ye and hiue ye and
starve ye, and sooth ye and flatter ye and fail ye. The^ apple ye and eye ye,
and ear ye and fear ye, and sponge ye and singe ye, and single ye and sign
and seal ye. Then chip ye and chop ye, and champe ye and chaw ye and chouze
ye, and scatter ye and spread, and butter ye and bast ye and bread ye, and
chalk ye and change ye and cheeze ye, and batter ye and bite ye and refuze ye.
Then stick ye and straw ye and daw ye, and fluse ye and fling ye and flaw ye.
Then ferret ye and fear ye and fray ye, and gast ye and ghost ye and spright
ye, and fetter ye and fox ye and fright ye. Then shroue ye and shrine ye, and
shriue ye and shrift ye, and court ye and coch ye and cart ye, and dirt ye and
drive ye and dragge ye, and drudge ye and dross ye and draffe ye, and dawbe ye
and mire ye and lagg ye, and whoope ye and hallow ye and whissle ye, and dish
ye and dash ye, and lash ye and plash ye, and shuffle ye and card ye and shift
ye, and clish ye and clash ye, and coupe ye and couch ye and cash ye. Then
fool ye and floute ye and poake ye and peate ye and point ye, and thrust ye
and foyne ye and foil ye, and fly ye and free ye and flight ye. Then hawke ye
and lurcke ye and lure ye, and male ye and meal ye and sift ye, and hand ye
and heart ye and fist ye, and prime ye and prune ye and princke ye, and currle
ye and frizzle ye and frounze ye, and pearl ye and purle and pincke ye, and
prampe ye and fillit ye and pride ye, and swip ye and swap ye, and rake ye and
shoouell ye and sweep ye, and noy ye and toy ye and coy ye, and jewel ye and
iem ye and joy ye. Then pill ye and pick ye and pare ye and powle ye and shave
ye and spare ye, and bald ye and skin ye and bare ye. Then slit ye and sliue ye
and slay ye, and slise ye and thin ye and share ye, and drench ye and diue
ye, and ducke ye and drown ye, and swim ye and sink ye and save ye. Then
skoggin ye and skoffe ye and skorne ye and skald, and skar ye and skurfe ye and
skarfe ye, and mock ye and mop ye and mow ye, and shelter ye and shield ye,
and shroud ye and shade ye, and house ye and mow ye and mew ye. Then hobbie ye
and horse ye and hire ye, and dingle ye and dandle ye, and spingle ye and
spangle ye, and fickle ye and fancy ye, and ferrie ye and fingle ye and fangle
ye, and handle ye dandle ye and dance ye, and hazzell ye and dazzell ye, and
muze ye and maze ye, and fizzell ye and mizzell ye, and madd ye and mewt ye and
mist ye, and dull ye and dolt ye and dunce ye. Then diddle cum derrie cum be
ye and boe ye and buzze ye, and amble ye and trot ye and prance ye. Then addle
ye and idle ye and bridle ye, and bramble ye and brier ye and branch ye, and
burre ye and bride ye and brush ye, and lark ye and lerke ye and ierke ye, and
gigg ye and iogg ye and iolt ye, and iangle ye and rod ye and ride ye, and
whiscum whascum brake ye and brine ye and breech ye. Then swigger ye and
swegger ye, and swagger ye and swelt ye, and stibb ye and stabb ye, and stobb
ye and stare ye and start ye, and roue ye and run ye and rhyme ye, and riddle ye
and rend ye and riue ye. Then tune ye and time ye and tame ye, and pot ye and
pitcher ye and pan ye, and stopple ye and bottle ye and bagg ye, and beggar ye
and pipe ye and can ye, and itch ye and pitch ye and patch ye, and bangle ye
and bungle ye and botch ye, and mende ye and cobble ye and piece ye. Then base
ye and case ye and buske ye and brace ye and lace ye. Then ruffin ye and ruffle
ye, and rampe ye and ripe ye and reach ye, and pilfer ye and pelf ye, and
rifle ye and spoil and rob ye, and flea ye and filch ye and fleece ye, and
ribbell ye and rabbell ye, and stibber ye and slabber ye, and scribbell ye and
scrabbell ye, and blibber ye and blabber ye, and bluster ye and blister ye, and
storm ye and whirtle ye and wind ye and rain ye and hail ye, and chafe ye
and snow ye, and blather ye and blow ye and blast ye. Then huffe ye and buffe
ye and muffe ye, and toe ye and taw ye, and tuffe ye and raw ye and rugg ye and
ruff ye and rag-men roll ye and snuff ye, and post ye and past ye and puff
ye, and clod ye and turde ye and turfe ye, and court ye and coast ye and puff
ye and cuffe ye and snuff ye. Then blubber ye and sullen ye and sob ye, and
drip ye and drop ye and driuel ye, and sliuer ye and slauer ye, and sloouen ye
and sott ye and slut ye, and wipe ye and trencher ye and tripe ye, and boil ye
and some ye, and suddes ye and soap ye, and surge ye and swill ye and swell ye,
and water ye and lade ye, and mell ye and fell ye, and wag ye and colt ye, and
quiddle ye and quill ye and quell ye, and flish ye and flash ye, and driggle ye
and draggle ye, and willow ye wallow ye and wash ye and laue ye and blithe ye
and bath ye, and lout ye and clout ye and cleave ye, and lance ye and lanke ye,
and blanch ye and blanke ye, and hanch ye and lanch ye, and leg ye and flinch
ye and flank ye. Then rascal ye and royster ye, and rotton ye and roag ye and
raze ye, and rauell ye and revel ye and riuill ye, and ierke ye and iag ye and
rag ye, and black ye blot ye and blur ye, and veil ye and mask ye and mum
ye, and chance ye and dice ye, and drum ye, and nod ye vice ye and scum ye,
and spot ye and blue ye and blend ye, and bleare ye and blinke ye and blind ye,
and twerrle ye and twist ye and twine ye, and rock ye and reele ye and wind
ye, and ricke ye and rack ye and roll ye, and stitch ye and tacke ye and
round ye, and bend ye and bruze ye and break ye, and band ye and ball ye and
bound ye, and chase yeand chafe ye and heat ye, and cool ye and sweat ye and
sound ye, and grind ye and grate ye and grieve ye, and gravel ye and gall ye
and ground ye. Then stragle ye and struggle ye and strangle ye, and slip ye and
soupe ye, and sloupe ye and slop ye, and slim ye and slam ye and slave ye, and
stem ye and stream ye and stray ye, and garnish ye and burnish ye and
furnish ye, and bud ye and blossom ye and bloome ye, and flourish ye and flower
ye and fresh ye, and gay ye and may ye and ray ye, and sport ye and rig ye and
play ye, and wreath ye and bower ye and brave ye. Then bird ye and bolt ye and
cage ye, and grave ye and wise ye and sage ye, and pope ye and prince ye and
page ye, and rope ye and hang ye and rage ye, and gild ye and gold ye and gage
ye. Then swillow ye and swallow ye, and swish ye and wash ye, and bib ye and
drink ye, and quiffe ye and quart ye and quaffe ye. Then iugg ye and jack ye,
and ginger ye and ginnie ye and gill ye, and mortar ye and barter ye, and
muster ye and master ye, and martyr ye and margerte and marry ye. Then maime
ye and jar ye and mar ye, and manch ye granch ye, and mash ye and quince ye
and quash ye, and mumble ye and mince ye and melt ye. Then humble ye and fumble
ye and iumble ye, and lighten ye and flighten ye, and rumble ye and thunder ye
and thret ye, and itter ye and titter ye and tipple ye, and mingle ye and
mangle ye, and tingle ye and terrify ye and tangle ye, and type ye and toss
ye and tire ye, and totter ye and weary ye and tumble ye. Then haunt ye and
deyntie ye and daunt ye, and taunt ye and viliffe ye and vaunt ye, and gigg ye
and iebe ye, and iuggle ye and jade ye and jest ye, and trouse ye and trumpe ye
and frumpe ye, and love ye and loath ye and leave ye, and win ye and wear ye
and tear ye, and prize ye and praise ye and please ye, and chant ye and charm
ye, and chin ye and check ye and chocke ye, and lock ye and chain ye and
clogg ye, and link ye and chink ye, chatter ye and cherp ye and chime ye, and
cock ye and crow ye, and cob ye and kembe ye and comb ye, and cackle ye and
cockle ye, and chockle ye and throttle ye choke ye, and cherrie ye and merry
ye, and roze ye and check ye and cheer ye, and print ye and lift ye, and load
ye and light ye, and rowze ye and rect ye and right ye, and rayze ye and eaze
ye, and grace ye and greaze ye and greet ye. Then aim ye and mark ye, and
pin ye and prop ye, and shaft ye and shoot ye, and drib ye and short ye and
miss ye. Then name ye and blame ye, and string ye and stretch ye and strain
ye, and ting ye and towle ye and ring ye. Then stamp ye and stain ye, and
sting ye and limpe ye and lame ye. Then ban ye and bane ye, and noynt ye and
balm ye, and slicke ye and smeare ye and smooth ye, and bundle ye and blouze
ye and dlaze ye, and smoother ye and smoke ye and waste ye, and barbe ye and
bless ye and curse ye, and kiss ye and cross ye and craze ye, and crab ye
and crush ye and squize ye, and clown ye and crown ye, and sparge ye and
spindle ye and sprinkle ye, and bill ye and beard ye and brain ye, and hit ye
and fit ye and miss ye. Then pepper ye and poison ye and perch ye, and pine
ye and perish ye and pain ye, and so fret ye and frost ye and freeze ye, and
plunge ye and pardon ye and plague ye. And so fire the world with Rattes and
Brattes, and Sprattes and Gnattes, and knottes and cords, and kogges and bobs,
and noddes and odds and Hearing-cobs, and Bussardes and Bears and Bugges and
Battes, and Flagges and Flies and Waspes, and Burres and Beeues and Buffes, and
Bees and Bawdes and Butterflyes.

VAL.
I commend me unto you, and to your Sis. Although at this time not worthy
either to be remembered or commended, because she thought that a red Hearring
was not a dish dainty enough to feast so royal a guest as a Commander, yet
think I my stomach eager enough at all times and seasons to feed upon a
poor Sprat, in her company. And although she thinks Sorrel a sauce too
sweet for an Asse-head, yet I think Mustard and Greene-sauce without Sugar,
not sweet enough for her Calues-head. So I am very well content to bear the
Asses burden ou my back for once, if she be as willing to wear the Ears, as
I am pleased to stink of the Pumpe, because I am not able to endure a pair of
straight Leather Shoes on my feet, my heels being sore. And to requite your
kindness and goodwill, which I perceive you bear me, I have sent you by this
bearer some Ditties and Songs, such as I have: And if it lie in my power to
gratify you with a better thing, ye shall command me. In the mean time, I
rest beholding unto you for your courtesy showed me at the poor Widows
house, being in your Sisters conceit too homely a roof to entertain so
great a Commander: And for bidding me, Come up Ass into a higher room, that
Chollericke Pill of hers will easily be disgested with one pleasant conceit or
other of Mounsier de Kempe on Monday next at the Globe, where I would gladly
meet you, if your leisure will so permit^* In the mean time I bid you
farewell.

FINIS.

