Century 3.

Numb. 27.

Nevves of this present week from Germany, Italy, and Spain, the greatest
that came these many years, in one week.

The general heads are as follow: A great overthrow given by General
Stalhanse, to the Count of Mansfield in Silesia.

A greater blow given to Piccolomini, by General Bannier in Saxony, near
Erfurd.

Two great victories obtained by the French in Italy, with the taking Prisoner
of Prince Thomas of Savoy, as the Letters report.

The general discontent of the Subjects of the King of Spain in Catalona, a
Kingdom bordering upon France.

With other very remarkable passages.

LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Butter. June 6. 1640.

With Privilege.

Norimberg.
Millaine, 6. 16. May.
THE French General Count of Harcourt has caused to be pillaged and burned
down in his return from Cazall toward Thurino many places in Piemont and
Montferat, which heertofore denied him provision for his Army, he has
likewise fired the fair place of Firenzo, where he caused the inhabitants to
be chased into the fire, and three of the chiefest to be nailed to the gate,
where they hung so long till they were starved; afterward he pitched his camp
within an hours going from Thurino, and thought to master the said City with
the help of some traitors, and a mine, which from the Castle went very far
into the City, but being it was discovered to Prince Thomas, he turned all
the French Merchants out of the City, and did cast into prison many chief
Citizens, as also the Count of Harcourts Secretary, who got secretly into the
City, and caused some of the ringleaders to be hanged: wherefore the said
Count of Harcourt assalted one passage which was but one quarter of hours
going from the City, and though he was beaten off three or four times with
some loss by the Marquis Serra, yet at last he mastered the same, and put all
to the sword in it: afterward he mastered also the bridge over the River of
Poe, the Suburbs of Thurino, as also Settio and other places, that no relief
and pro^ision can be brought into the City; wherefore our Governor Marquis de
Leganes rose from Verzelly and marched thitherwards with the Army consisting
of eighteen thousand men ^oth horse and foot, to succor and relieve the said
City, with ^he help of Prince Thomas: at Finate are likewise arrived 14.
Galleies with three thousand foot, as also four hundred chests with Reals, and
200. thousand crowns in gold for this City, those three thousand soldiers
are marching already toward the Army. The Duke of Parma is now at Venice, it
is thought that he will likewise come into the League, and the French King is
likewise desired by the Pope to come into it.

The Spaniards had an enterprise in hand against the City of Leucata,
wherefore the French fortify the same place more and more, and draw together
all the forces in Languedock. Marshal de Shomberg is carried prisoner into the
Castle at Mompelier, what the reason of it is, is not known.

Basel, 8. 18. May.
The French King has sent 900000. Francks to the Weymarish Army, Lieutenant
General Tupadel, Fieldmarshall Shmitborger, Shavelitzky, Zillhart, and other
Colonels are yet at Strasburg, they have no great mind to go to the Army,
because Baron de Oissenville, unto whom are sent yet from Paris 300000. francks
is to command as the French Kings Lieutenant in Brissack next after General
Major Erlack, but Colonel Hatzstein will not condescend unto it, except he sees
first order from the Directors of the Weymarish Army. The Imperialists
straggle continually with strong parties into Alsatia, and at Shoenaw in the
Plackwood five hours going from hence some hundreds are enqu^rtered.

Collen 10. 20. May.
The Count of Guyche fortifies his camp before Charlemont still more and more,
the loss before Cazall causes great alteration, Monsieur de Bordeaux is to
lead ten thousand men more into Italy, and Villeroy fix thousand, and Monsieur
Hallier is to lead six thousand men to the Duke of Longuevile his Army.

Strasburg May 21. 21.
On Saturday last the Imperial Colonel Bamberger with 1000. men both horse
and foot had an enterprise in hand against the City of Hagenaw, but his plot
was discovered by an untimely shot, and was forced to retire.

Eysfield May 15. 25.
The Imperial and Swedish Army ly on the River of Saala near Salfield within
a musket shot one from the other, they play uncessantly both day and night
with their Canons one against another, especially the other day General
Bannier played most fiercely against the Bavarians, with 3000. horse strong came
into the Camp; the rest of the Bavarian troops ly likewise not far from the
Imperial camp, and expect within few days the rest of their troops, which
are drawn together from all places, insomuch that without all question we
shall shortly hear of great blows, to which end hot skirmishes pass already
betwixt them every day, and the Imperalists have taken prisoners diverse of the
Luneburgish troops. The Imperial commissarie Fuse, who went to Erfurd to
General Bannier, is come back agine to Cronach, where he was put into prison,
it is thought, that he will loose his life.

Collen May 27. 37.
The Imperial Colonel Meuter has by a stratgeme the strong Castle of
Sicherg, which was guarded by the Duke of Newburg his forces, the letters from
Paris of the 9.19. of this month certify: that the French King is gone
toward Rein to be the nearer to the siege before Charlemont, and at Paris was
sung Te Deum laud amus for the victory, which the French had before Cazall.

Hamberugh May 9. 19.
The King of Denmark continues still to leave strong forces both for sea and
land, insomuch that by all appearance it will prove a war betwixt him and the
Hollanders. The 5. of this month Otto Brukman, who was sent Ambassador by the
Duke of Holstein to the king of Persia, was beheaded at Gotterp.

Erfurd May 17. 27.
After that General Bannier was gone with his Army toward the river of
Saala, the Imperalists put themselves into battle betwixt the river of Saala
and Salfield, but being the Swedes played so fiercely against them with their
Canons, the y were forced to forsake that ground, and on the other side of the
City of Salfield in a valley they put themselves into battle thinking to keep
back there the Swedish Army but some of the Swedish Regiments got immediately
with 40. pieces of ordinance over the River of Saala, took by force the Redout
which the Imperalists had made upon the Hill, in which action Colonel Slang
lost his right arm, which was shot off by a piece of ordnance, whereupon the
Swedes planted immediately their Canons upon the hill, wherewith they played most
fiercely into the Imperial Camp, and killed a great many of the Imperalists,
insomuch that they were forced to forsake the same valley and they lie now in a
valley betwixt two hills, wherefore Colonel Coning smark is commanded with many
troops to cut off from them below the forage and provision, that for want of
them they may likewise be forced to rise from thence, to which end the Swedes
have taken already the Magazins, which the Imperiallists had at Hahla, Newstat
and Besniek, wherein they found a great store of provision, and obtained a
great number of wagons laden with provision, which intended to go to the
Imperial Camp, both parties shoot yet with their Canons uncessanly one
against another, in so much that on both fides above four thousand men are
slain already, the Swedes strive above all to take the baggage from the
Imperiallists, for within five or six days both parties will be forced to
look out other quarters: at this instant we hear that the Imperial Army is
retiring toward Frangonia, the Barbarian forces lie for the present yet about
Hilpershausen six leagues from Pi^olomines Army. From Vienna and Prague we
have no other news, but 11.21. of this month, the Emperor is risen from
thence and gone toward Regenspurg, the report goes, that a general Diet shall
be kept there.

From Frankford.
Lion May 2. 12.
THe Burgundians with some few troops are come unawares before Poligny and
fling many fire bals and hand Granadons into it; wherefore the Marquis of
Villaroy, who with his Army lies at Board three leagues from Chalon has
commanded thitherwards with all speed five hundred foot and four 100. horse
to succor the said place. This week many troops both horse and foot are
passed hereby and gone toward Piemont to join with the Count of Harcourt.

Being the Spaniards in Catalogina have some enterprise in hand against the
City of Lemata, wherefore the French Governor there Monsieur Despinan causes
the said City to be more fortified, and in Languedok they draw all the French
^roopes together.

Greiffenberg in Silesia May 4. 14.
The ninth of this month the Saxon and Brandenburgish Regiments of horse
arived about Sittaw, from thence they thought to go toward Hirshberg to join
theirs with the Imperial Army under the command of the Count of Mansfield, to
which end they had come as far already as Lawben, where they received
intelligence, that General Major Stolhans with eight Regiments of horse was
come already as far as Hirshberg, wherefore the Saxon and Branderburgish
Regiments were forced to retire, because the tenth of this month the said
General M^jor Stolhans had charged already the Imperial troops about Shoene
betwixt Hirshberg and Goldenberg namely seven Regiments of horse, which
together with two pieces of Ordnance thought to go toward Hirshberg to begin
the same, and the foot forces together with the rest of the Artilerie should
have followed from Striega, but the said General Major Stolhans in his fuery
fell upon three Imperial Regiments of horse, and dispersed the same and
obtained the two pieces of Ordnance together with all the baggage, the other
four Imperial Regiments of horse were chased as far as Smicberg Landshut
and Striega, which action both Colonels Palefsky and Limpo were taken prisones.
The 8. Swedish Regiments lie yet about Hirshberg: this day the aforesaid
General Major Stolhans is to have his Head quarter at Lemberg 2. leagues from
hence.

Basel May 8. 18.
The Imperial Captain B^ssinger has stragled again as far as Benfield,
intercepted some of these French and Wemarish soldiers and returned with a
good booty to Phillipsberg.

Dresden the 8. 18. of May.
After that the Castle of Tershen was surrendered unto the Imperialists and
Saxons, the Saxon General Sergeant Major Delau came yesterday hither again
with the Artillery; And at this instant we receive likewise avisoes, that the
Castle of Toylitz was yesterday likewise surrendered by composition. General
Major Stollhans has chased the Saxon horsemen beyond Sittaw, and the
Brandenburgish horsemen are gone again toward Berlin.

Duringen the 11. 21. of May.
General Piccolomini lies in his entrenched camp betwixt Iehna and Salfeld on
the other side of the River of Saala, and the Swedish Army about Rudelstatt on
this side, where they one against another out of ye Canons play incessantly.
The Imperialists expect every day the Bavarian Army, as soon as they have
joined together we shall hear of great news, because for want of forage they
will not be able to lie long there, but must fight a pitched battle: General
Banniers Lady and some Officers, which were left at Erfurd, are gone this day
with a Convoy under the command of Colonel Heigings toward the Army, insomuch
that it is believed, that General Bannier will march toward Gera and Zwickaw.
The Imperial Colonel Gill de Haes has close besieged again the Castle of
Masfeld, and straggle as far as Eysenach.

Antwerp the 12. 22. of May.
From Artois is written, that the French intend to march likewise toward
Flanders, and to join with the Hollanders, wherefore the Imperial General
Major Lamboy is to join with the Prince Cardinal Infanta, insomuch that it
will prove a bloody summer.

Vienna the 13. 23. of May.
The Emperor has bestowed upon the Ambassador of Turkey a stately golden
chain, and the peace with the Emperor of Turkey Sultan Ibraim is confirmed,
whereupon the 11.21. of this month his Majesty went from hence toward
Regenspurg, where a general Dyete shall be kept.

Bonn the 15. 25 of May.
Yesterday morning 400 Imperial soldiers under the command of Colonel Meuter,
which came from Mulheim, have taken the strong castle of Sieburg being guarded
by the Duke of Newburg his forces, which made a show as if they would carry Hay
and straw into the said Castle, fell presently upon the watch and thus took
the City and Castle by force.

Duringen the 16. 26. of May.
General Bannier lies with his army yet about Rudelstatt, and the Imperial
General Piccolomini at Salfeld, the Bavarian succor consisting of 17.
Regiments has now joined with the said Piccolomini. Before the Bavarian
troops arrived, General Bannier gave an assault upon the Roten-Hill near
Salfeld, to see whether he could play from thence into Piccolominies Camp,
which at last he mastered, in which action General Major Pful was slain,
Colonel Slanghs right arm shot off, and Colonel Bawer dangerously shot,
besides many other Officers, insomuch that on both sides above 4000 men are
already slain, the Swedes have taken from the Imperialists 2. Sconces. yet
they could not get Piccolomini out of Salfeld, both Armies lie now so close
together, that they could not lie closer, insomuch that without a pitched
battle, they can not part one from the other.

Coburg the 14. 24. of May.
This morning we received avisoes, that 6000 Swedish horsemen have surprised an
Imperial quarter betwixt Rudelstatt and Mulberg, slain some 100 of them,
took many prisoners and obtained 9 standards. Both parties have order to fight.

Paris the 18. 28. of May.
The 9. of this month 150 horsemen and 70. foot of the garrisons of
Chastelet. Peronne and St. Quentin went toward the Fort of Agincourt, which
lies betwixt Baupalme and Cambray, and after that they had surprised and
pilladged the same they discry'd some Spanish forces both horse and foot,
which were gone into France, whom they followed, they came into the Village of
Ronsoy where they perceived an Alarm in the Vlage of Agincourt near
Chastilet, where the enemy has taken many Prisoners and obtained many horses
and a rich booty, whereupon our soldiers marched against them and found them
strong 3 Companies of horse divided into 3 Squadrons, and seconded by 30 foot
with firelocks, and being come in sight of the enemy our Horsemen divided
themselves into 5 Squadrons, which gave so fierce fire against the enemy, that
with the first charge they killed a Marshall and 11. horsemen and pursued after
the rest to the first Fort of their Country, where some few saved themselves,
but 60: were taken prisoners, all the goods, which they had taken were restored
again to the Peasants.

Erfurd the 14. 24 of May.
At this instant we receive avisoes, that General Bannier has totally routed
and defeated the Crabats that very few of them escaped alive.

A List of the overthrow of the Spanish Army before Cazall the 20. 30 of April.
In the River of Poe are drowned above a 1000 soldiers, and in the field were
found dead 2300 men. Wounded 1400. Prisoners 2000. Wagons laden with Baggage
were taken 1500. 2000 Barrels of Gunpowder, 1000 weight of Matches, 2000
Fireballs, 4000 weight of Musket bullets, 30 Coaches, 4000 Carts and Wagons,
9 great Pieces of Ordnance, and 36 others; 2 Mortar pieces, 52 Ensigns, 32
Standards. Of the Prisoners that were taken, the chiefest are Vasquiet
Lieutenant General of the Artillery, Don Carlo Hatta, Count Biglia, Marquis
Bellaviano, Don Alphonso and others; Of those that were then slain, the
chiefest are Don Alardy, Marquis Carisana General of the Horse, the Baron of
Osuman Lieutenant General of the horse, Field-marshall Mora, Marquis de
Sancto, besides many Captains and other Officers.

An Extract of a Letter from Franckford the 24of May, the 3 of June.
As for news I cannot but certify you, that we have rceived certain avisoes,
that 4000 Imperial Curassiers and 3000 light horsemen are totally routed and
defeated by the Swedes, and that an Austrian Earl is brought prisoner into
Erfurd, yea they say, that the whole Imperial Army is overthrown and
Piccolomini mortally wounded, (some have letters, that 28000 of the
Imperialists are slain and taken prisoners, the certainty whereof we shall
hear by the next.) It is likewise certain, that the Swedish General Major
Stollhans with his Army has likewise defeated the Imperial Army in Silesia,
and that he is gone already into Bohemia and come as far as Leutmaritz, so
that the Imperialists have their enemy before and behind them. The last letters
from France bring certain news, that the French under the command of the
Count of Harcourt has taken by assault the City of Thurino, and Prince Thomas
prisoner, and they write also, that the said Count of Harcourt has given
again an utter overthrow to the Spanish Army, which was coming to relieve the
said City of Thurino. They write also from Paris that the whole Kingdom of
Catalonia is in vproare and that they have killed already many 1000 Castillions.

From Holland.
Erford the 8. 18. of May.
THe other day about 11. of the clock the Luneburgish, Hessish, and Weymarish
forces arrived safely here, and before this City in the open field they keep a
general mustering the Generals of the said forces were received by General
Bannier with great reverence, all the Canons discharged and a valley of shot
made with muskets. Yesterday rose from hence the whole Army and marched
against Gen: Piccolomini, who lies on the River of Saala, Fieldmarshall
Hatzfeld has already forsaken his quarter, and is retired over the River of
Saala, throwing off all bridges over the said River: The Army of General
Bannier consisted of 22000. horse and foot, the Weymarish consisted of 10000.
men: the Hessish and Luneburgish Army o^ 12000. men, all stout and lusty
soldiers. The Imperialists (...) likewise very strong, they speak of 60000.
men. The Castle of Tetshen in Bohemia is surrendered upon discretion to the
Saxon and Imperial troops, after that they had taken by assault the
out-workes, and were ready to do the like to the Castle. The Swedish Gen:
Major Stollhans has defeated in Silesia near Hirshberg and Goldberg the
Imperial Army under the command of the Count of Mansfield, ruinated 3
Regiments and obtained all the baggage, and taken prisoners both Colonels
Palofsky and Limpo together with others.

Paris the 9. 19. of May.
This day was sung here Te Deum laudamus for the Victory, which the Count of
Harcourt had in Italy. The French King has sent fair presents to the Count of
Harcourt, and has made the Governor in Cazall an Earl, and to all the
Officers which had performed good service in the fight, presents were given.
Upon this Victory the said Count of Harcourt has besieged the City of Thurino,
and has reinforced his army with 4000. men, and 6000. more, which are already
in the way, are likewise to join with him. The Baron of Arnault has befieged
the Castle of Poligny in the French County, but was beaten away again by
Marquis Villeroy, who obtained all his Canons and Baggage: Duke Charles of
Lorraine has likewise had some loss.

We have news here, that the Count of Harcourt has taken the bridge over the
River of Poe, the Capuryner Sconce before Thurino and all the outworkes,
insomuch that the City will likewise not be able to hold out long. Yesterday
we received avisoes, that the City is taken already by assault, and that all
the Spaniards are put to the sword, and Prince Thomas taken prisoner. The
French King is gone to Reims to keep his Court there to be the nearer to the
fiege of Charlemont.

Liege the 16. 26. of May.
Charlemont is now close besieged and Monsieur de Milleray is likewise to come
with his army before it.

The French King is at Soy sons. At Hesdin and Dourans are erected great
Magazins. The Spanish Army under the command of the Marquis of Leden has order
to march toward Mabeuse to succor and relieve Charlemont. The report goes
that 40 barrels of Gunpowder in the camp before Charlemont, some speak of
more, are blown up, which has done great harm both to the men and to the
Artillery. The French have plundered and afterward sired Orimont, Guay, and
Chimay.

Hamberough the 16. 26. of May.
General Piccolomini has mustered his Camp, and is passed thereupon the
River of Saala taking his Head-quarter betwixt Witsensea and Longen Salzato
expect their the Swedish Army: In the mean time the said Piccolomini caused
the little City of Ilmen to be surprised, wherein he ruinated between 2 and
300. Swedish soldiers: General Bannier is risen from Ersurd with a strong
Army, if Piccolomini does stand to it, it will prove a most bloody battle.

Sluys the 17. 27. of May.
The Prince of Orange lies with his army yet at Maldegem, where he does
entrench himself; In the encounter near the new Ferry, whereof mention was
made heretofore, we have lost 38 men and 40 were wounded, since that time
nothing is passed. Count William of Nassaw Field marshall could not hitherto do
much good upon the Fort of St. Donaes, though he lies very nigh to it, and they
can fling into hand grenades, he plays continually with his Canons upon it,
and makes the same like a heap of earth: He labors likewise very hard to get
over the River of Soete, over the Zoute he has a bridge and two Batteries
standing upon the Ditch. The Spaniards have cut through the Zoute with a trench
to maintain the better the River of Soere, if we do master the same then the
said Sconce is lost, because all succor and provision is then cut off from
them.

Flussingen the 17. 27. of May.
Here are arrived 3 ships, which came from Bordeaux, they have been fighting
for 6 hours long against 2 Dunkerck Fregats, one whereof carried 18 and
the other 26 pieces of Ordnance: The 13.23. of this month went through Gent
toward Bruges, the Count of Fountain with many forces: General Major Lamboy
is going with his Army toward Mamur, Marquis de Leden, who lay the 13.23. of
this month about Bael os to join with him.

From the Imperial Camp at Salfeld the 12. 22. of May.
The 8.18. of this month about 10. of the clock in the forenoone Gen: Bannier
came with his whole army in a great fury before our Camp and finding us in a
good posture after some hot skirmishes marched the same night toward
Rudelstat, and the 9.19. of this month presented himself again in battle
array; We remained in our trenches, and the charges dured all the day long,
as soon as the Bavarian forces have joined with us, we shall resolve another
thing, in the mean time Gen: Bannier descryes all the passages hereabouts, and
we fear, that he will besiege us and march against Leipzigh, yesternight
General Bannier came to Rudelstat, and being he is better furnished with
provision, it is likely he will stay hereabouts a good while. Last night he
had his quarter in both Valleys Blanckenberg and Rudelstat, and near the
Cloister of Munchenberg he planted the Canons, and advanced within 2 or 3
musket shorts of our trenches, and being we can get no provision from
Altenburg and Swartzenburg, we shall shortly resolve one way or other.

Franckford the 18. 28. of May.
From Prague and Leipzigh is written that the Swedish General Major Stollbans
has defeated about Hirishberg in Silesia 9 Imperial Regiments, taken a great
number prisoners, amongst which are Colonel Palofsky and Limpo, obtained all
their Canons and baggage, and upon this victory he advanced within 8 leagues of
Leutmaritz.

From Franconia of the 15.25. of this month is written, that General Bannier
has burned down the Suburbs at Kala, found a great store of provision in the
City and maistered a passage over the River of Saala, from thence he marched
toward Katze^stein, not far from Salfeld. The Crabats which were commanded
against him are totally routed and defeated.

Flussingen the 19. 29. of May.
St. Donaes remains yet close besieged, Count Willi^^ has put four Companies
behind the Sconce together with mortar piece to send from thence continually
fireballs into the said Fort. The Spaniards come yet in and out the For^ along
the river of Soete, and within the Sconce they have made diverse deep holes
into the wall to shelter themselves against the Grenades, and the women and
children are for the most part departed out of the Sconce; In the mean time
the besieged shoot very little with their Canons, and the other Sconces as
namely St. Frederick and the Star-sconce shoot less only those of St. Job
thunder continually with thheir canons.

The ships which transported our horsemen lie before Ramekins

Upon the Ditch of the Soete and Zoute they shoot fiercely one upon another:

Flushingen the 21. 31. of May.
The Prince of Orange lies with his Army yet at Maldeg^^ there is as yet but
little hope of the getting of St. Dona^^ long as we cannot get over the river
of Soete.

Amsterdam the 23 of May, the 2 of June.
The 16.26 of this month, Marquis de Leden marched with 8000 men both horse
and foot over the bridge at Antmery The gates at Hulst have been kept shut
above three days long* and suffered no man to come in or out.

The report goes, that the French King and Marshall de Ch^^stillien are coming
with a strong army toward Flanders, it is thought that they will join with
the Prince of Orange.

All the bands of Ordonnancie are now in the field, out o^ every Company 20 men
are taken and put under the weal^^^ Spanish companies.

Our Admiral Martin Harpers Tromp, we hear is to go^ within few days to Sea.

The French continue still the fiege before Charlemont, an^ fortify themselves
before it exceedingly.

Imprimatur

Philip. Minutelius.

LONDON, Printed for NATH: BUTTER.


