A FORM OF Prayer, with Thanksgiving, to be used of all the Kings Majesty's
loving Subjects every year the 27. of March.

Being the day of His Highness entry to this Kingdom.

Set forth by Authority.

Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton and John Bill, Printers to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty.

Anno 1626.

Cum priuilegio.

surrounding the title page text, printer's device (McKerrow 221b):
"Compartment with [the arms of Charles I] at top, Fides and Humilitas at sides;
the ensigns of the four evangelists at the corners" FIDES

HVMILITAS



An Order for Morning Prayer to be used the 27. of March.
1. Tim. 2. verse. 1. I Exhort you therefore, that first of all, prayers,
supplications, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men: for
Princes, and for all that are in authority, that we may live a quiet and
peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty, for that is good and acceptable
in the sight of God our Savior.


You shall understand, that every thing in this Book is placed in order, as it
shall be used, without turning to and fro, saving the two Lessons taken out of
the old Testament, of which you may choose either, as you think best, for the
first lesson at this morning prayer. And in Cathedral Churches, the Minister
may use either of the other two, for the first Lesson at Evening prayer. First,
the Minister shall with a loud voice pronounce some one of these three
Sentences, as in the Book of common Prayer. Ezech. 18.
AT what time soever a sinner does repent him of his sin from the bottom of
his heart, I will put all his wickedness out of my remembrance, says the Lord.

Joel 2.
Rent your hearts, and not your garments, and turn to the Lord your God,
because he is gentle and merciful, he is patient, and of much mercy, and
such a one that is sorry for your afflictions.

If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no truth
in us.

Dearly beloved brethren, the scripture moves us in sundry places, to
acknowledge and confess our manifold sins and wickedness, and that we
should not dissemble nor cloak them before the face of Almighty God our
heavenly Father, but confess them with an humble, lowly, penitent, and
obedient heart, to the end that we may obtain forgiveness of the same, by
his infinite goodness and mercy. And although we ought at al times humbly to
acknowledge our sins before God, yet ought we most chiefly so to do when we
assemble and meet together, to render thanks for the great benefits that we
have received at his hands, to set forth his most worthy praise, to hear his
most holy word, and to ask those things which be requisite and necessary, as
well for the body as the soul. Wherefore I pray and beseech you as many as be
here present, to accompany me with a pure heart and humble voice, unto the
throne of the heavenly grace, saying after me.

A general Confession to be said of the whole Congregation after the
Minister, kneeling. ALmighty and most merciful Father, we have erred and
strayed from thy ways like lost sheep, we have followed too much the devices
and desires of our own hearts. We have offended against thy holy Laws. We
have left undone those things which we ought to have done, and we have done
those things which we ought not to have done, and there is no health in us,
but thou, O Lord, have mercy upon us miserable offenders. Spare thou them, O
God, which confess their faults, restore thou them that be penitent, according
to thy promises declared unto mankind in Christ Jesus our Lord. And grant, O
most merciful Father, for his sake, that we may hereafter live a godly,
righteous, and sober life, to the glory of thy holy Name. Amen.

The absolution or remission of sins to be pronounced by the Priest alone.
ALmighty God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which desires not the death
of a sinner, but rather that he may turn from his wickedness and live, and has
given power and commandment to his ministers, to declare and pronounce to his
people, being penitent, the absolution and remission of their sins: he
pardons and absolueth all them which truly repent, and unfeignedly believe
his holy Gospel. Wherefore we beseech him to grant us true repentance and his
holy Spirit, that those things may please him which we do at this present,
and that the rest of our life hereafter may be pure and holy, so that at the
last we may come to his eternal joy, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The people shall answer, Amen.


Then shall the Minister begin the Lords Prayer with a loud voice. OUr Father
which art in heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done
in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us
our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And lead us not
into temptation: But deliver us from evil, Amen.

Then likewise he shall say: O Lord open thou our lips.


Answer. And our mouth shall show forth thy praise.


Minister. O God make speed to save us.


Answer. O Lord make haste to help us.


Minister. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end, Amen.

Praise ye the Lord.


Then shall be said or sung this Psalm following. O Come, let us sing unto the
Lord: let us heartily rejoice in the strength of our salvation.

Let us come before his presence with thanksgiving: and show our selves glad
in him with Psalms.

For the Lord is a great God: and a great King above all gods.

In his hand are all the corners of the earth: and she strength of the hills is
his also.

The Sea is his, and he made it: and his hands prepared the dry land.

O come, let us worship, and fall down: and kneel before the Lord our maker.

For he is the Lord our God: and we are the people of his pasture, and the
sheep of his hands.

To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts: as in the
provocation, and as in the day of temptation in the wilderness.

When your fathers tempted me: proved me, and saw my works.

Forty years long was I grieved with this generation, and said: It is a
people that do err in their hearts, for they have not known my ways.

Unto whom I swear in my wrath: that they should not enter into my rest.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

Exaudiat te Dominus. Psalm. 20.
THe Lord hear thee in the day of trouble: the Name of the God of Jacob defend
thee.

Send thee help from the Sanctuary: and strengthen thee out of Sion.

Remember all thy offerings: and accept thy burnt sacrifice.

Grant thee thy hearts desire: and small all thy mind.

We will rejoice in thy salvation, and triumph in the name of the Lord our
God: the Lord perform all thy petitions.

Now know I that the Lord helps his anointed, and will hear him from his
holy heaven: even with the wholesome strength of his right hand.

Some put their trust in charets, and some in horses: but we will remember the
Name of the Lord our God.

They are brought down and fallen: but we are risen, and stand upright.

Save Lord, and hear us, O King of heaven: when we call upon thee.

Domine in virtute. Psalm. 21.
THe King shall rejoice in thy strength, O Lord: exceeding glad shall he be of
thy salvation.

Thou have given him his hearts desire: and have not denied him the request of
his lips.

For thou shall prevent him with the blessings of goodness: and shall set a
crown of pure gold upon his head.

He asked life of thee, and thou gave him a long life: even for ever and ever.

His honor is great in thy salvation: glory and great worship shall thou lay
upon him.

For thou shall give him everlasting felicity: and make him glad with the joy
of thy countenance.

And why? because the king puts his trust in the Lord: and in the mercy of
the most highest, he shall not miscarie.

All thine enemies shall feel thy hand: thy right hand shall find out them
that hate thee.

Thou shall make them like a fiery oven in time of thy wrath: the Lord shall
destroy them in his displeasure, and the fire shall consume them.

Their fruit shall thou root out of the earth: and their seed from among the
children of men.

For they intended mischief against thee: and imagined such a device as they
are not able to perform.

Therefore shall thou put them to flight: and the strings of thy bow shall thou
make ready against the face of them.

Be thou exalted Lord in thine own strength: so will we sing and praise thy
power.

Benedixisti Domine. Psalm. 85.
LOrd, thou art become gracious unto thy land: thou have turned away the
captivity of Jacob.

Thou have forgiven the offense of thy people: and covered all their sins.

Thou have taken away all thy displeasure: and turned thy self from thy
wrathful indignation.

Turn us then O God our Savior: and let thine anger cease from us.

Will thou be displeased at us for ever: and will thou stretch out thy wrath
from one generation to another?

Will thou not turn again, and quicken us: that thy people may rejoice in
thee?

Show us thy mercy, O Lord: and grant us thy salvation.

I will hearken what the Lord God will say concerning me: for he will speak
peace unto his people, and to his saints, that they turn not again.

For his salvation is nigh them that fear him: that glory may dwell in our
land.

Mercy and truth are met together: righteousness and peace have kissed each
other.

Truth shall flourish out of the earth: and righteousness has looked down
from heaven.

Yea, the Lord shall show loving kindness: and our land shall give her
increase.

Righteousness shall go before him: and he shall direct his going in the way.

Confitemini Domino. Psalm. 118.
O Give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious: because his mercy endures
for ever.

Let Israel now confess, that he is gracious: and that his mercy endures for
ever.

Let the house of Aaron now confess: that his mercy endures for ever.

Yea, let them now that fear the Lord, confess: that his mercy endures for
ever.

I called upon the Lord in trouble: and the Lord heard me at large.

The Lord is on my side: I will not fear what man does unto me.

The Lord takes my part with them that help me: therefore shall I see my
desire upon mine enemies.

It is better to trust in the Lord: then to put any confidence in man.

It is better to trust in the Lord: then to put any confidence in princes.

All Nations compassed me round about: but in the Name of the Lord will I
destory them.

They kept me in on every side, they kept me in (I say) on every side: but in
the Name of the Lord will I destroy them.

They came about me like Bees, and are extinct, even as the fire among the
thorns: for in the Name of the Lord will I destroy them.

Thou have thrust sore at me, that I might fall: but the Lord was my help.

The Lord is my strength and my song: and is become my salvation.

The voice of joy and health is in the dwellings of the righteous: the right
hand of the Lord brings mighty things to pass.

The right hand of the Lord has the preeminence: the right hand of the Lord
brings mighty things to pass.

I will not die, but live: and declare the works of the Lord.

The Lord has chastened and corrected me: but he has not given me over unto
death.

Open me the gates of righteousness: that I may go into them, and give thanks
unto the Lord.

This is the gate of the Lord: the righteous shall enter into it.

I will thank thee, for thou have heard me: and art become my salvation.

The same stone which the builders refused: is become the head stone of the
corner.

This is the Lords doing: and it is marvelous in our eyes.

This is the day which the Lord has made: we will rejoice and be glad in it.

Help me now, O Lord: O Lord send us now prosperity.

Blessed be he that comes in the Name of the Lord: we have wished you good
luck, ye that be of the house of the Lord.

God is the Lord which has showed us light: bind the sacrifice with cords,
yea, even unto the horns of the Altar.

Thou art my God, and I will thank thee: thou art my God, and I will praise
thee.

O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious: and his mercy endures for
ever.

For the first Lesson is appointed to be read the first Chapter of the Book of
Iosuah.
AFter the death of Moses the servant of the Lord, it came to pass that the
Lord, spoke unto Iosuah the son of Nun, Moses minister, saying, Moses my
servant is dead: now therefore arise, go over this Iordane, thou, and all this
people, unto the land the which I to them the children of Israel do give. All
the places that the soles of your feet shall tread upon, have I given you, as
I said unto Moses. From the wilderness and this Lebanon, unto the great river
Euphrates, all the land of the Hittites, even unto the great sea, toward the
going down of the Sun, shall be your coast. There shall not a man be able to
with stand thee, all the days of thy life: for as I was with Moses, so will I
be with thee, and will not fail thee, nor forsake thee. Be strong therefore,
and bold: for unto this people shall thou divide the land for inheritance,
which I swear unto their fathers to give them, Only be thou strong, and of a
stout courage, that thou may observe and do according to all the law which
Moses my servant commanded thee: turn from the same neither to the right hand,
nor to the left, that thou may do wisely in all that thou take in hand.
Let not the Book of this Law depart out of thy mouth, but occupy thy mind
therein day and night, that thou may observe and do according to all that is
written therein: for then thou shall make thy way prosperous, and then thou
shall do wisely. Have not I commanded thee, that thou should be strong
and hardy, and not fear nor be faint hearted? for I the Lord thy God am with
thee, whithersoeuer thou go. Then Iosuah commanded the officers of the
people, saying, Go through the midst of the host, and command the people,
saying, Prepare your victuals: for after three days ye shall pass over this
Iordane to go in, and enjoy the land which the Lord your God gives you to
possess it. And unto the Reubenites, Gadites, and half the tribe of Manasses,
spoke Iosuah saying, Remember the word which Moses the servant of the Lord
commanded you, saying, The Lord your God has given you rest, and has given
you this land. Your wives, your children, and your cattle, shall remain in
the land which Moses gave you on this side Iordane: but ye shall go before
your brethren armed, all that be men of war, and help them, until the Lord
have given your brethren rest, as he has you, and until they also have
obtained the land which the Lord your GOD gives them: and then shall ye
return unto the land of your possession, and enjoy it, which land Moses the
Lords servant gave you on this side Jordan toward the Sun rising. And they
answered Iosuah, saying, All that thou have commanded us, we will do, and
whithersoeuer thou sendest us, we will go. According as we obeyed Moses in all
things, so will we obey thee: only the Lord thy God be with thee, as he was
with Moses. And whosoever he be that does disobey thy mouth, and will not
hearken unto thy words in all that thou command him, let him die: only be
strong, and of good courage,

The first Chapter of the second Book of the Chronicles.
Or this may be the first Lesson.
AND Solomon the Son of David waxed strong in his kingdom, and the Lord his
God was with him, and magnifyed him in dignity. And Solomon spoke unto all
Israel, to the Captains over thousands, to the Captains over hundreds, to the
Judges, and to every Officer in all Israel, and to the ancient fathers. And so
Solomon, and all the Congregation with him, went to the high place that was at
Gibeon: for there was the Tabernacle of the Congregation of God, which Moses
the servant of the Lord made in the wilderness. But the Ark of God had David
brought from Kiriath-iarim, into the place which David had made therefore: for
he had pitched a tent for it at Jerusalem. Moreover, the brazen Altar that
Bezaleel the son of Vri, the son of Hur had made, was there before the
Tabernacle of the Lord, and Solomon and the Congregation went to visit it. And
Solomon went up there before the Lord, to the brazen Altar that was before the
Tabernacle of the Congregation, and offered a thousand whole burnt offerings
upon it. And the same night did God appear unto Solomon, and said unto him,
Ask what I shall give thee. And Solomon said unto God, Thou have showed great
mercy unto David my father, and have made me to reign in his stead. Now
therefore O Lord God, let thy promise, which thou made unto David my father,
be true: for thou have made me king over a people which is like the dust of the
earth in multitude: Give me now wisdom and knowledge, that I may be able to
go in and out before this people: for who else can judge this people that is so
great? And God said to Solomon, Because this was in thine heart, and because
thou have not asked treasure, and riches, nor honor, nor the lives of thine
enemies, neither yet long life, but have asked wisdom and knowledge for thy
self, to judge my people, over whom I have made thee king: Wisdom and
knowledge is granted unto thee, and I will give thee treasure, and riches, and
glory: so that among the kings that have been before thee, or after thee, none
was or shall be like thee. And so Solomon came from the high place that was at
Gibeon, to Jerusalem, from the Tabernacle of the Congregation, and reigned
over Israel. And Solomon gathered charets, and horsemen: and he had a thousand
and four hundred charets, and twelve thousand horsemen, whom he bestowed in
the charet cities, and with the King at Jerusalem. And the King made silver
and gold at Jerusalem, as plenteous as stones, and Cedar trees made he as
plenteous as ye mulbery trees that grow in the valleys. Also Solomon had
horses brought out of Egypt, and fine linen: the kings merchants received the
fine linen for a price. They came also, and brought out of Egypt, a charet for
six hundred pieces of silver, even an horse for an hundred and fifty: and so
brought they horses for all the kings of the Hittites, and for the kings of
Syria, by their own hand.

Te Deum laudamus.
We praise thee, O God: we knowledge thee to be the Lord.

All the earth does worship thee: the Father everlasting.

To thee all Angels cry alowde: the heavens, and all the powers therein.

To thee Cherubin and Seraphin: continually do cry.

Holy, holy, holy: Lord God of Sabbath.

Heaven and earth are full of the Majesty: of thy glory.

The glorious company of the Apostles: praise thee.

The goodly fellowship of the Prophets: praise thee.

The noble army of Martyrs: praise thee.

The holy Church thoughout all the world: does knowledge thee.

The Father: of an infinite Majesty.

Thy honorable, true: and only Son.

Also the holy Ghost: the Comforter.

Thou art the King of glory: O Christ.

Thou art the everlasting Son: of the Father.

When thou tookest upon thee to deliver man: thou did not abhor the
Virgins womb.

When thou had overcome the sharpness of death: thou did open the
kingdom of heaven to all believers.

Thou sit on the right hand of God: in the glory of the Father.

We believe that thou shall come: to be our Judge.

We therefore pray thee help thy servants: whom thou have redeemed with thy
precious blood.

Make them to be numbered with thy Saints: in glory everlasting.

O Lord save thy people: and bless thine heritage.

Govern them: and lift them up for ever.

Day by day: we magnify thee.

And we worship thy Name: ever world without end.

Uouchsafe, O Lord: to keep us this day without sin.

O Lord have mercy upon us: have mercy upon us.

O Lord let thy mercy lighten upon us: as our trust is in thee.

O Lord in thee have I trusted: let me never be confounded.

The second Lesson, taken out of the Epistle of S. Paul to the Romans, the
thirteenth Chapter.
LEt every soul be subject unto the higher powers: for there is no power but
of God: and the powers that be, are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore
resists the power, resists the ordinance of God: and they that resist shall
receive to themselves judgment. For Princes are not to be feared for good
works, but for evil. Will thou then be without fear of the power? do well: so
shall thou have praise of the same. For he is the minister of God for thy
wealth: but if thou do evil, fear: for he bears not the sword for naught:
for he is the minister of God to take vengeance on him that does evil.
Wherefore ye must be subject, not because of wrath only, but also for
conscience sake. For, for this cause ye pay also tribute: for they are Gods
ministers, applying themselves for the same thing.

Give to all men therefore their duty, tribute, to whom ye o we tribute:
custom, to whom custom: fear, to whom fear: honor, to whom ye o we honor.
O we nothing to any man, but to love one another: for he that loves another,
has fulfilled the Law. For this, Thou shall not commit adultery, Thou shall
not kill, Thou shall not steal, Thou shall not bear false witness, Thou shall
not covet: and if there be any other Commandment, it is briefly comprehended
in this saying, even in this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.

Love does not evil to his neighbor: therefore is love the fulfilling of the
Law.

And that, considering the season, that it is now time that we should arise
from sleep: for now is our salvation nearer, then when we believed it. The
night is past, and the day is at hand: let us therefore cast away the works of
darkness, and let us put on the armor of light. So that we walk honestly,
as in the day: not in gluttony, and drunkenness, neither in chambering and
wantonness, nor in strife and envying: But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ,
and take no thought for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts of it.

After the second Lesson, shall be used and said, Benedictus in English, as
follows.
BLessed be the Lord God of Israel: for he has visited and redeemed his
people.

And has raised up a mighty salvation for us: in the house of his servant
David.

As he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets: which have been since the world
began.

That we should be saved from our enemies: and from the hands of all that hate
us.

To perform the mercy promised to our forefathers: and to remember his holy
Covenant.

To perform the oath which he swear to our forefather Abraham: that he would
give us.

That we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies: might serve him
without fear.

In holiness and righteousness before him: all the days of our life.

And thou Child shall be called the Prophet of the Highest: for thou shall go
before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways.

To give knowledge of salvation unto his people: for the remission of their
sins.

Through the tender mercy of our God: whereby the day spring from an high has
visited us.

To give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death: and
to guide our feet into the way of peace.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

Or this C. Psalm.
O Be joyful in the Lord all ye lands: serve the Lord with gladness, and
come before his presence with a song.

Be ye sure that the Lord he is God, it is he that has made us, and not we
our selves: we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture.

O go your way into his gates with thanksgiving, and into his courts with
praise: be thankeful unto him, and speak good of his Name.

For the Lord is gracious, his mercy is everlasting: and his truth endures
from generation to generation.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

I Believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth. And in Jesus
Christ his only Son our Lord, which was conceived by the holy Ghost, borne
of the virgin Mary, suffered under Ponce Pilate, was crucified, dead, and
buried, he descended into hell, the third day he rose again from the dead,
he ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the Father
Almighty, from thence shall he come to judge the quick and the dead. I
believe in the holy Ghost, the holy Catholic Church, the communion of Saints,
the forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the body, and the life
everlasting. Amen.

And after that, these Prayers following, as well at Evening prayer, as at
Morning prayer, all devoutly kneeling; The Minister first pronouncing with a
loud voice. The Lord be with you.


People. And with thy Spirit.


Minister. Let us pray.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our Father which art in heaven, etc.


Minister. O Lord show thy mercy upon us.


People. And grant us thy salvation.


Minister. O Lord save the King


People. Who puts his trust in thee.


Minister. Send him help from thy holy place.


People. And evermore mightily defend him.


Minister. Let the enemies have none advantage over him.


People. Let not the wicked approach to hurt him.


Minister. Indue thy Ministers with righteousness.


People. And make thy chosen people joyful.


Minister. O Lord save thy people.


People. And bless thine inheritance.


Minister. Give peace in our time, O Lord.


People. Because there is none other that fights for us, but only thou, O
God.


Minister. O God make clean our hearts within us.


People. And take not thy holy Spirit from us.


A Prayer for the Kings Majesty. O Lord our heavenly Father, high and mighty,
King of kings, Lord of lords, the only ruler of Princes, which do from thy
Throne behold all the dwellers upon ye earth, most heartily we beseech thee
with thy favor to behold our most gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles, and
so replenish him with the grace of thy holy Spirit, that he may always incline
to thy will, and walk in thy way, indue him plentifully with heavenly gifts,
grant him in health and wealth long to live, strengthen him that he may
vanquish and overcome all his enemies, and finally after this life, he may
attain everlasting joy and felicity, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Or this. O Lord, thou have dealt graciously with our land: and we thy unworthy
creatures acknowledge our selves infinitely blessed in thy servant our dread
Sovereign King Charles, whom thou have chosen and anointed to rule over us:
and we are at this time here gathered together before heaven, and before thee,
to make a grateful commemoration of the time, and of the day wherein this
thine unspeakable goodness began to be powered upon us, and to offer up our
vows and sacrifices of thanksgiving, and praise unto thy glorious Name, which
cannot worthily of us be praised: humbly beseeching thee to accept the unworthy
oblation of our selves, vowing all holy obedience in thought, word and work
unto thy divine Majesty, and promising in thee, and for thee unto this our
King all loyal and faithful allegiance, and to his seed, his heirs, and
successors after him in all generations, whom we beseech thee to follow with
all increase of honor and happiness in this world, and to crown with
immortality, and glory in the world to come, for Jesus Christ his sake our
only Lord and Savior. Amen.

O God, which art the author of peace, and lover of concord, in knowledge of
whom stands our eternal life, whose service is perfect freedom, defend us
thy humble servants in all assaults of our enemies, that we surely trusting in
thy defense, may not fear the power of any adversaries, through the might of
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The third Collect for grace. O Lord our heavenly Father, Almighty and
everlasting God, which have safely brought us to the beginning of this day,
defend us in the same with thy mighty power, and grant that this day we fall
into no sin, neither run into any kind of danger, but that all our doings
may be ordered by thy governance, to do always that is righteous in thy sight,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

It is ordered, that the Letany shall not be omitted the seven and twentieth
day of March, though it fall upon Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, or Saturday. O God
the Father of heaven: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Father of heaven: etc.

O God the Son redeemer of the world: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Son redeemer of the world: etc.

O God the holy Ghost proceeding from the Father and the Son: have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

O God the holy Ghost proceeding, etc.

O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, three persons and one God: have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

O holy blessed, and glorious Trinity, etc.

Remember not Lord our offenses, nor the offenses of our forefathers, neither
take thou vengeance of our sins: spare us good Lord, spare thy people whom
thou have redeemed with thy most precious blood, and be not angry with us for
ever.

Spare us good Lord.

From all evil and mischief, from sin, from the crafts and assaults of the
devil, from thy wrath, and from everlasting damnation.

Good Lord deliver us.

From all blindness of heart, from pride, vain glory and hypocrisy, from
envy, hatred, and malice, and all uncharitableness.

Good Lord deliver us.

From fornication, and all other deadly sin, and from all the deceits of the
world, the flesh and the devil.

Good Lord deliver us.

From lightning and tempest, from plague, pestilence and famine, from battle
and murder, and from sudden death.

Good Lord deliver us.

From all sedition and privy conspiracy, from all false doctrine and heresy,
from hardness of heart, and contempt of thy word and commandment.

Good Lord deliver us.

By the mystery of thy holy incarnation, by thy holy nativity and
circumcision, by thy baptism, fasting and temptation.

Good Lord deliver us.

By thine agony and bloody sweat, by thy cross and passion by thy precious
death and burial, by thy glorious resurrection and ascension, and by the
coming of the holy Ghost.

Good Lord deliver us.

In all time of our tribulation, in all time of our wealth, in the hour of
death, and in the day of judgment.

Good Lord deliver us.

We sinners do beseech thee to hear us, (O Lord God) and that it may please
thee to rule and govern thy holy Church universally in the right way.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to keep and strengthen in the true worshipping of
thee, in righteousness and holiness of life, thy servant Charles, our most
gracious King and Governor.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to rule his heart in thy faith, fear and love, and
that he may always have affiance in thee, and ever seek thy honor and glory.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to be his defender and keeper, giving him the victory
over all his enemies.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and preserve our gracious Queen Mary,
Frederick the Prince Elector Palatine, and the Lady Elizabeth his wife, with
their Princely issue.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to illuminate all Bishops, Pastors, and Ministers of
the Church, with true knowledge and understanding of thy word, and that both by
their preaching and living they may set it forth, and show it accordingly.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to endue the Lords of the Counsel, and all the
Nobility, with grace, wisdom, and understanding.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and keep the Magistrates, giving them grace
to execute justice, and to maintain truth.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and keep al thy people.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to give to all nations unity, peace, and concord.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to give us an heart to love and dread thee, and
diligently to live after thy commandments.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to give to all thy people increase of grace, to hear
meekly thy word, and to receive it with pure affection, and to bring forth the
fruits of the Spirit.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to bring into the way of truth, all such as have
erred, and are deceived.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to strengthen such as do stand, and to comfort and
help the weak hearted, and to raise up them that fall, and finally to beat
down Satan under our feet.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to succor, help, and comfort all that be in danger,
necessity, and tribulation,

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to preserve all that travail by land or by water, all
women laboring of child, all sick persons and young children, and to show thy
pity upon all prisoners and captives.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to defend and provide for the fatherless children
and widows, and all that be desolate and oppressed.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to have mercy upon all men.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to forgive our enemies, persecutors and slanderers,
and to turn their hearts.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to give and preserve to our use the kindly fruits of
the earth, so as in due time we may enjoy them.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to give us true repentance, to forgive us all our
sins, negligences and ignorances, and to endue us with the grace of thy holy
spirit, to amend our lives according to thy holy word.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

Son of God: we beseech thee to hear us.

Son of God: we beseech thee to hear us.

O Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the world.

Grant us thy peace.

O Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the world.

Have mercy upon us.

O Christ hear us.

O Christ hear us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

And lead us not into temptation.

But deliver us from evil. Amen.

The Versicle. O Lord deal not with us after our sins.

Answer. Neither reward us after our iniquities.

Let us pray.

O God merciful Father, that despisest not the sighing of a contrite heart,
nor the desire of such as be sorrowful, mercifully assist our prayers that
we make before thee, in all our troubles and adversities, whenever they
oppress us: and graciously hear us, that those evils, which the craft and
subtlety of the devil or man works against us, be brought to naught, and
by the providence of thy goodness they may be dispersed, that we thy
servants being hurt by no persecutions, may evermore give thanks unto thee in
thy holy Church, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Lord arise, help us, and deliver us for thy Names sake.

O God, we have heard with our ears, and our fathers have declared unto us the
noble works that thou did in their days, and in the old time before them.

O Lord arise, help us, and deliver us for thine honor.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now, etc.

From our enemies defend us, O Christ.

Graciously look upon our afflictions.

Pitifully behold the sorrows of our hearts.

Mercifully forgive the sins of thy people.

Favorably with mercy hear our prayers.

O Son of David, have mercy upon us.

Both now and ever vouchsafe to hear us,

O Christ.

Graciously hear us, O Christ.

Graciously hear us, O Lord Christ.

The versicle. O Lord let thy mercy be showed upon us.

The answer. As we do put out trust in thee.

Let us pray.

We humbly beseech thee, O Father, mercifully to look upon our infirmities,
and for the glory of thy Names sake, turn from us all those evils that we
most righteously have deserved: and grant that in all our troubles we may put
our whole trust and confidence in thy mercy, and evermore serve thee, in
holiness and pureness of living, to thy honor and glory, through our only
Mediator and Advocate Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Psalm. 46. 1.
GOd is our hope, and strength: a very present help in trouble.

2 Therefore will we not fear, though the earth be moved: and though the hills
be carried into the midst of the sea.

3 Though the waters thereof rage, and swell: and though the mountains shake
at the tempest of the same.

4 The rivers of the flood thereof shall make glad the City of God: the holy
place of the Tabernacle of the most highest.

5 God is in the midst of her, therefore shall she not be removed: God shall
help her, and that right early.

6 The Lord of hosts is with us: the God of Jacob is our refuge.

Psa. 132. 8
8 Arise, O Lord, into thy resting place: thou, and the Arc of thy strength.

9 Let thy Priests be clothed with righteousness: and let thy saints sing with
ioyfulnesse.

10 For thy servant David's sake: turn not away the presence of thine anointed.

11 The Lord has made a faithful oath unto David: and he will not shrink
from it.

12 Of the fruit of thy body: shall I set upon thy seat.

13 If thy children will keep my covenant and my testimonies, that I shall
learn them: their children also shall sit upon thy seat for evermore.

Psalm. 72.
1 Give thy judgments therefore unto the King, O God: and thy righteousness
unto the Kings son.

2 Then shall he judge the people according unto right: and defend the poor.

3 The mountains also shall bring peace: and the little hills righteousness
unto the people.

4 He shall keep the simple folk by their right: defend the children of the
poor, and punish the wrong doer.

5 In his time shall the righteous flourish: and abundance of peace so long as
his reign endures.

Psalm. 18.
35 Thou shall give him the defense of thy salvation: thy right hand also shall
hold him up, and thy loving kindness shall make him great.

Psalm. 132.
19 As for his enemies, they shall be clothed with shame: but upon himself
shall his crown flourish.

Psalm. 61.
7 He shall dwell before God for ever: O prepare thy loving mercy, and
faithfulness, that they may preserve him.

Psalm. 68.
28 And now, O Lord, we humbly beseech thee for thy Temples sake: stablish the
thing that thou have wrought in us.

Psalm. 28.
10 O save thy people, and give thy blessing unto thine inheritance: feed them,
and set them up for ever.

Psalm. 145.
12 That thy power, thy glory and thy kingdom: may be known unto men.

Psalm. 79.
14 So that we thy people, and the sheep of thy pasture shall give thee
thanks for ever: and we will always be showing forth thy praise from generation
to generation.

21 Our mouth shall speak the praise of the Lord: and let all flesh give
thanks unto his holy Name for ever and ever.

Let us pray.


O Lord God most merciful Father, who as upon this day, of thine especial
grace and favor, did place thy servant King Charles our Sovereign, in the
royal throne of this Kingdom, thereby assuring us of the continuance of thy
Gospel, and sacred truth amongst us, to the great joy and comfort of our
hearts: we thine unworthy servants, here assembled together in memory of this
thy mercy, most humbly beseech thy Fatherly goodness to grant us grace, that
we may in word, deed, and heart, show our selves always thankful unto thee
for the same; and that, as his Majesty has now finished one whole year of
his happy government, so through thy grace he may in all honor, virtue and
godliness continue the same his glorious reign over us many and many years
yet to come, and we dutifully obey him as faithful and loyal subjects: that
so we may long enjoy him with the continuance of thy great blessings, which by
him thou have powered upon us, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

ALmighty God and heavenly Father, by whom Kings do reign, and Princes are
set up to rule the people, which have by thy power and goodness, safely and
quietly advanced to the Throne of this Kingdom, thy servant our Sovereign
Lord King Charles, to the happy continuance of our peace and welfare, and to
the blessed maintenance of thy Gospel and true religion amongst us: we praise
and magnify thy holy Name for this thy great and marvelous mercy, most
humbly beseeching thee of thine infinite goodness, so evermore to bless and
protect his Majesty with thy grace and heavenly favor, that he may always
serve thee in true faith and godliness, govern thy people in peace and
righteousness, vanquish and overcome all his enemies, and finally after a long
and prosperous reign on earth, inherit with thee an everlasting kingdom in
heaven, through thy Son our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

ALmighty God, the fountain of all goodness, We humbly beseech thee to bless
our gracious Queen Mary, Frederick the Prince Elector Palatine, and the Lady
Elizabeth his wife, with their princely issue: endue them with thy holy Spirit,
enrich them with thy heavenly grace, prosper them with all happiness, and
bring them to thine everlasting kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

ALmighty and everlasting God, which only workest great marueiles, send down
upon our Bishops and Curates, and all congregations committed to their charge,
the healthful Spirit of thy grace, and that they may truly please thee, power
upon them the continual deaw of thy blessing: Grant this, O Lord, for the
honor of our Advocate and Mediator Jesus Christ, Amen.

A prayer of Chrysostom. ALmighty God, which have given us grace at this time
with one accord to make our common supplications unto thee, and do promise
that when two or three be gathered together in thy Name, thou will grant their
requests: fulfill now, O Lord, the desires and petitions of thy servants, as
may be most expedient for them, granting us in this world knowledge of thy
truth, and in the world to come life everlasting, Amen.

THe grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of
the holy Ghost, be with us all evermore, Amen.

The second Service.
OUr Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
And lead us not into temptation: But deliver us from all evil, Amen.

ALmighty God, unto whom all hearts be open, all desires known, and from whom
no secrets are hid, cleanse the thoughts of our hearts by the inspiration of
thy holy Spirit, that we may perfectly love thee, and worthily magnify thy
holy Name, through Christ our Lord, Amen.

Minister. GOd spoke these words, and said, I am the Lord thy God: Thou shall
have none other Gods but me.


People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law.


Minister. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, nor the likeness
of any thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the water
under the earth. Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them: For I the
Lord thy God am a ielous God, and visit the sins of the fathers upon the
children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and show
mercy unto thousands in them that love me, and keep my Commandments.


People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our, etc.


Minister. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the
Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.


People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our, etc.


Minister. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day. Six days shall thou
labor and do all that thou have to do, but the seventh day is the Sabbath of
the Lord thy God. In it thou shall do no manner of work, thou, and thy son,
and thy daughter, thy man servant, and thy maid servant, thy cattle, and the
stranger that is within thy gates: For in six days the Lord made heaven and
earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore
the Lord blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it.


People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our, etc.


Minister. Honor thy Father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the
land, which the Lord thy God gives thee.


People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our, etc.


Minister. Thou shall do no murder.


People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our, etc.


Minister. Thou shall not commit adultery.


People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our, etc.


Minister. Thou shall not steal.


People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our, etc.


Minister. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.


People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law.


Minister. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, Thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor
any thing that is his.


People. Lord have mercy upon us, and write all these thy Laws in our hearts,
we beseech thee.


Let us pray.

ALmighty God, whose Kingdom is everlasting, and power infinite: have mercy
upon the whole Congregation, and so rule the heart of thy chosen servant
Charles our King and Governor, that he (knowing whose minister he is) may
above all things seek thy honor and glory, and that we his subjects (duly
considering whose authority he has) may faithfully serve, honor, and humbly
obey him, in thee and for thee, according to thy blessed word and ordinance,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, who with thee and the holy Ghost lives and
reigns ever one God, world without end, Amen,


Or this. O Most gracious God, and merciful Father, we thine unworthy servants
acknowledge it thy special care and fatherly providence over us, that it has
pleased thee, for the good of thy Church, and glory of this land, to place thy
servant King Charles, our Sovereign Lord, in the Royal seat of this Kingdom,
giving us by him, and with him, a happy continuance of thy sacred truth and
Gospel, and of our former peace and prosperity, together with a great increase
of honor, power, and dignity: beseeching thee to grant unto him the defense
of thy salvation, and to show forth thy holy kindness and mercy, both to his
Majesty thine Anointed, and to thy servant our gracious Queen Mary, with the
rest of the Royal seed for evermore: and to stir up in our hearts a dutiful
and loyal obedience unto this thy ordinance, and a religious and holy
thankfulness unto thee for these thy great mercies, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

Stir up, we beseech thee, O Lord, the wills of thy faithful people, that
they plenteously bringing forth the fruits of good works, may of thee be
plenteously rewarded, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle. 1. Pet. 2. 11.
Dearly beloved, I beseech you, as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from
fleshly lusts, which fight against the soul. And have your conversation honest
among the Gentiles, that they which speak evil of you, as of evil doers, may
by your good works which they shall see, glorify God in the day of the
visitation. Submit your selves unto all manner ordinance of man for the Lords
sake, whether it be unto the King, as unto the superior, or unto Governors,
as unto them that are sent of him, for the punishment of evil doers, and for
the praise of them that do well. For so is the will of God, that by well doing
ye may put to silence the ignorance of the foolish men: As free, and not as
having the liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, but as the servants of God.
Honor all men: love brotherly fellowship: fear God: honor the King.

The Gospel. Mat. 22: 16.
ANd they sent unto him their disciples with the Herodians, saying, Master, we
know that thou art true, and teach the way of God truly, neither carest for
any man: for thou considerest not the person of men. Tell us therefore, how
think thou? Is it lawful to give tribute unto Caesar, or not? But Jesus
perceived their wickedness, and said, Why tempt ye me, ye hypocrites? Show me
the tribute money. And they brought him a penny. And he said unto them, Whose
is this image and superscription? They said unto him, Cesars. Then said he
unto them, Give therefore to Caesar, the things which are Cesars, and give unto
God, those things which are Gods. And when they heard it, they marueiled, and
left him and went their way.

I Believe in one God the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth, and of
all things visible and invisible: and in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only
begotten Son of God, begotten of his Father before all worlds. God of God,
Light of Light, very God of very God, begotten, not made, being of one
substance with the Father, by whom all things were made: who for us men, and
for our salvation, came down from heaven, and was incarnate by the holy Ghost,
of the Virgin Marie, and was made man, and was crucified also for us under
Pontius Pilate. He suffered and was buried, and the third day he rose again,
according to the Scriptures, and ascended into heaven, and sits at the right
hand of the Father. And he shall come again with glory to judge both the
quick and the dead: whose Kingdom shall have no end. And I believe in the
holy Ghost, the Lord and giver of life, who proceeds from the Father and the
Son, who with the Father and the Son together is worshipped and glorified,
who spoke by the Prophets. And I believe one Catholic and Apostolic Church.
I acknowledge one baptism for the remission of sins, and I look for the
resurrection of the dead, and the life of the world to come. Amen.

Matthew. 5.
LEt your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in heaven.

Let us pray for the whole state of Christ's Church militant here in earth.

Almighty and everliving God, which by thy holy Apostle have taught us to make
prayers and supplications, and to give thanks for all men: we humbly beseech
thee, most mercifully to receive these our prayers which we offer unto thy
divine Majesty, beseeching thee to inspire continually the universal Church
with the spirit of truth, unity, and concord: and grant that all they that
do confess thy holy Name, may agree in the truth of thy holy word, and live
in unity and godly love. We beseech thee also to save and defend all Christian
Kings, Princes, and Governors, and especially thy servant Charles our King,
that under him we may be godly and quietly governed. And grant unto his whole
Counsel, and to all that be put in authority under him, that they may truly
and indifferently minister justice, to the punishment of wickedness and vice,
and to the maintenance of Gods true religion and virtue. Give grace (O heavenly
Father) to all Bishops, Pastors and Curates, that they may both by their life
and doctrine set forth thy true and lively word, and rightly and duly
administer thy holy Sacraments. And to all thy people give thy heavenly grace,
and especially to this Congregation here present, that with meek heart and due
reverence, they may hear and receive thy holy word, truly serving thee in
holiness and righteousness all the days of their life. And we most humbly
beseech thee of thy goodness (O Lord) to comfort and succor all them which in
this transitory life be in trouble, sorrow, need, sickness, or any other
adversity. Grant this, O Father, for Jesus Christ's sake, our only Mediator
and Advocate. Amen.

O Lord our God Son of the eternal Father, which vpholdest and gouernest all
things in heaven and earth by the word of thy power, receive our humble prayers
with thanksgiving for our Sovereign Lord King Charles, set over us by thy
grace and providence to be our King and Governor, and so together with his
Majesty, bless our gracious Queen, and the rest of his Royal alliance with
the dew of thy heavenly Spirit, that they ever trusting in thy goodness,
protected by thy power, and crowned with thy gracious and endless favor, may
continue before thee in health and peace, joy and honor, a long and happy
generation upon earth, and after death obtain everlasting life and glory in
the Kingdom of heaven, by thy merits and mediation, who with the Father and
the holy Spirit live and reignest ever one God, world without end. Amen.

Almighty God, which have promised to hear the petitions of them that ask in
thy Sons Name, we beseech thee, mercifully to incline thine ears to us that
have made now our prayers and supplications unto thee, and grant that those
things which we have faithfully asked, according to thy will, may effectually
be obtained, to the relief of our necessity, and to the setting forth of thy
glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

THe peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and
minds in the knowledge and love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our
Lord: and the blessing of God Almighty, the Father the Son and the holy
Ghost, be among you, and remain with you always. Amen.

Imprinted at London by BONHAM NORTON and JOHN BILL, Printers to the Kings Most
Excellent Majesty. 1625.


