Loves Leprosy.

The Preface to the Title.

The Leprosy if Physic bin approved,
Achilles cure, because Achilles loved:
The Leprosy (says Gordon) a disease,
Which on the child as yet unborn does sease,
Infectious and contagious, I could prove
It is incurable, and so is Love.
Loves Leprosy according to her kind,
Made him a Leaper in a Lovers mind.
Imprinted at London by W. White, dwelling in Cow-lane. 1598.

To the right Honorable Sir Rebert Sydnie, Lord governor of Flushing, T. P.
wishes all increase of Honor, with the continuance of his house in that
flourishing estate wherein it is now established.
IKnovv not (right Honorable) how to excuse this insinuation of mine, in
committing this vnballast Bark to the maine of your protection, considering
that every little River has water enough to bear it from the ground: yet if
the Ozean rage not (as in disdain to support so vveake a vessel) I may
accomplish the period of my desires, and by this voyage learn to correct my
Compass; if otherwise, this Bark containing all my fortunes, suffers
untimely shipwreck, and I banquerout of my infant hopes: At tua supplicibus
domus est assueta iuuandis,
In quorum numero me praecor esse velis.


There is a Sea interuenting the Haven Aulis of Beotia and Eubaea, called
Euripus; which flovves with such violence, that it preuayles against the
vvindes in maynteining full sails displayed exaduerso: The same Sea (right
Honorable) a true Idaea, resembles the Love vvherevvith you embrace the Muses
sons in rescuing from the Phocian Pyreneus the Pyerian queristers, whom
headstronglust seeks to dishonor; I present to your Lordshyppe the lucklesse
loves of Achilles: which if they may but gain a gracious view in your
judicial discretion, you shall buy my labors at a high rate, and I think my
self therevvith bountifully revvarded.

Your Lordshippes officious in all duties of humility, Tho. Povvell.

LECTORI.
It Was Dedalus that envied at the Boy
Drencht in the Sea, for making of a toy:
Little glory did he win;
Envy is a mickle sin.
It Is he, and none but he I fear,
Loath to buy my toy so dear.
When Apollo shines bright,
Lesser Stars shall loose their light.
Wonder not when day is ended,
Though our glimmering be extended.
If I borrow from the Sun,
And restore not, day once done.
May this Star that is so impaled,
Like a Meteor be exhaled:
That with his prodigious breath,
Does infect unto the death.
Cast me not headlong from Parnassus hill,
Although my work be wanting to my will.
Gentle Reader yours to use, If propitiate with his muse. T. P.

JAMES HARMAN in commendations of the Author*
I Can but muse to see thy timorous Muse,
Of Enuies hidden sting to stand in awe:
What though the Athinian Carpenter did bruise
The forward youth, foyboasting of his Saw:
Envy will turn to Love, and Love to liking;
Such influence abides in thy wryghting.
Let but the gentle Reader read thy years,
Thy Cygnet for a Swanne he will allow:
For by Achilles Loves it well appears,
Thee with her treasure Pallas did indow.
Let this suffice for all, thou may be bold,
So young a head near wrote a verse so old.
Cum tonat ocyus Ilex.
Sulphur discuitur sacroquam tuque domusque.
Loves Leprosy.
TROY lost her Soldier,
Priam lost a Son:
Troyes hopes were past,
and Priams triumphs done.
The Phrygian Dames,
those sad Illyades,
Earth spherifying lyghtes,
heavens Pleiades,
Do fret the pauement of his brazen Tomb
With tears, whose currants from their eylids run:
With tears in stead of flowers they strew the way,
Such sollemne rites beseem so black a day.
With tears they wash his wounds, and then again
Lament with tears, their brother Hector slain.
Even at these exequies amongst the rest,
Was Peleus issue an unwelcome guest.
He noates their sorrow, and each several passion,
Affrighting Nemesis with invocation.
Polyxena sendes forth from trembling breast,
Ye Gods in whom Troy holds her interest.
Be just upon Achilles for this deed,
Who first begirt me with a mourning weed:
At this incenst, to hear such imprecation,
As to his own soul had so near relation.
His blood grows proud, and makes his brow the land
Which he try fallowes like caractered sand.
Thus he replies in language mixed with gall,
That but for honor of the capital:
And of that truce whereto they were coniured,
By Hectors blood, which had the earth manured.
And all the souls which by untimely fate,
His Sword had sent to hell before their date.
That tongue from whom such ranckor had his course,
Should beg for life, and yet find no remorce:
But sacrificious at her brothers shrine,
Besprinkling it with blood, her soul refine.
These words he used, and using them came near,
So nigh that fair Polyxene did appear:
Our Mermaidonian Captain all amazed,
Stone still he stands, and standing still he gazed:
His eyes were dimde, the object was so bright;
Such is the force of Beauty, such her might.
His heart an anuill to a tragic theme,
Where death began to forge a stratageme
Will not endure while fury strikes a heat:
But at the first allarums sounds retreat.
His hands intended like that furious Knight,
Who thought the Grecian fleet might prove his right.
Or as him self, when as his second self
Breathed forth his soul, diuorst from life and death.
Even now as then for his Patroclus sake:
Now did I say, even now I mistake,
O now they plead as Oracles of grace,
They menace none, for Love has changed the case.
A change to see his knee to offer duty,
The foot whereof spurns at all changing beauty.
Achilles loves Polyxene: What is she?
The living daughter of his enemy.
How shall he woe her, that has wed another?
How shall he win her, that has slain her brother?
His Trophies and his triumphs she does hate.
In Hectors death his valor lived too late.
Live blessed in this, that thou art Orpheus brother:
He none of thine, nor Thetis is his mother.
He in Castalian, therein did thou bath,
And thou in Stygian, so he never has:
Minion to Mars, and Champion to the nine:
O that our age could elbow that of thine.
But widow she has lost Achilles mate,
SYDNEY whose breathing fame admits no date.
O but for him I never should abide,
But tell the Achademicks loud he lyde,
Who mids those wholesome herbs which he did cherish,
Suffered Metemsucosin so to flourish.
In him Achilles wandering soul did rest,
Who like an Eagle could not buyld her nest,
Till she had found him out; but full of pain,
Seeks her Echytes els-where all in vain.
With finding him, my Muse has lost her self:
Come back, for Natures banquer out of her wealth.
The Phaenix burns, would tears might quench the flame:
Andromache calls on dead Hectors name.
Though he be dead, his honors ever live:
My infant Pen shall him his tribute give.
And when this Cygnet has a whiter hew,
She vows to swim, or sink, in open view.
Achilles wooes her Love, is full of woe,
Polyxen yeeldes, but Hecuba says noe.
Alas that Love the son, and Love the mother,
By opposition should adverse each other:
She does accuse him as degenerate,
Whose birth a Goddess did contaminate:
He swears she is unkind of woman kind:
Predominance stuffes her ambitious mind.
Both strive to soueraignize, both emulate,
Such civil war the weal does dissipate.
O I should deem them, but for their descents,
Two of the four substantial Elements.
Those two I mean, whose contrariety,
Seeks to expel by their adversity.
Hence is it Polyxen loves and loathes together,
Much like the Vain that's guyded by the weather:
This is the influence of Love the mother,
And Love the son, efficient of the other.
Once more, and reprehende not for digression:
A woman's mind is fit for each impression:
Hippocrates electuarie wise
Attributes it to weakness in their eyes:
Induce me to subscribe he never can,
For every female will outface a man,
And sink him in the center of her eye,
Drentcht with the sourses of immodestye.
Old Hecuba, well learned in their sex,
Instructes her daughter in this devilish text:
Hate occupy the center of thy heart,
Varnish with Love the superficial part,
That when Achilles hopes to croppe a flower,
The hidden Snake may have him in her power.
The dryft is this, Achilles being slain,
The Grecian Trophies will decline and wayne:
Love him as Rangers use to love their Dear,
That being fatt, they fall at time of year.
The Lecturis was diligent to reed,
The Pupil as attentive gives good heed:
The Grecian at the first encounter faylde,
Albeit, his second orasons preuaylde.
Albeit, his second orasons preuaylde.
Maids at the first, fear to be counted light,
And therefore use their Noe but as a slight:
Yet if she love, preventing Nay at thrice,
For fear she loose her pray, cries Yea at twice.
Egiptus Son whom Danaa takes to wise,
Feels ere he sees his throat to kiss the knyfe:
Even so our Lover, fearing no infection,
Tastes by the tongue, but tryes not by digestion.
And now he strikes a higher noate in Love,
Than erst when baser stringes did only move.
Am I Loves thrall (quoth he) and must I yield
To her, the honors which I won in feelde?
Lo Cytherea at thy sacred shryne,
My conquestes I do willingly resign.
Where Love's the goal, and Beauty gives aim,
I Will prove an Archer, though I loose the gayme.
Some of my shaftes are spent, not will I spare,
But other shaftes shell proforate the air:
When all are gone, Heavens archar shall supply,
By him I Will calculate Loves destenie.
Joined with the most propitiate of the seven,
Dart forth caelestiall influence from heaven.
For this days deed, O chide me not to morrow,
It Is not of Maurus that I beg or borrow:
If I do so, let Euseus loose his right:
And yet it is far to reach unto the whight.
His heavy quiver and my heart of lead,
Will make the crasie sick, the sick-man dead.
The Destenies were never yet my Saints.
At Fortunes shrine I breath not forth my plaintes.
How much I scorn to borrow Maurus Bow,
Heavens constellations may confirm and show:
I will command them all; if they refuse,
The pledge of Wisdom shall be my excuse, ens inebi-Astris.

If Sagitarius throw me from a far,
Four spheres remote to Phoebus thirling carre,
And he suppose it be disparagment,
To give a heaven wrackt soul some intertainment,
Like to a fire I Will sit upon the maynes
Of his vnmanaged Iades, and burn their raynes
Then will I take my Goddess by the hand,
Whose awful Scepter guydeth Paphos land.
How I am wronged she shall inform her Son,
And he shall help when all my hopes are done.
If Cupid favor not, then will I prove,
Apostata unto the God of Love.
Nay more, a Cynick like Diogenes,
Misanthropos and a Misogones:
This resolution did proceed from Love,
In whose thought flying Orb his soul did move:
The day he spendes in study how to gain her,
His study nothing else but to obtain her:
Observing this a motive in their kind,
High praises humor best a woman's mind.
And this mooues him to prove practitioner,
Solicit love pleas Cupids barrister.
Polyxenes Poet in his Mistres praise,
Thus gins to volley forth his amorous lays*
Thou wretchles Father of a wretched Son,
Sire to that dismounted Phaeton:
Give raynes unto those fiery Steedes of thine,
That tread the path of the signiferous line.
Fair Sun that see each mothers Son on earth,
Cynthius by love, Latoides by thy birth:
Proud for the one, promoted for the other.
Vowde to thy Love, devoted to thy Mother.
Eye of all seeing-heauens, earthes life, worlds light;
Whose presence makes the day, and absence night:
Perform the revolution of swift time,
according to these fair demaundes of mine.
Point at that time, that wished time, and say;
Lo this of many, a selected day:
Wherein thy Love yeeldes her consenting voice,
Of thee (would God of me) to make her choice.
Know thou Earth, animating light, my saint?
The fountain of my grief, and hearts complaint?
If not, attend the whilst I shall thee show,
How thou my Love from others loves may know
O she is fayrer then the lovely Boy,
Who by his death bereft Hyperions joy.
Had this Diana naked in the Sring,
By any Forrester bin ever seen,
He could not have the power to run away:
But there inchaunted, at the gaze to stay.
Nor need she call the Nymphs to reach her boe,
The fight had ravished and bewitched him so.
Her voice the ground of winged Hermes sweet,
Wherewith Lucinaes Watchman fell a sleep:
Her hands, if Jove perceive they seem to crave,
She need not speak, Jove graunts what she would have.
The margent is so fair to gaze upon,
That he shall surfeit if he gaze too long.
Her arms heavens continent, the way so bright,
Reflecting Cynthius rays seems lacteall whight.
Once more the more for to decipher her,
She Is like thy self, O none so like fair star.
The beauty thy dissheuered locks contain,
Does in the tramels of her hair remain.
As we eye thee (all obiectes set apart)
So she has power to draw both eyes and heart.
If any pen distinguish twixt the Gods
And fair Polyxen, I allow him ods:
Maintain, there is no difference but this;
That they in Heaven, she on the Center is.
By him her praises have eternity,
And she lays naked his mortallitie.
True Love's a saint, so shall you true love know:
False Love a Schythian, yet a saint in show.
When many elegies of Love were done,
Polyxens hand, but not heart he won:
On this condition, that his Sword and Shield
Should never be aduanst in Teucrian field:
And every Mermaidon whom he controlde,
The same with him inuiolate to hold.
By this the days of truce did take an end:
And here begins the practice they intend*
A second leader to the forebred fight,
Was instigated Troilus behight:
He knows Achilles sleeps within his tent,
His loins vngirded, and his Bow unbent.
He there the Trojan gallant plays his prankes,
Passes confronted Pykes, and breaks their ranks.
The Graecians fly, their Captains being slain,
Our younger Son to Mars pursues amayne:
Makes pauement of their Trunkes, and where he rides,
The hollow hoof check quered in blood abides,
Leaving the print behind, as who should say,
Be witness that the Trojan rode this way:
Achilles does behold by Love restraynde.
He fears to be orebolde, but restes contaynde,
With execration that he did consent,
By solemn oath unto this dark intent,
Their instruments of War keep tims accord,
The Spartan King, before Antenors Sword:
Flies in such danger of recovery,
He wished nights mantell were his sanctuary.
His Foe grows insolent, made proud with pray,
And conquest must her vtmust duty pay.
Achilles is not tide unto the Mast,
The Acheloydes singe, and he in have
Leapes from his Cabin: O twere treble wrong
That he impatient should abstain so long.
Well mounted and well met, they join together
Like Clouds, whose rushing cause tempestuous weather:
And now their clattering Shildes resemble thunder.
The fire a lightning when the clouds do sunder,
Long did it thunder ere the heavens were bright,
So long that when it cleared, the day was night:
A night perpetual unto Priams son;
His Horse was slain, the day was lost and won,
And here each one might hear winds whispering sound,
When erst the Drums their senses did confound
Troilus dethes, chief conquest from the field,
Wrapped in their Colors, covered with his Shield,
They carry him to make the number more,
Whose bleeding sides Achilles Spear did gore.
O had he not bin over insolent,
Achilles Spear had rested in his Tent:
But his provoking pride did seem to brave
The brauest Soldier in the air concaue.
This is the only price that Valor yeeldes,
Thy soul shall find his rest in Martial fields.
The second league for days they do proclaim,
And now Achilles visites his fair dame.
Ill fare that outward fair that is inward foul,
An Angels face wed to Proserpines soul:
If Devils in Dietie thus masked bin,
The man that's so bewitched does no whit sin.
Thus pleades the subject of my weeping Muse,
Eor his fond Loves, alleging this excuse.
If he complain on Love, she hears his plaintes
With delinition, and because he faintes,
She does revive him, brooking no delay,
With as signation of a wedding day.
Forthwith a marriage twixt them was concluded:
Alas that true Love should be so deluded.
The Sun is rose, sees Thetis Son to fall,
Under this false pretended nuptial.
The Delphick Oracle is now fulfilde,
Ear Troy be won, Achilles must be kilde.
This is the day wherein they surfeit all,
With blood of his, who made the Trojans thrall.
And this the day wherein he did appease
Unquiet souls, which erst could find no ease,
This day was night to him, and day to those
By whom untimely death did here repose
His lives familliar Star does shoot and fall,
The fairest Star the heavens wear gracte withal.
Even when his steps salute the Temple porch
With Hymmes, and Hymenaeus burning torch,
A shaft from Paris hand did soon disclose
Where Styx had kissed him, and how high it rose.
Where the Stygian flood did never reach,
Deaths winged messenger did make a breach:
Whence from each vein, the sacred breath descending,
Polyxens joys began, and his had ending.
FINIS.
Elaegia.
OF all the Gods above,
I did honor Love:
Love his dietie.
Nothing might me move,
For I did approve
Love his piety.
I did love,
He did prove,
Nothing might my Love remove.
He did prove,
I did love:
Witness this the Gods above.
He did not respect me,
But he did reject me,
In his royalty:
He did not affect me,
But he did suspect me
Of disloyalty:
No respect
Did reject
Me in this his royalty:
No affect
Did suspect
Me, for no disloyalty.
I the Field did leave,
And mine Arms bequeath
To the Love Qneene.
To my brow did cleave
Venus Myrtill wreath:
There was love seen.
I did leave,
And bequeath,
Mine Armor for a Myrtill wreath:
Myrtle wreathe
Purchased leave,
To my Temples fast to cleave,
The Body that was so blind,
Showed himself unkind
To mine amors:
Playning to the wind,
I no ease could find
To my clamours.
He was blind,
And unkind:
So unconstant was his mind,
As the wind,
So unkind:
Ease for Love I could not find.
Now I do repent me,
Now I do lament me:
But alas too late.
Gentle heart relent thee,
Though thou must content thee
With thy froward fate.
Heart content thee,
Heart relent thee,
Since Polyxen was untrue.
I lament me,
And repent me:
Love and Women both adieu.
Tam veneri quam Marti, mortuus Achilles.


