November 29.

Numb. 50.

THE CONTINVATION OF OUR FOREIGN Intelligence since the 22. to this present
month.

The first Part.

Containing amongst the rest these particulars following; The taking of the
City Great Glogaw in Silesia, and Eger, on the Fronter of Bohemia; with the
expulsion of the Imperialists out of Silesia, and both the upper and lower
Lusatia.

The taking of the Bishoprics of Patterborn and Corvay by the Landgrave of
Hessen, with his Summoning of all the Lords and States of Westphalia, to render
themselves under his Majesty of Sweden.

Several late passages of the King of Sweden his proceedings near Mentz, and
of his Armies in other parts.

The taking of many Towns more, and the yielding of the Cities of Norimberg
and Vlm, with diverse others unto his Majesty of Sweden.

LONDON Printed for Nath: Butter and Nicolas Bourne. 1631.

The Continuation of our Weekly NEWS,
From Prage the 22, of October, 1631.
IN this Kingdom are many thousands of Soul diers enquartered for the ensuring
of the same. Unto these forces shall be adjoined the General Dieffenbach, with
6000. foot and 800. horsemen. Don Balthazar shall Command as General. His
Imperial Majesty has granted many Commissions more for the levying of new
forces; in so much that the Drums beat in all places. From Silesia we have
newly received tidings that the Commander Gotsen has taken the Cities Gorlits,
Sittau, and other places in Lusatia, and newly are adjoined to him fifteen
hundred Hungarians.

From Prage the 27. of October, 1631.
The Imperialists have abandoned the upper and lower Lusatia, which places are
again possessed by the Duke of Saxony, The said Imperialists after they had
made great spoil in the Duke of Freidland his Country, and within his own
Territories, were at last enquartered in the Earldom of Glatz. The new levied
forces of Tertzich are utterly defeated at Great Glogaw in Silesia, yea quite
destroyed. And the same City over and above that is delivered up, and taken by
the same forces of the King of Sweden, and now fully in the possession of his
Majesty.

The Swedish horsemen waiting their opportunity, defeated some Imperial
troops near unto Vlm, between Schorndorf and Augsburg. Which forces convoying
along with them some treasure, became good booty to the Swedish.

From Gotlitz in Silesia the 25. of October, 1631.
This day the Imperial Feild-Marshall has sent hither to this City a warlike
Commissary, with a request that wee-would be pleased to afford the Imperial
Army free passage, and grant them to be enquartered thereabouts. After this
Commissary had waited with his Convoy before the Gates of the City for an
answer, from twelve of the Clock till two in the afternoon, was at last
suffered to enter, and caused to propound his errand upon the Towne-house,
after he had made his speech and ended his proposition, he was wished to
return back to his lodging, until they had fully deliberated concerning his
demand of so high a nature. This Commissary General finding the time of his
expectation for an answer somewhat too long and tedious, returned back to the
City gate again, before he was sent for, but was not suffered to enter before
five of the Clock. And when he had conferred with the Peers and Counsel,
they could in no wise agree together, whereupon he departed peaceably for that
time. Afterward his Feild-Marshall commanded hither certain Regiments of
Soldiers, with some Ordnance, and demanded obedience from the City, and
willed to yield. Which we perceiving to be so earnestly intended, yielded our
selves, after some Articles of agreement considered and concluded upon, and our
Garrison departed out of the City, and we suffered eleven Companies of the
Emperors forces to enter. Lately also the Commander Four was sent to
Baudissen, and the Commander Illo to Sittow, but those of Boudtsen will resist:
for they expect aid and relief: and some Regiments of horse and foot are
already marching thither.

The Imperialists press hard upon this City and Country, aiming to extract
provision from us for the whole Imperial Army; but hitherto is nothing
granted. Neither can we learn what is their intention, because the absolute
resolution for the whole matter must come from Vienna, and they must be
directed and guided by the order that they receive thence. We do exceedingly
long to perceive which way the Duke of Saxony will convert his proceedings, but
it is very doubtful.

Now we do at this instant receive tidings, that the Imperialists have been
constrained to forsake the upper and low er Lusatia, which they have abandoned,
and diverted them selves toward Bohemia. At Dresden is lately arrived one
Imperial and another Spanish Ambassador.

From Kitzingen the 26. of October, 1631.
The King of Sweden will suffer no posts or Messengers to pass these ways.
Certain it is that he has taken Wirtzburgh, with the Castle near unto the
same City. His Majesty by reason of the great confluxe of Soldiers, daily
coming to him, cannot but exceedingly augment his Army.

Another from the same place, the 27th.
The King of Sweden by the sword, with his valorous proceeding has subdued and
brought under his subjection this whole Bishopric of Wirtzburgh. Which
Bishopric is bound to contribute unto him monthly a great sum of money.
All the Cities in this Country, and almost all the houses in the Cities are
full of Corn, Wine, and other good provision, for it is a rich Country: so
that the Soldiers are come into a good harbor, and will speed well, for they
find great plenty of all things. The Cattle strayes and do err about the
high ways and streets, without any keeper. A good Cow is sold here for one Ryx
Dollar, and a sheep for a very small value. His Majesty of Swedens Army is
very strong, as it is certainly esteemed, consisting of 60000. men, for ever
since his great victory, and since his coming into these parts, he has had a
great conflux of forces coming to him. The principal parties and heads of
Bamburg (since their Bishop has forsaken them) are agreed and have compounded
with his Majesty of Sweden, upon these 4. Articles set down.

1. That they shall be bound to pay to his Majesty without further delay,
three Tun of Gold, 2. That they shall yield up to his Majesty the two
strongest fortified places in the Country, as namely, Fortheym and Kronnach. 3.
That they shall monthly contribute to his Majesty as great a sum of money,
as the Catholic League formerly received from them. 4. They shall abandon all
the forces of the Catholic League, and casheere them, renounce the agreement
between them, and cleave to his Majesty of Sweden.
From Leyprich the 28. of October, 1631.
From Dresden is written that certain thousands of Crabates came before
Old-Dresden, and their intention was to take in the old Iaggers-Castle. But
those that were within, played so furiously with Canon upon them, that they
were constrained to retire, but not without doing mischief, for they burnt
down some houses and barnes, and went their ways.

After that Garlits-Bautsen and some other places more were taken by the
Commander Gotzen, our Prince Elector of Saxony, with his Army went against
him, whereupon Gotzen not being able to abide the power of his Army, retired,
and has quite abandoned both the higher and lower Lusatia. And all the Cities
are beset by the Duke of Saxony.

The 22. day of October this present month, but few days ago, the water in
the Burgg-wall behind S. Thomas Church in this City was changed suddenly into
a color as red as blood, which was beheld and admired by many thousand
Spectators.

From Augsburgh the 25. of October.
The Spiritual and Clergy men, especially the Jesuits fly in great number
from Dillingin, Inglestadt, Ratsboone, and other places, very confusedly, with
all their movables bag and baggage, and take their refuge to this City, and
so forward. The Spiritual persons in this City dare not stay here, but do
also depart hence into other Parts, so that they cannot be furnished
susticiently with Carts and Wagons for their conveyance.

The Marck-Graue of Barut 8 days ago, sent am hundred load of hay to
Weysenstadt, for there-abouts are many thousands of the King of Swedens men
come, namely, at Moninghsbergh, Rausteyn and Lichtenbergh: they have taken all
the places of note betwixt Coburgh and Norimberg. It is certainly thought that
his Majesty will make toward Eyckstadt and Bauaria.

The Duke of Saxony is upon the very Frontiers of Bohemia, and it is for a
truth, that he has taken Eger which is a City of great moment, upon the said
Frontiers of Bohemia.

Some Swedish Horsemen have lately taken 200000 Rix-Dollors appertaining to
Commissary Wolfstiere, with some other treasure sent to Munchen. These Horsemen
were but a 100 in number, but had with them a troop of Footmen, they took
their occasion near unto Vlme, and so carried away this maine booty.

From Selingstadt the 6. of November. 1631.
Upon Sunday last the General Tilly from the head-cheife quarter of his Army,
sent forth 3000 men Horse and Foot, to take in the City of Wertheym, which his
Majesty of Sweden took but lately before, where 14 Companies of his Majesty
of Sweden were enquartered. The King having advertisement hereof, caused diverse
thousands of men to lie in Ambuscado (parted in two parts) in a place named the
Taubergrond, he had also given notice to the Governor of the City of Wertheym,
and charged him to retire if in case he saw occasion, and leave the City, his
Majesty intending some exploit that way. But before it came to that, the Kings
foresaid Troops consisting of some Horse and Foot, which lay in Ambush,
before they could come near the City, environed these Imperialists round
about, before and behind, and assaulted them so furiously, that 2700 of them
were slain dead on the place, so that but a very few of them escaped: 14
Ensigns were delivered to his Majesty at Wirtsburgh, and this exploit
afforded the Soldiers very good booty.

But in the mean while the Imperialists have taken the Castle and City of
Bobenhausen, where they do ensconce and entrensh themselves,

His Majesty of Sweden was invested at Wirtsburge, a few days ago, and
received very willingly by the Citizens for their Lord and Protector.

From Hanaw the 29. of October.
It is now confirmed that his Majesty of Sweden has also taken the Castle of
VVirsburgh by the Sword and many assault, therein were slain 2000 men: only
one Gentleman saved his life, whom the King graciously pardoned, the said
Gentleman revealed unto the King a hidden great Treasure.

Last Saturday his Majesty was in person at Karelstadt by the Maine, where he
brings a maine Army together. The Lord Witzdom has forewarned the Citizens of
Aschenburgh, to convey their goods into the strongest and surest places.

Eight days ago the Swedish have taken Rottenberg on the River Tauber,
whether the Commissary Masen was fled. This City was yielded to his Majesty by
agreement. The Garrison which was 700 strong, mutined when they heard of the
Swedish coming, and rent their Ensigns all in pieces from the very shafts,
and most of them betook themselves into his Majesty's service.

The Swedish have also taken Dunckenspill, and diverse other places there-abouts.

The Citizens of Northingen (an Imperial Town in Wirtenbergh) have by force
of Arms expelled the Imperial Garrison of 600 men, which was within the
City, and they have freely surrendered up the City to the King of Sweden.

On Friday last some thousands of Swedish Forces lodged at Newstadt, and the
next day marched to Haylbrun, and those parts toward the River of Necker,
doubtless having some great exploit in hand.

His Majesty of Sweden causes the City VVertheym, and the Castle of
VVurtsburgh to be fortified. He has placed for Governor at Konigshouen, Duke
Ernst of Saxen Wymer.

The Army of the Duke of Loraine, and the General Tilly in person were two
days since at Mildeburgh, Most of the said Army is yet betwixt Mildeburgh and
Aschenburgh, and some of them about Nyterburgh and Heytbatch. It is supposed,
that the General will go toward Bischopsheym on the River Tauber, and there
pitch his Army. His Forces in the Bishopric of Mentz commit great
insolences, and do great mischief.

From Bremen the 26. of November.
It is now confirmed from all parts that the Landgrave of Hessen has taken
Paderborn and many other places, as also Niewenhouse. Where he caused the
Arms of the Bishop of Collen to be pulled down, and the arms of his Majesty
of Sweden to be set up in the room. He has also demanded Hexter to be
delivered to him and Hamelen and thence will pass on forward to Osnabrug.

Letters from Norimberg and Leypsich newly received, relate, that a very bloody
fight lately happened between the Duke of Saxons forces: and the Imperial
forces which came from Lusatia. And that the Saxon at the first by reason of
the furious assault of the Imperialists was moved to retreat, but being
seconded by some Swedish forces they obtained a great victory. In time we shall
have farther intelligence and be able to certify you concerning the truth
hereof.

From Maestricht the 3. of November.
Here do daily pass many soldiers horse and foot over the Maze toward the
Rhine. The Prince of Barbancon shall command 4000. horse, the Lord of
Wittenhorst causes also his regiment of horse to be augmented and reenforced.
The Earl of Solmes, and the Lord Roveroy follow them with two dutch regiments
of foot forces. These all of them march to the General Tilly, or to the
Palatinate.

From Collen the 9. of November.
The Land-Grave of Hessen has since the taking of Paderborn, Munden, Warburgh,
Felckmersen, Arenstbergh, and Weel, summoned the Peers and chief of the
Bishopric of Paderborn to appear before him and take the oath of fidelity, as
likewise to agree and consult concerning the payment of the monyes that are to
be contributed, and concerning the Enquartering of the soldiers, has also
distributed commissions for the levying of 4. regiments of foot, and 3. of
horse. In those parts he marched with his Army toward Hexter and Corway. And
now tidings is come that he has taken Hexter. Our Elector with the Bishop of
Osnabrug and the Elector of Mentz are here yet together at the Diet: Where the
Peers have concluded to contribut 200000. Ryxdollers but with Condition that
all their agreements shall first be remooved, and than the monyes Contributed
be employed for the defense of the Country. And whereas that money is not
sufficient long to maintain many soldiers, our Elector is very earnest for a
larger contribution to be granted. And because the Spirituality ought not
herein to be exempted, especially since all this war and Commotion had from
them it is original, it is thought fit that they shall be large Contributors,
and with their Church Ornaments etc. and revenues, they shall help to
maintain a defensive Army. But in the mean while there is a great flight, of
Priests, Monks and Jesuits with their Church Ornaments to the City St.
Liborius. Yesterday the Spanish troops 14. Cornets in number were expected
about Duringen commanded by Wittenhorst, and 4. or 5000. foot under the command
of Colonel Roveroy, among these is comprehended the Regiment of Ysenborg and
the new Italians. They take their way toward the Mosell through the Eyffel, so
to Trarbach and Cochum. The 4. of this Month passed 3. or 400. men over the
Mosel-bridge under the command of Everfeeld, these pass to the Palatinate.

Here is much ammunition and great store of Arms bought.

The Commander Newhousen levies 1000. Curassiers, Dislingen 500. Light horses,
Angstell 500. more, Overlachen one Regiment foot, and one horse. Commander
Lambach will likewise have a regiment. All these for the service of our Elector
of Collen.

The Duke of Bavaria levies the tenth man for defense of his Country.

From Hamburgh the 30. of October.
The Garrison which yielded up Rostock to the King of Sweden, the 19. day of
this Month, passed by Dutzaw in the Dukedom of Mechelenburgh, and so to the
River Elb Wismar is not as yet agreed, being resolved to defend it self, and
hold out as long as one man shall be left alive.

As Soon as Rostock was delivered up to his Majesty of Sweden, the Imperialists
for very fear forsook Ratsenburgh two Leagves from Lauwenburgh. At
Blanckeneese those Imperialists passed over the river Elbe to Boxteheede and
Stade.

From Hamburgh the 6. of November.
From Mechelburg is written that the Army is come from Rostock before Wismar,
those within Wismar fell out of the City a thousand strong, so that an
exceeding hot fight happened on both sides. The besieged were driven back into
the City with great loss leaving behind them many dead men, and many wounded.
Among the dead was their great Commander Aldessa Barry an Italian, who
commanded there for the present in lieu of Gabriel de Roy, as Governor of the
said City, many were also carried prisoners to Weryn. On the other part of
Mechelburgh were also diverse of them slain, among the rest Leiutenant General
Berenbach.

Duke William, Governor at Erfort, causes a new army of 8000. foot and 4000.
horse to be raised. And we understand farther, that the Swedish Chancellor
Oxenstern is daily expected with an Army of 12000. men, with these to take the
City Magdenburgh and Wolfenbuttel which have been so long besieged.

From Collen the 4. of November.
The Lant-grave of Hessen with an Army of 12000. men, besieged the City Munden
by the river Weser, and in one day shot very strongly from two batteries, thus
attempting to take the City by force, those within yielded up themselves by
agreement, they departed out of the City with Bag and Baggage, and were convoyd
to Gottingen. The said Lantgrave has also taken Waerburg, Selkmersen and other
places by agreement. And so marched to Paderborn which City yielded presently,
and gave 50000. Ryxdollers to be freed from pillaging, and as we understand
has since taken that whole Bishopric. The leuy of our Elector continues
still, but there are hardly any men to be gotten.

The General Tilly could not parswade those of Hanaw by fair means,
entreaty, or any other ways, to take into their City any Imperial forces. And
as now we have received information, the same City is yielded up to some
Swedish forces for his Majesty.

The General Tilly marched lately above Francford on the Mayn toward
Selingstadt, and there passed over the Mayn, thence he marched toward
Berghstraet, and laid still certain days in the jurisdiction of Darmstadt,
where his Army did great hurt. It was formerly supposed that the said General
would have marched to Hedelbergh and Manheym by that means to defend the
Palatinate, but now we do understand that he takes his way to Margentheym and
so forward to Bavaria. The Duke of Bavaria causes the 10. person, nay some say
the 4. person to bear arms for defense of his Country, many thousands of
them he has enquartered in Donawert.

Duke George of Lunenburgh has been with his Majesty of Sweden at Wurtsburgh,
where he had Commission granted him from the said King for the raising of
20000. men.

From Berlin Letters affirm that part of the Duke of Saxons Army is going with
the General Bannier and some Swedish Commanders into Silesia. And that the
English were marched upon some exployt from Crosses accompanied with some
horsemen.

From Paris the 2. of November.
Our King is yet at Chasteaulery and God be thanked our whole Kingdom is at
peace. Only Monsieur St. Romyn is taken in hold, because he would have levied
a regiment of soldiers for his May. brother.

In the business of Marillac there is taken great pains the goods of all
those that joined with the Duke of Orleans his May. brother, are confiscated
and annexed to the Crown, as namely the Dukedom Delboeuf the Dukedom of
Bellegarde, the Earldom of Moret, Rovanes and others. The Cardinal of Savoy
is here yet, but the Prince of Cariano is departed for Piedmont. It is most
certain that the Duke of Savoy delivered Pignarola, Susa, and Avigliana, into
the hands of his Majesty to ensure the passage into Italy. What his May. has
granted the said Duke in recompense we know not yet.

At Verdun is a great Treason discovered whereupon 5. Captains are imprisoned.

The Army of his Majesty is still upon the Frontiers the same is daily
augmented, but we cannot learn to what end.

From Antwerp the 9. of November.
This week here arrived a Spanish post from Lisbon, relates that a Caravel is
arrived in Spain from the Babia de Todos los fanctos, sent from Don Anthonio
de Ocquendo the 6. of August: To certify his Majesty that in eleven weeks he
was safely and happily arrived with his fleet of 25. ships and the Merchants
fleet with him, which caused great joy in the Bahia. They met with no Holland
Armado by the way, they will now expect the Hollanders coming with great
courage and resolution.

From Bergen up Zoom, the 11. of November.
The 27. of the last month, his Excel: the Prince of Orange, commanded the
baggage of the whole army to be shipped. The 29. the whole army of the
Archdutchesse went into garrison, 18. companies of their horse were commanded
to the Rhyne, to march into Germany.

The 31. all our Canon was shipped, and the 26. of November all our drawing
horses.

The 3. of November the soldiers broke down all their huts and all the army
departed, his Excel. with some Earls and Colonels are come into this City the
4. of November from whence they departed.

The Emperor causes 3000. soldiers horse and foot to be levied in the Land of
Liege.

The troops of the Duke of Lerma, and Feria are reduced into 17. companies and
are marching into Germany.

The late Governor of this City the Lord Ryhoven was buried with great pomp
the last week, according to the manner of war. The States General, his
Excel; the Prince of Orange, and the States Deputies, with all our gentry of
our Army accompanied the Corpse to the Enterment. Colonel Morgan is chosen
Governor in his stead.

Extract out of a letter from Maintz the 16. of November.
SIR, If you did now come hither again, you would marvel at the alteration
that is here, you know there was but three Months ago such boasting amongst
us and such writing of pasquils against our Neighbors especially those of Vlm,
and the Duke of Wirtenburg, where the Monks, Priests, and Nunns had taken into
their possession many a goodly and rich Cloister! But now we do hear amongst
us here, nothing but complaints, deliberations whether to fly and what to do,
and on the other side we do hear, there they are now taking their turn and pay
us in the same coin they lately received from us. Thus goes the world: Our
General Tilly, whose name I do believe is rather used to encourage us then to
affright the Enemies, who (we do well see) do neither care whether he be alive
or dead, is said to have a great Army and I believe he has it; But what he
does with it I cannot tell. He has been long about to take the town of
Wertheim (as we have been often informed by letters) wherein are but 5. or
600. Swedes! And yet he cannot master them, and meanwhile there is still one
regiment and troop or other of Imperialists, and of Loraines beaten, and I can
assure you that the Loraines have no more mind to meet with the Swedes, for
they solicit still to be put in garrisons in such places as are farthest from
their Enemy, and likely to be not troubled or assaulted at all. Thus we suffer
more already by those that will make us believe to be our defenders, then we
could fear at the Swedes hand, if we do no worse to them then the Country of
Wirtzburg has done, who is now in their Kings possession, but withal in peace
and quietness. But of this I dare not say, what I think. The Kings troops
have lately assaulted one of the Imperial quarters which was betwixt
B^shopsheim and Mergenthal, out of which almost all the Imperialists (having
gotten notice of the Swedes coming) ran away and so by their light heels
saved their lives; For those that were not so quick were soon put to the
number of the dead by the Swedes, who slew about two hundred and took
threescore prisoners, and withal all the Baggage that was left there, which
was laden (but could not so speedily be convoyed away) upon above two hundred
Wagons, all which besides many other Horses, Mules, and other cattle was
seized by the said Swedes without any Notary, and carried away toward their
royal Camp near Wirtsburgh.

I am sorry I cannot tell you of so great matters and victories as formerly I
did oftentimes, when both Wallstein (whilst he was upon our stage of War,
and played his part) and Tilly did every week, nay day, get some notable Town,
Castle, and place, where they found no body that durst oppose them, there
having never appeared any great Army resolutely against them, except that of
the Bores in Austria; Howsoever, I will give you what I receive, and tell you
the truth, though it is not liked amongst us here. We had yesterday Letters,
and I have heard it confirmed this morning by a Colonel of ours, that 13.
Finlanders (Horsemen) met with 60. Lorraines, and although the Finlanders saw
them a far off, and could have fled and saved themselves (for the Country is
thereabouts not open) yet with a boldness and courage that defies and scorns
death it self, they set amongst them; and without any delay, laid down to the
ground the most part of the said Lorraines; and made the rest which were yet
16. to yield, and so these 13. Finlanders (which our Country people fears now
as if they were Fiendlanders; that is, of the Land of the Devil) brought away
to their King 16. Lorraines, without any complement, for I assure you, that
they could understand never a word the one of the others.

Our Army of the Imperial and Catholic and Lorraine troops, does only
endeavor (as I do perceive) to hinder the Circle of Swaben, and other Towns
of Alsatia and the Countries thereabouts to join or to yield to the Swedes:
But yet nevertheless we do hear, that the said Countries and the chief
Towns and Imperial Cities have already or do yet send and acco^modate
themselves with that King, and put themselves under his protection.

The City of Norimbergh is altogether in love with him, and will be trimmed
after his own desire, having already Swedish Engineers, that give order for
new fortifications thereof; and there are made leavies for the said City, which
they will entertain in the said King of Swedens service.

Those of Vlm we hear are doing as much, although I have yet no particular
notice of what they are resolved: But this I know, that they (having some
troops for their own defense ready) have hereby beaten back some Imperial
forces, that were come out of Italy with much pain and labor, and craving
from those of Vlm, (but with some threatenings) some relief; namely, for every
Horse 10. dollers, and for every Soldier 6. dollers (and there were of them 12.
Companies) they were for all answer, contribution and comfort, and without any
compassion of their weariness and sufferings they endured by passing the
Alps, beaten back and driven to lie upon the Archduke Leopolds dominions, and
so it is thought they will disband.

The K of Sweden has caused the Castle of Wirtzburg again to be mended and
fortified, that now it may be called what before it was esteemed, an
impregnable place in the hands of Swedes. Let this suffice for this time, I
hope for better news shortly.

Extract of another Letter the 18. of November.
I Do not doubt but you have already been informed, that the Swedish forces
have taken in the midst of the Catholic army the Old and new Town of Hanaw,
making the beginning with the Castle which they took by Pettarding and
Escaladoes. We hear Francfort has also made some acco^modation. But thereof
you will be pleased to expect my next Letters. The Elector of Maintz has kept
some of the Spanish forces, that are sent toward the Rhine and Palatinate, for
the defense of his own Country, whereat his people (how great soever the fear
is amongst their Churchmen) is very ill pleased All the Spanish forces that are
come and coming hither toward the Rhyne (which amount already to 7000. foot
and 32. Cornets of horse) are to be enquartered (as I do hear) along the
Country called Rhinegow and so lie along the Rhyne, to hinder the King of
Sweden to pass the same River.

Now concerning the Landgrave of Hessen, who has a good army and in good
discipline, he has already taken all the Bishoprics both of Paterborne and
Corvay, where he has made great store of money by way of contribution, whereby
he makes still new leavies: And withal he has published a Proclamation in
Westphalia, whereby he does call and admonish all Westphalians that serve
either the Emperor or Catholic league, to withdraw themselves out of that
service, giving them term of 6. Weeks, which past, and they not appearing and
obeying, he will proceed against them (for many Noble and Gent: of that Country
serve against the K. of Sweden and his Allies) and their goods, with all
rigor, etc. More you shall have the next Post.

FINIS.

