ANTI-MORTONVS OR AN APOLOGY In defense of the Church of Rome.

AGAINST The Grand Imposture of Doctor Thomas Morton, Bishop of Durham.

Whereto is added in the Chapter XXXIII. An Answer to his late Sermon printed,
and preached before his Majesty in the Cathedral Church of the same City.

Narrauerunt mihi iniqui fabulationes: sed non vt lex tua?

Psalm. 118. verse. 85. Dubit abimus nos cius Ecclesiae condere gremio, quae ab
Apostolica Sede per successiones Episcoporum, frustra Haereticis
circumlatrantibus, culmen Authoritatis obtinnit? Cui nolle Primas dare, vel
summae profecto impietatis est, vel praecipitis arrogantiae.

S. August. de vtil. cred. cap. 17. Permissu Superiorum, M.DC.XL.

S. Bernardus sermon. 64. in Cantica, in id Cant. 2.15.
Capite nobis vulpes paruulas quae demoliuntur vineas.
SI iuxta allegoriam, Ecclesias Vineas, Vulpes Haereses, vel potius Haereticos
ipsos intelligamus, planus est sensus, vt Haeretici capiantur etc. Capiantur
dico, non Armis, sed Argumentis, quibus refellantur Errores eorum: ipsi vero,
fi fieri potest, reconcilientur Catholicae, reuocentur ad veram Fidem. Haec est
enim voluntas eius, qui vult omnes saluos fieri, and ad agnitionem Veritatis
venire etc. Quod si reuerti noluerint, non propterea se nihil egisse putet, qui
Haereticum vicit and conuicit; Haereses confutauit; Verisimilia a Vero clare
aperteque distinxit; praua dogmata plana and irrefragabili ratione praua esse
monstrauit etc. Cepit, qui talia operatus est, Vulpem, etsi non ad salutem
illi: and cepit eam Sponso, and Sponsae, quamuis aliter. Nam etsi Haereticus
non surrexit de faece, Ecclesia tamen confirmatur in Fide: and quidem de
profectibus Sponsae, Sponsus sine dubio gratulatur.

TO DOCTOR MORTON BISHOP OF DVRHAM.
My Lord,
WITHOUT endangering the least suspicion of Complement, I believe I may crave
your pardon for this Dedication: And as others use in modesty, of necessity I
must suspect my Boldness. But Truth which I here vindicate from Imposture,
disdaines to shadow it self in Ceremony, most resplendent in its naked luster.
And forced by that, I address this Work to you, who have hitherto with so
much art endeauored to clowd it. I know the pride of human judgment slights all
the threatenings of hereafter punishment, when confession of mistake is
required: And often by the opiniated, Obstinacy in error is esteemed
Resolution: which makes me in some degree despair that fruit, these labors
otherwise might have hereafter gathered. Moreover your Lo.^ is so glorious in
your Challenge, and your Grand Imposture proclaims it self so invincible,
that jealous of my own inhability, I feared I might repent my courage, if I
entertained the Combat. But from my Weakness I drew Confidence, and called to
memory, how small an arm confounded the proud boast of the huge Philistian;
and by how childish a weapon he was hurled down to what he built on, earth;
and forced to acknowledge himself dust, and vanity.

Take not therefore your own height by the Eminency of that Title you bear, or
Reputation of your much learning, which is your Guilt, not Ornament. Nor
measure me by my humble Vocation, for I have vowed to be ambitious of no
higher; or by the obscurity of my Name, since I can easily forgive the present
Age, if it know me not; and Posterity, if it forget, I was. Neither had I now
entered into this public Quarrel, had not your bold defiance to all of my
profession provoked me to disconer how little integrity there is, where it is
most vaunted. At first, a pious Curiosity labored only my own Satisfaction:
That it now appears abroad, is the Charity I owe my Country: And that it
swells to this Volume, is the fault of your many, and I fear, too wilful
mistakes.

Consider, my Lord, how many souls are embarked with yours; for whose wrack at
the last day you must stand accomptant. And though a pleasing gale has blown
gently on you, yet no wind but drives you on toward Judgment. There the
sincerity of action, not the fallacy of language shall prevail: there no
enforced Argument, false Citation, or cunning Distinction shall be able to
justify Untruth. There heresy shall stand confounded, and they who maintained
it (rackt by their own Consciences) cry out; Behold where the Saints are
enthroned in glory, raised thither by Humility, and Obedience to the authority
of that Church, which if Truth it self speak truth, is Infallible; by
resignation of theirs to the divine will, and cooperating to the merits of the
great Mediator: But we mad men made a mockery of their wisdom; and to take the
blemish from our loose behavior, discredited the value of good works: We
presumptuous in the vanity of Wit, opposed the divine Truth; and to destroy the
Monarchy of S. Peter and his Successors, proclaimed liberty to every Rebellious
Doctrine: We listened to the suggestions of a private Spirit; and seduced by
that, contemned a long received, and universal Verity: and therefore justly now
is our portion darkness, and our inheritance eternal fire.

I doubt not but the holy Spirit often whispers these thoughts into your soul:
but Pride keeps the gate of the heart fast shut. Moreover if we look not
straight on heaven, without squinting on temporal respects; considering your
fat revenue, and your Lordship, I may well be thought to inuit you to your
loss. But who, that has regard to Safety, despises not the flatteries of
Wealth, and Honor, when he meditates on the Treasures of the Eternal? And why
should I utterly despair, though you have erred wilfully, that the Almighty
Mercy may reclaim you; if ignorantly, that when you here find how much your
judgment has betrayed you, you will penitently submit, and make much
satisfaction by your great example?

S. Augustine thought it no dishonor to his Judgment, to be overcome by Truth,
and rather then loose a Soul, forsook an Heresy; which, as all others, had an
age to flourish in. Nor is his Humility, a scandal to his Learning, or was his
Change, Inconstancy: whose Volumes carry that reputation, that even Sectaries,
who want his virtue for Obedience, endeavor to wrest his doctrine, for
Defense. Here may your Lo? learn instruction: whom to accompany in an humble
Conversion, will be more safety and glory, then to persevere obstinate in a
proud mistake. If the cunning, and art of your many Writings enamour you, throw
away the unhappy dotage, though in them Hope flatters you, that your memory may
hereafter live. Safer far, to have no Name with the succeeding Age, then to
preserve it in the infamy of a spurious Issue. And believe it, when the Soul
wilfully imbraceth Error, it commits the worst Adultery; what-euer is
engendered by such conceptions, being both illegitimate, and monstrous.

Look upon the opinions of them, who live severed (if they can be said to live
who are dead to grace) from the Unity of the Church; and confess, how little
constant Error is to it self. That Innocence from Lust, which so many of your
Writers affirm impossible to preserve, your own single, and (I hope)
incorrupt life has approved possible: for unless you will endanger your self
to a Censure in the high Commission, you must acknowledge, flesh and blood may
be kept in order, by the spirit. But what discouers the bodies of all Churches,
which oppose the Catholic, most misshapen is the division among your selves;
now and ever so apparent, that I dare confidently auerre, were there a Council
called of all those you reckon yours, his Holiness might suspend his Censure,
each one of you prepared to pronounce the other, Heretic. And for your Lo.p,
though reputed most Orthodoxall, unless you quit that most reverend Title,
which is your honor to make good, I suspect, you would by the Mayor voice be
condemned, without the guilt of any other crime: though Truth and all Antiquity
teach us, that Episcopal dignity has ever been most eminent, and necessary in
the Church, and ought to be held in veneration, where lawfully conferred, not
usurped.

But I fear, I keep no good time, when I strike on this harsh string: I will
not therefore further afflict your ear. Let me only entreat, and if possible,
prevail with your Lo.p, to cast up the account of those many years you have
numbered here on earth. And if you have provided a Marble hereafter to enclose
your dust, look not on the flattering Epitaph, which betrays the Reader: but
listen to the silent sad Oratory, in which it pleads to you your condition. It
tells you, that every path of life, how crooked soever in man's purposes, leads
straight to death: That all the pomp of wealth, and honor (for acquisition of
which he doubts not often to stake a Soul) is but an evening shadow, soon to
be lost in an everlasting darkness: That youth does oftentimes break promise,
when it proposes length of life; but that age is frantic, if it hope long to
hold out against the assault of death.

It therefore imports your Lo.p, who oppressed with years bow downward to the
grave, seriously to look inward, and turn your sight from those vanities
which have hitherto bewicht you. For pardon me, if to pride and vanity I
ascribe a long continuance in error: and that I want credulity to think, an
able Scholar can believe Untruth, though for the designs of his own
Ambition, he obtrude it to the world. May your Lo p take, courage, and gain an
entire Conquest over Sense, by subscribing to that Church, in which only is
safty, and which your many unlucky Labors have slaundered, not injured. So
signal a Conversion will add^ joy, and triumph to the Angels; and make me,
who have been hitherto your Adversary, not Enemy, hereafter,

Your true Admirer, and humble Servant. I. S.

TO THE READER.
GOOD READER,
The Author of the Grand Imposture, in his first Epistle dedicated to his
Majesty, sets only forth in general the heads of that doctrine he afterward
endeavors (though unluckily) to make good. But Error without appearance of
proof, confutes it self: And it would anticipate the design of my study, if
here I should labor thy satisfaction; since the whole ensuing Treatise
discouers every of his mistakes in particular, which at the first entrance to
his Book, he affirms in gross. Yet could I wish, that only truth should dare
to approach the throne of Majesty; and that a conscience guilty of deceit,
should not be able to pretend the confidence of the innocent: for the falsest
doctrine may easily win belief upon the Laity, whom either much business
diuerts from the search of truth, or an unwillingness to be disturbed,
encourages to follow that easy path, they from their infancy have beaten;
especially when it appears in public asseuered by them who have their large
stipend, and high honor, only on condition to be sincere in what they teach.
But howeuer he may flatter himself that hs Reader will never arrive to
patience enough, to travail beyond his Epistles, or that his authority will be
sufficient, though his proofs are defective; I hope he will find his comfort
to have betrayed him: for the business which here we controuert, being of value
far beyond the whole world beside, I mean the soul of man, and the Church, in
which only that can expect safety; I doubt not (good Reader) but thou will be
so charitable to thy self, as to read, distinguish, and then reject error,
how plausible soever it may appear to sense: Nor, though his reputation may
have gained heretofore much upon thee, will thou believe, that Truth is by
covenant bound to christen all the abortiues of his Opinion.

And whereas in his second Epistle, directed to all Romish Priests, whether
Jesuits or others, he seems by a Rhethoricall figure, to hear them censuring
his charging the Church of Rome with Imposture, the bold assumption, or rather
impudent, and impious presumption of an Heretic; I cannot but commend the
judgment he instructs them to pronounce: for how could the wit of Justice
invent a more proper, or seuerer? Or to speak more truly, how could Mercy use
a gentler? And though in that single word, Heretic, all Impiety is
comprehended; yet how can he deserve any other sentence, who has dared to
defame thy innocence, O thou Immaculate Spouse of our great Redeemer? Who has
termed thy doctrine, which threw down the Statues of the Heathens, and rooted
up all false worship, Idolatrous, Sacrilegious? Thy doctrine, which planted the
faith of Christ with the blood of Martyrs, and tied up the common enemy of man,
Satanicall, and Antichristian? Thy doctrine, which is the only safety of the
soul, Execrable, and Pernicious? which teaches the true adoration of God,
Blasphemous and Impious? which never varied in the least article from the
truth, Schismatic, and Heretical? But how far unable are these weak
calumnies to wound thy strength, which has triumphed over all the opposition of
heresy, and hell? Thou art built upon a Rock of Diamond, which yields the
brightest luster, when impure slander raifeth the blackest night: A Rock, which
never moved since Christ designed it, as a foundation for his greatest work on
earth: A rock, against which her many Adversaries have battered with continual
tempests, but still ended in froth, and noise.

But all these foul aspersions might be interpreted the wild expressions of an
extrauagant zeal, and perhaps challenge that pity we throw away upon the
frantic. Neither can any man be enraged with such infamous language, who
considers, it is that spirit, which possessed the first professors of this
pretended reformation; who created a Religion in contempt of jurisdiction. And
as every where they derogated from the spiritual, so spared they not the
temporal, where fear of punishment restraind not their tongues to modesty.

But what even amazeth my Understanding, is, that so well practiced a man in
controversy, so jealous of honor, and such a pretender to integrity, should
fall into that deceitful, and, I may say, fatal crime of the writers of his
Coat, false citation, and misinterpretation of Authors. What injury has he
done the dead, whose souls are blessed in heaven, and whose ashes are
reverenced on earth, to make them defend a doctrine, in opposition to which
they emptied every vein in their most (acred bodies? What cruelty to the
living, by a pretended obedience to the authority of the primitive times, to
enforce them to believe the errors of the present? Does he hope, his Volumes
shall fall only into the hands of the ignorant, or else of the negligent, so
far, that any doctrine shall posse for current, which his fancy has been
pleased to coin? Did he entrust others to make scrutiny into Authors for his
purpose, and so adventure his reputation to the world, on an uncertain, and
perhaps unfaithful evidence? Or did he believe, according to the rule of the
worst Statesmen, any allegation how injurious soever, most just, if it served
the advancement of his design? For certainly he has given the world an
example of such a courage, that no good Writer will ever follow, in daring thus
to be disproued by any Reader, who has the benefit of a Library, and the
patience to compare truth with falsehood. For without giving credit to the
testimonies I here allege, if any man will search into the Authors themselves,
he shall find them mangled, as that Procrustes apud Plutarch, in Theseo.
Tyrant did his ghests (who with most barbarous torment shortened or lengthned
their bodies, according to the proportion of his bed:) No man writes short of
his sense, but is extended on the rack: no man beyond, but is mutilated without
mercy.

This discovery of his unhappy practice I wish may beget his conversion, not
confusion. But should he be so enamoured on his error, as not to be removed by
the most forcible Arguments of Truth; I hope (Reader) in thee to reap some
fruit of my labor. The Almighty in distribution of his benefits, will not be
directed by humane judgment. Let his divine wisdom therefore bestow the fruit
of my study, where, and on whom he pleases: for to his glory I must consecrate
that, with whatsoever I am.

Only (Curious Reader) I must beg thy pardon, that in endeavoring to write
business, I have neglected language, which like that music Poets ascribe to the
Sirens, has been often treacherous to the hearer. Elegancy of speech is a
gift, in which the wicked share equally with the good: and the most sacred
tongue that ever spoke, disdained to adulterate truth with any fallacy of an
artificial Phrase. The policy of some Republikes has expeld their Orators, as
subjects whom the power of eloquence rendered formidable; the multitude being
easy to receive any impression through the ear; and Oratory being a weapon as
sharp to destroy, as defend the State. Nor do I value the cunning of language
worthy the industry of the serious: It may be of consequence, where well
directed; but truth needs not borrow any ornament of language, to make it self
more amiable. That which I aim at, is thy satisfaction; and that the Church of
God, which is on earth no other, but the Roman, may shine vnclouded in the
sight of men, as it has ever been most pure in the eye of God. And that all
mankind whom error has misled, may re-vnite themselves into her faith; guided
by which, the innocent can only hope for perseurance to glory, and the
repentant a way to mercy.

An Addition.
COurteous Reader, I had almost forgotten to advertise thee, that whereas Doctor
Morton has made two Editions of his Grand Imposture; the Edition which I shall
cite in this Apology, is the second, reuised, and supplied, and printed at
London by George Miller, for Robert Milbourne. 1628.

A table of the Chapters and Sections of this Book.
CHAP. I. General principles premised for the better understanding of this
Apology. Page 1. The importance of the subject. Sect. 1. ib. Whether the Roman
Church be truly called the Catholic Church, and in what sense. Sect. 2. page
4. That in the language of antiquity the Catholic Church, and the Roman
Church, were two names signifying one and the same thing. Sect. 3. page 7. That
whosoever is out of the Roman Church, is out of the state of salvation. Sect.
4. page 13.
CHAP. II. Of Doctor Mortons manner of alleging Authors in general. page 27.
CHAP. III. Whether the (now) Roman Church, has composed a new Creed. page 36.
CHAP. IV. Whether the (now) Roman Church have added any new Articles to the
Creed of the Apostles. page 38. CHAP. V. That the word Roman, is no
deprauation, but a true declaration of the article of the Catholic Church.
page 40. Doctor Mortons first Argument against the precedent doctrine
answered. Sect. 1. ibid. His second Argument answered. Sect. 2. page 43. His
third Argument answered. Sect. 3. page 52. His fourth Argument answered.
Sect. 4. page 54. His fifth Argument answered. Sect. 5. page 56. His sixth
Argument answered. Sect. 6. page 58. His seventh Argument answered. Sect. 7.
page 59. His eight Argument answered. Sect 8. page 60.
CHAP. VI. That the Roman Church is the Head and mother of all Churches. page
61. CHAP. VII. S. Peter's primacy defended. page 72. CHAP. VIII. Abuses and
wrongs offered by Doctor Morton to the ancient Fathers and other Catholic
writers. page 81. CHAP. IX. S. Peter exercised his authority, and jurisdiction
of supreme Pastor and Governor, over the other Apostles, and over the whole
Church. page 88. CHAP. X. Doctor Mortons Arguments against the former doctrine,
answered. page 93. CHAP. XI. Sleights and falsifications of Doctor Morton to
shift of the testimonies of ancient Fathers teaching S. Peter's supremacy. page
107. CHAP. XII. The authority of the Roman Church in her definitions of faith
proved to be infallible. page 117. Our first Argument. Sect. 1. page ibid. Our
second Argument. Sect. 2.125. S. Paul's subjection to S. Peter, and his
acknowledgment thereof. Sect. 3. page 132. Other Arguments of Doctor Morton
answered. Sect. 4. page 140. Privileges granted to other of the Apostles, and
not to S. Peter, objected by Doctor Morton. Sect. 5. page 143. What estimation
S. Paul had of the Roman Church. Sect. 6. page 152. Why S. Paul did not entitle
his Epistles, Catholic Epistles. Sect. 7. page 159. Other Arguments out of S.
Paul, and other Catholic Authors answered. Sect.8. page 162.
CHAP. XIII. Whether S. John the Evangelist conceived himself subject to the
Roman Church. page 166. Whether Rome shall be the seat of Antichrist. Sect. 1.
ibid. Whether S. John suruiuing S. Peter, were subject to the B. of Rome, S.
Peter's Successor. Sect. 2. page 173.
CHAP. XIV. Why the Epistles of S. James, John, and Jude are entitled
Catholic Epistles. page 177. Of the name Catholic. Sect. 1. ibid. Whether the
title of Vicar of Christ belong to the Pope, and in what sense. Sect. 2. page
180. Whether S. Paul reckoning the Ecclesiastical orders, gave the Pope any
place among them. Sect. 3. page 182. Doctor Mortons railing against the
Inquisition. Sect. 4. page 187.
CHAP. XV. Of the signification of the word Catholic: and the judgment of
diverse Fathers, objected by Doctor Morton against the Roman Church. page 195.
That the word Catholic proves the Roman Church to be the true Church. Sect. 1.
ibid. The judgment of S. Hierome concerning the Church Catholic. Sect. 2. page
198. The judgment of S. Gregory concerning the Supremacy of the B. of Rome, and
his title of universal Bishop. Sect. 3. page 201. S. Dionyse his judgment
concerning the supremacy of the Roman Church. Sect. 4. page 302. S. Ignatius
his judgment of the Roman Church. Sect. 5. p. 303. S. Irenaeus his judgment of
the Roman Church. Sect. 6. p. 304. Tertullian his judgment of the Roman Church.
Sect. 7. page 308. Vincentius Lyrinensis his judgment of the Roman Church.
Sect. 8. page 311. Other observations of Doctor Morton out of Antiquity,
answered. Sect. 9. page 312.
CHAP. XVI. The judgment of the Council of Nice, concerning the authority of
the B. and Church of Rome. page 313. Doctor Mortons objections against the
precedent doctrine, answered. Sect. 1. page 318.
CHAP. XVII. The second general Council held at Constantinople, believed the
supreme authority of the Bishop and Church of Rome. page 324. By what authority
this Council was called. Sect. 1. ibid. Whether the Primacy of the Pope be
Primacy of Authority and Jurisdiction, or of Order only. Sect. 2. page 328.
Whether the names of Brother, Colleague, and Fellow-Minister, which the Pope
gives to other Bishops, and they to him, argue them to be of equal Authority,
and Jurisdiction with him. Sect. 3. page 330. A frivolous cavil of Doctor
Morton against Bellarmine, answered. Sect. 4. page 335. Of the Decree of this
second Council general made in favor of the Archbishop of Constantinople.
Sect. 5. page 336. That no Canon of any Council can be of force, until it be
confirmed by the Sea Apostolic. Sect. 6. page 338. That the Bishops of
Constantinople knew this Canon to be of no force. Sect. 7. page 340.
CHAP. XVIII. The third Council general, being the first of Ephesus, believed
the supreme authority and jurisdiction of the B. of Rome over all Bishops. page
343. Of the deposition and condemnation of Nestorius, by the command of Pope
Celestine: and whether the style of ancient Popes were to command. Sect. 1.
ibid. The Council of Ephesus acknowledged the supreme authority of the Pope in
the cause of John Patriarch of Antioch. Sect. 2. page 351. Of the Ordination of
the Bishops of Cyprus, treated in the Council of Ephesus. Sect. 3. page 352.
Whether it may be gathered out of the Council of Ephesus, that the authority
of the Pope is above a general Council. Sect. 4. page 353.
CHAP. XIX. The Council of Chalcedon believed the supreme authority of the B.
of Rome. page 355. That Leo Pope called the Council of Chalcedon by his
authority, and presided in it by his Legates. Sect. 1. ibid. That the Council
of Chalcedon by the authority of Leo Pope deposed Eutyches and Dioscorus, and
restored Theodoret. Sect. 2. page 356. Whether the title of Universal Bishop,
which the Council of Chalcedon gave to the Pope, argue in him no more but a
general care of the good of the Church, such as belongs to every Bishop, and
to every Christian. Sect. 3. page 360. Whether the Couneell of Chalcedon did
give to the B. of Constantinople privileges equal with the B. of Rome. Sect.
4. page 362. Falsifications and untruths of Doctor Morton discovered, and his
Arguments answered. Sect. 5. page 367.
CHAP. XX. The fifth Council general believed the supreme authority of the
Bishop and Church of Rome. p. 375. Doctor Mortons ignorance, and contradictions
concerning this Council. Sect. 1. ibid. Doctor Mortons ignorance further
discovered, and his falsifying of Binius. Sect. 2. page 377. Of the matter
treated in the fifth general Council. Sect. 3. page 381. Doctor Mortons
gloss upon the word Obedience. Sect. 4. page 383.
CHAP. XXI. Of the sixth general Council. page 385. That it acknowledged the
supreme authority of the Bishop and Church of Rome. Sect. 1. ibid. Whether the
fixth Council condemned Honoriu Pope as an Heretic. Sect. 2. page 387.
CHAP. XXII. Of the seventh and eight general Counsels: page 391. That these
two Counsels acknowledged the supreme authority of the Bishop and Church of
Rome. Sect. 1. ibid. Doctor Mortons ignorance concerning the eight general
Council. Sect. 2. page 392. Whether the eight general Council condemned the
Saturday-fast allowed by the Roman Church. Sect. 3. page 394.
CHAP. XXIII. Doctor Morton defends the heretical custom of the Asian
Bishops. page 397. CHAP. XXIV. Doctor Morton in opposition to the Roman Church
defends the heretical Doctrine of Rebaptization. page 402. CHAP. XXV. Other
Arguments of Doctor Morton out of S. Cyprian, answered. page 408. CHAP. XXVI.
The Counsels of Carthage and Mileuis acknowledged the supreme authority of the
Bishop of Rome. page 411. CHAP. XXVII. Appeals to Rome proved out of the
African Council which was the sixth of Carthage. p. 419. The state of the
question. Sect. 1. ibid. That the Nicen Canons were more then twenty in number.
And that the Canons concerning appeals to Rome, were true Canons of the Nicen
Council. Sect. 2. page 421. Whether, if there had been no Canon for appeals
to Rome in the Council of Nice, it had been forgery in Pope Zosimus, to
allege a Canon of the Sardican Council, for a Canon of Nice. Sect. 3. page
426. Untruths and falsifications of D. Morton discovered, and his objections
answered. Sect. 4. page 429. Whether this Controversy of appeals wrought in
the Africans, any separation of Communion from the Roman Church. Sect. 5. page
437.
CHAP. XXVIII. Whether the Britans and Scots, not celebrating Easter after the
manner of the Roman Church, were for that cause separated from her communion.
p. 450. CHAP. XXIX. Of the great reverence of ancient Christian Emperors, and
Kings, to the Pope. page 454. CHAP. XXX. Whether Christian Emperors have
invested themselves in Ecclesiastical affairs. page 461. Constantine the
Great invested not himself in Ecclesiastical causes. Sect. 1. ibid. Doctor
Mortons second Example of Theodosius, examined. Sect. 2. page 469. Doctor
Mortons third instance of Theodosius the younger and Honorius, examined. Sect.
3. page 471. Doctor Mortons fourth instance of Theodosius and Valentinian,
examined. Sect. 4. page 473. Doctor Mortons fifth instance of Justinian,
examined. Sect. 5. page 475.
CHAP. XXXI. Of the authority, and place of Emperors in Counsels. page 480.
CHAP. XXXII. Whether Popes have challenged civil subjection from Emperors and
Kings, Christian and Heathen. page 483. Doctor Mortons first Argument out of
Innocent the third examined. Sect. 1. ibid. Doctor Mortons second Argument out
of Hieremy the Prophet, examined. Sect. 2. page 486. Doctor Mortons third
Argument out of the examples of diverse Popes, examined. Sect. 3. page 490.
Doctor Morton contradicts himself. Sect. 4. page 494.
CHAP. XXXIII. Doctor Mortons late Sermon preached in the Cathedral Church of
Durham, answered. page 495. The sense of S. Paul's words which Doctor Morton
took for his text, declared. Sect. 1. page 496. Ancient Popes objected, and
falfified by Doctor Morton. Sect. 2 page 501. Other Fathers and Catholic
authors objected by Doctor Morton. Sect. 3. page 507. Doctor Morton slaundereth
Urban Pope, and with him all Catholics. Sect. 4. page 510. Doctor Morton
obiecteth the Bull of Maundy-thursday. Sect. 5. page 512. Other slanderous
accusations of Doctor Morton answered. Sect. 6. page 514. The same matter
prosecuted. Sect. 7. page 517.
CHAP. XXXIV. Doctor Mortons doctrine condemns the Saints and Martyrs of God.
page 522. S. Policarpe objected by Doctor Morton. Sect. 1. ibid. S. Cyprian
objected by Doctor Morton. Sect. 2. page 523. S. Athanasius objected by Doctor
Morton. Sect. 3. page 525. S. Basils belief of the supreme authority of the B.
of Rome proved, and Doctor Mortons objections answered. Sect. 4. page 528.
Whether S. Hilary excommunicated the Pope. Sect. 5. p. 533. S. Hieroms judgment
concerning the necessity of union with the Church of Rome, and subjection to
the Bishop thereof. Sect. 6. page 536. S. Ambrose his judgment concerning the
necessity of Union and subjection to the Bishop and Church of Rome. Sect. 7.
page 545. S. Augustines judgment concerning the necessity of Union, with the
Church of Rome, and subjection to the Bishop thereof. Sect. 8 page 552. S.
Hilary B. of Aries acknowledged himself subject to the B. of Rome. Sect. 9.
page 558.
CHAP. XXXV. Of titles attributed to the Pope. p. 561. CHAP. XXXVI. The nullity
of Doctor Mortons answeares to the testimonies of ancient Fathers discovered.
pa. 571. Some of his answeares examined. Sect. 1. ibid. Others of Doctor
Mortons answeares to the Ancient Fathers, examined. Sect. 2. page 574, Doctor
Mortons answer to the testimony of Acacius examined. Sect. 3. page 577.
Doctor Mortons answer to Vincentius Lyrinensis confuted. Sect. 4. page 581.
Doctor Morton in his answer to Optatus contradicts himself. Sect. 5. page
582. Other untruths of Doctor Morton discovered, and his cauilling against the
title of Holiness given to the Pope. Sect. 6. page 583.
CHAP. XXXVII. Of the authority of the Epistles of ancient Popes. page 587. Of
the Epistles of Popes living within the first 300. years after Christ. Sect.
1. page 588. The nullity of Doctor Mortons answeares to the testimonies of
Popes, that lived in the second 300. years after Christ. Sect. 2. page 592.
CHAP. XXXVIII. The universal jurisdiction of the B. of Rome proved by the
exercise of his authority over other Bishops. page 600. The Popes universal
authority proved by the institution and confirmation of Bishops: And of the use
and signification of the Pall, or mantle granted to Archbishops. Sect. 1. p.
601. A shift of Doctor Morton rejected. Sect. 2. page 604. The Popes power of
instituting and confirming Bishops, proved by examples. Sect. 3 page 605. The
Popes power of deposing Bishops without a Council proved by examples. Sect. 4.
page 608. The Popes power of restoring Bishops without a Council Sect. 5..
page 611. Doctor Morton to Cross the Popes authority in restoring Bishops
deposed, takes part with the Arians, and iustifies their impious proceedings
against S. Athanasius, and other Catholic Bishops. Sect. 6. page 612. Other
passages of Doctor Morton examined. Sect. 7. pa. 618. Doctor Mortons ignorance
concerning excommunication. And of Heretics excommunicating the Pope. Sect. 8.
p. 621. Adrian and Nicolas Popes objected by Doctor Morton. Sect. 9. page 623.
Of the deposition of Flauianns Patriarch of Antioch. Sect. 10. page 624. Doctor
Morton in defense of his doctrine charge ancient Bishops which exercising
Acts of authority out of the limits of their own jurisdiction. Sect. 11. page
631.
CHAP. XXXIX. Of Appeals to Rome decreed in the Council of Sardica. page 635.
Whether the Council of Sardica were a general Council. Sect. 1. ibid. Other
objections of Doctor Morton against Appeals to Rome, answered. Sect. 2. page
637. Examples of innocent Appellants. Sect. 3. page 638. Doctor Mortons
ignorance concerning the antiquity of appealing to Rome from remote nations.
Sect. 4. page 639. That S. Athanasius appealed to Julius Pope, and Theodoret to
Leo, as to absolute Judges: and that by their authority both of them were
restored to their Churches. Sect. 5. p. 641. That S. Chrysoftome appealed to
Innocentius Pope, as to an absolute Judge, and by his authority was restored to
his Church of Constantinople. Sect. 6. page 643. That Flauianus appealed to Leo
Pope, as to an absolute Judge. Sect. 7. page 648. Of Nilus equalling the B. of
Constantinople with the Pope, in his right of Appeals. Sect. 8. page 650. The
rest of Doctor Mortons Arguments against Appeals to Rome. Sect. 9. page 653.
CHAP. XL. Whether the Eastern Churches be at this day accordant in Communion
with Protestants. page 654. The state of the question. Sect. 1. ibid. Whether
the Grecians of the primitive and successiue times agreed in Faith and
Communion, with the Bishop and Church of Rome, and particularly at the Council
of Florence. Sect. 2. page 655. That many of the Grecians at this day are of
the Roman Communion, and profess subjection to the B. of Rome. Sect. 3. page
662. Of the Egyptians. Sect. 4. page 663. Of the Aethiopians. Sect. 5. page
664. Of the Armenians. Sect. 6. page 665. Of the Russians. Sect. 7. page 666.
Of the Aslyrians. Sect. 8. ibid. Of the Antiochians. Sect. 9 page 668. Of the
Africans. Sect. 10 page 669. Of the Asians. Sect. 11. ibid.
CHAP. XXXXI. That in the forenamed countries there are no Christians that
agree in faith and Communion with Protestants. page 669. The Grecians, which
are not of the Roman communion are absolute Heretics. And Doctor Morton
falsifieth Catholic Authors to excuse them. Sect. 1. page 670. Of the
Lutherans of Germany, writing to Hieremy Patriarch of Constantinople to be
admitted into the communion of the Greek Church: and his answer to them.
Sect. 2. page 674. A particular instance of Ignatius Patriarch of
Constantinople produced by Doctor Morton, to prove that he dissented from the
Roman Church, examined. Sect. 3. page 678. The Egyptians, Aethiopians,
Armenians, Russians, Melchites, Africans, and Asians, which call themselves
Christians, and be not of the Roman communion, are absolute Heretics. Sect. 4.
page 679.
CHAP. XXXXII. Doctor Mortons plea for his Protestant Church. page 683. The
small extent of the Protestant Church proves her not to be the Catholic
Church. Sect. 1. ibid. Whether the Protestant Church be free from error in
doctrine. Sect. 2. page 686. Doctor Mortons pretended purity of manners, in his
Protestant Church. ect. 3. page 687. That Protestants by Schism have divided
themselves from the Catholic Church. Sect. 4. page 688.
CHAP. XXXXIII. Of the Head of the Roman Church compared to the body thereof.
page 691. Whether it be matter of faith, that the Pope is above a Council.
Sect. 1. ibid. Whether it be matter of faith, that this individual person, v.
g. Urban the eight, is true Pope, and true Head of the Church. Sect. 2. page
692. Whether the Church of Rome be at any time a body headless. Sect. 3. page
693. Whether the Roman Church have at any time a false Head. Sect. 4. page 696.
Whether the Roman Church at any time be divided into many Heads. Sect. 5. page
700. Whether the Roman Church be doubtfully headed. Sect. 6. page 702. Of the
Council of Constance, defining a Council to be above the Pope. Sect. 7. page
704. The same matter prosecuted, out of the Council of Basil. Sect. 8. page
706. Doctor Mortons instances of France and England to prove the no-necessity
of Union with the Church of Rome. Sect. 9. page 709.
CHAP. XXXXIV. Whether Luther and his followers had any just cause to separate
themselves from the Roman Church. page 711. Whether any Protestants have held
that the Catholic Church, before Luthers fall, was wholly extinguished. Sect.
1. ibid. Whether the Catholic Church assembled in a general Council may err
in her definitions of faith. Sect. 2. p. 714. Whether Protestants hold the
Church of Christ to be invisible. Sect. 3. page 720. What causes may suffice to
depart from the communion of a particular Church. Sect. 4. page 725. Of Luthers
excommunication, and his conference with the Devil. Sect. 5. page 731. Whether
the Roman Church be as subject to Errors, as any other Church. Sect. 6. page
735. Whether there be in the Scripture any Prophesy, that the Church of Rome
shall fall from the faith. Sect. 7. page 740. Whether Luther were justly
excommunicated. Sect. 8. p. 741. Of the first occasion of Luthers revolt from
the Church. And that Doctor Morton to defend his doctrine against Indulgences,
falsifieth sundry Authors. Sect. 9. page 744. The causes given by Doctor Morton
in excuse of Luthers departure from the Roman Church. Sect. 10. page 749.
Whether Protestants had any professors of their faith before Luther. Sect. 11.
page 751. That all changes of faith have been noted in the persons, times, and
places of their beginnings. Sect. 12. page 757. The lineall succession of
Bishops in the Sea of Rome, is a true and certain mark of the Catholic
Church. Sect. 13. page 760. Of the conformity of Protestants and Donatists, in
their separation from the Catholic Church. Sect. 14. page 763. That the faith
of the (now) Roman Church is acknowledged by Protestants to be sufficient for
salvation. Sect. 15. page 765.

CHAP. I. GENERAL PRINCIPLES PREMISED for the better understanding of the
ensuing Apology.
SECT. I. The importance of the Subject.
THOUGH there be many questions in Religion controuerted between Protestants
and us, yet none more important, or more necessary to be known, then that of
the Church. Protestants agree with us so far, as to believe that there is. and
shall be to the end of the world extant on earth One, Holy, Catholic, and
Apostolic Church, which is the 1. Tim. 3.15.
Pillar and touchstone of truth; which all men that will not be as Heathens,
and Publicanes, must hear and Math. 18.17.
obey; which is the second Eve framed out of the side of our second Adam
Christ, whom whosoever will not acknowledge to be his Mother, cannot have him
to be his S. Aug. de Symb. l. 4. c. 10.
Father. She is the mystical body of our Ephesians. 5.23.
Lord, out of which (says S. Augustine) Ep. 50. ad (...).
the holy Ghost imparteth life to no man. She is the Vineyard Math. 20.1. and
seqq.
in which he that labors not, shall not receive the wages of everlasting
life. She the Ark of Noah S. Hiero. ep. 57 S. Gaudent tract. 2. de lect. Euang.
in which whosoever is not, or out of which whosoever departs, shall perish.
She is the wellspring of truth, Lactant. 4 divine iustit. ^. vlt. Orig. hom 15.
in Math. Theod in c. 2.2. ad Thessal.
the House of faith, the Temple of God, in which men's prayers are heard, and
their sacrifices accepted; all other congregations being Synagogues of Satan
and denns of Devils. She is the garden of God Cant. 4.12.13.15.
in which whosoever grows not, is not a flower planted by the hand of Christ
but a weed to be plucked up, and cast into hell fire. Finally she is the
kingdom of Christ 2. Reg 7.12 1 Paralip. 17.11. Psalm 44.7. Luc. 1.33 Colos^.
1.13.
in which whosoever is not, is none of Christ's people Whosoever (says Eb. 152.
ad popul. fact. Donas. and cont. ep Parmen l. 2. c. 3.
S Augustine) is divided from the Catholic Church, although he think himself
to liu^ never so laudably, for this only crime that he is divided from the
unity of Christ, the wrath of God abides on him And speaking of Emeritus an
heretical Sermon. super gestis cum Emerito post med.
Bishop; He cannot have salvation, but in the Catholic Church. Out of the
Church he may have all things but salvation: he may have honor he may have
Sacraments, he may sing Alleluia he may answer Amen he may have the Gospel,
he may have and preach belief in the name of the Father, and the Son and the
holy Ghost: but salvation he can find no where, but in the Catholic Church.

Wherefore since the salvation of our souls cannot be had out of the Catholic
Church, it is most necessary for every man to inquire and learn, which, and
where is that Temple of God, that kingdom of Christ, that storehouse of
truth, and that second Eve our spiritual Mother, that knowing her, and
resorting to her, he may be cherished in her lap, and nourished at her breasts
with the milk of her wholesome Doctrine.

The belief of all Catholics is, that these foresaid a^tributs agree to the
Roman Church, and to no other congregation in the world; and that therefore she
alone is the Holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church, in which whosoever is, may,
and in which whosoever is not, cannot be saved. Upon this our Doctrine you
pass a censure suitable to your modesty, Videlicet, that it is False.
Imposterous Scandalous, Schismatic, Heretical, Blasphemous; every way
Damnable, Page 5.182.419.
Presumgtuous, Page 336.
Impious, Page 95.
Execrable, Page 127.
Damnably heretical, Page 91.
Pernicious, Antichristian, Page 99.
Sacrilegious, Page 336.
Sathanicall, Idola^rous Page 387.
This is your censure; and to make it good, you write a large volume, which you
entitle, The Grand Imposture of the (now) Roman Church; but mistake your self
in the name, for the book is, and ought to have been entitled, The Grand
imposture of Doctor Thomas Morton, against the Roman Church of this and all
former ages, for upon due examination such he will find it to be, that shall
please to pass his Eye over the ensuing Apology: and I doubt not, but after
the perusal thereof, he will rest convinced, that those monstrous Titles
wherewith you slander our Doctrine, most fitly agree to your own, delivered
in your Grand Imposture. But before I come to join issue with you concerning
the particulers, it will not be amiss, to examine briefly in general, whether
the ancient Fathers and Doctors of Gods Church (whom you acknowledge to have
lived upon earth in the true faith, and now to be most glorious Saints in
heaven) were of your belief concerning the Roman Church, or of ours: for they
being lights of the world Math. 5.15.
whom God has raised in all ages, and placed on the candlestick of his
Church, to enlighten our ways, and deliver unto us the true sense and meaning
of his holy word, that we may not be like children wavering and carried away
with every blast of heretical Ephef. 4.14.
Doctrine, I suppose, that as there is no wiseman, who will not desire to be
rancked among them in the next world, and to stand with them at the later day:
so there is none, that will not desire to be in this world a member of the same
Church, and a professor of the same faith, which brought them to that happiness,
especially knowing (as we do) that there is bur one Church in which, and one
faith by which me^ may be saved: for to think that so many men so eminently
learned, and that used so great means both of study and prayer, to attain to
the knowledge of truth, and of the right way to heaven, have all erred, not
living in the true Church which leads to salvation, but in an erring
Synagogue, that leads to everlasting ruin and damnation, is a conceit that I
think no Christian (and I am sure no prudent man) can harbor in his breast;
which yet he must do, that will credit your Doctrine, as the ensuing proofs
will declare.

SECT. II. Whether the Roman Church be truly called the Catholic Church, and
in what sense?
ALthough the Name of Catholic Church, whether we regard the etimology, or the
most proper and usual acception of the word Catholic, signify not any
particular Church, but the Universal spread over the whole world, yet with-all
it is true, that every particular Church may in some sense be called Catholic:
for as every particular Orthodoxe man has the denomination of a Catholic man,
because he professes the Catholic faith, and is a member of the Universal
Church: so for the same reason, and in the same sense, both the particular
Church of Rome, and all others orthodoxall, may be called Catholic Churches.
In this sense, the Christians of Smyrna writing to the Churches of Pontus,
Eusebius. l. 4. histor. c. 14.
address their Epistle, To the Church of God at Philomelium, and to all other
the holy and Catholic Churches throughout the world. In the same sense
Constantine In Apolog. 2. Atha^asij.
the Emperor calls the Church of Athanasius, The Catholic Church of
Alexandria, by reason of the Catholic faith, which it preserved entire, whiles
many other Churches of Egypt were infected with Arianisme. And so likewise
Cont. ep. Fund. c 4.
S. Augustine (with whom agree Epist. 1.
Pacianus, and Cyrill of Jerusalem) Cateches. 18.
says, that if a stranger come into a City infected with Heresy, and enquire
for the Catholic Church, even the Heretics themselves will not direct him to
any Church of theirs, but to a Church in which Catholics meet to serve God.

In this sense, as other particular Churches, so also the Roman (even as she is
a particular Church limited to the Dioces of Rome) may have the name of A
Catholic Church. But when we say, No man can be saved, that is not a member of
the Roman Church, we speak not of the Roman Church in this sense (for
Catholics of other Dioceses may be saved, as well as of the Roman) but by the
Roman Church we understand the Universal Church, comprehending both that of
the Roman Dioces, and all other particular Churches that profess subjection to
her, follow her Doctrine, and embrace her communion: for all these by adherence
to her, and union with her, make one mystical body of Christ, and one holy
Catholic, or universal Church, of which she is the Head, and the rest members.

For the better understanding of this, we are to consider several dignities
united in the person of the Bishop of Rome. He is Bishop, Archbishop,
Patriarch, and Pope. As he is Bishop, his jurisdiction is confined to the City
of Rome, and other towns within her territories, of which the Roman Dioces
consists. As he is Archbishop, he has subject unto him some few others, the
chiefest of which, is the Bishop of Ostia. As he is Patriarch, the extent of
his authority is over all the Western, or Latin Church. And finally as he is
Pope, that is to say the Successor of S. Peter, and the chief Vicar or
Lieutenant of Christ upon earth, he is the supreme Pastor and Governor of the
whole Church of God, which is universally spread over the face of the earth,
wheresoever the name of Christ is known; which therefore is absolutely and
without limitation called the Catholic Church. In regard of this transcendent
authority of the Bishop of Rome, he is rightly styled Bishop of the Universal,
or Catholic Church; to whom therefore all the members of the Church as well
Pastors as people, by the institution of Christ, owe subjection and obedience.
And as he is the head and Father of all Bishops, so the particular Church of
the Roman Dioces, is the head and Mother of all Churches. Now, that not only
the particular Church of the Roman Dioces, but also the whole body of the
Catholic or universal Church consisting of the Roman as head, and the rest as
members, is likewise rightly and in a true and proper sense styled the Roman
Church. I prove out of S. Augustine, saying De percato orig. l. 2. c. 17.
that against the Pelagians, not only the Councels of Bishops, and the Sea
Apostolic, but also, vniuersam Romanam Ecclesiam, the whole Roman Church, and
the Roman Empire were most justly incensed: where by the Roman Church he
understands the universal, or Catholic Church spread over the world, as by
the Roman Empire he understands the Empire of the Romans spread over the world.
And the same I prove by examples. For when we speak of the Jewish people, or
the Jewish Church, we understand not the tribe of Judah only, but all the rest
of the tribes, that were joined therewith. S. John Baptist was of the tribe of
Leui; S. Paul of the tribe of Benjamin; and that holy widow Anna, mentioned by
S. Luke Cap. 2.36.
of the tribe of Aser: and yet they all are rightly called Jews, parts of the
Jewish people, and members of the Jewish Church, by reason of their adherence
to, and communion with the principal tribe, which was that of Judah. Likewise
under the name of the Greek Church, are not comprehended the natural Greeks
only; for the Muscouits and Russians, though they be of a different nation, and
have their service in a different tongue, are yet esteemed, and said to be of
the Greek Church, because they embrace her Doctrine, and communion. And what
more usual to Protestants themselves, then to call Catholics in what part of
the world soever they live, Romanists? And lastly to confirm this manner of
speech with secular, as well as with Ecclesiastical examples, who knows not,
that according to the phrase of all writers, by the name of the Roman Empire,
is not understood the City and territories of Rome only, but also whatsoever
other Provinces subject to the Roman Emperors, though never so distant from
Rome? And so in like manner, when we say, that out of the Roman Church there is
no hope of salvation, by the Roman Church we understand not the particular
Dioces of Rome, but all the Churches of the world, which make one Catholic or
universal Church, of which the Roman is head, and the rest members subject to
her. And because the Bishop of Rome is head of all Bishops, the particular
Church of the Roman Dioces is the mother and mistress of all Churches: In
regard whereof she may in a sense not improper, be called the Catholic Church:
as in a fleet of Galleys the chief Galley which has command over the rest,
though it be a particular Galley, is called the General: and in an army of
men, though the chief commander be a particular man, and as a Captain have a
particular company of his own, yet he is rightly called the General. And as
none can be a Soldier of that fleet of Galleys, unless he be in the chief
Galley, or in some of the rest subordinate to her; nor a soldier of that Army,
unless he be of the Generals particular company, or of some of the rest
subject to him: so none can be a memb^r of the Catholic Church, unless he be
of the particular Church of Rome, or of some other, subject to her. And from
hence it is, that albeit every Orthodoxe Church may be called a Catholic
Church, and every Orthodoxe man a Catholic man, yet this denomination agrees
to the Bishop and Church of Rome causally and originally, and to other men and
C^urches participatiuely. In regard whereof S. Cyprim L. 4. ep. 8.
^alleth the Roman Church The root and Mother of the Cathol^ke Church, and the
original of Sacerdotall unity: from whence also it follows, that as every
particular person that is in communion with the Church of Rome, is rightly
styled Catholic: so all others, that are not of her communion, are
Schismatiks, or Heretics.

SECT. III. That in the language of Antiquity, The Catholic Church, and the
Roman Church, were two names signifying one, and the same thing.
IT has ever been the constant belief of all Orthodoxe Fathers and people,
as well of the primitive, as of the successiue ages since Christ, that the Roman
Church is the Catholic Church as has been declared; and that out of her
there is no hope of salvation. The whole scope of your Grand Imposture, is, to
impugn this truth: and the whole drift and subject of this Apology shall be to
maintain and defend the same truth. And that the reader may have some little
taste or prelibatio^ of what shall be more largely proved in the ensuing
Chapters, I have thought good to set down in the frontispice of this work,
the belief of some of the most famous and renowned Fathers of Gods Church, not
in mine, but in their own clear express and unanswerable words. First
therefore Tertullian speaking of Marcion, who had presented a great sum of
money to the Church of Rome, says Cont. Marcio. l. 4. c. 4.
Marcion gave his money to the Catholic Church, which rejected both it and
him, when he fell into heresy. The same appears by that ancient learned
Bishop of Carthage and Primate of Africa S. Cyprian L. 4. ep. 2.
who expresses to Antonianus, how great joy he conceived to understand, that
forsaking the Nouatians, he wholly agreed with the Catholic Church, adhering
to Cornelius Pope. And again: Ibid.
You writ (says he to Antonianus) that I would send a copy of your letters to
Cornelius, to the end he might understand, that you communicate with him, that
is to say, with the Catholic Church. And speaking to Cornelius himself, L. 4.
ep. 8.
and calling the Roman Church, The root and original of the Catholic Church,
he says: It seemed good to us, that letters should be sent to all our
Colleagues at Rome, that they should firmly embrace your communion, that is to
say, the unity and charity of the Catholic Church. Hereby it appears, that in
S. Cyprians language and belief, to communicate with the Roman Church, and to
communicate with the Catholic Church, was one and the self same thing. And
the same appears by those Africans whom Nouatus had seduced to forsake
Cornelius the true P^pe, and adhere to Nouatian the Antipope: for perceauing
that by falling from Cornelius, they were fallen from the Catholic Church, and
become Schismatiks, they acknowledged their error, and made their recantation
in these words, reported and commended by S. Cyprian: Ep. 46.
We acknowledge Cornelius to be Bishop of the most holy Catholic Church,
chosen by Almighty God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. We confess our error we
have been seduced: we have been circumuented by perfidiousnes and captious
loquacity: for although we did seem to have communication with a man (Nouatian
the Antipope) that was a Schismatike, and an heretic, yet our mind was
always sincere in the Church: for we are not ignorant that there is one God,
and one Lord Christ, whom we have confessed, and one holy Ghost, and that there
ought to be one Bishop in the Catholic Church. In these words S. Cyprian (as
you see) together with those his Africans, calls the Bishop of the Roman
Church the Bishop of the Catholic Church, and p^ofesseth, that to be divided
from him, is to be divided from the Catholic Church. The same appears by
Cornelius himself, who speaking of Nouatus, that had set up Nouatian an
Antipope in opposition to him, says: Apud Eusebius. l. 6. hist. c. 35.
Nouatus forsooth would have us to think, that he had forgotten there ought to
be but one Bishop in the Catholic Church; where by the Catholic Church he
understands the Roman Church, as the head and Mother of all others. The same
appears by S. Ambrose De obitu fratris Satyri.
, who reporting, how his holy Brother Satyrus in his return out of Africa,
being cast by shipwreck on the Island of Sardinia, which he knew to be infected
with the Schism of the Luciferians, and desiring to communicate with none but
Catholics, called for the Bishop of that place, and enquired of him, whether
he agreed with the Catholic Bishops, that is (says S. Ambrose) with the Roman
Church. And S. Augustine having alleged a sentence of S. Ambrose to confute
Julian the Pelagian heretic, says: L. 1. cont. Iulia. Pelag. c. 2.
Here is Ambrose of Milan, whom thy Master Pelagius so highly commended, as to
say, that in his books chiefly the Roman faith does shine, so, that his very
enemy durst not reprehend his faith, and most pure interpretation of Scripture.
Who sees not that S. Augustine here by the Roman faith, understands the
Catholic faith? And therefore speaking again of the great constancy of the
same Saint, of his labors, and dangers for the Catholic faith he says: Cont.
Julian. Pelag. l. 1. c. 2.
The Roman world doubts not to magnify them with him; where again by the
Roman world he understands all the Catholics of the world. The same was the
belief of S. Hierome: Apol. aduers. Ruffin. l. 1.
What faith (says he) does Ruffinus call his faith? That which the Roman
Church holds, or that which is contained in Origens books? if he answer that
which the Roman Church holds, then are we Catholics. The same appears by the
Epistle of Theodosius the Emperor to Acatius Bishop of Bero^e, and other his
Colleagues, to whom he says: In Synod. Ephesians. to. 5. c. 10.
It becomes your Holiness to ask these things of God earnestly, and by
manifest tokens to show your selves approved Priests of the Roman Religion.

The same appears by Palladius, In vita Chrysostomi.
who writes of Theodorus Tyanaeus, that he fortified his Bishopric with a
wall of piety, by perseuering till the end of his life in the communion of the
faithful Romans, of whom Paul gives testimony, saying, your faith is renowned
throughout the whole world.

The same appears by what Victor of Tunes reports of Vitalianus a Scythian
In Anastas.
namely, that he took arms against Anastasius the Emperor, and would never
promise peace unto him, but upon condition that he should unite all the
Churches of the East to the Roman: which plainly shows that the Roman Church
was then held to be the Catholic Church, as the Head and center of Catholic
Communion, and Mother of all Churches.

The same appears by John Patriarch of Constantinople, who abiuring the memory
of Acatius, said to Hormisdas Pope: Epist. ad Hormisd.
We hope to be in one communion with you declared by the Sea Apostolic, in
which there is the integrity of Christian Religion, and perfect solidity; and
we promise not to recite hereafter in the sacred mysteries, the names of those
that have separated themselves from the communion of the Catholic Church, that
is to say, that agree not in all things with the Sea Apostolic. And not unlike
to this is the profession of faith which Justinian the Emperor sent to Agapetus
Pope. The same appears by Ep. ad Agapet. apud Bin. to. 2. page 417.420.
S. Augustine, testifying, Ep. 157.
that the Heresy of Pelagius and Celestius by means of the vigilance of two
Episcopal Councels, has been condemned in the extent of the whole world, by
the Reverend Prelates of the Apostolic See, yea even by two of them, Pope
Innocentius and Pope Zozimus. And that S. Augustine by the Sea Apostolic
understands the Catholic Church, Possidius speaking of the same subject
declares, In vita Aug. c. 18.
calling the sentence pronounced by these Popes, Ecclesiae Catholicae iudicium.
The judgment of the Catholic Church Innocentius (says he) and Zozimus in
their several times, censuring the Pelagians, and cutting them of from the
members of the Church, by their letters addressed to the African Churches of
the East and West, commanded them to be anathematized, and avoided by all
Catholics: and the most religious Emperor Honorius hearing of this sentence
of the Catholic Church pronounced against them, condemned them also by his
laws, ordayning that they should be ranked among Heretics.

The same appears by Gelasius In decret. de Scriptor. apocryph.
an African borne, and (it is thought) a Disciple of S. Augustine, testifying,
that the holy Roman Catholic and Apostolic Church has not been preferred
before other Churches by any Synodicall constitutions, but has obtained the
primacy by the voice of our Lord and Savior in the Gospel, saying, Thou art
Peter etc.

The same appears by S. Prosper S. Augustines second soul, saying: L. de
promiss. and praedict. Dei part. 4. c. 5
The Apostles Peter and Paul founded the Church of the Gentiles in the City of
Rome, where they taught the doctrine of Christ our Lord: they delivered it to
their Successors peaceable and free from division: the Christian that
communicates with this general Church, is a Catholic: but if he be separated
from it, he is an Heretic and Antichrist.

The same appears by the testimony of those two famous Doctors of the African
Church S. Fulgentius and Primasius, with other their fellow-Bishops 220. in
number, who being banished by the Arian King Trasamundus out of Africa into
Sardinia, writ from thence a Synodicall Epistle to the Catholics of Africa, in
which they exhort them for the avoiding of Pelagianisme to read the books of S.
Augustine, of which (say they) Extat in Bibliotheca Patr. edit. Colon. to. 6.
part. 1. page 152.
Hormisdas of blessed memory, a glorious Bishop of the Apostolic See, made
mention with great commendation of Catholic praise, in the Epistle which he
writ in answer to the Consultation of Possessor our holy brother, and
fellow-Bishop. His words are these: What the Roman Church, that is the
Catholic Church holds, and observes concerning freewill and the grace of God,
may be fully known out of diverse books of blessed Augustine, and chiefly those
which he writ to Prosper and Hilary. These their words convince that not only
in the belief of that ancient and holy Pope Hormisdas, but also of all the
Catholic Bishops of Africa, the Roman Church and the Catholic Church, the
Roman faith and the Catholic faith, were Synonima's betokening one and the
same thing.

The same appears by S. Gregory the Great, who sets down the form of
abiuration which all Bishops returning from Schism to the Unity of the
Catholic Church were to make, expressing it in these words: L. 1. epist. 30.
I Bishop of N. having discerned the trappe of division wherein I was caught,
am returned by Gods grace with my pure and free will to the Unity of the Sea
Apostolic: and I vow and promise, that I will never return to Schism, but
always remain in the Unity of the Catholic Church, and in the communion of
the Bishop of Rome. This profession shows, that as now it is, so then it was
held to be no less then open Schism to be divided from the Roman Church. And
the like profession made by Nicolas the first of that name, was afterward sent
by Adrian the second to the eight Council general, and being read in the
first Action, was approved and praised by all the Fathers thereof. Act. 1. apud
Bin. to. 3.881.913. and Can. page 199.


The same appears by the testimony which Venerable Bede gives of Oswin King of
Northumberland, who by means of a famous disputation held between Colman a
Scottish Abbot, and Wilfrid a learned Priest of the Britans for the decision of
certain points of Religion, wherein the Britans and Scots at that time
disagreed, was converted to the Roman Church: and thereupon with the advice of
Egbert king of Kent sent Wigandus a Priest to Rome to be ordained Archbishop
there, to the end that returning he might ordain Bishops throughout all
Britany: for (says Bid) Oswin though brought up by the Scots, L. 3. hist.
Angl. c. 29.
had rightly understood, that the Roman Church is the Catholic and Apostolic
Church.

These testimonies sufficiently prove, that the most holy and learned Fathers,
as also the Orthodox Christians of former ages did believe that the Roman
Church was the Catholic Church, and that to be divided from the Roman Church
was to be no Catholic but a Schismatike. And that it may appear how like you
that deny this truth are to the Arian Heretics, it will not be amiss to show
that they knew Catholic and Roman to be all one: and that because they would
not grace Catholics with the name of Catholics, they called them Romans, or
Romanists, as at this day you call us, showing your selves to be of the same
spirit with the Arians. Victor that famous African Bishop of Vrica writes to
this L. 2. de persecut. Vandal.
purpose, that Iocundus an Arian speaking to king Theodoricus, said: Thou
may make an end of Armogastus with diverse afflictions: for if thou put him
to death by the sword, the Romanists will proclayme him a Martyr. And of
another Martyr he reports Ibid.
that being questioned by the Arians concerning his faith, he professed himself
to be a Catholic, saying. Romanus sum, I am a Roman. Apud Baron, amo 471.
In like manner Ermodius reports of the Nobility of the Ligures that
proposing to Ricimer an Arian Goth a man fit to solicit a peace, they said:
Si Catholicus est, and Romanus, if he be a Catholic, then is he a Romanist.
And S. Gregory of Tours reports of an Arian Prince, De glor. Mars. c. 25.
that thinking within himself be said: It is the fashion of the Romans (so they
call men of our religion) to attribute it to chance and not to the power of
God. And again he reports this speech of one Arian to ^n Ibid. c. 361
other: If thou will but harken to my Counsel, we will this day make our
selves merry, laughing heartily at this Romish Priest. And speaking of the
Arians that were in France: Ibid. c. 79.
what think you (said one of them) will these Romanists now say? And what
think you now Doctor Morton, what will you say? Do not these testimonies
convince, that in the language and belief of antiquity Catholic and Roman did
signify the same Church, the same faith, and the same Orthodoxall people? Or
what may we think of you that either are so ignorant, as not to know this? Or
if you know it, so malicious as to deny it, to call it an insultation of ours,
and to censure it as Schismatic, heretical, temerarious, impious,
sacrilegious, Antichristian etc.

SECT. IV. That whosoever is out of the Roman Church, is out of the state of
Salvation.
THis truth is evidently deduced (out of the premises already proved) by this
syllogisticall argument.

Whosoever is out of the Catholic Church, is out of the state of Salvation.

This mayor Proposition you grant, and it has been already proved. Hoc cap.
sect. 1.


But whosoever is out of the Roman Church, is out of the Catholic Church.

This also has been Hoc cap. sect. 3.
and shall be throughout this whole Apology effectually proved. The consequent
then is evident in Barbara.

Ergo, whosoever is out of the Roman Church, is out of the state of Salvation.

But yet in further confirmation of this consequent, it will not be amiss to
hear the ancient Fathers themselves speak and testify the truth thereof in
their own language. For so teaches that ancient and learned Bishop S.
Irenaeus who lived soon after the Apostles and was Disciple to their
Disciples. He prescribing a certain rule to know and distinguish the Catholic
Church from the conuenticles of Heretics, says L. 3. c. 3.
that, All Churches and all the faithful from all places must necessarily
agree with the Roman Church by reason of her more powerful principality, that
is by reason of the soueraignety of the Sea Apostolic, and the
neuer-interrupted succession of Bishops in that See: which succession (says
he) is Ibid.
a conuincing demonstration, that the same faith which was preached by the
Apostles, is still conserved in that Church; and therefore, L. 4. c. 43.
that all such as withdraw themselves from this principal succession, we
ought (says he) to hold them as Heretics of a perverse judgment, or as
Schismatikes and selfe-liking presumptuous fellows. And as S. Irenus alleged
this never interrupted succession of twelve Bishops until his time in the
Roman Church, as in the head Church of the world, which therefore he calls the
principal succession; if (I say) he alleged this against the heretics of
those primitive times, as a conuincing demonstration to prove that they having
departed from the Roman Church, in which that principal succession was to be
found, had thereby departed from the Catholic Church, and forsaken true faith
delivered by the Apostles: far greater reason had Tertullian, De praescrip.
Eusebius, L. 5. hist. c. 6.
S. Epiphanius, Haeres. 27.
S. Jerome, Dial. cont. Lucifer.
Optatus, S. Augustine Lib. 2. cont. Parm.
and other Fathers of after ages to all eage the same succession of longer
Continuance against the Heretics of their times to convince them to be such.
And Ep. 165. and Psalm contra part, Donati.
^f diverse of these Fathers as Irenaeus, Tertullian, Eusebius, S. Epiphanius,
Optatus, and S. Augustine have reckoned up by name all the Bishops of the Roman
Church against the Heretics of their times; we may now justly reckon a ^ar
greater number of them continued until these our days against Protestants, to
prove them to be out of the true Church, in which only this never interrupted
succession is to be found, and wish them, (as S. Augustine Psalm. contra part.
Donati.
did the Donatists) not to lie cut of from this succession, that being ^he Rock
against which the proud gates of hell prevail ^ot. So teaches S. Cyprian
saying: L. 1. ep. 8.
There is one God, and ^ne Christ. and one chair built upon Peter, out of
which whosoever gathers, scatters, that is, makes a Schism in the Church,
^s the Nouatians did, against whom he writes. And why did he rejoice L. 4. ep.
^.
to hear that Antonianus communicated with Cornelius Pope, but because (as
there he expresses) to be in his Communion was to be in the communion of the
Catholic Church? And writing to Cornelius himself he calls the Chair of S.
Peter L. 4. ep. 8.
the root and Mother of the Catholic Church, and L. 1. ep. 3.
the principal chair from whence sacerdotall Unity is derived: from whence he
infers, that whosoever departs from that L. de unit. Ecclesiae.
See, holds not the faith, nor is in the Church.

So teaches ancient Pacianus Ep. 2.
: for Nouatian (as S. Cyprian affirms) having made himself an adulterous and
contrary Head to Cornelius the lawful Pope, and thereby separated himself from
the Roman Church, Pacianus for that very cause pronounces him to have dyed out
of the state of salvation. Although (says be) Nouatian has been put to death,
yet he has not bone crowned. And why not? because he was out of the peace of
the Church, out of concord, out of that Mother whereof whosoever will be a
Martyr, must be a portion.

So teaches Optatus that learned Bishop of Mileuis in Africa, when writing
against Parmenianus the Donatist, he L. 2. cont. part. Parmen.
says; Thou can not deny out that thou know the Episcopal chair to have
been first set up in Rome for Peter, in which seat was placed the Head of all
the Apostles, Peter; from whence he has been also called Cephas, to the end
that in this only chair Unity might be preserved to all, least the other
Apostles might attribute to themselves each one his particular Chair, and that
he should be a Schismatike and a sinner, that would against the only chair set
up another. And again showing the Donatists to be Schismatikes, and out of the
state of salvation, because they opposed the Roman Church, he Ibid.
says: From whence is it, that you attempt to usurp to your selves the Keys
of the kingdom, you that fight against the chair of Peter by your bold and
sacrilegious presumption? Thus writ Optatus 1200. years since: and by his
argument we may now prove Protestants to be Schismatikes, no less then he did
the Donatists.

So teaches S. Ambrose, De obitu Satyri.
professing, that to communicate with Catholic Bishops, and to communicate
with the Roman Church is all one. And writing to Siricius Pope, and
acknowledging all those to be Heretics whom the Roman Church condemns as
such, he says: L. 10. ep. 81.
Whom your Holiness has condemned, know that we also hold them condemned,
according to your judgment.

So teaches S. Hierome, who writing against Lucifer the Schismatic Bishop
of Calaris in Sardinia, and the Luciferians his followers, that boasted
themselves to be the true Church says to Lucifer: Epist. 8.
I could dry up all the rivers of thy arguments with the only sunshine of the
Church: but because we have now reasoned long, I will in few words declare
plainly unto thee my judgment, which is, that we are to remain in that Church,
which being founded by the Apostles, dureth until this day. And else where
declaring what Church he means, he advises Demetrias that if she will avoid
the snares of Heretics, she hold fast the faith of Innocentius Pope, son and
successor in the Apostolical chair to Anastasius, who had broken the
pestilent head, and stopped the hissing mouths of that Hydra, which attempted
to pollute and corrupt the simplicity of the Roman faith commended by the voice
of the Apostle. And again: writing to D^masus Pope he says: Ep. 57.
I am joined in communion with your Blessedness, that is to say, with Peter's
Chair: I know the Church is built upon that Rock, whosoever is not in the
Arc shall perish at the coming of the flood; he that eats the lamb out of
this house, is profane: whosoever gathers not with you, scatters, that is to
say, whosoever is not of Christ, is of Antichrist.

So teaches S. Basil. In very deed (says he in a letter to the Ep. 69. per
Sabin. Diac.
Pope) that which was given by our Lord to thy piety, is worthy of that most
excellent voice, which proclaimed thee blessed, to wit, that thou may
discern betwixt that which is counterfeyt, and that which is lawful and pure,
and that without any diminution thou may preach the faith of our Ancestors.
It is then certain in S. Basils belief, that the assurance which Christ gave
to S. Peter that the gates of hell (which are errors and Heresies) should never
prevail against the Roman Church, was not made to S. Peter in his own person
only, nor only for his time, but in him to all his Successors; and to them in
him is granted that admirable privilege of preaching the faith of Christ pure,
and without any diminution.

So teaches S. Maximus, alias In ep. ad Orientales apud S. Tho. in Opuse. 1.
prope fin.
Maximianus. All the bounds of the earth that have received our Lord sincerely,
and all Catholics throughout the whole earth that confess the true faith,
look upon the Church of the Romans as upon a Sun, and shall receive from her
the light of the Catholic and Apostolic faith: and not without cause: for
Peter is the first that is read to have made a perfect confession of the faith,
our Lord revealing it unto him, Math. 16. When he said: Thou art Christ the
son of the living God: whereupon our Lord said unto him, I have prayed for
thee Peter, that thy faith fail not. And Ibid.
again: We profess the Universal Church to be framed and founded upon the
rock of Peter's confession according to the sentence of our Savior, in which
Church it is necessary to remain for the salvation of our Souls, and to yield
obedience to her, keeping her faith and confession.

So teaches S. Augustine: who among the Arguments which held him in the
Catholic Church, reckons the succession of Bishops in the Roman See even
from S. Peter until his time: I am kept (says L. eont. epist. Funda. c. 4.
he) in the Church by the succession of Priests from the very See of Peter the
Apostle, to whom our Savior after his resurrectien committed his sheep to be
fed, even to the present Bishop. And exhorting the Donatists, which bragged
that they also had Bishops, he Epist. 165.
says: If the order and Succession of Bishops be to be observed, how much more
assuredly and safely indeed do we begin our account from S. Peter himself,
unto whom as he represents the whole Church, our Lord said. Math. 16. upon this
Rock I will build my Church? for Linus succeeded to Peter, Cletus to Linus: and
having reckoned up all the Popes unto Anastasius, who then sat in S. Peter's
chair, he concludes against the Donatists: In this order of succession there
is not any one Donatist to be found: to which we may add, no, nor yet any
Protestant. Since therefore the Church, in which there is a continued
Succession of Bishops from S. Peter, cannot be the Protestant Church (which
has no such succession) but the Roman; it follows that S Augustine held the
Roman Church to be the Catholic Church: and therefore he grieved to see the
Donatists lie cut off from her, as branches from the vine. Be ye ingraffed on
the Vine (says he to the Psalm. contra part. Donati.
Donatists: It is a grief to us to see you so lie cut of: number the Priests
even from the Sea of Peter, and consider in that rank of Fathers, who
succeeded whom: That is the Rock which the proud gates of hell overcome not.
And as in these words S. Augustine shows the miserable estate of those then
that are divided from the Roman Church, so on the contrary he declares the
happiness, and security of all, that are in communion which her, when speaking
of Cecilianus Archbishop of Carthage, who had been condemned by a numerous
Council of Donatist Bishops in Africa, he says: Ep. 162.
Cecilianus might have contemned the conspiring multitude of his enemies,
because he knew himself to be united by communicatory letters both to the
Church of Rome in which the Soueraygnty of the Sea Apostolic has always
flourished, and to other Countries, from whence the Gospel came first into
Africa.

So teaches Possidius Bishop of Calama, a familiar friend to S. Augustine,
whose life he writ; and therein reports Cap. 18.
that when Innocentius and Zozimus had condemned the Pelagians, the most
religious Emperor Honorius hearing of this sentence of the Catholic Church
pronounced against them obeyed it, and condemning also by his laws, ordained
that they should be ranked among heretics. By which it appears, that the
Roman Church was then held to be the Catholic Church; and her judgment in
matters of faith to be infallible, and that the Emperors by their laws
seconded her judgment, comdemning as Heretics those whom she had condemned.

So teaches S. Cyril Patriarch of Alexandria, explicating those words of our
Math. 16.
Savior; Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church, and the
gates of hell shall not prevail against it. According to this promise of our
Lord (says Apud S. Thom. in Caten. ad cap. 16. Math.
he) ^he Apostolical Church of Peter perseuereth in her Bishops pure and free
from all seduction and circumuention, above all Prelates and bishops, and above
all Primats of Churches and people, most perfect in the faith and authority of
Peter. And whereas other Churches have been stained with the errors of some,
she alone remayns established firmly and vnconquerably, silencing and stopping
the mouths of all Heretics: and we upon necessity of salvation neither
deceived nor drunk with the wine of pride, together which her confess, and
preach the form of truth, and of holy Apostolical tradition. And Apud S.
Thom. Opusc. 1.
again: Let us remain as members in our head the Apostolical throne of the
Bishops of Rome, from which it is our part to inquire, what we ought to
believe, and what to hold. And lastly; It is (says the Angelical Ibid.
Doctor) proved necessary for salvation, to yield obedience to the Bishop of
Rome: for Cyril says in his book of Treasures: Therefore Brethren if we will
imitate Christ, let us as his sheep hear his voice, remaining in the Church of
Peter, and let us not be puffed up with the wynd of pride least peradventure
the crooked serpent for our contention cast us out, as long since he cast Eve
out of Paradyse.

So teaches S. Peter, for his golden eloquence surnamed Chrysologus, exhorting
Eutyches the Arch-heretike, to leave his heresy, and learn the true faith from
the Church of Epist. ad Eutych.
Rome. We exhort thee Reverend Brother to lend an obedient ear to the letters
of the most holy Pope of the City of Rome, for as much as the Blessed Peter who
lives and rules in his own seat, exhibits the true faith to those that seek
it.

So teaches L. de promiss. and prodict. Dei part. 4. c. 5.
S. Prosper: The Apostles Peter and Paul founded the Church of the Gentiles in
the City of Rome, where they taught the Doctrine of Christ our Lord, and
delivered it to their Successors A Christian communicating with this general
Church is a Catholic: but if he be separated from it, he is an heretic, and
Antichrist.

So teaches Arnobius In psalm. 106.
explicating the necessity of remaining in the Roman Church in these few, but
effectual words: He that goes out from the Church of Peter, perishes for
thirst. Whereupon Erasmus says, Praefat. instruct. Comment. in Psalterium.
Arnobius seems to yield this honor to the Roman Church, that whosoever is out
of her, is out of the Catholic Church.

So teaches John an ancient Patriarch of Constantinople, In ep. ad Orientales.
who making profession of his faith to Hormisdas In ep ad Hormisd.
Pope, acknowledged, that in the Sea Apostolic the Catholic Religion is
always conserved inviolable: and that they who consent not fully with the Sea
Apostolic, are out of the communion of the Catholic Church.

So likewise teaches S. Fulgentius Bishop of Ruspa and a famous Doctor of the
African Church, who together which other Bishops his Colleagues made this
answer to Peter a Deacon that had been sent out of the L. de incarnat. and great
c. 11.
East: The Roman Church enlightened with the words of the two great lights Peter
and Paul, as with radiant beams, and honored with their bodies, and which is
also the top of the world, without hesitation belieues so to justice, and
doubts not to Confess so to salvation. So he, teaching that no Christian
ought to make doubt of the faith of the Roman Church. Again a Disciple of his
that writ and dedicated his life to Felicianus his Successor, reports that
when Fulgentius going to the Vita S. Fulgent. c 11. Extat in Biblioth. Pat.
Edit. Colon. tom. 6.
wilderness of Thebais, to fast, arrived at Syracusa, Eulalius Bishop of that
City, dissuaded him with these words: Thou do well in aspiring to greater
perfection: but thou know that without faith it is impossible to please God,
and that a perfidious dissension has separated those Countries into which
thou art traveling, from the communion of blessed Peter: wherefore, Son,
return home, least by seeking a more perfect life, thou run hazard of
loosing the true faith. By which it is evident that the Roman Church was then
held to be the Catholic Church; and that all such as dissented from her
Doctrine, were out of the true faith, and incapable of Salvation. So teaches
S. Leo, the first Pope of that name, for his admirable learning, wisdom, and
sanctity surnamed The Great, who writing to the Bishops of Vienne, says;
Epist. 89.
Christ from the Sea of Peter, as from a certain Head, powers his gifts upon
the whole body of his Church, to the end that whosoever should be so bold, as
to depart from the solidity of that See, might know himself to be no way
partaker of the divine mysteries. And Ibid.
that, whosoever goes about to diminish the power of the Bishop of Rome,
endeauoreth with most impious presumption to vi^late the most sacred strength
of the Rock (Peter) framed by the hand of God. And speaking against Hilary
Bishop of Arles, and all such as are refractary and disobedient to the
Successors of Peter, and in them to Peter himself, he Ibid.
adds: To whom whosoever thinks the primacy to be denied, can no way
diminish their authority, but puffed up with the spirit of pride, plungeth
himself headlong into hell. And Epist. 75.
that he who dare oppose the Roman Church built by the voice of our Savior
upon the most blessed Peter Prince of the Apostles, as upon a rock is either
Antichrist, or a Devil. All these sayings of so learned a Doctor, and so great
a Saint, I wish the Protestant reader duly to consider.

So teaches the holy Council of Chalcedon Act. 3.
affirming Peter the Apostle to be the rock and head of the Catholic Church,
and foundation of the true Faith. From whence it follows, that whosoever
builds not upon the foundation of Peter's See, is not in the Catholic Church,
nor in the true faith, without which no man can be saved.

So teaches S. Gregory the Great, who writing to Bonifacius, L. 3. ep. 41.
says: I admonish you that whiles you have time of life remaining, your soul
be not found divided from the Church of blessed Peter, to whom the keys of
the kingdom of Heaven were committed* and the power of binding and losing
given, lest his favor be contemned here, he there exclude you from the
entrance into life.

So teaches S. I sidore, a learned Doctor and Archbishop of Seuill, Ep. vltima
ad Eugenium Episcop. Toletanum.
saying; that albeit the Episcopal dignity and power descend from S. Peter to
all Catholic Bishops, yet especially and by a fingular privilege it remains
for ever to the Bishop of Rome, as to a Head higher then the rest of the
members: whosoever therefore (says he) yelds not obedience reverently to him is
separated from the head, and makes himself guilty of the schism of the
Acephalists, that is of certain heretics, who acknowledged no one particular
Head. And he adds, that the Church belieues this as the Creed of S.
Athanasius, and as an article of faith: and that whosoever belieues it not
cannot be saved. So teaches S. Maximus Martyr the greatest Divine of his age,
and that writ learnedly against the Monothelites, pestilent Heretics, that
held but one will and operation in Christ, and were anathematized in the sixth
general Council. He among other Elogies of the Roman Church has Epist. ad
Marinum Diac.
this: All the bounds of the earth, and whosoever in any place of the world, do
confess Christ our Lord with a pure heart, and Orthodox faith, look upon the
most holy Roman Church and her confession and faith attentively, as upon a
Sun of everlasting light, receiving from her the shining light of spiritual,
and holy Doctrines etc. For from the first coming of the Word Incarnate all
the Churches of Christians throughout the world have had from her their
beginning, their only and surest foundation, against which the gates of hell
shall no way prevail, according to the promise of our Savior himself, that
she should have the Keys of Orthodoxall faith and Confession, and open to them
that religiously come to the same Roman Church, seeking true real and only
piety; and contrariwise shut and stop every heretical mouth that speaks
iniquity against heaven.

So teaches S. Aldelmus an ancient Bishop of the Scots, whom Venerable Bede
highly commends for his eloquence, for his great knowledge of humane
literature, of Scripture, and Ecclesiastical rites. Among other his works
which Bid reckons, he writ an excellent book against the error of the
Britans, who at that time differed from the Roman Church in the celebration of
Easter. And of the same subject he writ an epistle to Geruntius, in which he
shows, the Britans by reason of that their separation from the Roman Church,
to be in error. Epist. ad Gerunt.
If (says he) the keys of the heavenly kingdom were by Christ given to
Peter, of whom the Poet says: He is the Porter of heaven, that opens the gate
to the stars, who is he that despising the principal statutes of that Church,
and condemning the Doctrine which she commands to be observed, can enter into
the gate of heavenly paradise? And if Peter by a happy lot, and a peculiar
privilege, deserved to receive the power and monarchy of binding both in
heaven and earth, who refusing to observe the Roman rite of Easter, can think
that he is not rather to be straightly tied with in soluble bonds, then any way
to be absolved? And the same he further proves out of the privilege of not
erring, granted to the Roman Church, when Christ promised to build his Church
upon Peter as upon an impregnable rock.

So teaches Venerable Bede, Homil. in die Apost. Petri and Pauli.
saying: Therefore the blessed Peter confessing Christ with true faith, and
following him with true love, received specially the keys of the kingdom of
heaven, and the sovereignty of judicial power, that all the faithful
throughout the world might understand, that whosoever do any way separate
themselves from the Unity of his faith and society, can neither be losed from
the bonds of their sins, nor come within the gate of the heavenly kingdom. And
speaking of a conference held between Colmannus an Abbot, and Wilfridus a
learned Priest concerning the celebration of Easter, Colmannus defending the
Jewish rite, and Wilfridus the custom of the Roman Church, Wilfridus said:
Beda in histor. gent. Ang. l. 3. c. 25.
If you disdain to follow the decrees of the Sea Apostolic, yea and of the
universal Church, they being confirmed by the holy Scriptures, without all
doubt you sin: for be it, that your Columba was a holy man, and of Christ,
and likewise your Fathers; yet is their small number in a corner of a remote
Island to be preferred before the universal Church of Christ? And having in
proof of the Authority of the Roman Church alleged the words of Christ,
promising to build his Church upon Peter, and to give him the keys of the
kingdom of Heaven, Of win king that was present at the conference demanded of
the disputants, whether both of them agreed in this, that those words of our
Savior were principally spoken to Peter, and whether the keys of the kingdom
of heaven were given to him? And they answering Yes; the king Ibid.
concluded: And I say to you that because Peter is that porter, I will not
gainsay him; but so far forth as I know, and am able, I desire to obey his
ordinances in all things, least peradventure if I coming to the gates of the
kingdom of heaven, there be none to open unto me, he being offended with me,
that is known to keep the keys.

So teaches Aponius in his learned Commentary upon the Canticles In Cant. lib.
2.
saying: It is manifest to all the earth, where the pasture of wholesome doctrine
was revealed to Peter: to wit, when Christ asking he answered; Thou art Christ
the son of the living God etc. These pastures the Jew sees not, nor the
Gentill nor yet any heretic whatsoever: for they follow not that Pastor, whom
Christ the Prince of Pastors has left as his Vicar in the world.

So teaches Theodorus Studites a holy Abbot and very famous for his learning,
and constancy in maintayning the Catholic faith against heretics, who with
diverse Regulars his Colleagues writing to Paschalis Pope, among other titles
calls him, The Ep, ad Paschalem Papam.
chief Priest of Priests, Pastor of the sheep of Christ, Porter of the kingdom
of heaven, and Rock of the faith, upon whom the Catholic Church is built. And
the Roman Church, he Ibid.
calls? The supreme throne in which Christ has placed the keys of faith,
against whom the gates of hell, which are the nouthes of heretics, have never
prevailed, nor shall ever prevail; the fountain of Orthodoxall truth, the
quiet haven of the Universal Church against all heretical storms; the chosen
City of refuge for salvation. And else where speaking of the Heretics of his
time, he Ep. ad Naucrat.
says: I protest here before God and man, they are divided from the body of
Christ, and the supreme See, in which Christ has deposited the keys of faith,
against which the gates of hell, that is to say the unbridled mouths of
heretics have never prevailed nor shall prevail even to the end of the world,
according to the promise of our Lord, which cannot fail. And In opere de cultu
imag.
again: So great is the faith of the Romans, that there is seen to be the
impregnable rock of faith founded according to the promise of our Lord. These
two later testimonies are set down and highly commended by that learned
Patriarch of Constantinople Gennadius Scholarius, who adds to them this
verdict of his In defens. Council. Florent. c. 5. sect. 17.
own: If that divine See believe not aright, Christ lies, when he says;
Heaven and earth shall pass, but my words shall not pass; for in these words
he promised his Church to be with her, and that the gates of hell shall not
prevail against her.

So teaches Rabanus, that learned Bishop of Mentz: Apud S. Thom. in Catena ad
c. 16. Matthew.
Therefore Peter specially received the keys of the kingdom of heaven and the
Sovereignty of judicial power, that all the faithful throughout the world
might understand, that whosoever in any sort separate themselves from the
unity of his faith and society, can neither be absolved from the bonds of their
sins, nor enter into the gate of the kingdom of heaven. And the same power of
the Roman Church to shut the gates of heaven against all those, that divide
themselves from her communion, he expresses again in a Poem which he writ in
praise of the holy Cross, to Gregory the fourth of that name.

The same teaches Petrus Baron. anno 105^.
Damiani a Bishop of excellent learning and of a most holy and austere life,
that lived six hundred years since, and was sent by Nicolas the second
(together with S. Anselme Bishop of Luca) to Milan to extinguish the heresies
of the Simonians, and Nicolaits, wherewith diverse clergy men of that City being
infected, to the end they might avoid the correction and censure of the Roman
Church, pretended, that the Church of Ambrose was free, and not subject to the
laws of the Pope of Rome: for the co^futation of which error Petrus Damiani
made a learned oration, in which he proved effectually the supreme authority
granted by Christ to the Roman Church above all Churches, and that whosoever
denies her authority, is an heretic. And this his Oration took so good
effect, that those licentious Clergymen abandoning their heresy, submitted
themselves to the Roman Church, with promise never to depart again from her
Communion.

So teaches S. Bernard, who In ep. ad Innocent. 2.
writing against Schismatikes gives this rule to distinguish between them and
Catholics: Those that are of God, are united willingly to Innocentius (the true
Pope): And he that stands out against him, either belongs to Antichrist, or is
Antichrist himself.

To omit the like testimonies of many other holy and learned Doctors, so
writes our famous Archbishop of Canterbury De Eucharist. conc. Boreng.
Lanfrancus, that lived almost six hundred years since, delivering his own
and their Verdicts in these words, worthy to be noted: The Blessed Doctors, if
not in the same words, yet in the same sense have unanimously taught in many
places, that every man which dissenteth from the Roman and universal Church in
Doctrine of faith, is an heretic.

If therefore the Blessed Doctors, those (I say) whom Protestants with us
acknowledge to have lived and died in the true says, and to have been members
of the Catholic Church, and lights of the world, have all agreed in this; and
these be their express Tenants, faithfully delivered in their own words, that
whosoever is out of the Roman Church, is to beheld as an Heretic of perverse
judgment, or as a Schismatike, and self-liking presumptuous man: That he which
stands out against the Sea of Rome, neither is in the Church, nor holds the
true faith: That upon necessity of salvation we ought to remain as members in
our Head the Apostolical throne of the Bishop of Rome: That if we imitate
Christ, we are (as his sheep) to hear his voice, remaining in the Church of
Peter: That he who opposes the Chair of Peter, is a Schismatike, and a
sinner: That he agrees not with the Catholic Church: That he is a profane
person: That he gathers not, but scatters: That he is not of Christ, but of
Antichrist: That he shall perish at the coming of the flood: That he perishes
for thirst: That a perfidious dissension has separated him from the Communion
of S. Peter: That he is an Heretic, and Antichrist: That he can no way be
partaker of the divine mysteries: That he is either Antichrist, or a Devil:
That in the next world he shall have the entrance of life shut unto him: That
he is guilty of the heresy of the Acephalists: That he gainsayth S. Peter, the
Porter of Heaven: That he cannot be admitted into the gate of heavenly
paradise: That he is an Heretic, speaking iniquity against Heaven: That he
cannot be loosed from the bonds of his sins: That he either belongs to
Antichrist or is Antichrist himself. These be the very Tenants of the most
famous Doctors, and Saints of God: These (M. Doctor) the censures which not I,
but they inflict on your Doctrine. And now I desire to know with what
conscience you tax this their and our doctrine as false, pernicious, impious,
Schismatic, Heretical, scandalous, damnable, blasphemous, sacrilegious,
Antichristian etc. Or with what title you go about to defend your own
departure from the Roman Church, and to persuade others, that being out of her,
they are in state of salvation? If you answer, that you have departed from the
(now) Roman Church, because she has departed from the true faith, which the
Roman Church anciently professed, that is an excuse common to all heretics, and
can no more justify you, then it could the Pelagians, the Donatists, or other
ancient Heretics, who would never have departed from the Roman Church, but
upon pretense that she had fallen from the true faith. And moreover it is
absolutely false: for as the Fathers censure, and condemn all that are out of
the Roman Church, as incapable of salvation, so shall you hear them Chap. 12.
sect. 1. and 2.
constantly affirm, and prove, that it is as impossible for the Roman Church
to fall from that faith, which she once received from the blessed Apostles
Peter and Paul, as it is for the word of Christ to fail, or for Christ himself
to be a liar.

In proof of this truth, I might yet further insist by other most forcible
arguments: but partly not to detayne the reader, and partly because diverse of
them shall be touched in the current of this Apology, I will immediately pass
to the examination of your Grand imposture, first in general, and then in
particular.

CHAP. II. Of Doctor Mortons manner of alleging Authors in general.
Grand Imposture, one is, to mask Protestants with the names of Our Authors,
and Our own men; and thereupon to urge against us their testimonies, as of
Authors whose Doctrine we are bound to allow, and maintain: Whereas you know
right well, that they are not our, but your men, and your own Protestant
brethren, and that their works are in particular, and by name condemned and
forbidden by the Roman Church. Of this you have been formerly By M. Brierley in
the Aduertisment before his Protest. Apology.
admonished; and yet notwithstanding, in this your Grand imposture, you hold on
your wonted course, as confidently, as if you never had been admonished of your
unconscionable dealing therein. Of this, and other your like slightes I thought
fit to give the reader notice, that before hand, he might have some taste of
your manner of writing in general, the particulars whereof will more clearly
appear hereafter, in their due places.

One of the Authors, whom in your former works you have urged against us, as a
Catholic writer, is George Cassander, borne at Bruges in Flanders, and a
pestilent heretic, as being infected not only with the errors of this age, and
with an other peculiar to himself against the holy Ghost, but also with the old
condemned heresy of Apelles, and others that lived afterward under Zeno the
Emperor, called Pacifiers; which heresy of his has been learnedly confuted not
only by Ioannes a Louanio a Catholic Divine, but also by your Grand-Maister
John Calvin, in a special book written against him. And for these his
Heresies he is by name censured and condemned as an heretic primae In indice
lib. prohib.
classis. Of all this you have been particularly admonished by a learned
Antagonist of yours F. Persons in his treatise tending to mitigation page 238.
and seqq.
, and since again by M. Brierley Loco cit.
, wishing you in your future writings not to urge against us the testimonies of
Cassander, as being of an heretical and condemned Author. Who would not think
this warning sufficient to stay the hand of any man, that has regard (I will
not say of honesty, but at least) of his own credit? And yet you without
taking any notice at all of these Caueats, confidently urge in this your Grand
imposture the testimonies of Cassander, not once Page 135. h. 389. o 400. b.
410. q.
but often, and not as of an Heretic, but as of a Catholic; nor as of a
Grammarian (for he was no more) but as of a grave and learned Divine. Can this
dealing be excused?

With no less want of sincerity and conscience you allege against us Paulus
Venetus Pa. 382. m.
a seditiour friar of Venice, burnt a few years since at Rome for heresy; and
diverse others, whose works you know to be expressly and by name condemned by
the Catholic Church: as 1. Nilus a Bishop of Thessalonica Page 333. l.
, who besides his heretical Doctrine against the Holy Ghost (whom he holds
not to proceed from the Son, but from the Father alone) was a professed enemy
to the Roman Church, and writ two special Treatises against the Popes
supremacy, and Purgatory; and is therefore challenged for a Protestant by
Illyricus, and rejected by Bellarmine, and all Catholic writers.

2. Faber Page 77. b.
, whose works are censured and condemned by the University of Paris, as
Illyricus testifies, and in regard thereof he is claymed by him for a
Protestant. 3. Controuersiae Page 163. l. 382. m.
memorabiles. 4. Acta Concilij Page 34. q. 338. y. 382. m.
Tridentini. 5. Page 361. b. 382. k. 336. c. 388. l.
Fasciculus rerum expetendarum, and fugiendarum. All which are works of
Protestants deceiptfully set forth without names of authors; and as well they,
as Nilus prohibited by the Church.

A second sleight of yours is, to cite as Catholic authors diverse others, who
if they were not absolute heretics, yet were tainted with erroneous and
heretical doctrines; whose books are therefore justly condemned and forbidden.
As first Beno Pa. 388. l.
a feigned Cardinal, and a Schismatike, who to become gracious with that
sacrilegious and dissolute Emperor Henry 4. unadvisedly and untruly uttered
certain speeches in disgrace of Religion, and the Apostolic See. 2. Cornelius
Agrippa Page 85 u. 385. *.
, who was no Divine, but a Lawier, and a Magician from his youth, as he himself
professes. And though he was afterward ashamed of what he writ in that kind,
yet his other book De vanitate scientiarum (which is the work you cite) by
the very title well shows his arrogant presumption, and is justly condemned
by the Church. 3. Josephus Scaliger Page 37. marg. fine.
a man not unlike to Agrippa, and a condemned Author. 4. Franciscus Duarenus
Page 45. c.
a lawier, and (as the most eminent Cardinal Peron Repliq. Chap. 34. page 270.
advertised our late Sovereign K. James) a professed enemy to the Pope, and
Church of Rome. 5. Nicolaus Augustus Thuanus Page 85. x. 385. b. 389. u. 404. f.
, an other French Lawier, whom you call. Our noble Historian, whereas the whole
course of his history shows him to have been a Huguenot, or little better. Nor
are you contented with citing him as a Catholic author, but to help out the
matter, you falsify him most notoriously, as hereafter Chap. 44. sect. 9.
shall be proved.

A third slight is, to urge as Catholic authors, some, that are of suspected
faith: as 1. Erasmus Page 208.
, who albeit in the end he abandoned Luther, 303. u. 306. a 381. g 380. f. g.
and dyed Catholic, (as out of his own confession, and Osianders testimony
Brierley Aduertism. before his Protest. Apol.
has proved) yet for some time he favored Luther, and in regard thereof, is
challenged by Doctor Humfroy, and Doctor Reynolds, for a man of your religion,
and by John Fox Canonized for a Protestant Saint Acts and Mon. pa. 402.
Kalend. 22. December.
His rash and unadvised writings gave occasion to Lutherans and Zuinglians, to
Father on him diverse of their heretical Tenants, and therefore are generally
reproved by Catholics, and Ind. lib. prohib.
condemned by the Church; which you cold not be ignorant of, and therefore your
persisting still to allege him against us as an approved Catholic author, is
inexcusable.

2. To this class may be reduced others, who though Catholics, yet fell into
some errors: as Beatus Rhenanus, Claudius Espencaus, Papyrius Massonius,
Ioannes Ferus, and Gulielmus Barklaius: of which, the four first are
prohibited by the Church; nor were you ignorant thereof: for speaking of
Rhenanus, you say: Page 101.
Rhenanus writ so, whiles he had the use of his tongue, but since you have
gagged him by your Index expurgatorius. By what authority then do you vngagge
him, whom the Roman Church (which he acknowledged to be his Mother) has so
justly gagged? And though William Barkley be not registered in the Index as a
condemned author (his book being set forth since the Index was made) yet
Bellarmine Tract. de potest. Papae aduers. Barclaium, in praesat.
has produced against his doctrine, the agreeing consent of the most learned
Divines of Italy, France, Spain, England, and Scotland, as also the decrees of
ancient Popes, and general Councels; and therefore with great reason has
censured him, for that being no Divine, but a Lawier, he presumed to write a
book De potestate Papa in temporalibus, which containing diverse errors, and
being left imperfect at his death, was afterward published without name of
author, printer, or place of impression: for although some copies say it was
printed at Mussipont, yet Bellarmine conuinceth that to be an Ibid.
untruth, and John Barkeley son to William has confessed the same, In praef.
Parenesis.
giving notice to all men, that it was published in England by Protestants, and
has withal acknowledged his Father to have erred in that book, and retracted
his own defense thereof. All this might have moved you to forbear the
alleging of Barkeleys book against us. And so much the urge in this your
Grand imposture, the very same passage of his, which your ancient Antagonist F.
Persons Treatise to mitigations, Chap. 6. page 202.
here tofore showed you to have objected in an other treatise of yours
corruptly against our common belief and practice, falsifying and
sophisticating both his and our meaning. And the like abuse he shows you to
have offered to Ibid.
Tolosanus, whose testimony you yet again impertinently produce here against
Page 172.
us.

3. And to this class may be reduced Polydore Virgill Grand. Impost. page
46.97. e. 164. p. 382.^.386. c.
who being a Catholic author, his Book De inuentoribus rerum has been
enlarged and corrupted by heretics, and is for that cause prohibited.

4. Your fourth slight is, to allege, and insist much on some writings of
Aenae as Siluius, Cardinal Cusanus, and Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester,
which they set forth in their youth, but afterward repented, and publicly
retracted. Aenaeas Siluius that was afterward Pope Pius the second, being in
his younger years present at the Council of Basil, and Secretary thereof, writ
a book exalting the authority of a Council, and depressing the authority of
the Pope: which book is not only forbiden by the Church, but he himself also
being more mature in years, more ripe in judgment, and more solidly learned,
repenred the writing thereof; and when he came to be Pope, set forth a special
bull to retract it: Extat hac Bulla apud Binium to. 4. page 512. and seqq.
in which among other words, he says, In minoribus agentes etc. Whiles I was
in minority, not yet entered into any holy orders, being present at Basil, among
those, who made themselves a general Council, and said they represented the
universal Church, I writ a small book of Dialogues etc. in which ignorantly
(as Paul did) I persecuted the Roman and chief See. Wherefore I admonish in our
Lord, that you give no credit to such former writings of mine, as do in any
sort extenuate the Sovereign authority of the Sea Apostolic. And then having
declared that he made not this change by his coming to the Popedom, but
before he was either Pope, or Bishop, and set down the causes that moved him
thereto, he adds: Having considered all these things, I submitted my self to
Pope Eugenius, saying with Hierome, I am joined in communion with the chayreof
Peter, upon which I know the Church to be built: and I had at that time no
other orders, but of Priesthood only, when I returned to the obedience of
Eugenius. By this it appears, that when Bellarmine says, Lib. de Scriptor. in
Aenea Siluio.
he retracted his error in his old age, and being Pope, he speaks only of the
setting forth of the said Bull, to make his retractation publicly known to
the whole world: but the error it self he recalled before he was either Pope
or Bishop, as you have heard. And this discovers your want of sincerity, who
in diverse places of your Grand Imposture alleging testimonies of Aeneas, to
show his judgment concerning the Roman Church, conceal all those, in which his
doctrine and belief is truly delivered, and set down Page 91. d. 210.*.249. d.
only such, as you could pick out of his former works written in his youth,
forbidden by the Church, and retracted by himself: which dealing is no less
impostetous, then if you should deliver as S. Augustins doctrine, that, which
in his Retractations he has recalled. But you seek to lessen this Imposture,
by adding an other to it: for lest peradventure your Reader might have notice
of this retractation of Aeneas, and thereby discover your bad dealing, you cover
it by insinuating that he made no such recantation, till he was Pope: for
having cited a passage of his, you say: Page 210.
So Aeneas (out of Hierome), whilst he was Aeneas, and not as yet Pope of Rome
himself: whereas it is a certain truth, and well known to your self, that
Aeneas retracted those his writings, even whilst he was Aeneas, and long before
he was Pope of Rome himself.

Having done this wrong to Aenaeas, you offer the like to Nocolaus Cusanus Page
22 y. 29 f. 40. nu. 44. a. 93. l.c. 7. d. 107. d 12 i. 163. m. 200. f. 179 i.
283. d. 287. l. 289. q. 301 f. 302. l. 366. d.
who in his youth and before he was Cardinal, being also present at the
Council of Basil, writ a book which he entitled Concordantia Catholica,
seeking therein to exalte the authority of a Council above the Pope: but soon
after perceiving the Council to grow into open schism against Eugenius then
lawful Pope, he withdrew himself, and detesting their proceedings, writ most
grave and learned Epistles against them, and employed his best indeautors to
extinguish that Schism, as it is to be seen in his epistle to Rodericus,
where he fully expesseth his judgment concerning the supreme authority of the
Pope and Church of Rome; as also in many other places of his works; and
especially in his Epistle to the Bohemians, where he prescribes to them and to
all others an infallible rule to know whether they be in the true church, which
is, to examine, whether they be united to the Chair of the Bishop of Rome by
continual succession derived from S. Peter. If your meaning had been good, you
would have alleged this, as the Doctrine of Cusanus, and not the contrary
which he himself acknowledged to be false, and recanted: but your intention
was to deceive: and no marvel, for such sleights are the firtest proofs for
such Doctrine.

No less want of syncerity is that, which you show in setting down, and
descanting upon a passage of Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester Page 362. c.
390. q.
, who in the beginning of King Henry's defection from the Church of Rome, being
carried away with the stream of the time, and desiring to purchase the kings
favor, writ a little book, De vera obedientia, and in it en deauored to prove
the Kings supremacy in spiritual things, and to justify his divorce from Q.
Catherine, and his marriage with Anne Bolen: which book is forbidden by the
Church, and he himself afterward in the days of Queen Mary (who for his
great wisdom and learning made him Lord Chancellor of England) condemned his
own doing in a famous Sermon preached at Paul's Chrosse, which is mentioned by
John Stow in his Anno 2. Mariae.
Cronicle. At this Sermon were present the King, and Queen, Cardinal Pole,
the Popes legate, the Ambassadors of the Emperor, of the french King, and other
Princes, besides a marvelous great, learned, and noble auditory, as perhaps
was ever at any sermon in England, either before, or since that time. He took
for his text those words of the Apostle. Rom 13.11.
Hora estiam nos de somno surgere: It is high time now for us to awake from
sleep. His discourse was to show, that since King Henry left the old trodden
path of his Ancestots, breaking from the union of the Roman Church, they had
run astray not without great strife and division among themselves, and that
therefore it was now time to awake. In this sermon he likewise made a most
humble and hearty accusation of himself for his fall, and consenting to king
Henry's will in that book De vera obedientia, which he uttered with so great
vehemence of spirit, and such abundance of tears, that he could not go
forward, but was enforced diverse times to make pauses. And how hearty those
tears were, the event declared: for afterward falling sick, and drawing near
his end, he caused the passion of Christ to be read unto him, and coming to
the denial of S. Peter, and how Christ having looked back upon him he went
out and wept bitterly, the Bishop cried out, bidding them stay there, and see,
whether his sweet Savior would vouchsafe also to look upon him, and give him
some part of Peter's tears: For (said he) Negaui cum Petro, exiui cum Petro,
sed nondum fleui amare cum Petro. I have deuyed with Peter, I have gone out
with Peter, but I have not yet wept bitterly with Peter. And by often
repetition of those words, and as king God forgiveness with sighs and cries,
he entertained himself, until floods of tears streaming from his eyes, he
gave up the ghost. This answer was given to Sir Francis Hastings, In the
Wardword Encounter 4. page 41. and seqq.
who objected against us Bishop Gardiners book De vera obedientia, as you now
do: nor do I think, that you were ignorant thereof. But howsoever you knew
that before his death he repented himself of his fall, and recalled that
book: for the passage which in this your Imposture you object out of it, you
profess to take out of the English translation Page 390. q.
the author whereof being a Protestant, and of your strain in writing, both in
his preface and in his marginall notes, throughout the book, rayleth most
imte^peratly against Bishop Gardener, for recalling that Book, tearming him.
Doctor double-face, a weathercock that turns ersy-uersy as the wind blows,
an Antichristian Angel of Satan, a seducer, a hell-hound of a false traiterous
heart, a filthy traitor, a pernicious Papist, a knave, a double-faced,
perjured, impudent, traiterous, chattering Chancelour, that seeks to pull away
the authority of the crown from the Queen, and her heirs for ever. And
finally he gives his reader this mark, whereby he may know him to be, a double
perjured traiterous Villayne, because (says he) in that book he affirmed that
the Bishop of Romes authority in England was against Gods word, and now be
iugleth to bring it in again. All these and other worse are the words of your
modest Brother, whose style you seem to approve, by citing his translation of
Bishop Gardiners book against the Pope, and Church of Rome: but with what
conscience, you can best judge, sithence the translator testifies that he
retracted it, and the Church has forbidden it, and the Bishop himself before,
and at his death lamented the writing of it with so many and so hearty tears.
Wherefore as it were a grand imposture to persuade men, that it is lawful for
them to deny Christ, because S. Peter out of humane infirmity denied him; so it
is for you to persuade your readers that it is lawful for them to deny the
authority of the Pope and Church of Rome, because Bishop Gardener out of
fraylty and other humane motives once denied it: for as S. Peter bewailed his
fall, with many tears, so did Bishop Gardener, his.

Finally, and that which most of all shows your lack of Conscience in
producing diverse of these authors as competent witnesses against us, is, that
whereas in your former wrytings you have objected the testimonies of Cassander,
Nilus, Faber, Cornelius Agrippa. Erasmus, Aenaas Siluius, Cusanus, and Polydore
Virgill; M. Brierley in the Advertisement prefixed before his Protestant
Apology, has given you in particular and by name special warning, not to
object them in your future wrytings against us, as being prohibited authors,
whose testimonies are of no more authority with us, then your own Grand
imposture, or then the testimonies of diverse other Protestants, whom in the
same work you allege against us.

This may serve to give the reader a taste of your manner of writing in
general, which how unfitting a man of your place, years, and learning it is,
the ensuing Chapters will better declare.

CHAP. III. Whether the (now) Roman Church has composed a new Creed.
that the Roman Church in her Council of Trent, Page 3.
and by the Bull of Pope Pius the fourth, set forth for the confirmation of the
same Council has composed a new Creed, consisting of more then twenty
articles of the (now) Roman faith. These your words contain two untruths: for
neither has the Council of Trent composed any new Creed, nor is there mention
of any such Creed, or articles in the bull of Pius, set forth for the
confirmation of that Council. Among other Bulls of his commonly annexed to the
Counsel, there is extant a profession of the Catholic faith to be made by all
Ecclesiastical persons, that have charge of souls, and by all Doctors and
professors of whatsoever Artand faculty of learning: in which they oblige
themselves by oath to observe all the decrees of the Council of Trent, and of
all other Oecumenicall, that have been held in the Church of God, and to
anathematize all heresies condemned by them. This profession you are pleased to
call a new Roman Creed, of more then twenty articles. But if that be a Creed,
which consists of Articles, you that have composed and swear to a new
belief, which your selves call, The 39. articles, are chargeable with a new
Creed of your diuising. But that we call the bull of Pius the fourth, a Creed,
or the profession of our faith contained in it, Articles, you cannot show: and
therefore your tearmyng it a new Creed is a silly conceypt void of truth, and a
fit foundation for a Grand Imposture.

And no less untruly you charge us, with adding in our Creed to the article of
the Catholic Church, the word, Roman. For that article of our Creed, I believe
the holy Catholic Church is set down without any such addition in all our
Missals, Breuiaries, Primers, and Catechismes. And that which most of all
declares your cauilling, is, that in this very profession of our faith set
down in two different bulls of Pius the 4. the Creed used by the Roman Church
is read without any addition of the word, Roman: It is true, that out of the
Symbol of Creed, when we explicate which is the Catholic Church mentioned in
the Creed, we say, it is the Roman Church, which to be true, appears
evidently by the testimonies of antiquity, out of which I have already proved,
The Catholic Church, and the Roman Church to be terms conuertible.

CHAP. IV. Whether the (now) Roman Church have added any new articles to the
Creed of the Apostles.
Page 7.
It is a doctrine acknowledged in our own schools, that the Church has no
power to create new articles of faith: and yet afterward you set down as our
doctrine Page 383.
out of Philiarchus, that the Church has power to create new articles of
faith, and that the contrary is one of Luthers Heresies. These two propositions
of yours I know not well how to save from contradiction: that, I leave to you.
In the thing it self, there is neither difficulty, nor difference of opinions
among Catholics: for if by new articles of faith, you understand doctrines
newly revealed, as none but God can be the author of divine revelation, so none
but God can make articles of faith: and in this sense all Catholic Divines
agree. But if by articles of faith, you understand not new revelations, but
such Verities as are contained implicitly and virtually in the word of God, but
not as yet explicitly declared unto us, so likewise all Catholic Divines
agree, that the Church has power to make articles of faith; that is, to
explicate and declare unto us some verities of faith, which before were not so
clearly delivered, nor universally received as such. So she has declared the
epistle to the Hebrews, and that of S. James to be canoicall: and (as our
learned Roffensis has well Ad articul. 18. Lutheri.
observed) there are many things of which no question was made in the primitive
Church, which yet, doubts arising against them, are now accleared by the
diligence of posterity. So in the first Council of Constantinople the holy
Ghost was explicitly declared to proceed from the Father and the Son. So the
three Creeds of Nice, of Constantinople, and S. Athanasius add by way of
declaration, many Verities, which are not expressly but implicitly or virtually
contained in the Creed of the Apostles. And so likewise neither the celebration
of Easter after the manner of the Roman Church, nor the validity of Baptism
ministered by heretics, were of necessary belief, until the Council of Nice
had declared them to be such. In this sense the Canonical law Gloss. in
Extrau. d^ Verb. signif. tit. 14. c. 4.
expresses, that the Church has power to make articles of faith, to wit, by
confirming and declaring them to the faithful. This power Luther denied to the
Church; and Pope Leo the X. in his bull against him condemned him for it. But
you to justify Luther, falsify Leo. Luthers assertion is this: Apud Bin. to. 4.
page 654.
Certum est in manu Ecclesiae aut Papae prorsus non esse statuere articulos
fidei, imo nec leges morum, seu bonorum operum. It is certain, that it is no
way in the power of the Church or the Pope, to appoint articles of faith, nor
laws of manners, or good works. You, to justify Luther, and traduce the Pope
for condemning this his assertion, leave out the later part of Luthers article,
add nouos in the midst, and omit prorsus, setting it down thus. Page 383.
Certum est (ait) non esse in manu Ecclesiae statuere nouos asticulos fidei.
Luther maintaynes as certain* that it is not in the power of the Church to
ordain new articles of faith. You cut of the later part of his article* to
conceal the impiety of his Doctrine, denying the Church all power of making
laws, either to reform abuses, or refrain men from sin by the practice of
good works. And so likewise your leaving out of prorsus, and putting in of
nouos, is to persuade your reader, that the Pope condemned Luther for denying
the Church power to coin new articles of faith, that is, to broach new
revelations; which is an untruth: for if Luther had said nothing else, Leo would
not have condemned him. And to the same end you corrupt Philiarchus, who (say
you) will have us to take head of the heresies of Luther, teaching that the
Church has no power to create new articles of faith. That word (new) is an
addition of your own to Philiarchus his text, as his Latin words in your
marge^t convince: but what wonder, since your work is a Grand Imposture.

CHAP. V. That the word (Roman) is no deprauation, but a true declaration of
the article of the Catholic Church.
TO declare which is the catholic Church mentioned in the Apostles Creed, we
say, it is the holy, Apostolic, Roman Church. Against this you Page 8. 9. 10.
object, that the word (Roman) is no true exposition and declaration, but a
notorious alteration and deprauation of the article of the Catholic Church.
This you prove with eight several arguments set down in so many sections.

SECT. I. Your first Argument.
YOUR first is, Page 9.
that because the Catholic Church mentioned in the Apostles Creed by the
accordance of S. Augustine and other our Divines comprehends both the
triumphant and the militant Church, the word (Roman) which cannot be a
declaration of the Catholic Church, as she is triumphant but only as she is
militant, can no way be a declaration of the Catholic Church mentioned in the
Apostles Creed. So you, forgetting your self: for here you hold that the
Catholic Church mentioned in the Apostles Creed comprehends both the
triumphant Church, and the militant: but else where contradicting your Page 365.
self, you define the Church properly Catholic set down in the Symbolor
Creed of the Apostles to be the Church militant* videlicet, the multitude of
Christian belieuers, whenever, and wheresoever dispersed throughout the
world; and, the congregation of Christians assembled in a general Synod, to be
the representative body of the Church in the Symbol properly called Catholic.
From whence it follows against your self, that the word (Roman) may be a
true declaration of the Catholic Church mentioned in the Apostles Creed, which
by your own definition, is the multitude of all Christian belieuers dispersed
throughout the world; for this definition can no way agree to the Church
triumphant (where the clear vision of the divine essence excludes faith) but
to the militant only, consisting of all Christian belieuers. And because true
Christian belief is to be found, only in the Roman Church, it follows, that
the woro (Roman) is a true declaration of the Catholic Church mentioned in the
Apostles Creed.

2. Be it, that the Catholic Church mentioned in the Creed taken in her whole
latitude, comprehends both the militant and the triumphant; yet in your
argument you mistake the state of the question: for when we declare the
Catholic Church to be the Roman Church, we speak not of her taken in her
whole latitude, but only as she is militant. And this you know right well: for
whiles in this Imposture you so often rail at us, for holding the Roman Church
to be the Catholic Church, out of which there is no hope of salvation, you
sufficiently declare, that you know us to speak of the Catholic Church, as
she is militant only: for she only is in hope of salvation; the triumphant
already enjoys it. I conclude therefore, that your argument is grounded on a
wilful mistake of the question; which as you cannot defend without
contradicting your self, so neither without wronging S. Augustine: for when he
says, that the Catholic Church comprehends both the militant and the
triumphant, he speaks of her, taken in her whole latitude: but that the may,
and even in the Apostles Creed be taken for the militant only, he expressly
declares in his explication of the same Creed, where teaching the
Catechumenists which is the Catholic Church mentioned in the Creed, he De
Symb. ad Catechum. l. 1. c. 6.
says: We believe the Catholic Church: She is the holy Church, one Church,
the true Church, the Catholic Church, fighting against all heresies: she may
be opposed, but she cannot be overthrown. All heresies are gone eut from her,
as unprofitable branches cut of from the Vine: but she remaynes in her root,
in her Vine, in her charity; and the gates of hell shall never overcome her. In
these words S. Augustine teaches the catechumenists to believe, that the
Catholic Church mentioned in the Apostles Creed, is the Church militant built
upon S. Peter's Chair as upon a rock, against which the gates of hell can not
prevail. And the same he declares, when speaking to the Donatists, he
denounces unto them, that because they were out of the Roman Church, they were
out of the Catholic Church and out of the state of Salvation. Be ye ingrafted
(says Psalm cont. part. Donati.
) he) on the Vine: It grieueth us to see you lie so cut of. Number the Priests,
even from the Sea of Peter, and consider in that rank of Fathers who succeeded
each other. That is the rock, which the proud gates of hell overcome not. That
Church therefore in which there is a never interrupted succession of Bishops
from S. Peter, is (in S. Augustines belief) the Catholic Church. Do not you
then abuse S. Augustine producing his authority to prove that the catholic
church mentioned in the Creed, cannot be the Church militant, since he so
expressly teaches the contrary? yea, and not only that she is the militant
Church, but in particular that she is the Roman Church, built upon S. Peter and
his successors; and that whosoever is divided from her, is an unprofitable
branch cut of from the Vine, which is Christ our Lord, and therefore no less
deuoyd of spiritual life, then the dead branch is of natural.

SECT. II. Your second argument.
YOur second argument Page 10.1^.12.
is grounded on a false principle, with is, that the Catholic Church in her
essential state is invisible. We know, that the essential form of the Church
which is, Faith, is invisible to corporal eyes. But the Church (as you Page 36^
confess) is the multitude of all Christian belieuers whenever and
whersoeuer dispersed throughout the world, and that the congregation of
Christians assembled in a general Synod is the representative body thereof.
Wherefore as it were ridiculous to affirm that a multitude of men joined in one
Commonwealth, or the representative body thereof assembled in Parliament, is
essentially invisible, because their souls are invisible, or that Christ
living on earth was invisible, because his Divinity was invisible: so it is no
less ridiculous to affirm that the Church in her essence is invisible,
because faith is invisible: for faith is not the Church, but the essential
form of the Church, as the soul of man is not man, but the essential form
of man. Man consists essentially of body as well as of soul: and by reason of
his body he is visible; for according to the axiom of Philosophers, Actiones
and passiones sunt suppositorum. And so likewise the Church consists
essentially of the persons that believe, as of matter, and of faith, as of
form; and by reason of her matter is visible, as man is by his body, and
Christ by his humanity. Now whereas to prove, that the Church in her essential
state is invisible, you allege the whole tenor of the Apostles Creed, Page 11.
affirming, that the object of every article of that Symbol (from belief in
God unto belief of life everlasting) is unto us invisible, and so far as it is
believed, is without compass of sense, you speak untruly and ignorantly: for
was not the nativity of Christ visible to corporal eyes? did he not visibly
suffer in his body, when he was whipped, crowned with thorns, and buffeted?
Was he not visibly crucified? Did he not visibly dye? Was he not visibly
buried? Did he not visibly ascend into heaven, the Astpoles beholding Act.
1.9.10.11.
him? And is he not to come again visibly to judge the quick and the dead? The
example which you allege of S. Thomas, is against your self: for not only the
Divinity of Christ is the object of faith which S. Thomas believed, but also
his humanity: and he that belieueth not his humanity, as well as his Divinity,
is an heretic. To what end, I pray you, when the Apostles thought, that Christ
after his resurrection appearing to them, was not a man, but a Spirit, did he
show them his hands and Luc. 24.39.40.
side, and bid them feel, and see, that so they might believe him not to be a
Spirit; because (said he) a Spirit has not flesh and bones, as you see me to
have? And to what end did he Joan. 20.27.
bid Thomas put his finger and hand into his wounds, but that by feeling them
he might believe the body he touched to be the same that he had seen suffer
on the Cross? Nor do you bring any thing of moment to disprove this: for the
definition of faith, which the Apostle gives, saying, Heb. 11.1.
Faith is an argument of things not appearing, is sufficiently verified in
these obiectes. It suffices that faith be either of things wholly invisible,
or else of things visible, apprehended under inuifible conditions, and
proprieties, as those are, under which we apprehend Christ when we believe him
to be both man and God; and those, under which we apprehend the Scripture, when
we say, it is the word of God; or the Church, when we believe her to be the
spouse of Christ, the house of faith, the temple of God, the mansion of the
holy Ghost, the gate of heaven, the treasuresse of spiritual graces. And who
knows not, that the Sacrament of baptism, whether we confider the matter,
which is water, or the form, which are words, is the object of sense? and the
very essential definition of a Sacrament, is to be, A visible sign of
iuuisible Magist in 4. d 1. S. Tho. 3. part q. 60. a 2. and 3. corp.
grace: and yet to believe one Baptism in remission of sins, is an article
of the Creed expressed in the Council of Gonstantinople.

And this discovers the weakness of your argument taken from the
predestinat, to approve the inuisibility of the Church: for though
predestination be invisible, as faith is, yet neither the predestinat, nor the
faithful are invisible; and therefore if I should grant for argument sake, that
the Church consists of the predestinate only, it would not follow that she is
invisible.

But to prove her inuisibility, you Page 11.
say: Divine Scripture in positine doctrine does manifest thus much, in that
speech of Christ to S. Peter, Mat 16.19. Upon this Rock will I build my Church;
and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it; where the word, Church (by
the judgment of S. Augustine, and the accordance of your own Doctors) does
signify, Only the number of predestinat. But let us see how you make good this
your charge. Our Doctors which you name, are Caietan, Ferus, Stella, and
Salmeron. But Stella in that place neither explicates those words of Christ,
nor makes any mention of them, nor of S. Peter, nor of the Church; but speaks
of particular men, proving out of other words of Christ recorded by S. Luke
Luc. 6.47.48.49.
that they which have faith without good works, build their house upon loose
earth, which therefore wanting foundation, by winds and storms of tentations is
easily ouerthowne; whereas they that have both faith and good works, build upon
a firm Rock, which is Christ: and from thence he infers, that your Lutheran
Brethren teaching that faith cannot be without good works, build not on Christ
the Rock, but upon sand. This is Stellas discourse, which to be imposterously
alleged by you, to prove, that the Church consists only of predestinat, or
that she is invisible, no man can deny.

And no less imposterous is your objection out of Salmeron, who speaks in
the same sense that Stella does; and is so far from teaching that the Church is
invisible, that in the very same disputation which you In 1. Timoth. 3. disp.
22. q. Porro. to. 15.
object, he proves that the house of God, which is his Church, is visible and
conspicuous in her Head or governor, the Bishop of Rome; in her members, the
faithful; in the word of God, which she is commanded to hear; in the
profession of her faith, which she is commanded to make openly; and in her
Sacraments, wherewith she is sanctified; all these being objects of sense. And
Tom. 7. tract. 6.12.38.
^e furthermore she weth that the church in holy writ is compared to a field
that has wheat and cockle; to a floare that has corn and chafe; to a net
that contaynes good and bad fishes; to a vine that has some branches bearing
fruit, and some that bear none; to a body of which some members are living,
and some dead; to a fold in which there are both sheep, and kids; to a great
house in which there are not only vessels of gold and silver, but also of wood
and earth; and to the Ark of Noah, in which there were living creatures, both
clean and unclean. And from these parables, as also out of other testimonies
of holy Scripture, he infers against your Confession of Augusta, as also
against the Pelagians, the Donatists, and all other sectaries, that the
Catholic Church in this life consists both of good and bad, of predestinate
and reprobate. I know not therefore, with what conscience you produce him as a
patron of your Doctrine, so contrary to his own. Caietan and Ferus I have not
seen: but I fear, you deal with them as you do with Stella and Salmeron.
Besides, Ferus is a prohibited author.

Your second objection is proposed in these Page 11. sin. 12.
words: The same may be said of the Church, as it is called the flock of
Christ, Ioh. 10. My sheep hear my voice: where by Sheep, are only meant, the
sanctified Elect of God, as the testimonies of your own Jesuits, the judgment
of S. Augustine, and S. Chrysostom do confirm. This then is your argument.
Suarez, Tolet, and Bellarmine (for those are the Jesuits you name) S.
Chrysostom and S. Augustine, by sheep in the words of Christ objected,
understand only the sanctified Elect of God. Ergo, the Church consists only
of predestinat. An absurd consequence, and falsely fathered on these authors,
who teach that the name of sheep in holy writ, is taken sometimes for the
elect, and sometimes for the reprobate. In this text of S. John which you
object, it is taken for the elect; for Christ speaks of those sheep, to whom
he will give everlasting life, and which therefore no man shall pluck out of his
Joan. 10.28.
hand, as Suarez rightly L. 3. de auxil. great. c. 16.^^.18.
observes: but other sheep there are, which the infernal wolf shall devour:
such was Judas; and such are all reprobate Christians. And if it were true,
that by sheep in Scripture were understood the elect only, yet your consequence
is false, and the Doctrine contained in it, heretical: and such it is held to
be, by those very authors, which you allege to patronize it. Suarez shows De
tripl. virt. Theol. part. 1. disp. 9. (...). 6. and seqq.
that the Church is a fold, containing both sheep, and kids, that is, both
predestinate, and reprobate, as Christ himself has Math. 25.33.
declared. And treating there of the sense of this very place of S. John, he
proves, that some wolves are in the Church, and some sheep out of the Church:
this (I say) he proves out of the words of S. Augustine (whom you allege for
the contrary) saying: Tract. 45. in Joan.
According to prescience and predestination, how many sheep are without, and
how many wolves within? how many live wantonly now, that will become
Christians? how many blaspheme Christ, who shall believe in Christ etc. And how
many praise God within, who will blaspheme him? are chaste, and will become
wantons? stand now, and will fall? And he concludes, that these later
notwithstanding they be actually in the Church, are reprobat, and the former
though they be actually out of the Church, are predestinate.

All this and much more to the same effect is alleged by Bellarmine L. 3. de
Eocles. c. 7. and 9.
out of Scriptures, and Fathers. And the same is delivered by Tolet in that
very place which you cite for the Ad c. 10. Joan. Aunotat. 16.
contrary: for he says, that as some who did not as yet believe were sheep,
and elect, so contrarily, some, that did actually believe and were sheep, were
notwithstanding reprobats, as Judas. And lastly S. Chrysostom is so far from
holding with you, that the Church contains only the sanctified Elect of God,
that he writes In Psalm. 39.
thus: The whole Church consists not of perfect men, but has also those that
give themselves to idleness and sloth, that lead easy and dissolute lives,
and willingly serve their pleasures. And that in the net of the Apostles (which
is the Church) are contained good and bad Hom. 45. in cap. 12. Math.
fishes. Which Doctrine he like wise delivers in other places of his works.

I conclude therefore that you have wronged Suarez, Tolet, Bellarmine, S.
Augustine, and Chrysostom, fathering your false Doctrine on them.

But you proceed, Page 12.
saying: A third Scripture we find, Romans 1.9. where the Apostle says. He that
has not the spirit of Christ, the same is not his, which shows that none is
truly a Christian, but as he is regenerated by the spirit of Christ. But we
find this Scripture to make nothing at all for you, for you, for who ever is
regenerated in the Sacrament of Baptism, receives some gifts of the holy
Ghost, which is the Spirit of Christ. And as he is truly a man, that is borne
of Adam by natural propagation, so is he truly a Christian, that is borne of
Christ in Baptism by spiritual regeneration; for as thereby he receaueth
faith, so he is enrolled in the number of Christians, and made a member of the
mystical body of Christ, which is his Church. True it is, that all members of
the Church are not alike: those that with faith have sanctifiing grace (which
is the life of our souls) are living members: they that have faith without
grace, are according to diverse opinions termed diversely: some say, they are
dead members: some, that (because they are dead) they are not members properly,
but improperly or equiuocally, and therefore rather to be called parts of the
Church, then members. Others say, that they are neither members, nor parts,
but as superfluous or corrupt humors in the body of man.

These opinions though they differ in words, yet they agree in this, that faith
being the essential form of the Church, all the faithful (be they Saints, or
sinners, predestinat or reprobat) are contained in the precincts thereof, even
as all, whether members, parts, or humors of man are contained in the body of
man. And as for this different manner of speech, Turrecremata, Canus, and
others cited by them, and here alleged by you out of Bellarmine (for out of
him you took them) call sinners, parts of the Church, and not members, but
only equiuocally, because (as Suarez rightly De trip. virtute Theol. p. 1. d.
9. n. 12.
observes) by members, they understand only such parts as live; whereas the
name of parts may also agree to those that live not. Wherefore they differ only
in the names, understanding by parts the very same, that the holy Council of
Trent and other Divines do by members. And doubtless this manner of speech
used by the Council, is more proper, because sinners having faith, and hope,
are not void of all motion of spiritual life: for as faith is the beginning of
justification, so it unites the belieuer in some sort unto Christ. Nor does
Costerus (whom here you object) differ from this opinion: for that he denies
not sinners to be dead parts, or members of the Church, he declares, Enchir
i^ contro. 6.2. prope fin.
when speaking of the Bishops of Sardis, and Laodicea, that were reprehended,
the one, that he was dead in Spirit, the other that he was nether cold nor
boat, but lukewarm, wretched, miserable, poor, blind, and naked, he
affirms that notwithstanding this, they were both still acknowledged to be
Bishops, and heads of their Churches. And a little after, where he says Solut.
ad* object. Haer^t.
that sinners are in the Church, as humors in the body, he says withal, that
they are as wythered bows on the tree. Wherefore unless you will have the Head
to be no member of the body, and the wythered bows no parts of the tree, you
must consesse, that your obiecting of Costerus to prove, that sinners and
reprobates are no parts of the Church, is a grand Imposture.

And here by the way I must advertise you of a slight which you often use, and
it is; that when in the explication of any point of Doctrine, you find
diversity of opinions among Catholic Divines, some speaking more probably, or
properly, and others less; you conceal the former, and set down the latter
(as here you do) calling it, the accordance of our own Doctors, and from
thence frame arguments against us, as from a ground, which we are not to deny.
But who sees not this manner of arguing, to be fraududulent? For by denying
that opinion, or manner of speech, as any Catholic may do, such arguments need
no solutions, but of themselves fall to the ground. For example, I may refuse
to allow the opinion of those Divines, which say, sinners are not members, but
parts of the Church. I may also reject Costerus his manner of speech tearming
them superfluous humors; and thereby it will appear that your obiecting these
authors to prove that sinners are not members of the Church, is an argument of
no force, especially since they differ not from other Divines (which hold
wicked men and reprobats, to be members of the Church) really, but only in
manner of speech, as has been showed,

To the testimonies of Scripture you add Page 1^.
some Fathers, who so expressly condemn your doctrine, that no man but your
self could be so inconsiderate, as to make them patrons of it. S. Ambrose
teaches, and proves out of S. Paul 1. Tim. 2.20.
that, as in a great house there are some vessels of silver and gold, and some
of wood and earth: so in the Church there are some good and perfect, signified
by the silver and gold; and some bad and reprobate, signified by the vessels of
wood and earth. And of this truth (says he) I think no man to doubt. The same
Doctrine he like wise expresses in other his works.

S. Augustine (whom in the second place you object) condemns your Doctrine in
these words. Tract. 6. in Joan.
We confess* that in the Catholic Church there are both good and bad: the
good are corn; the bad, chafe. The Church has in her strong men, and weak;
she has just and iniust. Sermon. 107. de temp.
In the Church there are many reprobates mingled with the good; and both of
them are gathered as into a net, and swim together in this world without
difference, until they come to the shore, where the evil shall be severed
from De Ciuit. Deil. 18 c. 49.
the good.

With S. Augustine accords S. Bernard, proving out of the same parable of the
Net containing good and bad fishes; that in the Church militant there are just
men and sinners, elect and Sermon de conuers. ad cleri^os c. 17. and eoist 11.
reprobate.

S. Gregory says, Hom. 11. in Euangel.
That the holy Church on earth is rightly compared to ten Virgins, of which
some are wise, and some foolish; because in her, the good are mingled with the
wicked, the elect with the reprobate.

These testimonies convince, that whereas you here confess Page 13.
your Doctrine in this point to be one of the Tenants, for which John Husse was
burned in the Council of Constance; you by making the Fathers guilty of the
same Tenet, do what you can, to cast them into the same fire with him, that so
they may be burnt for heresy, as he was. The accusations you being against
them, to prove, them guilty of John Husse his heresy, are: First because, S.
Ambroses words (say you) are, Page 12.
All that are in the Church fight for Christ, intimating that the wicked fight
against Christ. Why do you wrest S. Ambroses words to a false sense? his words
are, Omnes qui sunt in Ecclesia, Deo militant: which signify nothing else, but
that all which are in the Church are Gods soldiars, and fight under his
colors. But all that fight under Gods colors, fight not as good soldiars:
many suffer themselves to be overcome, and lose that crown which no man shall
gain, but he that ouercometh. These are the reprobats, of whom it is true,
that albeit for the present many of them be in gods camp, which is his Church,
yet before their death they shall run away, as Judas did, and be damned with
him.

Out of S. Augustins work de Genesi ad literam c. 2. you object these words:
Page 12.
The Catholic Church is so called, because it is in every part perfect. But S.
Augustine in that place has no such words. And you are very forgetful: for a
little before you told Page 9.
us, out of S. Augustine, that, to hold the Catholic Church here upon earth to
consist of them that are perfect, was the heresy of the Pelagians. And yet now
speaking of the same Church, you set down, as S. Augustins words, that the
Catholic Church is so called, because it is in every part perfect: which is to
make S. Augustine say, and unsay, as you do; but the truth is, that these
later words are not his, but yours: and so the contradiction must rest upon
you, not upon him.

In like manner you say Page 12.
that the Church of Christ consists only of the predestinate and sanctified
elect of God. But else where, you tell us, Page 340.
that the Egyptians, Aethiopians, Armenians, Russians, and others among whom
there are some guilty of some fundament all heresies, are parts of the
Catholic Church, and in state of salvation. And again both in this Grand
Imposture Page 330.
, and in your Treatise of the kingdom of Israel in the Tract of the Church
Sect. 4. page 8.
, your Tenet is, that those who profess Jesus Christ to be the Savior of the
world, although they do indirectly by wickedness of life or heresy in
doctrine, deny their own profession, yet are they to be accounted Christians,
true members of the Church consist only of the predestinate, and sanctified
elect of God, how can it be verified that heretics are true members of the
Catholic Church; since it is the constant Doctrine of S. Augustine, and all
the fathers, that heretics are wholly out of the Church, and neither sanctified
nor predestinate, but miscreant reprobates, and out of the state of salvation.
Your doctrine therefore is, that the Church consists of the sanctified and
predestinate only; and yet withal, that it consists also of Arians and other
heretics, who are damnable reprobates. Reconcile these two. Again you
Protestants esteem your selves to be all true members of the Church: and yet
among you there are some drunkards, adulterers, usurers, and thieves. If
therefore you be all in the number of the sanctified, and elect of God, some of
you be strange Saints.

But to return to your objections out of S. Augustine, the other two
testimonies which you Page 12. lit. 0.
bring, are nothing to your purpose: for he only says, that the predestinate
cannot be seduded, nor divided from the Church, which is true: for before the
end of their life, they shall become members of Gods Church, and persevere in
her until death. But how proves this, that none but predestinate are in the
Church? Nor does it import, that he gives to the predestinate the name of
Church: for that name sometimes does not signify the universal Church, but a
particular company of the faithful; as when we say: The Church of the
Corinthians, or of the Ephesians: and when S. Paul Romans 16.3.
says, Salute Prisca and Aquila, and their domestical Church. And 1. Cor.
16.19.
again: Aquila and Prisca with their domestical Church salute you. In the
same sense the name of Church is taken by Clemens Alexandrinus, S. Gregory, and
S. Bernard, whom here you Page 12.
object: for they all give that name to the just and predestinate, by reason
they are the principal parts of the Church.

SECT. III. Your third Argument.
You Page 16.
say: Though all agree in this (as your selves confess) that without the
Catholic Church there is no salvation, yet have you confessed two sorts of
Christian professors, namely Excommunicates, and Catechumenists to be actually
saved, albeit no members of your Roman Church. So you, inferring, that the
Roman Church is not the Catholic Church. Sir, you know, that Bellarmine (whom
here you cite) expressly L. 3 de Eccles. milit. c. 6.
declares, that when we say, none can be saved out of the Church, we speak
only of such as neither are in the Church really, nor intentionally by desire,
but that if they be in the Catholic Church, either really, or at least by
desire (as Catechumenists, and some Excommunicats are) they may be saved. Which
Doctrine both he, and other Catholic Divines approve. And it is so certain,
that you know not how to disprove it, but by Page 16.
that as for being saved only by desire or vow of being in the Church, is but a
wild and extrauagant piece of learning, in the judgment of your own Jesuit
Suarez. Pardon me, Sir. This is not Suarez his censure, but an untruth of
yours: for Suarez speaking of excommunicats, De trio. virt. d. 9. sect. 1. n.
14.
says; that those Divines which hold them not to be in the Church really, but
only by desire, differ not from him in the substance of their Doctrine, but
only in manner of speech. Now, he defends, that both excommunicats and
Catechumenists are in the Church actually and really: which also Valentia
holds of Tom. 3. d. 1. q. 1. punct. 7.. 14. and 15.
excommunicats: on whom therefore you Page 15. marg lit. d.
saying, that the Church Catholic is compared by S. Peter to the Arc of Noah:
from whence you infer, that as in the time of the deluge, all which were
within the arc, were saved, and all without it, were drowned (although they
desired never so much to be admitted into the arc) so whosoever are essential
members of the Catholic Church, cannot possibly perish; and contrarily,
whosoever is not a real and vital member therein, cannot but perish. So you
reason the matter, misunderstanding S. Peter: for he compares not the Ark of Noah to the Church, but to the Sacrament of Baptism, wherein your argument
holds not: for though in the deluge, none were saved, but only they, which
actually were in the arc, yet it is certain, that in the law of grace, some
are saved, which never received the Sacrament of Baptism, as diverse Martyrs,
that were baptized in their own blood: and you acknowledge the same of
Valentinian the Emperor, who dyed unbaptized.

But admitting the ark of Noah to be a type of the Catholic Church (for so it
is often taken by the ancient Fathers) yet your argument proves nothing: for
similitudes hold not in all things. Wherefore I answer, with S. Augustine L. 5.
de Bapt. c. 28.
that albeit none that were in the arc perished in the deluge, and all
perished that were out of the arc; yet it falls out otherwise in the
Catholic Church represented by the arc: for ill Catholics notwithstanding
they be in the Church, not only by desire, but corporally and really, perish,
because they make bad use of their baptism: and contrarily, others that
believe aright, and live accordingly, though they be not in the Church really,
but only in heart and desire (as being yet unbaptized) are saved. From whence S.
Augustine concludes, that what is said of being in, or without the arc in
order to salvation, is to be understood, of being in, or without the Church,
cord, non corpore, that is to say, not corporally and really, but in heart and
desire. Which Doctrine, as it is all Catholic Divines, so it is contrary to
yours, and shows your simplicity, in calling it, a wild and extrauagant piece
of learning. The things in which the Church is like to the arc (witness S.
Aduers. Lucifer.
Hierome) are: that as the arc was visible, so is the Church: as in the arc
there were Creatures clean, and unclean, so in the Church there are good and
bad: and as in the arc, there were predestinate, and also Cham, a reprobate;
so in the Church, there are both predestinate and reprobate. Wherefore this
comparison which you have brought, of the arc, destroys your own doctrine.

SECT. IV. Your fourth Argument.
YOur fourth Argument to prove the Roman Church not to be the Catholic Church,
is Page 17.
because (say you) our Divines that speak more ingeniously, freely grant,
that the Pontifical dignity, Roman (as it is Roman) is not from Divine
authority, because only from the fact of Peter. And they that are more
affectionate to the Roman See, although they attribute it to the institution of
Christ, yet dare they not say, that this is to be believed upon certainty of
faith, but only as a matter probable and coniecturall.

If you should argue thus: An Aethyopian (as he is black) is not a man, Ergo,
an Aethyopian is not a man, your argument were a sophisme; and so is that which
here you make against the Roman Church: for as an Aethyopian though he be not
a man reduplicatiue and formaliter, as he is black, yet he is a man, as he is a
rational creature: so like wise, though it be no matter of faith, that the
Roman Church reduplicatiue, as Roman, is the Catholic Church, yet it is matter
of faith, that S. Peter by divine institution was created supreme Pastor and
Governor the whole Church, and that the same power descends from him to his
Successors. And it is also matter of faith, that S. Peter fixed his See at
Rome, and died there, and that the Bishop of Rome succedeth him in his See, and
supreme authority of Prince, and Governor of the whole Church of Christ: nor
was this ever questioned by any but heretics. That which some Catholic
writers dispute, is, whether S. Peter had any command from Christ, to place his
See at Rome, and not to remove it from thence; or whether without any
commandment from Christ he chose Rome for his See, out of his own free
election, as he might have chosen Milan, or any other city? That he had such a
command from Christ, is affirmed and learnedly proved by De triplici virt.
Theol. d. 10. sect. 3. n. 10.
Suarez, L. 2. de Pont. c. 12.
Bellarmine, Institut. mor. part. 2. l. 4. c. 21.. Secunda sent.
Azor, and by the greatest part of Catholic Divines, with many forcible
testimonies of antiquity. According to this opinion (which is the more probable
and pious, and learnedly proved by Suarez) it follows, that the Roman Church,
even as Roman, is by Divine institution the Sea of S. Peter, and his
Successors; and that therefore it is not left free for them to remove their See
from Rome, to any other place.

But (to give you your greatest advantage) be it, that S. Peter received no
such commandment from Christ, but that it was free for him to chose for his
See, either Rome, or any other City; and that his successors may also freely
transfer their See from Rome: Yet this affoards no help to your cause: for
though according to this opinion it be no matter of faith, that the Roman
Church reduplicatiue, as Roman, be the Catholic Church, yet specificatiue, and
absolutely it is: for albeit S. Peter might have placed his See else where, yet
it is matter of faith that de facto he placed his See at Rome; and that whiles
his Successor continues his See there, the Roman Church is de facto the Head
and Mistress of all Churches, and that whosoever is not a member united to
this Head, is out of the Catholic Church. This you should have disproued; but
wilfully mistake the state of the question; and because it is not matter of
faith, but of opinion, that the Roman Church reduplicatiue, as Roman, is the
Catholic Church; you infer that specificatiue and absolutely it is not
matter of faith, but only of opinion, that she is the Catholic Church: which
is as good a consequence, as that an Ethiopian absolutely is not a man,
because formally, as black, he is not a man. With such arguments you delude
ignorant Readers, that want learning to discern your sleights.

SECT. V. Your fifth Argument.
YOur fifth argument to prove that the Roman Church is not the Catholic
Church, Page 18.19.20.
is, because there was a Catholic Church, which had Apostles, Martyrs, and
Confessors blessed Saints of God, before the Roman Church was founded, yea and
before the article of the Catholic Church was put into the tenor of the Creed,
or the Apostolical Creed it self composed. All this though it be granted as
true, is yet of no force against our Doctrine; which is, that S. Peter was
ordained by Christ Pastor of his whole flock; and therefore Governor of the
universal Church: from whence it follows, that whatsoever Apostles, Martyrs,
Confessors, or other faithful lived in the Church of Christ, after S. Peter
was made Head thereof, were members of the universal, or Catholic Church
subject to Peter, though for a time there were no one particular Church which
was head of al Churches, because S. Peter as yet had not made choice of any
particular seat, as afterward he did at Antioch: and therefore the Church of
Antioch whiles he sat there, was the Head and Mother Church, to whom all other
Churches were bound to profess union and obedience. In regard whereof, that
Holy Pope Innocentius the first, greatly commended by S. Augustine, Epist. 18.
Alexand. Episc. Antioch.
says, that the Sea of Antioch had not given place to the Sea of Rome, but
because what Antioch obtained only by the way, Rome obtained absolutely and
finally. To which I add, that if the Successor of S. Peter should now remove
his See from Rome to Milan, as S. Peter did from Antioch to Rome, not the
Church of Rome, but that of Milan should be the Catholic Church, as the Head
and Mother Church of the world. But because by the providence of God S. Peter
fixed his seat, and left it to his Successors at Rome, whiles they continue it
there, the Roman Church by reason of his See, is the Head, and Mother Church of
the world, to which (says L. 3. c. 3.
Irenaeus) all Churches, and all the faithful from every place are of
necessity to agree, by reason of this her more powerful principality. I
conclude therefore, that you ignorantly or wittingly mistake the state of the
question: for the Roman Churches being, or not being the Catholic Church, as
the Head and Mother Church of the world, no way depends on her being founded
before or after the article of the Catholic Church was put into the tenor of
the Creed, but upon being the Sea in which S. Peter Prince of the Apostles
lived and dyed, and which he left to his Successors: for the Bishop of that
See, being S. Peter's Successor, succeeds him in his supreme authority; and
that authority makes the Roman Church the Head of the world, which dignity it
has ever enjoyed since S. Peter sat there, and shall enjoy whiles his
Successor continues there, which shall be to the end of the world. To have
spoken to the purpose, you should have proved, that the Saints which departed
this life, before the Roman Church was founded, were separated from the
communion of S. Peter, and from the Church of which he was Head: which if they
had been, they had no more been Saints, then you now are.

SECT. VI. Your sixth Argument.
YOur sixth Argument is a mere sophisme. Al Catholic Divines accord, as in a
matter of faith, that the Catholic or universal Church Page 20.21.22.
mentioned in the Apostles Creed, has a prerogative of continuing in the true
faith until the end of the world, according to Christ's promise made to S.
Peter. Secondly, and that the Roman Church, whiles the Successors of S. Peter
continue their seat at Rome, cannot fail in faith. But that S. Peter fixed
his seat at Rome by the commandment of Christ, there to remain to the end of
his life, and in his Successors to the end of the world, although it be a most
pious and probable opinion, held by the greatest and best part of Divines, yet
it is not express matter of Faith, because no such precept of Christ appears
in Scripture or tradition: and therefore some Divines stick not to grant that
the fixing of S. Peter's See at Rome, was a thing proceeding merely from his
own free will, and election; and consequently, that it is in the power of his
Successors to transport it from Rome to Antioch, or any other City. In which
case, as Rome should not then be the Sea of S. Peter, but Antioch: so neither
should the Bishop of Rome be the supreme Governor of the whole Church, nor the
Church of Rome the Catholic Church, as the Head and mistress of all others
(as now she is) but Antioch: Nor should she then have any privilege of not
erring in faith, as now Antioch has not, since the remouall of S. Peter's See
from thence. But therefore to infer that the now Roman Church (against which
you write this Grand Imposture) being at this present the Sea of S. Peter, or
whiles hereafter she shall remain the Sea of S. Peter, may err in faith, is
to argue a sensu diuiso ad sensum compositum, and to infer that such things as
perhaps are possible, but never shall be, are already in being. If I should
argue thus. It may possibly come to pass (though it be improbable) that the
Metropolitan See of England may be removed from Canterbury to Carlisle: Ergo the
Church of Canterbury is not now the Metropolitan Church of England: were not
this a sophisme? And so is yours. Some of our Divines grant that the Sea of S.
Peter which makes the Church of Rome the Mother and Mistress of all Churches,
and secureth her from all error in faith, may be removed from Rome, though
there appear no likelihood thereof: Ergo (infer you) in the opinion of some
of your Divines, the now Roman Church is not the Mistress and mother Church of
the world, but may now fall from the faith, even whiles she is the Sea of S.
Peter, no less, then she might, if his See were already removed from thence.
Who sees not this Argument to be sophistical? And to sophistry you join
fraud: for, to prove that the Successor of S. Peter has not his See at Rome by
divine ordinance, but only by humane election, you Page 21.
allege Suarez De trip. virt. Theol. disp. 10. sect. 3. n. 10.
saying, that before the ascension of Christ, nothing appears of any such
ordinance, either in Scripture, or from tradition. Here you break of, leaving
out the rest of Suarez words, and concealing his Doctrine: for in the very same
place both before and after these his words, which you cull out, he expressly
affirms, that it is more pious, and probable, that Christ after his ascension
appearing to S. Peter, commanded him to place his See at Rome; which he ptoueth
by the testimonies of many ancient Fathers, and by other Arguments; all which
you conceal, and cite him for the contrary opinion. The same abuse you offer
to Valentia, Bellarmine, and Azor. For all these prove, with many testimonies
of antiquity, and other forcible Arguments, that it is of Divine institution,
holding it for certain, and the contrary opinion not to be safe, though not
expressly de fide.

SECT. VII. Your seventh Argument.
THAT the Successor of S. Peter in the Roman See canonically chosen, is Head of
the universal Church, all Catholics believe, as undoubted matter of faith.
But that this individual person, v. g. Urban the Eight, is true Pope, and true
Head of the Church, though the more probable opinion of Divines hold it also to
be of faith, yet diverse others defend, that it is only of moral certaynty. You
not knowing how to solue the arguments of the first opinion, otherwise then by
railing against it, Page 23. fine.
and calling it, a Jesuitical faith both grossly false and wickedly
blasphemous, assume the second, as granted, which I, with the authors of the
first opinion, do not grant, but deny. For the Church proposing unto us this
individual man. Urban the eight, as true Pope, it is not only morally, but
absolutely, and infallibly certain, that in the person of Urban the eight, are
found all the conditions of true Baptism, Ordination, Election, and whatsoever
else requisite for a true Pope, and true head of the Church: for as the Church
being assisted by the holy Ghost, cannot err in proposing other Verities of
faith; so nether in proposing this man to be the true head, and lawful
governor of the universal Church wherefore our belief that this man is true
Pope, is not humane, moral, and fallible; but divine, and infallible, unless
you will question the authority of the holy Ghost, making it humane, and
fallible. Yea even in the other opinion, though it be no matter of faith that
this individual man is true Pope, yet the Authors thereof hold it to be a
Theological conclusion so certain, that whosoever shall deny it, is worthy of
flames.

SECT. VIII. Your eight Argument.
YOUR eight argument Page 25. 26. 27.
is nothing but a repetition of what you have said in the former sections,
without any addition of new proofs, unless to prove your Doctrine be to rail
against ours, calling it, new, false, scandalous, pernicious, heretical,
blasphemous, and us perjured persons: all which being nothing but an empty
froath of injurious words, deserve no other answer, but contempt.

CHAP. VI. The Roman Church is the Head and Mother of all Churches.
IN this matter you wholly mistake the state of the question: for when we
demand, which Church is the Head, the Mother, and Mistress of all Churches,
the question is not, which Church was first founded? If you speak of priority
of time, or antiquity, and call those Churches, Mothers of all such, as were
founded after them, we grant that in this sense the Church of Jerusalem is the
Mother Church of all Churches, and the Roman in the same sense a daughter both
to the Church of Jerusalem, of Antioch, and all others that were founded
before her. And in this sense the Bishops which had been present at the first
Council of Constantinople call the Church of Jerusalem, the Mother of all
other Churches Theodor. l. 5. histor. c. 9.
. But this is not the question: for you know, and set it down as our Doctrine,
Page 29. and 38.
that the Roman Church is called the Mother Church of all Churches, because S.
Peter was constituted by Christ the ordinary Pastor of the whole Church. By
which it appears, you know right well, that the mother-hood which we attribute
to the Roman Church, is not priority of time, but of authority, and
jurisdiction grounded on the supremacy of S. Peter: for as by reason of his
transcendent authority over the whole flock of Christ, which is his Church, he
was (and in his successors is) the Father and Head of all Bishops; so the Roman
Church (in which says S. Chrysologus Epist. ad Eutych.
Peter still lives and governs) is the Head and mother of all Churches, and
unto which (says S. L. 3. c. 3.
Irenaeus) all Churches are necessarily to agree, by reason of her more mighty
Principality, that is to say, by reason of the sovereignty, and supreme
authority of the Sea Apostolic. And in this sense, she is called by S.
Irenaeus Ibid.
and Origin Apud Eusebius. l. 6. hist c. 12.
. The most ancient Church: and by S. Cyprian De simplicit. Praelat.
, The Root, the fountain, and head of Episcopal power; and, The principal
Church from whence Priestly unity began. L. 1. ep. 3.
. And from the same ground it is, that S. Maximus Martyr said Spond. anno 657.
n. 8.
, All the Churches of Christians had their beginning from the holy Roman
Church: and the Primates of Africa Ep. ad Theod. Papam.
that, all other Churches were to learn from her, as from their native
fountain, what they ought to believe: and Innocentius the first in his Epistle
Epist. 9.
highly commended by S. Augustine Epist. 106.
, that from the Roman Church other Churches as springs proceeding from their
mother source, and running with the purity of their original, through the
diverse regions of the whole world, are to take what they ought to ordain. And
the holy Council of Chalcedon, Epist. ad Leonem.
that the fountain and source of our religion is from the Sea Apostolic. And
finally, for diverse other respects the Roman Church is justly called, The most
ancient Church, as Bozius learnedly proves Desig. Eccles. to. 1. l. 3. cap. 10.
. To him I remit you.

Wherefore the mother-hood of the Roman Church which we defend consists in her
supreme authority, and jurisdiction over all other Churches. This you should
disprove, which here you do not, but infer, that Jerusalem, Caesarea,
Antioch, the British Church, and the Greek Church in general, are all
Mothers to the Roman, because they were founded before her; which is a false
co^sequent drawn out of a wilful mistake of the state of the question: for
though the Church of Jerusalem was founded before that of Caesarea, yet who
knows not, that (as the famous Council of Nice Can. 7.
has declared, S. Hierome Ep. 61.
testifies, and you here confess) the Church of Caesarea was the
Metropolitan, or mother Church of all Palestine, and that both the Church of
Jerusalem and all others of that province, were for above four hundred years
subject to her. Again, who knows not, that the Bishops of Caesarea, of
Jerusalem, and of all the East were subject to the Bishop of Antioch, as to
their Patriarch, notwithstanding that the Church of Antioch was founded after
some of the Eastern Churches? And who knows not that albeit the Church of
Antioch was founded before that of Rome, it was nevertheless subject to the
Church of Rome? for why else did Iuuenal Bishop of Jerusalem say In Council.
Ephesians. Act. 4.
in the presence of the whole Council of Ephesus, that the ancient custom,
and Apostolical tradition was, that the Church of Antioch, is to be ruled, and
judged by the Roman.

Sir, a man of your reading ought to have known, that in the mysteries of
Christ, the younger are preferred before the elder: Abel before Cain; Jacob
before Esau; Judas before Ruben; David before Eliab; Solomon before Adonias?
and so likewise of Christians, the Gentiles were preferred before the Jews; the
Latins before the Greeks, and the west before East: for as the Apostle says,
1. Cor. 15.46.
that is natural which is first; and spiritual that which is afterward: and
he that by his birthright shall exalt himself, as being the elder, shall by
the right hand of God be humbled, that so the favors he bestows on his Church
may be known to proceed from no other root, but his gracious vocation. So we
see, among the Apostles, that although in the opinion of S. Epiphanius Haeresi
51.
(which is followed by Baronius Anno 32. n. 23.
, Lorinus In ca. 1. Act. 5.13.
, Serarius Tract. de Apost.
, and many others) Andrew were elder then Peter, and (as S. Ambrose In c. 12.2.
ad Corinth.
says) followed Christ before Peter, yet Andrew received not the primacy, but
Peter. And therefore though the Churches of Jerusalem, of Antioch, and others
of the East, were founded before that of Rome, yet not they, but she obtained
the primacy.

Wherefore you produce in vain the testimonies of S. Hierome, S. Augustine, and
S. Basil, affirming, that the Gospel was first preached at Jerusalem, and
other parts of the East, and that from thence it came into the West: for this
proves, that the Church of Jerusalem and some others were founded before that
of Rome, and therefore were mothers to her in antiquity, not in jurisdiction and
authority.

But S. Chrysostom (say Page 30.
you) affirms, that S. James was the first that obtained a Bishopric,
namely at Jerusalem. You ought to have added, that the same S. Chrysostom
likewise says In Joan. Hom. vltima.
that he was made Bishop of Jerusalem by S. Peter master of the whole world.
If therefore James was chosen Bishop of Jerusalem by Peter, that sufficiently
shows his authority over James, and the other Apostles. And what else did S.
Chrysostom signify, saying, that James was made Bishop of Jerusalem by Peter,
Master of the world, but that as much as the Bishop of the whole world
surpasses in authority the Bishop of one See: so much did Peter surpass James
in authority? which Euthymius has also expressed in the same words with
Chrysostom. And no less effectually S. Bernard: The rest of the Apostles
(says he) L. 2. de consid. c. 9.
obtained each of them their peculiar flocks; James contented with Jerusalem,
yelds the universality to Peter. And S. Gregory: L. 4. epist. 38.
Peter surely is the chief member of the holy and Universal Church Paul,
Andrew, John, what were they but heads of particular Dioceses? Impertinent
therefore is your alleging of S. Chrysostom, to prove that James was the first
that obtained a Bishopric at Jerusalem: for both he and these other Fathers
testify, that Peter was Bishop of the whole Church, and consequently also of
Jerusalem, which was a part of the Church. And who knows not, that of all
the Apostles, S. Peter first preached the Gospel to the Jews, and also to
the Gentiles; first in the East, and then in the West? and that by his authority
he instituted the three Patriarkcall seats, of Rome, Antioch, and Alexandria,
by which all other Churches of the world were governed? and that (as Bozius De
sign. Eccles. l. 4. c. 2. and 3.
observes) the whole world was converted by those, which either were sent by
S. Peter, and his Successors in the Roman See, having their mission and
authority from them; or else by such as were made Bishops by them whom S. Peter
had ordained. And so likewise whereas here Page 33.
you make the Church of Caesarea mother to that of Rome, who knows not, that
S. Peter founded that Church, and made Cornelius the Centurion Bishop thereof,
which therefore remained subject to S. Peter's See?

Impertinent likewise, and fraudulent is your objection Page 34.
out of Sozomene, L. 3. c. 7.
that the Eastern Greek Churches challenged this prerogative in their letters
to Pope Julius, that they came from the East, who first brought Christian
Religion to Rome: for if they came from the East, their ordination and
authority was from S. Peter. And again those letters were not of Orthodoxe
Bishops, but of the Arians, assembled in their false Council at Antioch; who
with an heretical pride stomaked at the Authority of the Bishop of Rome,
because (as Sozomene there reports) by the dignity and prerogative of his
See, he had restored to their Church, Athanasius Patriarch of Alexandria, Paul
of Constantinople, and other Catholic Bishops, whom they had deposed; and
rebuked them sharply for their unjust proceedings against them. But yet, their
writing was more tolerable then yours: for though (to magnify themselves) they
alleged, that the Doctors of Christian Religion came first from the East to
Rome, yet withal they acknowledged, Sozom. ibid.
that the Roman Church obtained the prize of honor from them all, as having
been from the beginning the Metropolitan of Religion: A truth, which you here
conceal, and every where deny.

But you tell us Page 29. 30.
, that Bellarmine groundeth the motherhood of the Roman Church on a false
principle taken out of the counterfeit epistles of Anacletus, which is, that
all the Apostles had their Episcopal ordination of Pastorship from Peter;
which principle is denied by Azor and Suarez. Here you speak untruly, and
contradict your self: for (as you confess) Page 38.
Bellarmine groundeth the monarchy of S. Peter upon those words of our Savior
Math. 16. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church etc. And on
the same passage, as also upon those other words John. 21. feed my lambs, feed
my sheep, (by which Christ made him Pastor of his whole flock) not only
Bellarmine, but all Catholics, with the ancient Fathers, ground their belief
of the Monarchy of S. Peter, and of the universal authority and motherhood of
the Roman Church. Wherefore Bellarmine here alleged by you out of those
passages of Scripture, supposes the supremacy of the Roman Church, as
undoubted matter of faith; and from thence infers probably, as a singular
privilege of S. Peter, that all the Apostles had their. Episcopal ordination
from him, and proves the same not only out of the epistle of Anacletus (which
you are pleased Page 29. and 34.
to call counterfeit, and bastardly, grounding your self on the testimony of
Cusanus in a prohibited work, and which you know he himself has retracted)
but out of the express testimonies of S. Cyprian, of Innocentius the first in
his epistles to the two Councels of Carthage and Mileuis, of Julius the first,
and Leo the Great; all which you imposterously conceal.

This deduction of Bellarmine, though it follow probably, yet not so
necessarily, that the authority of the Roman Church any way depends thereon.
And therefore other learned Divines, and in particular Azor, and Suarez (who no
less firmly believed the Roman Church to be the mother of all Churches, then
Bellarmine did) are herein of a different opinion from him, holding that the
Apostles were not ordained Bishops by Peter, but immediately by Christ himself,
which (say you) Page 29. and 31.
they mantayne upon the oracles of God, out of direct Scriptures, accompanied
with the consent of S. Augustine, and many other Divines. And because you would
have us believe, that in their opinion, none of the Apostles were ordained by
Peter, you set down in a different letter these words, as theirs: Page 30.
mitio.
Mathias had his ordination to the Bishopric which Judas lost, not by the
hands of Peter, but by lot immediately from God; and S. Paul, his, not by S.
Peter, but by a voice from Heaven, even immediately from Christ. But your
dealing is insufferable: for these words are not theirs, but feigned by your
self, and falsely fathered on them. And as the words are not theirs, so nether
is the Doctrine: for when they say, The Apostles were ordained Bishops
immediately by Christ, they speak not of Mathias, and Paul, but only of those
twelve, which Christ called and conuersed with in his life time, as Suarez
expressly declares; De trip. virt. Theol. disp. 10 sect. 1. n. 7.
proving withal, that both Mathias and Paul were not ordained Bishops
immediately by Christ, but by the Apostles (s) their imposition of hands: which
also (for as much as concerns S. Paul) he confirms with the testimonies of
S. Chrysostom, and S. Leo.

Again, whereas you say, they mantayne that the Apostles were ordained Bishops
immediately by Christ, out of direct Scriptures accompanied with the consent of
S. Augustine, you cannot be excused from an untruth: for albeit Suarez in
proof of his opinion allege the gloss upon those words of the Apostle, God
placed in his Church, first, Apostles etc. yet he neither urges these words of
S. Paul, nor any other text of Scripture to that purpose; nor any testimony of
S. Augustine, saving one, out of the book of Questions of the old and new
Testament, which you ought not to regard, because, when it is alleged against
you, you reject it with contempt, Page 50. marg.
as heretical and contrary to S. Augustine: but because you conceive, that
here it makes for your purpose, you will have it to be S. Augustines. So
inconstant and contradictorious are you to your self.

And I must here also advertise you of your absurd manner of arguing, whiles
you frame a syllogism Page 30. fin. 31.
assuming for your Mayor proposition out of Bellarmine, that, all the other
Apostles were ordained Bishops by S. Peter; and out of Suarez and Azor for your
Minor, that all the other Apostles were not ordained by S. Peter; which being
two contradictories, as there is no man so senseless, that will defend two
opinions plainly contradictory: so there is no man so foolish, that will grant
both the premises of this your syllogism; which yet he must do, that will
allow your argument to be good. He that will defend Bellarmines opinion, will
deny your Minor: and he that will hold with Azor, and Suarez, will deny your
Mayor: and so your consequent in both the opinions is false: for what else can a
consequent be, that is inferred out of two premises contradictory to themselves.

Moreover you say Page 34. fine 35.
The nation of Brittayne by our own accounts, received the Gospel (Cardinal
Baronius and Suarez acknowledging thus much out of most ancient records) by the
preaching of Joseph of Arimathia in the 35. year of Christ, two years before
Peter did found the Church of Antioch where he was seated, 7. years before he
founded the Church of Rome: that is to say; in Brittany was planted a Church
nine years before there was any Church in Rome, and hereby so much her elder
sister. So you, not without ignorance and falsehood: for you set down this
acknowledgment in a different character, as the words of Baronius and Suarez,
which yet are not theirs, nor of any of the other authors, whom you name, but
your own fiction. They indeed acknowledge, that Joseph of Arimathia came into
Brittany: but that his coming was the 35. year of Christ, before S. Peter
founded either the Church of Rome, or of Antioch, is your addition falsely
imposed on them. For though according to the computation of Baronius, Lazarus
with his sisters Mary and Martha were driven out of Jerusalem in the 35. year
of Christ, and together with Joseph of Arimathia (by the providence of God)
came to Marsils in France; yet nether Baronius nor Suarez, nor any one of the
authors ancient or modern, which you object, says, that Joseph planted that
year a Church in Britain. You name Gildas; but he neither mentions Joseph
of Arimathia, nor says, that Christian religion was planted in Britain in
the time of Tiberius Caesar, as you by misplacing his words, make him say, but
speaks of the great calamities and desolation of that Island, caused by the
wars which the Romans made upon the Brittans, not in the time of Tiberius,
nor of Caius (for in their times the Romans had no wars with the Brittans)
but of Claudius; in the third year of whose Empire, those wars began, and
continued 40. years together, until the time of Domitian. Interea etc. In
the mean time (says In epist. de excidia Britan. c. 6.
Gildas) that is, during those wars, there appeared, and imparted it self to
this cold Island (more remote from the visible sun, then other Nations) that
true and invisible sun, which in the time of Tiberius Caesar, had manifested
himself (by the fame of his preaching and miracles) to the whole world; I
mean, Christ vouchsafed to impart his precepts. Gildas then is wholly against
you: for although he say, that in the time of Tiberius Caesar Christ manifested
himself, and imparted his precepts to the world, yet he discribeth the first
planting of Christian Religion in Britain not in the time of Tiberius, but of
the Roman wars in time of Claudius, by occasion whereof, there was continual
going and coming from Rome to Britain: and as Christian Religion was then
planted, and did daily increase in Rome, so from thence it was also kindled in
Britain, especially there being many Britains at that time inhabiting in
Rome, some for their pleasure, some to fly the wars, and unquiet state of
their own Country, and some taken by force and carried thither for hostages,
as Caractacus King of the Silures, and much Nobility with him, as Cornelius
Tacitus reports Annal. l. 12.
. And from hence it is, that Holin shead In descrip. Britan. to. 1. c. 9.
and Cambden In sua Britan. p. 162.
Protestant historians affirm, that one Claudia Ruffina a noble British Lady
(wife to Pudens the Senator, and the first hostess of S. Peter in Rome,) sent
from thence diverse books and messages to her friends in Britain, and was
thereby a great help to their conversion. To which I add, that S. Peter being
come to Rome in the second year of Claudius, to teach and convert the Western
parts of the world, when all the Jews were by public proclamation banished
from Rome, he took that occasion to go into France, and preached the Gospel
to the French; and from thence passing into Britain (as Metaphrastes Apud
Sur. die 23. Iun. page 862.
out of Greek antiquities records) preached, founded Churches, and ordained
Priests and Deacons there: which is also testified by that famous holy Pope
Innocentius the first, saying; In epist. ad Decen.
The first Churches of Italy, France, Spain, Africa, Sicily, and the
bordering Islands were founded by S. Peter, or by his Scholars, or successors.
Which caused Guilielmus Eysengrenius Cent. 1 p. 7. d. 8.
to affime, that the first Christian Churches of England were founded by S.
Peter. And finally S. Peter himself appearing to a holy man in the time of
King Edward the Confessor, showed him how he had preached in England and the
care he had of that Church, and Nation, as Alredus Rhieuallis Apud Sur. 5.
Ianuar. page 131.
left written 500. years since. And from that care it proceeded, that as
Dorotheus In Synopsi.
, Mirmanus In the^^ro de conuers. gent. page 4^.
and Baronius Martyrol. 15. Martij.
out of the Greek Martyrologe affirm, Aristobulus his disciple, and a known
Christian in Rome, was sent by him into Britain, and there made Bishop.

By all which it appears, that the British Church was not first founded by
Joseph of Arimathia, the 35. year of Christ in the reign of Tiberius, but by
S. Peter in the time of Claudius, after he had founded the Church of Rome, and
placed his seat there; and consequently that the Church of Rome is most truly
and properly Mother of the Church of Britain, not only by reason of the
second conversion of our nation by Fugatius and Damianus sent by Eleutherius
the 13. Pope after S. Peter; and also of the third conversion by S. Augustine,
and his companions, sent by S. Gregory the Great (whom therefore Bid calls
the Apostle of England) but also in respect of the first preaching, and
founding of a Christian Church in this Island, it having been wrought by S.
Peter his disciples, and other Roman Christians cooperating thereto. And so much
the more if it be true, that S. Paul assisted S. Peter therein, going from Rome
into Britain to preach, as Theodoret In psalm. 106. and l. 5. de curandis
Graec. affect.
, Sophronius Sermon. de Natali Apost.
, Venantius Fortunatus In carm.
and others affirm.

As for Joseph of Arimathia his coming into England, I grant it to be true,
though it be not affirmed by any ancient writer, but only by Capgrauius,
Polydore Virgil, and other late historians. Tradition is sufficient to confirm
me in the belief thereof. Yet withal it is certain, that he came not the year
of Christ 35. (as you without any proof at all suppose) but having come out of
Jury into France, with S. Mary Magdalen, and her company, after he had lived
there sometime, and seen her great austerity of contemplative and solitary
life, and rigor of penance which she used, went over into Britain, either
sent by S. Peter, or by his own free election. And though it be likely that by
preaching the Gospel, he increased the number of Christians in the British
Church, yet the chief intention of his coming was, to begin that kind of
solitary and heremiticall life, which he had seen practiced by S. Magdalene in
France, as Cambden In descrip. Brit. pa. 162.
observes. Joseph (says he) and his company did take upon them a solitary
life: that with more tranquillity they might attend to holy learning, and with
a severe kind of conversation exercise themselves to the bearing of Christ's
Cross.

From hence it follows, that the Roman Church is Mother to that of Britain,
not only by reason of the supereminent authority and power which she has over
her, as well as over all other Churches of the world, but also in antiquity, she
being planted before there was any Church at all in Britain; and most
especially, because she begot, and founded the British Church. Wherefore with
great reason K. Henry the eight confesses, Lib. de 7. Sacram. contra Luther.
art. 2.
that all the Churches of the faithful acknowledge and reverence the most holy
See of Rome for their Mother. And our late Sovereign K. James of famous
memory, in the Sum of the conference before his Majesty, affirms Page 75.
that the Roman Church was once the Mother Church, and consequently that as
well the Church of Britain, as all others were her daughters; which right she
being once possessed of, cold never lose; unless you will make false the words
of Christ, who promised that, the gates of hell (which are false and heretical
Doctrines) shall never prevail against her.

Lastly I will not omit to put you in mind of two other sl^ights. The one is,
that whereas you know, all antiquity to have believed, and left expressed in
their works, that the Roman Church is, The head and Mother of all Churches,
and that it were not difficult (if needful) to set down their testimonies in
their own words, you mention no other authority for our belief of that truth,
but the late Council of Trent.

The other is, that you run on in your own mistake, calling it in us, a mad
point of genealogizing, to conclude, that Rome must be mother to those
Daughters of S. Peter, which were begotten 7. years before she was borne, and
which therefore you call Page 31. and 36.
Mothers, grand-mothers, and Aunts to her. If by motherhood you understand,
antiquity of time, though it were indeed a mad point of Genealogizing to call
the Roman Church, Mother, in respect of any Church that was founded before her,
yet in this very sense of Motherhood, it is false, that the Roman Church is a
daughter to the British: for the British was founded after the Roman. But you
know, that by Motherhood we understand superiority, and jurisdiction: and
therefore as it were a mad manner of arguing to infer that Caesarea in
Palestine is not Superior in jurisdiction and mother to the Church of
Jerusalem, after which she was founded; so it is in you to infer, that the
Roman Church is not superior in jurisdiction and Mother to all Churches,
because she was founded after some of them.

CHAP. VII. S. Peter's Primacy defended.
TO prove that S. Peter was not of the now Roman faith concerning his own
primacy, you Page 38. and seqq.
object those words of our Savior Mat. 16. upon this Rock: for in them (say
you) Page 38.
the faith of S. Peter did not conceive any Monarchical, or supreme
jurisdiction promised unto himself by Christ.

The native, obuious, and true sense of these words of Christ delivered by the
agreeing consent of ancient Fathers, Councels and all Orthodoxe writers, is,
that Christ spoke them to Peter, and in reward of that admirable confession of
his faith, whereby he proclaimed Christ to be The Son of the living God, made
him an impregnable Rock, and promised to build his Church upon him, as upon a
foundation so firm and immovable, that the gates of hell (which are errors
and heresies) should never prevail against it.

This sense you cannot digest; and therefore seek to elude it by abusing and
falsifying the Fathers, and other expositors. For the better understanding
hereof, it is to be noted, that whereas you allege some Fathers affirming, that
the rock on which Christ promised to build his Church, is the faith and
confession of Peter, and others saying, that it is Christ himself; these their
expositions are no way contrary either in themselves, or to our Doctrine: for
(as Bellarmine L. 1. de Pont. c. 10.. Nemo dubitat.
observes) no man doubts, but that Christ is the chief foundation of the
Church, and that so much may be gathered out of these his words: for if Peter
be a secondary foundation supplying the place of Christ on earth, it follows
that Christ himself is the first and chief foundation, or as S. Augustine In
Psalm. 86.
, and S. Gregory L. 28 Moral. c. 9.
call him, Fundamentum fundamentorum, The foundation of foundations.

Again, they are not to be understood of the person of Christ abstracting from
the Confession of Peter, but including it, as the object confessed; nor of
Peter's confession abstracting from Peter himself, but including him, as the
person that confesses. Wherefore the sense is, that Christ promised to build
his Church upon himself confessed by Peter, or (which is all one) upon Peter
confessing Christ, and for the confession he made of Christ. Which (to speak
in the School language) is to say, that Christ built his Church causally upon
Peter's confession and formally upon his person; because that excellent
confession of Peter was the cause which moved Christ to chose Peter's person for
the foundation of his Church. The confession of Peter (says S. Hilary Cau. 16.
in Mathaeum.
has received a worthy reward: and declaring what reward it was, he adds: O,
in the title of a new name, happy foundation of the Church, and worthy stone of
her edifice! O blessed Porter of Heaven etc. And again: Lib. e. de Trim.
This is he that in the silence of all the other Apostles, beyond the capacity
of humane infirmity, acknowledging the son of God by the revelation of the
Father, merited by the Confession of his faith a supereminent place. 2. S.
Basil: L. 2. Cont. Eunom.
Because Peter excelled in faith he received the building of the Church on
himself 3. S. Ambrose: Sermon. 47.
Peter for his devotion is called a rock; and our Lord is called a Rock for his
strength: he rightly deserves to be a partaker in the name* that is partaker
in the work: for Peter laid the foundation in the house. 4. S. Hierome: In
cap. 16. Math.
Because thou Simon have said to me, Thou art Christ the Son of God, I also
say to thee, not with a vain or idle speech that has no effect, for my saying
is doing; therefore I say to thee, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will
build my Church. And again: Ibid.
He rewards the Apostle for the testimony he had given of him: Peter had
said; Thou art Christ the Son of the living God. His true confession received
a reward etc. 5. S. Chrysostom In psalm. 50.
: He^re, what he says to Peter, that Pillar, that foundation; and therefore
called Peter, as being made a Rock by faith. 6. Theophilact Ad cap. 1^. Math.
: Our Lord rewards Peter, bestowing on him a singular favor, which is, that
he built his Church upon him.

By these testimonies of Fathers it appears, that to say, Christ built his
Church upon the confession of Peter, is not to deny, that he built it on the
person of Peter, but to express the cause, for which he built it on his
person: Even as when we say, The valor of a Captain got the victory, we say it
not, to signify that his valor in abstracto got the victory without his person,
but to express the means whereby he got it. And in like manner, when S.
Hierome and S. Ambrose Ep. 61. Ad Pamma. aduers error. Io^n. Hierosol. S.
Ambros. l. de fide resurrect.
said, Not Peter, but his faith walked upon the waters, it was not to deny,
that his person truly and formally walked on them, but to declare, that the
cause which made him walk on them, was not the natural virtue or actiuity of
his body, but the faith he had given to the words of Christ. And so likewise it
is in our case: for as these two propositions, The faith of Peter walked on the
waters, and, Peter walked on the waters, are both true, but in a different
sense; for the faith of Peter walked on them causally, as being the cause why
Peter walked: and the person of Peter walked on them truly, properly, and
formally. So likewise are these two both jointly true, though in a different
sense: The Church is built upon the person of Peter; and, The Church is built
on the faith or confession of Peter; because the primacy of Peter's faith and
confession was the cause which moved Christ to choose Peter for the foundation
of his Church, rather then any of the other Apostles: and to that end he gave
him the name and solidity of a Rock, that the gates of hell might never
prevail against the Church built on him.

In like manner when S. Augustine and other expositors teach, that Christ is
the Rock or foundation on which the Church is built, their exposition differs
not from the former in substance, but only in manner of speech: for (as
Salmeron Tom. 4. part. 3. Tract. 2.
and Suarez Defens. fid. l. 3. c. 11. n. 11.
have well observed) their meaning cannot be, that the Rock on which Christ
promises to build his Church for the future, is his own person, formally
considered as in himself, both because on him, it was already built from the
time of his incarnation; as also because he speaks not to himself, but to
Peter, saying, Thou art Peter etc. And therefore as when in the words
immediately preceding, he called Peter by his own name Simon the Son of John,
he spoke to Peter in particular; so likewise he did when immediately he added:
and I say to thee, that thou art Peter (that is a Rock) and upon this Rock I
will build my Church. And the same is yet made more evident by other profes
which Bellarmine L. 1 de Pont. c. 10.. Primo pronomen.
alleges. Wherefore the sense is, that Christ promises to build his Church on
himself, obiectiuely, that is to say, as confessed by Peter: which exposition
differs not from the former, and is expressly delivered by S. Ambrose In c.
3.1. ad Cor.
in these words: The true and approved sense is, that the Church is built by
God upon Christ, but yet as confessed by Peter, and not by any other: which is
as if it were said, upon thee confessing Christ, and upon the confession which
Peter made of Christ, or upon Christ confessed by Peter. So S. Ambrose: and so
also S. Augustine saying L. 1. Retract. c. 21.
: Afterward I expounded thus, these words of our Lord, Thou art Peter, and
upon this Rock I will build my Church, that it should be understood to be built
upon him whom Peter confessed, saying, thou art Christ etc. And that by this
exposition S. Augustine intends not to deny the Rock meant by Christ in those
words, to be S. Peter, is a truth that may not be denied: both because in that
very place he says, that, This sense is celebrated by many in the verses of S.
Ambrose saying, The Cock crowing, the Rock of the Church washed out his
offense; as also, because he there affirms, that in other places of his
works he had expounded those words not of Christ, but of Peter (as the rest of
the Fathers do) which exposition he recalleth not, but leaves to the readers
discretion, to choose which of the two, he likes best. Let the reader chose
(says he) Ibid.
which of these two senses is the more probable. From whence it must needs
follow, that albeit he doubted, whether of those two senses agrees best to the
words of Christ in that place, yet of the truth to the thing it self, to wit,
that, Peter is the Rock on which Christ built his Church, he never doubted. If
he had thought that to be a false sense, he had done very absurdly, in not
recalling it, but leaving to the readers choice, to follow either that, or the
other: for it had been to leave it in his choice, to follow a true sense, or a
false, an orthodoxe verity, or an heretical error: which though you do, yet
none but such as you, will presume S. Augustine to have done.

By this it appears, that all those testimonies of Fathers, Popes, and other
authors, which you (to make a flourish) heap up in the four first Sections of
your fourth Chapter, to prove that the Rock on which Christ promised to build
his Church, is not Peter, but the Confession of Peter, or Christ (for either of
both will serve your turn, so that Peter be excluded) are impertinently
alleged: for the meaning of them is, that the Church is not built upon Peter,
merely, as he was a weak man, and abstracting from his confession of Christ;
but upon him, as confessing Christ, and for his confession, and in reward
thereof. And so likewise it is built upon Christ, not excluding Peter's
confession, but upon him as confessed by Peter. All which is evident out of
those very Fathers and expositors which you produce for the contrary: For they
so fully, and so unanswerably avouch Peter to be the Rock on which Christ built
his Church, and you so certainly know it to be true, that much against your
will you are enforced upon the rack of truth to confess so much, though you do
it mincingly, saying: Page 42.
We may not dissemble thus much, that some Fathers do expound by Rock, Peter.
You should have said, All Fathers, and all Councels which treat of that
subject, and all Catholic expositors. And I must entreat the reader here in
prudence to consider, how unadvisedly you allege Catholic approved authors
against this truth, which no understanding Protestant will in his judgment
believe, that any of them ever denied, it being a main, and even the greatest
point of difference between us and you, and which being decided the rest would
easily follow. Wherefore it cannot be but that you wrong the Catholic authors
which you cite in favor of your doctrine: and the like you do to the ancient
Fathers. To examine every particular, were an endless labor, for your
falsifications for the most part consist in a very few words, cut off, and
dismembered from their contexture: whereas to show your finistrous dealing, the
whole context must be set down, as it lies. Yet some of them I will present
to the readers view, by which he may make conjecture of the rest.

1. You begin with Baronius, saying: Page 38.
When Luther, Calvin, and others adventured to expound this of Christ, and of
faith in him, as the Son of God, your two grand Cardinals oppose: What do
they oppose? The one (say you, speaking of Baronius) opposes his own passion,
calling it impudent madness in Protestants to expound the Rock to signify
Christ. So you, untruly, and sundry ways abusing Baronius: for in that very
place Anno 33. n. 19. and seqq.
he expressly affirms Christ to be the Rock, on which the Church is built:
and a little before Anno 31. n. 24.25.26.
he had professedly proved the same out of the Syriack, in which our Savior
spoke, and showed by the testimonies of Fathers, that as Christ is the primary
Rock, or foundation, on which the Church is built, so he communicated to Peter
his own name of a Rock, and the honor of being next to himself. the secondary
and ministerial foundation in the structure of his Church. And as witnesses of
this truth he alleges Tertullian, S. Basil, S. Hierome, S. Leo, Hypolitus,
Opiatus, expressly affirming, that the name of Cephas signifies a Rock, and is
the same that Petrus, or Petra: which he further proves Anno 33.
out of the testimonies of S. Cyprian, Tertullian, Origin, S. Epiphanius, S.
Hilary, S. Hierome, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, S. Cyril, S. Basil, S. Gregory
Nazianzen, S. Chrysostom, S. Leo, and of the Council of Ephesus; all of them
affirming, that Christ by Rock (on which he was to build his Church) understood
S. Peter. And this they teach in as plain and effectual words, as either
Baronius or any Catholic living at this day is able to express. And as
Baronius cites the words of these Fathers, so he might of the rest (for they
were of the same belief) as likewise all the general Councils; which to avoid
prolixity he omitteth, but yet expresses their doctrine in general, in these
words: All the Ecclesiastical Orthodox writers that have lived since the
aforesaid Fathers, al^ the Synods that ever have been lawfully assembled in the
hely Ghost, have no less constantly and ingeniously professed the same truth,
to wit that Peter is by Christ our Lord made the foundation of the Church.

By this it appears how untruly you say, that Barenius opposes his own
passion against the exposition of Protectants, denying Peter to be the Rock, on
which the Church is built, since he confuteth it with the testimonies of all
the Fathers, of all general Councels, and of all Orthodox writers. You by
saying. he opposes his own passion, would persuade your readers, that he had
nothing else to say against their exposition, but only to call it, Impudent
madness. Whether he might not with reason have called it so, judge your for
what else can it be, to deny that to be the true sense of our Saviors words,
which all Fathers and Councels have professed to be the true and lawful sense
of them? But you (to have a better color of inueighing against Baronius) say,
that he calls the exposition of Protestants Impudent madness, which is not true:
for he has not the word impudent: that's your addition to his text.

2. Having thus wronged Baronius, you pass to Bellarmine, saying, Page 38.
that he to prove Peter to be the Rock on which Christ promised to build his
Church, obtrudeth the consent of our own school, saying, that by Rock, it
meant Peter, it is the common opinion of all Catholics: He says so indeed:
but says he nothing else? does he not prove it, out of twenty several passages
of the new Testament, so expounded by the ancient Fathers? Does he not prove
it, out of the agreeing consent of the most famous Doctors as well of the
Greek, as of the Latin Church? If this be to obtrude the consent of our own
school, then (your self being the judge) our schole consists not only of
all the Catholics of later ages, but of Christ, of his Apostles, of his
Evangelists, and of the ancient Fathers of the Greek and Latin Chuurch: for
all these Bellarmine alleges. These we acknowledge to be our school, and
from these masters we have learned our Doctrine. And yours being contrary to
this, it is soon understood out of what schole, and from what Master you, and
your grand Tutors Luther and Calvin have learned it.

3. Having thus handled Baronius, and Bellarmine, you pass to Roffensis, our
learned Bishop of Rochester, who in time of K. Henry the eight writ in defense
of this Doctrine against Luther, and sealed what he writ with his blood. Of him
you say: Page 38. fin. p. 39.
he approves the same exposition (that Peter is the Rock on which the Church
is built) saying: In this, truth triumphs, as though it were as clear as the
Sun; which sunne-shyne we Protestants (alas aur blindness) cannot discern,
but rather judge, that it has been, and is mistaken by you for moone-shine
through some defect in your faculties of sight. So you taunting that learned
Bishop, and with him all Catholics, telling us of his insultation: but not
without imposture: for the insultation is not his, but Luthers; who though he
bring nothing against this exposition (as Roffensis shows) foolishly
insulteth upon the Pope, the ancient Fathers, and all Catholics, for
expounding Peter to be the Rock. Adeste huc etc. Come hither Pope (says Art.
25.
Luther) and all you Papists, melt and cast all your studies into one, if
perhaps ye be able to vnty this knot. At least, this authority stands
victorious, and triumphant against you. This insultation of Luther it is, which
Roffensis justly retorteth on him. Thou (says Adart 25. Luthert.
he to Luther) vpbraydest these things to the Orthodox members of the Catholic
Church: and I will return thee thine own words: Come hither Luther, with all
thy Lutherans: cast all your studies into one; and yet you shall never euince
but that Christ foretold truth when he said, he was to build his Churh upon a
Rock, namely Peter. This authority stands victorious against you, and
triumphs, and shall triumph over you. And how true this speech of Roffensis
is, who knows not? for in other Bishoprics even in the greatest Patriarchall
seats, there have been many heretics, and not a few of them Arch-heretikes,
as in the Sea of Jerusalem John the Origenist, Salustius, Arsenius, Heraclius,
Hilarious. In the Sea of Antioch, Paulus Samosatenus, Eulalius, Euzoius,
Ioannes, Domnus, Petrus Gnapheus, Macarius. In the Sea of Alexandria,
Gregorius, Sergius Cappadox, Lucius, Dioscorus, Timotheus, AElurus, Moggus, and
others. In the Sea of Constan^inople Macedonius, Acacius, Sergius, Pyrrhus,
Paulus, Petrus, A^astasius. Anthymus, Theodorus, and others. And who knows
not, that the Churches founded by the other Apostles have been, and still are
overwhelmed with Paganism, Turcisme, and heresy? and that the Succession of
Bishops has failed in them; as of James, in Jerusalem; of Andrew, in Achaia;
of John, in Asia; of Thomas, in India; of Jude, in Persia; of Matthew, in
AEthiopia; of Philip, in Phrygia; of Paul, in Greece? The Roman Church only is
she, to whom (says S. Cyprian L. 1. ep. 3.
) misbelieue can have no access: she only has ever remained free from all
spot, and contagion of heresy, or other infidelity: and notwithstanding the
outrageous persecutions of Pagan Emperors, the barbarous attempts of Saracens
and Turks, and the furious assalts of all Heretics, she has ever flourished,
and still florisheth: which evidently shows, that she, and none else but she,
with such other Churches, as by union with her make one universal Church, are
the true Church of Christ, founded by him on S. Peter, as upon an impregnable
Rock. against which the gates of hell shall never prevail. Upon this Rock
(says S. Hierome speaking Ep. 57.
of the Roman See) I know the Church to be built. She may be assalted, she may
be battered, but overcome she cannot be: sor she (says Psalm. contra part.
Donati.
S. Augustine) is that Rock. against which the gates of hell prevail not. And
S. Leo the Great speaking of S. Peter and his See. pronounces Epist. 89.
; that, whosoever goes about to violate the most sacred strength of the Rock
(Peter) framed by the hand of God, or to infringe the power of the Roman Church
is most impiously presumptuous: and that whosoever thinks the Principality to
be denied to S. Peter's Successor, can no way diminish his dignity, but puffed
with the spirit of pride, casts himself headlong into hell: and Ep. 74.
that, since the Universal Church by that principal Rock Christ, is made a
Rock, and the most blessed Peter chief of the Apostles has heard from the
mouth of our Lord. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church,
when is he that dare oppose this inuincibletruth, but either Antichrist or the
Devil? I conclude therefore with Roffensis, that the authority of S. Peter's See
grounded upon the promise of Christ, stands death victorious, and triumphant
against you, and shall so remain until the end of the world.

CHAP. VIII. Abuses, and Wrongs offered by Doctor Morton to the ancient
Fathers, and other Catholic writers.
TO prove that Christ, by the Rock, on which he promised to build his Church
understood not S. Peter, you object the ancient Fathers. And first Page 42.
lit. ^.
S. Ambrose saying, Ad c. ^. Luc. lib. 6.
Petra erat Christus: Christ was the Rock. There cannot be a more wilful
falsification: for that Peter is the Rock on which Christ has built his Church
S. Ambrose teaches, when in his hymn mentioned by S. Augustine Hym^. ad laud.
Dom.
speaking of S. Peter's tears, he says: The Cock crowing, the Rock of the
Church washed out his offense. The same he declares and fully explicateth else
where Sermon. 11. and sermon. 47.
and (to show your false dealing) in that very place L.e. comment. in ca. 9.
Lucae
in which you allege him for the contrary: for he says, that as Christ was
the Rock, so he communicated almost all his own names to his Disciples. He was
the light of the world, and he called his Disciples the light of the world etc.
And having proved the same of other names, as of Bread, of a Vine etc. he
particularly shows the same of the name of Rock. saying, Petra est Christus
etc. which are the words you object. And then, to show that he gave also this
his name of Rock to S. Peter, he adds: Etiam discipulo suo huius vocabuli
gratiam non neganit etc. And he refused not to honor his Disciple with this
name, that he also may be a Rock, having from the Rock Christ the solidity of
constancy, and firmness of faith.

2. You object Page 42. marg.
that S. Ambrose Sermon. 84.
distinguishes between the Rock. and Peter, as plainly as between Christ and
a Christian. But though S. Ambrose say, that as Christianus is called a
Christo, so also Peter the Apostle is called Petrus a Petra, yet he says not,
that Petrus is a deriuatiue of Petra, as Christianus, is of Christus, but that,
Petrus, and Petra, is one and the same name. His words are: because Christ is a
Rock, Simon is also rightly called Petrus, that as he agreed in faith with our
Lord, so also he might have one and the same name with our Lord. Whereby it is
evident that S. Ambrose takes Petrus and Petra to be one and the same name.
And the same is evident out of the words of Christ: for if he had said, Tu es
Petra, and super hanc Petram, thou art a Rock, and upon this Rock I will build
my Church, there had been no color to deny, that Christ promised to build his
Church on Peter: Ergo, now there is none; for Christ spoke in Syriack, Tues
Cephas, and super hanc Cepham etc. Whereupon S. Hierome In c. 2, ep. ad Gal
notes, that Petrus signifies not one thing, and Cephas another, but the self
same, because what the Latins call Petra, the Hebrews and Syrians call Cephas.
And the same is proved out of the Greek: for as Phauorinus aduertiseth (...),
and (...) have one, and the same signification, (...) being used (...), and
(...); which he confirms out of Euripides: and not only he, but Calvin and
Beza Ad cap. 16. Math. verse. 18.
confess, that Petrus and Petra are the same that Cephas, and differ not in
signification, but only in termination. And therefore as if the latin
interpreter had said, Tues Cephas and super hanc Cepham etc. the sense had been
plain against you, so it is now: for the Latin interpreter intended not to
alter the sense of our Saviors words; but used Petrus rather then Petra,
because Petrus being the masculine gender, was more fit to express the name of
a man, then Petra, though both of them have one and the same signification.
This you know right well, and therefore cannot deny, but that S. Ambrose
acknowledged Peter to be the Rock on which the Church is built: for you say:
Page 42.
Among the Fathers S. Ambrose gives this reason, Sermon. 47.
why S. Peter was called Rock, because he did first lay among nations the
foundation of faith: but gives he no other reason? Yes, because he sustayneth
the frame and weight of Christian building, which words declare Peter to be the
Rock or foundation, on which the Church is built: and therefore you mangle S.
Ambrose sentence, leaving them out.

3. You object Page 42. r.
out S. Hierome these words; Petrus nominatur a Petra, to signify, that Petrus
does not signify a Rock, but is a deriuatiue of Petra, as Christianus of
Christus. But S. Hierome has no such Doctrine, but directly the contrary. His
words are; upon this Rock our Lord founded his Church; from this Rock the
Apostle Peter took his name, to wit, of a Rock. And that this is the true
sense of S. Hierome, it is plain out of his Comment upon Mat. 16 where
professedly declaring the words of Christ, he says that they were not vain
and without effect, but that by calling the Apostle, Petrus, he made him a
Rock: and that as Christ himself being the light, granted to his Disciples
that they should be called the light of the world: so to Simon, which had
believed in Christ the Rock, he gave the name of Petrus, and according to the
metaphore of a Rock, it is truly said to him: I will build my Church upon thee.

4. You object Page 42. c.
S. Hilary to prove that not Peter but Christ himself is the Rock on which he
promised to build his Church. The words you bring, are: Vna hac fidei petra
Petri ore confessa, Tues Christus filius Dei viui. I find no such words in S.
Hilary: nor is it likely that he would use confessa passiuely, as in these
words you do. But how imposterously you allege him to prove, that S. Peter is
not the Rock on which Christ promised to build his Church, S. Hilary himself
shall be the judge. O (says Can. 16. in Math.
he) in the title of a new name, happy foundation of the Church, and worthy
stone of her Edifice! O blessed Porter of Heaven, to whose arbitrament are
committed the keys of the eternal kingdom, whose judgments have authority to
preiudge in heaven! And else where In Psalm. 131.
he calls Peter the first Confessor of the son of God, the foundation of
the Church. And in that very place which you object L. 6. de Trin.
that, after his confession, subiacet, he is laid under the building of the
Church, and receaues the Keys of the heavenly kingdom.

5. You object Page 42.1.
S. Epiphanius alleging out of him these words, Haeres. 59.
(...), that is, the Rock of faith, which show, that Peter is the firm Rock on
which the Church is so strongly built that she shall never fail in faith. But
he that will see your insincere dealing, if he read S. Epiphanius his
contexture, shall find that in that very place which you cite for the contrary
Haeres. 59.
he affirms in most express words, not once, but thrice, that Peter is the
Rock on which Christ has built his Church: that he is the foundation of the
Church: and that Christ has committed to him the charge of feeding his flock.
The same he teaches in his Ancoratus Prope in^t.
, adding, that all questions of faith are in Peter. Whereby is not only
signified his supremacy (which twice he there expresses) but also his
authority to resolve all doubts of says, and condemn all heresies, which he
expounds to be the gates of hell, that shall never prevail against the
Church built upon Peter.

6. You say: Page 40.
Gregory (surnamed the Great) speaking of the foundation of the Church, has
defined that whenever the word, Foundation, is in the Scripture used in the
singular number, no other then, Christ, is signisied thereby; from whence you
infer, that out of the Scripture Peter cannot be proved to be the foundation
of the Church. But you shall be judged out of your own mouth: for you confess
Ibid.
that, Petra, a Rock, is taken as all one with foundation: you also grant, Page
42.
that some of the Fathers understand by Peter, Rock; you should have said all:
for (as Maldonate whom you cite Page 39. f. marg.
notes, In c. 16. Math. n. 16. prope fin.
none but heretics ever denied it: from whence it must follow, that since the
name of Rock (which is all one with foundation) is given him in Scripture, it
is all one, as if the name of foundation had been given him in Scripture. And
therefore Clemens Romanus, Origin, S. Hilary, the Council of Chalcedon,
Isidorus, Pelusiota, and others give him the name of Foundation, as well as of
Rock Apud Iod. Cocc. to. 1. l. 7. art. 4.
.

7. To S. Gregory the Great, you join Gregory the seventh, a most holy and
learned Pope, whom you traduce, saying: Page 40.
Hildebrand who in his own opinion was greater then Gregory the Great, and the
greatest Dictator that ever possessed the Papal See, Anno 1077. invited
Rodulph Duke of Sueuia, to rebel against his Liege Lord and Emperor, Henry the
4. and sent unto the same Rodulph a Crown with this inscription, Petra dedit
Petro Romam, tibi Papa coronam. Sir, you have been formerly admonished by P. R.
in his Treatise tending to mitigation against the seditious writings of Thomas
Morton Minister, of your tradueing and falsely slandering this holy Pope, of
whose admirable vertnes I may have occasion to speak hereafter. But you are
still the same man. and tell us this fable, which Baronius Anno 1077. n. 7. apud
Spond.
sets down as related by Albertus Stadenfis, and Helmoldus, two late
writers, whom he conuinceth of falsehood, showing, that the Princes of Germany,
who cold no longer endure the execrable wickedness, insolency, and oppressions
of Henry, and being greatly incensed against him for his sacrilegious practices
against the Sea Apostolic, wholly renounced him, and chose in his place
Rodulph Duke of Sueuia, without either the advice or knowledge of Gregory, and
brought him to Mentz, where he was consecrated by Sigefridus Bishop of that
City. So untrue it is, that Gregory either Crowned him, or sent any Crown
unto him, or any way incited him against Henry. And it is to be noted, that
whereas you call Henry, Rodulphs Liege Lord, and Emperor, he was never Crowned,
but only by Guibertus an Antipope, set up by himself to that end, and
consecrated by Bishops, that were actually excommunicated, and deposed. But any
thing will serve your turn, to make an argument against the Pope, be it true,
or false.

8. You object Page 41. marg.
these words of Theophylact: Confessio ipsa, fundame^tam. But why do you mangle
his words, which are: Our Lord rewards Peter, bestowing a great favor on
him, which is, that upon him he built the Church: for because Peter confessed
him to be the son of God, he said, that this Confession which he made, shall
be a foundation to them that believe etc. Can there be a more gross
falsification, then to object three words of Theophilact, to prove Peter not to
be the foundation of the Church, and leave out the former part of the sentence,
in which he so expressly affirms, that, Christ to reward his faith, built his
Church upon him?

9. And no less deceiptfully you allege Page 39. g.
the Roman gloss, Gloss. Decret. part. 1. d. 10. in Cap. Dominus no fler.
to prove, that not Peter, but his confession without any relation to his
person, is the Rock, on which Christ promised to build his Church: for the
gloss says: Christ would have his own name of Petra, a Rock, given to
Peter, etc. therefore called him Petrus. And the Chapter on which this gloss is
made, is taken out of an Epistle of S. Leo, in which he not only affirm Ep. 83.
Peter to be the Rock on which the Church is built, but adds; that whosoever
denies this truth is impiously presumptuous, and plungeth himself into Hell.

To these, and otherlike objections out of the Fathers, and other Catholic
authors, you ad some confirmations of your own. The first is: None (say you)
Page 41.
will deny, but that there was meant in Peter's Confession, that matter, which
he confessed: but Peter confessed not himself, but Christ, saying. Then art
the Son of the living God. Ergo, his confession had relation to Christ, and
not to himself. A false and senseless consequence: for every confession has
relation not only to the matter, as to the object, or thing confessed, but also
to him that confesses, as to the agent, from which it proceeds: and therefore
to infer, that when Christ answering Peter, and rewarding his confession,
said unto him, Thou art Peter etc. he meant not Peter, but himself to be the
Rock, is as senseless an inference, as to say, that when Thomas cried out unto
Christ, Joan. 20.28.
My Lord, my God, and Christ in reward of his confession said, Ibid. verse. 29.
Blessed art thou Thomas, he pronounced not Thomas blessed, but himself, which
was the matter Thomas believed.

2. You object: Page 42. fin. 43.
All the Apostles and Prophets are called foundations, whereby is not meant
their persons, or dominions, but their doctrines. I grant, that Christ, S.
Peter, the rest of the Apostles, and Prophets, are foundations, on which the
Church is built: Christ is the chief and primary foundation by his own power,
and strength: Of him the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 3.11.
Other foundation no man can lay, beside that which is laid, which is Christ
Jesus: whom therefore S. Augustine In Psalm. 86.
and S. Gregory L. 28. Moral. c. 9.
call, Fundamentum fundamentorum, The foundation of foundations. Besides
Christ, the Apostles, and Prophets are also secondary foundations of the
Church: for the Prophets by foretelling Christ, and the Apostles by preaching
his says and doctrine, uphold the body of the Church, to wit, the faithful;
who therefore are called Ephesians. 2.20.
Domostikes of God built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets,
Christ himself being the chief cornerstone: and for this cause, the wall of
the City (of the Church) is said Apoc. 1.24.
to have 12. foundations, and in them the 12. names of the 12. Apostles. Among
these secondary foundations, Peter has the first, and chiefest place. The rest
of the faithful in respect of him are ordinary stones; he, an impregnable
Rock, as being built immediately upon Christ, and the rest by means of him: in
regard whereof it was said to him alone, and to no other of the faithful, or
Apostles, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church. And
therefore S. Augustine says: Sermon. 15. de Sanct.
Our Lord called Peter the foundation of the Church; for which cause the Church
with reason worshippeth this foundation, upon which the height of the
ecclesiafticall edifice is raised.

3. You say, Page 42.
that when the Fathers expound by Rock Peter, they mean either a primacy of
order, or honor, or else a priority of Confession in Peter, not of Authority and
Dominion: and the same you repeat afterward saying; Page 110.
The similitude of head and members has no color of superiority, but of
priority, of place, or of voice. And this reason you allege, Page 41.
why, though the other Apostles believed before Peter spoke, yet he alone
answered, as being the mouth of the rest. I grant that Peter spoke in the name
of the rest: but to infer, that therefore Christ when he answered Peter,
saying, Thou art Peter, made him not a Rock, or promised not to make him the
foundation of his Church, is a Non sequitur. I grant also, that the other
Apostles believed before Peter spoke, and that he answered, as the mouth of the
rest; not because he had any Commission from them, but because out of his great
feruor, he prevented the rest, and spoke for them, as their head, and
Superior, as Christ sometimes did for all his Apostles; Math. 9.11. Luc. 6.2.
and as the Rector is wont to answer in the name of the whole College. So
says S. Cyrill of Alexandria L. 4. in Joan. c. 18.
They all answer by one, that was their Superior. And again Ibid. l. 12.
cap. 64.
when our Savior asked his Disciples, whom do you say that I am? Peter as
being Prince, and head of therest, first cried out: Thou art Christ the son
of the living God. So S. Cyrill of Jerusalem: Catech. ^^.
All the Apostles being silent (for this doctrine was above their strength)
Peter Prince of the Apostles, and the chief preacher of the Church, says unto
him, Thou art Christ etc. And in the same sense, S. Cyprian, L. 1. ep. 3.
says; Peter on whom our Lord built his Church. speaks for all, and in the
voice of the Church: And S. Augustine: Sermon. 31. de verb. Apost. c. 1.
Peter bearing the figure of the Church most fervent in the love of Christ,
chief in the order of Apostles, and holding the Princedome of the Apostleship,
often answers one for all. And again Tract. 124. in Joan.
That in his answer he bare the person of the Church, for the primacy of his
Apostleship; and for the primacy which he had among the Disciples.

And whereas you, to elude this exposition of the Fathers, say, Page 42. and
110.
that, when they expound by Rock, Peter, or pronounce him to be the head and
Captain of the rest, they mean not primacy of authority and jurisdiction, but
of order or honor, is a distinction that caries with it its own confutation,
and shall be effectually disproued Chap. 17. sect. 1.
hereafter.

CHAP. IX. S. Peter exercised his Authority, and Jurisdiction of supreme
Pastor, and Governor over the other Apostles, and over the whole Church.
TO disprove S. Peter's authority over the other Apostles, you object first,
Page 45.46.
that S. Gregory upon those words of the Apostle, Romans 9.12.
I will magnify my office, in as much as I am Doctor of the Gentiles, says: L.
4. ep. 36.
The Apostle teaches us so to carry humility in our heart, that we do keep and
preserve the diguity of that order whereunto we are called: but S. Peter (as
Salmeron testifies) though he were Head, and Judge over the other Apostles, so
behaved himself among them that he might seem in a manner to have neglected
his Pastorship, by carrying himself as a Brother, and equal with them, and
not as either Head, or Rector over them. So you out of Salmeron, whose words
make wholly against you: for in them he acknowledges the Pastorship of S.
Peter over the other Apostles; and that he was their Judge, their Head, and
their Rector. If therefore he say, that S. Peter carried himself with so great
humility, that in some sort he may seem to have neglected his Pastorship, he
says it not, to deny his Pastoral power, but to show, that in the exercise
thereof, he carried himself rather like a Brother, and equal, then as a
Superior or Judge: which Salmeron might have said of Christ, who says of
himself, Joan. 13.13.
You call me Master and Lord, and you say well, for I am so: and yet he
carried himself not as a Master, but as a servant, washing his Disciples
feet.

It is the property of the Spyder, to draw poison from the same flower, out of
which the Be sucketh honey: and so out of the singular modesty and humility of
S. Peter in the exercise of his Pastoral power (which Salmeron alleges to
his great commendation) you draw an argument to disprove his authority; to
which S. Gregory has answered long since. Peter (says he) L. 9. cp. 38.
the chief of the Apostles answered the complaint of the faithful, not by his
power, but by reason: for if when he was blamed by the faithful, he had
regarded the charge which he had received over the holy Church, he might have
answered, that the sheep should not dare to reprehend their Pastor, to whose
care they were committed. But if in the complaint of the faithful, he should
have said any thing of his own power, surely he had not been the Doctor of
meekness. Wherefore Peter exercised his power, but yet with meekness and
humility, after the example of Christ, who being Lord and Master, was in the
midst of his Disciples, as one that ministered. Luc. 22.27.
His example Peter followed, showing himself to be meek and humble of heart,
Math. 11.29.
and practicing that lesson which he had learned from him, The Princes of
nations dominiere over them, but you not so; Luc. 22.25.
but he that is the greater, let him become as the younger, and he that is the
elder, as the wayter. Yet nevertheless as humility hindered not Christ from
showing his power, and authority, when and where it was sitting, so neither did
it hinder Peter from exercising his jurisdiction, as often as occasion
required: for as Philip a reverend Priest and Legate of the Sea Apostolic in
the famous Council of Ephesus, truly said, Council. Ephesians to. 2. c. 10.
It is out of doubt, and notorious to all ages, that the holy and most blessed
Peter Prince and Head of the Apostles, pillar of the faith and foundation of
the Catholic Church, received from Jesus Christ our Lord, our Savior, and
redeemer of mankind, the keys of the heavenly kingdom, and exercised the
power of binding and losing which he had received, and that in his Successors
he still lives until this day.

Some of the particulars in which he exercised his power, are expressed in holy
Scripture. We read in the Acts of the Apostles, Cap. 1.15. and seqq.
that immediately after the Ascension of Christ, Peter rising up, proposed to
the brethren the substituting of an other Apostle instead of Judas, exercising
his authority therein. Peter (says S. Chrysostom) Hom. 3. in Acta.
rising up in the midst of the Disciples, said etc. Behold how fervent Peter
is: how he owneth the flock committed to him by Christ; how he shows himself
Prince of this assembly. See likewise the modesty of James: he had been made
Bishop of Jerusalem, and yet says not a word. Consider also the singular
modesty of the other Disciples, how they yield the throne to Peter, not debating
for it among themselves, as formerly they had done. And further showing, how
Peter in this affayre exercised his authority before, and above the rest, he
says: Ibid.
Why does he communicate this business with them? might he not have made the
election alone? He might without doubt but did not, lest he might seem
partial to any. And again: Ibid.
This was the wisdom and foresight of this Doctor: He said not, We alone are
sufficient to teach: and although he had right to appoint an Apostle, as much
as all they had, yet this doing it with advice, was agreeable to the Virtue of
the man. And because eminency in spiritual power is not an honor, but a care of
subjects, yet worthily does he first before them all, exercise authority in the
business, qui omnes habebat in manu, who had all the rest at his disposition,
and will: for this is he, to whom our Lord said; And thou being converted
confirm thy brethren. So Chrysostom. And no less plainly Oecumenius: Not
James (says he Ade 1 Act.
but Peter ryseth, to whom the government of the Disciples was committed. Nor
did any of them make reply to Peter's words; but presently at his command, they
appointed two whom they thought worthiest of that dignity, that God himself
might design one of them. Can any Catholic at this day more fully, or in more
significant words express the exercise of S. Peter's jurisdiction over the
other Apostles and his power to command them, then these two ancient Fathers
have done? To whom also I adioyne another like testimony of Leo the ninth, a
learned and holy Pope Epist. ad Michael. c. 1.
.

Silly therefore is your shift, whiles you reduce the force of this argument to
Peter's deposing of Judas from his Bishopric: for it insisteth not on his
deposition, but on the election of Mathias in his place, which you conceal,
not so much as mentioning it, because you know it to be unanswerable.

2. No less cunningly you shift of S. Peter's giving sentence of death upon
Ananias and Saphyra Act. 5.5.10.
for their fraud and hypocrisy. It was (say you Page 48.
no act of ordinary Magistracy, but an extraordinary act of Miracle, as Paul's
striking of Elimas stark blind, was. But S. Augustine (or whosoever is author
of the work De mirabilibus sacrae scripturae) teaches you another lesson,
saying; L. 3. cap. vlt.
Peter punished the^ to show how great his Apostolical authority was, and how
great their sin, and that their chastisment might be an example to others.
And S. Gregory treating of the Pastoral function, and showing how great
benignity it requires toward those that do well, and how great severity, and
zeal of justice toward those that offend, gives this fact of Peter, as an
example. L. 1. ep. 24.
From whence it is (says he) that Peter by authority from God, having the
Principality of the holy Church, refused to be overmuch reverenced by
Cornelius, that did well: but when he found the fault of Ananias and Saphyra,
he presently showed, how far he was grown in power above the rest: for he
took away their lives with a word, and showed himself to be the chiefest in
the Church against sin. And he adds, that Peter's zeal in punishing,
declared the force of his power. The same is delivered by S. Bernard Epist. ^^8.
, who speaking to Eugenius Pope of his power over the whole Church, and in
particular to depose Bishops when they deserve it, says: He that holds the
place of Peter, can with one blow kill Ananias; and Simon Magus, with another:
and (to speak more plainly) it belongs only to the Bishop of Rome, to
pronounce a peremptory sentence for the deposing of Bishops; because though
others be called to a part of solicitude, yet he only has the fullness of
power etc. How think you Doctor Morton? whether is it fit, that we believe
these renowned Doctors of Gods Church, teaching us, that the sentence of death
pronounced by S. Peter against Ananias and Saphyra was an act of his ordinary
power, and jurisdiction, or you, denying it?

3. He exercised his authority upon Simon Magus, who (witness L. 1. c. 2. and l.
3. initio.
S. Irenaeus) was the Prince and father of all heretics. The holy Apostle
detected his wickedness first at Samaria, and excommunicated him Act. 8.18.
and seqq.
; and afterward (as S. Hierome In catal. script. in Simone Petro.
and Theodoret Haeret. Fabul. l 1.
report) went to Rome to oppose him, and there condemned his Doctrine. The
Doctrine of Simons sorcery, serving the Angels (says Tertullian) L. de
Praescrip.
was reckoned among Idolatries, and condemned by Peter the Apostle in Simon
himself. And S. Augustine L. de haeres. haer. 1.
: At Rome the blessed Apostle Peter killed Simon the Magician by the true power
of almighty God. And Marianus with all the Regulars of Syria in their petition
presented to the Council of Constantinople under Menas Act. 1.
God sent Agapete Pope of old Rome to Constantinople for the deposition of
Anthymus, and the forenamed heretics, as hereofore he sent great Peter to the
Romans, for the destruction of the sorcery of Simon. And S. Bernard: Sermon. 1.
in die Potri and Pauli.
What more powerful then Peter, who with the breath of his mouth ouertoke
Simon Magus in the air, and received the keys of the kingdom of Heaven in so
singular a manner, that his sentence goes before the sentence of heaven? And to
declare that the power of Peter still lives in his Successors, he says:
Epist. 138.
He that holds the place of Peter, can at one blow kill Simon Magus. Nor was it
void of mystery, that the first Arch-heretike, with his heresy, should be
condemned at Rome, by Peter, where all the heretics, and heresies of ensuing
ages, were to be condemned by S. Peter's Successors.

4. He showed himself to be Head, and Prince of the Apostles, in asking, and
answearing oftentimes, in the name of them all. When Christ exhorted the
Apostles to perfection, Peter answered for all: Math. 19.27.
Behold we have left all things, and followed thee: what therefore shall we
have? And when some of the Disciples forsaking Christ, he asked the rest, will
you also be gone? Peter as representing the person of them all, answered: Joan.
6.58.
O Lord, to whom shall we go? thou have the words of eternal life. Upon
which passage S. Cyrill writes: L. 4. in Joan. c. 28.
It was not fitting, they should answer confusedly; and therefore giving
example of wisdom, and modesty to future ages, they answer by one, that was
governor, and greater then the rest. And to another question of our Savior;
Peter answered (says S. Cyrill) L. 12. in Joan. c. 64.
as Prince and Head of the rest. The same is testified by S. Cyprian, by S.
Cyrill of Jerusalem, and S. Augustine See above nu. 23.
Now that Peter's answering for all, was an act declaratiue of his jurisdiction,
is proved by the example of Christ our Lord: for as oftentimes the Deane,
because he is Head, and Superior of the Chapter, answers for all the Canons,
and in name of them all; so Christ, because he was Head and Master of all the
Apostles in diverse occasions answered for them. The Pharisees demanded of them:
Math. 9.11.12.
Why does your Master eat with Publicans and sinners? Christ answered for
them: They that are in health, need not a Physician, but they that are ill at
ease. And when the same Pharisees saw the Apostles plucking ears of corn on
the sabbath day, and asked them, Luc. 6.2.
why they did so? Christ answered for them, defending their fact by the example
of David. Wherefore as Christ's answering for all the Apostles showed him to be
their Head, and Master, so Peter's answering for the other Apostles, declared
him to be Master, and Rector of the Apostolical College.

5. Among the Christians newly converted at Antioch there arose a dispute,
whether the law of Moses were to be observed, or no? for decision of this
doubt, Paul, Barnaby and some others went up to Jerusalem, to the Apostles and
Priests, and chiefly to S. Peter, to whom as to the Head of the Church, and
supreme Judge of Controversies the resolution of that doubt chiefly belonged.
Whereupon S. Paul himself speaking of this his journey says: Gal. 2.2.
I went up to Jerusalem etc. And Theodoret Epist. ad Leon.
: Paul the preacher of truth, and the trumpet of the holy Ghost, ran to great
Peter, to bring from him a resolution of such doubts, as arising about the
observation of the Law, did minister occasion of strife to them that were at
Antioch: How much more need then have we that are weak and contemptible to
run to your Apostolical seat, to fetch salues for the sores of the Church.
And S. Chrysostom Hom. 87. in Joan.
says: Paul went to Peter, prae alijs, above others, and that, by reason of
his authority, as S. Hierome expresses Ep. 11. ad Augustinum.
And S. Ambrose: In cap. 1. ad Gal.
because our Savior had committed to him the charge of the Churches. Nor did
S. Paul's going to Peter, and the other Apostles, and Priests together with
him, any way derogate from this supreme authority; as the bringing of a suite
to the Parliament, derogateth not from the supreme Authority of the King, who
is Head of the Parliament. Wherefore Peter, as Head of the Church, for the
determination of that doubt assembled a Synod at Jerusalem Act. 15.7. and seqq.
, which as it was the first Christian Council, so was it the pattern of all
others, that since that time have been held in the Church of Christ. For from
this Council it proceeded, (and ever since has been the custom of general
Counsels) that the Pope presiding by himself, or by his legates, first
declares the faith of the Roman Church, all Bishops subscribing, and
condemning the contrary. And this is done to the imitation of this Apostolical
Synod, in which Peter spoke first, and the rest following him, confirmed his
sentence; Paul and Barnaby by relating the great signs and wonders God had
done among the Gentiles by them; and James, both by showing the sentence given
by Peter to accord with the words of the Prophets, and by giving this verdit of
his own Act. 15.19.
: I judge, that they which of the Gentiles are converted to God, are not to be
disquieted etc. These are the words which you object Page 64.
to prove that, not Peter, but James gave sentence in the Apostolical Synod;
but without ground: for the word, I judge, contaynes no definitive sentence,
not expresses any authority, but only signifies, It seems to me, or, my
verdict is: the contrary were to make James Superior to Peter, which no man
ever said. Besides, that the definitive sentence was given by Peter, the
ancient Fathers expressly affirm, none of them so much as insinuating, that is
was given by James. All the multitude (says S. Hierome Ep. 89. ad Aug. c. 2.
held their peace, and into his (Peter's) sentence James the Apostle and all the
Priests together did pass. And long before him, Tertullian: L. de pudicitia.
In that controversy of keeping the law, Peter by instinct of the holy Ghost,
spoke of the vocation of the Gentiles. And having set down S. Peter's words, he
adds: This sentence both losed those things that were omitted of the law, and
bound those that were reserved. It was therefore the authority of Peter that did
bind and lose in that Council: for which cause S. Hierome Ibid.
calls S. Peter, The Prince, or author of the decree. And finally the sentence
of Peter was confirmed, and ratified by the whole Council, and sent to Antioch
by Paul and others, chosen to that purpose, to the end they might publish it,
as an Ordinance of the holy Ghost.

6. Peter exercised his pastoral function by promulgating the Gospel both to
the Jews and Gentiles. To the Jews; for he first of all the Apostles upon the
very day of Pentecost, immediately after the receiving of the holy Ghost,
preached unto them Jesus Christ Act. 2.14. and seqq.
, and exhorting them to penance, at that one Sermon converted about 3000.
souls. He spoke (says S. Ad cap. 2. Act.
Chrysostom) as the month of all; and the other eleven stood by, approving
with their testimony, what he said. Peter also was the man, that first preached
to the Gentiles, and that by special Commission from God, as he declared in the
Council of Jerusalem, saying: Act. 15.7.
Men brethren, you know, that of old days God among us chose, that by my mouth
the Gentiles should hear the word of the Gospel, and believe. And to this end,
when God sent Cornelius the Centurion unto him to be instructed, he showed unto
him that marvelous vision, Act. 10.1^.
which is described in the Acts of the Apostles, to declare, that the time of
founding the Church among the Gentiles was now come: And by bidding him, kill
and eat, he declared him to be the Head of the Church; for eating is an action,
that belongs to the head. Hereupon Peter out of hand preached the Gospel to
Cornelius, and other his friends and kindred, and baptized them. Act. 10.35.
and seqq.
Again, who but Perer founded the Churches of Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia,
Asia, and Bithinia, in which Constantinople is? who founded the Patriarchall
seats of Antioch, (where the faithful were first called Christians) but
Peter? Who the other seats of Alexandria, and Rome, the one by S. Mark his
Disciple, and the other by himself, but Peter? For Christ according to his
promise, chose him to found his Church, and as S. Ambrofe says Sermon. 47.
first of all to begin it (both amongst the Jews and Gentiles) giving him
thereby, the same place in his Church, which the foundation has in a material
building; and by that means notifying his supereminent dignity unto us: for as
S. Chrysostom wisely observes* In cap. 2. Act.
One thing it is, to open a gate that is shut, and give beginning to a work (as
S. Peter did,) and another thing, to prosecute the same work, after it is
begun, as the rest of the Apostles did.

7. Peter, of all the Apostles, wrought the first miracle after the ascension
of Christ, in confirmation of the Gospel which he had promulgated, curing a
man that was lame from the womb of his mother Act. 3.7.
: which S. Ambrose interprets to be an act of his supreme Pastoral power;
the healing and consolidating the lame man's feet, betokening him to be the
firm, and solid foundation of the Church. Because Peter (says S. Ambrose)
Sermon. 68.
is the Rock on which the Church is built, with great reason he first heals
the feet, that as he holds the foundation of faith in the Church, so
likewise in man he may confirm the foundations of his limbs. It was Peter
also that raised Tabitha from death Act. 9.40.
, working that kind of miracle, first before any other of the Apostles. And
that as well in working these first miracles, as by performing other admirable
things in the first place before the other Apostles, he exercised his
jurisdiction and authority, S. Chrysostom expresses in these words: Hom. 21.
in Acta.
Peter walking as a Captain in his army, did consider which part was united,
and well ordered, and which wanted his presence: See how diligently he runs
up and down, and is found to be the first in every place. When an Apostle is
to be chosen, he is the first: When the Jews are to be certified that the
Apostles are not druncke, when the lame man is to be cured, when the Gospel
is to be preached, he is before others: When the Princes, and Ananias are to be
proceeded against, and when cures are to be made by a shadow, Peter is the man:
and when miracles are to be wrought, he steps out first: where there is danger,
and where government is necessary, there Peter is: but when things are in peace
and tranquillity, they are left to all the Apostles indifferently.

Lastly Peter by the judgment of our Lord was appointed to feed his flock, when
he said unto him, Joan. 2^.26.27.
feed my lambs, feed my sheep. By lambs, he understands the faithful
people: by sheep (which are the dammes of the lambs) the Bishops and other
Pastors of the Church. Wherefore S. Peter in the exequution of his Pastoral
charge, among other admonitions, which he gives to his subjects, puts the
Bishops and Pastors in mind of their duties, alluding to the words feed my
sheep, by which Christ made him supreme Pastor of Pastors under himself. Feed
(says he 1. Pet. 5.2
the flock of God, which is among you, providing not by constraint, but
willingly according to God; neither for filthy lucres sake but voluntarily; nor
as ouer-ruling in the Clergy, but made examples of the flock from the heart. And
when the Prince of Pastors shall appear, you shall receive the incorruptible
crown of glory. Now that S. Peter made this exhortation to them, as their
Superior, and chief Pastor, is declared by the second Council of Nice: Can. 4.
Peter the chief Apostle commanded, Feed the flock of our Lord, administering
your Bishoprics, not by force, but voluntarily etc. And Haymo: Domin. 2. post
Pascha.
The chief Pastor of the Church admonishes the other Pastors, sayng: Seniors
that are among you, I beseech you etc. And the Bishops of the East, when they
banded themselves against the preuarication of their Patriarch Acacius, writ to
Pope Symmachus: Extat haec Epist. inter O^thodox. impress. Basil. to. 2^
Thou art every day taught by thy sacred Doctor Peter, to feed the sheep of
Christ, which are committed to thee throughout the habitable earth, not
constrained by force, but willingly etc.

CHAP. X. Doctor Mortons objections against the former Doctrine, answered.
THESE examples taken out of the holy Scripture, expounded by the ancient
Fathers, convince that S. Peter in diverse occasions exercised acts of
jurisdiction properly belonging to his authority, over the Apostles, and over
the whole Church. And the same will yet more appear by the futility of the
Arguments which you frame to disprove his Supremacy.

The first is, Page 46.
that be had no Crown on his head to show his Empire* nor Miter to show his
pastoral dominion over the other Apostles: for though Peter had no Empire, as
being no temporal Prince, yet (as Baronius shows Anno 34. (...). 85.
all the Priests in the old testament (which represented our Bishops) did use
Miters: and the high Priest (representing the Pope in the law of grace) had an
especial Miter odorned with a plate of gold, which the Scripture calls a
Crown Ecclest. 45.14.
, and (as Josephus testifies L. 3. Antiq c. 8.
made in a triple form. How then do you prove that S. Peter (who call's the
Priesthood of the new testament a kingly Priesthood 1. Pet. 2 9.
had not a triple Miter or Crown as his Successor now has? (though not so
rich, by reason of the poverty in which the Church at those her first
beginnings was) especially since S. Hierome treating of the Sacerdotall
Ornaments of the law of Moses, affirms, Ep. 128. ad Fa^iolam.
that in Christ they are more perfectly consummated.

2. You say, Page 46.
that Peter had no Legates a laetere to carry his mandats. This is your
ignorance: for as the Pope sends to other Churches his decrees, made with the
advice of his Confistory; so S. Peter with advice of the rest assembled with
him in the Council of Jerusalem, chose out two prime men, Judas, surnamed
Barsabas, and Silas, together with Paul and Barnaby to carry the mandats or
decrees of that Council to the Churches of Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia Act.
15.12.13.
.

Your third Objection is Page 46.
No person was admitted (a pride which S. Peter abhorred) to kiss his feet.
From whence to infer, that S. Peter was not Head of the Church, or that he
exercised not any jurisdiction over the other Apostles, is an argument, that
deserves no answer; the Consequent having as little connection with the
Antecedent as an Egg with an Oyster. But you are so pleased with it, that you
repeat it afterward again Page 160.
, and both here and there urge it against the Pope, to disprove his supremacy,
not considering, that if it be a sin in him to admit of that honor, yet it is
no error in Doctrine, nor want of authority, and jurisdiction (which is the
thing you should have proved) but of humility; and therefore no more disproues
his supreme authority, then Pride, or other vices disprove the supreme
authority of a temporal Monarch, or the jurisdiction of any other Bishop. But
whereas you attribute the admittance of this honor to Pride in the Vicar of
Christ, you know that De sign. Eccles. l. 11. c. 9.
Bozius (whom you cite Page 160.
effectually proves, that the Pope considering his place and supereminent
dignity of being the Vicar and Lieutenant of Christ on earth, admits less
honors then any temporal Prince or Bishop whatsoever; which you conceal, that
so you may tax him with pride, for suffering his feet to be kissed. You might
in like manner blame Christ for admitting the same honor from Mary Magdalene
Luc. 7.3^.
, and for suffering the Jews Math. 21.8.
to straw the bows of the trees, and spread their own garments in the way,
under the very feet of the Ass on which he rid, and for not prohibiting the
Children to proclaim his praises: for at that the Jews stormed Ibid. Verse. 16.
, as you do at the Popes permitting his feet to be kissed.

Now that this honor of kissing his feet (and that prostrate on the ground) is
no new thing (as Polydore Virgil by you cited, in a work corrupted by
Protestants, and which you also know to be prohibited, affirms) the history
of the holy Virgin Susanna Apud Baro. anno ^94.
makes good. And the same is proved by what Tertullian Lib. de poenit. c. 9.
100. years before that time reported of the manner used by the Roman Church
in receiving of penitents, who (says he) did kneel down to the Priests, and
to the servants of God. And the same is convinced by the practice of ancient
Christian Emperors, and Kings: of Justinius; of both the Justinians, the elder,
and the younger; of Fridericus the first, and the second, surnamed Aenobarbus;
of Ludouicus, the first surnamed The godly, and Ludouicus the second; of
Luitprandus King of the Lombards; of Pipinus, Ludouicus Crassus, and Ludouicus
the seventh Kings of France; of Henry the first, and the second, kings of
England: some of them falling down prostrate on the ground to reverence the
Popes person, and kissing his feet; and others performing the office of yeomen
of his stitrop, and leading his horse, going themselves on foot by him. All
which particulars if you please you may read in Baronius Spond. in Indic^ V.
Obsequia.
.

And this reverence done to the Pope, was not obscurely foretold by the Prophet
Isay, in two places, which are excellently pondered by Iacobus Gordon Huntley
Contro. 2. c. 26.
to this purpose, where withal he shows, that Calvin to avoid the force of
the former, corrupts the facred text. The like is also gathered out of the
other words of the same Prophet, Cap. 60.14.
speaking of the great power and majesty of the kingdom of Christ on earth
(which is his Church), where he mentions this promise made unto it. The
Children of them that humbled thee, shall come crouching to thee; and all that
detracted from thee, shall adore the steps of thy feet: in which words is
plainly foretold the adoration of the Church, and of her visible head on earth;
an honor which Calvin upon this very place confesses not to exceed that which
is due to the Church, because it is given to Christ, who is adored in the
Church: and Leo de Castro upon the same text out of a very ancient record of
the order of S. Benedict, concerning the customs of the Catholic Church,
reports, that, Kings in ancient times going to the Synods of Bishops, did
prostrate themselves before them and kiss the ground, not rising, until the
Bishops descending from their seats did take them up in their arms, and place
them in thrones answerable to their Princely dignity.

To this purpose also make the testimonies of S. Hierome, Ep. ad Pammach.
aduers. error* Joan. Hieroso*
who speaking of S. Epiphanius, says: A great number of all ages and sexes did
flock unto him offering their little ones, and kissing his feet; and of S.
Chrysostom Hom. 14. in priorem ad Timoth*
exhorting the people to prostrate themselves at the feet of the monks, and
kiss them: Draw near, touch their holy feet: for it is a far greater honor to
touch their feet, then to touch the heads of other men. It was therefore in the
puter times of the Church, no disparagement to the greatest Princes to
prostrate themselves, either to the Pope, or to Bishops, or to other holy
servants of Christ, and to kiss the hemms of their garments, and their feet:
because as Alexander the great Apud Joseph. do antiq. l. ^1. (...)* vlt.
adoring Iaddus the high Priest of the Jews, knew and testified, that he did
in him exhibit that honor to God, whose Priest he was; so Christian Emperors
and Kings, when they adore the Pope, kissing his feet, do it to honor Christ
in him, to whom that honor redoundeth, even as the honor done to an Ambassador
redounds to the king his Master.

And as Princes by exhibiting this honor to the Vicar of Christ, no way
disparage their royal greatness, so neither is the acceptance thereof any note
of pride in the Pope: for he accepts it not, for his own sanctity, or for any
other personal quality* as he is a private man, but only for the public
authority, and spiritual power which he receaueth from Christ, and which
properly, and principally is of Christ, who is honored and adored in his Vicar,
as Tertullian notes, saying: Vbi sup. cap. 10.
When thou castest thy self down at the feet of thy brethren, thou touchest
Christ, thou adorest Christ. And therefore the Pope has on his shoe, a Cross,
which the faithful kiss, to signify that they exhibit not that honor to him,
but in him to Christ, whose person he represents.

And finally whereas you object Page 46,
that, S. Peter abhorred this pride when Cornelius prostrated himself unto
him, I answer with S. Hierome L. Aduers. Vigilant.
, that Cornelius conceived Peter to be some God, (as the Lycaonians thought of
Paul and Barnaby) and therefore prostrated himself to honor him with the
supreme adoration of Latria due to God alone, as it appears out of S. Peter's
answer to him: Act. 10.26.
Arise, for I also am a man. This kind of adoration, if any man should offer to
the Pope, he would admonish and forbid him, as S. Peter did Cornelius. But yet
if it be granted that (as some Fathers expound) Cornelius adored not S. Peter,
as a God, but as a man, yet S. Peter with great reason forbid him: for he
adored him not, in respect of Christ, whose Vicar he was, but in respect of
himself: and in like case the Pope would also forbid any man to adore him: but
he knows (and so do you) that the cause why Catholics exhibit that honor to
him, is the excellent power given him by Christ, or rather Christ himself
governing his Church in his Vicar. which adoration is good, and pleasing to
God, both as it is exhibited by the faithful, and as it is admitted by the
Pope.

Your fourth Objection is Page 46.
that, S. Peter had no Canon to direct the Apostles.

Sir, the Apostles being guided by the holy Ghost, needed no humane Canons, nor
constitutions for their own direction. But for the direction of all
ecclefiasticall Pastors they made Ecclesiastical Canons, which S. Peter as
their Head, confirmed, and delivered by word of mouth to S. Clement his
Disciple, and Successor in the Roman See: and he committing them to writing
left them to posterity as Canons of the Apostles. I know, that your
Magdeburgian Centurists cauil against them, as false, and suppositious: but
withal I know, that diverse of those Canons are alleged by many ancient
Fathers, by many Counsels, and confirmed by later Canons of the Church, and
inserted word by word into them, as Franciscus Turrianus has learnedly
demonstrated (x), L. 1. pro Canon. Apostol.
, and vindicated them from the Magdeburgian calumnies.

Your fifth and sixth Arguments are, Page 46.
that, S. Peter made no claim, nor yet admittance of any appeal from the
other Apostles; no reservation of any great case as by special prerogative due
to himself, to wit, of admitting any out of the Dioces of another, absoluing
those that are excommunicated by another, of Canonizing Saints, of confirming
Synods, of granting plenary Indulgences etc. Who sees not the futility of
these objections? For first the Apostles being confirmed in grace, neither did,
nor could wrong their subjects: in which case only Appeals are lawful.

2. I have already showed Chap. ^.
that the resolution of that great case concerning the observation of the law
of Moses, was reserved to S. Peter; and that he resolved the same in the Synod
of Jerusalem, presiding in it: and when the Pope personally presideth in a
Council, there needs no other confirmation.

3. When Christ made Peter Head of his whole Church, he gave him power to bind
and lose throughout the whole world, and thereby power to excommunicate
delinquents in whatsoever Dioces of other Bishops; and likewise to absolve them
from the guilt of sin, in the Sacrament of penance, as also to bind by
excommunication, and absolve from the same: and finally to release the penalty
due to sins by Indulgences, out of the Sacrament: for the power of binding
and losing which he gave to Peter, he limited not to the Sacrament of Penance
only. But whether Peter exercised this power of excommunicating and pardoning
by indulgences, we know not; for all his actions are not written. We know, that
S. Paul did excommunicat the incestuous Corinthian 1. Cor. 5.5.
, and afterward when he repented, at the intercession of Timothy, and Titus,
(as Theodoret In 1. Cor. 2.10.
expounds) granted him a pardon, or Indulgence in the person of Christ, that
is to say, by the power he had received from Christ to that end. Nor is it to
be doubted, but that S. Peter (who as ordinary Pastor had power over the whole
Church) did exercise the same power, if the like occasion were offered.

4. In those primitive times the Canonization of Saints was not performed with
so great solemnity, nor with such exact inquiry into all particulars, nor with
the deposition of so many witnesses, as in these later ages it is. If then the
Church did with unanimous consent, reverence any one that had died for Christ
(as the Martyrs did) or that lived and died holily (as did the Confessors,) he
was by public voice and consent of the Church reverenced as a Saint, (the Sea
Apostolic either expressly, or taci^ly approving the same) and thereby
canonized. In this manner were Canonized S. Stephen, and others, that died
before S. Peter, without whose approbation neither S. Stephen, nor any one else
was then reverenced by the whole Church, as a Saint; not any since that time,
without the approbation of his Successors.

5. To make good S. Peter's jurisdiction over the other Apostles, you require us
Page 46. fin.
to show, that he pardoned Simony, and almost an 100. the like sins; which is
to say, that unless we show, that the other Apostles committed Simony, and
almost an 100. the like sins, and that S. Peter pardoned them, we must not
believe S. Peter to have had power and jurisdiction over them. That S. Peter
ever pardoned Simony, we read not; but that he punished it, we prove by the
power he showed over Simon Magus See above Nu. 24.
. And how far the Successors of S. Peter are from pardoning, or any way
conniuing at Simony, yea how severe they are, and ever have been in the
punishment thereof, the decrees and constitutions of diverse Popes extant in the
Canon Law give abundant witness against such men as you are, who out of their
hatred to the Roman See, are wont to slander S. Peter in his Successors falsely
with pardoning Simony and almost an 100. the like sins, as here you do,
without any proof at all.

6. With no less folly you require us Page 46. and 47.
to show, that S. Peter was distinguished from the other Apostles by some one
note and character of Imperial eminency, and authority, as by his guard, or
coin, or habit, or command, or constitutions, as every temporal Monarch is
distinguished from his Nobles. Can there be greater simplicity, then to require
us to show, that S. Peter like an Emperor, had Princely robes, a guard, and a
peculiar coin, as kings and Emperors have, when he was no temporal Monarch?
and when not only he, but (as you forgetting your self Page 283.
confess the holy Popes his Successors in those primitive time, were (alas)
daily in danger of banishments, imprisonments, torments, and death? Is it not
then ridiculous, to bid us show S. Peter's guard, and his coin? his commands we
show: for Oecumenius says In cap 1. ^ct.
: The Apostles were committed to the government of Peter, and presently at his
command appointed two, whom they thought worthiest to be chosen in place of
Judas: which Doctrine is also delivered by S. Chrysostom Hom 3. in Act.
.

Of the Constitutions of the Apostles, which were peculiarly of S. Peter as
their Head, and set forth by Clement his Disciple and Successor, we know, that
albeit they are of no great reckoning among many of the Latins (as having some
things inserted into them by heretics) yet they are greatly esteemed by the
Greeks, and both cited, and commended by S. Epiphanius H^^r 45. and ser 70.
and other Greek Fathers: To which I add, that they are learnedly defended by
Turrianus Proem in lib. Clem. To.
: and Genebrard L. de Liturg. Apostol c. 5 fol. 21.22.
affirms them to have been received by all antiquity.

Your last argument to prove (as you call it) Page 47.
the no domination of S. Peter over the other Apostles, is, that, meeting
together at Jerusalem, they sent Peter, and John into Samaria; which proves
Peter to have no superiority over the rest, by whom he was sent; or if it do,
it must needs imply in John an equality with Peter: for as John was not sent as
Superior to the other Apostles, so neither was Peter. This inference we wholly
deny. 1. because in a Corporation or College (as that of the Apostles was) the
Superior may out of his own desire be sent in the name of the whole Community,
the Mayor in name of the City, and the Deane in name of the Chapter. 2. The
authority of the whole College together (which includes both the head and the
members) differs from the Head alone (to use the phrase of Metaphysics)
tanquam includens ab incluso, and is at least extensiue of greater authority
then the Head alone; and therefore the Head alone may be sent by authority of
the whole College. 3. And if we take a community for the inferiors, not
including their Superior, though he cannot be sent by their command, he may by
their in treaty. So S. Chrysostom In cap 11 ep. ad Gal.
says, Paul was sent to Jerusalem by the Christians of Antioch, who yet were
not his Superiors. So the Deane is sometimes sent by the Canons, and the Rector
by the Collegialls. So was Pope Pi^^ the second sent by the College of
Cardinals, about an expedition intended against the Turks: and (as Bozius
obserneth De fig. Eccles. to. 2. l. 18. c. 2.. Quocirca.
the Roman Emperors were often sent by the Senate. Nor does such a mission any
way extenuate, but rather manifest the authority of such Missionants: for
persons of greatest quality are fittest to be employed upon weighty affairs,
especially when they import the public good, as this Mission of Peter and John
did: for Philip the Deacon having converted the Samaritans to Christ, these two
great Apostles were sent to oppose the wicked practices of Simon Magus, by whom
the Samaritans had been long seduced, and to confirm them in their faith,
giving them the holy Ghost by imposition of hands; a thing, which Philip
(though otherwise a most perfect man, and full of the holy Ghost, yet being no
Bishop) was not able to do, that being a function proper to Bishops. To this
you have no other reply to make, then tell us, that a journey vndertake^ by a
Governor, at the desire and request of his inferiors, cannot be called a
mission, but a profection and going. An answer, that serves for nothing, but
to discover your ignorance: for the same journey is both a going and a mission:
a going, as it is performed by him that undertakes the journey; and a mission,
as it proceeds from those that sent him: even as the same lesson is both
doctrina, and disciplina; doctrina, as it is delivered by the Master that
teaches; and disciplina, as it is received by the Scholar that learneth; and
as in Philosophy the same production is called Actio, as it proceeds from the
Agent, and Passio, as it is received in the subject. And to say, that the
sending of John with Peter, argues John to be equal in authority with Peter,
is a great Non sequitur, as if you should argue a Chanon to be of equal
authority with the Deane, or a Cardinal with the Pope, if they be sent
together.

CHAP. XI. Sleights, and falsifications of Doctor Morton, to shift off the
testimonies of Ancient Fathers, teaching S. Peter's supremacy.
BELLARMINE to prove S. Peter's primacy over the other Apostles, produces
conuincing testimonies of many Fathers, both Greek and Latin L. 1 de Pont. c.
25.
. These you undertake to answer, or rather to elude by diverse sleights. Some of
them, as being so clear, that you knew not how to devise any answer unto them,
you wholly omit, without any mention of them, as of S. Prosper, Arator, and
Aetherianus. Others you mention, as of S. Leo the great, of S. Gregory, of
Venerable Bede, and S. Bernard, but put them of with devises. We pretermit (say
Page 50. marg. n. 20.
you) the testimony of Pope Leo, whereof reason is given hereafter: but whereas
Bellarmine alleges two unanswerable testimonies of S. Leo, you are so far
from giving any reason of them, that (for ought I can find) you never after
mention either of them. The testimonies of Bid, and S. Bernard you reject, as
not truly ancient: whereas Bid lived almost 1000. and S. Bernard above 500.
years since. But the true reason indeed why you reject them, is not want of
antiquity, but because they clearly convince your Doctrine of falsehood. For
when S. Bernard, the later of these two, has any thing which by
misinterpreting his meaning or falsifying, you can wrest to your purpose (as
afterward you do) Page 170. and 182.
S. Bernard is ancient enough. S. Gregory you shift of, promising to speak of
him largely afterward. S. Gregory did disclaim from the title of Universal
Bishop, in that sense in which John Patriarch of Constantinople did arrogate
the same to himself. Of this indeed you treat at large Page 92. and seqq.
: but his testimony which Bellarmine urges in proof of S. Peter's pastoral
power over the whole Church, you neither answer, nor so much as mention
afterward.

3. Bellarmine cites out of Eusebius his Chronicon, these words: Petrus
natione Galilaeus, Christianorum Pontifex primus. Peter a Galilean borne, the
first chief Bishop of Christians. He says not, Peter the first Bishop of the
Romans, as in the same place he says. James the first of Jerusalem, and
Euodius the first Bishop of Antioch, but, Peter the first chief Bishop of
Christians: which difference of expression she weth, that whereas James and
Euodius were Bishops of two particular Dioceses, Peter was the Bishop of all
Christians. This is one of the testimonies of Eusebius alleged by Bellarmine,
which you conceal, without giving any answer unto it, though you name the
place, out of which he alleges it. The second is out of Eusebius his history,
which you are contented to mention, that you may pick a quarrel against
Bellarmine: for you say, Page 49. marg.
he miscites the Chapter, the 14. for the 13. But by desiring to carpe, you
discover your ignorance: for in the different versions of Eusebius, the
Chapters are differently divided: and though the passage which Bellarmine
cites, be in the 13. Chapter according to the version of Christophorson, yet
in that of Ruffinus, which he follows, it is in the 14. as he cites it. And
whereas Eusebius there calls Peter Reliquorum omnium Apostolorum Principem.
The Prince of all the other Apostles, you answer, That it is with this
restriction. omitted by Bellarmine, (...), for his singular virtues sake. But
what does this omission avail your cause. or hurt ours? The Fathers agree in
this, that when Christ promised to make Peter the foundation of his Church, it
was for that excellent confession of his Divinity, and in reward thereof, as
has been proved Above Nu 11.
: and so likewise when he actually conferred on him the dignity of supreme
Pastor, it was a reward of his fervent love. But does it follow, that because
this supereminent dignity was promised to Peter, and conferred on him for his
singular virtues, it was nor therefore a primacy of Magistracy, and
jurisdiction, but of order only? Is not the office of Pastor of Christ's flock
an office of Magistracy and jurisdiction? but such are the answers, which you
give to insoluble arguments; and yet shame not to charge Bellarmine with
unconscionable dealing, in urging this place of Eusebius against you.

4. He urges S. Gregory Nazianzen saying: Vides etc. You see how among the
Disciples of Christ, all truly great, and high, and worthy to be chosen; this
(to wit Peter) is called a Rock, and has the foundations of the Church
committed to his charge: And he (that is John) is loved more, and reposeth on
the breast of our Lord; and the other-disciples did not take it in ill part,
that these were preferred before them. These are the words of Nazianzen: and
these very words Bellarmine truly and punctually sets down; whom therefore
you unjustly traduce Page 49. marg.
as deprauing Nazianzen; whose words as he corrupts not, so neither does he
pervert his sense: for out of them it is evident, that as Christ preferred
John, by loving him more then the rest, so in far higher degree he preferred
Peter before them, and before John also. For who sees not that Nazianzen
acknowledges a far greater dignity in Peter, then in John, or any other of the
Apostles, when he says that, Christ called Peter a Rock, and committed to his
charge the foundations of the Church? for that is to say, that he made him
Head, and Governor thereof, it being a known truth, that the foundation in a
building, is the same that the Head in a political body: from whence it is,
that the famous Council of Chalcedon Act. 3.
calls Peter, The foundation of true faith, and the rock and top of the
Catholic Church, which is a far greater dignity, then to lean on Christ's
breast, or any other that was conferred on John, or any of the other Apostles.

5. Bellarmine L. 1. de Pont. c. 25.
urges 3. testimonies out of S. Augustines works. The second you pass over
without any answer to it, or mention of it. The third you reject, as taken out
of a book, which Bellarmine himself and others acknowledge not to be S.
Augustins, but of an heretical Author. Bellarmine (I grant) confesses the
book not to be S. Augustines, and therefore he cites it not, as of S.
Augustine: he grants also, that the author erred in some particulars, which
he expresses: but because in this matter of S. Peter's Supremacy, he was never
taxed of error, but agrees with the rest of the Fathers, his testimony was not
to be contemned; especially being so forcible, as you Page 52.
confess it to be. But be it whose you will; with what face can you reject it?
For do you not produce against us two other testimonies of the same book,
affirming Page 30. and 286.
S. Augustine himself to be the author of them? This Dilemma will discover your
dealing: either the book is S. Augustins, or it is not. If it be not S.
Augustines, why do you in other places urge it against us, as of S. Augustine?
If it be S. Augustines, why do you here deny it to be his, and reject it as
heretical, when we urge it against you? Is not this shufling? Shall it be S.
Augustines, and of force, when you urge it against us? and shall it not only
not be S. Augustines, but heretical when we urge it against you? but such
dealing suiteth best with a Grand Imposture.

The third testimony which Bellarmine alleges of S. Augustine is out of his
second book of Baptism against the Donatists, where having said, that the
primacy of the Apostles does singularly excel in Peter, he adds: I think
that Cyprian Bishop* without any affront, is compared to Peter the Apostle* for
as much as concerns the glory of Martyrdom: but I rather ought to fear, lest
I be contumelious to Peter: for who knows not, that that Princedome of
Apostleship, is to be preferred before whatsoever Bishopric? To this you
answer, Page 49. marg. fin.
That Primatus Apostolorum signifies nothing else. but, Munus Apostolicum, the
Apostolical function, and that is most illustrious in Peter. But your answer
is deficient* for to say that the primacy of the Apostleship singularly
excelled in Peter, is not only to say, that Peter was an Apostle, but that he
was Primate and Prince of the Apostles, and that his primacy contained a
singular preeminence of dignity belonging to him, which was not in any of the
other Apostles: and this dignity it was, that made him more illustrious then
the rest. Again whereas S. Augustine said, he had cause to fear, lest he might
affront S. Peter in comparing Cyprian the Martyr unto him, because that
Princedome of Apostleship (which was in Peter) exceeded all Bishoprics: you
answer Page 50. marg.
that in these words there is only a comparison between Peter's Apostleship and
Cyprians Bishopric, and that no Protestant will deny that the Apostleship,
though of Barnabas, was more excellent, then the Bishopric although of Linus.
This answer is not to the purpose: for S. Augustine compares not the
Apostleship in general with Cyprians Bishopric, but in particular, illum
Apostolatus principatum, that Princedome, or Sovereignty of the Apostleship,
which was peculiar to Peter, as to Head and Prince of all the Apostles. Nor is
it true, that S. Augustine only compares Peter's Apostleship with Cyprians
Bishopric: he compares Peter's Bishopric with Cyprians Bishopprick, Peter's
Chair with Cyprians Chair; and (which you cunningly leave out both in your
english, and Latin) acknowledges, that distal cath^drarum gratia, etsi vna sit
Martyrum gloria, that albeit the glory of Martyrdom be alike in them both, yet
there is distance between the Dignity of their chayres: and by reason of this
distance, S. Augustine says, he has cause to fear, lest he wrong Peter, in
making any comparison between Cyprians chair, and his chair: for though
Cyprian were Primate of all Africa, yet Peter was Bishop, and Governor of the
Universal Church: a dignity no way belonging to Cyprian, or any other Bishop,
or Apostle whatsoever.

With shifts not unlike to these you elude the testimonies of S. Cyprian, S.
Hierome and other Fathers, who (as you confess) Page 50. i^it.
call Peter sometimes Prince, Head, and Captain of all the Apostles; somtymes
Chief Priest of the Christians, Captain of Gods host, Pastor and foundation
of the whole Church, and, One to whom the guydance and presidence of the
universal Church is committed. To these their testimonies you answer Page 50.
med.
that they argue not any primacy of authority and jurisdiction over the other
Apostles, or over the whole Church, but of Order only. This distinction you
often use, to shift of the authorities of Fathers, when you are pressed with
them. By Primacy of Order, you understand priority of place and of voice, as
afterward Page 110.
you declare. But whatsoever you understand, sure I am, that ancient Fathers by
the primacy of Peter understand not only priority of place, and of voice, but
true power, and jurisdiction over the other Apostles, and over the whole
Church, and so it is apparent by the very names which they use to express his
primacy, as, of Prince, Head, and Captain of all the Apostles, Pastor, and
President of the universal Church: for has not the Prince in his territories
authority, and jurisdiction? has he not power to command his subjects, to make
laws, to punish offenders? In a City, has not the Head (which is the
Magistrate) power and authority over the Citizens? Has not a Captain the
command of his soldiers? and the Pastor power to rule his flock? wherefore since
with the Fathers you confess, that Peter is Prince, Head, and Captain of all
the Apostles, Pastor, and foundation of the whole Church, and that the
guydance, and presidence of the universal Church is committed to him, either
you understand not what you say, or else you grant that Peter has not only
primacy of Order, but of authority, power, and command over the Apostles and
over the whole Church, as a Prince has over his subjects, a Captain over his
soldiers, a Mayor over the Citizens, and a shepherd over his flock. And what
else is it that S. Chrysostom teaches, saying Hom. in B. Ignat.
: that Peter was the Superintendent of the whole world; that to him Christ
consigned the keys of the kingdom of Heaven, and committed the disposition of
all things. And Orat. 5. aduers. Iud.
that Peter was made chief of the Apostles, and had the whole world in
subjection: and Hom. 80. ad pop. Autioch.
that, Christ delivered to him the government of the Church throughout the whole
world. What else did S. Maximus mean when he said Hom. 3. in Natali Apost. Pet.
and Pauli.
Peter was of so great merit in the sight of Christ, that after the rowing of a
small boat, the government of the whole Church was put into his hands? What
Arnobius Ad Psalm. 138.
, pronouncing that, Peter is Bishop of Bishops, and that Christ gave to him,
and to no other of the Apostles, his own name of Shepherd, and together
which the name, that power which he alone had, to to wit, of being Pastor of
his whole flock? what else S. Cyril saying In l. thesau. apud S. Thom. Opuse. 1.
that, as Christ received of his Father the scepter of the Church over all
Princedome, and most full power over all, that all be subject unto him; so also
he committed the same power to Peter and his Successors: and that what was his,
he fully committed to P^ter, and to none else, but to him alone? what S. Leo
affirming Ser^^ 3. d^ Assamp. sua.
that, albeit in Gods people there be many Priests, and many Pastors, yet Peter
governs them all, as Christ also does principally rule them? what Euthymius
and Theophilact In c. 21. Joan.
that, Christ committed to Peter the charge and government of his flock
throughout the whole world? what Oecumenius Adc. 1. Act.
that, the government of the Disciples was committed to Peter? what S. Bernard
L. 2. de confiderat.
, that, every one of the other Apostles received their several ships; but that
Peter received the government of the whole world, and that to him was committed
grandissima nauis, that marvelous great ship, to wit, the universal Church
spread over the whole world: and that to him the pastoral charge of the whole
Church was committed? Finally, and what S. Eucherius that ancient Bishop of
Lions saying In vigil. S. Pet. Extat in Bibliothee. Pat. edit. Colon. to. 5.
par. 1 page 712.
that, Christ first committed to Peter his lambs, and then his sheep; because
he made him not only a Pastor, but Pastor of Pastors. Peter therefore (says he)
feeds the lambs, and the sheep: he feeds the young ones, and the dammes: he
governs the subjects, and the Prelates, and is therefore Pastor of all: for
beside lambs, and sheep, there is nothing in the Church.

What think you Doctor Morton? do these Fathers acknowledge in Peter no other
primacy, but of order? Can there be any thing more clear, then that they
believe him to have authority, power, and jurisdiction over the whole Church,
as President, and Governor thereof? were these men of your belief?

But you object Page 51.
: James and John (whom S. Paulcalleth chief Apostles) S. Chrysostom
interprets Princes; and Oecumenius Heads: Ergo, they were also Governors over
the other Apostles, and Monarkes over the whole Church, or else Peter was not.
How follows this? In the Empire there are many Princes, Ferdinand the Emperor
and many others: Ergo they are all equal to Ferdinand, and all Emperors, or
else Ferdinand is no Emperor. In the kingdom of Naples there are many Heads,
the Viceroy, and the Governors of diverse Provinces, and Cities: ergo these
Heads are all equal in authority, and have power over the whole kingdom, or
else the Viceroy has not. These consequences are absurd; and yours is no less.
It is true, that each of the Apostles are Princes over the whole earth by reason
of their Apostolical power: but as Bishops they are only Heads of their
several flocks, and therefore in jurisdiction not equal to Peter. Paul, Andrew
and John (says S. Gregory L. 4. epist. 38.
what are they but Heads of several flocks? but Peter is the chief member of
the holy and universal Church. And S. Bernard L. 2. de considerat.
: James contented with the Bishopric of Jerusalem, yeldes the universality
to Peter. And again speaking to Eugenius Pope of his authority received from
S. Peter Ibid.
, Thou alone art Pastor of all Pastors. Do thou ask how I prove this? By the
words of our Lord: for to which (I will not say) of the Bishops, but even of
the Apostles, were all the sheep so absolutely, and without exception
committed? If thou love me Peter, feed my sheep: what sheep? the people of
this, or that City, or country, or kingdom? he says, My sheep: who sees not
manifestly that he designed not some, but assigned all? Nothing is excepted,
where no distinction is made.

And so likewise the other title, Prince of all the Apostles, is an attribute
which agrees not to James, nor to John, nor to any other of the Apostles: for
though James and John be chief Apostles, and Princes in respect of that
transcendent authority which as Apostles they had from Christ, to preach, and
ordain Bishops throughout the whole world, yet neither the one, nor the other,
is, nor ever is called severally by himself, Prince of all the Apostles, as
Peter is. And so likewise. when Peter and Paul together, are called Principes
Apostolorum, Princes of the Apostles, it is not in respect of any authority and
jurisdiction common to them both, over all the other Apostles, but in respect
of their great labors in preaching and propagating the faith of Christ: for
when there is speech of the extent of their authority, and jurisdiction, Paul
severally by himself is never called Prince of the Apostles, as Peter is. All
the Apostles being silent (says Cath^c. 11.
S. Cyril of Jerusalem) Peter Prince of the Apostles says etc. And S. Ephrem
Sermon. de Transfigu. Dom.
: As Moses by the commandment of God was Prince of the congregation of the
Hebrews, so is Peter of the Church of the Christians. And as Moses was Prince
of the old testament, so is Peter of the new. And Cassianus L. 3. de Incarnat.
c. 12.
: Let us ask that chief Disciple amongst the Disciples, and Master amongst
Masters, which governing the Roman Church, as he had the Princedome of faith,
so likewise of Priesthood. Speak therefore and tell us, O Peter, Prince of the
Apostles etc. In which words Peter is called Prince of the Apostles, because he
was the chief among them, and had the sovereignty of Episcopal, and
Sacerdotall dignity above the rest.

But by the way I must advertise you of your abusing S. Ambrose and S. Cyprian.
In your Margen Page 10:
you object certain words of S. Ambrose in Latin; and coming to english them
in your text, you set down in lieu of them others of your own, in a different
character, as of S. Ambrose, which neither are his, nor of the same sense with
his, as the judicious reader will perceive, if he compare S. Ambrose his Latin,
with your English. With S. Cyprian you deal in the same manner, for you make
him say, that, Christ before his resurrection did build his Church upon Peter:
An ignorance, of which S. Cyprian was not guilty. He says, that, Christ
speaking to Peter said: upon this Rock I will build my Church: which words he
spoke before his resurrection, and they contain no more, but a promise of
building his Church upon Peter, for the future: which promise he fulfilled not,
until after his resurrection, when he gave to Peter the actual charge of
feeding his lambs, and his sheep Joan. 21.16.17.
. Nor does S. Cyprian contradict this, in the words which you object; to wit,
that, Christ after his resurrection gave equal power to all the Apostles
saying: As my Father sent me, so I send you: receive ye the holy Ghost etc.
For by these words he gave to them all, equal authority to preach throughout
the world, to reveal matters of faith, assurance of infallibility to make
canonical Scriptures, to institute the first mission of Pastors, to remit
sins, to give the holy Ghost, and the like. In this sense, he says: The
Apostles were the same that Peter, endowed with like fellowship of honor and
power, to wit, in the exercise of these Apostolical functions over the
faithful, to whom he sent them. But S. Cyprian says not, that Christ made all
the Apostles equal among themselves, exempting them from the jurisdiction of
S. Peter in the manner of exercising this power. Nor is it true: for he gave it
the^ with subordination to him, as to their Superior. Peter (says S. Leo Sermon.
^. in A^niuers. suae Assumpt.
is preferred before all the Apostles: and if Christ would have them to have
any thing common with him; he gave it them not, but by him, And this is
declared, and the reason thereof yielded by Optatus, and S. Hierome; and by S.
Cyprian himself in that very place, which you object for the contrary. In the
Episcopal chair (says Optatus L. ^ cont. Parm^n.
was set the Head of all the Apostles. Peter, from whence he was also called
Cephas, to the end, that in this only chair, Unity might be preserved in all;
and that the other Apostles might not challenge to themselves each one a
several chair; but that he might be a Schismatike, and a sinner, that against
this only Chair should erect another. The Church (says S. Hierome L. 1.
aduers. louin. c. 14.
, is built upon Peter: and though else where it be also built upon the rest, yet
among the twelve, one is chosen, to the end that a Head being made, occasion of
Schism might be taken away. And S. Cyprian L. de unit. Eccles.
: Christ, to manifest unity, constituted one chair, and ordained the original
of Unity, beginning from one, giving the primacy to Peter, that so one Church
of Christ, and one chair might be manifested. And then declaring you, that
have forsaken this original of Unity (S. Peter's Chair, on which the Church is
built) to have lost the faith, and to be out of the Church, he addoth: He that
keeps not this unity of the Church, does he believe himself to hold the
faith? he that resists the Church, he that forsakes the chair of Peter, on
which the Church is built, does he think himself to be in the Church? So S.
Cyprian, equalling you with the Nouatians, for your disclayming from the Church
of Peter.

CHAP. XII. The authority of the Roman Church in her definitions of faith,
proved to be infallible.
HAVING in vain shot your darts at S. Peter, to dethrone him from the height
of Authority in which Christ has placed him, you come now to try their force,
against the Bishop of Rome his Successor; whose authority in his definitions of
faith you hold to be fallible.

SECT. I. Our first Argument.
THat the authority of the Bishop of Rome in his definitions of faith is
infallible, we prove out of the words of Christ, spoken to S. Peter Luc. 12.32.
: I have prayed for thee, Peter, that thy faith fail not, and thou being once
converted, confirm thy Brethren. There is no man so void of understanding
(says Leo the 9. speaking Ep. ad Michael. Imp^r.
of this prayer) that can think Christ's prayer (whose will is his power) to
have been inefficacious: which the Apostle also teaches, saying Heb. 5.7.
; he was heard for his reverence. And for this prayer in particular Christ
himself signifies so much, saying, I have prayed for thee: for what would his
prayer have auayled Peter, if he had not obtained for him what he asked? Or how
cold his brethren have any assurance of their confirmation in faith from Peter,
if Peter could have error; proposing unto them falsehood for truth? Again, that
Christ in these words prayed not in mediatly for the whole Church, nor for all
the Apostles, but for Peter alone, appears in this, that he expressed one
singular person, saying: Simon, S^mon (for in the Greek it is twice repeated)
and added the pronounce of the second person; I have prayed for thee, that thy
faith fail not, and thou being once converted, confirm thy brethren. That
Christ prayed not for the other Apostles, you grant Page 53.
, and take this for a ground to prove, that, he prayed for Peter only, and not
for Clement, Urban, or any other of his Successors in the Roman See. But your
argument proves nothing: for Christ had formerly obtained the personal
perseverance of Peter and the rest, when he said: Joan. 17.9. and seqq.
for them I do pray etc. Holy Father keep them in my name etc. I pray not, that
thou take them out of the world, but that thou preserve them from evil: And
therefore this prayer for Peter's not failing in faith, was not made for him, in
the person of a private man, and without relation to his office of Supreme
Pastor, but as for a public person, that is, as for the Head of the Apostles,
and Governor of the whole Church, and consequently for his See, and all his
Successors in the same See: for as that supreme dignity of Head, and Governor
of the universal Church was not to dye with Peter, but to descend by him to
his Successors; so the effect of this prayer of Christ, being a prerogative
obtained for Peter, by reason of his office, was to descend to Clement, to
Urban, and to whosoever has hitherto, or shall hereafter succeed him in the
same office: even as whatsoever prerogative is granted to a Viceroy, as
Viceroy, and as belonging to his office, is consequently granted to all his
Successors in the same office.

But you object Page 54.
, that this privilege cannot agree to Peter's Successors, because, Salas the
Jesuit teaches, that a personal and singular privilege is that which is
granted to an individual person with expression of his name: and therefore does
not extend to any other, but dies with the person to whom it is granted. You
understand not Salas: for he calls a personal privilege, that, which is
granted to an individual person, as he is a piuat person only, for his own
particular good, and not by reason of any public office, for the good and
benefit of the community: for if it be granted to him, as to a public person,
by reason of his office, as this was to S. Peter, as to the Head of the Church,
and for the common good of the Church, though his name be never so much
expressed in it, it is not a personal, but a common See Bonacina Compend. v.
Priuileg.
, or as Suarez L. 7. de leg. c. 3. n. 23.
from whom Salas learned his Doctrine, de legibus) call's it, A real
privilege: which he confirms with the example of a privilege, that being
granted to a certain Bishop in the Canon law with expression of his name, is
notwithstanding supposed to pass to his Successors.

Now that this prayer of Christ, was not made for Peter as for a private, but
as for a public person, that was supreme Head and Govern or of the Church, and
consequently for the common good and benefit of the Church, and that therefore
by virtue thereof the Popes his Successors have an infallible prerogative of not
erring in their public definitions of faith to the seducing of others, is the
agreeing consent of the ancient Fathers in their expositions of this passage of
S. Luke.

And 1. three holy Popes in their epistles: Lucius the first, to the Bishops of
Spain and France, Felix the first, to Benignus; and Mark to S. Athanasius,
out of this prayer of Christ made for S. Peter, gather the infallibility of the
Roman Church in her definitions of faith. But because Protestants hold for
suspected the authority of these epistles, I omit them, and pass to such as by
Protestants are granted to be undoubtedly of those Popes, to whom they are
attributed.

2. Therefore Agatho a most holy Pope, and whom God graced with Miracles, in his
Epistle to the Emperor Extat Act. 4. Apud Bin. to. 3. page 12.
Constantine Pogonat (which was read in the sixth general Council, and
approved Act. 8. and 18.
as the suggestion of the holy Gho^t, dictated by the mouth of the holy, and
most blessed Peter Prince of the Apostles, speaking by Agatho) says: Our Lord
promised, that the faith of Peter should not fail, and commanded him to
strengthen his brethren: which, that the Popes my Apostolical predecessors
have ever performed, is a thing notorious to all. This testimony shows that
not only Agatho, but all the Fathers of that Council believed this privilege
of not erring in says, and confirming others to have been obtained by Christ
not only for S. Peter, but for all his Successors; and that this is a truth
suggested by the holy Ghost, and dictated by S. Peter speaking by Agatho.

3. S. Gregory: L. 6. ep. 37.
Who is ignorant that the holy Church is strengthened by the solidity of the
Prince of the Apostles, who in his name received the constancy of his mind,
being called Peter of a Rock, to whom by the voice of truth, it is said,
Confirm thy Brethren. And else where L. 4. ep. 3.
he proves, against John Patriarch of Constantinople, the authority of the
Bishop of Rome over the universal Church, by the Commission given to S. Peter
his predecessor: It is manifest to all such as know the Gospel, that the
charge of the whole Church is committed to the Apostle Peter Prince of all the
Apostles: for to him it is said; Feed my sheep. And so him it is said, I have
prayed for thee Peter, that thy faith fail not* and thou being once converted,
confirm thy Brethren. Which testimony conuinceth tha^ Christ prayed not for S.
Peter as for a private person, bu^ as for the Head of his Church, and
consequently for his Successors in him.

4. S. Leo the great Sermon. 2. de Natali Apost. Petri and Pauli.
: The danger of tentation was common to all the Apostles and they all equally
needed the protection of Gods help: but our Lord takes a special care of
Peter, and prays peculiarly for his faith, that the state of all the rest
might be more secure, if the mind of the Chief were not corquered. The
strength then of all is fortified in Peter, God so dispensing the aid of his
grace; that the assurance and strength which Christ gave to Peter might by him
redound to the Apostles. And he adds, that, as Pe^er confirmed the Apostles,
so it is not to be doubted, but that still he affords his help to his
Successors in the Roman chair, and as a pious Pastor confirms them with his
admonitions, and cease not to pray for them etc.

5. Leo the ninth Ep. ad Michael. Imper. c. 7.
: The false devises of all heretics have been reproved, confuted, and
condemned by the Sea of the Prince of the Apostles, which it the Roman Church,
and the hearts of the Brethren strengthened in the faith of Peter, which has
not failed hitherto, nor shall ever fail hereafter. And the same sense of
these words of Christ, is delivered by Nicolas the first Ep. ad Michael. Imp.
, and Innocentius the third In Cap. Mayor. de Bap.
.

If you answer, that these testimonies are of Popes speaking in their own
cause; I reply, that they speak in the cause of God, and his Church, and are
worthy of all credit, both because they were men most eminent in learning, and
sanctity; as also because in this exposition they agree with the Fathers both
of the sixth general Council, and the rest: for S. Ambrose says Ad ca. 22.
Luc.
: Behold what our Lord said, and understand it: Peter is sifted; he falls into
tentations, but after his tentation, is made Governor of the Church: and
therefore our Savior before hand signifies, why afterward he chose him to be
Pastor of his flock; for he said unto him, And thou being once converted,
confirm thy brethren. You see then, that in S. Ambrose his judgment, Christ
prayed for Peter, as for the Pastor of his flock, and that, for Peter to
confirm his brethren, is to perform the office of Pastor, and Governor of the
Church: which office, as it was no less necessary afterward then in S. Peter's
time, so it descended from him to his Successors.

A truth, which Theodorus Studites with other his brethren being pressed with
the outrageous persecutions of ^eretikes, profess in their epistle to
Paschalis Pope, in these words: Apud Baron. anno 817.
Hear O Apostolical Head, made by God Pastor of his sheep, porter of the
kingdom of Heaven, and Rock of the faith, upon whom the Catholic Church is
built: for thou art Peter adorning and governing the Sea of Peter. Christ our
God said to thee; And thou being once converted, confirm thy brethren. Behold
now the time, behold the place; aid us etc. Thou have power from God, because
thou art Prince of all: fright away the heretical wild beasts etc.

And Theophilact Ad cap. 22. Luc.
expounding the same words: The plain sense of them is this: because I hold
thee as Prince of my Disciples, when thou (after thou have denied me) shall
weep, and come to repentance, confirm the rest; for this becomes thee, that
next to me art the Rock and fortress of the Church. And we may understand it
not to be spoken of the Apostles only, but of all the faithful that shall be
till the end of the world. Which addition of Theophilact shows, that this
privilege given to Peter of not failing in faith, and confirming his brethren,
was not personal, but belonging to his office, and descending with it to his
Successors: for Peter in his own person, was not to live till the end of the
world; and therefore not by himself, but by his Successors, to confirm the
faithful until the end of the world.

The same truth is further proved out of an ancient Treatise entitled, A
dispute between the Church and the Synagogue, written by a learned Author,
above 700. years since, in which it is said Cap. 19. art. 4.
: Christ seems to have defined, that the faith of the Roman Church shall
never fail, saying to Peter; I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not:
for he foresaw, that Peter whose faith he promised should never fail, was to be
Bishop of the Roman Church, and there to end his life by Martyrdom. And what,
I beseech you, are we to think him to have signified to us, but that, that
Church especially whose Bishop Peter (the Head of all Churches after Christ)
was to be should always remain in the confession of one true faith. To these I
add the testimony of Georgius Trapezuntius a learned Grecian, who explicating
the same words of Christ, says In illud Joan. Si eum volo manner etc.
: In them, two great Mysteries are plainly expressed: the first, that only the
faith of Peter and his Successors, that is to say, of the Roman Church, shall
not fail. The other, that the faith of the rest shall sometimes fail:
Wherefore (says Christ) thou being once converted, confirm thy brethren. He
said, Once, to show that the Apostles being confirmed with the grace of the
Holy Ghost none of them should err; but that their Successors should; for
whose confirmation Peter, that is to say his Successors, are commanded to be
converted; which has been effectually performed: for the rest of the Churches
of the world have been often confirmed by the Roman, but She never by others.

Finally S. Bernard writing to Pope Innocentius, and requiring him to condemn
the heresies of Abailardus, subscribeth to the same exposition, saying Ep. 190.
: It is fit that all dangers and scandals arising in the kingdom of God, and
chiefly those that concern faith, should be referred to your Apostleship: for
I think it just, that the ruins of faith should be repared there, where faith
cannot fail; for that is the prerogative of your See: for to what other was it
ever said, I have prayed for thee Peter, that thy faith fail not: and therefore
what follows, is required from Peter's Successor: And thou being once
converted, confirm thy brethren. It is time therefore (most ^ouing Father) that
you show your zeal, repressing the corruptors of ^ayth.

Out of these testimonies I infer against you, that whatsoever Bellarmine in
his Controversies holds to the contrary L. 4. de Pont. c. 3.
, these words of Christ, I have prayed for thee Peter etc. contain no
privilege of Peter peculiar to his person, but a public prerogative belonging
to his office, and descending to his Successors, as Bellarmine in a later work
Apol. c. 14.. Neque solum.
expressly declares. And therefore though out of them it cannot be proved, but
that his Successors in their private Doctrine, or writing may err, and fall
into heresy; yet it follows, that they never shall, nor can err ex cathedra,
that is, iudicially, in their Councels, Consistories, public decrees or
definitions of faith made for the whole Church: for S. Augustine Epist. 16^.
truly says; The heavenly Master in the chair of Unity has placed the
Doctrine of verity, and secured his people, that for evil Prelates they
forsake not the chair of wholesome Doctrine, in which chair even they that are
ill men, are enforced to speak good things. There is then in the Church a
chair of wholesome Doctrine, which is not the chair in which Christ now sits
in Heaven: for in that there sit no ill men, nor any other but himself. Nor is
this Chair, the chair of every Bishop; for every Bishop is not enforced to
speak truth: many have been heretics and inuentors of heresies. Wherefore S.
Augustine himself declares this chair of Unity to be that, in which sits
one Pastor, in whom all Pastors of the earth are one. I find (says he) L. de
Pastor. c. 13.
all good Pastors in one: for surely good Pastors are not wanting, but they are
in one. They that are divided, are many: here one is praised, because unity is
commended. This one chair is none else but that of S. Peter: There is one
chair (says S. Cyprian) L. 1. ep. 8.
founded upon the Rock by the voice of our Lord. and again: Lib. de Unit.
Eccles.
Christ to manifest unity constituted one chair, and ordained the original of
this unity, beginning from one, giving the primacy to Peter, that so one Church
of Christ, and one chair might be manifested etc. He that keeps not this unity
does he think himself to hold the faith? In the Episcopal chair, says
Optatus L. 2. contra Parmen.
was set Peter, the Head of all the Apostles, to the end, that in this only
chair unity might be preserved to all.

From this privilege obtained by Christ for S. Peter and his chair, it
proceeds that the ancient Fathers have not doubted to believe and teach the
infallibility of the Roman Church in matters of faith, as also from other
grounds of Scripture to be declared hereafter.

S. Cyprian speaking against the Nouatians, says L. 1. Ep. 3.
: They presumed to carry letters from Schismatikes, and heretics, to the
chair of Peter, and the principal Church from whence Sacerdotall unity is
derived; not considering that the Romans are they whose faith was praised by
the mouth of the Apostle, and to whom misbeliefe can have no access.

S. Basil writes to Damasus Pope Epist. 69. per Sabinum Diac.
: Surely that which is given by our Lord to your Holiness, is worthy of that
most excellent voice, which proclaimed you Blessed, to wit, that you may
discern between what is counterfeit, and what is lawful and pure, and that
you may without any diminution preach the faith of our ancestors.

S. Ambrose writes to Siricius Pope L. 10. ep. 31.
: Whom your Holiness has condemned know that we also hold them condemned
according to your judgment.

S. Hierome says to Ruffinus L. 1. Apol. aduers. Ruffin.
: Know thou, that the Roman faith commended by the voice of the Apostle,
admits no such delusions, and that being fensed by S. Paul's authority, it
cannot be altered though an Angel should teach otherwise.

S. Augustine writing against the Pelagians, and having professed that the
Bishop of Rome has from the holy Scriptures authority to declare the true
faith and condemn heresies, adds Epist. 157.
: The Catholic faith expressed in these words of the Apostolic See, is so
ancient, so grounded, so certain, and clear, that it is great impiety for a
Christian to doubt thereof.

S. Fulgentius says De incarnat. and great. c. 11.
, that what the Roman Church teaches, the Christian world without hesitation
belieues to justice, and doubts not to confess to salvation.

S. Peter surnamed Chrysologus exhorts Eutyches the arch-heretike thus Ep. ad
Eutych. prafixa Act is Council. Chalced.
: We exhort thee reverend brother, to lend an obedient ear to the letters of
the most holy Pope of the City of Rome, for as much as the blessed Peter who
lives and rules in his own seat, exhibits the true faith to those that seek
it. I omit other testimonies no less clear of S. Cyrill, of John, and
Maximianus Patriarchs of Constantinople, of Venerable Bede, S. Maximus Martyr,
Theodorus Studites, Rabanus, and others formerly alleged Chap. 1. sect. 4.
.

From this infallibility of the Roman Church it proceeded that the ancient
Fathers and Councels for the decision of all doubts of faith had ever recourse
to the Sea of Rome, and that many learned and holy Doctors have sent their
writings to the Popes of their time to be examined by them, and approved if
their Doctrine were found to be Orthodoxall, or reproved if it were erroneous.
So did S. Augustine to Zozimus: the 4. Primates of Africa to Theodorus: the
Counsels of Carthage and Mileuis to Innocentius: S. Cyril to Celestine:
Theodoret and the Council of Chalcedon to Leo the great: S. Anselme to
Vrbanus: S. Bernard to Innocentius. Other particulars I omit, having dwelled
long in this point already.

SECT. II. Our second Argument.
AN other place of Scripture wherewith we prove the Roman Churches
indefectibility in faith, are the words of Christ, Math. 16. Thou art Peter,
and upon this Rock I will build my Church* and the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it. By the gates of hell Origin, S. Epiphanius, S. Hierome, S.
Cyril, Rabanus, and all other expositors understand, Heresies, and
Arch-heretikes, by whom as by gates men descend into hell. And contrarily by
Rock, they understand S. Peter, and his Successors in the Roman See, against
which heresies, and whatsoever persecutions raised by them, have no more power
to prevail, then the furious waves of raging tempests against a Rock, firmly
seated in the midst of the sea. They may beat, and break themselves against
it, but destroy it they cannot. And so experience teaches: for howbeit the
Heathnish persecutors and other enemies of Christ have tried their forces
against it, and all the other Patriarchall Sees have fallen into heresy, yet
against the Roman Church (God protecting it) no persecutions, no errors have
prevailed, nor ever shall prevail: for she, says S. Augustine Psalm. cont.
part. Donati.
is the Rock which the proud gates of hell overcome not. Neither against the
Rockon which Christ builded his Church (says Origin Tract. 1. in Math.
nor against the Church it self the gates of hell shall prevail. Upon this
Rock (says S. Hierome Ep. 57.
speaking of the Roman See to Damasus) I know the Church to be built: he that
gathers else where, scatters. Our Lord (says S. Epiphanius In Ancorato.
made Peter, the chief of the Apostles, a strong Rock, upon whom the Church of
God is built; and the gates of hell which are heresies and Arch-heretikes shall
not prevail against it: for the faith is every way fortified in him. S.
Chrysostom says Hom. 55. in Math.
: Our Savior promised to Peter power to forgive sins, and that the Church
having for her Pastor, and Head, a poor fisherman, should amongst the assalts
of so many raging floods, remain immovable, and more firmly fixed and
settled, then the strongest Rock.

S. Cyril explicating the same words of our Savior says Apud S. Thom. in
Catena ad c. 16. Math.
: According to this promise of our Lord, the Apostolical Church of Peter
perseuereth in her Bishops pure, and free from all seduction and circumuention,
above all Prelates and Bishops, and above all Primates of Churches, and people,
in the faith and authority of Peter. And whereas other Churches have been
stained with the errors of some, she alone remains established firmly, and
vnconquerably, silencing, and stopping the mouths of all heretics.

Possessor a famous African Bishop, and banished by the Arians, consulting
Hormisdas Pope, about the Doctrine of Faustus Rhegiensis, yeldeth this reason
Extat Epistola apud Baron. Anno 520.
: It is expedient to have recourse to the head, as often as the health of the
members is treated of: for who has a more solicitous care of his subjects, or
from whom is the resolution of faith when it is questioned, to be required, but
from the President of that See, whose first Rector heard from Christ, Thou art
Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church, and the gates of hell shall
not prevail against it.

S. Leo the great: Sermon. 2. de sua assump.
The solidity of that faith which was praised in the prince of the Apostles, is
perpetual: and as that remains, which Peter believed, so remains that also,
which Christ instituted in Peter. Wherefore the disposition of truth remains,
and Peter perseuering in the strength of a Rock, has not left the government of
the Church, which he once undertook.

S. Maximianus an ancient Patriarch of Constantinople higly commended by
Celestine Pope Ep. ad Theodosium.
, and others Apud Spond. anno 431. n. 22.
, writes to the Orientalls: All the bounds of the earth have sincerely
acknowledged our Lord; and Catholics throughout the whole world, professing
the true faith, look upon the power of the B. of Rome, as upon the Sun: And
then speaking of the reward, which our Savior gave to Peter, for that
excellent confession of his faith, he adds: For the Creator of the world
amongst all men of the world, chose S. Peter, to whom he gave the chair of
Doctor, to be principally possessed, by a perpetual right of privilege, to
the end, that whosoever is desirous to know any divine and profound thing, may
have recourse to the oracle, and doctrine of this instruction.

Justinian the Emperor makes this profession of his faith to Bonifacius Pope
Extat inter decreta Bonif. Papae.
: The beginning of salvation is to conserve the rule of right faith, and no way
to swerve from the tradition of our Forefathers; because the words of our Lord
cannot fail, saying. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock etc. And the proofs
of deeds have made good those words, because in the Sea Apostolic the
Catholic Religion is always conserved inviolable. And the same profession was
made by John Patriarch of Constantinople to Hormisdas Pope In epist. ad Hormisd.
, abiuring the memory of all such, as dye out of the Communion of the Roman
Church, or agree not in all things fully with her.

S. Gregory L. 6. ep. 37.
: Who knows not, that the holy Church is strengthened by the solidity of the
Prince of the Apostles, who with his name received the constancy of his mind,
being called Peter, of a Rock to whom by the voice of truth it is said, I will
give thee the keys of the kingdom of Heaven?

S. Maximus a famous Martyr, the greatest Divine of his age, and a stout
Champion of the Church against the Monothelites Epist. ad Marin. Diac. Apud
Spond. Anno 657. n. 2.
: All the Churches of Christians had their beginning, and surest foundation
from the Roman Church, against which the gates of hell shall no way prevail,
according to the promise of our Savior himself, that she should have the
keys of Orthodoxe faith and confession, and open to them that come to her
religiously seeking true piety, and contrarily shut and stop all heretical
mouths, that breath out iniquity against heaven.

Theodorus Studites a man very famous for his learning, and constancy in
defending the Catholic faith, writing together with other his Colleagues to
Paschalis Pope Ep. ad Pashal. and ep. ad Naucrat.
calls him, Porter of the kingdom of Heaven, and Rock of the faith, upon
whom the Catholic Churches built; And the Roman See, The supreme throne in
which Christ has placed the keys of faith, against whom the gates of hell,
which are the mouths of Heretics, have never prevailed, nor shall ever
prevail, according to the promise of our Lord which cannot fail.

To these testimonies I add others of Theodoret and Gelasius alleged by
Bellarmine L. 4. de Pont. c. 3.
, which make up more then a full Jury, to pronounce you guilty of a solemn
untruth, in denying Page 55.
that, what was here spoken to Peter, does accordingly belong to the Pope, by
the right of Succession: for you have heard the Fathers teaching the contrary.
Their exposition I embrace, and follow, as the true sense of holy Scripture,
and detest yours, who have nothing to say against it, but to outface it, by
calling it, An error, and to object against it the comment of Abulensis, who
(say you Page 55.
teaches, that by those words, Blessed art thou Simon, there was granted to S.
Peter an infallible certainty of his souls eternal blessedness, which is an
excellent privilege, but no promise of authority made unto him. If Abulensis
comment so, his comment makes nothing to your purpose: for he denies not the
Church to be built upon Peter, nor grants, that the gates of hell (which are
heresies) shall prevail against her. Again if he say (for I have not seen
him) that Christ by saying, Blessed art thou Simon, granted to S. Peter an
infallible assurance of his eternal happiness, it follows not, that the same
assurance passes to his Successors, as the office of Foundation, Head, and
Governor of the Church, does: for the assurance of eternal happiness, was for
his own peculiat good, and therefore granted to him alone, and not to his
Successors. But the office of Head, and Governor of the Church, was promised to
him for the good of the whole Church, and therefore to pass to his Successors,
according to the nature of privileges, which is, that when a prerogative is
granted to a Governor for the good of the Community of which he is Governor,
(as the office of Head and foundation of the Church was to S. Peter) it dies
not with him, but still lives in his Successors.

Again, that comment of Abulensis (if it be his) I approve not: for it is
disproued out of the words themselves, which being of the present tense, import
nothing else but a present blessedness, in having so great a favor bestowed on
him, as by the special revelation of Almighty God, to know the Divinity of
Christ, and to be the first that made so illustrious a confession thereof, and
(as S. Basil Orat. 3. de peccato, and in proem. de iudicio Dei.
expounds) to have his confession rewarded with a promise of building the
Church on him, and of having the keys of the kingdom of heaven committed to
him: which (says he) was a far greater blessedness then the other Apostles
obtained. And in the same sense expound S. Hierome Ad c. 16. Math.
and S. Augustine Sermon. 10. de verb. Do. and sermon. 31. de verb. Apost.
.

But whereas out of the comment of Abulensis (be it his, or whose you please)
you charge us Page 56,
, with lack both of conscience, and modesty in violating the sacred writ,
unless to make good the jurisdiction of our Popes deriuatiuely from S. Peter,
we can show that all of them by virtue of their succession from him, are so
blessed now in their hopes, as to be infallibly persuaded that no temptation of
Satan shall prevail against their persons, but that they shall be blessed
everlastingly; you cannot be excused from fraud, and folly: fraud, in changing
the state of the question: for our assertion is, that out of these words of
Christ, S. Peter, and his Successors are secured from erring in their public
decrees, and definitions of faith. But that Popes may not err in manners, to
the damnation of their souls, we neither deduce out of this, nor any other
place of holy writ: nor is it true, nor asserted by any Catholic, nor
necessary for the defense of their jurisdiction, or privilege of not erring ex
cathedra: for Christ (says S. Augustine) Ep. 166.
has placed in the chair of Unity the doctrine of Verity, and secured his
people, that for ill Prelates they forsake not the Chair of wholesome Doctrine,
in which chair even ill men are enforced to speak good things. And else where
Ep. 165.
having reckoned all the Popes from S. Peter to Anastasius, who then possessed
his chair, he adds: If in all this time any traitor had come in by
surreption, it cold not breed any prejudice to the Church, nor to innocent
Christians, for whom our Lord making provision, says of evil Prelates; What
they say do ye; but what they do, do it not: for they say, and do not.

And as it is fraud, in you to change the state of the question, so is it folly
to infer, that because Popes may be vicious in their lives, they may err in
their public definitions of faith, or manners, to the seduction of others. S.
Augustine Ep. 137.
observes it to be an old trick of Heretics, because they cannot calumniate
the Scripture, in which they find the Church commended, to calumniate those, by
whom she is defended and governed, to make them odious. And Tertullian long
before L. de Praescrip.
observed the same in the heretics of his time, to whom he answered, that what
they objected, were vitia conuersationis, non pradicationis, faults of manners,
not of Doctrine: and for this S. Augustine reprehendeth Petilianus the
Donatist, saying Cont. lit. Petil. l. 2. c. 51.
: Why do thou call the Apostolic See the chair of pestilence? if for men,
whom thou think to profess the law, and not to fulfill it, did our Lord
Jesus Christ for the Pharisees, of whom he says, that they say and do not, do
any wrong to the chair in which they did sit? Did he not commend that chair
of Moses, and reprehend them, preserving the honor of the chair? Wherefore you
in carping at the vices of some Popes, show your self to be like to the
Donatists, who (says S. Augustine Ibid.
had with wicked fury separated themselves from the Roman Church. And as no
vices of Popes could justify their separation, so neither can it yours.

I deny not, but that histories mention sins and scandals of some Popes; but
yet of few in comparison of the great number of most holy and learned Bishops,
that have possessed that Seat, for whose excellent virtues, and great labors in
defending, and propagating the Catholic faith, you ought rather to commend the
Bishops of Rome, then for the vices of a few to defame both them and their
Seat. Though all the Popes have not been holy like Sem and Iaphet, yet (as S.
Gregory admonishes) L. 25. Mor. c. 22. and l. 3. Pastoral. c. 1.
it is not lawful for you to imitate wicked Cham, in laying open their faults.
It is no marvel, if among so many good there have been some few bad: for among
the twelve Apostles there was a Judas, whose wickedness, as it was no
defamation to the Apostolical function, so nether are they faults of a few bad
Popes, to the dignity of the Roman See. But what if there had been many? Could
their evil life excuse your evil faith? Shall their falling from God by
frailty for a time, justify your departing for ever from Gods Church, by
contempt and obstinate rebellion? If the ill lives of Prelates be a sufficient
cause to forsake the Church, how can you remain in your Protestant
Congregation? For Luther (whom your brother Klebitius in his book against the
Saxonicall Popedom terms, The Pope of Wittemberg) was a Iewd Apostata, and
had conversation with the Devil: Calvin, a stigmaticall Sodomite; Beza, an
especial pattern of wantonness and lust. And if you look nearer home,
Cranmer, and other chief Heads in your English Church, have not been very great
Saints. Wherefore since you cannot but know, that the ill lives of some Popes,
is a Non sequitur, to prove that they may err in their definitions of faith,
you cannot be so simple, as to allege it to that end, but only to ease your
stomach of some part of that venime, wherewith it is charged against the
authority of the Roman Church. And yet not this without imposture: for of the
authors, which you bring, Massonius is a fabulous Historian, and forbidden by
the Church. In indic. le. prohib.
Costerus, as in that very place he confesses that Popes may be wicked in
their lives, Enchir. c. 3.. Patemur.
so he proves that they cannot propose to the Church any heresy, or error,
which is the thing you ought to disprove, but cannot, and therefore divert from
it to rail at the ill lives of Popes, that have been, or may be. Baronius and
Genebraed speak only of such Popes as were intruded, partly by the tyranny of
Emperors, partly by the Marquis of Thuscia, partly by the Nobility of Rome, and
Princes of Etruria. This you ought to have observed with Baronius, and with him
to have put your reader in mind, of the singular care, and providence, wherewith
Christ protecteth the Roman Church: for notwithstanding she suffered greater
calamities by the tyranny of these Christian Princes, the^ she had ever done
under any heathenish persecutors, yet it cannot be showed, that any of those
Princes ever doubted of the infallibility of the Roman Church, or that any of
the aforesaid Popes, albeit they came in by intrusion, ever taught any thing
repugnant to faith.

SECT. III. S. Paul's subjection to S. Peter, and his acknowledgment thereof.
TO prove that S. Paul believed not the domination of S. Peter (for so you call
it Page 57.
and consequently of the Pope, or the universal power of the Roman Church
above all others, or yet the absolute continuance thereof in the faith of
Christ, you spend many arguments throughout six whole Sections, from the eight
to the fourteenth, all which make against your self.

It is frequent with you to call the supreme Ecclesiastical jurisdiction of S.
Peter and his successors, their dominion. If by dominion you understand a
dominiering power, wherewith some temporal Princes govern their subjects, S.
Peter forbids that to all ecclesiastical Prelates 1. Pet. 5.3.
, commanding them not to dominiere in the Clergy. But if by dominion, you
understand a Fatherly government and jurisdiction over the universal Church and
their infallible assurance in their definitions of faith; that S. Peter and his
successors have such a power and jurisdiction, has been already proved, and
will be more confirmed by the answer to your arguments against S. Peter's
supremacy out of sundry passages of S. Paul to the Galathians Page 58. and seqq.
. The first is, Paul some time after the exercise of his Apostleship, would not
go to Jerusalem to Peter, or any of the Apostles, lest he might have seemed
to have been authorized by them: yet three years after that, he takes a
journey thither of see Peter; doubtless for honor sake, as one in order of
Apostleship most eminent: but this be did voluntarily, in discretion, and
brotherly communion; and not in subjection, as the Context shows. So you: but
the Context shows no such matter, and the sacred Expositors teach directly
the contrary. S. Ambrose In eum locum.
: It was fit, that Paul should desire to see Peter, to whom our Savior had
committed the charge of the Churches. S. Hierome Ep. 89. quae est 11. inter
epist. August.
: Peter was of so great authority, that Paul writes in his epistle, Then after
three years I came to Jerusalem to see Peter. And again In c. 1. ad Gal.
: He went to see him to the end he might yield honor unto him. Theodoret In
cap. 1. ad Gal.
: he went to yield unto Peter, as to the Prince of the Apostles, that honor
which was fitting. And showing that S. Paul held Peter to be the supreme judge
to whom all doubts of faith ought to be referred, he says In ep. ad Leon.
: Paul the preacher of truth, and the trumpet of the holy Ghost, ran to the
great Peter, for a resolution of such doubts, as rising about the observation
of the Law, did minister occasion of strife to them that were at Antioch.
Oecumenius In cap. 1. ad Gal.
: He went to see him, as one greater then himself, and stayed with him, to
honor him with his presence. S. Chrysostom Hom. 87. in Joan.
: He went to see him above others, because he was the mouth, and Prince of the
Apostles, and the Head of the whole company. and again In c. 1. ad Gal.
: he went to him, as to one greater then himself, and that, not in a vulgar
manner, but (as he observes out of the Greek Verb, (...)) to behold and
admire him, as a personage of great excellency, and majesty, as men go to
behold, and admire great and famous Cities: for which cause, and to satisfy
himself with a perfect view of his person, and behavior, notwithstanding his
great employments, he stayed 15. days with him. If therefore the general
accord of sacred expositors be of weight, this 1. place of S. Paul which you
produce to disprove his subjection to S. Peter, is so far from disprouing it,
that it strongly proves it, and his own acknowledgment thereof.

Again: 14. years after this time (says S. Paul) I went up to Jerusalem,
according to revelation to confer with them the Gospel which I preach among
the Gentiles. From this place you argue Page 5^.
that S. Paul held himself equal in authority with S. Peter: for S. Hierome
(whom you allege out of Salmeron) says, it is one thing to confer, an other
thing, to learn: for among them that confer, there is equality. What
equality? of jurisdiction, and power? No: (for a subject may confer with his
Superior, a Collegiall with his Rector) but of Doctrine, and learning only; as
S. Hierome there declares, adding, that between him that teaches, and him
that learneth, he that learneth is the lesser; to wit, in knowledge. And
therefore I grant that S. Paul went not to learn of S. Peter: he had learned
his Gospel by revelation immediately from Jesus Christ, the same Master that
taught S. Peter. Nor did he receive from S. Peter, or the other Apostles power,
or authority to preach: for that likewise he had immediately from Christ: and in
this sense he says Gal. 2.6.
: The Apostles added nothing to me. Nevertheless because he had not conuersed
with Christ in mortal flesh, nor learned his Doctrine from the other Apostles,
which had been instructed by him before his death, lest the Gentiles, to whom he
preached, being incensed against him by false Apostles, might have any doubt of
the truth of his Doctrine, or of his Commission to preach; for their
satisfaction, and that his preaching might not be in vain, and without profit
to the hearers, he went to Jerusalem, and conferred his Gospel with the
chief Apostles, to the end that the Gentiles might be certified of the truth of
his Doctrine, knowing it to have their approbation, and to be the same, that
they preached.

But you that borow your argument from Salmeron In Ep. ad Gal. Disput. ^2.
, why do you conceal what follows in his Comment? If (says he) it was
needful for so great an Apostle of Christ, to confer his Gospel with the
Apostles, and Peter; how much more necessary was it, that Luther and Calvin
should have brought theirs, to be conferred with the Sea Apostolic? With what
pillars of the Church did they confer it, as Paul did? or with what Miracle
did they prove it? they that could never persuade themselves so much, as to
come to the Sea Apostolic, and Roman Church the mother of all Churches to
confer; nor to the Oecumenicall Council (of Trent) that was gathered for
their souls health sake, that was free, and open to them, that did courteously
entreat them, and with a safe conduct inuit them to come. So Salmeron; whose
words you thought best not to mention, both because they show your Doctrine to
be destitute of lawful authority, and also because they refute the fabulous
report which you Page 404.
make out of Thuanus your historian, that, diverse Protestants came to the
Council, and desired of the Popes Legates liberty to dispute, but could not be
admitted: for Samleron was present at the Council, as one of the Popes
Divines, who therefore knew what passed in the Council better then Thuanus. And
to Salmerons testimony, I add your own confessions in the late Declaration of
the Archbishops and Bishops of Scotland against the pretended General assembly
holden at Glascow Page 13.
; and in your Apology of the Church of England, which also expresses the
reasons why you refused to come, set down in your own words, and refelled by
Doctor Harding, in his Confutation of the same Apology Part. ad Chap. 7. fol.
293. and seqq.
.

How far therefore you are from the Doctrine and example of S. Paul in this
point, not only Salmeron, but Venerable Bede and S. Anselme In cap. 2. ad Gal.
have declared out of S. Augustine, whose words both they and Salmeron set
down to this purpose. If the Apostle Paul himself (says S. Augustine) L. 28.
contra Paust. c. 4.
being called from Heaven, after the Ascension of our Lord, had not found the
Apostles living, that by communicating and conferring his Gospel with thew,
he might show himself to be of the same society, the Church would give no
credit at all unto him. But when they knew that he preached the same Doctrine
which they did, that he lived in communion and unity with them, and did work
Miracles as they did (our Lord thereby commending him) he deserved so great
authority, that his words at this day are heard in the Church, even as if
Christ were heard to speak in him, as he most truly said. With these Fathers
accords S. Hierome Epist. 89. quae est 10. inter epist. August.
defining that, Paul had not had security of preaching the Gospel, if it had
not been approved by Peter's sentence, and the rest that were with him. So S.
Hierome, whose testimony with the rest show how beggarly a cause you have,
since those very Scriptures which you produce in defense thereof, are so many
verdicts against you.

A third text of S. Paul 2. Cor. 12.11.
you set down thus: I am nothing inferior unto the Chief of the Apostles. But
I cannot commend your translation: for none but Peter is Chief of the
Apostles, to whom therefore S. Paul compares not himself in the singular
number, as you here, and else where (falsifiing his words make him to say) but
to the Chief Apostles in the plural number, and yet not that, in authority
and jurisdiction, (of which he speaks not) but in the dignity of an Apostle,
in his great labors, in his Miracles, in his revelations, in his dangers and
iourneys undertaken for the preaching of Christ, as the Context before and
after shows, and S. Ambrose, Theodoret, S. Anselme, S. Thomas Aquinas and
other expositors declare In eum locum.
.

But you urge the testimonies of Fathers. Page 60. fin.
upon this text of S. Paul: And first that S. Ambrose says In 1. Cor. c. 12.
, Paul was no less in dignity, then Peter. You falsity. S. Ambrose there
compares not Paul with Peter in particular, but speaking of him and the rest in
general says, that, albeit he were called to the Apostleship after them all,
yet in the dignity and function of an Apostle, in preaching and in working of
miracles he was not inferior to them. And to show how imposterously you bring
this his testimony against S. Peter's primacy, he adds, that, Though Andrew
followed our Savior, before Peter, yet Andrew received not the primacy, but
Peter.

2. You object Page 60. fin.
S. Maximus, saying: Whether Paul or Peter is to be preferred, is uncertain.
Here again you falsify. For, to insinuat that S. Maximus preferred Paul before
Peter, you pervert the order of his words, placing Peter after Paul, which S.
Maximus does not, but contrarily Paul after Peter. Again he compares them not
in authority, but only in sanctity of life, and merits. Howbeit (says he) all
the most blessed Apostles obtain equal grace of sanctity in the sight of God,
yet I know not how Peter and Paul by a peculiar prerogative of faith in our
Savior, surpass the rest etc. But which of the two is to be preferred, is
uncertain, for I think them to be equal in merits, because they are equal
in their death. You make no mention of merits to persuade your reader that S.
Maximus compares them in authority, and so much the more you are to be blamed,
because in that very place, he says, that, Paul has the key of knowledge to
preach and teach, but Peter the key of power; which is to say, that Paul
excelled in knowledge, but Peter in authority. And therefore else where he says;
Hom. 3. in Not. Apost. Pet. and Paul.
Peter was of so great merit in the sight of our Lord, that after the rowing of
a small boat, the government of the whole Church was committed to him: and that
Hom. 1. de eisdem.
As Christ was a Rock, so be made Peter a Rock, and built his Church upon him,
and gave him charge of feeding his sheep, and lambs, which out of his mercy he
had redeemed. Wherefore, as certain as it is, that S. Maximus held S. Paul to
be a member of Christ's Church, and one of the sheep which he redeemed: so
certain it is, that he held him subject to S. Peter, as to his Head and Pastor.

3. You object Page 60. fin.
out of S. Chrysostom: Paul (that I say no more) was equal to Peter. You
still falsify. S. Chrysostom says: Paul was equal to Peter in honor, to wit,
of an Apostle, for of that he speaks: you leave out, in honor, to infer
that he equaleth Paul with Peter in authority and jurisdiction; which cannot be
excused from imposture: for one thing it is to be equal with Peter in the
honor of Apostleship (in which all the Apostles were equal unto him) and
another, to be equal to him in authority, which none of the Apostles were.
Among the most blessed Apostles (says S. Leo Ep. 48;
in the likeness of honor, there was difference of power: and though the
election of them all were a like, yet it was granted to one, that be should
surpass the rest: from whence as from a pattern, has proceeded the
distinction of Bishops. The same is declared by S. Maximus Sermon. vlt. de Apost.
Pet. and Paul.
, yea, and by S. Chrysostom himself, in this very place which you object,
saying In ep. ad Gal. 1.18.
: Paul went to Peter, as to one greater, and elder then himself: And, Hom. 87.
Joan.
he went to see him, because he was the mouth, and Prince of the Apostles, and
head of the whole company. These testimonies as they demonstrate Chrysostom to
have believed that S. Peter surpassed Paul in authority; so they convince you
of imposture in putting on him the contrary.

4. You attribute Page 60. fin.
to S. Hierome In Psalm. 44.
these words: The titles of these two Apostles are equal: they are Chiefes of
the Church. But S. Hierome upon that Psalm has no such words, nor makes any
comparison between Peter and Paul, nor any mention at all of them.

5. You object Page 61. init.
out of S. Basils epistles (but at random naming none in particular) that, S.
Peter and Paul are Pillars of the Church. And what of that? As among many
great, one may be greater then another; so of two Pillars, one may be higher
then another. By those 7. Pillars mentioned in the Proverbs Prou. 9.1.
, some of the Expositors understand the 7. Sacraments, which yet are not all
equal: for Baptism exceeds the rest in necessity, and the Eucharist in
Excellency. Others understand the Doctors of the Church, whom Daniel compares
to stars Dan. 13.3*
which yet (witness S. Paul 1. Cor. 15.42.
are unequal in their light. And hereby is showed the futility of your
argument, that S. Paul held James and John to be equal in jurisdiction with
Peter, because speaking of them three, he calls them all, Pillars.

6. You object Page 61. init.
out of Casaubon, that, Eucherius calls Peter and Paul, Two Princes of the
Christians. But S. Hierome In Psalm. 44.
calls all Bishops, Princes of the Church, and yet all Bishops are not equal
in jurisdiction: for Bishops are subject to Archbishops, Archbishops to
Patriarchs; Patriarchs to the Pope; and so was Paul, to Peter. But let
Eutherius speak for himself: Christ (says he) In vigil. S. Pet.
first committed to Peter his lambs, and then his sheep; because he made him
not only a Pastor, but Pastor of Pastors. Peter therefore feeds the Lambs.
and the sheep: he feeds the young ones and the Dammes: he governs the
subjects and the Prelates, and is therefore Pastor of all: for beside lambs,
and sheep, there is nothing in the Church. So Eucherius, showing how Casaubon
and you abuse him: and that if Paul be a sheep of Christ's flock, he is subject
to Peter's pastotall authority.

A fourth text of Scripture you object, Page 59.
which are those words of S. Paul: They saw, that the Gospel of the
uncircumcision was committed to me, as the Gospel of the circumcision unto
Peter. Your gloss is, that the ordinary ministration of these two Apostles was
distinct, Peter having for his Diocese, the Jews; and Paul the Gentiles,
which was of infinite extent larger. But by the like argument you might infer
that S. Paul by calling Christ, The minister of Circumcision, Romans 15.8.
and himself, Doctor of the Gentiles, 1. Tim. 2.7
signified that himself had a distinct ordinary ministration from Christ, and
a Dioces of far larger extent, then his. Wherefore this clause implies not any
division of the authority of their ordinary Ministry; nor yet, that the
Diocese of Peter was confined to the Jews, or of Paul to the Gentiles; for
both of them preached to Jews and Gentiles. It co^taines nothing else, but a
special testimony of the blessing of God upon S. Peter, to persuade the Jews,
and upon S. Paul to persuade the Gentiles: and yet not so, but that all the
other Apostles had likewise authority to preach unto them both.

But you oppose Page 59.
, that S. Ambrose In Gal. 2^
from hence cellecteth two different Primacies, the one of Peter, and the other
of Paul. S. Ambroses words are: As Paul received a primacy of founding Churches
among the Gentiles; so Peter had the primacy of founding the Church; a dignity
far greater, then to preach and found Churches among the Gentiles, and that
implies the subjection of S. Paul, and all other Prelates of the Church unto
him.

2. You say: Page 59.
Chrysostom argues from these words of S. Paul, that both he and Peter had
the same dignity: and, Oecumenius wishes his reader to observe, that Paul
herein equalled himself to Peter. I answer: The false Apostles excepted
against S. Paul's Doctrine, and authority to preach, because he had not
conuersed with Christ, nor bin trained up in his schole before his passion, as
the other Apostles had; and by that means seduced some of the Galathians, as
it appears out of the first Chapter of his epistle to them. Wherefore in the
second Chapter he certifies them, that he went to Jerusalem, to confer his
Gospel with the chief known Apostles, and was received by them into their
society, as being an Apostle no less then they were, and one that had learned
his Doctrine by revelation, and received his authority to preach from the same
master, that taught and authorized them. And herein only S. Chrysostom and
Oecumenius say, that S. Paul is equal to the rest, and compares himself to
Peter the chiefest of them: for (says Oecumenius) In cap. 2, ad Gal.
though he speak this of Peter praedicationis causa, to authorize his own
Doctrine (with the Galathians) yet he respects and honoreth Peter far above
himself, that is to say, as, Head of the Apostles (for so he had called him a
little before:) and, Ad c. 1. Act.
As one, to whom the government of the Disciples was committed, and that had
power to command them all. And how cold S. Chrysostom mean any other thing,
he that said; In c. 2. ad Gal. and hom. 87, in Joan.
Paul went to Peter as to one greater then himself; as to the mouth and Prince
of the Apostles, and Head of the whole company: that, in matters belonging to
authority Paul gives the primacy to Peter Hom. 35. in c. 14.1. ad Cor.
: that Peter surpassed the rest of the Apostles in authority by many degrees:
L. 2. de Sa^ord.
that he was chief of the Apostles, and had the whole world subject to him:
Orat. 5. aduers. Iudaeot.
that, Christ delivered to him the gouerme^t of the Church throughout the whole
world, Hom 80. ad Antioch.
and the charge of feeding those sheep, which he had redeemed with his blood L.
2. de Sacord.
.

3. You object Page 61.
S. Gregory, saying: Paul was made the Head of Nations, and obtained the
principality of the whole Church. S. Paul (I grant) obtained the principality
of the whole Church, as the rest of the Apostles did, because they were all
Princes over the whole Church, as S. Hierome and others collect out of those
words of the Psalm, Psalm. 44.17.
Thou shall make them Princes over all the earth. And this is the principality
which S. Chrysostom declared S. Paul to have, Hom. 18. in epist. ad Rom
when he said; all preaching, the affairs of the world, all mysteries* and all
dispensations were committed to him. But this argues not that the Princedome
and authority of S. Paul or the other Apostles was independent, and without
subordination to S. Peter: for (as S. Hierome In psalm. 44.
observes) The Church has Bishops instead of the Apostles, and as their
Successors in their Episcopal authority; which therefore in that respect are
Peers and Princes of the Church, yet not without due subordination: for all
Bishops are subject to the Pope: and so were Paul and the other Apostles to
Peter. And this S. Gregory himself (to show your imposture in obiecting him
for the contrary) declares saying: L. 4. ep. 38.
Peter the Apostle is the chief member of the holy and universal Church:
Paul, Andrew, John, what are they, but Heads of several flocks?

SECT. IV. Other arguments of Doctor Morton answered.
IN prosecution of the same matter you object, Page 62.63.64.
that Paul named James before Peter saying: James, Cephas, and John: whereby you
will have, Paul to mate and equal James, and John with Peter: for it had been
ill manners in him to name James before Peter, if Peter had been James his
Superior, as it would be thought ill manners, in a Catalogue of Bishops to
reckon the Bishop of Colen before the Pope. You argue from an uncertain
ground: for S. Chrysostom in his commentary, S. Ambrose, and S. Hierome both
in the text and commentary, read, Peter, James and John: and so likewise does
S. Hierom^ in other his works Contr^ Heliud and l. de Scriptor. Eccles. in
Paulo.
. It is therefore credible that S. Paul in naming them, observed the same order:
but if he named them otherwise, it is no argument to prove that he equalled
James in authority with Peter: first because (as S. Chrysostom In cap. 1. ep.
ad Gal.
notes) S. Paul (in that very Epistle) professes himself to yield greater
honor to Peter, and show more love to him, then to the rest, in saying, that he
went up to Jerusalem, not for any of them, but for his sake alone. 2. because
ascending by gradation he places Peter above himself, and next unto Christ: I
am Paul's, and I Apolloes, but I of Cephas, and I of Christ. 3. If it be true,
that he named James before Peter, he did it not to equal them in authority,
and much less to prefer James before Peter, but in regard of the priority of
the knowledge which James received of the great grace given to Paul: for when
he came the first time to Jerusalem to give the Apostles notice of his
calling, and of the great fruit of his labors, he found none of them there but
James. Put now the like case, and it will neither be ill manners, nor any
derogation to the Popes authority to name him after the Bishop of Colen, or of
Milan. 4. Because it is certain, that in all other places of the new
Testament, in which there is a Catalogue of all the Apostles in general, or of
some in particular, Peter is still named in the first place: and if here (as
you say) he is named before Peter, because he was Bishop of Jerusalem, it is
no argument to prove him Superior or equal in authority to Peter. S. Bernard
Sermon. 3. de 7. misericord. fragm.
names Paul and Matthew before Peter, and yet in that very place expressly
says, that the Pastoral care of the whole Church was committed to Peter. And
the sacred Expositors teach you the same lesson: for when a new Apostle was to
be chosen in place of Judas, S. Chrysostom notes Hom. 3. in. Act.
that albeit James was Bishop of Jerusalem, yet he acknowledged the
superiority not to belong to himself, but to Peter, and that therefore not he
but Peter showed his authority in the carriage of that business. Behold (says
Chrysostom) the modesty of James: He had received the office of Bishop of
Jerusalem, and yet speaks ^ot a word, but yelds the throne to Peter. And
Oecu^^e ni^^: Ad cap. 1. Act.
James rises n^^, out Peter, be being the man, to whom the government of the
Disciples was committed. And Chrysostom further declaring that the Episcopal
authority which christ gave to Peter, was as far above that of James, as the
Bishop of the whole world surpasses in authority the Bishop of one particular
See. says Hom. vlt. in Joan.
: If any one demand how James obtained the Sea of Jerusalem, I answer, he
was made by Peter, Master of the whole world: which difference between the
authority of Peter and James, Euthymius Ad c. 21. Joan.
has also expressed in the same words. And no less S. Bernard, saying L. 2.
de considerat. c. 9.
: The other Apostles obtained each of them their peculiar stocks, James
contented with Jerusalem, yelds the universality to Peter. I conclude therefore
that if S. Paul once named James before Peter (which is yet doubtful) it is a
non sequitur to collect from thence, that he held James superior or equal in
authority to Peter. You show your self to be one of those men of whom S. Peter
1. Pet. 3.16.
says, that reading S. Paul's epistles, they deprave them, and the rest of the
Scriptures, to their own perdition.

Not unlike to this, is the argument you make Page 62. fin. 63.
to prove that S. Paul (forsooth) butteth and excopteth against Peter's
authority, because he says Gal. 1.18.
, I went to Jerusalem to see Peter, and tarried with him 15. days; but other
of the Apostles I saw none, save James the brother of our Lord. Your inference
is, that Paul going up to stop the mouths of false Apostles, who objected that
he had not sufficient commission to preach, as not having been authorized by
the other Apostles, if the spirit of Popery had reigned in those days, his
Adversaries might have replied, that Peter being the Vicar of Christ, and the
Ordinary and universal Pastor of his Church, was alone sufficient, and All in
All to authorize him, because the Governor of all others without exception. So
you, but falsely and ignorantly: for Paul went not then to Jerusalem to have
his Gospel approved, but only for honors sake, to see and reverence Peter his
Superior, as the expositors with one accord declare: Their words you have
already heard. His journey to Jerusalem to vindicate his calling, and have his
Gospel approved by S. Peter and the other Apostles, was 14. years after,
when he took Barnabas and Titus with him, as in the second Chapter to the
Galathians he declares. But you are contented to confound the former journey
with this: such mistakes are the engines of Arguments wherewith you But at the
Popes authority.

SECT. V. Privileges granted to other of the Apostles, and not to S. Peter,
objected by Doctor Morton.
TO the former objections you add others, concerning some privileges granted
to other Apostles, and not to S. Peter; which I will briefly touch. The first
is Page 64.
; Peter gave not sentence in the Apostolical Synod, but James in his presence.
This is an untruth, and such I have proved it to be.

The second Page 64.
: Peter leaned not on Christ's breast, as John did. True; but Christ made Peter
the foundation of his Church, and Pastor of his flock; a far greater dignity,
then to lean on his breast, and which implies John's subjection to him.

The third is Page 64.
: Peter solicited John to ask a question of scorecy. He did so: but how ill
advised you are, to object this against Peter's Primacy, the Fathers will
inform you. Cassiodorus L. de amicit. c. Quasi diceret, benefac. sint amici.
: Surely our Lord preferred Peter before John, and bestowing the Princedome on
Peter did not therefore withdraw his affection from the disciple whom he loved.
He gave to Peter the keys of the kingdom of heaven, that he might open and
shut heaven: to John he gave a facility of opening unto us the secrets of his
breast. To Peter he gave the charge and government of his Church: to John the
care and custody of his Mother. Peter durst not ask of our Lord, who was to
betray him: John at Peter's instance asked confidently what the Prince of the
Apostles durst not in quire. S. Chrysostom Hom. vlt. in Joan.
: Why does John mention his leaning on Christ's breast? Not without cause; but to
show the confidence of Peter after his denial: for he that durst not then
ask, but did is by another, after the charge of his brethren was given to him
commits is not to another, but himself asks the Master; and John is
silens. He speaks and shows his love to John etc. For when Christ had
communicated great matters to Peter, and given him charge of the whole world,
he being desirous to have John for his partner, and colleague, said; And this
man, what? And as he not daring to ask at the last supper, did it by John; so
now does he the like for John, thinking that he was desirous to ask, but durst
not. And again Hom. 66. in Math.
: Mark how this same John that lately made such demands, after wholly yelds
the primacy to Peter, and prefers him in all things before himself. S. Hierome
L. 1. aduers. Iouin.
; Among the twelve Apostles one is chosen, that a Head being appointed,
occasion of Schism might be taken away. And declaring Ibid.
why the dignity of Head was not given to John, but to Peter, he yeldeth this
reason, because Peter was the elder, and lest if Christ had bestowed that
dignity on a young man, whom he loved, he might seem to minister occasion of
envy to the rest. That famous Emperor Leo surnamed The wise, having declared
Sermon. de S. Petro.
that Christ male Peter Prince of pastors, and required of him the care of
feeding his flock, as a return of his love, adds: Peter knowing that to be a
great Princedome, and how great strength it requires, seeing John following
whom Jesus greatly loved, said; And this man, what? will thou have me to be
placed as Head over the disciples, what then do thou command him to do? Our
Lord answered, as it were checking Peter: So I will have him to remain, till I
come: what is that to thee? follow thou me, that is, follow me with this
pastoral staff: and as whiles I was with you, I did keep you watching over
you, as a Father, and as your Head and Master: so be thou in my place, and
follow me with thy Princedome and power, confirming thy brethren; for I will
have thee to be in my place: from whence it is, that Peter remains till this
very day following Christ in his Successor. Theophilact Ad c. vlt. Joan.
: Our Savior speaking to Peter, says: I deliver into thy hands the preaching
of my Gospel and the whole world etc. I lead thee forth, to govern the
world. And again Ibid.
: The government of the sheep is committed to Peter: and not only that; but he
asks, and is made a mediator for him, that was best beloved. So these
Fathers. And if it be lawful to compare sacred things to profane, we may in
this liken Christ, and these two Apostles, to Alexander, and his two friends,
Craterus and Ephestion. Craterus loved Alexander as a King, looking to his
public affairs, and honor: Ephestion loved his person, diligently procuring
his health, and private well-doing: whereupon Alexander was wont to say, that
Craterus loved the King; and Ephestion loved Alexander. So we may say, that
John loved Christ, more then any other of the Apostles did, as the cause of his
virginity, and author of his chaste love: but Peter loved him, as the Prince of
Pastors, more then any other ever did. And in reward of this their love, Christ
loved John, as a Virgin, that had dedicated his body and soul to him alone,
and commended to him, as to a Virgin, the custody of his Virgin Mother: but he
loved Peter in regard of his flock, which was to be fed, and governed upon
earth: and in that respect, made him Universal Pastor and Governor thereof:
which was a greater dignity, then to lean on Christ's breast, or to be the
guardian of his Mother.

The fourth objection is Page 64.
: Paul reprehended Peter to his face before all. This you had urged before Page
61.
as a principal Argument, to disprove S. Peter's superiority over S. Paul; but
as unfortunately as the rest: for this reprehension was not of superiority, but
of charity, as that of Iethro Exodus 18.14.
to Moses; that of Ioab to king David 2. Reg. 19.15. and seqq.
; and of S. Bernard to Pope Eugenius L. 4. de considerat.
: all which, as they stand well with the superiority of the persons reproved,
to their reprouers; so does this with the superiority of Peter, to Paul: yea
the Fathers are so far from arguing from hence any equality of Jurisdiction
between these two Apostles, that diverse of them assume it, as an Argument, to
prove that when there is just occasion, inferiors may with due charity and
humility reprehend their Superiors. Paul (says Chrysostom In cap. 2. ad Gal.
reproues, and Peter hears, to the end that whiles the Master reproved holds
his peace, the scholars may learn to change their opinion. S. Augustine: Ep.
19.
That which was done of S. Paul profitably, by the liberty of charity, Peter
took in good part, by holy and benign godliness of humility: and thereby gave
a more rare and holy example to posterity, if at any time they do amiss, not
to disdain reproof from their inferiors, then Paul did in teaching the meaner
to resist the greater with brotherly charity, for the defense of truth. And S.
Gregory Hom. 18. in Ezechiel.
notes, that Peter as he was chief in the Apostellship, so he showed himself
to be chief in humility. All which discovers your ignorance, in saying Page
62.
, that with all like circumstances of opposition, in true tenor of morality,
one can hardly reprehend another, unless he be his equal. If you had been as
skillful in Divinity, as you are diligent in laying hold of any shadow of
occasion, to carpe at S. Peter's authority; you would have known the lesson
which S. Thomas and all Divines with him, 2.2. q. 33. art. 4.
teach, that there are two kinds of correction; the one of justice, the other
of charity: the first belongs only to Superiors, in respect of their
subjects: the second, to all men: for as charity binds us to love all, so it
binds us in due circumstances to use fraternall correction to all, even
Superiors: and so Paul did to Peter. Finally so certain it is, that all
antiquity believed S. Peter to be Superior in authority to S. Paul, that (as S.
Hierome Apud S. Aug. op. 11.
notes) blasphemous Porphyrius taxed S. Paul of petulancy, and pride, in
reprehending his Superior: and that some to free him from that note, thought it
was not Peter the Apostle whom he reprehended, but another of the Disciples,
called Cephas.

But you reply Page 62.
out of our interlineary Gloss, that Paul reprehended Peter, tanquam par, as
being his equal. You mistake: for that note is not in the interlineary, but in
the gloss of Lyra, and (as Gratian has declared 2. q. 7. Cap. Paulus.
is to be understood of parity in the Apostleship, and in purity of life, and
conversation, not of Ecclesiastical power, and jurisdiction: in which sense,
S. Augustine L. 2. de bapt. c. 1.
writes of S. Cyprian, that he was equal to S. Peter in his Martyrdom, but
inferior in power.

But you make a digression Page 61. and 210.
to tell us, of a notorious prerogative, which our Popes challenge to
themselves in their books of privileges authorized by themselves for their
own licenciousnesse, saying: None presumes to reprehend the Pope, except only
in case he depart from the faith: no, not although otherwise he draw
innumerable multitudes with himself into Hell. Of which privilege they can
give no other ground, then their falsely pretended plenitude of Papal power:
whereupon it is, that their Gloss affirms, that in disposing of Prebends,
and such acts, there is none that dare say to the Pepe, Sir, why do you so?
These are your words, from which you take occasion to rail lustily against the
Pope. And I ask you, Sir why do you so? For you cannot but remember, that in
your hateful libell, set forth many years since under the title of, A
discovery of Romish doctrine in the case of conspiracy and rebellion, you
proposed this very objection, and that a learned Antagonist of yours F. Persons.
in his Treatise tending to mitigation, against the seditious writings of
Thomas Morton Minister, told you Chap. 5. number. 54.
, that many years before that time the same objection had been set forth in
print, by Sir Francis Hastings, in his Watchword, and defense thereof, and
stoutly avouched by Matthew Sutcliffe Minister, his Advocate and Proctor of that
defense: and that the same objection was confuted at large by the Warn word,
and so many lies, falsehoods, and frauds discovered therein, that the said
Matthew Sutcliffe in his Reply entitled, A full and round answer, thought good
to let it pass roundly, without any answer at all: and therefore your said
Antagonist told you (as with reason he might) that he greatly marueyled, with
what conscience, or if not conscience, with what forehead at least, you could
at that time write and print things, that you did know, or might have known,
to be merely false, and forged. Is not this (says he) a sign of obstinate
wilfulness, and that neither God, nor truth is sought for by you, but only to
maintain a part or faction, with what slight or falsehood soever? Having given
you this admonition, though he remit you, or rather the reader to the Warnword
for a larger satisfaction, yet he also briefly answers Ibid. number. 55.56.57.58.
showing, 1. Your gross ignorance in ascribing that Canon to Pope Boniface,
whereas it is gathered by Gratian, out of the sayings of S. Boniface an
Englishman, that was Archbishop of Ments in Germany, and a holy Martyr. 2. Your
fraud, in setting down the words of the Canon corruptly, both in Latin, and
English, as by leaving out the beginning which shows the drift of the Canon;
and the end which contains a reason of all that is said; and cutting of other
words in the midst, to cover the pious meaning of S. Boniface. 3. Your
falsehood in leaving out, and altering some words, and corruptly translating
others, with a heap of falsities, as he rightly calls them Ibid. number. 57.
marg.
. Wherefore if he had just cause to marvel, with what conscience or forehead
you could then repeat an objection so fully answered before; far greater
cause have I to maruayle now, that after he has again given you this second
answer, and so fully discovered your fraud, you are not ashamed yet again to
reiterate the same objection, without taking any notice of those errors, and
wilful falsities, which that answerer laid to your charge. To him, and to the
Warnword, I remit the reader.

But because the gloss affirms the Pope to have plenitude of power in
disposing of Prebends, and that none ought therein to say unto him, why do you
so? You call this, the height of all desperate presumption in the Popes, to
make themselves incontroulable in their mischiefs. A bold censure. Kings have
fulness of power to dispose of the temporal offices of their kingdoms, and
none ought to say unto them, Why do you so? Will you therefore tell them, that
this their authority is the height of all desperate presumption to make
themselves incontroulable in their mischiefs? No; why then do you give it that
name, and censure in the Popes? You might have done well, to ask S. Bernards
opinion: He would have told you Ep. 131.
, that the plenitude of power is by a singular prerogative given to the Sea
Apostolic: That he which resists this power, resists the ordination of
God: that he has power, if he judge it profitable, to erect new Bishoprics,
where formerly they were not; and of those that are in being, to put down some
and set up others, as reason shall dictate unto him; so that he may lawfully of
Bishops, make Archbishops; and contrariwise, if it shall seem necessary: He
can summon from the furthest parts of the earth, whatsoever Ecclesiastical
persons of never so high degree, and compel them to appear before him, and
this, not once, or twice, but as often as he shall find it expedient. This is
the power which the gloss speaks of: you call it the Height of all desperate
presumption, whereby the Popes make themselves incontroulable in their
mischiefs. S. Bernard holds it to be a power given him by Christ, and that
whosoever refisteth it (as you do) resists the ordinance of God. Whether is it
fit, that Christian men should believe S. Bernard, or you? especially since you
acknowledge him to be a Saint, which he cold not be, if he had erred in faith:
nor will any wise man think, that in this point he was of any other belief,
then all the holy Fathers of Gods Church were, whose doctrine he knew, and
understood better then you do.

But not contenting your self with censuring, and condemning Popes, you carpe
at the holy Martyr S. Boniface, (whom all Germany reuerenceth as their Apostle)
for teaching, that albeit the Pope should by his scandalous life draw
innumerable multitudes with him into hell, yet no man may presume to correct
him (to wit iuridically by punishing or deposing him, for that is the sense in
which S. Boniface speaks) unless he also depart from the faith. But you
consider not the wrong which by thus carping at the Pope, you offer to all
Christian Princes: for dare you say, that if an Emperor, a King or any other
absolute Prince be of so scandalous a life, that by his example he lead
thousands with him into Hell, he may therefore be deposed? Wherefore since you
will hold it to be good doctrine, that albeit a temporal Prince, yea or many
Princes living at the same time, should by their vicious lives, draw thousands
with them into hell, none of them may therefore be corrected iuridically; why
do you carpe at us for defending the same of the Pope, who is but one at once?

Your fifth objection is Page 64. sin. 65.
; S. Paul alone writ to the Romans, not S. Peter. True; for when S. Peter writ
his Epistles, he was at Rome, and had converted many of the Romans to Christ,
and planted the Church among them, before S. Paul came theither, or writ his
epistle to them. Again S. Peter writ his epistles to all the faithful, and in
regard thereof you entitle them, General Epistles, and we, Catholic Epistles,
a title, which is not given to those of S. Paul.

Your sixth Objection is Page 65.
: It was not said of Peter's ship as it was of that wherein S. Paul was, God
has given unto thee all them that sail with thee: and except those (to wit
the Mariners) remain in the Ship, you cannot be saved. Among 28. famous
privileges, which Bellarmine Lib. 1. de Pont. c. 17.18.19.20.21.22.23.24.
shows to have been granted to S. Peter, and not to S. Paul, nor to any other
of the Apostles, you are content to conceal them all without making any
mention of them, unless it be of two or three, to carpe at them, as here you
do at his ship, postposing it to that, in which S. Paul sailed, because in a
dangerous tempest, God preserved the lives of all that were in the ship, for
his sake. But in this, your dealing is no better, then in the rest: for the
holy Doctors take the ship of Peter to be a type of the Catholic Church, out
of which none can be saved eternally: which they say not of the ship, in which
Paul sailed. When Christ saw two ships standing by the lake of Genezareth,
going into the one, ship Luc. 5.3.
that was Simons, and sitting, he taught the multitude out of the ship; it was
not without mystery, that of those two ships, Christ made choice of Peter's only
to teach the people out of it: for (as S. Hilary says) Can. 13. in Math.
the Church is the ship, in which the word of life is placed, and preached, and
which they that are out of it, cannot understand, but lie like sand barren and
unprofitable: and the preaching of Gods word out of the ship of Simon in
particucular, signifies, that Christ dwells in that society, which keeps the
faith and communion of Peter, and makes his See the pastoral chair, from
whence by Peter and his successors, he teaches the doctrine of his Gospel.
Our Lord (says S. Ambrose) Sermon. 11.
goes only into that ship of the Church, of which Peter is Master, our Lord
saying, Upon this rock I will build my Church. And then he adds, that the
Church of Peter is the Arc of No^e, to show that out of his Church none can be
saved. Which Doctrine S. Hierome likewise delivers, comparing the Roman
Church to the Arc of No^e, out of which whosoever is, shall perish at the
coming of the flood. Moreover howbeit other ships be tossed, yet (says S.
Ambrose) Peter's ship is not tossed: in her wisdom sayleth, perfidiousnesse is
absent, L. 5. in c. 5. Luc.
faith favors: for how cold that ship be tossed, of which he is Governor,
that is the strength of the Church? And S. Bernard L. 2. de consider.
: The sea is the world; the ships, the Churches: From whence it is, that Peter
walking on the waters like our Lord, showed himself to be the only Vicar of
Christ, which was not to govern one nation, but all; for many waters are many
people: and therefore whereas each of the others has his peculiar ship, to thee
(he speaks to Eugenius Pope S. Peter's successor) is committed that one mighty
great ship made of them all, to wit the universal Church of the whole world. I
conclude therefore, that the ship of S. Peter is the pastoral Chair, from
whence the doctrine of Christ is to be learned by all, and the Arc of No^e,
out of which none can be saved; and that therefore between his ship, and that
in which S. Paul sailed; as also between the privileges granted to the one,
and to the other, there is as much difference, as between the eternal
salvation of all Gods elect, and the corporal life of a few Mariners, and
passengers, that sailed with S. Paul.

Your seventh and principal Objection is Page 65.
: If S. Peter had written of himself, as S. Paul did of himself, saying: I
have the care of all the Churches, this one would have seemed to you a firmer
foundation, then the word, Rock, or any other of those Scriptures, whereby you
labor to erect a Monarchy on S. Peter, and (by your consequence) upon the Pope
over all Churches in the world. Answer. There are two kinds of solicitude,
and care: one proceeding from the obligation of justice, the other merely out
of the zeal of Charity. The supreme care which S. Peter had both of all
Churches, and of their Pastors was of obligation of justice, because he had
jurisdiction over them all, as being supreme Pastor over the whole flock of
Christ: and therefore as the Pastor has obligation of justice to govern his
flock, and attend to the good thereof, so had S. Peter to attend to the good and
government of the universal Church, and whatsoever persons thereof; which
function was not committed to S. Paul, nor did Christ promise to build his
Church on him, as he did on S. Peter: and therefore that care he had of the
universal Church, proceeded from his great zeal of Gods glory, and feruorous
charity, which made him travel so much in the conversion of souls.

SECT. VI. What estimation S. Paul had of the Roman Church.
YOu say, Page 65.
S. Paul had not by far so great estimation of the Roman Church, as we would
make the world believe. How prove you this? because (say you) Dionysius Bishop
of the Corinthians, ( witness Eusebius L. 2. c. 24.
says, that Peter and Paul both founded the Church of Corinth, and that of
Rome. This then is your argument: Dionysius Bish. of Corinth says; Peter and
Paul founded the Churches of Corinth, and Rome: Ergo S. Paul had not by far
so great estimation of the Church of Rome, as we would make the world believe.
A witless consequence: It is true, that we account it a great honor, and
happiness for the Church of Rome, to have been founded by those two most
glorious Princes of the Apostles: and so it was also to the Church of Corinth.
But the Church of Rome was not only founded, but moreover ennobled by them: for
(as Tertullian L. de Praescr. c. 36.
observes) they powered into her all their doctrine, together with their
blood, and enriched her with the inestimable treasure of their sacred bodies.
But her chiefest dignity, and that which makes her absolutely the Head and
Mother of all Churches, is, that S. Peter the supreme Pastor and Governor of
the universal Church fixed his seat at Rome, and ending his life there, left
the same dignity to his successors: and they (as occasion required) ceased not
to send their pastoral admonitions to the Corinthians: for when not long after
S. Peter and Paul had founded a Church among them, they fell into errors and
dissentions among themselves, S. Clement Pope successor to S. Peter, writ unto
them (says S. Irenaeus) L. 3. c. 3.
potentissimas literas, most effectual letters, reducing them to peace, and
showing them the Doctrine, which they had newly received from the Apostles. And
to the same purpose Soter Pope, not long after, writ also unto them. And that
the Corinthians acknowledged these epistles of the Roman Church to be sent unto
them, as from their Mother Church whose doctrine they were to embrace, and
received them as such, appears in this, that (is Dionysius their Bishop, and
Eusebius L. 4. hist. c. 22.
out of him testify) they held them in so great veneration, that they used to
read them publicly in the Churches, for the instruction of the saythfull. But
this you could not see, or if you did see it, were willing to conceal it, as
not being for your purpose.

2. Whereas we in commendation of the Roman faith and Church are wont to allege
those words of S. Paul, in his Epistle to the Romans Romans 1.8.
: I give thanks to my God; through Jesus Christ for all you, because your
faith is renowned throughout the whole world; you say Page 66.
, that we upon this commendation of the faith of those Romans, use in a manner
to triumph, as though that Encomium with the same faith were hereditary to that
Church, or as if at that day, Catholic, and Roman, had been all one. If in
this testimony of S. Paul we triumph, and hold the Catholic faith, and the
Roman faith, to be all one, and hereditary to the Church of Rome, we do therein
nothing more, then what the most holy and learned Doctors of Gods Church from
time to time have done. And as out of this passage of S. Paul we show you, that
the faith of the Roman Church was pure in the Apostles time, so we require of
you (as S. Augustine L. de. unto. Eccles. c. 12. and 13.
did of the Donatists) to show us out of Scripture, that after 600. years she
was to fall from the true faith, as you pretend her to have done. Let them
(says S. Augustine) read us this in the Scripture, and we yield: but if they
read not this in the Scripture, but seek to persuade it by their contentions
wrangling, I believe those things which are read in the holy Scriptures, but I
believe not those which are affirmed by vain heretics. And in requiring this
at your hands, we require no other prose for the truth of your Protestant
Church and faith, but what we are able to show for ours: for that the Roman
Church cannot err in says I have already proved Hoc cap. sect. 1. and 2.
out of Scriptures and Fathers, which therefore convince her to be the true
Catholic Church, in which the spirit of truth dwells for ever Joan. 14.16.
And that the Catholic Church, and the Roman Church, are terms conuertible
denoting one and the same thing, has also been proved Above Chap. 1. sect. 3.
. But because you seem to think, that out of this text of S. Paul it cannot
be proved, that the faith which S. Peter delivered to the Romans, is hereditary
to the Church of Rome, or that the Catholic faith, and the Romen faith are all
one, it will not be amiss to let you hear, what the ancient Fathers (the best
interpreters of Scripture) have believed in this point.

That holy and renowned Martyr S. Cyprian L. 1. ep. 3.
out of this text proves, that the Roman Church cannot fall from that faith
which she once received. They (to wit the Nouatian heretics) having set up a
false Bishop presume to carry letters from Schismatikes, and heretics, to the
chair of Peter, and the principal Church, from whence Sacerdotall unity is
derived, not considering, that the Romans are they whose faith was praised by
the mouth of the Apostle, and to whom unfaithfulness, can have no access. If
unfaithfulness can have no access to the Roman Church, it follows that she
retains still the same faith, which was commended by S. Paul, and that
whosoever belieueth at this day as she belieues, is free from all error in
faith. The same is confirmed by an other testimony of the same Father, who
writing to Cornelius Pope, and diverse of the Romans suffering banishment in the
persecution of Decius, and praising their constancy and faith, says Ep. 57.
: It was foreseen in spirit, and prophetically foretold by the Apostle: My
dearest brethren whiles you are of one heart, and one voice, it is the
confession of all the Roman Church; that faith has shined in you which the
Apostle praised. He did even then foresee in spirit, this praise of your
virtue, and strength of your constancy, and by prediction of future things gave
testimony of your deserts, and comm^nding the parents, encouraged their
Children.

With S. Cyprian accords S. Hierome: When (says he to Demetrias) Ep. 8.
thou wast little, and the Bishop Anastasius of happy and holy memory governed
the Roman Church, a cruel tempest of heretics risen out of the Eastern parts
attempted to pollute and corrupt the sincerity of that faith, which had been
commended by the mouth of the Apostle: but this personage (Pope Anastasius)
rich in a most plentiful poverty, and in an Apostolical care, brake the
pestilent head, and stopped the hissing mouth of that Hydra. And because I
fear, yea have heard say, that the buds of this most renemous plant do still
liu^, and spring up in some, I thought it my duty, to admonish thee in a
devout zeal of Charity, that thou keep fast the faith of S. Innocentius his
son, and successor in the Apostolical chair. And writing to Theophilus,
Patriarch of Alexandria Ep. 68.
: Know, that we have nothing in greater recommendation, then to conserve the
statutes of Christ, and not to transgress the bounds of our Fathers, and
always to have in mind the Roman faith praised by the mouth of the Apostle,
whereof the Church of Alexandria glories to partake. And impugning Ruffinus his
errors as being contrary to the Catholic faith Lib. 1. Apol. aduers. Ruffin.
: Know thou, that the Roman faith commended by the Apostle, receaues not such
delusions: though an Angel should denounce otherwise then it has hene once
preached, it cannot be altered, being fensed by Paul's authority. If therefore S.
Hierome be to be credited, the Roman faith in his time was conserved pure, as
it was preached, and cannot be altered, as you pretend it to have been since
that time. And therefore, as it were speaking to you Ep. 6. ad Pammach. and
Ocean.
he further says: Who-euer thou art, that auouchest new sects, I pray thee
have respect to the Roman ears, spare the faith which was commended by the
voice of the Apostle. And to Paula and Eustochium Proem. lib: Comment. in ep.
ad Galat.
: Will you know, how the Apostle has noted every province with their
proprieties? the faith of the people of Rome is praised; where is so great
concourse to Churches, and to Martyrs sepulchers etc. Not that the Romans have
any other faith then the rest of the christian Churches, but that in them there
is more devotion, and simplicity of faith. To which place of S. Hierome the
Angelical Doctor S. Thomas alluding, says In verse. 8. cap. 1. ad Romans
: The Romans are commended for their faith, because they received it easily,
and perseuered in it constantly: from whence it is, that to this day are showed
very many signs of their faith in the visitation of holy places, as S. Hierome
says upon the Epistle to the Galathians. And a little after: The Apostle
rejoices, and gives thanks to God for their faith, not only for their sake,
but for the profit that followed thereof, because they being Lords of nations,
other countries were moved to believe by their example: for as the Gloss
says; The inferior does readily, what he sees done by his Superior: which last
words are also of S. Ambrose. And S. Augustine speaking of Pelagius the
Arch-heretike L. 2. de peccat. orig. cont. Pelag. c. 8.
, says: He deceived the Palestine Council, and therefore seems to have been
absolved there. But he was not able to deceive the Roman Church, (though be
endeauored, to do is) because the most blessed Pope Zozimus called to mind
what opinion (Innocentius) his predecessor worthy to be imitated, had of his
proceeding: and be considered likewise, what judgment the faith of the Romans
worthy of praise in our Lord did make of him: for he perceived them with united
endeavors to strive earnestly against his error for the Catholic truth. The
reason therefore why Pelagius after he had deceived the Council of Palestine,
endeauored also to deceive the Roman Church by a feigned profession of his
faith sent to Innocentius Pope, was, because it was the constant belief of all
Christians in those days, that the Roman Church as being heir of the faith
commended by S. Paul, could not approve any doctrine, but what was truly
orthodoxall and Catholic, as Pelagius in that his profession acknowledges,
saying: In fin. Symb. ad D^^^. apud Hieron. to 4. and Baron. anno 417
This (o most blessed Pope) is the faith which I have learned in the Catholic
Church, and which I have always held, and do bold. Wherein if I have said any
thing ignorantly, or unwarily. I desire to be corrected by you, that hold the
faith and chair of Peter. If this my confession be approved by the judgment of
your Apostleship, whosoever lays an aspersion on me, shall show himself to be
ignorant, or malicious, or else not to be a Catholic; but he shall not prove me
to be an heretic. With this profession Pelagius sought to deceive the Roman
Church, but could not, because Zozimus (says S. Augustine Proxime cit.
considered what judgment the faith of the Romans commended by the Apostle, had
made of him in the time of (Innocentius) his predecessor. For which cause
Procopius truly said L. 1. de bello Goth.
: If ever any, surely the Romans chiefly are they that have had the Christian
faith in veneration. I conclude therefore, that (if the holy Fathers have
understood the Scriptures aright) the faith of the Roman Church is proved to be
infallible, not only by the Scriptures formerly alleged Supra hoc ^ap.
, but by this very passage of the Apostle.

Nor do Tolet, or Sa, whom here you object Page 66.
, say ought to the contrary: for if they observe, that when the Apostle says
to the Romans, your faith is published every where, it is an hyperbole (because
the sense is not, that the faith which they believed, was then actually
preached throughout the whole world, but that is was a thing known, and
published throughout the whole world, that they had believed) they say nothing,
but what is true: for the Apostle cold not say, that the Roman faith which was
the faith of Christ, was then actually preached in all parts of the world, as
neither it is yet at this day; but that it was publicly known throughout all
the world that the Romans had received the faith of Christ, because in common
speech and moral reputation, that which is diffused over a great part of the
world, and famously known, is said to be every where. And this public fame
was of great moment for the conversion of other nations: for Rome being the
Head of the world, whither all sorts of people under that vast Empire had
recourse for discharg of their tributes, and accounts of their offices, they
cold not but have knowledge that the Romans believed in Christ. And (as Tolet
notes out of S. Chrysostom, but you to detract from the Romans what praise
you can, conceal it) this public same and knowledge of their belief, was an
example and a great motive for other nations to receive the faith of Christ.

Now, whereas you add Page 60.
, It is an objection now a days breathed into the mouth of every vulgar
Papist, that at that day, Catholic, and Roman were all one, the testimonies of
antiquity which I have formerly brought in proof thereof, show that none but he,
which is not so much as vulgarly read in Ecclesiastical history, can be
ignorant of so certain a truth. Wherefore you speak untruly, when you say, it
is an insultation of ours easily checked with a parallel of the like, if not of
a larger commendation of the Church of Thessalonica by the same Apostle. 1.
Thessal. 1.2. We give thanks always to God for you all, making mention of you
in our prayers, remembering without ceasing your work of faith. And again. v.
8. From you (says he) sounded out the word of the Lord, not only in Macedonia
and Achaia, but also in every place your faith to Godward is spread abroad etc.
This is your parallel, which is easily disparalelled: for as Baronius observes
Anno 58.
out of S. Chrysostom, the Romans being Head of the world, their faith was a
forcible motive to bring other nations to believe in Christ. And therefore S.
Leo Sermon. 1. in Not. Apost. Pet. and Paul.
had reason to say, that S. Peter Prince of the Apostles, not by humane
counsel, but by divine ordination came from Antioch to Rome, to preach the
Gospel and fix his chair in that City, that so the chief seat of religion
might be, where the Head of superstition had been: and that the faith from
thence as from the top of the Empire might be diffused throughout the world.
And S. Anselme ^n c. 1. ad Romans
that, S. Paulgiuing thanks to God for the faith of the Romans, says: I give
thanks to God for all the faithful, and in the first place for all you,
because you are the chiefest, the Roman Church having the primacy among all
Churches. And whereas the Apostle says, The faith of the Romans is published
throughout the whole world, the same S. Anselme notes In c. 1. ad Thessal.
, that he says not so to the Thessalonians, but, You are made a pattern to all
that believe in Macedonia and Achaia: and from you the word of our Lord was
bruted not only in Macedonia and Achaia, but also in ^uery place, that is
(says he) in every place near to you. And hereby it appears that the Romans
for the example of their faith and the profit that redounded thereby to others,
were preferred by S. Paul before the Thessalonians, as far as the whole world
(over which the conversion of Rome was quickly spread) exceeds Macedonia and
Achaia, with a few bordering Provinces, which only had notice of the
Thessalonians. And therefore S. Paul gives a further praise to the Romans Romans
15.15.
: I am assured of you, that you are also full of love, replenished with all
knowledge, so that you are able to admonish one another. And again Romans 16.19.
: Your obedience is published into every place: none of which praises he gave
to the Thessalonians.

But lest we should gather any preeminence of the Roman Church, because the
Epistle to the Romans among all S. Paul's epistles has the first place, you
preoccupate this objection, telling us Page 67.
that the epistle to the Thessalonians and others were written before that to
the Romans. Be it so: but we advertise you with S. Anselme Praefat. in ep. ad
Romans
. It is to be believed, that they which collected S. Paul's epistles into one
body, judged that the epistle to the Romans ought to have the first place,
because it was addressed to that City which was then Head of the whole world,
and because the Roman Church still until this day has the sovereignty of all
Churches. And in his commentary of the eight verse of the first Chapter, Here
again (says he) it is manifest, that the ^pistle to the Romans ought to be
placed first, because the Romans among all the faithful are the chiefest, and
because the Roman Church has the sovereignty among all Churches.

SECT. VII. Why S. Paul did not entitle his Epistles, Catholic Epistles.
THat S. Paul in his epistle to the Romans has given sufficient testimony of
the preeminency of the Roman Church above all others, is a thing manifest, if
not you but the ancient Fathers may be the judges. Them you must give us leave
to follow, and forsake you, fighting against S. Paul and them.

Against this truth you frame yet two Arguments more: The first is Page ^^.
, that whereas the epistles of S. James, Peter, Jude, and John are entitled
Catholic epistle^, if S. Paul had been possessed with the spirit of the now
Bishop of Rome, he would have entitled the Church of Rome, the Catholic
Church, and at least inscribed his epistle* Catholic. The second is Ibid.
, that he gives not to the Roman Church so much as the title of a Church,
which yet in his prefaces to the Corinthians, Galathi^ns, and Thessalonians he
gives to those Churches.

To the first I answer, that the Apostles themselves did not give to any of
their epistles the name of Catholic epistles. That title is prefixed to the
epistles of James, Peter, John, and Jude by the Church for diverse reasons,
which you may read in Salmeron Disp. 1. in Ep. S. Iacobi.
and chiefly because (as S. Augustine De fide and oper. c. 14.
witnesses) they were written against the heresy of Simon Magus, defending
Justification by only faith, wherein Protestants are his heirs. And for that
cause their epistles insist so much on good works, and the keeping of Gods
Commandments, and show that faith without charity is dead and fruitless. And
for the same cause S. John Ep. 1. verse. 24. and 27.
admonishes the faithful, to abide in that Doctrine which they have heard
from the beginning, because many seducers are gone out into the world. And S.
Jude Verse. 4.8. and seqq.
exhorts them to stand to their old faith, showing them by examples, that it
is damnable not to be constant in it.

To your second Argument I might answer with 8. Chrysostom, that they which
were but a small number newly converted, and weak, S. Paul salutes them by the
name of a Church, to comfort them; but not those, that were more in number, and
of longer standing, as the Romans were, when he writ unto them. For this reason
I say, that as S. Paul did not salute the Ephesians, Philippians, and
Colossians, by the name of a Church in express words, so neither did he the
Romans, but only virtually and implicitly, saying Romans 1.7.
To all that are at Rome the beloved of God, called Saints, which title cannot
agree to any congregation, but to a true Church of Christ, as Tom. 13. disp. 7.
in ep. ad Romans
Salmeron learnedly proves, and you contradicting your self acknowledge,
saying: Page 7^. sin.
S. Paul to show that the Church rather does consist in the professors then in
the place, omitteth the name of a Church, and mentions only the persons
saying: To the Saints at Colosse: To them at Rome beloved of God, called
Saints. But because you mention Salmerons solution, I will give the reader
notice, how foully you abuse and fallify him. He gives three solutions to this
Argument. The first, he most approves; and this you wholly pretermit to
persuade your reader, that he gives not three, but only the two later: and
therefore whereas he begins the second thus: Posset secundo commode dici, you
leave out fecundo that this may seem not to be his second solution, but his
first: and to the same end you say, allata alia solutione, ad hunc redit, that
having brought another solution he returns to this, saying, but the first
solution in my judgment is more so^de, which words contain a most notorious
falsification: for he returns not to this, which you make the first, by
leaving out secundo, but to the first of the three, which you never mention.
And whereas he says, that the first solution is in his judgment the more
solid, you by falsifying, apply this his saying to the second; against which
because you can make a shift to cavil, you would have your reader think it is
Salmerons first solution, and that he thought it to be the most solid of all
the three.

But of what import to your cause is this iugling? Marry, that because in the
second solution Salmeron mentions the factions that were then in Rome
between the Jews and Gentiles, you may infer, that S. Paul did think Rome
to be (as other Churches) subject to the alteration of Schisms and factions:
and in proof thereof you say, Page 69.
that, not only our Professors among themselves, but also Popes and Antipopes
were distracted into diverse Schisms, and factions etc. One of our devout
Doctors reckoning the number of these Schisms to have been twenty; an other
accounting the continuance of one of them to have endured fifty years. Our
Devout Doctor whom you mention to prove that there has been twenty schisms in
the Roman Church, is Stapleton. The place in which you cite him is his
thirteenth book, De princip. Doctrine. Cap. 15. whereas in that work he has
but twelve books in all. But be it, that there have been twenty Schisms in the
Roman Church: Schism is not a sin against faith, but against Charity. If
then Antipopes or other professors of the Roman Church have broken the bond of
charity, was it therefore lawful for you to renounce the faith of the Roman
Church? If Schisms be a lawful cause of departure, who can stay in your
Protestant congregation, divided and subdivided into Lutherans, Caluinists,
Zwinglians, Brownists and a thousand other Sects under these? new ones daily
arising among you, as Separatists and Socinians, all which are divided not only
in point of charity, but in the very substance of faith.

And surely you are ill advised to object the Schisms of the Roman Church in
justification of your departure from her: for since (as our Authors have
advertised) nether the persecutions of heathen Emperors, nor the Goths and
Vandals, nor the Turk, nor any sacks, or massacres by Alaricus, Gensericus
Attila, Borbon, and others, nor the emulation of secular Princes, (were they
Kings or Emperors) nor the many Schisms and divisions between the lawful
Popes and Antipopes, nor the manifold difficulties and dangers in their
elections, nor the great vices which have been noted in some of their persons,
nor any scandal, have had power to overthrow the Roman Church, as they have
done the Churches of the East, and many of the West; it is a manifest sign
(and so much the more evident, the greater the persecutions, and the more and
longer the schisms have been) that she is the impregnable Rock which the proud
gates of hell cannot overthrow.

SECT. VIII. Other Arguments out of S. Paul, and other Catholic Authors
answered.
S. Paul writing to the Romans says Romans 1.13.
: I have often purposed to come unto you that I may have some fruit in you, as
also in the other Gentiles. Tolet in eum loc. Annot. 22.
upon these words observes that the Gospel is indifferent to all, and that
howbeit the Romans were more eminent then other nations, and had the primacy,
yet in preaching of the Gospel and business belonging to salvation, the
Apostle equalleth others with them. These words of Tolet you object Page 70.
but to what end I know not: for Tolet declares the reason why S. Paul
equalleth other nations with the Romans in preaching to them the doctrine of
Christ, and procuring their salvation, to be, because, as Christ found all
sinners and dyed for all; so he calls all, and receaueth them from whence
soever they come. If you had set down these words of Tolet, you had
discovered, that to infer either from his, or S. Paul's words, the equality of
other Churches with the Roman in matter of jurisdiction, is a senseless
illation: for by the same consequence you may infer, that all Diocesans in
spiritual jurisdiction are equal with their Bishops, and all subjects in
temporal power with their Princes, because Christ having shed his blood
equally for all, the souls of all are equally dear to him, and their
salvation ought with all indifferency to be procured by preaching the Gospel
to all as well to the least, as to the greatest, to the poorest, as to the
richest.

2. No less impertinently you object other words of the same Apostle Romans
11.19.
in which (as you confess) he exhorts not the Romans in particular, but all
the converted Gentiles in general, not to be ouer-wise, but to fear, lest they
also be broken off by infidelity, as the Jews were. For these words show, that
no man has certainty of faith that he shall be saved, as Protestants vaynly
presume themselves to have, but that all ought to live in fear, lest they fall
into infidelity, or other sins: which fear the Bishop of Rome and the Romans
ought to have, as well as other nations. But to infer from thence, that the
Bishop of Rome may teach heretical Doctrine ex Cathedra, or that the whole
Roman Church may fall from the faith (which is the point in controversy) nether
is it S. Paul's meaning, nor any Interpreter ever expounded so.

3. As little to your purpose it is, that S. Paul says Romans 1.11.
to the Romans, I desire to see you, that I may impart unto you some spiritual
grace to confirm you: for thereby, as S. Hierome (or whosoever is the author of
those Commentaries) Theodoret, S. Chrysostom and S. Thomas expound In eum
locum.
, he shows that they had received the faith already from S. Peter: Because
(says Theodoret) the great Peter had already declared to them the Evangelical
Doctrine, therefore S. Paul necessarily adds, To confirm you. And S. Hierome:
Paul says, he will confirm the Romans already belleeuing: not that they had
not received the faith by the preaching of Peter, but that their faith might be
strengthened by the witness and doctrine of two Apostles. Wherefore S. Paul
desired to see them to confirm them, that is (as he himself declares) to the
end both he and they might receive mutual comfort from each other; they by his
faith, and he by theyrs. What makes this against the primacy of S. Peter, or of
the Roman Church?

4. You object Page 72*
Bellarmine, confessing that S. Peter and Paul were Co-sounders of the Roman
Church. He does so; and it is true: but yet so, that S. Peter first planted
that Church, and S. Paul came not to Rome till many years after, to assist
him: for which cause the conversion of the Romans and the planting of Christian
religion there, is absolutely attributed to S. Peter. Our will is (say the
godly Emperors Theodosius and Gratian) Cod. tit. 1. l. 1.
that all the people ruled by the Empire of our clemency, shall live in the
same religion which the divine Apostle Peter gave to the Romans, as the
religion insinuated by him until this present witnesses, and which it is
manifest, that the high Priest Damasus follows. Wherefore when Bellarmine
says, that S. Peter and Paul were Co-founders of the Roman Church, he says it
not to equal them in the foundation, and much less in authority: for in that
very place L. 1. de Pout. c. 27.
he learnedly proves that in authority S. Peter far exceeded S. Paul.

5. You object Page 72.
out of Lorinus, that S. Epiphanius calls both Peter and Paul Bishops of
Rome. True: but S. Paul's Episcopal authority was only transient: he had no
Episcopal Chair at Rome, as S. Peter had: and therefore Lorinus says, that S.
Epiphanius called S. Paul Bishop of Rome in no other sense, then because he
exercised the Episcopal functions there, as he might do in any other place of
the world. This explication contents you not: and therefore you say Page 72.
marg.
, it is confuted in the next testimony, and in the Challenge following: but you
break promise; for there you nether confute it, nor mention it. And as for the
thing it self, it is manifest: for no man ever said that S. Paul had an
Episcopal Chair at Rome, as S. Peter had: no do S. Irenaeus, Tertullian,
Eusebius, Optatus, S. Augustine, S. Epiphanius (whom you object,) making
catalogues of all the Roman Bishops from S. Peter till their time, nor any
other writers, reckon S. Paul as one of them.

6. You object Page 72.
, that, the authority of both is cited in the Popes Breues for confirmation of
Papal ordinances: that both have their images engraven in the Popes bulls, and
that in such sort, that Paul sometime has the right hand of Peter, as well as
other while Peter of Paul. You often borrow arguments out of Catholic authors,
and conceal their answers. This you borrowed out of Bellarmine. L. 1. de
Po^t. c. 27.
who largely and learnedly answers, giving three different solutions unto it:
To him I remit the Reader. Only I will tell you, that the words which you set
down in a different character as of Peterius are not his, but your own: for
though he prove out of Scripture, and out of a place of Virgil, that apud
homines, among men the right hand is the better and more honorable, yet he
says not, that it is so among all people saving the Persians (as you by adding
to his words this particle, All, make him to say:) for he acknowledges, and
Bellarmine out of Eusebius and Nebrissensis proves the like by examples of
other nations. And to what he says, I add the reason, which Blessed
Augustinus Triumphus a holy and ancient writer that lived 400. years since,
yields, De Potest. Ecclesiact. c. 7. art. ^
why S. Paul in the Popes bulls is sometimes placed on the right hand of S.
Peter. S. Paul (says he) was less then Peter, greater then Peter, and equal
to Peter. He was equal to Peter in the office of preaching: less then Peter
in Ecclesiastical power, for Peter alone was Cephas, that is, Head of the
whole Church: but he was greater then Peter in the prerogative of his election
to the Apostleship, for he was chosen by Christ after his resurrection, and
glorification: and for this cause Paul in the Popes bulls is placed on the
right hand, and Peter on the left. So he.

Having now answered the arguments which hitherto you have brought out of S.
Paul's epistles, and showed that by alleging them, you convince your own
Doctrine of falsehood, and prove ours; I must crave pardon, if I ask you a
question concerning his Epistle to the Romans, which Optatus asked the
Donatists concerning some other of his epistles, and S. Augustine concerning
them all. How dare you (says Optatus) L. ^. cont. Parmen.
read S. Paul's epistle to the Romans, in whose communion you are not? You
(says S. Augustine) L. 2. de Baptism. c. 6.
that have it, and read it, and say that you live according to it, why do you
not communicate with the Church to which it was sent? Answer, why have you
separated your selves etc? Choose which you will: If then (that is when
Donatus, when Luther, when Calvin began) the Roman Church was polluted with
errors, it was perished: for a Church that holds false, pernicious,
schismatic, heretical, blasphemous and Antichristian Doctrine (with which
you often charge the Roman Church) cannot be a true Church of Christ, but a
Synagogue of Satan: from whence then had Donatus (Luther or Calvin) his
beginning? where was he Cathechized? where baptized? where ordained? I conclude
therefore as Optatus did against the Donatists, Know, that you are cut of from
the holy Church. And I say to you as S. Augustine did to them L. de unit.
Eccles. c. 12.
: You have the epistle to the Romans but we read it, and believe it, and have
the Roman Church in our communion from which we grieve (with him Psalm. cont.
part. Donati.
to see you lie cut of, she being that Rock which the proud gates of hell
overcome not.

CHAP. XIII. Whether S. John the Evangelist conceived himself subject to the
Roman Church.
YOUR Tenet is Page 73.
, that S. John's faith did not conceive the Article of subjection to the Roman
Church. In proof thereof you assume, that in his book of Revelation, he
reuealeth the City of Rome to be Babylon, and that Autichrist shall have his
seat there: which though it were granted, yet I see not, which way it
follows, that. John did not acknowledge himself subject to S. Peter, or ^o
his Successors in the Church of Rome. But let us examine the particulers of
your Doctrine and proofs.

SECT. I. Whether Rome shall be the seat of Antichrist.
THat the City of Rome is Babylon mentioned in the Revelation (say you Ibid.
is the gener all consent of our own Jesuits and other Divines. But in proose
hereof you can find no other Jesuits, nor Divines to allege, but Ribera,
Viegas and the Rhemists, whom you abuse and falsify to make them serve your
turn, as I shall now declare.

The Rhemists (say you) Page 74.
do thus far grant* as to say: The great Antichrist shall have his seat at
Rome as it may well be, though others think that Jerusalem rather shall be
his principal soat. But your Jesuits Ribera and Viegas both of them Spanish
Doctors and public professors do confidently auerre the contrary: and the one
is so bold as to hold him to be a most notable fool that shall deny it. But
good Sir, by your leave, this is a most notable untruth. That which Ribera
says, is, that toward the end of the world, Rome shall be burned, not only
for her former sins of Idolatry, and persecuting of Christ, under the Pagan
Emperors, but also for other sins, that in the end of the world she shall
commit under Pagan Kings: and that this is so certain out of the Apocalypse,
that no man, though never so foolish, can deny it. This Ribera says: and it
may well be said, that he who out of these words of Ribera infers (as you
do) that the City of Rome is to be the seat of Antichrist, or that Ribera says
so, is, I will not say, a notable fool, but whether he deserve not that name,
I leave to the readers censure.

The Doctrine of Ribera, Viegas, and the Rhemists is, that when S. John calls
Rome, Babylon, he neither speaks of the Church, or Pope of Rome, nor yet of
the City of Rome, as she is under the government of Christian Emperors, or in
obedience of the Sea Apostolic: for in that estate, the has (says S.
Hierome) L 2. cont. louin.
wiped out the blasphemies written in her forehead, by the confession of
Christ. In that estate Ep. 17. ad Marcell.
, there is in Rome the holy Church, there are the triumphant Monuments of
Apostles, and Martyrs, there is the true confession of Christ, there is the
faith praised by the Apostle, and gentility trodden under foot, the name of
Christ daily advancing it self on high. Wherefore when S. John calls Rome.
Babylon, Ribera, Viegas, and the Rhemists, with the ancient Fathers expound him
to give her that name, as she was the head of Paganism, the mother of
superstition, and Idolatry, and persecuted the Church and Popes of Rome, (being
drunk with the blood of the Saints, and Martyrs of Christ Jesus Apoc. 17.6.
as she did under Nero, and Domitian, in S. John's time, and afterward under
other Pagan Emperors, when she put to death thirty Popes successively, one
after another; and as she shall do again in the end of the world: for both
Ribera and Viegas hold, that the City of Rome shall then fall from the
obedience of the Sea Apostolic, and from the faith of Christ: and that as well
for her enormous sins anciently committed under the heathen Emperors, as also
for other like, which in the end of the world she shall commit under heathenish
Kings, she shall be burn's and consumed with fire. But that Rome even then
under pagans Emperors, was, or hereafter under Heathenish Kings, shall be the
seat of Antichrist, neither Ribera, nor Viegas affirm, nor any way insinuate,
as it may appear out of their words, which you here set down in Latin Page
74. marg.
: for those words, Roma seeds Antichristi which you attribute to Ribera, are
not his, but foysted in by your self, to Father on him your own fiction. And
therefore whereas here, and else where often Page 377. 378. and alibi.
you affirm peremptorily out of Ribera, and take it as a truth granted by him
and us, that Rome shall be the seat of Antichrist, you pass the limits of
truth; for Ribera most expressly affirms Adcap. 11. Apoc. n. 20. sin. and 21.
init.
that Antichrist shall have his Court in Jerusalem and reign there; and that
the Jews shall receive and honor him as their Messiah. And the same is the
most common and received opinion as well of our modern Divines, as of the
Ancient Fathers. Hippolitus Martyr, Lactantius, S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, S.
Hierome, S. Augustine, Sedulius, S. Damascen, Arethas, Seuerus Sulpitius, S.
Gregory of Tours. Venerable Bede, Haymo, and S. Thomas related by Suarez
Defens. sid. l. 5. c. 16.
, Bellarmine L. 3. de Pont. c. 13.
and Sanders Visib. Monarch. l. 8. c. 26.
, that Antichrist shall not have his seat at Rome, but at Jerusalem. And if
the Rhemists say, it may be that he shall have his seat at Rome, withal they
rightly observe that, whosoever opposes the Roman Church, or belieueth
otherwise then she teaches, belongs not to Christ, but is an Heretic, and a
member of Antichrist, And the same was the belief of the most learned Doctors
of Gods Church. S. Hierome Ep. 57.
: I know the Sea of Rome to be the Rock on which the Church is built. And
speaking to Damasus Pope Ibid.
: Whosoever gathers not with thee, scatters, and is not of Christ but of
Antichrist. And before him S. Cyprian L. 1. ep. 8.
had said: He that gathers out of the Church and chair built upon Peter,
scatters. Optatus: L. 2. cont. Parmen.
that whosoever opposes the Episcopal chair of Rome built upon Peter, is a
Schismatike and a sinner. S. Leo Ep. 75.
: that whosoever presumes to oppose the Roman Church built by the voice of our
Savior upon the most blessed Peter Prince of the Apostles as upon a Rock is
either Antichrist, or a Devil. S. Maximus a famous Martyr, and the greatest
Divine of his age Epist. ad Marin. Diue.
; that they which speak against the Church of Rome, are heretics that with
unbridled mouths breath out iniquity against heaven. S. Bernard Ep. ad
Hildebert. Arch. Turon.
; that, they which be of God, are united with the Pope, and he that stands but
against him, either belongs to Antichrist, or is Antichrist himself. By these
testimonies it appears first: how great reason the Rhemists, Ribera, and
Viegas had to admonish you, that this Prophecy of S. John, though (in their
opinion) it point out the destruction of the City of Rome for her Idolatry
under the Pagan Emperors, and for the Apostasy from the faith under other
wicked kings in the end of the world, when she shall return to her ancient
greatness; yet it aymeth not at the Church of Rome, or Bishop thereof, because
that Apostasy shall be from the faith of that Church, and from the Bishop
thereof.

2. And since you confess Page 75.
that these Authors admonish their readers here of again and again, thereby
you convince your self of folly: for this your argument out of the Apocalypse
against the Bishop and Church of Rome is wholly grounded on their exposition and
testimony, which being so manifestly against you, what man but your self would
have produced them, or (which is all one) S. John as expounded by them, for
witnesses against the Roman Church? Or with what conscience could you say here
Page 74.
and afterward again so boldly repeat Page 377. 378.
, as their Doctrine, that Rome shall be the seat of Antichrist, since Ribera
(from whom Viegas dissententh not) most expressly teaches that Jerusalem
shall be his seat, and that he shall reign there? Is not this a most wilful
falsification?

3. And from hence the reader may learn how fraudulently you remit us to the
testimonies of Ribera and Viegas in their exposition of this text of S. John,
to prove a necessity of your departure from the Church of Rome; since they
condemn you as an heretic, and the holy Fathers pronounce you to be a member
of Antichrist for it. The departure which S. John speaks of, is not from the
Church of Rome, but from the idolatry and vices which in his time reigned in
the City of Rome, and shall reign in her again in the end of the world. And
this departure is not to be made so much by local motion, as by steps of
faith, that is, by not communicating with her in her wickedness. And therefore
notwithstanding that admonition of S. John, Go out of Babylon my people, the
faithful in his time did not leave the City of Rome, but still remained
there, departing from her idolatry, and other Vices.

But you ask Page 76. 77.
; If the destruction of Babylon mentioned in the revelation point only at the
City, and not at the Church, or Bishop of Rome, how can the Pope at that time
still remain Bishop of Rome, when he and all Christian people are departed out
of the City, and the City it self is utterly extinct? for then to be called
Bishop of Rome (say you) is but a man in the moon, and, Titulus sine re. I
answer, though at that time the City of Rome shall be consumed with fire;
yet the Church of Rome shall not, for you Page 76.
confess, that the Church rather consists in the Professors, then in the
place: and therefore whiles the faythfulll Professors of the Roman Church, yea
of Rome it self, with their Bishop shall remain, which shall be till the end of
the world (though not in the City after it is destroyed,) the Church of Rome
shall still remain according to your own Principle, and chiefly according to
the oracle of Christ, That the gates of Hell shall never prevail against her.
Suppose (which God forbid) Turks and Infidels should take from you the City
of Durham; or that the same should be consumed by fire into ashes, the whole
multitude of your good and godly Christians escaping away with your self,
living, and being by you fed in some corner of your Diocese; in this case
would you say, the Church of Durham should be extinct? the Bishop of Durham
become Titulus sine re? Should the superintendent of Durham, be changed into
the man in the Moon?

The City of Rome, as Ribera Ribera in Apocal c. 1^. n. 47. Pontificem cum
multitudine Sanctorum eijcient. Nam multi viri boni, ex has potissimum
Ciuitate, ^iecto Pontifici adhaerebunt.
holds, shall toward the end of the world fall from the Christian faith and
obedience of her Bishop; not that all the people of Rome shall fall away, for a
great multitude of good Christians, and Saints shall remain constant, and
adhere to the Pope, and depart with him out of the City; yea the City it
self (their Bishop with the multitude of Saints being departed out of it)
shall be consumed with fire before the reign of Antichrist, or in the very
beginning thereof, as Riber a cap. 17 n. 20. in verse 16. Ex hoc, quod nunc ait
Apostolus, intelligitur Roman euertendam antequam Antichristus regnare
incipiat, vel certe ipso initio regni eius.
Ribera and Viegas in cap 17. n. 5.
Viegas reach. In this supposition why may not the Pope with that multitude of
holy Christian Romans, be truly and verily, the Bishop, and Church of Rome? Why
should that multitude of Roman Christian and Saints be titulus sine re, and not
a very glorious and venerable Church? Why should the Pope then cease to be
Bishop, more then the Bishop of Canterbury should, in case Canterbury should be
destroyed into ashes? Will you say upon this contingent that the Bishop of
Canterbury shall be the man in the moon, the shepherd of Vtopia, to wit,
(...)? You might have learned from Cusanus Epist. 2. ad Bohemos.
(whom you cite often, and highly commend) that if by any accident the City
of Rome should fail, the truth of the Church shall remain there, where the
Principality, and seat of Peter shall be.

Nor is your example of the Emperor of Rome Page 77.
any help to your Argument: For albeit the Roman Empire be now in part
decayed, or weakened, in respect of that power and greatness, which anciently
it had; yet it still remains so, that the name and succession of the Roman
Emperors at this day is famous in the world: else why did our late Sovereign
King James inscribe his Monitory Prefation, Sacratissimo, atque inuictissimo
Principi ac Domino, Rodulpho secundo Romanorum Imperatori, semper Augusto etc.
And why else does the Church of Rome in her Office In die Parasceues and
Sabbatho Sancto.
, pray for the Roman Emperor? Nor the Authors which you allege for the
contrary, do say ought else, though you falsify Salmeron to make his words found
otherwise: for whereas he speaking of the Roman Empire, as it anciently was,
says, Imperium illud Romanum iamdiu euersum est, that Empire of Rome (to wit,
with that ancient splendour, majesty, and power, which once it had) is long
since destroyed; you leave out illud, and make him say absolutely, The Roman
Empire is long since destroyed, whereas in the words next following, he expressly
affirms, that there is still a Roman Emperor, and that he is so called,
although what now be possesses, be but a very small shadow of the ancient
Empire.

Lastly, I will not omit to put you in mind, of your weak manner of arguing
throughout all this Section: for how does it follow, that because Ribera and
Viegas hold, that Babylon, out of which the faithful are commanded to depart,
is the City of Rome, as she shall be idolatrous in the end of the world, you
may now lawfully revolt from the Church of Rome? Again, who obliges me to
allow of their exposition? I might retort your Argument upon your self, and
tell you, that Babylon signifies not Rome, but Geneua; and prove it by the
testimony of Castalio, a prime brother of yours, who lived there, and was a
special friend of Beza. They (says he speaking of the Geneuian brethren) Apud
Rescium page 54.
are proud, puffed up with glory, and revenge: We may with less danger offend
Princes, then exasperate these fiery Caluinists: their life is infamous, and
villainous: they are Masters of art in reproaches lies, cruelty, treachery, and
insufferable arrogance. They name their Geneua, The holy City; and their
assembly, Jerusalem: but in very truth we should call it, O Babylon, Babylon;
O infamous Sodom, and children of Gomorrha. If you like not this exposition,
yet I know no reason, why if you will believe Ribera and Viegas expounding
Babylon in the Apocalypse to be Rome you may not as well believe your brethren
Vdalricus Velenus Lib. de hac r^.
, and Henricus Buntingus It iner. de it iner. Petri.
denying it: and so much the more because S. Augustine, Tyconius Bid, Arethas,
Primasius, Ansbertus, Haymo. S. Anselme, and S. Thomas Apud Riber. in verse. 8.
cap. 14. Apoc.
, by Babylon understand not Rome, but the society of all the wicked in
general, from whose vices the faithful are commanded to depart S. August.
Breuic. Collat. collat. 3.
. Others understand Paganism, which because it adoreth a confused multitude of
Gods, is rightly named Babylon, that signifies Confusion; others Mahometisme,
the mother of fornication, and all filthiness. Others, Constantinople, the
Metropolitan of Turcisme. And others, the chief City of the Chaldaeans, which
is properly called Babylon. These expositions with their Authors and reasons,
you may read in Cornelius a Lapide Ade. 17. Apoc.
, Suarez Defens. fid. l. 5. c. 7.
, and Peron Replic. Chapit. 15.
. But the truth is, that all these senses, as likewise that of Ribera, being
purely allegorical, afford no solid foundation to build matter of faith upon,
but are merely coniecturall. And therefore if S. August. say Ep. 48.
, Who dares with an unbridled license produce for himself, that which is
couched in an allegory, unless he have places more clear by whose light to
illustrate that which is obscure, we may with just reason reprove you, for
grounding your departure from the Roman Church upon the allegorical sense of
those words of the Apocalypse, Get forth of Babylon my people: and so much the
more, because the Authors whose exposition you take for your ground, admonish
you, that by Babylon is not understood the Church of Rome, but the City, and
that not as it is Christian, but as it was idolatrous in S. John's time, and
shall be again in the end of the world. But any thing will serve your turn, be
it true or false, if by sleights you can wrest it against the Pope and Church
of Rome.

SECT. II. Whether S. John suruiuing S. Peter were subject to the Bishop of
Rome, S. Peter's Successor?
SVarez treating of the authority of S. Peter, and his Successors, moves this
question De trip. virtute disp. 10. sect. 1.
, Whether the Apostles that suruiued S. Peter, were subject to S. Peter's
successor in the Sea of Rome? His answer is: I remember not, that I have read
any thing of this point in Authors: but it seems to me, to follow out of what
has been said, that they were inferior in jurisdiction, and consequently
subject therein to the Bishop of Rome, although in other excellencies and
prerogatives they were superior to him. For the same power and jurisdiction
that was in S. Peter descended to his Successors; who therefore in three things
surpassed the Apostles there living. 1. In the object of their power; for the
charge and government of the whole Church belongs primarily to the Successor
of S. Peter, which (as I have said) belonged not to the other Apostles. 2. That
power did extend to all Bishops, because the reason of order and
Ecclesiastical unity so required. 3. The power of the Bishop of Rome was
always ordinary, and to continue perpetually in the Church, not so in the
other Apostles.

This is Suarez his Doctrine, which I have set down in his own words, that
the reader perusing yours, and comparing them with his, may see how you
falsify: for both in your Latin margent, and English text, you leave out Page
79.
the reason, wherewith he proves his assertion, and set down for his only
ground, that he cannot remember to have read in any author any thing of this
point, whereas he proves it out of what he had formerly said. And does he not
here again prove it, out of the power and jurisdiction which was in S. Peter
over the whole Church, and descended from him to his Successors? And does he
not from thence infer, three prerogatives which his Successors had over the
other Apostles, two of which you conceal? And though you set down the third,
yet it is in your Latin Margent only, and so dismembered from Suarez his
context, that the reader will not easily understand the force thereof. Again,
who is so blind that sees not your absurd manner of arguing, which is this Page
78. 79.
Suarez opinion is, that S. John suruiuing S. Peter, was subject to Linus his
Successor, ergo, S. John's faith did not conceive the Pope to have jurisdiction
over all other Bishops and Pastors in the Catholic Church. You might as well
have inferred, that because York has a Minster, London has a Bridge: for
this is as good a consequence, as yours. But hereby the Reader may see, with
what silly Sophistry you delude (or to use your own words against your self)
with what untempered mortar, you daube up, the consciences of your followers.

Now as for Suarez his assertion, that the jurisdiction of S. Peter's Successor
was greater, then the ordinary Episcopal jurisdiction of the other Apostles, a
judicious Reader will easily conceive to be no such improbable Doctrine, if he
reflect, that the Successor to every Bishop is invested in all the Episcopal
authority of his predecessors and therefore Linus being Successor to S. Peter,
it must follow, that 8. Peter being in Episcopal authority, and jurisdiction,
superior to all the other Apostles, Linus had the same authority and
jurisdiction over those that suruiued S. Peter. And this S. Chrysostom seems
to have expressed L. 2. de Sacerd. 1^
, when he said: Christ committed to Peter, and to Peter's Successors, the charge
of those sheep, for the regayning of which he shed his blood: from which number
I trust you will not excluded S. John, or any other of the Apostles that
suruiued S. Peter. And what else did S. Cyril mean, when he said Apud S. Thom.
Opusc. cont. error. Graec. c. 32.
: As Christ received from his Father most ample power, so he gave the same most
fully to Peter. and his Successors? And what Paschasinus, when in the presence,
and with the approbation of the Council of Chalcedon Act. 1.
, he affirmed, the Pope to be invested in the dignity of Peter the Apostle. And
what meant S. Bernard L. 2. de considerat.
when he said to Eugenius Pope? Thou art Peter in power, and by unction Christ:
the sheep of Christ were not so without exception committed to any Bishop, nor
to any of the Apostles as to thee: thou art Pastor not only of the sheep, but
Pastor of all. Pastors. And what meant S. Leo Sermon. 2.^. Anniuers. suae assump.
when he said: The ordinance of truth stands, and S. Peter continuing in the
received solidity of a Rock, has not left the government of the Church: for
truly he perseuereth and lives still in his Successors. And again Ibid.
: In the person of my humility he is understood, he honored, in whom the
solicitude of all Pastors, with the sheep commended to him perseuereth, and
whose dignity in an unworthy heir fails not. And what S. Peter (surnamed
Chrysologus Ep. ad Eutychet.
when he exhorted Eutyches, to hear obediently the most blessed Pope of Rome,
because S. Peter who lives in his own See, and is still president in the same,
exhibits the true faith to those that seek it? And what the Legates of
Celestine Pope in the Council of Ephesus P. 2. Act. 2.
? No man doubts (for it has been notorious to all ages) that the holy, and
most blessed Peter, Prince and Head of the Apostles, pillar of the faith, and
foundation of the Catholic Church, lives and decides causes yet unto this day,
and for all eternity by his Successors? And what Eulogius Patriarch of
Alexandria writing to S. Gregory Apud Greg. l. 6. ep. 37.
, that Peter Prince of the Apostles sits still in his own Chair, in his
Successors? And what S. Gregory himself reporting Dial. l. 3. c. ^.
that Agapet Pope coming to Constantinople, the friends of a man that was lame
and dumb, beseeching him to cure that man by the authority of Peter the
Apostle, Agapet by the same authority cured him. And what the Fathers of the
sixth Council general, when commending the Epistle of Agatho Pope they said
Act. 18.
: The paper and ink appeared, but it was Peter that did speak by Agatho. And
finally, what Constantine Pogonate, when writing to the Roman Synod Apud 6.
Syn. Act. 18.
, he admired the relation of Agatho, at the voice of the divine Peter himself.

It follows then, that if Linus was invested in the Episcopal dignity and
power of Peter, if S. Peter still live and rule in his own See, and decide
causes in his Successors, if he speak by them, and their voice be to heard as
his voice; to be subject to Linus, was no other thing then to be subject to S.
Peter; and to disobey Linus, was to disobey S. Peter, who did speak by Linus,
and govern in his own See by him. Wherefore as the Apostles owed subjection to
S. Peter, whiles he lived, so those that surui^^^ him, did to Linus, having the
place of Peter for (...) ^^^rian ^alles the Roman See. L. 4. ^p. 2.


CHAP. XIV. Your fifth Chapter, with diverse Arguments answered.
SECT. I. Of the Name, Catholic.
AFTER a discourse made from an Argument ab authoritate negative, which every
Logician knows to be of no force, you say Page 81.
: We begin at the word, Catholic, and desire to understand, why the epistles
of James and John, and Jude were called Catholic, or universal, as well as
the two Epistles of Peter, if the word Catholic were so proper to the Roman
Chair? seeing that the Epistles of James, John, and Jude were not sent to, or
from Rome, nor had any relation to Peter there. Before I answer, I desire you
to remember, that the name Catholic by the ancient Fathers is given as a
certain note, or mark, whereby Orthodoxall people are distinguished from
Heretics, as you have already heard Chap. 2. sect. 2.
out of Pacianus, S. Cyrill of Jerusalem, and S. Augustine: and contrariwise
that they who to express their faith, have taken new names (as the Arians of
Arius, the Marcionists of Marcion, the Pelagians of Pelagius, the Donatists of
Donatus, and the like) witness S. Irenaeus L. 1. c. 20.
, S. Iustine In Triphone.
, Lactantius Divine. institut. l. 4.30.
, S. Athanasius Sermon. 1. cont. Arian.
, and S. Hierome Cont. Lucifer. fine.
, have been known thereby (as by an undoubted mark) to be Heretics, who have
been enforced to take new names, knowing that the ancient name of Catholic
cold not agree to them. And for the same cause you knowing your selves not to
be Catholics, and that you shall never be esteemed such, have been enforced to
call your selves by a new name of Protestants, to distinguish your selves from
those, who in all ages have been, and are still known by the name of
Catholics; by which neither we, nor you understand any other, then those,
which profess the Roman faith, and are in the communion of the Roman Church;
Catholic and Roman being terms conuertible, as has been proved Chap. 1.
sect. 3.
. And this is the reason, why Protestants speaking not only to us, but even
among themselves, ever call themselves Protestants, as knowing, that by
Catholics, no man understands any other, but them that before Luther began,
were, and are still known by that name, and can never loose the possession of
it.

This was a thing well known to ancient Heretics, who therefore abhorred the
name Catholic. So did Gaudentius the Donatist, calling it Apud S. Aug. l. 1.
cont. Gaudent. c. 23.
a humane fiction. So did other heretics, who speaking in the Lutheran
language, said Praefat. in nouum Testam. anni 1565.
; Come, O ye fools, and silly wretches, that are commonly called Catholics,
and learn the true faith, which lay hid many ages heretofore, but is now
revealed, and showed of late. With these iumpe our Protestants: for Beza (k)
call's it, A vain word: Doctor Humphrey In vita Iuelli p. 113.
, An empty term: Master Sutcliffe, Challenge page 1.
A fruitless name: and others of you scoff at the word, Doctor Bristow
Motives, page 7.
nicknaming us, Cacolikes, and Cartholikes. And this is the reason why the
Lutherans rejected an allegation out of Luther, because (said they In Colloq.
Altemburg. anno 1568. page 154.
Is is not a phrase of Luther, that any thing ought to be understood
Catholikely. And for this cause (as Lindanus In Dubitant.
observes) Luther and other your new reformers in hatred of that name have
corrupted the Creed of the Apostles, saying in their Catechismes, instead of, I
believe the holy Catholic Church: I believe the Christian Church. And you
english Protestants insisting in their steps, for the good will you bear to
that name, have left it out of your Bibles: for whereas Eusebius L. 2. histo.
c. 12.
reports that the Epistles of James, Peter, John, and Jude were known in
antiquity by the name of Catholic Epistles, and therefore the Catholic Church
so instiles them in her Bibles, you in yours of the years 1562. and 1577.
(which are yet current among you, having never been forbidden) have wholly left
out that name. And though since that time you have been admonished of your bad
dealing therein, yet still in all your later Bibles you commit the same fault,
using the profane signification of the word Catholic in lieu of the
Ecclesiastical, and in styling the Catholic Epistles, The general Epistles,
saying, The general Epistle of James, of Peter etc. Who sees not the
absurdity of this translation? For it is as ridiculous to translate Catholic,
General, as if when S. Hierome said L. 1. Apol. aduers. Ruffin.
: If Ruffinus call his faith that, which the Roman Church professes, then are
we Catholics, you should translate, Then are we Generals: or whom S.
Augustine Contra ep. Fundam. c. 4.
reports, that Catholics travailing among Heretics, to distinguish their
own Churches from heretical conuenticless, ask. qua itur ad Catholicam?
which is the way to the Catholic Church, you should translate which is the way
to the General? All this shows that you know your selves not to be
Catholics, since you seek as far forth as you can, to suppress the name. How
therefore can you ask why the Epistles of James, John, and Jude, were called
Catholic, as well as the two Epistles of Peter? (I say) you that call none of
them Catholic, but in a profane manner, General Epistles? And that very
improperly if not also falsely: for some of them, (as the two last of S. John)
were not written to all the faithful in general, but to particular persons:
The reason why the Catholic Church instileth the Epistles of James, John, and
Jude Catholic Epistles, as well as the two Epistles of Peter, is, because they
were written in defense of the Catholic faith against heretics, as well as
the Epistles of S. Peter were. So it has been already showed out of S.
Augustine Chap. 12. sect. 8.
.

Your second question is Page 81.
; why S. Paul was so sole, as of himself to anathematize the false Apostles? I
answer, that not only S. Peter, but each of the Apostles had power to
excommunicate or anathematize offenders; for their Apostolical jurisdiction
was universal over all the faithful; but yet not ordinary, at S. Peter's was:
and therefore not to descend to their successors.

SECT II. Whether the title, of Vicar of Christ, belong to the Pope, and in
what sense?
YOur third question is Page 82.
, why S. Paul did absolve the incestuous Corinthian, as the Vicar of Christ, if
(as Bellarmine pretends) that title wholly belong to the Pope, as an Argument
of his succession from S. Peter in the Monarchy of the whole Church. This
argument you urge again afterward Page 242.
as of principal note, and confirm with the testimonies of S. Ignatius, of
Eusebius Pope, and Genebrard who observes that Tertullian calls Paul, Vicar
of Christ. Answer. The name of Vicar may be given to any one, that supplieth
the place of another. Kings are Vicars of God, in things belonging to Civil
government. Bishops are Vicars of Christ, in spiritual and ecclesiastical
affairs, because, the holy Ghost has placed them to rule the Church of God
Act. 20.28.
. All the Apostles were Vicars of Christ, because they were Legates, God as it
were exhorting by them 2. Cor. 5.20.
: and thereby S. Paul had power to absolve the incestuous Corinthian in the
person of Christ, or, as his Vicar, as the Rhemists expound. But the supreme
Vicar, and chief Lieutenant of Christ on earth (as S. Peter was, so now) is
the Bishop of Rome his Successor: and so much the holy Councels have declared.
He that has the Sea of Rome (says the Council of Nice) Can. 39. ex Graecis
and Arab.
is Head and Prince of all Patriarchs: for as Peter was, so he is, the chief,
to whom power is given over all Christian Princes, and all their people, as one
that is the Vicar of Christour Lord over all people, and over the whole
Christian Church. And the general Council of Lions In S^xt. Decret. Cap. Vbi.
periculum.
calls the Pope the Vicar of Jesus Christ, the Successor of Peter, the
Governor of the Universal Church; the guide of our Lords slock. And in the
same sense S. Bernard L. 2. de Confid
said: Peter walking upon the water like our Lord, showed himself to be the
only Vicar of Christ, that was to govern not one nation, but all: for many
waters, are many people: By this you see, that when we call the Pope, The Vicar
of Christ, we take the name of Vicar, antonomastice, for him, that bears the
person, and holds the place of Christ, as universal Pastor and Governor of
the whole Church. In which sense, neither Tertullian attributed that name to S.
Paul, as Genebrard observes in that very place in which you cite him for the
contrary Chrou. l. 3. page 479.^80.
: nor does it in that sense agree to any other Bishop but only to S. Peter and
his Successors in the Sea of Rome; which Genebrard also testifies against you
in these words: Christ has no Successors, because he still lives: but he has
Vicars and Ministers, on earth, among which Peter and the Bishops of Rome his
Successors have the Sovereignty, as all antiquity without exception has
believed: and therefore with great reason we reckon their Succession, which is
to continue till the worlds end, as one of the marks that hold us in the lap
of the Catholic Church.

S. Ignatius, and Eusebius Pope you likewise abuse: for although Deacons be in
their degree Ministers and Vicars of Christ, yet S. Ignatius says it not, but
only commands the Trallians to whom he writes, to reverence them as our Lord
Jesus Christ, and as guardians of that place: and so much his own words set
down by you Page 242. n. 15.
in Greek declare. The testimony of Eusebius you falsify: He says, Caput
Ecclesiae Christus est, Christ is Head of the Church: You corruptly translate,
There is one Head of the Church, Christ; to signify, that there is no one Head
thereof under Christ, as his chief Lieutenant, and Vicar on earth; which is
contrary to the Doctrine of Eusebius in the same Epistle, both before and after
the words which you object. And to this you add an other corruption: for where
Eusebius says, Priests are Vicars of Christ you in your English leave out the
word Priests for the good will you bear to that name, and function. Whose
Vicar may he be thought to be that deals so imposterously?

But you object Page 82.
: S. Paul to avoid Schisms among the people, will not have them adhere to any
one man; no more to Cephas (that is Peter) then to Paul or Apollos: whereas your
Roman Cephas would have taught S. Paul a contrary lesson, saying, that they who
adhere unto Cephas, cannot be called Schismatikes, as those who hold of
Apollos, because Cephas was the Rock whereupon the Church was built. Answer.
That Cephas was the ministerial Rock on which Christ built his Church, is a
truth asserted by Christ, and by all the Orthodoxall writers, that have lived
in the Church: and therefore with great reason they have pronounced him, that
separates himself from the communion of the Bishop and Church of Rome, to be,
a sinner, a Schismatike, an Heretic, and not to be of Christ, but of
Antichrist. Their words I need not repeat; you have heard them already Chap.
1. sect. 4.
.

And tell us now; did those Fathers teach S. Paul a lesson contrary to our
Doctrine? So you say, but misunderstand S. Paul: for S. Augustine, and S.
Gregory expound him to speak these words against them, that contemning Christ
did not build their faith upon him, but upon men, as upon Heads not subordinate
to him; L. 4. ep. 38
or to use S. Gregory's words, extra Christum, out of Christ. Paul the Apostle
(says S. Augustine Sermon. 13. de verb. Dom.
knowing himself to be chosen, and Christ to be contemned, said: What? is
Christ divided? was Paul crucified for you? or were you baptized in the name of
Paul? In like manner expound S. Anselme, and S. Thomas In eum loc.
, saying, that the Apostle speaks against those that made many Christ's, and
many Authors of grace. What force then has this Scripture against us, who hold
S. Peter and his Successors to be Vicars of Christ, and reverence and obey
them, because they are his Vicars? so far we are from contemning him, or
setting up another Head different from him, as the false Apostles, and some of
the Corinthians seduced by them, did; for which the Apostle reprehendeth them.
You might with more truth have proved out of these words, with S. Chrysostom
In hunc locum.
, that Paul acknowledged S. Peter to be his Superior, because he spoke
ascending by gradation, that so he might place Peter above himself, and next
to Christ.

SECT. III. Whether S. Paul, reckoning the Ecclesiastical Orders, gave the
Pope any place among them.
IF S. Paul (say you) Page 82.
had been of our says to believe, that the Pope of Rome as Successor of S.
Peter, is the visible Head of the Church, whereas he alleges the
Ecclesiastical orders twice, first, Apostles, then Prophets, after Doctors:
and again: Some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, he should
have alleged Peter among them, and the union with the Bishop of Rome, as a
true note of the Church. Sir, you may be pleased to take for an answer the
fearful example, which Doctor Sanders Vifib. Monarch. l. 7. page 690.
related of one Wright a Doctor of law, and Archdeacon of Oxford, who after the
change of Religion in England, being loath to loose his place, falling one day
in a Sermon on these words of S. Paul, said: Here you find not one word of the
Pope. Which when he had uttered, being presently stricken with a vehement
disease, and as it were suddenly become dumb, he was carried from the pulpit,
not to dinner as he had intended but to bed, where the eight day after he ended
his life. I fear that this answer (howbeit it is from God) will not please
you; S. Damascen will give you another. For with him I desire to know of you
(who to flatter Secular Princes grant them the chiefest place of government in
the Church, making them Heads thereof) where among the Ecclesiastical Orders
reckoned by S. Paul, you with all your wisdom can sind any place for secular
Princes, or Magistrates, or any mention at all of them? It belonges not to
Kings (says S. Damascen) Orat. 2. de Imagine.
to give laws to the Church: for consider what the Apostle says, and whom he
has placed in the Church, first Apostles, after Prophets, then Pastors, and
Doctors: in the constitution of the Church he placed not Kings: And again Ibid.
. Obey your Prelates and be subject to them, for they watch, as being to render
account of your souls. And; remember your Prelates, which have spoken the word
of God to you. Kings are not they which have spoken the word, but Apostles, and
Prophets, and Pastors, and Doctors. The civil government belongs to Kings; but
the Ecilesiasticall constitution to Pastors and Doctors. So Damascen, whose
Doctrine if it please you not, you may learn the same lesson from your
Grand-maister Calvin, teaching, that the chiefest place of government in Christ's
Church belonged to the Apostles, and so to Bishops and Priests their
Successors. And lest you might think, that there is so much as one word in S.
Paul, which may argue him to grant unto secular powers any place of government
in the Church. Calvin L. 4. Instit. c. 3. sect. 5. and cap. 11. sect. 1.
specially notes that by gubernationes, gouerments (which S. Paul after
Apostles, and Doctors reckons in the seventh place) are not understood
civil officers, but, such men, as were joined to the Preachers, for better
order in spiritual government.

But though you in neither of these places (where the Apostle speaks of the
Ecclesiastical dignities) can find any place for secular Princes, and
Magistrates, the Fathers of the Church have found in both of them a place for
the Pope: for S. Hierome observes In Psalm. 44.
that in the Church, Bishops succeed in place of the Apostles: and therefore
Tertullian L. de praescrip. c. 2^. and 32.
, and S. Augustine Ep. 162.
have noted, that their Churches were called Apostolical, so long as they
continued in the faith received from the Apostles; as likewise all others, that
being afterward founded, agreed with them in Doctrine, or as Tertullian
speaks propter consanguinitatem doctrinae. Now as S. Peter was Head and
Prince of the Apostles, so the Roman Church in which he placed his Episcopal
Chair, and into which (says Tertullian) L. de praser. c. 36.
both he, and S. Paul powered all their Doctrina, together with their blood,
was, and is still by a special prerogative called, The Sea Apostolic, in so
much, that when the Sea Apostolic is named without any addition, the Roman See
is always understood. In this language speak S. Hierome L. 2. Apol. aduers.
Ruffin.
when he said Ironice to Ruffinus: I wonder how the Bishops have rece^^ed that,
which the Sea Apostolic has condemned. In this spoke S. Augustine Ep. 106.
, saying: Relations concerning this business were sent by the two Counsels of
Carthage and Mileuis, to the Sea Apostolic. And else where Ep. 162.
: In the Roman Church has always flourished the Principality of the Sea
Apostolic. In the same language spoke the Council of Chalcedon Act. 1.
, calling Paschasinus the Popes legate, The Vicar of the Sea Apostolic. And
the Bishops of Dardania in their Epistle to Gelasius Ext^^ inter epist. Gelasij.
: It is our desire to obey all your commands, and to keep inuiolate the
ordinations of the Sea Apostolic, as from our Fathers we have learned to do.
And S. Bernard L. 2 de Considerat.
upon those words of S. Paul, He that resists power, resists the ordinance
of God, says to Conradus the Emperor: This sentence I wish, and by all means
admonish you to keep in yelding reverence to the chief, and Apostolical See.

From hence it also proceeds, that (as S. Hierome Ep. 58.
said to Damasus): The Bishop of Rome follows the Apostles in honor, and
therefore he above all other Bishops is called Apostolicus, Apostolical. So was
S. Leo called in the Council of Chalcedon Act. 1.
, The most blessed and Apostolical man, Pope of old Rome, which is the Head of
all Churches. And the Bishops of France Inter op. Leonis. ^^to 52.
salute him with the title of, The most blessed Pope to be reverenced with
Apostolical honor. And Rupertus De diui^^ offic. l. 1.27.
: The Successors of the other Apostles are called Patriarchs: but the Successor
of Peter for the excellency of the Prince of the Apostles, Apostolicus
nominatur, has the name of Apostolical. And Hugo Victorinus L. 1. Erud.
Theol. de sacram. Eccles. c. 43.
: The Pope is called Apostolical, because he has the place of the Prince of
the Apostles.

From hence also his Episcopal dignity is by a special prerogative called,
Apostolatus, Apostolate, or Apostleship. So Paschacinus in the Council of
Chalcedon said of Pope Leo Act. 1.
: His Apostleship has vouch safed to command, that Dioscorus sit not in the
Council. So the Bishops of France writing to the same Leo, beseech his
Apostleship to pardon their slownesse Iuter ep. Leon. ante 52.
. Honorius the Emperor beseeches Pope Bonifacius Ep. ad. Bonifac.
that his Apostolate would offer up prayers to God for the good of his Empire.
S. Bernard says to Innocentius Ep. 190.
: It is fitting that whatsoever dangers or scandals arise in the kingdom of
God, be referred to your Apostleship All this shows that under the name of
Apostles, to whom S. Paul allotteth the first and chiefest place among
Ecclesiastical governors, are understood S. Peter and his Succcessors, who
have the first and chiefest place of gouermentin the Church. And this the
Fathers and Councels have sufficiently declared by giving the Pope the title of
Apostolical, by calling his place Apostleship, and his Church absolutely
Apostolical See. This you could not see: so dim sighted you are in beholding
any light that shows the Authority of the Bishop or Church of Rome.

And this also is thereason, why you could not see, that S. Paul comprehends
Peter, and the Popes his Successors, under the name of Pastors: for Christ made
Peter Pastor of his flock; and the same dignity remains to his Suecessors:
for why else did the Mileuitan Council (in time of the Pelagian heresy) beseech
Innocentius Pope Aug. ep. ^2.
to apply his Pastoral diligence to the great perils of the weak members of
the Church? why did S. Hierome Ep. 57.
living in Palestine fly to Damasus Pope for resolution of his doubts, as a
sheep to his Pastor? Why did S. Chrysostom say L. 2. de Sacordot.
that, Christ committed to Peter, and his Successors, the charge of those sheep
for which he shed his blood? Why did S. Ambrose Ep. 81.
call Siricius Pope a good and rigilant Pastor, that with pious solicitude
keeps the flock of Christ? Why did S. Prosper say l. de ingrat. c. 2.
that Rome by the Sea Apostolic is made the Head of Pastoral honor to the
world? Why did the Bishops of the East say to Pope Symmachus, In volum.
Orthodoxograph. impres. Basileae.
You are taught daily by Peter your sacred Doctor, to feed the flock of Christ,
which is committed to you throughout the whole world? Why did Amator, an
African Bishop, write to Siluerius Pope in banishment: Ep. ad Silver.
What do you think becomes of us, when such things are done to the chief
Pastor? Why did that Emperor Leo, surnamed the wise, say Sermon. de. S Petro.
that Christ made Peter Prince of Pastors, and required of him the care of
feeding his flock as a return of his love? Why did the Emperor Constantine
Pogonate, and the sixth Council general call Agatho the universal
Arch-pastor? Ep. ad synod. Apost. in ^. synodo. Act. 18.
You (say they to the Council of the West) and the universal Arch-pastor by
your procurators have been present at our Council. Why did the second general
Council of Lions Sext. decret. C. Vbi peric.
call Gregory the tenth, Governor of the universal Church and guide of our
Lords flock? And finally why did S. Bernard L. 2. de considerat.
say to Eugenius Pope. To you are committed the sheep not of one City, or
country, but all the sheep of Christ without exception? What think you M.
Doctor? These Fathers and Councels found the Pope among the Pastors reckoned by
S. Paul, and believed him to be the Arch-pastor, and Pastor of all Pastors
under Christ: but you that shut your eyes against the light, cold not discern
him.

The same I say of the name and title of Doctor, which all antiquity has
acknowledged to be due to S. Peter, and in him to his Successors. S. Hypolitus
Martyr says: Orat de consummat. mundi.
Peter the Prince, the Rock of faith: he the Doctor of the Church, the chief
of the Disciples. S. Chrysostom calls him Orat. Encom. in Pet. ac Paul.
Doctor of the Apostles, and Master of the world. And the Council of Florence
In lit. union.
with the accord both of the Latin and Greek Church, defines the Bishop of
Rome to be, The Successor of blessed Peter Prince of the Apostles, the true
Vicar of Christ, the Head of the whole Church, the Father and Doctor of all
Christians. Nor does this title agree to him, as it does to others, but in a
far more noble and excellent manner: for S. Augustine speaking of his Chair,
says Ep. 160.
: The heavenly Master has placed in the Chair of Unity the Doctrine of
verity. To you (says S. Basil to Damasus Pope) Ep. 69. per Sabin. Diac.
it is given by our Savior to discern between what is counterfiete, and what
is pure; and without any diminution to teach the faith of our Ancestors. And S.
Hierome L. 1. Apol. aduers. Ruffin.
: That though an Angel should preach otherwise then the Roman Church teaches,
he were not to be believed: Whereof Maximianus Patriarch of Constantinople
yeldeth the reason, saying Ep. ad Oriental.
: The Creator of the world among all the men of the world, selected S. Peter,
to whom he granted the Chair of Doctor to be principally possessed by a
perpetual right of privilege, that whosoever is desirous to know any profound
and divine thing, may have recourse to the oracle and Doctrine of this
instruction. Nor is there any man that can deny this truth, if he credit the
ancient Fathers, teaching that the privilege given to S. Peter of confirming
his Brethren, did not dye with him, but was in him granted to his Successors:
In regard whereof the Councels have sent their decrees to the Pope to be
confirmed by him: and S. Hierome, S. Augustine, Theodoret, S. Cyril, Venerable Bede, S. Anselme, S. Bernard, and many other of the most learned Doctors of
Gods Church have submitted their writings to the several Popes of their times
to be examined and approved, or reproved according to their judgment.

SECT. IV. Doctor Mortons railing against the Inquisition.
YOu object Page 83. 84
that, S. Peter as an Elder exhorts the Elders or Bishops: feed the flock of
God, not dominiering over Gods heritage. What may be inferred from hence (say
you) we may understand in your second Challenge. But you must give us leave not
to learn the sense of this Scripture from your Challenge, but from the Ancient
Doctors of Gods Church, who out of it show, that S. Peter had, and practiced
the authority of Supreme Pastor, and Governor of the universal Church.

But because S. Peter writing to Bishops, commanded them not to dominiere in
the Clergy, See above Chap. 9. fin.
you take occasion to rail against the Romish Inquisition, first by making a
relation of your own Page 85.
no less false then spiteful) of imprisonment, famishment, torment, and ropes
to strangle prisoners, and all in tenebris, works of darkness; employed
against all believers, receyuers, defenders, and favorers of heretics. And to
this your relation you add another like of Cornelius Agrippa, Ibid.
whom you know to be a Magician, an heretic, and a forbidden author, and yet
you are not ashamed to call his lies. Our Confession. And to the same purpose
you bring Thuanus, Ibid.
whom we own not, but bequeath him to you, as one who by praising the
Huguenots and their Doctrine, and by speaking against the Pope and Church of
Rome, sufficiently declares what he is.

Now as for the thing it self, who sees not the absurdity of your argument,
which reduced to a few words is: The inquisition is severe in punishing
heretics, especially such, as having abiured their heresy before a Judge,
relapse into the same again, and are in danger to infect others, Ergo
salvation may behad out of the Roman Church; or, Ergo it is lawful to depart
from her faith and communion: or, Ergo the Roman Church is not the Head of all
Churches: for these are the points in proof whereof your grand Imposture wholly
insisteth. That you know all these illations to be absurd, it is not to be
doubted: but you are contented that men of learning, and judgment should know
you to be absurd, so that thereby you may make the Roman Church hateful to
simple souls, that want learning and judgment to discern your Impostures.

That Jews, Mahumetans, and Heretics hate the Inquisition, it is no wonder.
Malefactors hate their Judges, and thieves the gallows. How (says S.
Augustine) Ep. 166.
can he that has an ill suite, praise the Judges, by whom he has been
convicted? And else where Tract. 11. in Joan. and ep. 48. and 50.
he declares, that as they which blasphemed the God of Sidrach, Misach, and
Abdenago, were justly punished by the Edict of Nabuchodonosor; so heretics,
because they draw men from Christ are in like manner justly punished according
to the laws made against them by Christian Kings and Emperors. And showing
that they have no reason to complain thereof, he says Tract. 11. in Joan.
: They (the Donatists) will do such things, and yet will not suffer such
punishments: See what they do, and what they suffer: They kill souls, and are
punished in their bodies: They cause everlasting deaths, and complain that
they suffer temporal deaths. And again Cont. ep. Parme^. l. 1. c. 8.
: What do not these men justly suffer, seeing they suffer deservedly for their
offenses by lawful power, and by the judgment of God governing from above,
and admonishing them by such punishments to beware of everlasting fire. Let
them first prove themselves not to be Heretics or Schismatikes, and then let
them complain that they suffer iniustly. And else where he says Conc. 2. in
Psalm. 34.
: The Physician is somtymes enforced to cut and lance, and desisteth not,
though the Patient curse, and rail: They that are in a letargy are wakened,
and they that are in a phrensy, are bound; yet both of them are loved. Let no
man therefore say, I suffer persecution: let him not proclayme his punishment,
but let him prove his cause, lest if he prove not his cause, he be reckoned
among the wicked. And answering the arguments of the Donatists, who desiring to
be freed from the punishment due to their Heresy, argued out of Terence, that
it is better to refrain men from evil by shame and freedom, then by fear of
punishment, he answers, Ep. 50.
that albeit those which are drawn with love be better, yet more come by
fear; which he proves, 1. out of the same Poet, saying: Thou know not how
to do well, unless thou be enforced with punishment: 2. with a Proverb of
Solomon, that, A stif-necked servant will not be amended with words: for though
he understand, he will not obey: and 3. by experience: for (says he) it is
superfluous to prove this with words, seeing it is manifest by, many examples,
that not these, or those men, but that many Cities of Heretics are now become
Catholic for fear of the Imperial laws from Constantine to the present
laws. These are the laws M. Doctor, which you storm at: for the Inquisitors
nether pronounce sentence of death against any, nor execute it. If any man be
accused, they examine his cause, as with justice, so with great meekness. If
he be found guilty of heresy, they use all means both by themselves and by
other learned men to reclayme him. If he acknowledge his error, he is delivered
up to religious persons to be instructed, and with charitable usage gained to
God. But if they find him to stand out obstinatly against all persuasions, they
deliver him up with his whole process, to the secular Magistrates, beseeching
them to deal mercifully with him. And if the Magistrates judge him worthy of
death, and punish him according to the Imperial laws, I know no reason you
have to blame them: for (as S. Augustine says with the Apostle) Ep. 164. and
l. 1. cont. ep. Parmen. c. 8. and. l 2. cont. Petil. c. 83.
they bear not the sword without cause: for they are Gods Ministers, reuengers
unto wrath, to them that do evil. Nor do I see what you have in all this to
quarrel at, unless you think, that thieves, and murderers of men's bodies
ought to be punished with death, and that murderers of men's souls ought to be
spared. And so much the more inconsiderate you are in this your cavil, because
your selves use the same proceeding against heretics: for have you not burnt
David George in Holland, Hacket, Coppinger, and others in England?

But you complain Page 85. 86.
, that not only heretics are punished, but also Believers, Receauers,
Defenders, and Favorers of heretics, namely such as commend their learning,
wit, Zeal, constancy or simplicity, which any Christian may do in a Pagan.
Sir, I know not how to excuse you either from imposture or impiety: for (as
Suarez De trip. virt. Theol. disp. 24. n. 2.
and Azor Part. 1. l. 8. c. 15.
the very authors whom you object have declared) Believers are they that give
credit to the Doctrine of heretics, and make profession thereof, or praise the
same as no way dissonant to the Catholic faith: May a Christian do this to a
Pagan? Defenders are not they that praise the learning, wit, or eloquence of
heretics, but that commend or maintain their doctrine, or praise their
pertinacy (which you call zeal) in defending their errors. Say now: were it
not impiety to do this to a Pagan? And so it is in you, to say that, any
Christian may lawfully do it to an heretic. Favorers or receauers are not
they, that receive heretics into their howses, or show love or favor unto them
as to their friends or kinsfolks (this any man may do to a Pagan) but that
receive, co^ceale or assist them, that they may persevere in their heresy, and
teach it to others: also officers, that ought to concur to the apprehension
of heretics, and do it not, but aid them to escape the hands of the lawful
judges, that so they may not be punished, but remain free to pervert others.

This is the Doctrine of Suarez and Azor, whom you object: and no Catholic
Divines speak otherwise against him, that having abiured his heresy before a
Judge, relapseth into the same: for if he talk with an heretic, or visit him
as his neighbor, or reverence him as his Superior, or reward him for any favor
received, or commend him for his wit, or other talents of nature or learning,
he is not therefore thought to have relapsed into heresy. But if he visit,
reverence, reward, or commend him, because he is an heretic, and for his
heretical Doctrine, he is then by the law of Frederike the Emperor to be
delivered to the secular Magistrate, and as a relaps to be executed, as one
that by reason of his inconstancy is held morally incorrigible, and that by his
example and Doctrine may infect others. But yet if he repent, the Church like a
pious mother, receaues him into her bosom, allowing him the Sacrament of
Alsolution and Eucharist, and affords him all instruction, and help, for the
good of his soul, that so he may dye in state of salvation.

Against this your choler rises, saying Page 87.
: Bubalus was never so stupid, as to judge them morally incorrigible, which do
repent so* as to make themselves capable of Absolution: but, Sir, Bubalus was
never so stupid, as not to understand that a relapsed heretic being condemned
to death, may by the help of Gods grace open his eyes to see and acknowledge
his error, and thereby make himself capable of the Sacraments; and yet that
nevertheless the Church may justly fear, that as he became a relaps after he
had once solemnly abuired his heresy, so if he be permitted to live, he may
fall the third and fourth time again, which is to be morally incorrigible.

And whereas you add, Ibid.
that there was never any Rhadamanthus so extreme, as at once to pardon and
kill, and that therefore such mercy is to be cursed, because it is cruel: by
these words you condemn the practice of all Christian Common wealths, which
when they put Malefactors to death, grant them access to the Sacraments of
Penance and Eucharist, and afford them all help and instruction to dye well,
as the Church does to Heretics, if they will accept thereof: for with them she
deals no otherwise in this case, then all Christian Princes do with other
malefactors. But belike nether heretics nor other Malefactors must be put to
death, or if they be, the Church must deny them the holy Sacraments, that so
their souls may perish with their bodies; or else you will compare her to
Rhadamanthus: you will say she pardons and kills at once, and curse her mercy,
canonizing it for cruelty. What may we say, or think of such a man?

Small reason therefore you had P^g. 85. 86.
to call the Inquisitions proceeding against heretics, Tyrannous Romish
cruelty, and Barbarous Romish cruelty. And so much the reader will yet better
understand, if he consider, that nether the Inquisitors, nor any other
Ecclesiastical persons pronounce, nor much less execute sentence of death
against heretics: and what the secular Magistrate does in that kind against
Lutherans and Caluinists, is not by force of any new laws made against them,
but according to the laws which the most godly Christian Emperors have
anciently provided (before any Protestants were exstant in the world) for the
preservation of Christian Religion against Jews, Mahumetans, and Heretics.

But if I were disposed to deal with you by retorsion (which kind of argument
is familiar to you in this Grand Imposture) I cold put you in mind, how without
any warrant of law (for at that time you had made no laws against Catholics)
yea and contrary to all laws of this kingdom, and of Christianity, in the
days of K. Henry the eight, and Queen Elizabeth, you partly sent and forced
into banishment, and partly consumed with the loathsomeness of prisons, and
stench of dungeons, many Catholics of all degrees, as well Ecclesiastics, as
Laics. I cold write of your racking, and many other ways cruelly torturing of
Priests, and lay Catholics, and of your putting to death many of them for
crimes composed, and maliciously forged against them by your selves, you having
then no laws whereby to condemn them. And I cold reckon the number and specify
the cruelty of your Parliament Statutes made since that time against all sorts
of Catholics, and the severity used in the execution of them, with continual
vexation of innocent people, especially by the inferior sort of your officers.
But for the honor of our Country: I forbear the rehearsal of them, and wish
that the Christian world abroad had not taken so much notice of them, as their
Histories show them to have done. But if leaving England, I pass to other
nations, what pen is able to express the never before heard of inhumane,
barbarous, and sacrilegious cruelties of your Geuses in the Iow Countries, and
your good brethren the Huguenots in France? which whosoever desires to know
more in particular, may see lively presented to his view, by M. Richard
Verstegan in a book of pictures entitled Theatrum crudelicatum haere^icorum
nostri temporis, printed at Antwerp, Apud Adrianum Huberti Anno 1592. with so
many particulars of the time, place, persons, and torments, that no man ever
had the face to question the truth thereof: nor the relation which Doctor
Harding, In his proof of certain articles of religion against Master Iuell
Fol. 129.130.
has made of the Caluinists at Pat^e, not far from Orleans, throwing 25.
infants quick into the fire; of their burying of Catholics alive at S.
Macarius; of cutting infants in two; of ripping up the bellies of Priests
alive; of drawing out their entrails by little and little, and winding them
about stakes; of cutting of the privy parts of a Priest, then frying them,
after causing him by violence to swallow them down, and last of all ripping up
his stomach being yet alive, to see what was become of them; of their dragging
other Priests after their horses, then picking out their eyes, cutting off
their ears, noses, and privy parts, wearing their ears in their hats as
jewels to glory in their malice; hanging up the carcasses of some yet striving
for life, dispatching others at once with their pistols, hacking and mangling
the faces of some, and cleaving the heads of others in two at a stroke to make
trial of their strength. To which you may add the horible sacriledges, the
unspeakable cruelties fitter for Tigers then men; and the monstrous
beastliness of your French and Holland Brethren at Tillemont in Brabrant Anno
1635. I pretermit the particulars not to soil my paper with the rehearsal of
them. If you desire to know them, the famous University of Louayne, next
neighbor to Tillemont, has depainted them in lively colors: in their
relation you may read them. If you had consired these and many other most
horrible cruelties of your Ghospelling Brethren, the like whereof have never
been heard among any people never so inhumane and savage, and added unto them
your own outrages committed both in England and Ireland (some of which
Verstegans Theatrum represents unto you) you would surely have been ashamed to
instile the just proceedings of the Inquisition, or the sentences pronounced
against them by Catholic Magistrates, Tyrannous Romish cruelty, Barbarous
Romish cruelty.

CHAP. XV. Of the signification of the word, Catholic, and the judgment of
diverse Fathers objected by Doctor Morton against the Roman Church.
SECT. I. That the word Catholic proves the Roman Church to be the true Church.
You demand Page 88. 89
how the Roman Church (seeing it is Roman, that is, a particular Church) can be
called Catholic, that is, universal, or the whole Church? And if it be the
whole Church, how can it be a particular Church, distinct from the Church of
Greece, or Church of France? will you make us believe, that the thumb of the
hand can be the whole body? Sir as we are not so witless as to think that the
thumb of the hand can be the whole body, so nether are we so foolish as to
believe that the particular Church of the Roman Dioces can be the universal
Church. We know, and so do you to, and it has been already proved Chap. 1.
Sect. 2. and. 3.
, that not only the particular Church of Rome, may in a true and proper
acception be called the Catholic Church, as Head of all Churches; but also
that the Roman Church taken (as often it is) for the collection of all Churches
in the world, consisting of the Roman as Head, and the rest as members, may be,
and is truly and usually called The Catholic Church, and the universal
Church. Yea it is evident, that if (according to the Etimology of the name
Catholic, and Cont. Gand. l. 3. c. 1. Sermon. 131. de temp. and ep. 170.
the interpretation of S. Augustine, the Catholic Church be that which is
universally spread over the world, the Roman Church and none else but she, is
the Catholic Church: for Universality agrees to none but to her, all Sects
lurking in corners. Wherefore you not only inconsideratly but against your self
produce S. Augustine here Page 89.
, and Optatus afterward Page 341.
, to prove, that your Protestant Church is the Catholic Church. S. Augustine
says L de pastor. c. 8.
; Not all heretics are spread over the face of the earth. and yet there are
heretics spread over the whole face of the earth, some here, some there; yet
they are wanting no where; they know not one another. One fact for example in
Africa, another heresy in the East, another in Egypt, another in Mesopotamia.
In diverse places they are diverse: One Mother Pride has begot them all, as our
one Mother the Catholic Church has brought forth all faithful people
dispersed throughout the whole world. So said S. Augustine to the Donatists;
and so say we to you: There are diverse sectcs in the world: Wiclefists in
Bohemia; but in any other part of the world they are not. There be Lutherans in
Germany, in Denmark etc. but in the rest of the world they be not. There are
ridged Caluinists in Geneua, France, and Scotland, to whom you may ad your
English Puritans, but in other parts of the world they are not. There are
Protestants a more temperate sort of Caluinists in England; but out of England
they are not. These therefore, and all other sects of heretics whatsoever are
confined to a few Countries; and therefore none of them can be the Catholic
Church, which is universally spead over the whole world, as the Roman Church
is; and therefore she, and none else but she, is the Catholic Church.

Optatus speaking also to the Donatists, said L. 2. contra Parmen.
: You will have the Church to be where you are; and you will have it not to be
where you are not: that it may be with you, you will have it to be in a corner
of Africa: and that it may not be with us, you will not have it to be in
almost innumerable Islands, Provinces, and Countries, where we are, and you are
not. So we say to Protestants: you will have the Catholic Church to be in
England, where you are: but you will not have it to be in so many other
countries of Europe, Africa, Asia and America almost innumerable, where we are,
and you are not. If your Church be the Catholic Church, if it be universally
spread over the face of the earth, as the Catholic Church must be; we say to
you, as S. Augustine did to the Donatists Ep. 163.
: Give us formed letters to men of your faith and communion in all parts of the
earth. This you cannot do; but we can: for we are not only in Countries almost
innumerable of Europe, Africa, Asia, and America, where you are not; but we are
also in England, in France, and all other Countries, in which you are. We
therefore can give you letters of communion to men of our Religion, professing
the faith, and living in the communion of the Roman Church throughout all the
world, as well in places where you are; as where you are not. The Roman Church
therefore, ^^e al one, and ^on^ but she, is universally spread over the face of
the earth, whersoeuer the name of Christ is known: and therefore if Christ have
any Catholic Church on earth, none but she is the Catholic Church.

The words which you object out of the Confer^nce of Carthage (which in some
copies are joined to Opt^tus) are neither his, nor S. Augustine, but of
Balduinus a late Protestant writer of small credit. But be they whose you
please, they are not pertinent to your purpose: for no man doubts, but that as
the Church of Christ began at Jerusalem where his Gospel was first preached
by S. Peter, and from thence by degrees spread over the world, so whosoever is
in communion of this Church universally spread, has God for his Father, and
the Catholic Church for his Mother, as S. Augustine professed himself to
have. But withal he teaches Psalm. cont. part. Donat.
(and so does all Antiquity) that this Catholic Church so spread over the
world, is built upon S. Peter and his Successors as upon a Rock which the proud
gates of Hell cannot overcome: and so does S. Hierome, saying Ep. 57.
to Damasus of the Roman See, I know the Church to be built upon this Rock. In
regard whereof he ^^^^^nceth all them that are not in the communion of the
Bishop of Rome, not to be of Christ but of Antichrist. And for the same cause
S. Augustine Psalm. cont. part. Donat.
grieved i^ see the Dou^tist^l ye cut of from the Roman Church; and exhorted
them, as ^eunite themselves to her, as branches to their Vine.

SECT. II. The judgment of S. Hierome, concerning the Church Catholic.
WHat his judgment was you have partly heard. (...) ^^eli^^^^^ the Roman See to
be the Rock on which the Catholic Church is built* he was in her communion and
Ep. 57.
^eld you that refuse her communion, to be a profane person belonging to (...)
^^brist: he held her to be, The (...) of (...) whos^^uer else shall be found at
the ^^^^ing (...), shall (...). His judgment was Dial. cont. Lucifer.
* that if Christ (...) Church diffused throughout the world (as the (...) is
that was ordi^^^ only (as the sect of the Lucif^ri^n^ against whom he writes
was, or only in a few Northern parts of the world, as your Protestant
Congrega^^^^ (...)) fit i^ ^e ^^^^creding p^or^. His judgment was Ibid.
that (...) ^or^^ayne in that Church, which being founded by the ^postles
d^^^th until this day, which is none else but the Roman, (...) in her alone
there has been, and still is a never interrupted Succession of Bishops from S.
Peter, unto Urban the eight, who (...) g^^^ ^^e^h that Church; whereas there is
no other. Church founded by the Apostles, in which Succession is not either
wholly decayed, or has not been often interrupted and broken of by heretics,
or Arch-heretikes, those Churches being wholly possessed by them* His judgment
was that which he declar^^, when he said of Ruffinus L. 1. Apol. aduers. Ruffin.
: Which faith does he call his is. If that which the Roman Church holds, then
we are Catholics. And speaking to Ruffinus Ibid.
* Know, that the Roman faith commended by the voice of the Apostle, admits
not such delusions: though an Angel should teach otherwise th^^ ^^^^eth been
on ^^^^iuered, it cannot be altered being sensed (...). Paul ^^thority. He
declared his judgment* when he said to such as you are Ep. 6. ad Pammach. and
Ocean.
* Whosoever thou are, that auouchest no^ Sects, I pray thee have respect to the
Roman ears: spare the faith which was praised by the voice of the Apostle: He
declared his judgment Ep. 8.
, when aduising Demotrias to avoid the cruel tempest of Heresy, which rising
out of the Eastern parts, at that time when Anastasius of happy and holy
memory goa^^ned the Roman Church, attempted to pollute and corrupt the
sincerity of that faith, which was commended by the mouth of the Apostle, he
prescribes her this rule, that the keep fast the faith of S. Innocentius,
son and Successor to Anastasius in the Apostolical Chair. He declared his
judgment, when he said Proom. lib. 2. Comment. ad Galat.
: The faith of the people of Rome is praised: Where is there so great con^^^rse
to Churches, and to Martyrs sepulchers? Where sounds Amen like thunder from
He even etc. Not that the Romans have any other faith then the rest of the
Christian Churches, but that there is in them more devotion, and simplicity of
faith. He declared his judgment, when he said to Marcella Ep. 17.
: In Rome is the holy Church, there are the trophies of the Apostles and
Martyrs; there is the true confession of Christ there is the faith celebrated
by the Apostle, and gentility trodden under foot, the Christian name daily
advancing it self on high: He declared his judgment when he said Ep. 16.
that Peter (Patriarch of Alexandria) persecuted by the Arians sted to Rome as
to the safest haven of communion.

These testimonies of S. Hierome declare his judgment of the Roman Church:
against which you object Page 91.
that he reproved an ill custom (not of the Pope, or Church of Rome, but) of
the Deacons of that Church, who though few in number, yet growing proud in
regard they had the treasure of the Church in their custody, contrary to the
ancient practice of that Church, and of all other (which was that Priests,
fitting with the Bishop, Deacons should stand) they of Rome began to presume by
little and little to fit. This custom S. Hierome reprehended, because it
proceeded from pride, and wanted authority: for (says he) if authority be
required, greater is the authority of the world, then of a City: which is true
in things of this nature, that nether concern faith nor the Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome: for who feeth not, that a custom no way
concerning says or jurisdiction, but discipline, and warranted by all other
Churches of the would, was of greater authority, then a contrary, custom
brought in by a few Deacons of the Roman Church, without any warrant of the
Bishop of Rome? And who sees not, that these words of S. Hierome are
impertinently brought against the Roman says, or the supreme authority of the
Bishop of Rome? for in them he neither speaks against the Roman faith, nor
makes any comparison between the Church of Rome, and the rest of the world in
point of jurisdiction, but only between the authority of all the other
Churches of the world, and the authority of a few Deacons of the Roman Church
in a custom no way repugnant to faith, nor touching the jurisdiction of the
Bishop of Rome.

And finally, who sees not, that your intention is to delude, and deceive your
readers? For he that has so many and so pregnant testimonies of S. Hierome, in
which he expressly declares, that the Roman faith is the. Catholic faith; that
it admits no delusions, nor can be changed; that the way to avoid heresy, is
to hold fast the faith of the Roman Church; that we must remain in her, as
being that Church which has Succession from the Apostles, that he is the
safest port of communion; that the Church of Christ is built upon the Roman
See; and that he which is not in the communion of the Bishop of Rome, gathers
not, but scatters; that he is profane, and belongs not to Christ, but to
Antichrist. He (I say) that has so many, and so forcible testimonies of S.
Hierome, and yet coming to deliver his judgment concerning the Roman Church,
concealeth them all, and obiecteth one only testimony wholly impertinent, as
you do; what intention can he be thought to have, but to deceive men in the
most important affair of their salvation?

But you reply Page 91.
: This is that testimony of S. Hierome, wherein the Fathers of the Council of
Basil did in a manner triumph in opposition to the Popes claim. How prove you
this? With a sentence of Aeneas Siluius. O imposture! For you know, that the
Council of Basil was a Schismatic Conuenticle: and moreover you know, that
the words which you object, are, not of the Council of Basil, but of Aeneas
Siluius, and that he has retracted them, with the whole book out of which you
took them. Are not then you a deceiptfull merchant, to cosen your customers
with such false wares?

Nor do I well see, how you can be excused from contradiction: for you say Ibid.
, S. Hierome was a professed and devout child of the Church of Rome, when Rome
was yet a true and natural Mother, and no Step-dame: Ergo, in S. Hieromes
days the Church of Rome became a Step-dame, which could not be otherwise then
by falling into error. How then is it true, that, as afterward you grant Page
17^. and 19^.
the Roman Church remained pure and free from error in faith 600. years after
Christ, which was not in S. Hieromes time, but 200. years after him?

SECT. III. The judgment of S. Gregory, concerning the Supremacy of the Bishop
of Rome, and his title of Universal Bishop.
YOur scope here is, to disprove the universal authority of the Bishop of Rome
by the judgment of S. Gregory refusing, and reprehending in John Patriarch of
Constantinople the title of Universal Bishop, as likewise did Pelagius, and
Leo Bishops of the same See. And first you tell us Page 91.
, It can be no sufficient argument for concluding a Papal authority, to object
against you the testimonies of Popes in their own cause. It was necessary for
you to premit this Caveat: for howsoever you here pretend that S. Gregory, S.
Leo, and Pelagius did not acknowledge in themselves any superiority or
jurisdiction over the universal Church, your guilty conscience tells you the
contrary: and therefore you slight their testimonies as of men partial, and
that speak in their own cause. And the like you do afterward again with
reproachful and contumelious words: for whereas Bellarmine L. 2. de Pont. c. 21.
in proof of the ancient practice of appealing to the Pope, produces the
testimonies of S. Leo and S. Gregory, you Page 30^, 304,
reject them, as of partial witnesses, and compare them to Adonias, who
traitorously sought to set the crown on his own head, which is in effect to
say, that as Adonias traitorously assumed to himself the dignity of a King,
not due unto him: so did these Popes unlawfully challenge to themselves, the
dignity of Pastors, and Governors of the universal Church, having no right
thereunto. A most ungodly comparison: for these two Popes were of the most holy,
learned, and renowned Prelates, that ever sat in the Chair of S. Peter, since
his time, whose sanctity God has testified with most illustrious miracles, and
whom all posterity has justly honored with the surname of Great. S. Leo is he,
that with great care and vigilance suppressed the Manichees that came flying
out of the Africa to Rome, and other places of Italy; that used singular
industry to root out the Donatists in Africa, the Pelagians in France, and the
Priscilianists in Spain, writing to the Bishops of greatest learning, and
fame, that were then living in those Countries, to be watchful, and assemble
Counsels for the condemning, and extirpating those heresies: and like wise he
himself against the errors of Nestorius, Eutyches, and Dioscorus assembled in
the East that famous Council of 630. Bishops at Chalcedon, who all
acknowledged him to be their Head, and themselves his members, and children;
and that to him the government of the Church was committed by our Savior In
relat. ad Leon.
; and who esteemed his words as the words of S. Peter, and his judgments as
oracles of God, crying out all which one voice Act. 1.
, Peter has spoken by the mouth of Leo; Leo has judged the judgment of God.

Nor was S. Gregory of less renown: for to omit the admirable humility
wherewith he refused the dignity of supreme Pastor, the conversion of our
English nation, and other great works, which he performed for the good of the
Church, the excellent books he writ, for which he has deserved the title of
Doctor of the Church, and the many famous miracles wherewith God declared his
sanctity, who is ignorant of the admirable Elogies wherewith ancient writers
have celebrated his praises? Among others, that famous Archbishop of Toledo,
and Primate of Spain S. Hildephonsus writes of him In lib. de viris illust.
, that in sanctity he surpassed Antony, in eloquence Cyprian, in wisdom
Augustine, and by the grace of the holy Ghost was endowed with so great light
of humane science, that in former ages none had been equal unto him. And
Petrus Diaconus testifies Vit. S. Greg.
that he saw the holy Ghost in form of a dove at his care, inspiring him
whiles he was writing: which alone might have made you forbear the traducing
of so admirable a man. But returning to our question: this very evasion of
yours, to wit, that the testimonies of Popes are no sufficient argument to
conclude a Papal authority because they speak in their own cause,
sufficiently conuinceth, that you know them to have acknowledged such authority
in themselves, and that when you deny it, you speak without all ground of
truth: for who can think that S. Leo, S. Gregory, and many other Popes renowned
Martyrs, and glorious Confessors, most eminent in humility, and all kind of
virtue, and to whose sanctity God added the seal of divine miracles, should
with a Luciferian pride arrogate to themselves Pastoral authority, and power
over the Church of God throughout the whole world, if that dignity had not been
given by Christ to S. Peter, and in him to them? I deny therefore that when they
maintain their authority, they speak in their own cause: They speak in the
cause of God, as (witness your self) Page 4^.
S. Paul did when he said Romans 11.
: I will magnify mine office, in as much as I am Doctor of the Gentiles. And
the like did S. Gregory, when upon that text he collected a general lesson for
the defense of his own jurisdiction against such as you are, saying L. 4. ep.
36.
; The Apostle teaches us so to carry humility in our heart, that we do keep and
preserve the dignity of that order, whereunto we are called. Wherefore as if a
Viceroy should defend and maintain the dignity of his place, for the service
of the King his Master, and the repression of seditious persons, he that
should oppose him, and resist his authority, under color that he speaks in
his own cause, would be accounted no better then a rebel; so no other
reckoning is to be made of him, that reiects the testimonies of Popes, the
Vicars and Lieutenants of Christ on earth, because they defend their authority:
for they do it, to defend the honor of Christ their Master, to magnify their
office with S. Paul, and with S. Gregory to preserve the dignity of that order
whereunto they are called: which dignity S. Augustine Ep. 92.
and the whole Council of Mileuis acknowledge to be taken out of the authority
of holy Scriptures,

But here by the way I desire to be resolved of a doubt. You confess Page 301.
that power of appeals if it be right, and proper, is a most certain argument
of dominion. Again you confess Page 303. marg. fin. n. 8.
that S. Gregory excommunicated John, a Greek Bishop of the first
Iustinianaea, because he had presumed to judge Adrian Bishop of Thebes, after
he had appealed to the Sea Apostolic: which conuinceth S. Gregory to have
believed that the Bishops of the Greek Church might lawfully appeal from
their own Metropolitans, and from their Patriarch of Constantinople to the Sea
Apostolic, and that the same See had true and proper right, to admit their
appeals, and re-iudge their causes; which it could not have, if the Pope had
not true and proper authority over the Greek Church. How then can you deny,
that S. Gregory believed himself to have that authority, or that he practiced
the same?

Yea, that he had power and jurisdiction not only over the Greek Church, but
also over the universal Church, and practiced the same, is a thing so
certain, that your Protestant brethren Friccius, Peter Martyr, Carrion,
Philippus Nicolai, the Centurists, and Osiander Apud Brier. Protest. Apol.
Tract. 1. sect. 7. subdiu. 9. a n. 11. ad 29.
show out of his writings, these particulars: That, the Roman Church appoints
her watch over the whole world: that the Apostolic See is the Head of all
Churches: that the Bishop of Constantinople is subject to the Apostolic See:
that S. Gregory challenged to himself power to command Archbishops, to
ordain, or depose Bishops: that he assumed to himself right for citing
Archbishops to declare their causes before him, when they were accused, and
also to excommunicate and depose them, giving commission to their neighbor
Bishops to proceed against them: that in their provinces he placed his Legates
to examine, and end the causes of such as appealed to the Roman See: that he
usurped power of appointing Synods in their provinces, and required
Archbishops, that if any cause of great importance happened, they should
refer the same to him, appointing in provinces his Vicars over the Churches
to end smaller matters, and to reserve the greater causes to himself. All this
is testified by your own brethren: to which Doctor Sanders Visib. Monarch. l.
7. a n. 433. ad 541.
adds much more of the same kind, out of S. Gregory's own works, and in his
own words: as, that the Sea Apostolic by the authority of God is preferred
before all Churches: That all Bishops if any fault be found in them, are
subject to the Sea Apostolic: That she is the Head of faith, and of all the
faithful members: That if any of the four Patriarchs had done against the
Popesletters, that which was done by the Bishop Salona, so great a disobedience
could not have passed without a most grievous scandal: That the Sea Apostolic
is the head of all Churches: That the Roman Church, by the words which Christ
spoke to Peter, was made the Head of all Churches: That no scruple nor doubt
ought to be made of the faith of the Sea Apostolic: that all those things are
false which are taught contrary to the Doctrine of the Roman Church: That to
return from Schism to the Catholic Church, is to return to the communion of
the Bishop of Rome: That he which will not have S. Peter (to whom the keys of
heaven were committed) to shut him out from the entrance of life, must not in
this world be separated from his See: That they are perverse men, which refuse
to obey the commands of the Sea Apostolic.

I conclude therefore with Doctor Sanders, that he which reads all these
particulars, and more of the same kind that are to be found in the works of
S. Gregory, and yet with a brazen forehead fears not to interpret that which
he writ against the name of Universal Bishop, so, as if he could not abide,
that any one Bishop should have the chief seat and supreme government of the
whole militant Church; that man (says he) seems to me, either to have cast of
all understanding and sense of a man, or else to have put on the obstinat
perverseness of the Devil. How comes it then to pass, that you are not
ashamed to urge here, and else where so often in this your grand Imposture S.
Gregory's refusing the name of universal Bishop, as an argument to disprove
his authority, and jurisdiction over the universal Church, especially since it
has been so often, and so fully answered by us? But because here you insist so
much thereon, I will for the readers satisfaction briefly declare, in what sense
Pelagius, and S. Gregory refused that title, and how to better your argument,
you abuse, and falsify our Authors.

The title of Vniuersalis Episcopus, Universal Bishop, may be taken two ways:
first for a Bishop, that challenges an universal power over all other
Bishops, clayming to himself a right of hearing, and determing all
Ecclesiastical causes in his own, and their Diocesses, leaving them no other
right to exercise any Episcopal jurisdiction and power, but only such as they
shall receive from him as his Vicars. In this sense S. Gregory conceived John
Patriarch of Constantinople to style himself Universal Bishop, as it
appears out of his plain and express words in diverse of his Epistles L. 4.
ep. 32.34. and 36.38. and l. 7. ep. 70.
to which the margent will direct you. And in this sense he calls the name of
universal Bishop, A profane and Antichristian title. 2. It may be taken in
the same signification with Episcopus Vniuersalis Ecclesiae, so, that it
signify a Bishop to whom belongs the government of the universal Church and
the determining of all such causes as appertain to her in general, without
taking away, or hindering the ordinary power and right of other Bishops, and
leaving each of them in their several places and degrees with full power and
authority to judge and determine all Causes Ecclesiastical belonging to their
Diocesses, and within them. In this sense the title of Universal Bishop is not
condemned by S. Gregory as new, or profane, or any way unlawful, but agrees
to the Pope, no less then the title of Bishop of the universal Church. And
therefore as S. Gregory Ep. ad omnes Episc.
styles himself Bishop of the universal Church, so likewise when Eulogius
Patriarch of Alexandria writing to him L. 4. ep. 36.
gave him the title of universal Bishop, he acknowledged L. 4. ep. 36.
that in this sense he might lawfully accept thereof, and that, the Council of
Chalcedon, and the following Fathers had given it to his predecessors. But yet
he refused it out of his great humility, as also he denied himself to be a
Priest L. 4. ep. 31.
, and as S. Paul called himself the greatest of sinners 1. Tim. 1.15.
, and thought himself unworthy to be called Apostle 1. Cor. 15.^.
: And chiefly lest he might be thought to accept of it in the former sense
unlawful, and injurious to other Bishops, in which he conceived John Patriarch
of Constantinople to usurp it: And finally, that thereby he might better
repress his insolency.

This doctrine is delivered by Baronius and Bellarmine, of whom (because they
declare Vniuersalis Episcopus in this second sense to be all one with Episcopus
Vniuersalis Ecclesiae) you say Page 94.
: They would gladly confound these two titles, thereby to prove their Popes to
be proper Monarkes over the whole Church, because some predecessors of S.
Gregory have been called Bishops of the universal Church, which is their
perverse error refuted by one of their learned Jesuits. But you must pardon me,
if I tell you, that this is a shameful untruth: for Baronius and Bellarmine
deliver the same double acception of Vniuersalis Episcopus, which I have
declared; and likewise affirm, that in one of them it may be attributed to the
Pope, but not in the other: which is not to confound, but to distinguish, that
confusion and mistake may be avoided. And the thing it self is evident: for if
the title of Vniuersalis Episcopus might not be taken in a sense unlawful, S.
Gregory would not have condemned it in John of Constantinople, as a new,
profane, and Antichristian title. And again, if it might not be taken in a
sense lawful, neither the Council of Chalcedon, nor the following Fathers
Apud S. Greg. l. 4. ep. 36.
would have given it to the Bishops of Rome. The former sense is unlawful
because it takes away all ordinary power and jurisdiction due to other Bishops
in their Diocesses. The second is lawful, because it leaves to them their
ordinary power and jurisdiction. From whence it follows, that as S. Gregory
in this second sense did instile himself Episcopum Vniuersalis Ecclesiae; Ep.
ad omnes Episcop.
so if Vniuersalis Episcopus be taken in the same sense, it is also lawful,
and due to the Bishops of Rome: and in this sense he takes it when he says,
that the Council of Chalcedon and the following Fathers gave it to his
predecessors. But the former sense he condemned as profane and Antichristian,
and reprehended in John of Constantinople.

And Salmeron (for it is he whom you call the learned Jesuit) is so far from
refuting this double sense of Vniuersalis Episcopus delivered by Baronius and
Bellarmine, that in the very place which you nominate Tom. 12. Tract. 78.
he expressly delivers the same: but you (to make good your word) falsily him:
for (say you Page 94.
he confesses that a Bishop of the universal Church, is one, that has care
of the whole Church, which term may agree to every Bishop. This cannot be
excused from an untruth: for Salmerons words are: Episcopus Vniuersalis
Ecclesia is est, qui vacat curae and regimini Vniuersa Ecclesia: at Episcopus
Vniuersalis est, qui solus omnibus praeest, omnia curare vult. He is Bishop of
the universal Church that has the care and government of the Universal
Church: by which words Salmeron rightly proves that which is auerred by the
two Cardinals, to wit, that as the Popes before S. Gregory were styled Bishops
of the Universal Church, so they had not only a charitable care, which
belongs to every Bishop, and to every lay man, and woman, but also the
government of the whole Church, which by virtue of their office of supreme
Pastors belonged unto them. This explication of Salmeron you cannot digest:
and therefore though you set down truly part of his Latin words in your
margent, yet in your English of them you fraudulently leave out regimini,
government, to persuade your readers (which either understand not or else seldom
look into your Latin margents) that the ancient Popes had not the government of
the whole Church, but only a charitable care of her good, such as every Bishop,
and lay man is bound to have.

Having thus falsified Salmeron, you do as much for Platina, whose words you
set down thus Page 97.
: Bonifacius tertius a Phoca Imperatore obtinuit, vt seeds Petri, ficut est
caput omnium Ecclesiarum, ita diceretur and haberetur: quem quidem locum
Ecclesia Constantinopolitana sibi vendicare conabatur. And in your text you
english them thus: Boniface did obtain of the Emperor Phocas, that Rome should
have the same title of Head-ship over all other Churches, which the Bishop of
Constantinople had challenged to his See. In these few English words you have
no less then three falsifications. For, 1. Seeds Petri, you translate not the Sea of Peter, but Rome, which fignifieth not the Church but the City, that so
you may the better pretend that the Roman Church is not the Sea of Peter, nor
the Pope S. Peter's Successor. 2. Platina says, that The Sea of Peter is, Caput
omminm Ecclesiarum, The Head of all Churches: and this in your english you
omit, to insinuate that the Roman Church is not Head of all Churches, by any
right it has to that title from Christ, but only by the concession of Phocas,
and that obtained with much importunity by Bonifacius 3. You say, Boniface
obtained of the Emperor Phocas that Rome should have the same title of
Head-ship over all Churches, which the Bishop of Constantinople challenged to
his See. And these words you set down in a different character, as the words
of Platina, which is another imposture: for Platina's words are: Boniface
obtained of Phocas that the Sea of Peter, as it is, so it should be called and
esteemed to be, the Head of all Churches: which is not to say that Phocas gave
that title to the Roman See, but that it belonged unto it by right, and that
Phocas preserved the right of that See, ordayning, that the Patriarch of
Constantinople, who did falsely challenge to his Church a Head-ship, and to
himself a title of Universal Bishop, should desist from that unjust claim,
and that the Roman See, as it is, so it should be called and held to be the
Head of all Churches.

Phocas therefore did not first give the title of Universal Bishop to the Pope,
but preserved it to him, as his right: for it had been given to him long before
by the Emperor Martian in the Council of Chalcedon Act. 3.
. and by the Clercks of Alexandria, whose petitions presented in the same
Council bear this title Ibid.
: To the most holy and most blessed Universal Archbishop, and Patriarch of
great Rome Leo, and to the holy general Council. And in the Council of
Constantinople under Menas the petitions of the Regulars of Constantinople, and
of Syria, and of the Bishops of the Patriarkships of Antioch and Jerusalem, to
Pope Agapete were inserted with this inscription Act. 1.
: To our holy and blessed Lord the Archbishop of old Rome, and universal
Patriarch Agapetus. And the Angelical Doctor writes Opuse. cont. error.
Graec. c. 3^.
: It is read in the Council of Chalcedon, that the whole Synod cried out to
Leo Pope; Long live the most holy, Apostolic, and universal Patriarch Leo.

Hereby appears how falsely you say Page 9^.
, that the title of Universal Bishop was not absolutely ascribed to Pope Leo
in the Council of Chalcedon, but with a great restriction as thus: Universal
Bishop of great Rome, which is as much, as to deny him to be the Bishop of the
Universal Church, even as when the now Roman Emperor is instiled, The
universal Emperor of Rome, he is thereby distinguished from the Emperor of
Turkey of Persia, and others. Who feeth not the futility of this cauil? for as
none of these Emperors are Universal over the world, so neither do they
instile themselves, nor are by others instiled Universal Emperors. But in the
Council of Chalcedon the Pope is not only styled Patriarch of Rome, but also
Universal Archbishop, and Universal Patriarch absolutely, without any
addition, or restriction; which shows him to be not only Archbishop and
Patriarch of Rome, but also of the universal Church: for else those titles
absolutely, and without addition could not agree to him; as the title of
Universal Emperor without addition, agrees not to the Emperor of Rome, of
Persia, or to any other, whose Empire is not absolutely Universal throughout
the world, as the jurisdiction of the Pope is, and of whom that famous Bishop
of Patara in Lycia said to Justinian the Emperor Apud Liberat. in Breu. c. 22.
: that albeit there were many Kings in the world, yet not one of them, as the
Pope, who is over the Church of the whole world.

2. You revile the Roman See with most unseemly terms, and are extremely out
of patience with Phocas, for repressing the insolency of the Bishop of
Constantinople, and righting the Pope. Your words are Page 97.
: The Head of the Popes universal jurisdiction under that title, as it were
under a poisoned Miter, has grown far more loathsome by impostumes, and
swollen with tyranny, then it could possible be at the first usurpation thereof;
being become no less intolerable, then was that Emperor Phocas, of whom Pope
Boniface with much importunity received that title: which Emperor your
Cardinal Baronius notes to have been a bloody Tyrant. So you, who by calling
Phocas a bloody Tyrant, would diminish the dignity of the Roman See, as though
that See had not had for her protectors and devoted Children, the most godly
and religious Emperors of the Christian world Of this see Coccius to. 1. l. 7.
art. 8.
: Yea, by how much more pious they have been, so much the more devoted have
they been to the Chair of S. Peter. And although Phocas his cruelty be not
excusable, yet he was not so ungodly, but that as he preserved the right of
Roman Church, so he performed other works of Christian piety. Such were, his
clensing Rome from all filth of Idolatry, and his causing that famous Temple of
Pantheon, which was built in honor of all the heathenish Gods, to be dedicated
to Christ, in honor of his blessed Mother, and all the Martyrs.

3. You cavil at Bellarmine Page 96.
without cause, for saying, that the Bishop of Constantinople by clayming the
title of Universal Bishop sought to make himself sole Bishop, and the rest
only his Vicars: for Bellarmine says nothing, but out of the express words of
Saint Gregory himself L. 4. ep. 34. and 36. and ^^ 7. ep. 70.
: Nor is it against this, that diverse Bishops of the East, which still held,
and exercised their ancient jurisdiction, gave to the Patriarch of
Constantinople the Name of Universal: for they did give him the sole name,
without yelding to him any part of their Episcopal jurisdiction, which
therefore they still exercised as freely, and fully, as before he laid claim to
that title.

4. Without, and contrary to all truth, you object S. Leo against the title of
Universal Bishop: for he was not only so called by the Council of Chalcedon
(as you have heard) but he himself also used that title, Ep. 54.
as appears out of the Latin Volume of his Epistles, and out of the Greek
Copy of the same annexed to the Council of Chalcedon. So notes Spondanus anno
451. n. 34.
To which I add, that speaking of such as you are, he says Ep. 89.
: Whosoever denies the Supreme Authority of the Roman Chair, cannot diminish
the power thereof, but puffed up with the spirit of pride, plungeth himself
headlong into hell.

5. I must not omit to advertise you, that you abuse Binius Page 9^*
fathering on him certain words in his Annotation upon the third Action of the
Council of Chalcedon as taken out of Baronius: which words Binius has not:
nor does he in that Annotation so much as once mention Baronius, but shows
out of S. Gregory that the name of Universal Bishop was given to the Popes his
predecessors in that Council, and by other Fathers after wards, as also that
Syxtus and Zephyrinus used the same title long before that time: and finally
that S. Leo writing to Martian the Emperor Ep. 54.
styled himself Episcopus Romanae and vniuersalis Ecclesia. Wherefore when S.
Gregory says, that his predecessors used not that title, he only denies that
they used it in a solemn manner always, and in all their inscriptions as John
Patriarch of Constantinople did, who (witness S. Gregory) almost in every line
entitled himself, Universal Bishop.

SECT IV. S. Dionyse his judgment concerning the Supremacy of the Roman Church.
CAsaubon (say you Page 100.
spurs us a necessary Question, Why S. Dionyse the Areopagite professedly
writing of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy and government, was so utterly silent
in not mentioning the Universal Visible Head of the Church reigning at Rome,
if at that time there had been any such Monarchical Head there? Before I
answer, I must spur you a more necessary question, why S. Dionyse professedly
writing of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, did not reckon secular Princes, at
least in general, whom you not only place in the Hierarchy of the Church, but
make Heads thereof?

Now to Casaubons question I answer, that S. Dionise treats not of any
Church in particular, nor of the Bishop of any particular See, but of the
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, and orders in general, which he defines thus De
Recles. hierarch. c. 1.
Qui Hierarchiam dixit, omnium simul sacrorum ordinum dispositionem dixit. He
that names a Hierarchy, names the disposition or due ranking of all sacred
orders. And among the sacred orders, he gives the first and chiefest place to
Bishops. The divine order of Bishops (says he Ibid. c. 8.
is the first and chiefest of those orders that see God. From this number he
excludes not, but includes the Bishop of Rome, as being the Head, and Chief
of all Bishops: for (as S. Thomas the Master of Divines defining a Hierarchy,
1. p. q. 108. art. 1. corp.
says) A Hierarchy is a holy Principality; by which name of Principality; two
things are understood, namely the Prince himself, and a multitude ordered
under the Prince. Who is this Prince in the Hierarchy of the Church, but the
Prince of the Apostles, whom Christ made Pastor, and Governor of his flock, and
whom S. Dionyse did acknowledge for such De divine. nomin. c. 3. post med.
, when speaking of the Apostles and Bishops under the name of Divines, he
says: Peter was present the most ancient and supreme top, or Head of Divines.
These passages of S. Dionyse, Casaubon and you either out of ignorance could
not find, or if you could and did, why do you conceal them?

SECT. V. S. Ignatius his judgment of the Roman Church.
CAsaubon, and you with him object Page 100.
out of the Epistles of S. Ignatius, that ancient Bishop of Antioch, that, he
being frequent in setting forth the order Ecclesiastical, and dignity of
Bishops, forbeareth all mention of S. Peter, or any Roman Pope.

What Ignatius his judgment was of the great dignity of the Bishop and Church
of Rome, he himself declared, when writing to the Romans, he addressed his
Epistle, To the Church sanctified and illuminated in the will of God, which
has done all things according to faith, and the love of Jesus Christ our God
and Savior, and which governs in the region of the Romans, worthy of God,
worthy of eminency, worthy of memory, worthy of blessedness, worthy of praise,
founded in the love and faith of Christ, having the name of Father etc.
Although this holy Martyr writ to the Trallians, Magnesians, Philippians,
Antiochians, Ephesians, Philadelphians, and to those of Tharsis and Smyrna, and
gave great praises unto them, yet he attributes to the Roman Church, as her
peculiar prerogatives, that, she is illuminated in the will of God, that she is
founded in the love and faith of Christ, that she is of eminent dignity, that
she has (by reason of her Bishop) the name of a Father, which is to say, that
the rest as children are subject to her, and that she governs in the region
of the Romans: the sense of which words cannot be, that she governs the Roman
Dioces; for no Church governs it self, but one Church governs another, as
the Metropolitan does the Suffragans, and the Roman Church as being the Head,
and Mother Church, rules all others of the world.

Nor is this explication of less force, becauss he says, that she governs
in the region of the Romans: for he says it not, to limit her government, but
to express the place, in which she is seated, and from whence she governs
all other Churches. I conclude therefore that by calling her the Church that
governs, and not limiting her government to anyone Church, or number of
Churches, he declares her to be Head and Gouernesse absolutely of all
Churches: for as S. Bernard speaking of this subject, says L. 2. de consider
at.
: Where there is no limitation, nothing is excepted. And in this sense,
Theodoret long before had said Ep. ad Leon.
: The Roman See has the stern of government of all the Churches of the whole
world.

This to be the genume sense of S. Ignatius his words, Casaubon and you
peradventure did see; and therefore to give an expedite solution, you reject the
whole Epistle, saying: Page 100. marg.
No man skillful in Greek, would believe it to be written by S. ^gnatius. But
this solution is exploded by Euscbius L. 3. hist. c. 30.
and S. Hierome L. de Scriptor.
, who might be Casaubons and your Masters in Greek, and yet affirm S.
Ignatius to be the Author of this Epistle, and transcribe a part thereof ye^t to
be found in it; as also does S. Irenaeus L. 4. aduers. haeres. apud Baron. anno
109.
to show the admirable spirit and feruor of that holy Bishop.

Having proposed these arguments of Casaubon, you object out of your own
observations Page 100.
, that S. Ignatius exhorting the Trallians unto obedience to Bishops,
instanceth equally in Timothy S. Paul's scholar, as in Anacletus Successor to
S. Peter. Answer. You may by the like argument prove that S. Ignatius
equalleth Priests in authority with Bishops: for exhorting the Trallians to
obedience, he instanceth as well in Priests as in the Bishop: Obey (says he)
Ep. ad Trallianos.
the Bishop, and the Priests. Who then sees not your argument to be a childish
Sophisme?

SECT VI. S. Irenaeus his judgment of the Roman Church.
I Renaeus (say you) Page 100.
for direction in the right of Traditions, refers as well to Polycarpe
Bishop of Smyrna* as to Linus Bishop of Rome. Tertullian also to secure
Christians in the Doctrine of the Apostles, prescribes unto them, that they
consult with the Mother Churches, immediately founded by the Apostles, naming as
well Ephesus in Asia, and Corinth in Achaia, as Rome in Italy: and for the
persons, mentioning as well Polycarpe ordained by S. John, as Clemens by Peter.
The like argument you make out of Vincentius Lyrinensis. But all of them
imposterously, and against your self.

And first to begin with S. Irenaeus: these words, Discite ab Apostolicis
Ecclesijs. Habetis Romae Linum, which you allege as of S. Irenaeus L. 2. c. 3.
, I find not in him. It is true, that both he and Tertullian teaching the
Christians of their time to avoid heresy, warned them, that the true faith was
to be learned from the Apostolical Churches, that is, from the Churches
founded by the Apostles themselves, or by Apostolical men, as Timothy,
Polycarpe, and other their disciples, that preached the same faith they learned
from the Apostles their Masters. But withal they taught them, that the chief
Church they were to adhere unto, and by whose authority they were to confound
all Heretics, was the Roman Church. All men (says S. Irenaeus) L. 3. c. 3.
may behold the tradition of the Apostles (that is the faith delivered by them
to their Successors) in every Church, if they be desirous to hear the truth:
and we can number the Bishops, that were made by the Apostles in Churches, and
their Successors, even unto us, who neither taught* nor knew any such thing as
rauing heretics do broach etc. But because it were a long business to number
the Successions of all Churches, we declare the tradition of the most great,
most ancient, and most known Church, founded by the two most glorious Apostles
Peter and Paul; which tradition and faith it has from the Apostles coming to
us by Succession of Bishops; and thereby we confound all them that any way
either by evil complacence of themselves, or vaineglory, or blindness, or ill
opinion do gather otherwise then they ought. Lo here how Catholics in S.
Irenaeus time did confound all heretics, by the faith of the Roman Church, and
by the Succession of Bishops in that See. And he yeldeth the reason, saying
Ibid.
: for to this Church by reason of her more powerful Principality, all Churches
must necessarily agree, that is to say, all the faithful of what place soever:
in which (Church) the tradition and faith of the Apostles has been always
conserved. And in confirmation of this, he reckons by name all the Popes from
S. Peter to Eleutherius who at that time governed the Church Ibid.
: And by that orderly, and neuer-interrupted Succession, he proves the Roman
Church to have conserved unto his days the faith pure, and entyre, as it was
preached by the Apostles: By this Succession that Doctrine and truth which the
Apostles preached in the Church has come to us: And this is a demonstration
conuicing, that it is one, and the same quickening faith, which from the
Apostles time until this day, is conserved, and delinered in truth. And again
relating to this place, and speaking of the same Succession of Bishops in the
Roman Church (which he calls the principal Succession) he declares all
those that withdraw themselves from it, to be Schismatikes, or heretics: They
that are in the Church (says he) L. 4. c. 41.
ought to obey those Priests, which have their Succession from the Apostles,
which together with the Succession of their Bishoprikes have received the
assured grace of truth, according to the good will of the heavenly Father. And
we ought to hold suspected, all others, that withdraw themselves from the like
Principal Succession, and join together in some other place. We ought (I
say) to hold them as heretics of a perverse judgment, or as Schismatikes, and
selfe-liking presumptuous fellows, or else, as Hypocrites, that work for lucre
and vainglory. If then S. Irenaeus in his days thought it an argument
sufficient to convince all Heretics, that they had fallen from the true faith
preached by the Apostles, because they had fallen from the Succession of
Bishops in Peter's See, to which all the Churches, and faithful of the world
must necessarly agree, how much more conuincing is the same Argument against
Protestants, to whom we show not the Succession of twelve Popes in S. Peter's
See, as S. Irenaeus did to the heretics of his time, but almost of 240.

You were not ignorant of the force of these testimonies of S. Irenaeus, and
therefore lest you might seem to pass them over without answer, you say Page
100. marg. fine.
: As for the words, Propter Principalitatem, they are answered hereafter. How
are they answered? first, you bid us Page 253. marg.
remember, that Irenaeus was he, which consented with the Asian Bishops that
were excommunicated by Pope Victor. But we know this to be an untruth, and
wish you to remember, that you acknowledge so much, and contradict your self,
saying Page 131.
: Irenaeus differed in opinion from the Asian Bishops. These then are your
propositions: Irenaus consented with the Asian Bishops: Irenaeus differed in
opinion from the Asian Bishops: Reconcile them.

2. Whereas S. Iraeneus says L. 3. c. 3.
: It is necessary that all Churches have recourse to the Roman Church by reason
of her more mighty principality, you answer Page 253.
: This might have been spoken of the Imperial power of that City, to which the
subjects of the Roman Empire were bound to resort, for paying of tributes; and
the Governors of Provinces, to yield an account of their offices. But the very
words of S. Irenaeus show the falsehood of this answer: for he mentions not
the City, but the Church of Rome. Ad hanc Ecclesiam etc. To this Church (says
he) all Churches must of necessity resort. Again, they which were to resort to
the City of Rome for the discharge of their offices and payment of tributes
were the subjects of the Roman Empire only: But S. Irenaeus tells you, that
omnes vndique fideles, that is, All the faithful, and all the Churches, not
only of the Roman Empire, but of all the world are necessarily to repair to
the Church of Rome; showing thereby, that her authority and command is of larger
extent then that of the Roman Empire: for (as Prosper truly said De ingrat. c
2. and de vocat. gent. l. 2. c. 6.
, Rome the Sea of Peter is greater by the fortress of Religion, then by the
throne of (temporal) power: and being made the Head of Pastoral honor to the
world, possesses by religion, what, she does not by force of arms.

3. You answer Page 253.254.
: Be it Ecclesiastical power, yet was not the necessity of recourse unto it,
absolute, and perpetual, but occasional for that time. This is as untrue as
the rest: for the necessity of resorting to the Roman Church (says S.
Irenaeus) L. 3. c. 3.
is by reason of her more mighty principality, or (which is all one) by reason
of the great dignity of the Sea Apostolic, which (says S. Augustine) Ep. 162.
has always flourished in her and which makes her the Mother Church of the
world. And therefore so long as she shall be S. Peter's See, which shall be till
the end of the world: so long the necessity of all other Churches resorting to
her, and agreeing in faith and communion with her, shall still continue.

SECT VII. Tertullian his Judgment of the Roman Church.
TErtullian agrees with S. Irenaeus in pressing against all heretics the same
argument of the never interrupted succession of Bishops in the Roman See, L. 3.
Carm. cont. Marcio. c. vltimo.
recknoning all the Popes by name until his time against Marcion and all
heretics, to prove the^ to be such. It is manifest (says he) Praescrip. c. 21.
that all Doctrine which agrees with those Mother and original Churches,
founded by the Apostles is true, and to be held as certain, being that the
Churches received it from the Apostles, the Apostles from Christ, and Christ
from God, and that whatsoever is contrary to this, is to be accounted false,
and erroneous. And speaking of heretics Ibid. c. 32.
: If there be any of them that darevent their Doctrine for Apostolical, let
them show the original of their Churches; let them unfold the order of their
Bishops, in such sort, that by a Succession derived from the beginning, they
prove their first Bishop to have been some one of the Apostoles, or of the
Apostolical men that perseuered with the Apostles unto the end. This
Tertullian says the Smyrnaeans in his days could do, showing that Polycarpe
their Bishop was placed there by S. John; and that the Roman Church could do
the like, showing Clement ordained by S. Peter. And the same she can do at this
day, showing that all her Bishops unto Vrba^ the eight which now possesses
that Chair, had S. Peter the Apostle for their predecessor, and first Bishop
in that See; and that from him they can lineally derive their pedigree; whereas
no heretics could ever show any such descent, as Protestants at this day
cannot. And therefore Tertullian brings in the Catholic Church vpbrayding
them, and all heretics in this manner. Ibid. c. 37.
Who in Gods name are you? When, and from whence came you hither? What do you
among mine, being none of mine? By what right O Marcion do thou cut down my
woods? What leave have thou, O Valantine, to turn my streams and fountaynes
another way? By what authority do thou remove my bounds, O Apelles? (O
Luther, O Calvin, O Zuinglius?) The possession is mine: I have it of old I
enjoyed it before you: I can derive my pedigree from the very first Authors to
whom the thing did properly belong: I am the right beyre to the Apostles:
According to their will and testament, according to their trust and charge
given, my Tenure stands. As for you, they always disinherited you, and
rejected you as aliens, yea and as enemies. In this very manner may Catholics
with great reason upbraid you, who as you cannot show any Succession of your
Bishops continued from the Apostles; so you are thereby convinced not to be
their heirs, but strangers and enemies to them, and to the Churches founded by
them.

Again, Tertullian prescribing a rule for you to find out the true faith, and
doctrine delivered by the Apostles; says Ibid. c. 36.
: Go to: If thou will be curiously exact in the affair of thy salvation,
repair to the Apostolical Churches etc. If thou be a neighbor to Italy, thou
have Rome, from whence we also have authority. O happy Church, into which the
Apostles powered all their Doctrine together with their blood; where Peter is
equalled to our Saviors passion, where Paul is crowned with John Baptists lot,
where John the Apostle being plunged into boiling oil, and yet not hurt
therewith, was banished into an island. Let us observe what this Church has
learned, what she has taught. Tertullian was an African, a Priest of the
Church of Carthage, and yet speaking of the Roman Church, says: From whence
we, that is (as Macerus expounds) all the African Churches, or all Catholics
have authority at hand for our defense. Wherefore out of this place of
Tertullian Quintinus rightly infers, that the Roman Church even from her
first foundation had great authority above all Churches of the world; and that
all men are to learn from her the Doctrine of faith, delivered unto her by the
blessed Apostles. And this is the reason why Tertullian speaking of Marcion and
Valentinus Ibid. c. 30.
, proves them to be heretics, because they had fallen from the faith into
which they had believed in the Roman Church. Nam constat etc. For (says he,
and his words no less agree to Luther and Calvin, then to Marcion and
Valentinus) it is manifest that they first believed the Catholic Doctrine in
the Roman Church until in the time of the blessed Bishop Eleutherius, for
their turbulent spirit of nouelty, wherewith they did also pervert their
Brethren, they were often excommunicated, and at length cast out for ever to
perpetual ruin. By this it appears, that the Roman faith was then held to
be the Catholic faith, and the Roman Church, (which Tertullian calls, The
Catholic Church) L. 4. cont. Marcio. c. 4.
the Head and Mistress of all Churches in the world: for Marcion was borne at
Sinope in Pontus, and for his heresy and lewdness of life excommunicated by
his own Father a holy Bishop, who refusing to absolve him he went to Rome to
seek absolution: but (his Father opposing) obtained it not. Vale^tine was as
Egyptian borne, and having fallen into heresy in Cyprus, came to Rome in the
time of Higinius Pope, and feigning himself to be a Catholic, was received
into the Communion of the Roman Church, but falling often back into heresy, as
a dog returning to his vomit, was finally cast out of the Church by the blessed
Pope Elutherius, as you have heard Tertullian report. And why did these
heretics (as also Cerdon at the same time) when they sought absolution from
heresy, come from so remote countries subject to other Patriarchs, and why
from all the Eastern Church, and why all of them to the Church of Rome in
particular, but because they knew her to be the Head and Mistres of all
Churches, that had power to absolve all those which had been excommunicated by
any other Bishops whatsoever, and to be the original and center of Catholic
Communion, and that so long as they remained out of her bosom, they nether
were, nor should be esteemed Catholics, nor to be in state of salvation?

Herby it appears how little reason you had to say out of Beatus Rhenaus Page
131.1^^.
* though Tertullian give an honorable testimony to the Church of Rome, yet be
did not esteem her so highly, as we see her accounted of at this day. And
since you acknowledge that Rhenanus his mouth (for that and other his
inconsiderat speeches) is gagged by the Index expurgatorius, you show little
judgment in obiecting his authority against us.

SECT. VIII. Vincentius Lyrinensis his judgment of the Roman Church.
What has been said, shows the futility of your argument out of Vincentius
Lyrinensis, which is like to the two former out of S. Iraeneus and Tertullian.
And how little support you have for your cause in the authority of this ancient
and learned Father, he will testify for himself: for when the Doctrine of
rebaptizing Heretics at their return to the Catholic Church defended by
Firmilianus Bishop of Cefarea, Agrippinus, and S. Cyprian Bishops of Carthage,
and many others, wrought so great inconveniences, that it gave a pattern of
sacrilege to all heretics, and occasion of error to some Catholics,
Vincentius declares, how Stephen then Pope of Rome suppressed it by his
authority. When (says he L. cont. propha. haeres. nouat. c. ^.
all men every where exclamed against the nouelty of that Doctrine, and all
Priests in all places, each one according to his zeal did opppse, then Pope
Stephen of blessed memory Bishop of the Apostolic See resisted indeed with the
rest of his fellow Bishops, but yet more then the rest, thinking it (as I
suppose) reason, so much to excel all others in devotion toward the faith, as
he did surmount them in the authority of his place. To conclude, in his epistle
which then was sent to Africa, he decreed the same in these words: Let nothing
be innouated, but that which comes by tradition be observed. And Ibid. c. 10.
notwithstanding that the contrary doctrine had (says he) such pregnant wits,
such eloquent tongues, such a number of Patrons, such show of truth, such
testimonies of Scripture, but glosed after a new and naughty fashion, and that
it was decreed in an African Council; yet the authority of the Pope declaring
it a nouelty, was of so great force, that after he had condemned it, all those
things were abolished, were disanulled, were abrogated as dreams, as fables,
as superfluous. And afterward Ibid. c. 43.
he alleges as witnesses of his Doctrine, diverse Greek Fathers, and adds
to them, the authority of S. Felix Martyr, and S. Julius, both Bishops of the
Roman Church, whom (to declare their sovereign authority) he calls The Head
of the world* And he concludes: Ibid. c. 45.
Least in such plenty of proofs any thing should be wanting, we have added
for a conclusion a double authority of the Sea Apostolic; the one of S.
Sixtus, a venerable man, that now honoresh the Church of Rome; the other of
Pope Celestine of blessed menory, his predecessor. And their decrees he calls
Apostolical, and Catholic decrees.

SECT. IX. Other Observations of Doctor Morton, out of Antiquity, answered.
YOur observations are Page: 101. and seqq.
that S. Athanasius, S. Augustine, the Councels of Constantinople, of Egypt,
and of Cauthage, reckoning diverse Bishops to show their agreement in faith with
them, name not only the Pope, but other Bishops, and write both to him, and
them; and consult with him, and them, as with their fellow Bishops, which you
say, is to give the Bishop of Rome so many mates, and to equalize other Bishops
with him. But who sees not what poor stuff these your observations are? For
if one concerning matters of faith should consult with his parish Priest, and
his Bishop, would it follow, that he equalizeth the parish Priest with the
Bishop, and makes him his mate? Or if you writing to the King and his
Counsel, I should lay to your charge, that by consulting with his Majesty, and
his Counsel, you give his Majesty so many mantes, as he has Counselors, and
equalize them in power and dominion with him, would you not think m^ a
trifling, and indeed a childish opponent? how then shall we think otherwise
of you, that by like consequence go about to equalize other Bishops with the
Pope, and among themselves?

CHAP. XVI. The judgment of the Council of Nice, concerning the authority of
the Bishop, and Church of Rome.
THAT the Council of Nice acknowledged the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome
over all Bishops, is proved. 1. Because Julius a most holy Pope, in his third
Epistle (which S. Athanesius has inserted into his second Apology) writing to
the Arians, and declaring unto them the right of the Roman See, to have the
hearing and final decision of the causes of Bishops, faith: Are you ignorant,
that the custom is, that we be first written unto, that from hence may
proceed the just decision of things? And therefore if any suspicion were
conceived against your Bishops there, it ought to have been referred hither to
our Church. And then declaring unto them, that this authority of the Bishop of
Rome was acknowledged by the Council of Nice, he denounces unto them, that in
condemning Athanasius without expecting his sentence, they had done contra
Canones, against the Canons, to wit of the Nicen Council, which he sets
down at large in his second epistle to them; and that as well Athanasius in
appealing from their Council to him; as also he, in repealing their acts, and
in restoring to their seats Athanasius, and the other Bishops whom they had
deposed, and in summoning their adversaries to appear at Rome, and yield
account of their proceedings, had done, quod Ecclesiastici Canonis est,
according to the Canons of the Church.

2. The same is proved by the testimony of Innocentius the first, whom S.
Augustine, S. Hierome, and other Fathers of that age, highly commend: He
ordayneth Ep. ad Victric. Rhotomag. Epise.
, that if any difference arise between Priests, their cause be judged by the
Bishops of the same Province; but that greater causes be referred to the Sea
Apostolic, as the Nicen Council has ordained.

3. The same is proved out of S. Leo the Great, who writing to Theodosius the
younger Ep. 4^^
, and representing unto him the sacrilegious proceeding of the second Council
of Ephesus, which he by his own authority had called and impiously maintained,
and that Flauianus the holy Patriarch of Constantinople (which in that Council
had been iniustly deposed and many ways wronged) fled to him for redress,
presenting a Writ of Appeal to his Legates, entreats his assistance for the
calling of a general Council in Italy; adding, that the Nicen Canous
necessarily require the calling of a Council after the putting in of an
Appeal. This shows that the Council of Nice decreed the lawfulness of
appeals from general Councels to the Pope. Nor are you ignorant thereof: for
afterward Page 308.
you bring these very words of S. Leo against Appeals to him, but not without
great Eclypse of judgment: for in them two things are clearly expressed: the
one, that according to the Nicen canons. Bishops when they are wronged, may
lawfully appeal to the Pope: the other* that after the putting in of an
Appeal to him, a general Council ought to be called, that to the greater
satisfaction of all parts, the cause may be fully examined and reiudged by the
common consent of the Church: which no more preiudicateth the Popes Authority,
then it does the Kings, that after an appeal made to Majesty, a Parliament be
called for the decision of the cause: for as the King is Head of the
Parliament, so is the Pope of a general Council. And hereby it appears how
little judgment you show in obiecting the African Council, to prove, that the
Council of Nice denied appeals to Rome, both because your self alleging
this testimony of the Nicen Council out of S. Leo prove them to be lawful, as
also because the African Council is wholly against you, as hereafter shall be
proved Below Chap. 27.
.

4. That the Council of Nice acknowledged the vninersall authority and
jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome, is proved out of Socrates, a Greek
historian of above 1200. years standing, who speaking of the Arian Council at
Antioch L. 2. c. 5.
, proves it to be unlawful, because Julius Bishop of Rome was not there, nor
sent any in his steed, although the acclesiasticall canon forbids to rule the
Churches without the sentence of the Bishop of Rome. And Sozomen L. 3. c. 9.
: Julius reprehended them (the Arians) that they had secretly altered the faith
of the Nicen Council, and that against the laws of the Church, they had not
called the Pope to their Synod: for there was a sacerdotall law, which
pronounces all things to be inualide that are done without the allowance of
the Bishop of Rome. And Theodoret L 2. hist. c. 4.
: Julius Bishop of Rome following the canon of the Church, commanded them (the
Arian Bishops) to come to Rome, and summoned the Diuin^ Athanasius to answer
for himself in judgment. And the same is reported by Nicephorus.

Now this Canon so uniformly avouched by these Greek historians, which
forbids Bishops to be deposed, or any Ecclesiastical decrees to be made
without the allowance of the Bishop of Rome, can be of no other, then of the
Nicen Council, or else of that of Sardica, which confirmed the decrees of the
Council of Nice, and is reputed as an appendix unto it: both because (as you
have heard) Innocentius afflirmeth the Council of Nice to have made such a
law; as also for that since the Apostles time, until the time of those two
Councels there had been held no other general Council in the Church: And
finally because John that learned Disputant of the Latins in the Council of
Florence Sess. 20.
, in their name answeareth Marcus Ephesius* the disputant of the Greeks, that
the most ancient epistles of Julius and Liberius Popes, which Julian Cardinal
of S. Sabina had showed to the Grecians in that Council did convince, that
blessed Athanasius being persecuted by the Arians in their Council at Antioch,
writ to Felix, Marcus, Julius and Liberius, all of them successively Popes of
Rome for a true copy of the Acts of Nice, which were kept entire and incorrupt
at Rome, all those that were in the East, being corrupted by the Arians: and
that their answer was, They would not send the original acts, which being
written in Greek and Latin, and subscribed by the Nicen Fathers, and sealed
with their seals were kept by the Bishop of Rome with great veneration but
that they would send him copied out severally such Canons as were for his
purpose. And moreover he shows* that when Athanasius had appealed from the
Council of Antioch to the Sea of Rome, and that the Arians objected it unto
him as a thing unlawful, Liberius promised to send him copied out the Nicen
decree for the lawfulness of appealing to Rome: and that Julius in his Epistle
sharply rebuked the Arians for having presumed to call a Council without his
allowance; showing the^ out of a decree of the Council of Nice, that no
Council could ever be held without the authority of the Bishop of Rome. And
lastly Pisanus Apud Bin. to. 1. page 345.346.
in proof of these Nicene decrees produces the testimonies of the Council of
Constantinople, of Marcus, of Stephanus, and Innocentius Popes, of Athanasius,
and the Bishops of Egypt, of other Orientals, of Marianus Scotus, Iuo
Carnotensis, and Gratianus. All which with the rest here alleged show your
unshamefastness, in urging the Council of Nice against Appeals to Rome,
which were so certainly allowed and decreed by it.

5. The same is confirmed out of the Council of Sardica, which being held
soon after that of Nice, made three decrees concerning Appeals: The first
Cap. 3.
, that if in the cause of a Bishop, who conceaues himself to be wronged, a new
judgment be required, the Bishop of Rome is to give the Judges. The second
Cap. 4.
, that if a Bishop deposed by the next Bishops, say his cause ought to be
judged again, none is to be installed in his See, until the Bishop of Rome
have pronounced upon it. The third Cap. 5.
, that a Bishop accused, may have recourse to Rome, by way of appeal. These
Canons of Sardica sufficiently declare the belief of the Nicen council
touching the authority of the Bishop of Rome: for as Harmen opulus writes In
Epit. Can.
: By the advice of the Emperor, and of the Bishop of Rome, the Synod if Sardica
was assembled, consisting of 341. Fathers, which confirmed the faith of the
Council of Nice, and published the Canons. Wherefore these canons touching
appeals extant in the Council of Sardica, are either the very Nicen canons
inserted into that of Sardica, or declarations of them: for the Sardican
Council consisting for the most part of the same Bishops, that the Nicen did,
it is a senseless thing to say, that when those Bishops in their Council at
Sardica, so expressly, and so effectually declare the Bishop of Rome to be the
supreme judge of all Bishops, they profess a new doctrine contrary to that,
which a little before they had professed in the Council of Nice.

6. The authority of the Bishop of Rome over the whole Church, is yet further
declared in the Nicen Council, decreeing thus Can. 39. ex 80. Graec. and Arab.
: A Patriarch is so over all those that are under his power, as he that has
the Sea of Rome is Head, and Prince of all Patriarchs: for he is the chiefest,
as Peter was, to whom power was given over all Christian Princes, and all their
subjects, as being the Vicar of our Lord over all people, and over the vniuer
sall Church.

7. The same is proved by the order of subscribing in the Council: for Victor
and Vincentius being not Bishops, but simple Priests, because they were Legates
to the Pope, presided in the Council together with Osius B. of Corduba, and
subscribed in the first place, before all the Bishops, and Patriarchs, which
they could not have done, but only in regard they represented his person, who
was Superior to all Bishops and Patriarchs.

8. Though Constantine the Emperor was a great cause of the Bishops meeting in
the Council of Nice, both because he persuaded that means of Concord, as also
because he defrayed their charges, and by his letters called them together, yet
he called them not, by his own authority, but (as Ruffinus says L. 1. c. 1.
fin. apud Spond. Anno 325. n. 5.
) ex Sacerdotum sententia, by the determination or decree of the Priests: as in
like manner he called an other Council of 275: Bishops at Rome at the same
time, in which it is said, Siluester gathered the whole Council with the
advice of the Emperor. The same is testified by Damasus in Syluesters life, and
by the sixth general Council, saying Act. 18.
: Constantine and Syluester worthy of praise called the famous Council of
Nice. And how can it be thought, that it was called by any other authority then
of the Pope, seeing S. Athanasius and the Bishops of Egypt in their Council
at Alexandria, witness Ep. Synod. ad Felic.
, that the Nicen Council made a decree, that no general Counsels should be
held without the allowance of the B. of Rome: and this decree it is, which
Julius Pope (the next but one to Syluester) alleged against the Arians Ep. ad
Orientales.
, rebuking the^ sharply, that they had infringed it, by calling their Council
at Antioch without his allowance: which is also testified by Socrates, Sozomen,
and Theodoret, as you have heard.

9. And as this Council was called by Syluester Pope, so that it required
confirmation from him, we are certified by the Roman Council under Felix the
third In ep. Synod. Felic. c. 3.
, and by the Council of Nice it self, saying In sum. Conc. Nice.
: Placuit etc. It has seemed good, that all these Acts and decrees be sent to
Syluester B. of Rome. And in their letter to Syluester Apud Baron. An. 325. ex
collect. Crescon.
: Whatsoever is determined in the Nicen Council, we beseech you that it may be
seconded with the confirmation of your mouth. And that Syluester accordingly
confirmed their decrees, we may learn from a Council of the Bishops of Italy
held at Rome, in which he presiding, said Apud Bar. An. 325. and Bin. to. 1.
page 382.
: Whatsoever is determined by the 318. holy Priests at Nice in Bithinia, for
the strength of the holy Catholic and Apostolic Church, we with our mouth
accordingly confirm: and all those that shall dare to dissolve the definition
of the holy and great Council assembled at Nice, in the presence of the most
religious and venerable Prince Constantine the Emperor, we anathematize them.
And all answered: So be it.

SECT. I. Doctor Mortons Objections, against the precedent Doctrine, answered.
THough you either could not, or would not find any thing of all that which
has been alleged out of the Council of Nice in proof of the Popes
authority, yet you cold find two arguments to object against it, The first is
Page 105. and seqq.
: The Council of Nice decrees, that the ancient custom go on, to wit, that
the Patriarch of Alexandria, have power over Egypt, Lybia, and Pentapolis,
because the B. of Rome has so accustomed. To this argument Bellarmine has
answered L. 2. de Pont. c. 13.
, that the Canon speaks of the Patriarch of Alexandria with restriction,
assigning to him the Provinces of Egypt, Lybia, and Pentapolis: and of the
Pope, without restriction, not prescribing any lymits to his jurisdiction, nor
ordeyning any thing concerning the authority of the Roman Church, but making
her, a rule, and pattern for the government of other Churches, commanding, that
the B. of Alexandria have power over those three provinces, because the B. of
Rome has accustomed so to allow, or permit. And this canon is so explicated by
Nicolas the first Ep. ad Michael. Imper.
that lived almost 800. years since, and for his learning and sanctity has
deserved the surname of Great. And the same explication is confirmed by the
practice both of the Roman, and of the Alexandrian Church. For if according to
your construction the Roman Church by this canon be proved to have no
superiority of jurisdiction over the Church of Alexandria, or other Eastern
Churches, but only over those which are within the Patriarkeship of the west;
how comes it to pass, that S. Athanasius Patriarch of Alexandria, and other
Eastern Bishops, which had been personally present at the Council of Nice,
being soon after cast out of their Seats by the Arians, did fly to Rome, and
appeal to Pope Julius for redress, as to their lawful Superior, and Judge?
Or if this Canon do limit the jurisdiction of the Pope to the Patriarkeship of
the West, as it does that of the B. of Alexandria to the provinces named in the
canon; how comes it to pass, that (as Socrates L. 2. c. 1^.
Sozomen L. 3. c. 7.
and Nicephorus L. 9. c. 8.
report) Julius by the ancient dignity, and prerogative of his See, and because
the care of them all belonged to him* restored each of them to their Churches,
and rebuking the Arians for their iniust proceedings threatened to punish them,
unless they desisted to innouate; and cited Athanasius, and some of the chief
of the Arians, to make their appearance at Rome, on a set day, and answer for
themselves in judgment; and that Athanasius obeying, transported himself in
all diligence to Rome? And how comes it to pass, that when the Arians in their
mock-Councell of Philippopolis required the Fathers assembled at Sardica, to
absteyne from the communion of Athanasius, and the other Bishops whom they had
deposed, those Fathers representing all the Catholics of the world, answered,
Sozom. l. 3. c. 10.
that they never had, nor would now abstain from their communion* and
principally because Julius B. of Rome having examined their cause, had not
condemned them? And how comes it to pass, that Peter Successor to S.
Athanasius in the Sea of Alexandria (whom Theodosius and Gratian Cod. Tit. 1.
l. 1.
call, A man of Apostolical sanctity) being in like manner deposed by the
Arians, appealed to Rome as to the safest haven of communion S. Hieron. Ep. 16.
, and relying on the authority of Pope Damasus his letters, returned to
Alexandria L. 4. c. 30.
, and by virtue of them recovered his Seat, and expelled Lucius the Arian
intruder? Does not all this show, that the authority of the Roman Church was
not limited by the Nicen Council to the Patriarkship of the West? unless you
will have us believe, that you understand the sense and meaning of the Council
better, then S. Athanasius, and other holy Bishops, which were present at it,
and at the Council of Sardica; and better then Peter that renowned Patriarch
of Alexandria, that lived soon after these Counsels.

In confirmation of this, I add, that the Council of Nice ordeyneth Can. 6.
: that the ancient custom go on. Now the ancient custom was, that all
Churches should resort to the Roman Church by reason of her more mighty
principality Iren. l. 3. c. 3.
and because, she is the Chair of Peter, and the principal Church from whence
Sacerdotall unity is derived Cyp. ep. 55. ad Cornel.
: and because, in her the principality of the Apostolic Chair has always
flourished S Aug. ep. 162.
. And if we come to the Patriarchs of Alexandria, of whom this Canon
particularly speaks, they did always even before the Council of Nice,
acknowledge themselves subject to the B. of Rome, as appears by the example
of Dionysius Patriarch of that City, who being fallen into suspicion of
heresy, long before the Council of Nice, the Catholics of Alexandria had not
recourse to the Synods of their own provinces, nor to any other Patriarch of
the East, but went to Rome, to accuse him before Dionysius Pope. They went up
to Rome (says S. Athanasius) De sent: Dionys.
to accuse him before the B. of Rome, being of his own name. And a little after
Ibid.
: And the B. of Rome sent to Dionysins, to clear himself of those things,
whereof they had accused him; and suddenly he answered, sending his books of
defense, and apology. And again De Syn. Arim. and Soleu.
: Some having accused the B. of Alexandria before the B. of Rome, to hold the
Son for a creature, the Synod of Rome (that is the Popes Consistory
consisting of the neighbor Bishops, and the principal Churchmen of Rome,
without whose advice he judges nothing of importance) was offended with him,
and the B of Rome writ to him the opinion of all the Assistants: and he for his
justification addressed to him a Book of defense, and apology. This plainly
shows, that the custom before the Council of Nice, was, that the Bishop and
people of Alexandria did acknowledge the Pope of Rome to be their Superior:
which custom therefore the Council will have to go on.

But that the true meaning of this Canon may the better be understood, it is to
be noted, that the entire Acts of the Council of Nice being lost, that which
remains of them in the vulgar copies, is but fragments. Among the rest this
very Canon has not passed without mutilation: for the beginning of it (as it
is related by Dionysius Abbas, an author of 1000. years standing) is: Ecclesia
Romana semper habuit primatum: The Roman Church has always had the primacy.
This beginning troubles your patience, and to refute it, you say Page 108.
: They shame not to prefer one vulgar book before all other Greek and
Latin Copies: False. For that beginning of the Canon is in like manner extant
in an ancient Manuscript of the famous Monastery of S. Vedastus in Atras,
written above 800. years since Of this see Pamelius in Annot. ad lib. Cyp. de
Unit. Eccles. n. 16.
: and (which takes away all occasion of doubt) it is so read in the famous
Council of Chalcedon Act. 16.
. True (say you) Page 108.
but by the Popes Legates. But what? Were not the Popes Legates reverend
Bishops, and Presidents of that Council? And when they read this beginning of
the Canon, did the Fathers of that Council except against it, as you do? Nay,
after they had read and considered it, did they not say Act. 16.
? Ex his quae gesta vel ab vnoquoque deposita sunt perpendimus omnem primatum,
and honorem praecipuum secundum canones antiquae Romae Deo amantissmo
Archiepiscopo conseruari. By those things which have been done, and the proofs
which have been produced on both sides, we find that according to the Canons*
all primacy* and chief honor is preserved to the most beloved of God the
Archbishop of old Rome. Then which words none can be more effectual, to
declare the primacy of the Pope, to be Primacy of authority and jurisdiction,
and not of order only as you falsely comment; both because primacy of order is
not all primacy, nor is it the chief honor: for the honor due to superiority
of government, and jurisdiction, is far above it. Besides, that as I have
already showed Above Chap. 12.
and shall in the next Chapter prove Sect. 2.
, this your shift of Primacy of Order (to which you often betake your self, as
to your last refuge, when you are pressed with vnanswearable arguments) is a
mere shift invented to delude ignorant readers, with empty words void of truth.
And by this canon it is in like manner evident, that the primacy was not then
first given to the Church of Rome, but preserved unto it according to the
canons.

Your second Argument Page 107.
to prove, that the later Roman Counsels are bastardly* and illegitimate, and
that we have little regard to the Council of Nice, is taken out of Theodoret,
writing, that Constantine the Great required in that Synod, that, because the
books of the Apostles do plainly instruct us in divine matters, therefore we
ought to make our determinations upon questions from words which are divinely
inspired. And then you tell us, that Bellarmine answeareth thus: Constantine
was a great Emperor indeed but no great Doctor of the Church who was yet
unbaptized, and therefore understood not the mysteries of religion. Thus (say
you) does this your Cardinal twite* and taunt the judgment of that godly
Emperor, and (as the Steward in the Gospel) iniustly concealeth from his
reader that, which follows in Theodoret namely, that the greater part of that
Council of Nice obeyed the voice of Constantine. So you, as you are won^: for
first you falsify Bellarmine, who says not, that Constantine was yet
unbaptized, but that, that is the opinion of you Protestants, and the old
Arians: from whence he argues ad hominem against you, that this testimony of
Constantine is not of so great weight, as Calvin and Kemnitius make it: for if
he were unbaptized, he could then be no great Doctor of the Church, as being a
Neophyte, and therefore not so well skilled in the mysteries of Christian
Religion. What twiting, or taunting of that godly Emperor your find in this
answer of Bellarmine, I know not; but I know, that you in holding Constantine
to be then unbaptized, both seek to disgrace that godly Emperor, and withal
to uphold the authority and credit of the Arian heretics, who to make him a
Patron of their heresy, gave out that he was not baptized until a little before
his death, and that then he received his baptism from Eusebius B. of
Nicomedia, the chief ringleader of the Arian faction.

But that your dealing may the better appear, it is to be noted, that
Bellarmine is so far from twiting, or taunting that godly Emperor, that he
admits of his testimony: Admitting (says he) L. 4. de verbo Dei c. 11..
Admiss^
the authority of Constantine, I say, that in all those doctrines which
concern the nature of God, there are extant testimomes in Scripture, out of
which if they be rightly understood, we may be fully and plainly instructed;
but the true sense of the Scriptures depends on the unwritten tradition of
the Church. Wherefore the same Theodoret that reports this speech of
Constantine, declares in the next Chapter, that in the Council of Nice
Scriptures were produced on both sides, but the Arians were not convinced with
them* because they expounded them otherwise then the Catholics, and therefore
were condemned by the unwritten tradition of the Church piously understood: to
which condemnation no man ever doubted, but that Constantine assented. So
Bellarmine. And hereby it appears, that when you say, Bellarmine cites
Theodoret, and yet (as the Steward in the Gospel) iniustly concealeth that
which follows in him, namely, that the greater part of the Council obeyed
the voice of Constantine, you wrong Bellarmine, and a buse Theodoret, who in
those words relates not to the determining of controversies by Scriptures, but
to Constantines exhortation made to the Bishops of peace, and concord among
themselves, which (says Theodoret) the greatest part of the Council obeyed,
embracing mutual concord, and true doctrine, though diverse Arians disagreed,
some of whose names he there expresses. This you iniustly conceal, like the
ill Steward in the Gospel, that you may pick a quarrel with Bellarmine. In
confirmation of this I might add, that (as S. Augustine L. 5. de Baptism. c.
23.
and Vincentius Lyrinensis Cont. haer. c. 9. and 10.
have testified) the heresy of Rebaptization could not be disproued by
Scripture, but was condemned by Tradition. And finally I might ask you, why
you, like the bad Steward, conceal what Theodoret writes in that very place,
namely, that what Constantine said, he spoke not to the Bishops, as their Head,
but, as a son that loved peace offered up his words to the Priests as to his
Fathers, and that he would not enter into the Council but after them all, nor
sit down but with their leave, and in a low chair. Did he (trow you) believe
himself to be Head of the Church?

CHAP. XVII. The second General Council held at Constantinople, believed the
supreme authority of the Bishop, and Church of Rome.
SECT. I. By what authority this Council was called.
BELLARMINE in proof of the Popes universal jurisdiction, alleges, that the
Fathers of the first general Council of Constantinople, (which was the second
general of the whole Church) in their Epistle to Pope Damasus, say: They were
gathered by his Mandate, and confess that the Church of Rome is the Head, and
they the members. This (say you Page 109.
is all that is objected, but upon a mistake. What then is the mistake? Because
Bellarmine in the Recognition of his works, afterward observed, that it was
not the Epistle of the second general Synod, but of the Bishops which had been
present at the Synod, and met again the next year after at Constantinople.
But if this Epistle were not of the Synod, why do you, speaking of it not
without contradiction, say Page 10^.
: The general Council of Constantinople do endite an Epistle Page 110. margin.
, and inscribe it thus? And why do you mentioning the inscription of the same
Epistle call it, Synodicae Epistolae inscriptio, The inscription of the
Synodicall Epistle? And why does Theodoret L. 5. hist. c. 9.
style it Libellus Synodicus a Concilio Constantinopolitano missus, A
Synodicall writ sent by the Council of Constantinople etc? But howsoever, you
alleging that Bellarmine acknowledges his own mistake, is a mere cavil,
nothing auailing your cause: for be it, that those Bishops writ not their
Epistle, whiles they were assembled in Council, but when they met the next
year after at Constantinople, yet you must acknowledge the truth of what
Bellarmine alleges out of their Epistle, unless you will make them all liars.

But let us go on. Bellarmine says Recogn. page 46. in hoc Council.
, it is sufficiently proved out of the sixth general Council, that this of
Constantinople was called by the command of Pope Damasus: you answer Page
109.
that, in proof thereof he refers himself to another Council, against the
universal current of histories, which with general consent set down the
Mandates of Emperors as the supreme, and first compulsary causes for the
collecting of Counsels. So you, but falsely as has been already proved Chap.
1^. ^. 8.
. And to go no further for examples, That very sixth general Council which
you mention, bears witness for Bellarmine against you, saying: As soon as
Arius arose, the Emperor Constantine, and Syluester worthy of praise assembled
the great and famous Council at Nice. And that Constantine did not call that
Council by his authority, has been proved, Ibid.
, and is confirmed out of the sixth Council it self, which was called by the
authority of the Pope, as it appears out of the Epistle of Constantine the
Emperor to Donus Inter praeambul. 6. Synod. apud Bin. to. 3. page 6.
, in which he earnestly entreats him to send Legates in his name, with
sufficient instructions, and authority, for the celebration of a Council, to
repress heretics, and restore peace to the Church; promising withal to see
them securely conueighed to Constantinople, to receive them with due honor, and
the Council being ended, to return them home with safety. Donus being dead
before this letter came to Rome, it was received by Agatho his Successor, who
yielding to so pious a desire of the Emperor, caused diverse Synods to be held
in the West to examine the Monothelites Doctrine. Which being done, he called a
Synod at Rome to establish more firmly the Catholic faith against those
Heretics, and then sent his Legates to Constantinople, upon whose ariuall the
Emperor (as knowing that without the authority of the Sea Apostolic no
Council could be valid) signified by letters Extat apud Bin. to. 3. page 7.
to the Patriarchs of Constantinople and Jerusalem, that the Pope having
yielded to his desire of calling a Council, had sent his legates representing
his own person, and with them order, and instructions how to proceed therein:
and therefore wished them with their Metropolitans and Bishops, to resort to
Constantinople. All which shows how untruly you say, that Emperors are the
supreme, and first compulsarie causes for the collecting of Counsels: for
indeed how can that authority belong to them, who have no more, then the sixth
Council shows? Which being ended the Popes Legates, though none of them were
Bishops, but two of them Priests, and the third a Deacon, as they had presided
in the Council, so they subscribed in the first place, before all the Bishops,
and Patriarchs, and the Emperor in the last place after all, and in these
words, Legimus and consensimus Apud Bin. to. 3. page ^7.
, showing thereby, that he had no authority of a Judge in the Council, but that
his duty was (as it is also of other Emperors) to agree unto what the Bishops
by their authority, as Judges had determined.

2. To prove that the Emperor was the supreme and first com^ulsaty cause of
collecting the second general Council at Constantinople, you produce
Theodoret as a witness Page 109. 110.
, that not Damasus, but he was the absolute Commander. If Theodoret say, that
the Emperor commanded, he says it not to show, that he commanded by his own
authority, but by the power he had received from Damasus; so, that his command
and convocation was only executory of Damasus his authority: for why else do
not those Bishops say, that the Emperor called them? and why do they say to
Damasus, You called us, as your own members by letters sent to the Emperor,
but because Damasus was he that chiefly called them, and the Emperor no
otherwise, then by virtue of Damasus his letters sent unto him to that effect?
Even as Basilius the Emperor in like manner called the eight general Council
by the Mandate of Pope Adrians letters Apud Bin. to. 3. page 881.
: Volumus etc. We will (says Adrian to the Emperor) that a full Council be
held at Constantinople, by the industry of your Piety, in which our Legates
presiding etc. And this would have been no less clear concerning the calling
of the second general Council at Constantinople, if what you set down in
your Latin and Greek marginals, you had syncerely rendered in your English
text, which most imported your readers for the vnderstandding of the truth.

And the same is yet further proved out of two very ancient Manuscripts, the
one of the Vatican, and the other of S. Maria Mayor, in which it is said Apud
Baron. anno 381.
: Damasus confirmed the sentence of condemnation pronounced against Macedonius,
and Eunomius, in the second Synod, which by his command and authority was held
at Constantinople.

And lastly whether Damasus did believe, that the authority of calling
Counsels belonged to the Emperor or to himself, may be gathered out of
another Epistle of his, written in answer to one Stephen, an Archbishop of
Mauritania, and three African Counsels Damas. Ep. 4. apub. Bin. to 1. page 499.
, in which having declared, that he had the Episcopal charge, or ministry
over the house of God, which is the universal Catholic Church, and that the Sea Apostoleke is constituted by God over all Priests, and Bishops, he adds;
for as you know, it is not Catholic, that a Synod be held without the
authority of the holy See Apostolic, nor a Bishop condemned, but in a lawful
Synod assembled by the same authority: nor are any Counsels read to be valid,
but only such as have their strength from the Apostolical authority.

And hereby you are convinced of an untruth, in saying, Page 110.
that Damasus his letters were not mandatory to the Orientals, but letters of
request to the Emperor Theodosius for obteyning liberty, to collect, and
assemble a Synod. For albeit Damasus requested Theodosius to assist him therein,
as the duty of a Christian Emperor was to do, yet (witness Theodoret L. 5. c. 8.
he with his Roman Synod (without whose advice he dispatcheth no business of
moment) sent letters to the Eastern Bishops themselves, to call them to a
Council at Rome; which letters they having received by the Emperor, return an
answer to Damasus, not taxing him for want of authority to call them, but
excusing their not obeying his command, by reason of the shortness of time, and
the great inconveniences their long absence would have bred to their Churches
newly freed from the persecutions, and troubles of Heretics. Which excuse
sufficiently shows, that they acknowledged in him authority to call them.

SECT. II. Whether the Primacy of the Pope be Primacy of Authority and
Jurisdiction, or of Order only.
BEllarmine L. 2. de Pont. c. 13.
proves the Popes authority over the Orientals by their acknowledging him to
be their Head and themselves to be his members. You answer, Page 110.
that the similitude of Head, and members, implies, no superiority of
jurisdiction, but only of Order, that is, of priority of place, of voice, and
the like. But this evasion is confuted by the very comparison it self: for the
Head has not only priority of place above the members, but governs and
rules the whole body. And therefore your answer is no less contrary to
reason, then if you should tell us, that in a political body, as in a
College, the Rector, which is Head of the house, has no other superiority
over his fellow-Collegials, but only priority of place, or of voice: nor the
Governor of a City over the Citizens, nor the Viceroy over the inferior
officers of the kingdom. And so much the more reprehe^sible is this your
sophistry, because you know, that the holy Council of Chalcedon speaking to
Leo Pope, says Inrelat. ad Leon.
: You rule over us, as the Head does over the members. And Ibide
: We beseech you to honor our judgment with your decrees, and that as in what
concerns the weal we have had correspondency to our Head; so your Sovereignty
would fulfill to your Children, what concerns decency. Do not these Fathers
here expressly acknowledge Leo to be the ruler and Governor of the Universal
Church, and beseech him to confirm and authorize their decrees? If he had not
power and authority over the whole Church, why did S. Ambrose (one of the
Bishops to whom these Orientals addressed their letter, as the inscription Apud
Theodoret. l. 5. hist. c. 9.
declares) speaking of this very Pope Damasus, say In cap. 3. prior. ad Timoth.
: Though all the world be Gods, yet the Church is called his house, whereof at
this day Damasus is Governor? If the Pope have not jurisdiction over all
Bishops, even the greatest Patriarchs of the East, and power to annual their
decrees, and the decrees of their Counsels, why did S. Chrysostom Ep. 1. ad
Innocent.
, when he was deposed from the Sea of Constantinople, in a Council held by
Theophilus Patriarch of Alexandria, write to Innocentius Pope, beseeching him
to annull the Acts of that Council, and punish them that had so iniustly
condemned him? Why did Theodoret Bishop of Cyre, deposed in the second Council
of Ephesus, appeal to Pope Leo Ep. ad Renat. and ep. ad Leo.
, acknowledging, that the holy Roman See has the stern of government over all
the Churches of the world? If the rule and government of the universal Church
belong not to the Pope, why did the Bishop of Patara in Lycia, upon the
expulsion of Pope Siluerius from his See Liberat. in Breui. c. 12.
, represent unto Justinian the indignity of that fact, saying, that albeit
there be many Kings and Princes in the world, yet none of them over all the
earth, as the Pope is over the Church of all the world? If the government of the
universal Church belong not to him, why did the Emperor Valentinian the third
Cod. l. 7. and 8.
instile him, Rector of the vniuersaloty of Churches? Why does the same Emperor
and Theodosius decree Constit. Nouel. tit. 24.
, that all those things shall be laws, which have beue or shall be ordained by
the Pope of the eternal City, and that presumption attempt nothing against
his authority: for so (say thoy) the peace of the Church shall be maintained by
all, if the universality acknowledge her Rector. If the Pope have no
superiority over other Bishops, but only priority of place, or of voice, why
did Athanasius Patriarch of Alexandria, Paul of Constantinople, with many
others of the East, in their wrongs, appeal to Julius Pope, as to their Judge
Socrat. l. 2. c. 11.
? and how came he to replace them in their seats, but Sozom. l. 3. c. 7.
by the sovereignty of his Church; and Nicepho. l. 9. c. 8.
because the charge of all belonged to him?

But to return to the Council of Constantinople; Those Fathers in their
letter to Damasus, made sufficient acknowledgment of his authority over them
Apud Theodoret. l 5. c. 9.
, when they demanded from him the confirmation of their decrees of faith, and
in particular that of the deposition of Timothy Patriarch of Alexandria,
condemned for heresy: All these things (say they) being lawfully decreed
according to the Canons of the Church, we beseech your Holiness, to approve
them. To which petition Damasus answered Apud Theodoret. ibid. c. 10.
: Whereas your charity (most honored children) yeldeth due reverence to the
Apostolic See, it shall turn you to great honor etc. But what need was there
to require from one the deposition of Timothy, seeing he was long since deposed
here, with his Master Apollinarius, by the judgment of the Sea Apostolic, and
in the presence of Peter Bishop of Alexandria?

SECT. III. Whether the name of Brother, Colleague, and fellow-Minister, which
the Pope gives to other Bishops, and they to him, argue them to be of equal
authority, and jurisdiction with him?
YOu object Page 110.111.
, that the Fathers of this second Council general write not to the Pope
alone, but to him with other Bishops of the Roman Synod, whom they acknowledge
to be their Colleagues and fellow members, and thereby cut the Roman Head into
so many pieces, as there were Bishops, to whom they inscribed their Epistle.

It is a prime Argument of yours, which you often repeat, and strongly insist
on Page 63. fin. 64.83.84.110.111.116.141.268.
, that because Bishops are joined in society with the Pope, or because they
call him Brother, Colleague, and fellow-Minister, as also because he writing to
them, calls them, his Brethren and Colleagues, there is no inequality of
power between the Pope and them, but that they are all equal with him. Whiles
you give to the Pope (say you) Page 63. fin. 64.
an absolute jurisdiction, cum plenitudine potestatis, over all Bishops, how
can you suffer him to be mated, or equaled with others Bishops, as Paul did
Peter, by joining in society with him James and John? 2. Here Page 110.111.
you infer, that because the Oriental Bishops that had been present at the
second Council general, writing to Damasus Pope, and other Bishops assembled
at Rome, call both him, and them, their Brethren, and Colleagues, they
acknowledge not any authority or jurisdiction in the Pope, more then in
themselves, or in the other Bishops, to whom they write. 3. You frame the like
Argument Page 116.
out of the Council of Ephesus, because it calls Celestine B. of Rome,
Fellow-Minister. 4. And out of S. Epiphanius Page 241.
, who called Pope Hormisdas, Brother. 5. And out of S. Cyprian you tell us Page
268.
, that he never calls the Pope Bishop of Bishops, Father of Fathers, High
Priest of Christ, and Monarke of the universal Church, as he would have done,
if he had believed his Monarchy: but contrariwise in all his Epistles, saluteth
Pope Cornelius, with only Charissime frater, Most dear Brother, and takes his
Vale, with the same, Most dear brother, farewell. And when in his Epistles to
others he falls into mention of him, he exceeds not these Epithets,
Ourfellow brother Cornelius, Our Colleague, or fellow in office Cornelius:
which if it be beheld in a secular glass is, as if a Vassal should salute his
King, with, All hayle brother Henry, and take his leave with, Farewell brother
Henry. Fie fie: What will you make of the Fathers? will you judge them so
witless, as not to have understood their Morals. This is your discourse: Grave
(I warrant you) and very judicious, but how far from the purpose, have but a
little patience, and you shall hear.

And first, to begin with your secular glass; God in the holy Scripture says
to his people Deutero. 17.15.
: Thou shall take a King whom our Lord thy God shall choose out of the number
of thy brethren. And again Ibid. verse. 20.
: That the Kings heart be not lifted up into pride above his Brethren. Wherefore
the subjects of a King, are his brethren: and yet because the manner of
government used by Kings to keep their subjects in awe, and repress the
Violence of Malefactors, is with a Lordly dominion, such as our Savior
discribeth, saying Luc. 22.25.
The Princes of nations dominier over them, in the style of the world he should
be esteemed unmannerly and saucy, that should presume to say to his Sovereign.
All hail Brother Henry, or farewell fellow Henry. And therefore S. Gregory
speaking of the worldly greatness, and state of Kings, says In 1. Reg. l. 4.
c. 2.
: The things which are contained in the law, that concerns Kings, are
foretold, to the end they may be avoided, rather then followed. And the same is
taught us by the example of our Blessed Savior Marc. 10.45. and Luc. 2.27.
who, as he came into the world to serve, and not to be served, so he would not
have the Ecclesiastical Monarchy like to that of Secular Princes, but a gentle
and brotherly Monarchy, as that of an Elder brother, over his younger brethren:
for that is the title which the Apostle gives him, calling him Romans 8.29.
. The first begotten among many brethren. And therefore albe it (as he told his
Apostles Joan. 13.23.
he was their Lord, and Master, yet proposing himself unto them as an example
of superiority, accompanied with humility, and teaching them in what manner
they ought to govern their inferiors, he said unto them Luc. 22.27. and verse.
25.2^.
: I am in the midst of you* as one that ministers: the Princes of nations
dominier over them, but you not so: but he that is the greater among you, let
him become as the younger; and he that is the leader, as the waiter.

This rule S. Peter Prince of the Apostles, and first B. of Rome observed,
according to our Saviors command; and exhorted all Bishops, as his inferiors
to observe the same, saying 1. Pet. 5.2. and 3.
: Feed the flock of God, which is among you, providing not with constraint, but
willingly according to God; nor dominiering in the Clergy, but made examples of
the flock from the heart.

And out of this pattern of sweet and brotherly government used by Christ, and
prescribed by him to his Apostles, and by S. Peter to his Successors in the
Roman See, and to other Bishops, the Pope and all other Prelates have drawn
theirs, and therefore call and salute each other, by the name of Brethren: in so
much that S. Gregory speaking of Bishops says L. 7. ep. 65.
: When crimes exact it not, all Bishops according to the condition of humility
are equal. And yet to show, that all Bishops are subject to the Pope, he had
said immediately before, I know no Bishop, but is subject to the Sea Apostolic.
And again L. 7. op. 64.
: Who doubts, but that the Bishop of Constantinople is subject to the Sea
Apostolic? which the most religious Lord the Emperor, and our brother Bishop
of the same City, do continually Protest. In which words he calls the B. of
Constantinople, Brother, and yet declares him subject to the Sea Apostolic.
And in like manner our Savior in the Gospel often calls the Apostles. His
brethren Luc. 25.40 and cap. 28.10. and Joan. 20.17.
: from whence you may infer, that he was not Superior to them in authority,
and it will be as good a consequence, as to infer, that the Pope is not
Superior in power to other Bishops, because he calls them Brethren.

But for the more full declaration of this, it is to be noted, that it was a
thing familiar to ancient writers, to use the word Brother, not to exclude the
superiority of jurisdiction, but to express the unity of communion. For, 1.
the Catholic Bishops of Africa answeated the Donatists in the Conference of
Carthage, that Cecilianus who had been Archbishop of that City, and
consequently the Head and Superintendent of all the Bishops of Africa, was
their Brother: He was (says S. Augustine) Collect. Carthag. Act. 3.
our Brother because of the Communion of Sacraments. 2. In the same sense he
called Aurelius Archbishop of Carthage, his Brother De oper. Monach. c. 1.
, notwithstanding that he was the spiritual subject of Aurelius, and made B.
of Hippo by means of the dispensation, which he had given to Valerius B. of
that City, to take him for his Coadiutor (m); and he acknowledged himself
bound to execute his commands: I have (says he Possid in vita Aug. c. 8.
obeyed your commands my holy Brother Aurelius. 3. Epigonius one of the Bishops
of the third Council of Carthage, calls the same Aurelius, De opere Monach. c.
1.
His Brother Conc. Carthag. c. 45.
, whom yet he there acknowledges to have jurisdiction over all the Bishops of
Africa. 4. The Council of Carthage writing to Innocentius Pope, to confirm
the sentence of condemnation, which both in that, and in the Council of
Mileuis, had been pronounced against Pelagius, says Aug. ep. 90.
: This, o holy Lord and Brother, we conceived we ought to represent to your
Charity, that to the statuts of mediocrity might be added the authority of the Sea Apostolic. In which words they acknowledge Innocentius to be their Lord
and Superior, and to have authority to confirm their decrees, and yet
notwithstanding, call him their Brother. 5. John Patriarch of Constantinople
calls Hormisdas Pope, Brother, Ep. ad Hormisd.
and yet protests to obey the Sea Apostolic in all things. 6. Justinian Cod.
tit. 1. l 8.
writing to Pope John surnamed Mercurius, calls the Patriarch of
Constantinople, his Brother: and yet both in the same Epistle and in another to
the Patriarch himself Cod. tit. 1. l. 7.
, he professes the Pope to be The Head of all the holy Prelates of God.

Hereby it appears, how ignorantly and falsely you infer, that S. Cyprian
equalleth himself in authority with Cornelius Pope, because he styleth
himself his Brothrer, or that Cornelius acknowledges in himself no authority
over Cyprian, because he gives him the same title. For besides what has been
said, Erasmus a man highly esteemed by you has taught you Not. in ep. Cyp. ad
Cornel.
that the word Brother there signifies not equality, but society of religion.

And nothing else is signified by the words, Colleague, and Fellow-minister,
when other Bishops are so instiled by the Pope, or the Pope by them. For that
ancient Father Vincentius Lyrinensis speaking of Pope Stephen, and other
Bishops opposing the doctrine of rebaptization defended by Firmilianus, and
Cyprian, says Cont. haer. cap. 9.
: Then the blessed Stephen made resistance together with, but yet before, his
Colleagues, judging it (as I conceive) a thing worthy of him to excel them in
faith, so much, as he did in the authority of his place. And Innocentius the
first in answer to the Counsels of Carthage and Mileuis Inter ep. Aug. ep. 93.
: I conceive, that all our Brethren and fellow-Bishops ought not to refer
what may be profitable in common to all Churches, to any but to Peter, that is
to say, to the author of their name and dignity. And the Bishops of Egypt in
the Synod of Alexandria call S. Athanasius, their Colleague Athan. Apol. de
fuga sua.
, who yet was their Head, and had jurisdiction over them, as the Counsel of
Nice declares Can. 6.
. And lastly the Bishops of the Council of Ephesus, call Celestine Pope, their
fellow-minister Par. 2. Act. 1.
; and yet in the same place style him their most holy Father. and make
themselves executors of his decrees: Constrained necessarily (say they) by the
force of the Canons, and by the letters of our most holy Father, and
Fellow-minister Celestine, we are come not without tears, to pronounce this
heavy sentence against Nestorius.

I conclude therefore, that these words, Brother, Colleague, and
fellow-minister, when they are used by the Pope to other Bishops, or by other
Bishops to the Pope, signify nothing else, but society of religion and unity of
communion: from whence to infer (as you do) that other Bishops are of equal
authority with the Pope, is a piece of ignorance, no way suiting with a man of
your reading, and altogether unbeseeming him that holds the place of so great
a Bishop.

SECT IV. A frivolous cavil of Doctor Morton against Bellarmine, answered.
YOu object Page 109. fin.
that, whereas Theodoret says, (...), which is, letters the years past,
Bellarmine against all Lexicons reads, The mandate of letters. Is not this
fine art, trow ye? etc. If any should translate the year past, into Mandate,
might it not be suspected, that the man's wits were now in the wayne, as being
ignorant etc. So you; who by seeking to show your wit in scoffing at
Bellarmine, discover your ignorance, and folly. Bellarmines intent is to show,
that the Council of Constantinople was called by the Popes authority, because
the Fathers of the Council writing to Damasus, acknowledge that they were
called, (...), by his letters, which Bellarmine translateth, mandato literarum,
by command of his letters, following the version of Christopherson; and with
good cause: for who is so stupid, as not to understand, that it is all one, to
call the Bishops to a Council, by his letters, as the Greek says, or, by the
authority and Mandate of his letters, as Christopherson translated? But to
translate (...) for Mandate, neither did Bellarmine so translate, nor would any
man, whose wits are not in the wayne, have imputed so gross an ignorance to
that learned Cardinal, especially, since in two different places, he sets
down the same passage at large, and expresses both Mandato litterarum, L. 2.
de Pont. c. 13. and In Respon. ad Apol. pro iuram. fidel. page 375.
, and, Anno superiore, saying: Mandato litterarum superiore anno a vestra
Reuerentia ad sanctissimum Imperatorem Theodosium missarum: by the Mandate of
letters sent the last year by your Reverence to the most religious Emperor
Theodosius. Which shows, that if he had left out of the Latin, Anno
superiore, (as you citing his words cunningly do) it had not been to translate
(...) into Mandate, but to omit Anno superiore, as a particle wholly
impertinent, either to prove, or disprove the Popes power of calling general
Counsels, which no way depends on the year, but on the authority and
dignity of his place.

SECT. V. Of the Decree of this second Council general, made in favor of the
Archbishop of Constantinople.
AGainst what has been said, you oppose a Page 112. 113.
Canon of the second Council, ordayning, that the B. of Constantinople have
the honor of primacy next after the B. of Rome, because Constantinople is new
Rome. This Objection reboundeth on your own head: For if the Bishop of
Constantinople sought then to obtain the second place after the Pope, because
Constantinople is new Rome, it is thereby manifest, that before that time, the
B. of old Rome had the primacy, above all Bishops: The primacy (I say) not of
order only (for this the Bishops of Constantinople never denied to the Pope)
but of authority, and jurisdiction over the Patriarchs of Alexandria, Antioch,
and Jerusalem: for that authority it was, in which they sought to participate
with him, though in the second place after and under him: which they cold not
have done, unless the primacy of authority over those Patriarchs had
primitiuely, and originally belonged to him. So far therefore is this your
Argument from euincing any thing against the Popes authority, that it
confirms the same.

And so much the more, because the Canon objected (whatsoever the sense of it
be, and whatsoever the Bishops of Constantinople pretended by it) is of no
force: for the Council in which it was made, consisted only of the Bishops of
the East, and therefore was not General of it self, but only by the
adiunction, and confirmation of another Council of the Western Bishops, held
at Rome, under Damasus Pope, at the same time, which neither knew of this Canon
before it was made, nor confirmed it after it was made, as S. Gregory has
testified saying L. 6. ep. 31.
: The Roman Church neither has, nor receaueth the Canons, or the Acts of the
Council of Constantinople: but she has admitted that Synod in what it defined
against Macedonius. And the same is testified by S. Leo Ep. 53.
, who reprehending Anatolius Patriarch of Constantinople, for seeking to renew
this Canon in the Council of Chalcedon, says: The signature of certain
Bishops made (as thou vauntest) more then threescore years since, cannot
justify thy intention, to the upholding whereof (being of it self from the
beginning ruinous, and long since quite fallen) thou have sought weak and
feeble props: for never having been transmitted by thy predecessors to the
knowledge of the Sea Apostolic, it could be of no force.

That this Canon was never allowed by the Sea Apostolic, you know, but shift
it off saying Page 112.
: Truly it were more then marvel, if the Church of Rome should admit any
Canon, that may any way derogate from her presumption This your answer is, as
if the lower house of Parliament should enact a law against the Kings just and
lawful authority, or at least without his knowledge: and the King not
admitting thereof, you should justify their act, saying (a): It were more then
marvel if the King should admit any act that may any way derogate from his
presumption: Were this loyalty? Were this good Doctrine? Yet such is yours: for
concerning Ecclesiastical affairs, the Pope has the same place in a general
Council, that a King has in his Parliament. And as no Statute enacted in
Parliament can be of force, unless it be confirmed by his Majesty, so no
Canon, nor decree of a Council can be of force, unless it be confirmed by the
Pope.

SECT. VI. That no Canon of any Council can be of force, until it be
confirmed by the Sea Apostolic.
FOr who knows not, that, as Socrates showing the decrees of the Arian
Council at Antioch, to be of no force, says L. 2. c. 5.
: Julius B. of Rome was not there, nor sent any in his steed, whereas the
Ecclesiastical Canon commandes, that no decrees be made for the Churches,
without the sentence of the B. of Rome. Which Doctrine is else where repeated by
himself L. 2. c. 13.
, and by Epiphanius Scholasticus in the Tripartite, saying L. 4. c. 9.
: Counsels must not be held without the allowance of the B of Rome. And by
Sozomen, L. 3. c. 9.
who writes, that Julius rebuked the Arians, for that against the laws of the
Church they had not called him to the Synod, there being a Sacerdotall law,
which declares all Acts to be inualid, that are made without the allowance of
the B of Rome. The reprehension of Julius, which these Historians mention, is
exstant in his first Epistle to the Orientalls, where he says: The Nicen
Canons command that by no means Counsels be held without the B. of Rome. And
in his second Epistle (which S. Athanasius has inserted into his second
Apology) speaking to the Arians: Are you ignorant that the custom is, that if
any exceptions were taken against the Bishops there, we should first have been
written to, that what is just might be determined from hence?

And how ancient this custom is, Marcellus the first a holy Pope and Martyr
testifies, saying Ep. ad Epise. Antioch. Prouin.
: The Apostles ordained, that no Synod should be held without the Authority of
the Sea of Rome. Which ordination of the Apostles the Emperors Theodosius and
Valentinian confirmed by a special law in these words Constable. Nouel. Theo. tit.
24.
: We decree, that according to the ancient custom, nothing be innouated in the
Churches, without the sentence of the Reverend Pope of the City of Rome. And in
like manner Justinian in his Law to Epiphanius Patriarch of Constantinople Cod.
tit. 1. l. 7.
: We preserve the estate of the Unity of the most holy Churches in all things,
with the most holy Pope of ancient Rome, to whom we have written the like,
because we will not have any thing to pass concerning the affairs of the
Church, which shall not be also referred to his Blessedness, because he is the
Head of all the holy Prelatet of God. And in his letter to the Pope Cod. tit.
1. l. 8.
: We will not suffer that any thing be treated of, belonging to the estate of
the Church, though clear and manifest, which shall not also be referred to
your Holiness, who are the Head of all Churches.

Upon this ground it was, that Dioscorus Patriarch of Alexandria was accused,
and by the Popes command punished in the Council of Chalcedon Act. 1.
, for, that he had temerariously presumed to hold a Synod without the authority
of the Sea Apostolic, which neither was, nor could ever lawfully be done. And
Euagrius in the history of the same Council, reports L. 2. c. 18.
that the Senators demanding of Leo's Legates, what charge there was against
Dioscorus, they answered, that he must yield an account of his judgment, because
against right he had usurped the person of a Judge, without the B. of Romes
permission. Whereupon by the judgment of the Synod he was commanded as a person
guilty to stand up in the midst of the place, and accused of many crimes, as
the same Narration declares.

Again from this ground it proceeded, that (as the Fathers of Chalcedon
testify Act. 10.
, in general Counsels the Legates of the Sea Apostolic were always wont to
speak, and confirm the decrees made, in the first place, before all other
Bishops. And as all those Counsels general and particular which have required
and obtained Confirmation from the Sea Apostolic, have ever been held valid,
and reverenced throughout the Christian world; so contrarily all those that
have wanted this confirmation, have been rejected, and condemned as unlawful,
and spurious assemblies. The Council of Ariminum for number of Bishops, was
exceeding great; and yet for want of this confirmation, the profession of faith
made by them in that Council, as also the Council it self, have ever been
reputed inualid. The number of Bishops assembled at Ariminum (says Damasus
with many other Bishops Theod. l. 2. c. 22. Sozom. l. 6. c. 23.
ought to have no force of prejudice for as much as that profession of faith
was made without the consent of the B. of Rome, whose sentence before others,
ought to have been attended. Again, for want of this confirmation the second
Council of Ephesus has always been condemned as a piraticall Synod. And that
famous Martyr Stephanus Junior, speaking of a Council held by the
Image-breakers under Constantinus Copronymus, answered Apud Damas. edit. Pacis
an. 1603. part. 2. page 491.
: How can this Council be called Ecumenical, which was not allowed by the B.
of Rome, without whose authority no Ecclesiastical decrees can be made. In
like manner Pelagius predecessor to S. Gregory speaking of John B of
Constantinople says Ep. 1.
: That intituling himself Universal, he presumed to call a general Council,
whereas the authority of calling general Synods, has been consigned by a
singular privilege to the Apostolic See of blessed Peter etc. And therefore
(says he Ibid.
to the Bishops of that Council) all that you have decreed in that no-Synod of
yours (for Synod so attempted it could not be, but a Conuenticle) I ordain by
the authority of blessed Peter, that it be annulled and abrogated. And S.
Gregory speaking of this sentence of Pelagius, says L. 4. op. 38. and l. 7.
ep. 70.
: Our Predecessor Pelagius of blessed memory, has disanulled by a sentence
entirely valid, all the acts of that Synod, except what concerned the cause of
Gregory B. of Antioch.

Finally to add more proofs for the confirmation of a truth so certain, were
to add light to the Sun, stars to the Heavens, and water to the Ocean.
These sufficiently show, that you by confessing, that this Canon of the
Council of Constantinople was never admitted by the Church of Rome, discover
your folly, in insisting so much on a Canon, which for want of due confirmation
is inualid.

SECT. VII. That the Bishops of Constantinople knew this Canon to be of no
force.
YOu ask; Page 112.
Which of the Fathers, for the space of 60. years after, opposed against this
Canon? What one Bishop before Pope Leo thought is not most equal? I answer,
that this Canon was so far from being allowed, either by the Popes, or other
Fathers of that time, that because it was not confirmed by the Sea Apostolic,
it presently dyed: and the Patriarchs of Constantinople acknowledged themselves
still subject to the Pope, and the Pope exercised his jurisdiction over them,
as formerly he had done.

For this Council of Constantinople being held in the time of Nectarius
Patriarch of that City, S. Chrysostom that was his immediate Successor, being
deposed at the procurement of Eudoxia the Empress, by a Council of Bishops
held at Constantinople under Theophilus Patriarch of Alexandria, had recourse
by letters of appeal to Innocentius Pope, beseeching him to disanull by his
letters, and authority, the Acts of that Council; to abrogate their sentence
of condemnation iniustly pronounced against him, to restore him to his
Bishopric, and punish his adversaries according to the Canons of the Church;
yet not with such rigor, but that if they did repent, he would be pleased to
spare them. All these particulars are the requests of S. Chrysostom expressed
in his letters to Innoce^tius Ep. 1. and 2. ad Innocent.
: in which who sees not, that he acknowleged in him the power of an absolute
Judge, not only over himself, but also over Theophilus the greatest Patriarch
of the East, and over the whole Council, that had condemned him?

Chrysostom was no sooner thrust out of his See, and sent into banishment, but
his enemies set up Arsacius in his place, who living not much above a year,
Innocentius would never admit him to his communion, and after his death
commanded his name to be razed out of the records of the Church.

After Arsacius succeeded Atticus, Chrysostom yet living. Him likewise
Innocentius excommunicatated: and notwithstanding that he sent many embassages,
to procure absolution he could never obtain it, until he had enrolled the
name of Chrysostom in the records of the Church, as Innocentius ordained
Theod. l. 5. c. 34.
.

Sone after him succeeded Nestorius, who being fallen into heresy, was by the
authority and command of Pope Celestine excommunicated, and deposed in the
first Council of Ephesus See the next Chap. sect. 1.
.

In his place Maximianus a man of excellent virtue was ordained by the Legates
of the Sea Apostolic, and confirmed by Celestine Pope: and who, in
acknowledgment of the Sea Apostolic, writ a famous Epistle to the Orientals.
Part of his words you have heard above Chap. 1. sect. 4.
.

After him succeeded Flauianus, who having condemned Eutyches in a Synod at
Constantinople, and being therefore deposed in the second Council of Ephesus by
means of Dioscorus, an heretical Patriarch of Alexandria, appealed to Leo
Pope. Fliuianus (says Liberatus) In breuiar. c. 22.
appealed to the Apostolic See by petition presented to his Legates. The same
is testified by Leo himself Ep. 24.
, and by Valentinian the third to Theodosius his Father in law In Ep. preamb.
Council. Chalced.
.

These examples are so many testimonies of your ignorance. You ask, which of
the Fathers for the space of 60. years (after the Council of Constatinople)
opposed against this Canon, or what one Bishop before Leo thought it not
equal? But we contrarily demand of you, which of the Bishops of Constantinople
(in whose favor this Canon was made) for the space of 70. years, which passed
between the two Counsels of Constantinople, and Chalcedon, did claim any
privilege of honor, over the other Patriarchs of the East, or any exemption
from the Popes jurisdiction, by virtue of this Canon* Or what Pope in those 70.
years did think it equal? The examples alleged convince, that the most
famous Bishops of Constantinople, which lived in that time, knew the Canon to
be of no force; since in the wrongs done them by other Patriarchs, and
Counsels of the East, they never alleged it in their own defense, but still
appealed to the Popes of those times, as to their lawful Judges: and the Popes
thought their appeals, to be most equal, and just: and absoluing them,
condemned their adversaries.

And finally, that this Canon took no effect, is a thing evident, by the
answer which the Popes Legates made, when Anatolius B. of Constantinople
attempted to have it renewed in the Council of Chalcedon: for having said,
that it was not to be found in the Code of the Canons of the universal Church,
they added Act. 1^.
: If the Bishops of Constantinople have enjoyed it, what would they have more?
And if they have not enjoyed it, why do they now require it?

CHAP. XVIII. The third Council General, being the first of Ephesus, believed
the supreme Authority, and Jurisdiction of the B. of Rome, over all Bishops.
SECT. I. Of the deposition, and condemnation of Nestorius, by the Command of
Pope Celestine* and whether the style of ancient Popes were to Command.
CELESTINE Pope being informed of the blasphemous Doctrine of Nestorius
Patriarch of Constantinople (who held that in Christ there were two persons,
divine, and humane, and that therefore the B. Virgin Mary was the mother of man
only and not of God) condemned it first at Rome, and then made Cyrill Patriarch
of Alexandria his Vicar in the East, giving him Commission to publish, and
execute his sentence at Constantinople. This he signified to Nestorius himself
Conc. Ephesians. to. 1. c. 17. sin.
: We have sent (says Celestine) the form of this judgment, together with the
whole process to our holy fellow-Bishop of Alexandria, to the end that he
being made our Vicar, may notify this our Decree unto all, And giving
Commission to Cyrill to publish and execute his sentence, he says Ep. ad
Cyril. in Conc. Ephesians to. 1. c. 16.
: Adding to thee the authority of our See, and using with power the
representation of our place, thou shall execute exactly and severely this
sentence, namely, that if within ten days told, after signification of this
admonition made to Nestorius, he do not in express words anathematize his
wicked Doctrines etc. thy Holiness shall provide for that Church without
delay, and declare him to be wholly cut off from our body. Who sees not that
these words of Celestine import a command to Cyrill? And in conformity to this
command, Cyrill writ to the Clergy, and people of Constantinople Conc. Ephesians.
to. 1. c. ^5.
: We are constrained to signify to Nestorius by Synodicall letters: that if
very speedily, that is, within the time prescribed by the most holy Bishop of
the Roman Church, he renounce not the Novelties of his Doctrine, he is to have
no more communion with us, not place among the Minister of God* And the
Council it self proceeding to the sentence of condemnation against him, says
Conc. Ephesians. to. 2. c. 20.
: Constrained necessarily by the force of the Canons, and by the letters of our
most holy Father Celestine, we are come not without many tears, to pronounce
this heavy sentence against him. And then they couch the sentence it self in
these words Ibid.
: Therefore our Lord Jesus Christ whom Nestorius has assailed with his
blasphemies, by this holy Synod pronounces him wholly deprived of all
Episcopal dignity, and cast out from all company, and conversation of Priests.

These passages prove the authority of the Pope. 1. Over Cyrill Patriarch of
Alexandria whom he made his Vicar, and who acknowledged himself bound by
Celestines letters, to condemn Nestorius, and cast him out from among the
Ministers of God. 2. Over the Patriarch of Constantinople, whom he first
condemned at Rome, and afterward gave command to Cyrill, to publish his
condemnation at Constantinople, and to substitute another Bishop in his place.
And 3. over the Council of Ephesus, in which the Bishops profess Euagr. l. 1.
c. 4.
, that they were compelled necessarily by the force of the Canons, and by the
letters of Celestine, to condemn Nestorius: Which (says Bellarmine) was to
profess that they deposed him by the command of Pope Celestine. False (say you
Page 114.
: There is not the word Command used by the Council etc. No, you know well,
that to command, was not the style of Popes in primitive, and ancient times. S.
Gregory B. of Rome 150. years after Celestine, did utterly abhor it. I
command (says he)? Away with the word Command: I have not commanded. And the
same you repeat afterward again Page 233.
. And to persuade your readers, that the passages alleged contain no Command
of Celestine to Cyril, or to the Council, you shift them off saying Page 115.
; Those Fathers confess, they were moved, and compelled by Celestines letters
meaning by the persuasions of that Orthodox Bishop, and that but only (tum tum)
in part; for so they say, Both by the Canons, and also by your letters. But
this evasion cannot serve: for they say not. They were persuaded by Celestines
letters, (there is no mention of persuasion) but that they were necessarily
compelled by them, which is to be Commanded: for Persuasions do not necessarily
compel, but Commands. And what more clear, then that Celestine did exercise
the authority of a Judge, and Commander, in ordayning Cyrill to execute
exactly, and severely the sentence of condemnation against Nestorius, if he did
not within ten days after admonition given him, anathematize his heretical
Doctrine? Was this only to persuade? Was it not most strictly, and properly to
command? Unless you will say, that when his Majesty (without using the word
Command) gives strict charge to his Judges, to condemn a Malefactor, he
commands them not, but only persuades them to condemn him.

But you say Page 115.
, Those Fathers were compelled by Celestines letters, and by the Canons: and
therefore not wholly by his letters, but only in part. What then? If the Judges
say, they are compelled by the laws, and by his Majesty's letters to condemn
a malefactor, does it therefore follow, that his Majesty has no authority to
command the Judges, or that his letters were not mandatory to them, but only
persuasiue? with such poor euasions you deceive your disciples.

But you say Page 114.
: We well know, that to command, was not the style of Popes in primitive and
ancient times. Pardon us Sir, we well know, that you speak untruly, and
ignorantly: for Victor the first Pope of that name who lived in the first age
after Christ, commanded the Asian Bishops to celebrate the Feast of Easter,
after the manner of the Roman Church, and excommunicated them, that obeyed no^
Eusebius. l. 5. hist. c. 24.
. 2. Anthetus that lived in the beginning of the next age, writ to the Bishops
of Andaluzia, and Toledo: These things we command to be observed, according to
your desire Apud. Bin. to. 1. page 145.
. Stephen the first of that name writing to S. Cyprian, commanded that such as
were baptized by hetetikes, should not be rebaptized: Let nothing be innouated
(says he) Vincent. Lyr. aduers. haer. c. 9.
but the ancient to adition abserued. And notwithstanding the opposition of S.
Cyptian, of Firmi^ian^^s, and many other learned Prelates, this command of
Stephen prevailed, and the contrary doctrine was condemned by the Council of
Nice, as heretical. 4. Julius the first of that name, rebuked the Arians
Sozom. l. 3. c. 7.
because they had rashly depersed Athanasius, and other Catholic Bishops, and
commanded that some of them in the name of all, should appear at Rome on a set
day, to give ^ccempt of the justice of their sentence, and threatened not to let
them pass without punishment, unless they did leave to innouate. And both
Theodore^ L. 2. hist. c. 4.
and S. Athanasius Apol. 2.
out of an undoubted Epistle of the same Pope, report, that following the
Ecclesiastical law, h^ commanded the Arian Bishops to come to Rome, and
su^^^ned Athanasius can^nic ally to present himself in judgment: and that as
soon as he received the citation, he transported himself in diligence to Rome.

What think you of these examples? Was it not the style of ancient Popes
before S. Gregory, to command, and to command the greatest Patriarchs of the
East? But let us go on. 5. Anastasius the second of that name speaking to
Anastasius the Emperor says In ep. ad Anastas. Aug.
: Let not Pride make resistance to the Apostolical precepts, but those things
which are commanded by the Roman Church and Apostolical authority, let them be
observed. 6. when Aurelius Bishop of Carthage writ to Damasus Pope for a copy
of all the decrees and Statutes ordained by the Roman Church since S. Peter to
his time, he sent them to him, saying Ep. 5.
; We wish you to observe them, and command you to publish them, that with due
reverence they may be kept by all. The African Bishops acknowledge Ep. ad
Bonifac. in Council. Africa. c. 101.
, that they had received from the Pope, Mandata and literas, Mandates and
letters. 8. Gelasius a learned and holy Pope makes express mention of the
decrees and commandes of the Popes his predecessor for the good of the Church
Ep. ^.
9. Leo the great writing to Anatolius Patriarch of Constantinople testifies
Ep. 4^.
that he bath enjoined him the execution of his decree. And in his first
Epistle which is to all Bishops, he says: All the decrees and constitutions,
as well of Innocentius of blessed memory, as of all our predecessers, we
command your Dilection to keep, so, that if any one contemn them, he may
know, that pardon shall be denied him. And to the Bishops of Maurirania Ep. 8^.
: We command, that the cause of Lupicinus Bishop be heard there, whom we have
restored to our communion, he himself earnestly, and often desiring it.

These few testimonies of holy and renowned Popes that lived before S. Gregory,
are sufficient to show, how ignorantly you affirm, that it was not the style
of Popes in the ancient and primitive times to Command.

And as the ancient Popes commanded, when it was necessary for them to show
their authority; so the Bishops, even the greatest Patriarchs, acknowledged in
them authority to command, and in themselves subjection, and obligation to
obey. For did not S. Athanasius upon Pope Julius his citation, obey, taking his
journey from Egypt to Rome Theoder. l. 2. hist. c. 4.
? and does he not profess his subjection to Marcus Pope Ep. ad Marc.
, when he says: We are yours, and with all that are committed to our charge,
are, and will ever be obedient to you? And do not the African Fathers writing
to Bonifacius Pope promise, to obey his Mandates, until a more diligent
inquisition of the Nicen Canons? And do not the Fathers of the Mileuitan
Council beseech Innocentius the first, to show his authority against the
Pelagians? Many (say they) Ep. ad Innocent.
oppose against them, in defense of Grace, and the truth of the Catholic faith
etc. But we believe, that with the help of the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ,
they that hold these opinions so perverse, and pernicious, will more easily
yield to the authority of your Holiness, drawn from the authority of the holy
Scriptures. And when Paschasinus B. of Lilibaea, and Lucentius of Ascoli,
Legates of Leo pope, said to the Council of Chalcedon Conc. Chalced. Act. 1.
, We have in our hands the Commands of the blessed and Apostolic Prelate of
the City of Rome, whereby he has vouchsafed to ordain, that Dioscorus sit not
in the Council; and that if he offer to do it, he be cast out, because having
no right to do the office of a Judge, he attempted it, and presumed to hold a
Synod, without the authority of the Sea Apostolic, which never was lawful,
nor has ever benedone. And did not the Council obey the Popes command,
causing Dioscorus not to sit among the Bishops, as a Judge, but as a person
guilty, to stand in the midest of the place to yield account of hid proceedings?
And did not the Bishops of Dardania in their Epistle to Gelasius, acknowledge,
that they had received his commands with due reverence, and thank him that he
had vouchsafed to visit them with his Pastoral admonitions? And did not the
Bishops of France in the second Council of Tours, say Can. 21.
: Our Fathers have always observed, what the authority of the Sea Apostolic
has commanded? And when Chrysostom was deposed by a Council of Bishops at
Constantinople, did he not appeal to Innocentius Pope, and petition him in
these words Ep. 1. ad Innocent.
: Vouchsafe to command, that these things so wickedly done, we being absent,
and not refusing judgment, may not be valide, as in truth they are not; and
that they which have carried themselves so iniustly, may be submitted to the
punishment of the Ecclesiastical laws? And when Theodoret B. of Cyre was
deposed in the second Council of Ephesus, did he not write to Leo Pope: Ep. ad
Leon.
I attend the sentence of your Apostolic Throne, and beseech your Holiness,
to succor me appealing to your right, and just judgment, and to command that I
transport my self to you, and verify that my Doctrine follows the Apostolic
steps? And finally did not the Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian Nouel.
Theod. tit. 24.
publish a law which ordeynes, that to all Bishops those things shall be laws
which have been, or shall be ordained by the Apostolic See; in such sort,
that whatsoever Bishop being called by the Pope, shall refuse to appear, shall
be constrained thereunto by the Governor of the Province.

These, and a thousand more examples which may be alleged, convince, that it
was the style of ancient Popes before S. Gregory's time to command, when
necessity required it; and that all Bishops, and generally all Christians
acknowledged this power in the Popes, and in themselves obligation to obey.

And as for S. Gregory in particular, who (say you): utterly abhorred the word
Command, as he was a man of admirable humility, so his government was not
dominiering in the Clergy, but according to the commandment of Christ Lue.
2^.27.
, and of S. Peter his predecessor 1. Pet. 5.2.
, with great meekness and humility: and therefore writing to Eulogius
Patriarch of Alexandria he wishes him, L. 7. ep. ^5.
not to mention any command of his: for, when crimes exact it not (says he)
all Bishops according to the condition of humility are equal. And in many
places of his works he teaches L. 4. ep. 38. l. 2. Pasto. c. 7. Hom. 18. in
Ezechiel.
, that, the Ecclesiastical Governor ought to make himself a companion, and
equal to his subjects; and whiles they do well, to prefer himself before
them in nothing: but yet so, that if they offend, he show his power, and
authority in correcting them. This therefore is the reason, why in his Epistle
to Eulogius (which you object) he beseeches him not to say, that he commanded:
for being he writ not to him, to tax him of any crime, or offense committed,
though by the authority of his place he knew himself to be his Superior, yet
by humility, he made himself his equal, and wished him not to say that he
commanded: for (says he) I commanded not, but endeauored to signify those
things, which are profitable.

All which notwithstanding, the same S. Gregory to show, that in authority and
jurisdiction, he was Superior to Eulogius, and all other Bishops, and had power
to command, and punish them, when they ossended, says L. 7. ep. 64.
: For whereas the Patriarch of Constantinople confesses himself subject to the Sea Apostolic, I know no Bishop that is not subject to it.

And what he professed in words, he practiced in deeds, commanding, and
exercising his jurisdiction over the Bishops of all Christian nations, as out
of his writings, and the confessions of our own more learned brethren, I have
formerly proved Chap. 15. sect. 3.
. But because you so boldly auerre, that he utterly abhorred the word Command
Page 114.
, I will briefly show, how ignorantly, and untruly you speak: for to Anthemius
he writes L. 11. ep. 35.
: Because notice has been given us, that the Bishops of Campania are negligent
etc. therefore with this authority we command you, to call them together, and by
virtue of our Command, to give them a strict charge, that hereafter they be not
slothful, but by their carriage show themselves to have the zeal, and
solicitude which becomes Priests, and that they be vigilant in these things
which it is fitting for them to do justly according to God, that hereafter no
complaints may be made of them. And if you find any of them to be negligent,
send him to us without excuse, that he may feel by Canonical punishment, how
grievous an offense it is, not to amend those things which are reprehensible.
And in the privilege which he granted to the Monastery of S. Medardus L. 12.
Epistolarum sin. and alias l. 2. post ep. 38.
: If any King, Bishop, Judge or secular person whatsoever, shall violate the
decrees of this Apostolical and our Command, let him be deprived of his honor,
be he of never so high a degree. I know that Bellarmine alleging this decree,
you tell us out of Doctor James Page 179.
(a man of as much credit as your self) that it is forged, whereas that most
holy and learned Pope Gregory the seventh, which lived 600. years nearer the
time of S. Gregory, then Doctor James, and had better means to know, what
writings of his were legitimate and what spurious, alleges it as his
undoubted Epistle. And his testimony you disprove no otherwise, then by railing
against him, whom yet (as hereafter I shall show Chap. 32. sect. 3.
the Historians of that age, and among them the two S. Anselmes of Canterbury,
and Luca, highly extol for one of the most admirable Prelates that ever sat
in the Chair of S. Peter; and whose sanctity God himself testified with many
most famous miracles.

But howsoever you carpe at this decree of S. Gregory, Bellarmine in the same
place Cont. Bar^^^. c. 40.
alleges another of the same tenor, granted by him to an Hospital built in
Austum by Brunichildes Queen, and Syagrius Bishop of that City, which because
you know not how to shift of, you slily pass over without mentioning it,
notwithstanding S. Gregory's authority and command is no less effectually
expressed in it, then in the former. I conclude therefore, that (as this holy
Doctor confesses) L. 4. ep. ^6.
he had learned from the Apostle to carry humility in his heart, and yet to
preserve the honor and dignity of his place, commanding, and denouncing
punishment to offenders, when it was needful.

SECT. II. The Council of Ephesus acknowledged the supreme authority of the
Pope in the cause of John Patriarch of Antioch.
Having showed that the Council of Ephesus deposed Nestorius by the
commandment of Pope Celestine, and that it was the ancient custom of the best
and holiest Popes to Command, when the affair required it, let us go on with
you Page 115.
to the cause of John Patriarch of Antioch, whom the Council of Ephesus durst
not judge, but reserved him to the judgment of Celestine Conc. Ephesians. to. 4. c.
17. in ep. ad Celestin, Papam.
. This again (say we) shows the supreme authority of the Pope. You deny it,
because: Those Fathers in the same Epistle report, that they had diuested him
of all Sacerdotall power, and deposed him, before they made any relation thereof
to Celestine Pope. False. For their words are In eadem ep.
: Moved with the indignity of his proceeding, we would have pronounced against
him such a sentence, as he had pronounced against those, that were not
convicted of any crime. But to the end, that we might with lenity overcome his
rashness, we have reserved his sentence to the judgment of you Piety, and in
the mean time, we have excommunicated him, and diuested him of all Sacerdotall
power. These words evidently convince against you, that those Fathers to gain
John with lenity, and hoping that he might be reclaimed (as afterward in the
time of Sixtus Pope he was) pronounced not any absolute and final sentence
against him, according to his deserts, but reserved that to Celestine, as to
his supreme Judge: yet they excommunicated him in the mean time, and (as they
say to the Emperor Ep. ad Theodos. to. 4. c. 8.
tantisper, for a while suspended him from the exercise of his Episcopal
function, that he might not hurt others. And the same is gathered out of
Celestines Epistle to the Council Apud Bin. to. 1. page 628.
, in which he says, that, after their sentence against John, diverse things
remained to be considered, and determined by him. And this proceeding of the
Ephesine Council against John, was afterward imitated by the sixth Council
general, in the cause of Macarius another Patriarch of Antioch, as the Emperor
Constantine Pogonate reports in these words In 6. Synod. Act. 18.
: Macarius B. of Antioch, and his adhereurs, have been deposed by the consent
of the whole Council, and reserved to the discretion of the most holy Pope.

It is therefore evident, that both these Counsels acknowledged the giving of
the last and definitive sentence against those Patriarchs, to belong to the
Pope: which is also confirmed by the words of Iuuenall B. of Jerusalem uttered
in presence of the whole Council of Ephesus: To. 4. c. 4. apud Bin. to. 1.
page 794.
It is fit (said he) that John the right reverend B. of Antioch, honoring this
great, holy, and Oecumenicall Council, have recourse hither, to justify
himself, of what is objected against him, and that he honor, and obey the
Apostolic throne of great Rome; especially since the custom of Apostolic
tradition and practice is, that the seat of Amioch be perpetually ruled, and
judged by that of Rome.

I appeal to the reader, whether these Counsels did not acknowledge the
supreme power of the B. of Rome, in reserving to him the last sentence in the
causes of these two great Patriarchs. What then may we think of you, that have
the boldness to outface so manifest a truth?

SECT. III. Of the ordination of the Bishops of Cyprus, treated in the Council
of Ephesus.
But there remains one, which you Page 116.
call, A principal objection, and it is, that whereas Reginus, Zenon and
Euagrius Bishops of Cyprus had by a petition presented to the Council of
Ephesus made complaint of the Patriarch of Antioch To. 2. Append. 1. c. 4.
, That contrary to the ancient custom practiced from the time of the Apostles,
and contrary to the Canons of Nice, he had presumed to ordeyne Bishops in that
Island; the Council decreed, Ibid.
that, no Bishop should encroath upon the liberties of any other, nor draw
under his subjection any Province, which belonged not to him from the
beginning: and therefore, that if the ancient custom were not, for the Bishop
of Antioch, to ordain Bishops in Cyprus, he should not trouble the Bishops of
that Island, but leave to them the ordination of their own Bishops. This Decree
you will have to exclude the authority of the B. of Rome, as well as of any
other. But your Argument is of no force: both because neither this Canon, nor
any other of what Council soever, is powerful to limit his authority, nor
has force further then it is confirmed by him, as has been proved; as also
because he is not only Bishop of the Roman Dioces in particular, but of the
universal Church. Other Bishops (says S. Bernard) L. 2. de Confider. c. 9.
, according to the Canons, are called to a part of solicitude; he to the
fulness of power: the power of other Bishops is confined to certain limits;
his is extended also to them that have received power over others. He, if there
because can shut Heaven to a Bishop, and depose him from his Bishopric. He,
can erect new Bishoprics S. Bernar. ep. 131.
where they were not? He, of Bishopes, can make Archbishops, and contrariwise
of Archbishops, Bishops, if reason so dictate unto him. Wherefore albeit as
considered in the quality of a particular Bishop of the Roman Dioces, he cannot
ordain Bishops out of that Dioces, more then other Bishops can out of theirs,
yet as he is Pastor, and Bishop of the universal Church, he can depose and
ordain Bishops in other Dioceses, as Agapet deposed Anthymus Patriarch of
Constantinople, and ordained Menas in his place. And the Ecclesiastical
histories are full of examples of the same nature: which therefore convince,
that the Council of Ephesus by that decree intended not to prescribe any
limits of jurisdiction to the Pope, but only to command all particular Bishops
not to entrench upon the liberties of others: which decree Celestine Pope
confirmed with all the rest of that Council Ep. 2. ad Syn. Ephesians.
, as no way contrary to his Universal authority.

SECT IV. Whether it may be gathered out of the Council of Ephesus, that the
authority of the Pope is above a General Council.
YOu say Page 115.
: If the Council could not depose Nestorius, without the Popes mandate, nor
durst depose John Patriarch of Antioch, but reserved the cause to the judgment
of the Pope, the issue must be directly this, that the Pope is absolutely above
a general Council. And was not this (say you Page 116.
more then holdnesse in your Cardinal (Bellarmine) to infer this supreme
authority out of this Council? O egregious imposture! Bellarmine only relates
what passed in the Council, namely that those Fathers durst not pronounce a
definitive, and vltimate sentence against the two Patriarchs, but reserved it
to Celestine Pope, as to the supreme Judge of all Bishops. Your guilty
conscience telling you, that the issue thereof directly must be, that the Pope
is above a general Council, you make that inference out of the Council
against your self, and falsely father it on Bellarmine: for though else where he
defend, that the Pope is above a general Council, yet neither there, nor here
he makes any such inference out of this Council of Ephesus. And no less
imposterous is your alleging the Counsels of Constance, and Basil, against
that Doctrine of Bellarmine: for the Council of Basil is a damned Conuenticle:
and that of Constance, when it defined a Council to be above the Pope, was not
a general Council, nor speaks of him that is certainly known to be true
Pope, but of three Popes in time of Schism, when it was doubtful which of
them, or indeed whether any of them, were true Pope. Nor was that decree ever
confirmed, but expressly condemned by the Counsels of Florence, and Lateran, as
(you know) Binius To. 1. Not. ad Council. Constan. page 1662.
and Bellarmine L. 2. de Conc. c. 17.
have observed.

But to prove that the Pope is not above a Council you urge Page 116.
out of Stapleton, that the contrary was never expressly decreed in any
Council. But in this you are as false, as in the rest: for you cite Stapleton
in his thirteenth book, De principijs doctrinalibus, whereas in that work, he
has but twelve books in all. But be the proposition his, or whose you please,
and be it that no Council has expressly defined that the Pope is above a
Council, does it therefore follow, that the Doctrine is not true? Is nothing
true, but what is defined in Counsels? Who sees not how inconsequent this
your consequence is?

CHAP. XIX. The Council of Chalcedon believed the supreme authority of the B.
of Rome.
SECT. 1. That Leo Pope called the Council of Chalcedon by his Authority, and
presided in it by his Legates.
OVT of the famous Council of Chalcedon (one of the four which S. Gregory L.
1. ep. 24.
reverenced as the 4. Ghospells) the supreme authority of the B. of Rome over
the whole Church, is proved many ways, 1. Because this Council was called by
his authority: If it please your Holiness (says Martian the Emperor to Leo
Pope) Extat in Ep. preamb. Conc. Chalced.
that a Synod he held, vouchsafe to signify so much by your letters, that I may
direct mine into all the East, into Thracia, and Illyria, to the end that all
the most holy Bishops may meet at a set place, where your Holiness shall
please to appoint, and by their wisdom declare those things which may be
profitable for Christian Religion, and the Catholic faith, as your Holiness,
according to the Ecclesiastical rules, shall define. And Pulcheria the
Empress writing to the same Pope Extat epist. ibid.
: Your Reverence vouchsafe to signify, according as you have ordained, that all
the Bishops of the East, of Thracia, and Illyria, may come together into one
City, and by your authority determine there in a holy Council, what the
Christian faith and your Piety require, concerning the Catholic profession,
and the Bishops which have bone excommunicated. And the Bishops of the second
Maesia in their Epistle to Leo the Emperor Apud Bi^. to. 2. page 154.
: Ma^y holy Bishops were assembled in the City of Chalcedon, by the
commandment of Leo B. of Rome, who is truly the Head of all Bishops. And
Gelasius Pope 40. years after the Council of Chalcedon De Anathem. vinculo.
: The Sea Apostolic delegated the Council of Chalcedon to be held for the
common faith, and the Catholic and Apostolic truth. And again Ibid.
: The Pope alone ordained, that by his authority the Council of Chalcedon
should be held.

2. And, as by his authority he called this Council, so by his Legates he
presided in it. My Brethren (says he) speaking of this Council Ep. 94.
presided in my steed in the Oriental Synod. And writing to the Council it
self Ep. 47.
: Your brotherhood is to conceive, that in these my brethren Paschasinus and
Lucentius Bishops, Bonifacius and Basil Priests, which are sent by the Sea
Apostolic, I preside in your Synod: And be confident, that I am not absent
from you, who am present in these my Vicars. And to Pulcheria the Empress he
says Ep. 5^.
: that by those his brethren he sent to the Council instructions in writing,
what form they ought to observe in their judgment. And finally the Council it
self acknowledged, that the Pope presided in it: You (say they to Leo) In
relat. ad Leon.
presided in this assembly, as the head does to members, exhibiting your good
will by those that held your place: And the faithful Emperor presided for
ornament sake, and to see good order kept, that is, to hinder by his secular
power such tumults, and murders as had been lately committed in the second
false Council of Ephesus. Who sees not, that the whole Council in these
words acknowledged the Pope to be their Superior, and themselves to be his
subjects, since they profess that, he ruled over them, at the head does over
the members.

SECT. II. That the Council of Chalcedon by the authority of Leo Pope deposed
Eutyches and Dioscorus, and restored Theodoret.
THe supreme authority of the Pope is yet further proved out of the Council of
Chalcedon: For Flauianus Patriarch of Constantinople, having reckoned up the
enormities of Eutyches, requested Leo Pope to confirm the sentence of
condemnation, which in a Counsel at Constantinople he had pronounced against
him: Moved then (says he In ep. praeambul. Council. Chalced.
most holy Father with all these attempts of Eutyches, and with those things
which have been done, and are done against us, and against the holy Church,
work confidently according to your courage, as it belongs to the Priesthood:
and making the common cause and the discipline of the holy Churches, your own,
Vouchsafe to confirm by your writings, the condemnation which has been
regularty made against him. Leo according to this petition of Flauianus
condemned Eutyches and deprived him of his dignity. Dioscorus (says the
Council of Chalcedon writing to Leo Relat. ad Leon.
by the decrees of his tyranny has declared Eutyches innocent, and restored to
him the dignity, whereof he was deprived by your Holiness. What else is this,
but to say, that albeit Eutiches had been condemned by Flauianus his own
Bishop, and lawful Judge, yet afterward, when Flauianus by Eutyches his
negotiation being deposed in the false Council of Ephesus, appealed to Leo
Pope, and Leo declaring him innocent, deposed Eutyches; the Council of
Chalcedon embraced this sentence of Leo, and attributed to him the final
deposition of Eutyches, as to the supreme Judge, that had power to reiudge the
judgments of other Bishops? Which power Valentinian the third writing to
Theodosius acknowledged, and declared in this very cause of Flauianus: We ought
(says he In ep. praeamb. Conc. Chalced.
to preserve inviolable in our days, the dignity of particular reverence to
the blessed Apostle Peter, that the holy Bishop of Rome, to whom antiquity has
attributed the Priesthood above all, may have place to judge in matters of
faith, and of Bishops etc. For therefore according to the custom of Counsels,
the Bishop of Constantinople (Flauianus) appealed to him in the contention
which is risen about points of faith.

The same power was like wise acknowledged by the Council of Chalcedon in the
cause of Theodoret Bishop of Cyre, who being deposed by the second Council of
Ephesus, appealed to Leo, and was restored by him, and thereupon admitted to
take his place in the Council of Chalcedon: Let the right Reverend Bishop
Theodores come in (say the Emperors officers) Conc. Chalc. act. 1.
that he may have part in the Synod. because the most holy Archbishop Leo has
restored him to his Rishoprick, and the most sacred and religious Emperor has
ordained, that he assist in the holy Council.

Now, that the Emperor ordained not this, as challenging any authority over
Bishops, but only as one, that by his officers assisted at the Council, to
execute the Popes decrees, and to see peace, and good order kept, you have
heard the Council testify Sect. praeced.
; and he himself declared the same, saying to Pope Leo In ep. praeamb. Council.
Chalced.
: Our desire is, that peace be restored to the Churches, by this Council
celebrated under your authority. The authority then is in the Pope, not in the
Emperor.

And when the cause of Dioscorus Patriarch of Alexandria came to be examined,
the Council inquiring of the Popes Legates, what charge they had against him,
Lucentius one of them answered Act. 1. and Euagr. l. 2. c. 18.
: Dioscorus must yield an account of his Judgment, because having no right to
do the office of a Judge, he attempted it, and presumed to hold a Synod without
the authority of the Sea Apostolic; a thing, which nether was, nor cold ever
lawfully be done. And Paschasinus another of the Legates: Act. 1.
We have here the commandes of the blessed and Apostolic Prelate of the City
of Rome, which is the Head of all Churches, whereby his Apostolate has
vouchsafed to command, that Dioscorus Archbishop of Alexandria sit not in the
Council, but yet that he be admitted to be heard. Whereupon the Council
commanded him not to sit as a Judge, among the Bishops, but to stand in the
midst, as a person accused, to answer for himself. Euag. l. 2. c. 4.
And the Council having heard his whole cause, condemned him, requesting the
Popes Legates, to pronounce the sentence of condemnation against him Act. 3.
: We beseech your Holiness who have the place, and primacy of the most holy
Pope Leo, to pronounce the sentence against him. Whereupon the Legates
Paschasinus, Lucentius, and Bonifacius pronounced it in these words Ibid.
Therefore Leo the most holy and most blessed Archbishop of the great and
ancient Rome, has by us, and by this present Synod, together with the thrice
blessed and worthy of all praise Peter the Apostle (who is the Rock, and Head
of the Catholic Church, and the foundation of the right faith) deposed
Dioscorus from the Episcopal dignity, and deprived him of all Sacerdotall
function. To this sentence all the Bishops subscribed.

And it is to be noted, that whereas many most enormous crimes of Dioscorus are
there rehearsed Ibid.
, yet that which the Council judged to exceed all the rest, was, that he had
presumed to pronounce a sentence of excommunication against the most holy and
most blessed Archbishop of great Rome, Leo: which enormity of his the whole
Council exaggerating to Leo, said Relat. ad Leon.
: And after, and above all these things, he has extended his phrensy even
against him, to whom the guard of the Vine has been committed by our Savior,
that is to say, against your Apostolic Holiness, and has dictated an
Excommunication against you, that seek to unite speedily the body of the
Church. In which words the Council plainly professes, that the custody and
charge of the whole Church (signified under the name of a Vine) was given to
the Pope by our Savior; and that he, because he is Head of the Church,
laboreth to unite the body thereof: which also they profess by acknowledging
Ibid.
, that he ruled over them, as the Head does over the members: and therefore
beseeching him to confirm their decrees with his authority, they add Ibid.
: We pray you to honor our judgment with your decrees; and that as in what
concerns the Weal, we have held correspondence to our Head; so your
Sovereignty would fulfill unto your Children what is fit and convenient.

These testimonies so clear, and pregnant, cannot but convince the
understanding of any impartial reader, that the Council of Chalcedon believed
the universal authority and jurisdiction of the B. of Rome, whom therefore the
same Council often calls Act. 1.2.3
, Bishop of the universal Church.

SECT. III. Whether the title of Universal Bishop, which the Council of
Chalcedon gave to the Pope, argue in him no more, but a general care of the
good of the Church, such as belonges to every Bishop, and to every Christian.
OF all the proofs hereunto alleged you take no notice, two only excepted,
namely, of the title of Vninersall Bishop, and of the metaphor of a Vine, by
which the Council expresses the universal Church, saying In relat. ad Leon.
, that the custody thereof is by Christ our Savior committed to the Pope. These
two you call, Two posts to support the ruinous Monarchy of the B. of Rome. And
your answer to them, here Page 117.118.
and afterward again Page 236.
, is, that these attributes import no universal power of jurisdiction in the
Pope, but of providence and care, which every Bishop should have in wishing, and
to his power endeavoring the universal good of the whole Church. But if the
words of the Council import no more, it will follow that the custody of the
universal Church (that is the government thereof) was by Christ committed not
only to every Bishop, but also to every Christian man, and woman, who should
wish, and to their power procure the universal good of the whole Church.

But you object Page 116.117. and 236.
that Eleutherius Pope writing to the Bishops of France, says: The universal
Church of Christ is committed to you, that you may labor for all men: and that
according to Binius his exposition, the meaning of Eleutherius is, that for as
much as heretics oppugn the Catholic and universal Church, is belongs to
every Bishop to have an universal care to defend, and support it. And this
(say you) is a true answer indeed. But you speak untruly, and interpret
falsely: for Binius has no such word as Universal care: nor does he speak of
Bishops only, but says, that a care and solicitude of defending the universal
Church against heretics belongs not only to Bishops, but to every Christian,
for as much as we are commanded by God ( Eccl. c. 4.) to fight fortruth, and
justice until death. How do these words of Binius prove that the Pope has
not, or that the Council of Chalcedon acknowledged him not, to have authority,
and jurisdiction over the universal Church, but only a charitable care of her
good, as S. Paul had, and as every Bishop, and every Christian man, and woman,
according to their power are bound to have? for did not that Council give to
Pope Leo, the title of Universal Archbishop and Patriarch, or (as you set it
down) Page 235.
of Bishop of the universal Church? but, these words (say you Ibid.
were not the words of the Council, but of two Deacons, writing to the
Council, and of Paschasinus the Popes Legate. False: for it was given to him
Act. 3.
in four different petitions, of Theodorus, and Ischyrion, Deacons of
Alexandria; of Athanasius a Priest of the same City; and of Sophronius: And the
Council approving thereof, commanded their petitions to be registered in the
Acts. Moreover the same title was given him by Paschasinus, who though he were
his legate, was a Reverend Bishop; as also by Martian the Emperor, the Council
no way excepting thereat. And did not S. Gregory, and after him, the Angelical
Doctor S. Thomas, testify, that the whole Council of Chalcedon, with the
following Fathers, gave the same title to Leo Pope? And did not Leo (a man of
admirable sanctity and learning) instyle himself Bishop of the universal
Church? And did not the Regulars of Constantinople, and of Syria, and the
Bishops of the Patriarkships of Antioch, and Jerusalem, give the same title to
Agapetus Pope, in the Council of Constantinople under Menas See all this
proved above Chap. 15. sect. 3.
? Again did not the Council of Chalcedon acknowledge in Leo power to restore
Theodoret to his Bishopric of Cyre bordering upon Persia, from which he had
been deposed in the second Council of Ephesus Act. ^.
? Did it not acknowledge in him authority to depose Dioscorus the greatest
Patriarch of the East Act. 3.
? Did not all those Fathers, being the representative body of the Universal
Church, profess In relat. ad Leon.
, that Leo Pope did preside and rule over them, as the Head over the members?
Is this Authority, common to every Bishop? Or did Eleutherius, or the Fathers
of Chalcedon acknowledge any such thing?

But he that will see, how imposterously you wrest the testimony of Eleutherius
against the universal power and jurisdiction of the B. of Rome, and against
the meaning of the Council of Chalcedon, let him read the epistle, and he
shall find, that Eleutherius a little before the words, which you object,
declares, that althought it be lawful to examine the accusations and crimes
objected against Bishops, either before their Metropolitans, or before the
Bishops of their own Province; yet that it is not lawful to end them there,
for as much as it has been decreed by the Apostles, and their Successors, that
the final decision of Bishops causes, is to be referred to the Sea Apostolic,
and no others substituted in their places until their judgments be ended at
Rome. Can there be a more full expression of the universal jurisdiction of the
Pope over the whole Church, then to profess him to be the sole supreme Judge
of all Bishops? Or can there be a greater imposture, then to object this
epistle of Eleutherius for the contrary?

SECT. IV. Whether the Council of Chalcedon did give to the B. of
Constantinople privileges equal with the B. of Rome.
YOu object here Page 118.
, and often repeat, that the Fathers of Chalcedon, did give privileges to the
Patriarch of Constantinople equal with the Church of Rome. Answer. The
Fathers of Chalcedon in absence of the Popes Legates, and of the Patriarch of
Alexandria, and of all the Bishopes of Egypt, at the suggestion of Anatolius
Patriarch of Constantinople renewed the decree of the 150. Fathers made in the
first general Council of that City, which was, that, the B. of Constantinople
should have the second place of honor, after the B. of Rome. And to this decree
was added, that, he should have equal privileges with the B. of Rome after
him. But this addition to the Canon, of equal privileges, was surreptitiously
made, by the usurpation of Anatolius, to augment his power: for the Fathers of
Chalcedon never owned it, as it appears in this, that when they beseeched Leo
Pope to confirm their decree, they made to him no mention of Equal
privileges, but only said In relat. ad Leon.
, We have confirmed the rule of the 150. Fathers assembled at Constantinople,
which ordained that after your most holy and Apostolic See, that of
Constantinople should have the second place of honor; which is to say, that as
the B. of Rome had the Primacy absolutely over all the Patriarchs: so the B. of
Constantinople should have it after him, over all the other Patriarchs. So this
Canon is reported by Euagrius: It was decreed (says he) L. 2. c. 4. fin.
that the Sea of new Rome by reason she held the second place after the ancient
Rome, should have the primacy before the other Sees. In which sense, and in no
other, Socrates L. 5. c. 8.
testifies this decree to have been made in the Council of Constantinople,
which was the source of all this pretense. And Justinian the Emperor speaking
of both these Counsels, says Noue^. 131.
, that in them it was decreed, that, as the holy Pope of old Rome is the first
of all Prelates, so the Archbishop of Constantinople new Rome, should have the
second place after the Sea Apostolic of old Rome, and be preferred before all
the other Sees. And long after that time the Emperor Basilius the younger, and
Eustathius Patriarch of Constantinople Glaber Rodulph. hist. l. 4. c. 1.
desired, that it might be lawful for them to obtain with the consent of the
Pope, that the Church of Constantinople might be called Universal; in the
compass thereof, as the Pope of Rome, was in the compass of the whole world.

By this appears, that although the Fathers of those two Counsels, contrary
to the decrees of Nice, endeauored by this Canon, to make the B. of
Constantinople the first, and chiefest Patriarch of the East, and to confer
on him, after, and under the Pope, an universal jurisdiction over the other
Patriarchs; yet they never intended thereby to put any limitation to the
Universal Jurisdiction of the Pope, over the whole Church; nor any way to
exempt themselves, or the Patriarchs of Constantinople, from his subjection and
obedience.

Which is also further proved. 1. By the testimonies of Zonaras, and Nilus,
both of them Greek Schismatikes, and enemies to the Roman Church. Zonaras
says In Conc. Constantin. 1. c. 3.
that, whereas the Council of Constantinople ordained that the Bishop of that
City should be the second after the Pope of Rome, some think, that the
Preposition (after) imports not inferiority, and submission, but only
posteriority of time: and in proof of this their opinion, they make use of the
28. Canon of the Council of Chalcedon, which ordaynes, that new Rome should be
honored with the same ecclesiastical prerogatives, as old Rome; and should be
preferred in honor, before all the other Churches, being the second after her.
But this (says he) is refuted by the 130. Novel of Justinian, inserted into
the third title of the fifth book of the Basilikes* which gives the Canon to
be otherwise understood. And therefore he concludes saying Ibid.
: From hence it appears manifestly that the Preposition (after) signifies
submission, and inferiority. And Nilus B. of Thessalonica De primatu P^pae l. 1.
: We are not separated from peace, for attributing to our selves the primacy,
nor for refusing to hold the second place after the principality of Rome: for
we never contested for primacy with the Roman Church.

2. The same is proved: for the Fathers of Chalcedon acknowledged the supreme
authority of the Pope in the deposition of Eutyches and Dioscorus; in the
restitution of Theodoret to his Bishopric See above sect. praeced.
; in confessing In relat. ad Leon.
, themselves to be his members, and him to be their Head; in submitting to him
their decrees to be confirmed, and in particular this made in favor of the B.
of Constantinople: We have (say they) Ibid.
confirmed the decree of the 150. Fathers, confiding, that the beam Apostolic
reigning amidst you, and you by your ordinary government spreading it to the
Church of Constantinople, you may cause it to shine into these parts, because
you are wont without envy, to enrich those of your lineage, with the
participation of your goods. Again, if we speak of Anatolius in particular,
who to augment his own power, was the proiecter of this decree, how can it be
thought, that he did not acknowledge himself to be a spiritual subject of the
Pope? he I say, who being made Patriarch of Constantinople by Dioscorus, in the
false Council of Ephesus, had no right to that See, but only by the
confirmation of Leo Pope, which afterward he obtained: in regard whereof Leo
writing to Martian the Emperor against this attempt of Anatolius, said Ep. 54.
: It should have sufficed him, that by the help of your Piety, and by the
consent of my favor, he has obtained the Bishopric of so great a City. And
what else did Anatolius himself signify, when speaking of the Acts of the
second Council of Ephesus, in which Maximus was chosen Bishop of Antioch, he
said Cone. Chalced. Act. 10.
: My verdict is, that none of the things ordained in the pretended Council of
Ephesus remain firm, but that which was done for Maximus B. of great Antioch;
for as much as the most holy Archbishop of Rome Leo, receiving him into his
communion, has judged that he is to rule the Church of Antioch.

3. Because the Fathers of Chalcedon knowing that without the Popes
confirmation, their decree could be of no force, had recourse to Leo,
beseeching him to confirm it. We beseech you (say they In relat. ad Leon.
to honor our decrees, with your judgment: and that as we have held
correspondence with our Head for matters of weal, so your Soueraingty will
yield to your Children in things of decency: for in so doing, the religious
Emperor shall be gratified. To this their petition, Leo assented not, but wholly
annulled, and abrogated their decree. The Piety of your faith being joined with
us, (says he to Pulcheria the Emperesse Ep. 55.
we annull the plots of the Bishops, repugnant to the rules of the holy Canons
established at Nice: and by virtue of the authority of the Blessed Apostle
Peter, we wholly abrogate them by a general sentence. Another Epistle of the
same tenor, he addressed to the whole Council of Chalcedon Ep. 61.
: And to Anatolius himself he likewise writ Ep. 53.
: Never may my conscience consent, that so depraved a covetousness be
furthered by my favor, but rather that it be suppressed by me, and by them that
allow not the proud, but consent with the humble.

Wherefore this Canon first made in the Council of Constantinople, and
afterward renewed in the Council of Chalcedon, was never confirmed, but still
resisted, by the Sea Apostolic; and therefore has always remained inualid.
That (says Gelasius) De Anathem. vinculo.
which the Sea Apostolic consented not to, the Emperor imposed it not, nor
Anatolius usurped it, but all was put into the hands of the Sea Apostolic: and
therefore what the Sea Apostolic confirmed of the Council of Chalcedon, has
remained valid; and what that See has rejected, could never obtain any force:
and she has annulled that only, which the Synodicall assembly adjudged to be
usurped against order. It rests therefore, that albeit this decree have many
other nullities, yet this one of the want of confirmation from the Sea
Apostolic, abundantly conuinceth the inualidity thereof, as has been already
proved.

And because Anatolius knew, that if it were once understood, that this Canon
was resisted, and condemned by the Sea Apostolic, it would be condemned by the
judgment of all Catholics in the world, he craftily suppressed the letters of
condemnation, as Leo in his answer to the Emperor Martian testifies Ep. 59.
: I writ to your Glory, and to the B. of Constantinople letters, which
evidently showed, that I approved those things, which had been defined in the
Council of Chalcedon, concerning the Catholic faith. But because, by the same
letters I reproved those things, which by occasion of the Synod had been
unlawfully attempted, he (Anatolius) rather chose to conceal my applause, then
to publish his own ambition. And to Pulcheria the Empress Ep. 60.
: Whereas the most religious Emperor has willed me to write letters to all the
Bishops, which assisted at the Council of Chalcedon, to confirm what was
there defined concerning the rule of faith I have willingly performed it, lest
the deceit full dissimulation of some might breed any doubt of my sentence;
although by means of the B. of Constantinople, to whom I had largely testified
my joy, what I had written might have come to the knowledge of all, if he had
not rather chosen to conceal my contentment, then to publish the rebuke of his
own ambition.

Wherefore it is evident, that as this Decree, when it was first made in the
Council of Constantinople, remained inualid, for want of Confirmation from the Sea Apostolic See above Chap. 17. sect. 5. and 6.
; so for the same want, it took no effect, when it was renewed in the Council
of Chalcedon; in so much, that Anatolius was enforced to desist from his
claim, and excuse the attempt he had made, laying the blame on others, as it
is clear out of these words of Leo to him Ep. 7^.
: This thy fault, which to augment thy power, thou have committed, (as thou
say) by the persuasion of others, thy Charity had blotted out better, and
more sincerely, if thou had not imputed wholly to the Counsel of thy Clergy,
that, which could not be attempted without thy allowance etc. But (dear
Brother) I am glad, that thy Charity protests thou art now displeased with
that, which even then ought not to have pleased thee. The profession of thy
love, and the testimony of the Christian Prince is sufficient to re-admit thee
into common grace: nor does thy amendment seems late, that has gotten so
reverend a surety.

This recantation of Anatolius shows, that his attempt of having the second
place after the Pope, and enjoying the like privileges after him, was
unlawful, and proceeded merely from his ambition.

SECT. V. Falsifications and untruths of Doctor Morton, discovered; and his
Arguments answered.
What you produce in defense of this Canon, are either falsifications,
untruths, or frivolous cauills: for first you falsify Azor Page 118.
. His words are: The Canons and decrees of Counsels which are either of faith
or of the law of God, or of nature the Pope can neither annull, nor alter: but
if the decrees and Canons be of those things which belong to human right, he
may annull them, or alter them in whole, or in part: And this (says he) is the
common opinion of Divines, and Canonists. You very honestly mangle his words,
not mentioning the first part of them in which he says, The Pope can neither
annull, nor alter the decrees of Counsels which are of matters of faith, or of
things commanded by the law of God, or nature. And whereas he adds, that, the
Pope can annull, or alter the Decrees of Counsels, which are of human right,
you in your english leave out those words (which are of human right) to
persuade your Reader, that Azor says, and that our Divines and Canonistes with
common consent allow, the Pope power to change the Decrees of faith, and annull
the precepts of God, and of nature; whereas he speaks only of laws, that
concern Ecclesiastical discipline, which according to diverse occasions, and
circumstances, may be altered, for the good of the Church. If this be not an
imposture, what is?

2. You object Page 12.1^9.
; The Fathers of Chalcedon thought that the Church of Rome got the primacy, not
by divine, but by humane right, to wit, because Rome was the chief Imp^riall
seat. Answer. There are two causes of the primacy of the Roman Church: the one
immediate; the other mediate. The immediate cause is the dignity of S. Peter,
wherewith Christ honored him, when he made him the foundation of his Church
Math. 16.18.
, and the Pastor of his flock Joan. 21. verse. 15.16.17.
. And so much the Fathers of Chalcedon acknowledged, when they called the Popes
Epistle, The speech of the Sea of S. Peter In alloquut. ad Imperat.
, and when they said to Leo In relat, ad Leon.
: Dioscorus has extended his phrensy against him, to whom the custody of the
Vine (which is the Catholic Church) was committed by our Savior, that is to
say, against your Apostolic Holiness. The same truth the Mileuitan Council,
in which S. Augustine was Secretary, had professed not long before,
acknowledging the Popes authority to be of divine right, when speaking to
Innocentius, they said Aug. ep. 92.
, that, his authority was taken from the authority of the holy Scriptures. And
Gelasius with a Council of 70. Bishops In decreto de lib. Apocryph.
: The Roman Church has not been preferred before other Churches by the
constitutions of Synods, but has obtained the primacy, by the voice of our
Lord, and Savior in the Gospel. And as the same Gelasius rightly observes
Ep. ad Episc. Dardan.
, Milan, Rauenna, Sirmium, Treuers, and Nicomedia, were for a long time seats
of the Empire, and yet the Fathers never thought, that any Primacy was therefore
due to the Bishops of those Cities.

Nevertheless, it may be said in a true sense, that the mediate, and remote
cause of the Primacy of the Roman Church, that is to say, the cause which moved
S. Peter to place his See at Rome, rather then in any other City, was the
dignity of Rome; To the end (says S. Leo) Sermon. 1. de Apost. Pet. and Paul.
that the light of truth, which was revealed for the salvation of all nations,
might from the Head of the world, be communicated more effectually to the whole
body. Of this cause the Father^ of Chalcedon speak, when they say Act. 15.
. Rome got the Primacy, because it was the chief seat of the Empire. And both
these causes are comprehended by the Emperors Theodosius, and Valentinian, in
their Law made a little before the Council of Chalcedon, in these words Nouel.
Theodos. tit. 24.
: Three things have established the primacy of the Sea Apostolic; the merit of
S. Peter, who is Prince of the Episcopal society; the dignity of the City; and
the Synodicall authority.

3. You object Page 118.
: The Fathers of Chalcedon gave privileges to the Patriarchs of
Constantinople, equal to the Church of Rome. This we deny: for in the Council
of Chalcedon, there was no mention made of equal privileges; this clause was
afterward added by Anatolius, or by the Clerks of Constantinople See this
proved above in this Chap. sect. 4.
: and to this S. Gregory seems to relate, when he says L. 5. ep. 14.
: The Council of Chalcedon in one place has been falsified by the Grecians.
And the Fathes of Chalcedon never intended by this Canon, to give the
Patriarchs of Constantinople any privilege of exemption from their obedience,
and subjection to the Pope, but only to grant them precedence before the other
Patriarchs of the East, as has been proved In this Chap. sect. 4.
. And the same is manifest out of the writings of Leo Pope, who though in his
epistle to the Fathers of Chalcedon, and in diverse others, which he writ to the
Emperor Martian, to Pulcheria the Empress, to Anatolius himself, and to
diverse other Bishops, of this subject, he speak against Anatolius, for his
ambitious attempt; yet in none of them does he say, or insinuate, that those
Fathers gave to Anatolius, or that Anatolius himself ever aspired to equality
of privileges with the B. of Rome, but only reprehended him for wronging the
Patriarchs of Alexandria, and Antioch, in procuring himself to be preserred
before them.

The same is yet further proved, because when Rome was fallen into the hands of
the Goths, and Wandals, the Patriarchs of Constantinople making use of the
time, and setting this Canon on foot again, procured the Emperor Zeno to
establish by a law, that the Patriarch of Constantinople should have the
precedence before the other Patriarchs. And the like they obtained from
Justinian after the recovery of Rome, when he ordained Nouel. 131.
, that the Archbishop of Constantinople should have the second place after the
holy See Apostolic, and be preferred before all the other See.

Lastly the same is proved by the subjection, which the Patriarchs of
Constantinople acknowledged to the Pope, after the Council of Chalcedon, and
by the authority, which he exercised over them: for not long after that time,
when Acacius B. of Constantinople, an enemy to the Council of Chalcedon, had
fallen into the faction of heretics, the Churches of the Patriarkeship of
Constantinople had recourse to Symmachus Pope, as to their Pastor, and as
Superior to their Patriarch. Seeing your Children perish (said they Ep. Eccles.
Orient. ad Symach. in volum. Orthodox. impress. Bafil.
, in the preuarication of our Father Acacius, delay not, or rather, to speak
with the Prophet, stumber not, but make have to deliver us. And when the same
Acacius, for his adhering to Peter Moggus, an heretical inuasor of the Sea of
Alexandria, was deposed by Felix Pope, though he stood out, as long as he
lived, contemning the Popes sentence sent unto him to Constantinople, yet the
Emperor Iustine, that succeeded Anastasius, caused Felix his sentence to be
executed on him after his death, making his name to be razed out of the Records
of the Church, and from the recital in the sacred mysteries: We have given
order (says Iustine to Hormisdas Pope, Epist. ad Hormisd.
that the Reverend Church of Constantinople, and many others, accomplish your
desire, in razing out the names of those whom you have commanded to be taken
away from the sacred records. And in conformity to this, John Patriarch of
Constantinople writing to the same Hormisdas, said Epist. ad Hormisd.
: I anathematize Acacius sometime Bishop of this City, and promise hereafter not
to recite in the sacred mysteries, the names of them, that are excluded from
the communion of the Catholic Church, that is to say, that agree not in all
things with the Sea Apostolic. And Theodorus Anagnostes reports Ad calc.
hist. Eccles. Theodor. ex edit. Robert. Stopha.
, that when Anastasius the Emperor urged Macedonius Patriarch of
Constantinople, to abrogate the Council of Chalcedon, he answered, he could
not do it, without a general Council, in which the B. of Rome must be
president. And when Anthymus B. of Trebizond invaded the Sea of Constantinople,
Agapetus Pope being arrived thither, deposed him even in the City of
Constantinople it self, and in the sight of Justinian the Emperor, and
excommunicated the Empress Theodora, that protected him, and with his own
hands ordained Menas in his place: the truth of all which, is auerred by
Justinian himself Nouel. 42
, by Marcellinus Comes In Chron.
, by Liberatus Breuiar. c. 12.
, and Victor of Tunes In Chron. edit. per Joseph. Sc^lig.
. And did not Menas Patriarch of Constantinople make open profession, of
obeying the Sea Apostolic in all things In Conc. Constan. sub Me^. Act. 4.
? And when John the first Pope of that name, was arrived at Constantinople,
Iustine the Emperor inuiting him to sit in a seat by Epiphanius Patriarch of
that City, that they might seem both to be of equal dignity, John refused to
sit, until according to the prerogative of his See, a throne was prepared for
him above Epiphanius Nicoph. l. 17. c. 9.
: which passing in the City of Constantinople it self, and in Epiphanius his
own Church, and that many years after this decree of the Council of
Chalcedon was made, evidently shows, that it never took effect; since
neither Epiphanius, nor any of the other Patriarchs here named, living after
the Council of Chalcedon, claymed any right of Equal Privileges thereby, but
all of them remained subject to the Pope, as before the Council they had been.
And that which purreth this out of al doubt, is, that albeit the Patriarchs of
Constantinople at length obtained that precedence before the other Patriarchs
of the East, which in the Counsels of Constantinople, and Chalcedon they
labored for, yet nevertheless, even then, they still acknowledged themselves
subject to the Pope: witness S. Gregory, who writing to John B. of Syracusa,
says L. 7. ep. ^4.
: Who doubts, but that the Sea of Constantinople is subject to the Sea
Apostolic, which both our Lord the most religious Emperor, and our brother,
Bishop of the same City, do continually protest?

But whereas we say, that Leo never confirmed this decree of the Council, but
only such Canons and decrees, as concerned matters of says, This answer (say
you) Page 121.
proves you faithless in all your defense: for if he therefore opposed the
decree of that Synod, which oppugned the Papal primacy, and dominion, because
it was no matter of faith, he thereby plainly confesses your Article, which
maintayneth the dominion of the Roman Church, not to be at all an article of
faith. But, Sir, you wholly mistake your mark: for this decree was no way
against the primacy of the Pope, as has been proved In this Chap. sect. 2.
: Nor did Leo refuse to confirm it because it oppugned his primacy, but
because by virtue thereof, the Patriarch of Constantinople iniustly, and against
the Canons of the Nicen Council, sought to make himself superior to the other
Patriarchs of the East, whose rights the Pope, as supreme Governor of the
universal Church, was bound to maintain. Yea this decree was so far from
oppugning his primacy, that from it may be drawn a strong Argument in proof
thereof: for why else, was the decree sent to him to be confirmed, but because
the Council knew, it could be of no force, without his confirmation?

Lastly we say, that this decree could be of no force, because it was made by
the usurpation of Anatolius, after the departure of the Judges, of the
Senators, and of the Popes Legates. You answer Page 121.
, that the Popes Legates were absent, because they would not be present. Why do
you not say the same of the Judges, and the Senators? You might with as much
truth. But for the Popes Legates, Liberatus Br^u. c. 13.
bears witness against you, that they knew not of any such decree, until the
next day after it was made. And therefore, whereas you wish us Page 121.
, to tell you, if we can, where there cold be found more impudent boldness in
any, then appeared in the Popes Legates, who offered to face down 400. Bishops
in a Council, with a manifest untruth, obiecting circumuention in framing the
Act? We find no impudence at all in the Popes Legates, but we find it in a
very high degree in your self, who have the face to deny circumuention in an
Act, made by the usurpation of Anatolius, to augment his own power, espying
his time, when there was no Patriarch of Alexandria, and all the Bishops of
Egypt, who had most reason to oppose it, were absent, being excluded by his
means under pretense, that it was not lawful for them to sign the decrees of
Counsels, without the will and command of the Patriarchs; and in absence of
the Popes Legates, of the Emperors officers, and of the greatest part of the
Judges, which were the Bishops that assisted at the Council.

You say Page 122.
, that 430. Bishops concurred to the making of this decree. But you cannot be
excused from ignorance, or fraud: for albeit Marcellinus Comes In Chron.
, Liberatus Breu. c. ^3.
, Photius De 7. Synod. c. 4.
and Leo Pope Ep. 5^.
bear witness, that 630. Bishops assisted at the Council, yet of all that
number, none concurred to the Act, nor signed it, but those of the Patriarkship
of Antioch, and of the provinces near Constantinople, which were few more then
200. as the Acts themselves testify Apud Bi^. tom. 2. page 134. 135.
; which alone is a sufficient proof, that the decree was not Canonically made,
but by surreption and fraud.

What Aetius spoke in defense thereof, is not to be regarded: for he being an
Archdeacon of Constantinople, and an abbettor of Anatolius his claim, uttered
diverse manifest untruths in favor of this decree: as 1. that the Popes Legates
had notice of it before it was made. 2. That the Fathers yielded the primacy to
the Pope, because Rome was the seat of the Empire. 3. The 150. Fathers in the
Council of Constantinople, granted to the Bishop of that City privileges
equal with the Pope; whereas they make no mention at all of equal privileges,
but absolutely place him after the Pope Can. 3.
. 4. and that the same Council had adjudged to the Patriarchs of
Constantinople, the ordination of the Metropolitans of Pontus, Asia and
Thracia; whereas it ordaines directly the contrary Can. 2.
, namely, that the Bishops of Asia, should govern the affairs of the Dioces
of Asia; and the Bishops of Pontus, the affairs of the Dioces of Pontus; and
that the Bishops of Thracia (that is to say of Constantinople) should govern
the affairs of thracia only: which decree is in like manner reported by
Socrates L. 5. c. 8.
. And when in the Council of Chalcedon it self Act. 11.
, there was speech of having a new Bishop of Ephesus ordained in place of
Bassianus, and Stephen, both of them inuasors of that See, the Clerks of
Constantinople pretending, that this new Bishop ought to be ordained by the
Patriarch of Constantinople, according to the Canon of 150. Fathers in the
first general Council of that City, the Bishops of Asia minor prostrating
themselves before the Council, protested against it, crying out, that, it was
contrary to the Canons, and that of 37. Bishops of Ephesus, which had lived
since S. Timothy, until that time, all of them had been ordained at Ephosus,
Bassianus only excepted* who coming in unlawfully, was by Violence ordained at
Constantinople, which caused great tumultes, and many murders in the City of
Ephesus: and that the like would now fall out again, if their Metropolitan were
ordained out of the province. Whereupon the Bishops of the Council cried out
Ibid.
; Let the Canons stand; let the Bishop be ordained in the province.

This protestation of the Asian Bishops shows, that when afterward they
subscribed to the contrary, and being asked, said, they did it willingly, they
were partly wroght to that answer by Anatolius, and the Clerks of
Constantinople abusing the favor of the Senate, and partly moved by a false
relation of Eusebius B. of Dorilaeum, a principal abbettor of Anatolius his
claim, who testified, that the decree was approved by the Pope: I have (says
he Act. ^6.
voluntarily subscribed this Canon, because I have read it at Rome to the most
holy Pope, and he approved it. And thereupon it was, that the Fathers of the
Council said to Leo Pope In relat. ad Leon.
: We have taken the boldness to confirm it, as a thing begun by your
Holiness. And yet nevertheless this testimony of Eusebius, was full of
falsehood and fraud, as Bonifacius one of the Popes Legates convinced out of the
instructions given to him and the other Legates in writing Act. 16.
; one of them being, that, they should not suffer the Canons of the holy
Fathers to be violated by any rashness: and that if any trusting in the power
of their City, should offer to usurp any thing contrary to the dignity of his
person, they should repress them, as justice requires. Which in like manner
Leo himself testified to Maximus Patriarch of Antioch Ep. 62.
: If they say that the brethren which I send in my steed to the Synod have done
any thing more then what concerns faith, that shall be of no force, because
they were sent by the Sea Apostolic, only to root out heresies, and defend the
faith.

CHAP. XX. The fifth Council General beliued the supreme Authority of the
Bishop, and Church of Rome.
SECT. I. Doctor Mortons ignorance, and contradictions concerning this Council.
IN your discourse of the fifth General Council, contradictions, ignorance,
and untruths march by troops: for 1. Page 122.
here you suppose the Council of Constantinople under Menas, Archbishop of
that City, to be the fifth general: and afterward you directly affirm the
same Page 289. marg. lit. 0.
, when speaking of the Council under Menas, and alleging the Synodicall
relation made out of the Epistle of Pope Agapetus extant in the first action
thereof, you call it, Concilium secundum Constantinopolitanum, quod erat quintum
generale: The second Council of Constantinople, which was the fifth general.
And again twice more Page 347. lin. 14. and pa. 348. lin. 11.
you repeat, that this Council under Menas was a general Council. And yet
in another place contradicting your self you say no less expressly, Page 238.
lin. 11.
that, it was not a general Council. It was then a general Council, and it
was not a general Council. Reconcile these two, and eris mihi magnus Apollo.

2. You acknowledge. Page 238. and 347.
, that this Council under Menas, was held in the inter-regnum, or vacancy
between the death of Pope Agapetus and the election of his successor the year
536. and yet not without contradiction you prove out of Baronius and Binius
Page ^^2. in it is. sect. 6. and page 123. lit. m.
, that the fifth general Council was held the year 553. which was neither in
the vacancy after Agapetus his death, nor in the time of Siluerius his
successor, but in the 14. year of Vigilius, full 17. years after the other
under Menas. And as these two Counsels differed in time, so they did in
matter: for in that under Menas was handled the execution of the second
sentence, which Agapetus Pope before his death pronounced against Anthymus: but
in the fifth general, was discussed the cause of the Three Chapters. Is it not
then great ignorance in you, to confound these two Counsels, the one being
particular consisting of 50. Bishops only, and the other general of more then
165. the one held under Menas the year 536, and the other under Vigilius Pope
the year 553, and to frame Arguments out of them both, as out of one and the
same Council?

3. You say Page 189. marg. lit. o.
, that the Council under Menas, was the second Council of Constantinople: and
yet you had said before Page 235. marg. lit. s.
, that it was, the fifth Council of Constantinople; neither the one, nor the
other being true: for between this, and the first general Council of
Constantinople, there were held eleven or twelve other Counsels under diverse
Patriarchs of that City, as you may read in Baronius Apud Spond. Ind. verb.
Constantinop. Council.
.

4. To prove this Council under Menas to be a general Council you allege
Page 347.
Binius who says directly the contrary, to wit, that it consisted of such
Bishops only, as were near to Constantinople, and some others then resident in
the City, all of them being but 50. in number, whose names are expressed in the
beginning of the first action. And the same is testified by Baronius Anno 536.
and Bellarmine L. 1. de Conc. c. 5. and l. 2. de Pont. c. 13.
, by Zonaras In vita Justinian.
, and Nicephorus Lib. 17. c. 9.
.

SECT. II. Doctor Mortons ignorance further discovered, and his falsifying of
Binius.
COming to the relation of what passed in the fifth General Council, you say
Page 122.
: Anthimij causa ab Agapeto Papa condemnata. Binius Tom. 2. p. 416. post in
Synodo Constantinopol. ventilata. Idem Binius in Not. Conc. Constant. sub
Menna. This is an egregious falsification: for Binius has no such words, and
therefore your setting them down englished in a different character, as his, is
another false slight, that by fathering them on him, you might ground on his
authority, the Argument, which out of them immediately you frame against the
authority of the Pope, saying Ibid.
This argues the no-dominion of the Pope over that Council, which will take
upon them to examine that cause, which the Pope before had condemned. But these
your words besides falsehood, contain excessive ignorance: for Agapetus
pronounced two sentences of condemnation against Anthymus. By the one, he
deposed him from the Sea of Constantinople: by the other, from the Sea of
Trebizond. In the former sentence the Council had no hand: for it was
definitive, and absolutely perfected, and put in execution. Menas being
ordained in Anthymus his place by Agapetus his own hands, before his death.
But because Anthymus was not only an usurper of the Sea of Constantinople, but
also guilty of heresy, Agapetus being solicited by the Eastern Bishops,
ordained, that whereas upon the sentence of his deposition from the Sea of
Constantinople, his own See of Trebizond had been reserved unto him; if he did
not clear himself from the crime of heresy, he should also be deposed from
that See, and withal excommunicated, and deprived of all Sacerdotall title,
and of the very name of a Catholic. But because Agapetus dyed, before the time
which he gave Anthymus to purpe himself from the imputation of heresy. Menas
the Patriarch after his death assembled a Council, not to re-examine, mine,
and ventilate the sentence of deposition, which Agapetus pronounced against
Anthymus, as you ignorantly mistake, but to put in execution the second
sentence, which he had begun, but prevented by death, could not finish.

All this is clear out of the petition of the Regulars of Syria, reported in
the Council it self, when speaking of the first sentence of Agapetus, they
say In Conc. sub Mena. Act. 1.
: God sent into this City Agapet, truly, Agapet, that is, truly beloved of God
and man, Pope of old Rome, for the deposition of Anthymus, and of the aforesaid
heretics, as heretofore he sent great Peter to the Romans, for the destruction
of Sim^n the Magician. This reverend person then, knowing by the requests of
many of ours, the things iniustly attempted upon the Churches, and knowing them
by sight, would not so much as admit into his presence Anthymus, transgressor
of the Canons, but justly deposed him from the Episcopal See of this City.
Lo here the first sentence absolutely finished by Agapet before his death. And
then speaking of the second sentence, they add Ibid.
: Afterward the Bishops of Palestine assembled in this City, and others of
the East, and deputies of others, and we did again present petitions touching
Anthymus, and the other heretics, and demanded that Anthymus should certify
his belief by writ to the Sea Apostolic, and should purge himself from all
heretical errors; and in this case, return to the Church of Trebizond: or if
he would not do it, that he should be finally condemned, and deposed from all
Sacerdotall dignity, and action. And a little after Ibid.
: These our just requests, the same most holy personage (Agapet) preventing,
and seeing that Anthymus had failed to appear, condemned him with the
aforesaid heretics, and despoiled him of all office, and dignity Sacerdotall,
and of all title Orthodoxall, even till the penance of his errors.

The same is declared by all the Fathers of that Council, who in their
sentence pronounced against Anthymus, speaking of his first deposition, say
Act. 4.
: The Blessed Pope Agapet of most holy and happy memory, setting with God his
hand to the sacred Canons deposed Anthymus from the Sea, which belonged not to
him, pardoning those which had participated, and communicated in the act. And
then passing to the second sentence, they add: Ibid.
But because that even in doctrine, Anthymus was charged with many accusations,
and that many petitions were preferred against, him, by diverse reverend
personages, to the most religious Emperor, and the most blessed Pope; the same
most blessed Pope, after much pain taken with a Fatherly care to regaine his
soul etc. pronounced a sentence in writing against him, full of Clemency, and
seemly holiness, granting him time of repentance; and ordained, that until he
had changed his opinion, and satisfied the doctrines canonically defined by the
Fathers, be should neither have the title of a Catholic, nor of a Priest.

This shows that the Council intermedled not at all, with the first sentence
of Agapet, by which Anthymus was deposed from the Sea of Constantinople: but
because this second sentence of his deposition from the Sea of Trebizond, was
not absolute, but left depending, and subject to reuocation, if he should
appear, and purge himself from heresy, the Council taking the cause where
the Pope left it, and according to the order given by him, cited Anthymus
thrice to appear; and because he appeared not, executed the Popes sentence on
him, deposing him from the Bishopric of Trebizond, and depriving him of the
title of a Priest, and the name of a Catholic. We (say they) Act. 4. in
sentent. cont. Anthym.
following those things, which have been rightly examined by the most blessed
Pope, ordain, that he as an unprofitable and rotten member be cast out of the
body of the holy Churches of God, and deprived of the Bishopric of Trebizond,
and deprived of all sacred dignity, and action, and (according to the sentence
of the most holy Pope) stripped even of the name of a Catholic.

Who now sees not, how ignorantly, and untruly you have said Page 122.
, that, The cause of Anthymus, which the Pope had condemned, was afterward
ventilated in the Council of Constantinople? For those Fathers neither
questioned, nor any way examined either the first or the second sentence of the
Pope against Anthymus, but assembled themselves to put in execution the
sentence, which Agapet had pronounced, and being prevented by death, could not
see executed. All which is so far from making against the jurisdiction of the
Pope over the Bishops of the East, that it is a strong proof thereof.

And that it may better appear, how unadvised you are to urge this history
against the authority of the Roman Church, it is to be noted, that Anthymus an
Eutychian heretic, not contenting himself with his own Bishopric of
Trebizond, by the favor of Justinian (who as yet knew not, that he was an
heretic) and chiefly by the craft of Theodora the Empress, an Eutychian, and
for that cause a great fauorer of Anthymus, intruded himself to the Sea of
Constantinople. But Agapet Pope coming thither, deposed him, and with his own
hands ordained Menas in his place; which was an admirable effect of the power
of S. Peter in his Successor: for at that time Constantinople was the seat of
Justinian, and the Head of the Empire; whereas Rome was oppressed and made a
slave under the tyranny of Goths, a barbarous and Arian people. The Church of
Constantinople was most flourishing, and glorious; and that of Rome greatly
depressed, and afflicted. Justinian the Emperor wa^ v^ctorious, and triumphant;
and contrarily the Pope, brought to such straytes, that Theodat an Arian King
of the Goths, threatened to ruinate the Roman Church, unless he would go to
Constantinople, and solicit the Emperor for peace, and procure him to call his
armies out o^ Italy: which v^^^ge therefore Agapet could not refuse, though he
were so poor, that for the performance thereof, he was enforced to pawn the
sacred Vessels of his Church: whereas on the other side, Anthymus being exalted
by the Emperor and Empress, from the Bishoptick of Treb^zond, to the
Patriarkeship of Constantinople, was very powrefull in means, and highly
fouored by them both. And yet nevertheless, and that the Empress threatened
Agapet if he deposed Anthymus, and promised him great rewards if he would leave
him in the Sea of Constantinople, the holy Pope soon after his ariuall, being a
stranger, and without support, deposed him, casting him out of that See, even
in the very Imperial City, in the presence of the Emperor that favored him;
and excommunicated Theodora the Empress that obstinatly maintained him; and
with his own hands ordained Menas a Priest of Constantinople in his place, and
pardoned Peter Patriarch of Jerusalem, and other Bishops of the East, that had
communicated with him.

All this is accordingly reported by Marcellinus Comes In Chron.
, Liberatus Breu. c. 12.
, Victor of Tunes In Chron. edit. per Ios. Scal. ad calc. Chron. Eusebius.
, and Justinian himself Nou. 42.
: and is so clear an evidence for the supreme authority of the B. of Rome,
that it admits no color of answer.

SECT. III. Of the matter treated in the fifth general Council.
THe matter disputed in this Council was about certain writings of Theodorus
Mopsuestinus. Ibas, and Theodoret, commonly called, Tria capitula, The three
Chapters. Before the Council, Vigilius Pope with the Bishops of the West,
defended the Three Chapters. which the Eastern Bishops opposed: and what both
of them did, was upon pious considerations, in defense of the Council of
Chalcedon.

The Bishops of the East assembled in a Council at Constantinople, condemned
the Three Chapters. But Vigilius knowing, that the Western Bishops stood in
opposition to their sentence, refused to confirm it, hoping by that means.
like a prudent and solicitous Pastor, to work both parts to an accord, and
establish peace in the Church. But finding the Emperor, and the Eastern
Bishops violent in the prosecution of their decree, and that the Bishops of
Venice, and the regions adjoining, as also those of Ireland, following his
opinion, and relying on his authority, had condemned this Council of
Constantinople, and that the Church thereby was in danger to be rent in sunder
with Schism: and on the other side considering, that the subject of that
Contention, was no matter of faith, and neither the one part, nor the other any
way repugnant to the Council of Chalcedon (as S. Gregory has noted L. 3. ep.
37.
, but a thing of it self indifferent, he altered his opinion, and yielded to
confirm this decree, purchasing to himself that commendation, which S.
Augustine Ep. 162.
gives to the most famous Governors of Gods people both in the old and new
Testament, which is, that, They tolerate for the good of unity, that which they
hate for the love of equity, and imitating the example of S. Leo the great, who
testifies of himself Ep. 14.
that, for the love of peace he yielded to confirm the ordination of Maximus B.
of Antioch, which Anatolius Patriarch of Constantinople without any example,
and against the Canons, had presumptuously usurped to himself.

Nor can Vigilius herein be argued of leuity: for if he altered his mind, he
did it upon just causes, for the avoiding of Schism; and following the example
of S. Paul, who having first given his voice for the abolishing of circumcision
Act. 15.11.
, afterward upon just cause circumcised Timothy Act. 16.3.
: and yet again reprehended Peter, that by his dissimulation, he induced the
Gentiles to circumcision, and other Jewish ceremonies Gal. 2.11. and 14.
.

You to prove the no-necessity of subjection to the Pope, object the standing
out of the Eastern Bishops against Vigilius Page 123. 124.
. But you might by the like Argument prove, that subjects are not bound to obey
their Prince, because some of them stand out in rebellion against him.

And as little to the purpose is your telling us Page 123. fin.
, that those Bishops condemned all them, that defended the Three Chapters: for
contrarily we tell you, that the Bishops of the West in their Council at
Aquileia, condemned all those Bishops, and their Council at Constantinople:
and had more right to do it, then the Eastern Bishops to condemn them: for
they did it in defense of the Popes authority, whose opinion they followed.
Your urging Page 123.
the persecution which Justinian raised against Vigilius, to bring him to
confirm the decree of the Eastern Bishops, makes wholly against you: for why
did both he, and the Bishops themselves urge Vigilius so ^uch, to confirm
their decree, but because they knew, that no decree of any Council can be of
force, unless it be approved by the Sea Apostolic See this proved above Chap.
17. sect. 6.
?

Finally the Popes authority (...) effectually proved out of this Council, for
as much as by virtue of Vigilius his confirmation, it has obtained the force
of a lawful Council, and deserved the title of the fifth general; whereas
without his confirmation it would not have been received by the Church more
then that of Ariminum, or the second of Ephesus, which the Sea Apostolic has
rejected. And the same is confirmed by Eutichius Patriarch of Constantinople,
who though he prefided in this Council, yet acknowledged the right of
presiding not to belong to himself, but to Vigilius, when inuiting him to the
Council, he said Ep. ad Vigil. in quinta Syn. Collat. 1.
: Our desire is, to have the Three Chapters examined, your Blessedness
presiding over us.

SECT IV. Doctor Mortons gloss upon the Word, Obedience.
TO conclude your discourse of the fifth general Council, as untruly, and
ignorantly, as you began, you say: Page 124.
Idle and vain is your objection out of that Synod. from one word Obedience,
which they professed to the Catholic See, by not discerning between a logical
and a moral obedience: for they promised obedience to that See, in all her
orthodoxe, and reasonable persuasions, but not to her peremptory commands, and
conclusions: for you may obey S. Augustine by subscribing to his judgment,
without submitting to his jurisdiction. So you: where first you ignorantly make
this profession of obedience to the Roman Church, to be of the fi^^h general
Council, and allege Bellarmine for your author, who expressly says, that they
are words of the Synod held under Menas, before the fifth general Council. 2.
Your gloss upon the word Obedience, is idle, and false: for you wrest it to an
improper signification. I deny not, but that the words of Obedience, and
Command, may be taken improperly; as if when your equal or inferior requests
you, to do a favor for him, or persuades you, to your own good, you answer,
I will obey your commands, understanding by his Commands, his requests and
persuasions. But that the B. of Rome as being governor of the universal Church
has true power, and authority to Command, according to the most first and
proper signification of the word, and that the greatest Bishops, and Councels
have acknowledged in themselves obligation to obey in the same sense, has been
already proved Chap. 18. sect. 1.
. False therefore is you gloss, that this Council acknowledged not in
themselves obligation to obey the B. of Rome, nor in him authority to command,
but only to persuade. You defend an ill cause, which upon no other ground, but
only to excuse your disobedience to the Sea Apostolic, inforceth you to wrest
the words of the Council to an improper signification. And as your gloss upon
the word Obedience, is false; so is it repugnant even to common sense: for let
a general Council be called, of all the Orthodox Bishops in the world; let
them condemn an Arius, an Eutyches, or a Pelagius; if your gloss may be
allowed, any of these heretics, or any other never so impious, may refuse to
submit himself, and obey their decrees, saying, He will obey them in all their
Orthodoxe and reasonable persuasions, but not in their peremptory commands, and
conclusions, and so obey them in nothing at all. For what heretic will not
say, that the decrees of a general Council against his heresy, are not
Orthodoxe, and reasonable persuasions, but peremptory commands, and
conclusions? Cold this evasion justify Arius his disobedience, or excuse him
from heresy? No: and so neither can your gloss justify your cause, or satisfy
any man of judgment.

And as your gloss is false, so is your dealing imposterous: for the words of
the Council truly alleged by Bellarmine (out of whom you cite them) are:
Apostolicam Sedem sequimur, and obedimus, and ipsius communicatores
communicatores habemus; and condemnatos ab ipsa and nos condemnamus We follow
and obey the Sea Apostolic, and her communicants we have for our communicants;
and those that are condemned by her, we also condemn. Why then did you say,
that we object out of this Council, but one word Obedience? why did you here
and afterward again Page 237.
citing this passage out of Bellarmine, in both places, cut it of in the
middst? Can any Catholic at this day profess more perfect, and exact
obedience to the Sea Apostolic, then to hold all them for Orthodoxe, and
communicate with them all, that communicate with her; and to condemn all them
that are condemned by her? This was the obedience of that Council to the Pope;
which to shift of and deceive your reader, you mangle the words, leaving out
the most effectual part of them; because they show, that if you had been
living in those primitive times, that Council would have detested, and
condemned you, as it did Anthymus, and other heretics there mentioned, for
their disobedience to the Sea Apostolic, and for not communicating with her.

CHAP. XXI. Of the sixth General Council.
SECT. I. That it acknowledged the supreme Authority of the B. and Church of
Rome.
THAT the sixth General Council was called by the Authority of the B. of
Rome, I have already proved Chap. 17. sect. 1.
. And that it acknowledged the universal jurisdiction of the Pope over the
whole Church, is declared by Constantine the Emperor, who speaking to the Roman
Synod held under Agatho, calls him, Universal Father, and Universal
Arch-Pastor Syn. 6. Act. 18.
; and by the Council it self Ibid.
calling him. Bishop of the first See, and of the universal Church. And
speaking of the Epistle of Agatho sent from the Roman Council to the Emperor,
they receive it as of the holy Ghost, dictated from the mouth of the holy and
most Blessed Peter Prince of the Apostles, and written by the hand of the
thrice blessed Pope Agatho. And again: Ibid.
We assent (say they) and agree to the dogmaticall Epistle of our most holy
Father, the sovereign Pope Agatho (sent to your Highness,) and to the
suggestion of the holy Synod of 225. Fathers under him. And a little after,
speaking of the same Epistle, and acknowledging Agatho to be the Successor of
S. Peter, they add: The paper and ink appeared, but it was Peter that did
speak by Agatho.

One of the things which Agatho spoke in that Epistle Apud Bin. to. ^. page 11.
was, that the Roman Church has never been stained with error, and that the
whole Catholic Church, all the Counsels, and all the Venerable Fathers, and
all the holy Doctors have embraced her authority, and reverenced, and followed
her Apostolical Doctrine; which contrarily, the heretics have maliciously
derogated from, and persecuted. And speaking of the same Church to the Emperor,
and his two sons Ibid.
: This your spiritual Mother the Apostolical Church of Christ by the grace of
Almighty God, shall never be proved to have erred from the track of
Apostolical tradition, nor by any deprauation to have yielded to heretical
novelties; but as from the beginning of the Christian faith, the received it
pur^ from her authors the Princes of Christ's Apostles; so she remains until
the end, according to the divine promise which our Lord and Savior made to the
Prince of his Disciples in the Ghospells, saying: Peter, Peter, Satan has
required to sift you, as one that sifteth wheat: but I have prayed for thee,
that thy faith fail not, and thou being once converted, confirm thy Brethren.
Your Clemency therefore consider, that our Lord and Savior of all, who has
faithfully promised that the faith of Peter shall not fail, admonished him to
confirm his brethren; which that my Apostolical predecessors have always
assuredly performed, is a thing notorious to all men. And because Theodorus
Patriarch of Constantinople, was a Monothelite, and (as Anastasius testifies
In vita Agathon.
condemned with Pyrrhus, and the rest of that Sect, in this sixth Council, he
adds; that, Since the Bishops of Constantinople have endeauored to bring
heretical Novelties into the Church of Christ, his Apostolical predecessors
of holy memory, have never ceased to exhort, and admonish them to desist from
heretical error, lest by holding one will and operation in Christ, they should
occasion a beginning of division in the unity of the Church.

SECT. II. Whether the sixth Council condemned Honorius Pope, as an Heretic.
THese passages of the sixth Council so forcible for the authority of the
Roman Church, you mention not, but passing by them, as being not for your
purpose, pick out of it a quarrel against Honorius B. of Rome, and that with
no small lack of syncerity: for whereas you object out of Bellarmine, that in
this sixth Council, as also in the seventh, and eight, Honorius was condemned
as a Monothelite, Bellarmine contrarily proves out of Honorius his express
words, that he was no way guilty of that heresy, but always a Catholic,
holding with the Roman Church two wills and operations in Christ. And he
confirms the same with the testimony of S. Maximus Martyr, the greatest
Divine of that age, and that lived in Honorius his time. And Maximus himself
in a famous disputation which he had with Pyrrhus Patriarch of Constantinople,
alleges as witness of this truth Honorius his own Secretary, that writ
those epistles dictated from his mouth, and was then still living. Wherefore
Bellarmine denies that the sixth Council damned Honorius, as an Heretic; and
further proves it, because Agatho in his first epistle to Constantine the
Emperor, which was read in the Council, and not only read, but approved, and
admired as the words of S. Peter, and as dictated by the holy Ghost, affirms
expressly, that none of his Predecessors (one of which was Honorius) was ever
guilty of heresy, but that they have always made resistance to heretics, and
that the Pope, as Pope, cannot decree any thing contrary to faith. And from
thence he infers, that the Council did not judge Honorius to be an
heretic, nor condemn him as such: else by receiving and reuerencing Agathos
Epistle, as the words of S. Peter, and as dictated by the holy Ghost, the
Council should contradict it self, and condemn both S. Peter, and the holy
Ghost of a lie, in affirming that none of Agatho's predecessors was ever guilty
of heresy. And the truth hereof he confirms by the testimony of Nicolas the
first, who in his epistle to Michael the Emperor, avouches, that, none of his
predecessors was ever stained with the least spot, or blemish of heresy, which
he would not even for very shame have affirmed so resolutely, if Honorius in the
public asse^bly of a general Council had been anathematized as an heretic.

Wherefore Bellarmine rightly infers, that Honorius was not condemned by the
sixth Council, but his name inserted among those heretics whom the Council
condemned, by the Greeks, enemies to the Church of Rome. And so it is
testified by Theophanes Isaurus a Greek historian, and out of him by
Anastasius Bibliothecarius: which also he confirms, because it was the
frequent and almost ordinary custom of the Greeks, to corrupt, and falsify
Books in hatred of the Roman Church, and in favor of their own errors. S. Leo
complains Ep. 83.
that they had corrupted his Epistle to Flauianus Patriarch of Constantinople.
S. Gregory L. 5. ep. 14. ad Narsem.
, that they had falsified the Council of Chalcedon, and he suspected the like
of the Council of Ephesus. And where in his Dialogues L. 2. c. 38.
he has, Paraclitus a Patre semper procedit, and filio, they in their copies
leave out, and filio, and instead thereof, say, and in filio manet; a thing
which Ioannes Diaconus Vita S. Greg. c. 75.
observes, testifiing that Zacharias Pope having translated that work of S.
Gregory faithfully, and published it in the East, the Greeks razed out the
name of the Son, in favor of their heresy, that the holy Ghost proceeds not
from him, but from the Father alone. Again Nicolas the first remitteth
Michaell the Emperor to the Epistle of Adrian, if (says he) it be not
falsified after the manner of the Graecians, but kept by the Church of
Constantinople, as it was sent by the Sea Apostolic. And he had reason to say
so: for what he alleges to Photius, out of Adrians Epistle to Tharasius, is
not to be found in that Epistle, as it is read in the eight Synod. And finally
this very sixth Council discovered, that the Greeks had falsified the fifth
Council general, fathering on Pope Vigilius, and Menas Patriarch of
Constantinople, certain quaternions of their own.

If then they have falsified the writings of the Fathers of the third, the
fourth, the fifth, and eight general Counsels; what marvel if they have done
the like to the sixth, and seventh, defaining Honorius? and especially, since
a little after the sixth Council, they assembled themselves again at
Constantinople, by their own authority, and made the Trullan Canons, in hatred
of the Roman Church.

To this I add, that in the Lateran Council of 105. Bishops, held before the
sixth Synod, by Martin the first Pope and Martyr, against the Monothelites,
Sergius, Cyrus, Pyrrhus, and Paul were condemned by name without any mention of
Honorius; whom yet those Bishops being grave men and impartial, would not have
left uncensured, if he had been guilty of the same heresy; as neither would
Paulus Diaconus, Theophanes Cerameus, Photius, and Zonaras in their Catalogues
of the heretics condemned in the sixth Council: especially Photius, and
Zonaras being professed enemies to the Roman Church. And finally Emmanuel
Calleca, a Grecian, with all the Latin historians See Cocc. to 1. l. 7. arc,
13. and Bell. l. 4. de Pont. c. 11.
commend Honorius for a Catholic and holy Prelate.

These proofs, most of them being brought by Bellarmine, and so unanswerably
conuincing, that Honorius neither was an heretic, nor condemned by the sixth,
or seventh Council; is it not strange, that you should so confidently assume
the contrary, as a thing granted by him, and that it being a matter of fact
those Fathers were deceived therein? Good God (say you) Page 125.
the rare modesty of this man, who will have us believe, that one Bellarmine
living now 1000. years since that matter was in agitation, should judge better
by his conjecture, of the circumstances of a matter of fact, then could 639.
Bishops in their public Synods (iam flagrante crimine) when as yet the cause
was fresh, their witnesses living, and all circumstances, which are the perfect
intelligencers, visibly before their eyes. So you. And Bellarmine may truly
say: Good God, the strange conscience of Doctor Morton, that will speak so
untruly! for does bellarmine bring no other proofs, but his own conjecture?
Does he not produce the testimonies of Honorius his Secretary, and of S.
Maximus Martyr, who were living at that time, of Martin the first with a
Council of 105. Bishops, of John the fourth, of Nicolas the first, of
Theophanes Isaurus, of Emmanuel Calleca, and of all the Latin Fathers, that
Honorius never assented to the Monothelites, but (even in those his very
Epistles which are objected) defended two wills, and operations in Christ, with
all the Catholics of the world? And does he not prove the same, by the
express testimony of Agatho Pope, affirming that, none of his predecessors
were ever stained with heresy? and out of the sixth Council it self receiving
this testimony of Agatho, as the words of S. Peter, and as an oracle of the
Holy Ghost? Again, does he in all this say, that 639. Bishops were deceived?
Nay does he not prove by the testimony of Theophanes Isautus, and Anastasius,
and collect the same out of many other authors, that the condemnation of
Honorius, is not theirs, but falsely inserted in their Counsels by the Greeks,
according to their ordinary custom of corrupting Counsels, and other books
in hatred to the Sea of Rome? Good God then, the seared conscience of Doctor
Morton, who can conceal all this, and lay hold on a few words, which
Bellarmine adds, to wit, that, if any man be so obstinat, that all this
cannot satisfy him, he may receive another solution from Turrecremata, which
is, that the Fathers of the sixth Synod condemned Honorius, but out of false
information, and therefore erred therein, as any Council may in matter of fact.

The reason why you omit all the rest of Bellarmines doctrine, and catch at
this solution of Turrecremata, is, to infer that Popes may be heretics, and
that not only as private Doctors (which some Catholics grant) but in their
public persons, as Popes, because, those Fathers condemning Honorius in their
public Council did judge him according to his public person. These your
words Page 126.
contain a ridiculous fallacy: for when we say, The Pope cannot err, as Pope,
or (which is all one) as a public person, or ex Cathedra, the sense is, that
he cannot either in a Council, or by himself ordain any heretical doctrine
to be received by the Church. Nor could you be ignorant of this: for as Canus
(whon ye allege) grants, that Popes according to their private persons may be
heretics, and that peradventure one or two examples may be given thereof, so in
that very place L. 6. c. 8. page 214.
he adds, that no example can be given of any Pope, that though he fell into
heresy, did ever decree the same for the whole Church, which is the thing you
ought to have disproued, to show, that either the sixth, or any other Council
judged the Pope according to his public person. And lastly, as for Honorius in
particular, Bellarmine L. 4. de Pont. c. 11.
rightly shows, that Canus was in a double error, concerning him, whose
opinion therefore is to be rejected.

CHAP. XXII. Of the seventh, and eight General Counsels.
SECT. I. That these two Counsels acknowledged the supreme Authority of the
Bishop, and Church of Rome.
THAT the seventh, and eight General Counsels believed the B. of Rome to be
the Head, and Governor of the Universal Church, is a truth not to be denied. In
the second Action of the seventh Synod, was read, and approved the Epistle of
Adrian Pope to Tharasius, in which speaking of S. Peter's See, he says: Whose
seat obtaining the primacy, shines throughout the whole world, and is the
Head of all the Churches of God.

In the eight Synod, the profession which all Schismatic Bishops, returning
to the Catholic Church, were to make, is expressed in these words Apud Bin.
to. 3. page 923. and Can. l. 6. c. 6. page 200.
: The begiuning of salvation is, to conserve, the rule of right faith, and no
way to swerve from the tradition of our Forefathers, because the words of our
Lord cannot fail saying: Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my
Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. And the proofs of
deeds have made good these words; for as much, as in the Sea Apostolic the
Catholic religion is always conserved inviolable. We therefore desiring not to
be separated from the faith and doctrine of this Sea and following in all
things, the constitutions of the Fathers, and chiefly of the holy Prelates of
the Sea Apostolic, anathematize all heresies etc. And a little after. Wherefore
following the Sea Apostolic in all things, and observing all her
constitutions, we hope to deserve to live in one communion which the Sea
Apostolic teaches, in which there is the true and entire solidity of
Christian religion: and we promise likewise not to recite in the sacred
mysteries, the names of those, which are separated from the communion of the
Catholic Church, that is to say, which agree not to the Sea Apostolic.

What you think Doctor Morton, I know not: but sure I am, that if you who deny
the Roman Church to be the Head, and gouernesse of all Churches, you that live
out of her Communion, you that refuse to obey her constitutions, you that
profess not to follow her doctrine, had lived in time of the seventh and
eight Synods, they would have anathematized you, and condemned your doctrine,
as heretical. And this is the reason, why you conceal these, and many other
passages of those Counsels, in which the same truth is delivered, and many
other points of your Protestant Doctrine condemned.

SECT. II. Doctor Mortons ignorance, concerning the eight General Council.
IN your eight Chapter, in the title of the eight Section, you say Page 127.
The belief of the Article, Viz. The Catholic Roman Church, without
subjection whereunto there is no salvation, damneth the eight Council, which
you call general, consisting of 383. Bishops, in the year 870. This is your
title; in proof whereof, you cite Binius Tom. 3. p. 143.
in your margent, but ignorantly, and falsely: for the Council which Binius
there sets down, is not the eight general, held the year 870. under
Basilius the Emperor; and Adrian the second Pope of that name, but a particular
Synod, consisting of certain Greek Bishops assembled the year 692. by the
industry of Calinicus Patriarch of Constantinople, in the time of Sergius Pope,
and Justinian the younger, in his palace called Trullum, and has never been
esteemed a lawful Council, but always reproved as a false, and erraticall
assembly, as Binius proves To. 3. page 154. 155.
, and I shall presently declare Sect. seq.
.

Again you say; The eight general Council consisted of 383: Bishops, and
give Binius for your Author: But you are mistaken, and wrong Binius: for he
Tom. 3. page 910.
proves out of Nicetas, and Anastasius who was present at the eight Council,
that it consisted only of 102. Bishops. Nor will it serve you for an excuse,
that Bellarmine says, it consisted of 383. Bishops: for you bring not him for
your author, but Binius. who affirms, and proves the contrary. And in what
sense Bellarmine speaks, you might have learned, if you had observed, what
Binius notes out of Anastasius, namely, that many other Bishops agreed to this
Synod, though they were not present at it.

But let us go on: What was done (say you) Page 127.
in this fourth Synod of Constantinople, you may understand from your own men.
Here I must request you to call to mind, that else where you say Page 235. marg.
lit. ^.
, the Council under Menas was the fifth Council of Constantinople. How then
can the eight general Council, which you say was held the year 870. be the
fourth Council of Constantinople, since in this other place alleged, you
affirm the Council under Menas held the year 553. to be the fifth Council
of Constantinople? for thereby you ignorantly make the fifth Council of
Constantinople, to have been held above 300. year, before the fourth.

SECT. III. Whether the eight general Council condemned the Saturday fast,
allowed by the Roman Church.
YOu tell us Page 1^7.
that, we may understand from our Binius, that these Bishops (of the eight
general Council) condemned a custom of the saboth fast in lent, then used in
the Church of Rome: and thereupon, made they a Canon inhibiting the Church of
Rome, from keeping that custom any longer. And you add Ibid.
: This Canon (says your Surius) is not received, because it reprehendeth the
Church of Rome, the Mother Church of all other Churches. So you: And your
readers, especially of the vulgar sort, by this your expression, what will they
conceive, but that the Roman Church did in those times fast the Sundays in
Lent? for as by the Saboth day Protestants, especially the vulgar, understand
no other day but Sunday, so by the Saboth fast, what will they understand, but
the Sunday fast, which was never used, nor allowed in the Roman Church, but
condemned in the Council of Gangra, as an heretical observation of the
Eustathians See Spond. anno 319. n. 9.
.

The fast which this Canon inhibiteth is the Saturday fast, which, as then it
was, so, notwithstanding this Canon, is still used by the Roman Church in Lent,
and not prohibited out of Lent.

Nor was that Canon made by the eight general Counsel, to whom you ignorantly
ascribe it, but by the Trullan Synod, as Binius, and Surius testify; whom
therefore you abuse, in fathering on them your own ignorant mistake of the
Trullan Synod, for the eight general Council. And so much the more, because
both of them, with all Catholic Divines, hold the Trullan Canons to be
illegitimate, and of no force: for as much, as no Legates of Sergius then Pope,
were present at that Synod, nor was it assembled by his authority, or consent,
but absolutely reproved, and condemned by him, notwithstanding the barbarous
violence of Soldiers, and other means used by the Empetor, to extort a
confirmation from him, and his successors, as Venerable Bede L D^ sex aetat, in
justinian. iuniore.
who lived at that time, Paulus Diaconus L. 6. e. 4.
and other historians testify, and you may read in Baronius Anno 692
, Bellarmine L. 1. de
, Binius Tom. 3. page 152.
, and Canus L. 5. de loc. c. vlt.
; who rightly observe, that as not by the Pope, so neither by any of the
Patriarchs of the East, nor by any authority of antiquity it has been
received, as a true Council, but held to be (and so Bid Loco cis.
calls it) Erratica Synodus, An erring Synod; in so much, that the Greek
Historians, Theophanes, Zonaras, Cedrenus, Glycas, and others, thought best to
bury it in silence, never reckoning it among the Counsels, nor making any
mention at all of it. And with great reason: for how Almighty God punished both
the wicked Patriarch Calinicus, and the Emperor, who pleases may read in
Baronius Anno 691.
.

All which being true, as it is, it must follow, that you show great ignorance,
or else lack of Conscience, in attributing to the eight general Council a
decree of this impious Conuenticle, and obiecting it against a religious
custom of the Saturday fast in Lent, piously observed by the Roman Church,
from the Apostles time. If it be an abuse, why did not the seven first
Oecumenicall Councels take notice of it? Do not the Greek authors with one
voice cry out, that in things of this nature which are not repugnant to faith,
or good manners, the variety of ancient customs used in diverse Churches is to
be observed? And did not S. Hierome, being consulted about this very custom of
the Saturday fast, long before the Trullan Synod, answer Ep. 28.
, Let every country abound in their own sense, and reverence the precepts of
their Forefathers, as Apostolical laws? And did not S. Ambrose Spond. anno
384. n. 6.
in this very particular, advise Monica S. Augustines Mother, to observe the
custom of whatsoever place she was in? And do not both he, and S. Augustine
Apud S. Aug. ep. 86.
professedly prove against you, and such as you are, that whereas the Eastern
Church from the time of the Apostles fasted not, but feasted on Saturdayes,
contrary to the custom of the Western Church, both of them did it, upon good
and pious considerations, declared by the ancient Fathers Apud Baro. an. 692.
? And does not S. Augustine Loco cit.
show, that variety to be a singular ornament to the Church? And do not the
Counsels of Agatha C. 22.
, and Eliberis C. 26.
, subscribe to that custom of the Roman, and other Western Churches? What
authority then, had those Trullan Bishops to make themselves Judges of the
Roman Church, and of all the Churches of the West, over whom they had no
authority, as your self well knows?

And hereby is discovered your folly, that not contenting your self with
proposing here this Argument so impertinent, and frivolous, you repeat it
afterward again saying Page 220. 221.
that, S. Augustine approving the custom of the Eastern Church, wounds the
Papacy, and signifies that the Roman Church had not then any peremptory
authority to determine all causes: for the Roman Church then did, and still
does allow variety of Customs in diverse Churches, though sometimes contrary
to her own, when they are not repugnant to faith or good manners. Such was the
Eastern custom of not observing the Saturday-fast, which therefore she
allowed. How then does S. Augustine wound the Papacy, in allowing the
Oriental^s to observe their custom, since the Roman Church agrees with him,
in allowing the same? To prove out of S. Augustine that the Roman Church had
not then authority to determine all Ecclesiastical causes, you should have
showed, that he held endless, and indeterminable any cause, which she had once
determined; or that he allowed, what she had once condemned: which whiles you
do not, you spend your breath in vain.

Finally, whereas you ask Page 127.
Whether the Church of Rome would at this day swallow, and digest such an hot
morsel, as the Trull an decree was, you insinuate, that then she could, and
did swallow that morsel: which how false it is, you have heard; since neither
Sergius Pope, nor any of his successors, could ever be brought to confirm that
deceee, or the Synod that made it; which alone shows the transcendent
authority of the Roman Church in those days; for want of whose allowance, and
confirmation, that Synod was then, and ever since has been reproved, as an
impious Assembly: whose decrees therefore you are ill advised to object in favor
of your cause, against the Roman Church.

CHAP: XXIII. Doctor Morton defends the heretical custom of the Asian
Bishops against Victor Pope.
BELLARMINE, and other Catholic writers, to prove the authority and
jurisdiction of the B. of Rome practiced over the Eastern Church, in the first
ages after Christ, among other examples, allege the sentence of
excommunication pronounced by Victor Pope against Polycrates, and many other
Asian Bishops, for not celebrating the feast of Easter upon the Sunday, as the
Roman Church did, but according to the Jewish computation, at the full moon of
March, on what day soever it sell: whereas (witness Eusebius) Lib. 5. hist. c.
22.
the rest of the Churches, throughout the whole world, insisting in the
Apostolical tradition, and custom, did never observe their Easter on any
other day, then that, on which our Lord arose from death, which was on Sunday.
And so it was decreed to be kept, by the Counsels of Palestine, of Rome, of
Pontus, of France, of Osraena, of Achaia, and of other Bishops, almost
Innumerable Eusebius. Ibid.
. To which I add out of Tertullian De praescrip. c. 53.
, that Blastus by persuading the observation of that Jewish custom, did
endeavor to bring Iudaisme again into the Church: which also Eusebius
testifies, saying L. 5. hish. c. 14.
: Blastus having drawn many into error, did labor to bring in a new Sect, for
the destruction of truth. Upon these grounds Victor excommunicated him, and the
Asian Bishops for their obstinate defense of that custom, which Pius his
predecessor had forbidden.

You object Page 130.
, that the Asian Bishops stood out a long time against Victor, and contemned
his excommunication; and that Polycrates pleading their cause, in his Epistle
to Pope Victor, alleged, that they had received their custom from S. John,
who leaned an our Lords breast; that it was practiced by Philip the Apostle, and
continued by Polycarp, Thraseas, and Sagonius, all of them Bishops and Martyrs;
and that Polycrates himself having lived 65. years in the communion of the
faithful, was nothing moved with those terrors (meaning of excommunication)
which were urged against him, and the rest. And you add Page 131.
out of Eusebius, that this Act of Victor did not please all other Bishops, who
did greatly reprove him for troubling the peace of the Church. These (Sir) are
not Eusebius his words, but yours. He says, that, they did earnestly exhort
Victor to peace, and to a diligent care of charity toward his neighbors, and
bitterly reproved him, as providing unprofitably for the good of the Church. So
indeed Eusebius says, according to the translation of Ruffinus. And both of
them, being Heretics, show their malice against the Sea Apostolic, in saying,
that, other Bishops did bitterly reprove Victor: for coming to give an example
of this bitterness, they bring for their pattern, the words of S. Irenaeus,
in all which there is not one bitter word, but a gentle remonstrance, full of
submission to the person of Victor, and to the authority of his See: for he
says not, that Victor could not, but that, he should not have cut off from the
body of the Church so many provinces for so small a cause; which is not to
argue him of want of power, but for using his power indiscreetly: Irenaeus
(says Eusebius) L. 5. hist. c. 24.
did fitly exhort Pope Victor, that he would not utterly cut off so many
Churches, from the body of the universal Church of Christ. And whereas you Page
132.
traduce Christopherson, our learned Bishop of Chichester, for this translation
of Eusebius, it is a cavil sprung out of your ignorance: for the Greek verb
(...), which Eusebius uses, fignifieth to cut off from the whole mass or
body: and so it is proved out of Ruffinus, who translateth thus: Irenaus
reproved Victor, for not doing well in cutting off from the unity of the body,
so many, and so great Churches. And so likewise translateth your learned
Protestant-brother Ioannes Iacobus Grynaeus, in his Basilean edition of
Eusebius. And in the same manner translateth Nicephorus L. 4. c. 38.
, all of them as well skilled in Greek, as your self, to say no more. And
indeed how could Irenaeus reprove Victor, for exceeding the limits of his
power? he that cries out L. 3. c. 3.
: To the Roman Church, all Churches, and all the faithful, from all places,
must necessarily have recourse, by reason of her more powerful principality.

Wherefore it was not want of Power that Irenaeus reproved in Victor, but
indiscreet using of his power. But that even in this, he was instaken, and that
Victor failed not, even in point of prudence, nor used overmuch rigor,
appears in this, that hereby he repressed the Heresy of Blastus by which many
were seduced, as also because the famous Council of Nice, first, and many
others afterward, confirmed his sentence, and condemned the doctrine and
practice of Blastus, and the Asians in this point; in so much that all, which
since that time have persisted in the contrary custom, have been accounted
Heretics, and under the name of Quartadecimani registered for such, by the
Fathers, that have made catalogues of heretics.

That the Nicen Council had just cause to condemn this Quartadeciman error,
you dare not deny; but you deny the same of Pope Victor, and yield a disparity
in these words: Page 132.
Be it known unto you, that the decree of the Nicen Council, which ordained
that Easter should be kept upon the Lords day, makes nothing for the Act of
Victor his excommunicating the Asian Bishops: because as that Council was
celebrated 200. years after, so had it far more just and necessary cause, to
make such a decree by reason of the heresy of Blastus, who at that time
defended an indispensable necessity of observing the Jewish ceremonial law. The
cause then, for which you approve the decree of the Nicen Counsel, and
condemn that of Victor in the same cause, is, by reason of the heresy of
Blastus, who (say you) at that time (of the Nicen Council) defended an
indispensable necessity of observing the Jewish ceremonial law: which words
present unto us an excellent testimony of your ignorance in ecclesiastical
history: for Blastus lived not at the time of the Nicen Council (as you
affirm) but 130. years before, in the very time of Victor Pope, and of S.
Irenaeus, who writ against him, as S. Hierome testifies L. de Scriptor.
. And so likewise did Tertullian at the same time, saying De praescrip. c. 53.
: Blastus seeks covertly to bring in Iudaisine; for he teaches, that Easter
is not to be kept otherwise, then according to the law of Moses. And with them
agrees Eusebius reporting L. 5. bist. c. 14.
, that Blastus begun to preach and diuulge his heresy in the time of Victor
Pope. Wherefore you saying, that Blastus lived not in the time of Victor, but of
the Nicen Council, which was more then 100. years after, present us
ignorantly with falsehood, instead of truth; and in lieu of impugning the fact
of Victor, against your will confirm the same.

And by the way I will not omit to advertise the reader of three things. The
first is, that whereas you say Page 132.
. The Nicen Council was 200. years after Pope Victor excommunicated the
Asians, you cannot be excused from another ignorant mistake: for it was not
much above 120. years after that time; the sentence of Victor being in the
year 198. and the Council of Nice, the year 325.

The second is, that the sentence of Victor being ratified, and confirmed, and
contrarily the Jewish custom of the Asians anathematized by the three first
general Councels of Nice, Constantinople Ca. 7.
, and Ephesus P. ^. act. 6
, as also by the second of Antioch Ca. 1.
, the first of Arles Ca. 1.
, and that Laodicea Ca. 7.
, and they that obeyed not the sentence of Victor, registered for heretics by
Philastrius In catal. Haer.
. S. Epiphanius Haer. 50.
, S. Augustine L. de Haeres. haer. 29.
. Theodoret Haeret. fab. l. 3. cap. 5.
, S. Damascen Haeres. 50.
, and Nicephorus L. 4. c. 36.37.38.
, you nevertheless blush not, to approve that heretical custom, and to say
Page 157.
that, the Britans and Scots, in observing it, some hundreds of years after it
was thus condemned, did much more orthodoxally then the Roman Church: which
shows, that any custom, so it be contrary to the practice of the Roman
Church, is to you Orthodoxall, though in it self it be damnable, and
anathematized as heretical, by never so many Counsels and Fathers, as this
Asian custom observed by the Brittans, and Scots was.

3. And from the same spirit proceeds your saying Page 131.
that, Pope Victor was the Schismat^ke, that troubled the peace of the Church,
and not the Asian Bishops; since they for their obstinacy in defending the
Jewish custom, have been by all orthodox Fathers and Councels condemned, as
heretics: and contrarily Pope Victor (even as M. Whit gift your brother
acknowledges In his Defense page 5^0.
was a godly Bishop and Martyr, and the Church at that time, in great purity,
as not being long after the Apostles. And whereas, you Page 131.
appeal to our consciences, and bid us in all our reading show unto you, if we
can, that Polycrates, and other Asian Bishops, so excommunicated by Pope
Victor, were held by any other Catholic Bishops of those times, to be thereby,
without the state of salvation; we contrarily appeal to the conscience of any
christian man, whether it be not damnable doctrine, to mantaine (as you do)
that these Qartadeciman heretics, after they knew themselves to be
excommunicated by the Pope, and anathematized by so many Councels, if they
repented not, but persisted obstinatly in the defense of their heresy, cold be
in state of salvation.

And lastly whereas you add Page 131.
that, we full well know, that S. Hierome in his Catalogue of Ecclesiastical
writers numbered Polycrates among those who did advance the Catholic faith, we
know that you speak ignorantly and untruly: for S. Hierome in that his
Catalogue does not only number Catholics, but also diverse heretics that writ
of Ecclesiastical affairs; as Eusebius Caesariensis, whom the same S.
Hierome Apol. aduers. Ruffin. l. 1.
calls, The ringleader of the Arians. And so likewise, he numbreth Nouatianus,
Donatus, and Photinus, whom in that very Catalogue, he acknowledges not only
to be heretics, but authors and propagators of several heresies. And in no
other condition does he number Polycrates, whom he commends not for advancing
the Catholic faith (as you affirm) but having set down a piece of his
epistle written to Pope Victor, in defense of his error, says, He reports it
to show the wit, and authority of the man: where, by authority, he understands
not authority of right, but of fact, that is, the credit which Polycrates had
among the Quartadecimans.

CHAP. XXIV. Doctor Morton, in opposition to the Roman Church, defends the
Heretical Doctrine of Rebaptization.
FIRMILIANVS B. of Caesarea in Cappadocia, with other Asian Bishops, out of
their great hatred to heresy, decreed in their Counsels of Iconium, and
Synnada, that Baptism given by Heretics was inualid, and therefore that
Heretics returning to the Catholic Church, were to be baptized a new. This
Doctrine from Asia, crept into Africa: and Agrippinus B. of Carthage, having
laid the first grounds thereof, Cyprian with other African Bishops afterward
embraced the same, so far, that for the authorizing thereof, they assembled a
Council of 80. Bishops at Carthage. All which notwithstanding, that doctrine,
as being contrary to the tradition, and practice of the Catholic Church, was
forbidden by Stephen then Pope of Rome, in these words: Nihil innouetur, sed
seruetur quod traditum est: Let no innovation be made, but that observed which
has come by tradition. Firmilianus with other Bishops of Asia, notwithstanding
this prohibition, persisted still in their error, and were for that cause
excommunicated by Stephen. Whereat Firmilianus storming, in his fury spued out
reproachful and contumelious words against him. But Cyprian, although he
defended the same error, yet not as a doctrine of faith, nor condemning the
contrary, nor censuring the Pope, or the rest that defended it, as any way
guilty of Heresy: for as S. Augustine writing against the Donatists, and
excusing Cyprian L. 2. de Bapt. t. 18. and l. 2. c. 4.
says: If he held that opinion, it was before it was condemned by a a general
Council; to which he would most easily have submitted his judgment, if any
such had been held in his time. And moreover, if he held it, it was with so
great temper, that (as both he himself Ep. ad Iuba. and in Conc. Carthag.
, and S. Augustine L. 1. de Bapt. c. 18. and 19. and l. 2. c. 1.5.6.7.9. and
alibisaepe.
for him, testifies) for the defense thereof, he never forsook the communion
of the Roman Church: but as S. Peter dissented from S. Paul, concerning the
circumcision of Gentiles newly converted, and yet both of them still remained in
Catholic unity, and peace: so likewise though Cyprian touching rebaptization
differed in opinion from Stephen, yet he still remained in communion with him.
And therefore when the Donatists defended their heresy, by the authority of
Cyprian, and his Council, S. Augustine answered Cont. Crescon. l. 1. c. 32.
and l. 2. c. 31. and alibi saepe.
, that Cyprians patronage could not avail them, because they were out of the
communion of the Roman Church, in which Cyprian lived and dyed.

This is the controversy, as it passed between Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, and
Stephen Pope, briefly related. And you in obiecting it against the Popes
authority, show impiety, folly, and falsehood. Impiety, 1. In taking part with
Firmilianus and Cyprian, in their opposition to Pope Stephen, and approving
their doctrine, which you know to be erroneous, and that soon after being
condemned by a general Council, it has ever since been held for an absolute
heresy, not only by Catholics, but also by Protestants. And does not S.
Augustine say L. 2. de Bapt. c. 2.
, that, albeit Cyprian Bishop and Martyr were a man of great fame and merit,
yet not of greater then Peter the Apostle, and Martyr, in whom the principality
of the Sea Apostolic was so eminent: which shows that Cyprian ought to have
borne respect to Stephen Pope, sitting in the Sea, and invested in the
authority of Peter Prince of the Apostles? And does he not show L. 2. Cont.
Crescon. c. 32.
, that Cyprian erred herein, and that the Epistles which he writ of this
subject are of no force, because the contrary was decreed by the authority of
the whole Church, which is to be preferred before the authority of Cyprian, or
of any one man whatsoever? And does he not L. 5. de Bapt. c. 23. and seqq.
learnedly confute the Epistle which Cyprian writ to Pompeius, in defense of
his error? And whereas you to justify Cyprian, object Page 134.
, that, he gathered a Council of 87. Bishops, which concluded contrary to the
Pope and his Council celebrated in Italy, you know that S. Augustine doubted
L. 1. cont. Crescon. cap. 32.
, whether any such Council were ever held: and if it were, whether the greater
part of the Votes were not against Cyprian, because the Donatists could reckon
but 50. Asian, and 70. African Bishops, that adhered to Firmilianus, and
Cyprian S. Aug. cont. Crescon. l. 3. c. 3.
whereas many thousands held with Stephen Pope, against them. And the same S.
Augustine L. 6. de Bapt. per tot.
answeareth, and confuteth severally, every one of the verdictes of the
Bishops, which were said to be given in that Council assembled by Cyprian.

2. You cannot be excused from impiety, in obiecting Page 137.
against the Popes authority, the words which Firmilianus and Cyprian in their
passion let slip from their mouths against Stephen: for S. Augustine L. 5. de
Bapt. c. 25.
held them unworthy to be mentioned, and covered them with this excuse: The
things which Cyprian in his anger spread against Stephen, I will not suffer to
pass under my pen. But as Cham Genesis 9.22.
delighted to lay open the shameful parts of his Father, so you glory in
publishing the faults of the Saints, when you can espy any error or frailty
in them, though afterward they repented themselves as Cyprian did: for S.
Augustine reports as most credible L. 2. de Bapt. c. 4. and ep. 48. ad
Vincent.
that he changed his opinion before his death; and as absolutely certain, that
by his glorious Martyrdom, he washed out with his blood, the blemish which he
had contracted by defending that error.

3. In making this Argument you show great folly, it being so far from
disprouing the Popes authority, that it is an unanswerable proof thereof, as
that ancient and learned Father Vincentius Lyrinensis in his golden Treatise
against the profane novelties of heresies, conuinceth in these words Cap.
9.10.11.
: In times past Agrippinus of venerable memory Bishop of Carthage, the first of
all mortal men maintained this assertion against the divine Scripture, against
the rule of the universal Church, against the mind of all the Priests of his
time, against the custom and tradition of his fore Fathers, that Rebaptization
was to be admitted, and put in practice. Which presumption of his procured so
great damage to the Church, that not only it gave a pattern of sacrilege to
all beretikes, but also ministered occasion of error to some Catholics. When
therefore all men every where exclaimed against the Nouelty of that doctrine,
and all Priests in all places, each one according to his zeal did repugne;
then Pope Stephen of blessed memory, Bishop of the Apostolic See resisted
indeed with the rest of his fellow Bishops, but yet more then the rest,
thinking it, as I suppose, reason so much to excel all others in devotion
toward the faith, as he was superior to them in authority of place. To
conclude, in his Epistle, which then was sent to Africa, he decreed the same in
these words: Let nothing be innouated, but that observed which came by
tradition etc. What then was the end of this whole business? what else, but
common, and usual? Antiquity was retained, nouelty abandoned. But perhaps that
new invention wanted patrons; and defenders? To which I say on the contrary,
that it had such pregnant wits, such eloquent tongues, such number of
defendants, such show of truth, such testimonies of Scripture, but glosed after
a new, and naughty fashion, that all that conspiracy and schism should have
seemed to me invincible, had not the very profession of nouelty it self, so
taken in hand, under that name defended, and with that title recommended,
overthrown the very ground of so great a schism. To conclude, what force had
the Council or decree of Africa? By Gods providence, none; but all things
there agreed upon, were abolished, annulled, abrogated, as dreams, as fables,
as superfluous. And, O strange mutation of things! the authors of that opinion
are judged to be Catholics, and the followers accounted heretics: the
masters discharged, and the scholars condemned: the writers of those books
shall be children of the kingdom of heaven, and the maintainers of them shall
burn in bell.

All this is of Vincentius Lyrinensis, who tells you that albeit Cyprian, and
other his Colleagues, authors of that doctrine, be Saints in heaven, yet they
that maintain it now, after it has been condemned by the universal Church
(as you do, justifying Cyprian in his defense thereof against Stephen Pope)
shall burn for ever in hell; which I wish you to look to in time, and to
observe how properly you are discribed by Vincentius a little after, comparing
such as you are, to Cham, and expressing lively your imposterous dealing in
theirs.

4. As in this objection you show folly, arguing against your self, so you
cannot be excused from fraud: for whereas we answer, that Firmilianus and
Cyprian, with the other Bishops, that assented to them, when they saw their
doctrine reproved, and condemned by the Church, acknowledged their error, and
retracted the same by a new decree, contrary to that which before they had made
in their Council of Carthage, you shift it of, saying Page 138.
. I pass it over as a vain presumption; and so it is proved to be. By whom?
forsooth by your Reuitius, a man of as much credit as your self. His answer
set down by you in Latin in your margent, as also what he brings out of
Dionysius Alexandrinus, and S. Basil, you may see confuted by Baronius Apud
Bisciol. anno 258. page 148.
, S. Hierome, and other ancient Fathers. The blessed Cyprian (says S. Hierome
Aduers. Lucifer.
strove to avoid the miry lakes, and not to drink of strange waters; and upon
this subject addressed the Synod of Carthage to Stephen B. of Rome, who was the
twenty sixth after S. Peter: but his strife was in vain. And in the end they
which had decreed that such as were baptized by heretics, must be rebaptized,
returning to the ancient custom, set forth a new decree, saying: What do we?
So it has been delivered to them, by their ancestors, and ours. And Venerable Bede L. quaest. q. 5.
: Cyprian with his Bishops in Africa, made a decree contrary to the custom of
the Church, that heretics should be rebaptized: but because in his sense
(which he conceived to be right) he endeauored to enrich himself with good
works, he deserved to be soon reformed, and by the instruction of spiritual
men, to be reduced to the universal custom of holy Church. And S. Augustine
testifies L. 3. cont. Crescon. c. 3.
that, The oriental Bishops, which had met at Icomium, and Synnada, revoked
their decree, and corrected their judgment. And finally Dionysius Alexandrinus
certified Pope Stephen Ep. ad Stephan. apud Eusebius. l. 7. hist. c. 4. and
Nicephor. l. 6. c. 7.
that the same was done not only by the Oriental, but also by other foreign
Churches every where.

Wherefore your obiecting of Firmilianus and Cyprian, as opposing the Pope in
this conuouersy, and inferring that you may likewise oppose him in your
Protestant Tenants, is, as if you should prove out of S. Peter's denial of
Christ, that it is lawful for you to deny him: for as S. Peter repented his
fall, so did those Bishops retract their error.

And hereby also appears the fraud of your Reuitius, seeking to limit this
retraction of Firmilianus and other Bishops, to those of the East only: for you
have heard S. Hierome, Bid, S. Augustine, Eusebius and Nicephorus testify,
that S. Cyprian with his African Bishops, and all others, vbique locorum, in
all place, were reconcileds and this not only among themselves, as Reuitius
ridiculously glosseth (for they dissented not among themselves) but also with
Stephe Pope, returning to the ancient custom and practice of the Church, as he
had commanded. Whereupon Dionysius Patriarch of Alexandria writ to him a
congratulatory letter Extat apud Author. cit.
that he with them all might rejoice in the peace restored to the Church by his
means. And in another to Xistus his successor Apud Eusebius. l. 5. hist. c. 4.
, he declares the Popes authority over all those Bishops, beseeching him to
pardon their offense, and restore them to his communion: I writ to Stephen
(says he) an Epistle for all those Bishops.

To conclude, you add another falsehood, saying Page 135.
, that we grant Stephen Pope, to have excommunicated not only Firmilianus, with
other Eastern Bishops, but also S. Cyprian: and you prove it by the testimony
of Cassander, and heretical and prohibited Author, whom you contrary to your
own knowledge cite as a Catholic writer, that so you may have some color to
call his lies, our Confessions, as here you do. And indeed what man of common
sense, can persuade himself, that the Roman Church would honor S. Cyprian as a
glorious Saint, and Martyr, (as she does) if he had died out of her communion,
and especially if he had contemned her excommunication?

Lastly I must advertise you of another absurdity, whiles you tell us Page 138.
that, we should advise in this case rather with Firmilianus, a Bishop living
in the days of S. Cyprian, then with S. Augustine, who came 150. years after:
for this is to tell us, that we must rather believe Firmilianus, a party, and
for a time, guilty both of the heresy of the Quarta decimans, and of
Rebaptization, then S. Augustine, an Orthodox Doctor, and an impartial
witness. But yet, if we advise with Firmilianus, he will condemn you. 1.
Because he retracted his errors before his death, returning to the communion of
the Roman Church, and (witness S. Basil De Spir. S. ad Amphil. c. 29.
was admitted among the Catholic Bishops in the Council of Antioch, held
against Paulus Samosatenus. And 2. because in his Epistle to Cyprian, he
acknowledges Stephen to be successor of S. Peter, on whom the foundations of
the Church were laid. And the reason which he yeldeth for his not obeying
Stephen, is, that he must rather obey God, then man: Extat apud Pamel. page 198.
: which is a reason, not to be given, but by one, that knows himself bound to
obey him that commands, if his command be not contrary to the commandment of
God, as he thought Stephens to be, though erroneously, as you have heard.

CHAP. XXV. Other Arguments of Doctor Morton our of S. Cyprian, answered.
FRom this your main Argument of the opposition of Firmilianus and S. Cyprian,
you pass to other objections, showing (as you say) Page 134. in tit. sect. 4.
the full opposition of S. Cyprian and other Bishops, against Stephen B. of
Rome. But seeing you acknowledge Page 291. and alibi.
the Roman Church to have been pure and free from error for the space of 600.
years, and the Popes that lived in S. Cyprians time, to be glorious Saints and
Martyrs of Christ Page 172.178.181.287.
, with what conscience do you make S. Cyprian fully opposite to them, and to
differ in masters of faith from them? for what else is that, but to make S.
Cyprian an heretic, that so he may seem to be like to your self? Now to your
objections of the full opposition of S. Cyprian to Pope Stephen.

The first is Page 134.
, that S. Cyprian impugned the Popes pretended power of appeals to Rome: in
proof whereof you produce ignorantly the examples of Fortunatus and
Felicissimus: for they appealed not to Pope Stephen, but to Cornelius, between
whom and Stephen sat Lucius another Pope. Again, the objection is
impertinent: for the definitions of Counsels confirmed by the Popes, and the
decrees of the Popes themselves, ordeyne, that mayor causes, that is to say, of
faith, and of Bishops, be referred to the Sea Apostolic; but that minor
causes, that is, of the lives and manners of Priests, and inferior clerks, be
finally sentenced; and ended in their own provinces, by their Bishops, and
Metropolitans, or by the Counsels of their Province. This is declared by S.
Augustine, who speaking of Cecilianus B. of Carthage, that had been condemned
in Africa, by a Council of 70. Bishops, says Ep. 162:
: There was no question then of Priests, or Deacons, or other Clerks of the
inferior order, but of the Colleagues, that is so say, of Bishops, who might
reserve their causes entire to the judgment of the other Colleagues, and
principally of the Churches Apostolic: and therefore that Cecilian might have
contemned the multitude of his enemies conspiring against him, for as much as
he saw himself united by communicatory letters, with the Roman Church, in
which the sovereignty of the Sea Apostolic had always flourished.

This shows the futility of your objection. For Fortunatus and Felicissimus
were not Bishops, but simple Priests, who having been judged by their own
Bishops, ought not to have appealed to Rome: and therefore Cornelius rejected
their appeal, and excommunicated them (as S. Cyprian declares in that very
Epistle, which you object) and returned Felicissimus back into Africa, with
other his associates sent by Fortunatus: for Fortunatus himself went not in
person to Rome (as you mistake) but sent Felicissimus with other Schismatikes
like himself. And that S. Cyprian by complaining to Pope Cornelius, of these
rebellious sugiti^^s, did not deny his power of appeals, not the subjection of
the African Churches to the Sea of Rome, his words in that very Epistle Ep. 55.
three lines before (to go no further) plainly declare; when speaking of these
Schismatikes he says: They presume to sail to the Chair of Peter, and the
principal Church, from whence sacerdotall Unity is derived, and to carry
betters from schismatic and profane persons, not having in mind, that the
Romans are they, whose faith was praised by the mouth of the Apostle, and to
whom unfaithfulness can have no access.

Your second objection is Page 134.
that, the Council of Carthage did deny to any whomsoever, the title of Bishop
of Bishops. This is an untruth: for the words are not of the Council, but of
S. Cyprian, who speaks only of his fellow Bishops of Africa, assembled with
him in that Council: and to them only he directs his speech, wishing them to
deliver their opinion freely, without regard to the authority which he as their
Primate had over them. But in what sense soever you take the words, they are of
no force, as being uttered in an erroneous Council, which the Church has
condemned, which S. Augustine L. 6. de Baptism. per tot.
has confuted, and from which S. Cyprian himself afterward disclaymed,
retracting his error.

Your third is Page 134.
that, S. Cyprian would not acknowledge the name of Pope per antonomasiam, to
be proper to the B. of Rome, as we teach: because at the time of his
Martyrdom, being demanded of the Proconsull: Art thou he, whom the Christians
call their Pope? He answered him: I am. And I answer you, that this is a
frivolous objection: for as Onuphrius has noted Tract. voc. obscur. Eccles.
the name of Pope anciently, until after the time of S. Gregory, was common to
all Bishops of great Cities, as of Rome, Carthage, Alexandria, Antioch,
Jerusalem, and the like: and you afterward showing the futility of your
objection, prove the same Page 241.
. Wherefore S. Cyprian acknowledging that the Christians of Africa (of whom
only both he and the Proconsull spoke) did call him Their Pope, and that he was
so, did not acknowledge himself to be Pope, per antonomasiam (for in that
sense the name of Pope was not then used) but to be B. of Carthage, that is to
say, the chief Father, and Primate of all the Christians of Africa. How then
proves this, that the name of Pope, being from the time of S. Gregory
appropriated to the B. of Rome, to signify his supreme authority, does not
since that appropriation, declare him to be Pope per antonomasiam? For words
signify ad placitum, that which according to the common use and acception of
men they import.

And finally, that the name of Pope when it is applied to the B. of Rome,
imports a singular dignity, proper to him alone, is convinced by the Epithets
which ancient Fathers speaking to him, add to that name, as when they call him
Universal Pope: for so he is styled by the Council of Cyprus Ep. Synod. ad
Theodor. Pap.
, by S. Athanasius, and all the Bishops of Egypt Ep. ad Marc. Pap.
.

CHAP. XXVI. The Counsels of Carthage and Mileuis acknowledged the supreme
Authority of the B. of Rome.
AGAINST the prerogative of appeals to Rome you object Page 141.
the Council of Mileuis, held Anno 402. And yet afterward you say, that the
same Council was held in the year 416. and cite Binius as your Author for
both. Binius speaks of two different Counsels, held at Mileuis in those
several years, and under different Consuls; and you confound them, taking
them both for one, and father your ignorance on Binius. And with like ignorance
you affirm Ibid.
the decree touching appeals to have been made by the Council of Mileuis Anno
402. for the Council held that year, was the first of Mileuis, in which the
decree concerning appeals was not made, but in the second Anno 416.

2. You must remember, that when Bellarmine in proof of the Popes universal
authority, among other arguments, produces examples of African Bishops
instituted, or deposed by him, as also the ancient custom of appealing to him
out of Africa; you answer Page 289. and 304.
, that the Africans are within the Popes Patriarkeship (which you call his
Dioces) and therefore rather subject to him, then to others. If then the
Africans were within the Popes Dioces, they were subject to him as to their
lawful Judge, and had right to appeal to him, and he to admit their appeals,
and judge their causes. Wherefore if in the Mileuitan, or any other Council, or
occasion whatsoever, the Africans inhibited appeals out of Africa to the Pope,
their inhibition was an act of disobedience, and rebellion against their
lawful Superior; and no less a crime, then if the subjects of a temporal
Monarke, should forbid appeals to their Sovereign. With what face then can
you justify them therein?

But the truth is, that you slander them iniustly: for as there is nothing
more evident, then that the Council of Carthage and this of Mileuis held in
the cause of Pelagius and Celestius, did fully acknowledge the supreme
authority of the Pope, and professed their obedience to him, both in words and
deeds; so there is nothing more certain, then that they denied not his
prerogative of Appeals, without which his authority cannot consist.

If the African Bishops did not believe the sovereign power of the Sea
Apostolic, why did S. Cyprian address his Council held in favor of
Rebaptization to Stephen Pope S Hierom. aduers. Lucifer.
? And why did the Council of Carthage, held against Pelagius and Celestius,
send their decrees to Innocentius Pope, to be confirmed by his authority,
saying Aug. ep. 92.
: This our proceeding (holy Lord and Brother) we conceived we ought to
represent to your Charity, that to the statutes of our mediocrity, might be
added the authority of the Sea Apostolic for the defense of many men's
salvation, and also for the correction of some men's frowardness? Nor do they
require this of Innocentius by way of charity only, but require him, as their
Pastor, to take compassion on them, Pastoralibus visceribus, with the bowels of
mercy, which he as their Pastor owes to them as to his sheep. And having
rehearsed the opinions of Pelagius and Celestius, they conclude: What other
things soever are objected by them, we doubt not but that your Reverence, when
you have examined the decrees of the Bishops, which are said to be made upon
this occasion in the East, will frame such a judgment, whereat we all may
rejoice in the mercy of God.

Innocentius having received this Epistle, praised the Fathers of the Council
Aug. ep. 91.
, that, Antiquae traditionis exempla sequentes following the examples of
ancient tradition, and knowing: what is due to the Sea Apostolic, they had
sent their decrees to be approved by his judgment; for as much (says he) as we
all that sit in this place, desire to follow the Apostle himself, from whom
the Episcopal office, and the authority of this name has proceeded: the which
Apostle we following, do now as well know, how to condemn evil things, as to
approve those which are worthy of praise. And then declaring what that is,
which the ancient tradition has delivered, he adds Ibid.
: The Fathers have ordained, not by humane, but by divine sentence, that they
should not account any thing that is treated in provinces distant, and far of,
to be ended, until first it were come to the knowledge of the Sea Apostolic,
to the end that the sentence, which should be found just, might be confirmed by
the authority of the same See; and that from thence all other Churches* as
streams flowing from their Mother source, and running with the purity of their
original, through the diverse regions of the whole world, might take what they
ought to ordeyne, and what to avoid.

In like manner the Council of Mileuis writ to the same Pope, as to their
Pastor Aug. ep. 92.
: Because our Lord by the gift of his special grace, has placed you in the
Apostolic See, vouchsafe, we beseech you, to apply your pastoral diligence,
to the great dangers of the weak members of Christ. And S. Augustine, who was
present at this Council, and Secretary thereof, writ to Hilary of the same
subject Ep. 94.
: When I did write these things, we knew, that a decree had been made against
them (Pelagius and Celestius) in the Church of Carthage, to be directed to the
holy and Venerable Pope Innocentius. And we likewise had written from the
Council of (Mileuis in) Numidia, to the same Apostolic See. And what did they
write? We hope (says the Council Aug. ep. 92.
these men which hold so perverse and pernicious opinions, will sooner yield to
the authority of your Holiness, drawn from the authority of the holy
Scriptures, by help of the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, who vouchsafes to
govern you consulting with him, and to hear you praying unto him.

To this Epistle of the Council Innocentius answered Aug. ep. 93.
: You provide diligently, and worthily for the Apostolic honor etc. following,
in the consultation of difficult things, the form of the ancient rule, which
you know, as well as I, to have been always observed by the whole world. But I
omit this, for I think it is not unknown to your wisdom: for why else did you
confirm this by your deeds? but because you know, that answers do always
flow from the Apostolical fountain throughout all Countries, to those, that
ask them: And especially as often, as matter of faith is in question, I
conceive that all our brethren and fellow-Bishops ought not to refer what may
be profitable in common to all Churches, to any but to Peter, that is, to the
author of their name, and dignity, as your Dilection has done.

If you answer, that Innocentius writ this, but spoke untruly in his own
cause, S. Augustine will satisfy you, who highly prayseth both these answeares
of his. Upon this affair (says S. Augustine Ep. 106.
relations were sent from the two Counsels of Carthage, and Mileuis, to the
Apostolical See etc. And besides the relations of the Counsels, we writ also
private letters to Pope Innocentius of blessed memory* in which we discoursed
more largely of the same subject. And he answered us to every point, as it was
convenient, and fitting the Prelate of the Apostolic See should answer. And
again Ep. 157.
: Pelagius and Celestius having been the authors, or most violent promotors of
this new Heresy, they also by means of the vigilance of two Episcopal
Counsels (with the help of God, who undertakes the protection of his Church)
have been condemned in the extent of the whole world, by two reverend Prelates
of the Apostolic See, Pope Innocentius, and Pope Zozimus, unless they reform
themselves, and do penance.

Out of this it is evident. 1. That it was the ancient tradition and custom,
that Councels should send their decrees to the Pope to be confirmed by his
authority. 2. And that it is so ordained, not by humane, but by divine
sentence. 3. That all other Churches of the world compared to the Roman, are as
streams, that flow from their mother source, and are to embrace as pure,
whatsoever doctrine she delivers, and reject whatsoever she condemns. 4.
That the Fathers of both these Councels did acknowledge the Pope to be their
Pastor. 5. And that they did believe his authority, to be taken out of the holy
Scriptures. 6. That Christ guides him in his consultations and decrees of
faith. 7. That the custom and ancient rule bears, that in doubts especially
of faith, the Sea Apostolic is to be consulted, and nothing determined, until
answer had from thence.

Now to your objection Page 141. and seqq.
, that, the Council of Mileuis denied any right of Appeals from Africa to the
Church of Rome, which in your eyes is so forcible, that you repeat it
afterward again Page 321.322. and seqq.
, and descant on it at large against Bellarmine, who shows L. 2. de Pont. c.
24.
it to be wholly impertinent, and from the matter: for the question of appeals
to the B. of Rome, is not of Priests, and inferior Clerks (of whom only the
Council of Mileuis speaks) but of Bishops: for the Council of Sardica,
which has declared Can. 4. and 7.
, that Bishops may appeal to the Pope, has withal decreed Can. 27.
that Priests and inferior Clerks are to be judged by their own Bishops: and
that if they conceive themselves to be wronged by them, they appeal to other
Bishops of the same province. And the same had been ordained not long before by
the Council of Nice Julius ep. 1.2.3. apud Bin. to. 1. page 399. and seqq.
: and afterward by S. Leo Ep. 84. ad Anastas. Thessal.
, and S. Gregory L. 2. indict. 11. ep. 6.
, ordeyning that mayor causes be judged in the first instance by a Council of
Bishops of the same province; and by way of appeal by the Sea Apostolic. And
to go no further the same was answered by the holy Pope Innocentius, to whom
the Council of Mileuis sent their decrees to be confirmed. Aug. ep. 92.
For when Victricius B. of Rhoan desiring to order the government of his Church
according to the Roman discipline, required instructions from him, he Ep. 2.
addressed unto him diverse rules to be observed: of which the third is, that,
If dissentions arise between Priests, or other Clerks of the inferior order,
they are to be judged and ended by the Bishops of the same Province, as the
Council of Nice has determined. And for the causes of Bishops, he adds Ibid.
: If they be mayor causes that are in question, let them after the Episcopal
judgment, be referred to the Sea Apostolic, as the Synod of Nice, and the
ancient customs ordeyne.

This Epistle of Innocentius was cited by the Bishops of France, in the second
Council of Tours 700. years since. And his very words concerning the appeals
of Bishops to the Sea Apostolic are inserted in form of a Law into the
Capitulary of Charlemaine. And Hincmarus Archbishop of Rhemes in his epistle to
Nicolas Pope Erodoard. histor. Eccles. Rhem. lib. 3.
, repeating the same decree of Innocentius, says: We Metropolitans trauilling
in our provincial Councels, have care after judgment to refer the mayor
causes (that is of faith) and of mayor persons (that is of Bishops) to the
determination of the sovereign See. And speaking of Priests and inferior
Clerks: Let it not please God, that we thould depise the privilege of the
first and supreme See of the holy Roman Church, as to weary your sovereign
Authority, with all the controversies, and quarrels of the Clergy, as well of
the superior, as of the inferior order, which the canons of the Nicen Council
and the decrees of Innocentius, and other Popes of the holy See of Rome command
to be determined in their own Provinces.

From hence it follows, that the Canon of the Council of Mileuis, which you
object against appeals to Rome, makes nothing at all for your purpose; your
peremptory conclusion is Page 141.
, that, the Council of Mileuis denies any right of appeals from Africa to
the Church of Rome. To make this good you should have showed, that the Council
of Mileuis forbids the appeals of Bishops from Africa to Rome; for of them
only the question is. But instead of proving this you produce a Canon, in which
(even as it is reported by your self) no mention is made of Bishops, but only
a command given, that Priests, Deacons, or other inferior Clerks appeal not
from the Bishops of their own province, either to Rome, or to any other
transmarine Church: which no more impeacheth the sovereign power of the Pope,
or disproueth his right of appeals out of Africa, then it would impeach the
authority of the King of France, if to prevent the multitude of unnecessary
suites, and keep his people in awe of their immediate Superiors, his Majesty,
and his Courts of Parliament with his assent, should provide by a special law,
that in minor causes, no appeals be made from them to himself.

To this I add, that Innocentius confirmed this Council of Mileuis Aug. ep.
93.
, which he would not have done, if it had prohibited the appeals of Bishops to
his See, which he himself in his epistle to Victricius claymeth, and proves
out of the Council of Nice to be lawful. And the same is confirmed out of S.
Augustine, who was present at the Council of Mileuis, and speaking of Cecilian
Archbishop of Carthage, that had been iniustly condemned by the Donatists in a
Council of 70. Bishops, faith Ep. 162.
: Cecilian might have contemned the multitude of his enemies conspiring against
him, for as much as he knew himself to be in the Communion of the Roman
Church, in which had always florish't the principality of the Sea Apostolic;
and that he might have reserved his cause entire, to be judged a new there,
because it was not a cause of Priests, or Deacons, or other Clerks of the
inferior order, but of a Colleague, that is to say, of a Bishop.

This discourse of S. Augustine conuinceth that Bishops may appeal to Rome,
though Priests, and other inferior Clerks may not. How comes it then to pass,
that you say Page 323.
Bellarmine when he says, that, S. Augustine in the place alleged does
justify appeals (of Bishops) beyond the sea to Rome, speaks so still, as
though be were scarce able to report a truth? Bellarmine may indeed with truth
tell you, that when you said Ibid.
, The case of Cecilian (which S. Augustine speaks of) was not a case of
appeal, but of delegation (by the authority of the Emperor) to the Pope, and
to other Bishops, you speak as one, that is scarce able to report any thing
out of him without an untruth: for he speaks not of what passed de facto, in
the case of Cecilian, but of the right that Cecilian had to appeal to the
Pope; which right S. Augustine could not have alleged, unless he had
believed, that Bishops in their wrongs might lawfully appeal to him. And that
the case of Cecilian was not a case of appeal to the Pope, but a delegation
from the Emperor, is an untruth that shall be confuted hereafter Chap. 30.
sect. ^.


From hence Bellarmine collecteth, that albeit the Council of Mileuis
prohibited the appeals of Priests and inferior Clerks to Rome, yet they
nether did, nor could prohibit the Pope to admit of such appeals, if they
were made. Against this you reply Page 322.
that, where there lies a prohibition against appealing to a Judge, that Judge
is not held a superior Judge. False, if it be taken universally without
limitation: for a prohibition may be iniust, as being made without sufficient
authority: such is the prohibition of Protestants forbidding all Appeals to
Rome. Again, a prohibition may be made with dependence on the will and
confirmation of a Superior; to whom the right of appeals belongs. Such was
the prohibition made in the Council of Mileuis; which therefore without the
Popes confirmation was inualid, and is not valid further, then he confirmed it.
Wherefore though by confirming it, he did authorize the Africa^ Bishops to
impose on their Priests and other Clerks, a command of not appealing to Rome,
yet by gran^ing them that authority, he cannot be thought to renounce his own
right, so far, as that, if a Priest appeal unto him, he may not admit his
appeal, when he shall find it expedient: as it may be, in case the Priest or
Clerk can make evidence of his innocence, proving by sufficient witnesses,
that he has been iniustly condemned by the Bishops of his own province, out
of misinformation, or other motives.

CHAP. XXVII. Appeals to Rome, proved out of the African Council, which was
the sixth of Carthage.
SECT I. The state of the Question.
APIARIVS, an African Priest, of the City of Sicca, being of a lewd and
scandalous life, was excommunicated by Vrbanus B. of the same City. He
traveled twice to Rome, and making his complaints to Zozimus Pope, appealed to
his judgment. Zozimus sent him back into Africa, wishing the African Bishops to
examine his cause diligently. And for as much as not only Apiarius, but (as it
appears out of two Epistle of the African Bishops to Boniface, and Celestine,
successors to Zozimus) some Bishops also had appealed unto him out of Africa,
and the African Bishops complained thereof, he sent unto the^ three Legates,
Faustinus B. of Potentia, Philip, and Asellus Priests; and with them, the
Canons made in the Council of Nice concerning appeals to Rome. The Africans
not finding those Canons in their copies of the Nicen Council, sent Deputies
into the East, to procure authentical copies from Cyril Patriarch of
Alexandria, and Atticus of Constantinople. But when they came, their copies
were found to contain no more then 20. which is the number exstant in our
Latin editions, and in which there is no mention of appeals to Rome.

This objection has been often urged by Protestants, and as often answered by
us: and particularly by the most eminent Cardinals Baronius Anno 419.
, Bellarmine L. 2. de Pontif. c. 25.
, and Peron Repliq. l. 1. Chap. 49.
. In them you may read the solution: It will be sufficient for me to give the
Reader out of them, and other Authors, a touch of your vnsyncere dealing,
whereby he may also come to understand what the issue of this controversy was.

First therefore Bellarmine, Peron Loc. cit.
, and Brereley Prot. Apol. tract. 1. sect. 7. Subdiu. 2. n. 3.
show, that the ancient Fathers and Councels, and in particular the Africans
themselves, whom this matter most concerned, highly commend those three Popes,
Zozimus, Boniface, and Celestine, with whom this controversy was, and grace
them with titles of great reverence and honor, calling Zozimus, The most
blessed Pope Zozimus; Zozimus of venerable memory: that they call Boniface, The
venerable Bishop of the Roman Church; The most blessed Bishop of the City of
Rome; The holy and blessed Pope; The Reverend Pope Boniface; Boniface of holy
memory; The most blessed and our honorable brother, Boniface; and that S.
Augustine dedicated to him one of his principal works. And finally that they
qualify Celestine with these titles: Our most beloved Lord, and honorable
brother, Celestine; Celestine of blessed memory; and that the famous Council
of Ephesus calls him, New S. Peter.

This shows the impudency of your Centurists, who (as Peron, and Bellarmine
advertise Loc. cit.
, upon occasion of this African Controversy, traduce almost all the Popes of
those times, inuerting and perverting their names, by calling Innocent, Nocent;
Boniface, Maleface; Celestine, Infernal; and the most holy and learned Pope S.
Leo the great, A roaring Lion, and a hellish Wolf. To this impudency of the
Centurists you add your Vote, whiles in your late sermon before his Majesty at
Durham, speaking of Vrbane the second, you say Page 29.
Pope Vrbane called by the nick name of Turbane. So indeed he is nicknamed by
your self: but that he was ever so nicknamed by any one else, I think you
cannot show. And to make your self more like to the Centurists, in this your
Grand imposture, you brand Zozimus, Boniface, and Celestine, with the black
mark of Falsaries, charging them with forgery of a false Canon of Nice: which
censure you might have spared, if you had considered, that the African Fathers
themselves (with whom this controversy was) were so far from laying any such
aspersion on them, that contrarily, they honored them with titles of great
reverence, as you have heard. And how unjustly you charge them with forging a
Canon of Nice, may appear by the testimonies of antiquity, whereby I have
proved Chap. 16. and 26.
that the Canons of appeals to Rome, which Zozimus sent to the Africans, were
true Canons of the Nicen Council. But because afterward Page 301. and seqq.
you make a digression, to prove, that the Nicen Canons were no more but 20.
you shall hear receive your answer before hand.

SECT. II. That the Nicen Canons were more then 20. in number: and that the
Canons concerning appeals to Rome, were true Canons of the Nicen Council.
YOur words are Page 302.
: Your authors instance in multitudes of particular points, as being handled in
the Council of Nice, which they call Canons of that Council; but erring, for
want of that pair of spectacles (for so we may call a distinction) which their
own Jesuit Pisanus reaches unto them, who distinguishes thus. The things
(says he) handled in the Council of Nice, were partly Constitutions, or Acts
belonging to doctrines, and partly Canons, which concern Ecclesiastical
Policy. So now all the examples, which your obiectors have collected out of the
testimonies of Fathers and Councels, as though they had been Canons, are easily
answered by the former distinction, to prove them to have been Diatyposes,
Constitutions, Acts only, not Canons, as your Jesuit Turrian does also
manifest: which we grant, and oppose against all your instances. So you, not
without wilful imposture: for though Pisanus observe that in the Council of
Nice, there were not only Canons, but Diatyposes, or Constitutions, yet he is
so far from saying, that the Nicen Canons were but 20. in number, that
besides the 20. vulgarly acknowledged, he sets down Apud Bin. pa. 348.
other 24. taken out of the second Epistle of Julius to the Arians, in which
that holy Pope reprehendeth them severely for their proceeding against
Athanasius and other Catholic Bishops, whom in their Council at Antioch they
had iniustly condemned, infringing the Canons of the Nicen Council, which
command (says he) that no Counsels be held, praeter sententiam, without the
allowance of the B. of Rome. And this Canon out of the said Epistle of Julius
is in like manner reported by the Sardican Council, by Socrates, Sozomen,
Theodoret, Nicephorus, and other ancient authors, Whose testimonies Pisanus L.
3. in Conc. Nicen. apud Bin. to. 1. page 349. 350.
sets down at large.

2. And no less effectual are the words he alleges of Ibid. page 347.
John that famous Orator of the Latins in the Council of Florence: for when
Marcus the Greek disputant imputed to the holy Pope Zozimus the same crime of
forging a false Canon of the Nicen Council, which you now do, and in proof
thereof alleged that the Nicen Canons were but 20. in number, John in his own
name, and in the name of all the Latins answered, that the most ancient
Epistles of Julius, and Liberius Popes, which Julian Cardinal of S. Sabina had
showed to the Grecians, in that Council, did euince, that Athanasius being
persecuted and condemned by the Arians, writ to Felix, Marcus, Julius, and
Liberius, all of them successively Bishops of Rome, for a true copy of the
Acts of Nice, all that were in the East being corrupted by the Arians, and
that their answer was, They would not send the original Acts, which being
written in Greek and Latin, and subscribed by the Nicen Fathers, and sealed
with their seals, were kept by the B. of Rome with great Veneration; but that
they would send him copied out severally those Canons, which were for his
purpose. Moreover he showed, that when Athanasius appealed from the Council of
Antioch, to the Sea of Rome, and the Arians reproached it unto him, as a thing
unlawful, Liberius promised to send him copied out the Nicen decree, for the
lawfullnesse of appealing to Rome: and that Julius in his Epistle sharply
rebuked the Arians, for presuming to call a Council, without the authority of
the Sea Apostolic, showing to them out of a decreee of the Council of Nice,
that, no Synod was to be held without the authority of the B. of Rome.

3. And in proof of the same verity, he alleges out of Isidore the
testimonies of the Council of Constantinople, of Marcus, Stephanus, and
Innocentius Popes, of Athanasius, and the Bishops of Egypt, of Theophilus
Patriarch of Alexandria, and other Orientalls, of Marianus Scotus, Iuo
Carnotensis, and Gratian; giving us thereby spectacles to see your imposterous
dealing, who are not ashamed to produce his authority for your number of the
20. Nicen Canons, where he professedly proves the contrary. Yea in that very
place which you cite, though he distinguish the decrees of that Council which
you cite, into Canons, and Constitutions; yet he presently adds that
Onuphrius reports the Nicen Canons to be 84. in number; but that out of
Athanasius, we know them, not to be above 70. or 80. at the most: and that the
number of 84. reckoned by Onuphrius peradventure belongs to the Constitutions.
So Pisanus. Can you then be excused from a wilful falsification in cutting of
his words, and alleging him for your 20. Canons; in that very place, where he
adds immediately out of S. Athanasius, and proves afterward out of so many
ancient and learned writers, that they were many more?

But leaving him, and returning to Julius, he in his third Epistle which S.
Athanasius has inserted into his second Apology, intimating to the Arians the
right of the B. of Rome to have the hearing and final dicision of the causes
of Bishops, says: Are you ignorant that the custom is, that we be first
written unto, that from hence may proceed the just decision of things? If
therefore any suspicion were conceived against the Bishops there, it ought to
have been referred hither to our Church. And thereupon he denounces to them,
that in condemning Athanasius without expecting his sentence, they had done
contra canones, against the Canons, namely of the Nicen Council, which he
sets down in his second Epistle to them: and that as well Athanasius, as
other Catholic Bishops whom they had condemned, in appealing from their
Council to him, as he in repealing their Acts, in restoring the Appellants to
their seats, and in summoning their adversaries to Rome, had done, quod
Ecclesiastici Canonis est, according to the Canons of the Church.

If therefore the holy Popes Julius, Felix, Marcus, and Liberius, that lived
soon after the Council of Nice; if S. Athanasius that was personally present;
if John the learned Orator of the Latins, speaking in all their names in the
council of Florence; if Socrates, Sozomen, Theodoret, Nicephorus and many
other ancient writers deserve to be credited; and if they knew how to call
things by their proper names, there were in the Nicen Council more then 20.
Canons properly so called: which is also acknowledged by your Protestant
brethren Brereley Prot. Apol. Tract. 1. sect. 7. subdiu. 2.
Oecolampadius (who charge the Latin copies of the 20. Canons as defective)
Calvin, M. Iuell, and M. Bilson, mentioning a Canon of the Nicen Council
concerning the Sacrament; and lastly by Doctor Whitgift Brereley ibid.
proving out of the second Council of Arles, S. Hierome, and other approved
authors, diverse Canons, which are not to be found in those 20.

The testimonies which you object for the contrary, urge not: Not that of Pope
Stephen, for though he say that in the Roman Church there are 20. Chapters of
the Nicen council, yet he immediately adds, that, it is uncertain by what
negligence the rest are wanting: which words you wittingly leave out, mangling
the sentence, that so he may seem to favor your opinion of the 20. Canons.
Theodoret and Nicephorus speak only of 20. Canons, or laws made pro
conformandis moribus, for ordering or reforming of manners; whereas
notwithstanding (as Pisanus out of their own words has observed) else where
they acknowledge that the Arians in condemning Athanasius had infringed the
Nicen Canons; and that Athanasius in appealing to him, had done according to
the same Canons.

Wherefore it the two Patriarchs Cyrill, and Atticus knew not of more then 20.
Nicen Canons, it was because the Arians having cast out the Catholic Bishops,
and possessed their seats, (as we read in Socrates, Sozomen, Theodoret, and
Nicephorus Brereley ibid.
, had corrupted the Canons of that Council; and suppressed those which
declared their proceedings to be unlawful, and contrary to the Nicen Canons.
And howsoever those Patriarchs thought, you cannot deny that your 20. Canons
were not the only, nor all the true Canons of Nice, unless you will grant the
Canons of Ruffinus (which you allow) to be corrupt and false: for (as Osiander
confesses Epit. Cent. 4. page 122.
, those 20. of Ruffinus differ ordine and rebus, both in order and matter, from
the others, which Cyrill and Atticus sent out of the East. And the same is yet
made more evident out of the Council of Florence, affirming Sess. 20.
, that by the testimonies of many ancient, and holy Fathers, the African
Council it self did know those Canons which they received out of the East, to
be corrupt, and false. It rests therefore that neither they, nor the other of
Ruffinus comprehend all the true Canons of Nice, but that there were others,
declaring the primacy of the Roman Church, her authority to call, and confirm
Counsels, and in particular her right of appeals, as Pisanus has proved,
whom therefore you abusiuely allege for the contrary.

Nor is your dealing better with Turrianus: for albeit he grant that, as in the
Council of Chalcedon, so likewise in that of Nice, beside Canons, there were
among the Acts, other Decrees or Constitutions, and that of this number are
the several Decrees which you set down out of him; yet with what conscience
do you conceal the rest? for in the words immediately preceding, he says: In
illis Actis etc. In those Acts was also contained that Canon of Appeals,
which Zozimus Pope in the sixth Council of Carthage, witnesses to be of the
Nicen Council; and which after the Nicen Council, was renewed in the Council
of Sardica C. 7. And is not this very point here in question? Our dispute is
not verbal, whether the decree of Appeals to Rome made in the Council of
Nice, were a Canon properly so called, or, a Constitution. Words of this kind
are by the best authors used promiscuously. The canons of Counsels are
sometimes called Canones; sometimes Capitula; sometimes Leges; sometimes Decreta;
sometimes Co^stitutiones. The real difficulty between us is, whether appeals
to Rome were decreed in the Council of Nice by any either Canon properly so
called, or by any Law, or, Constitution. That they were decreed, has been
proved, and that not only ancient writers give it the name of a Canon, but enen
Pisanus, and Turrianus, those very two, whom you produce for the contrary.

I conclude therefore, that as this your discourse is a digression from the
truth, so it is from the purpose; and a trifling shift, to put of the real
difficulty, by reducing it to a question de nomine. And that which most shows
your folly, is, that by trifling, you wholly overthrow your cause: for you
grant Page 302.
all the examples, which our Authors collect out of the Fathers and Counsels,
as though they had been Canons of the Nicen Council, to be Constitutions of
the same Council, though not Canons; which is to grant, that in the Nicen
Council there was a Constitution whereby Appeals to Rome were decreed: for
this is one of the examples, which our Authors collect out of the Epistles of
Julius, out of Socrates, Sozomen, Theodoret, Nicephorus* and other ancient
writers. And this alone is sufficient to show, that as you deny the same
without ground, so you conclude your digression falsely, saying Page 303.
: that the decree which the Popes alleged for appeals, is not to be found at
all, either among the Canons, or the Constitutions of the Council of Nice.

SECT. III. Whether if there had been no Canon for appeals to Rome in the
Council of Nice, it had been forgery in Pope Zozimus, to allege a Canon of
the Sardican Council, for a Canon of Nice.
SOme Catholic writers conjecture that the Canons of appealing to Rome, which
Pope Zozimus directed to the Africans, were Canons of the Council of Sardica,
but sent by him under the title of Nicen Canons. You say Page 145.
: These Canons of Sardi^a mun be judged fictions; and that it is sufficiently
proved to be a fal^hood, that any such Canons were extant in the Council of
Sardica. I cannot but marvel at so great boldness: for, that those Canons
were extant in the Council of Sardica, is a truth proved, not only by all
editions of the Counsels, and all Catholic writers, but auerred by the
Magdeburgians, by Osiander, Peter Martyr, and John Calvin Brereley Protest.
Apolog. tract. 1. sect. 7. subdia. ^.
. It is true, that Calvin accuses Zozimus of heinous impudency, and fraud, in
citing the Council of Sardica, for that of Nice. But his accusation has no
other ground then his hatred to the Sea of Rome: for were it true (as it is
not) that the Canons which Zozimus sent, were not of the Council of Nice, but
of Sardica, and that he had sent them as Canons of Nice, it had not been fraud
or forgery in him; as it was not in S. Matthew Cap. 27.^.
to cite Hieremy for Zachary, because it was the same Spirit of God that spoke
in both those Prophets: And so likewise the Council of Sardica was of no less
authority, then that of Nice. Again, the Council of Sardica consisted in
great part, of the same Fathers, that the Nicen Council did, and was an
explication and confirmation thereof. Wherefore the Sardican Canons might not
unfitly bear the name of Nicen Canons, as the Constantinopolitan Creed,
because it is an explication and confirmation of the Nicen, bears the name of
the Nicen Creed. Moreover the ancient Fathers numbering the Counsels, after
that of Nice, ever reckon immediately the first of Constantinople, which they do
upon no other ground then because they repute the Council of Sardica, to be an
Appendix of the Council of Nice, and therefore as all one with it.

For these reasons, Zozimus might without any forgery or falsehood, have cited
the Canons of the Council of Sardica, under the title of Nicen Canons, as it
is the custom of the Greeks, to cite the Trullan Canons under the title of
the Canons of the sixth general Council, because they pretend the Trullan
Council to be an Apendix, and supplement of the sixth Council general. And
so in like manner S. Gregory of Tours De g^st. Fran. l. 9. c. 33.
citing a Canon of the Councall of Grangres, without either fraud or forgery,
calls it a Canon of the Nicen Council, because the Council of Gangres was a
branch, and slip of the Council of Nice.

Finally, and if these Canons were not indeed of the Council of Nice, but of
Sardica, how can Zozimus be thought to have used any fraud or forgery, in
alleging them, as the Council of Nice, since it had been more aduantagious
for his purpose, against the Africans, to have alleged them, as Canons of the
Council of Sardica? for as much as the fifth general Council bears
witness Act. ^.
, that in the Council of Nice, there was no other B. of Africa, but only
Cecilian Archbishop of Carthage; whereas in the Council of Sardica, were
present and subscribed 30. African Bishops, who are all named in particular by
S. Athanasius Apol. 2.
; which might have been a great motive to the Africans, to submit to those
Canons, as being approved, and signed by so many Bishops of their own nation.

But the truth is, that albeit the Africans had notice of a Council held at
Sardica, yet (as Peron learnedly proves) Repliq. l. 1. Chap. 49.
, the Donatists had suppressed in Africa the copies of the true Council of
Sardica; and those which the Africans had in the time of S. Augustine, and the
sixth Council of Carthage, were copies of the Anti-councell which Sozomen
mentions L. 3. c. 10.
held by the Arians at Philippopolis, near to Sardica, which they (to gain
credit to it, and to their cause) called The Council of Sardica, and published
it in Africa under that name. And this is the reason, why S. Augustine
professes Ep* 163. and Con^. Cres^on. l. 3. c. 34.
that he knew no other Council of Sardica, but that of the Arians, in which S.
Athanasius was condemned; whereas the true Council of Sardica justified S.
Athanasius, and confirmed the Council of Nice.

This true Council of Sardica you acknowledge to have been a general Council
of the whole Church Page 144. fin. 14^.
. This the Centurists have copied out, and inserted into their fourth Century.
And this it is, in which as well they, as also Calvin, Peter Martyr, and
Osiander acknowledge the Canons for appealing to Rome, to have been made: whereof
if the African Fathers had notice, they would not have replied to Pope
Celestine Ep. ad Celestin.
: We find it not to have been determined by the Fathers in any Synod, that
Legates should be sent from your Holiness, to order matters here: for it is
expressly decreed in the Council of Sardica Can. 7.
that, if it shall seem good to the B. of Rome, he may send Legates to judge
the causes of Appellants in their own Provinces.

This shows, how untruly you deny, that in the Council of Sardica, were
extant any Canons for Appeals to Rome. And since your own brethren
acknowledge them, with what conscience do you justify the Africans in their
denial of them? or blame the Pope for defending his right against them?
especially since you confess Page 289. and 304.
, that the Africans were subject to the Pope, as to their Patriarch.

SECT. IV. Untruths and falsifications of Doctor Morton discovered, and his
Objections answered.
FIrst you object Page 145.
, that 217. African Bishops (S* Augustine being a principal one) show, that
the Popes claim of Appeals, had no patronage from the Council of Nice, but
rather, that there was in that Council another Canon to control it, and that
makes much against such appeals, by determining, that Popes being so far
remote from Africa, could not be so competent judges in such causes: Except
(say they) some will think, that God will inspire one singular man with
justice, and deny that grace to innumerable persons assembled together in a
Synod. These words, Sir, are not of the Council of Nice, but of the African
Fathers in their Epistle to Celestine Pope. Is it not then a mere delusion to
object them, as a Canon of the Nicen Council, to control appeals to Rome?
They speak not of matters of faith: for the same Fathers a little before had
sent to Innocentius Pope, to confirm with his authority, the sentence of
Condemnation, which they had pronounced against Pelagius and Celestius, in the
Counsels of Carthage and Mileuis* acknowledging Aug. ep. ^2.
that. God did guide him in his consultations of faith, and therefore hoping
that those Heretics would more easily yield to his authority, drawn from the
authority of the holy Scriptures, then to the authority of their Counsels.
Wherefore in the words objected, they speak only of particular and personal
causes of fact, civil and criminal, in which (as those Fathers declare)
witnesses were to interuene, that could not without much difficulty pass the
seas, for the debility of sex, or of age, or other impediments: In regard
whereof, they requested the Pope, not to be facill in admitting appeals of that
nature.

2. You object Page 146.151.
: If it were granted, that the Canons for appeals were to be found in the
Council of Sardica, yet the Popes Monarchy would still stand upon but humane
authority: for the grant of appeals made in that Synod to Julius Pope, was but
upon favor, and not upon duty; not an old custom, but a new constitution: If
it please you (say they) so much to honor the memory of Peter, let us write to
Julius B. of Rome etc. And again: If you all be pleased etc. From these words
you infer, that the grant of appeals to Rome is no more but ad placitum; and
that, if the Pope for his pretension, could have drawn a two edged sword, ex
iure diuino, he would not have fought with this wodden dagger of humane
Constitution. This wodden Argument you think to be of such moment, that for
want of better, you repeat it afterward again Page 302.303.
. Your reason I know not: for the very words which you object, show, that the
Council of Sardica did not ground appeals to Rome upon humane Constitution,
but upon divine right: for what is it, to honor in the Pope, the memory of
Peter, but to acknowledge him to be S. Peter's Successor, and consequently Head
of the Church? And therefore what in their Canon they express in these words,
That we may honor the memory of Peter, let it be written to Julius B. of Rome
etc. they declare in their Epistle to the same Julius, saying: It is very good,
and fit, that from all Provinces the Bishops have reference to their head, that
is to the Sea of the Apostle Peter. Wherefore as the dignity of Head of the
Church had belonged to the Sea of S. Peter from all antiquity, by divine
institution (as the African Fathers in the Council of Mileuis have declared
Aug. ep. 92.
, professing the Popes authority to be taken from the authority of the holy
Scriptures) so likewise had the right of Appeals implicitly contained in that
dignity. And on this right was grounded the custom of appealing to Rome from
all antiquity, as it appears out of the Epistle of Julius Pope Apud Athan.
Apolog. 2.
written to the Arians before the Council of Sardica: Are you ignorant (says
he) that the custom is, that we be first written to, that from hence may
proceed the just decision of things? and therefore if there were any suspicion
conceived against the Bishops there, you should have written to us. And by this
right it is, that Athanasius, Paul, and other Bishops of the East being driven
from their seats by the Arians, appealed to Julius Pope before the Council of
Sardica, and he restored to each of them their Churches, by the prerogative of
his See, and because the charge of all belonged to him Socra. l. 2. c. 12.
Sozom. l. ^. c. 7.
. Wherefore the Council of Sardica did not then first institute appeals to
Rome, as you pretend, but only reduce into a written law, that, which had
belonged to the Sea of Rome by divine right, and had been formerly practiced by
custom only. And this written Law it is, which Osius proposed to be made,
saying: If is please your Charity, that we honor the memory of Peter etc. In
which sense Nicolas the first truly said Ep. ad Michael. Imper.
: The privileges of the Roman See were given by Christ our Lord, celebrated
and honored by the Councels, but not given by them. And before him Gelasius an
African, and scholar to S. Augustine, with a Council of 70. Bishops: In
Decret. de Apocryph, Scriptur.
The holy Roman Church has not been preferred before others, by any
constitutions of Synods, but has obtained the primacy by the voice of our Lord
and Savior in the Gospel, saying; Thou art Peter etc. And the same truth had
been professed long before that time, by Julius Pope in his first Epistle to
the Eastern Bishops, in the cause of Athanasius Extat apud Bin. to. 1. page
399.
.

Nor is it new for a Council, to make a written decree for the presetuation
and observance of that, which formerly had been practiced in the Church by
custom only: why else did the first Council of Constantinople speaking of the
ordination of Bishops by their Metropolitans, say Apud Theodore^. l. 5. hist.
c. 9.
. It is (as you know) a law, both grounded on custom, and on the decision of
the Council of Nice?

The example of a King wherewith you conclude this point, is against your self:
for although she dignity of a King include a supreme right of appeals to be
made unto him, yet it is no derogation to his Royal dignity, to have a written
law enacted in Parliament for the preservation of that right, against all such,
as shall either iniustly deny the same, or at least, shall think the practice
of them to be inconvenient.

3. You say Page 146.
: Antiquity has denied, that any Canon for appeals was to be found in the
Council of Sardica. This is an untruth sufficiently refuted by what has been
said Sect. 2. and 3.
, and by your own Confession, pretending that the right of Appeals is not by
divine institution, but by humane, because the decree which the Council of
Sardica made in favor of them, was a humane constitution. But that you may not
seem ^o speak without ground, you falsify Salmeron Page 147.
: He speaking of the reservation of cases in the inward court of conscience,
that is, in the Sacrament of penance, says In 1. part. 5. disp. 8.
: In S. Cyprians time, non erant casus peculiares conscientiae ipsi Pontifici
reseruati, No peculiar cases of conscience were reserved to the Pope: You to
make him speak of the contentions Court, and to deny, that any Appeals were
anciently reserved to the Pope, pervert his words, thus: Tempore Cypriani non
erant casus peculiares reseruati conscientiae Pontificis: In the time of
Cyprian, there were no peculiar cases reserved to the conscience of the Pope;
or as you english, In the days of S. Cyprian there was no reservation of any
such cases (namely of appeals) in use; for of them you speak. Answer now: Is
it all one to say, non erant casus peculiares conscientiae ipsi Pontifici
reseruati, as Salmeron says; and to say, non erant casus peculiares reseruati
conscientiae Pontificis, as you say? No: there cannot be a more wilful
falsification. For 1. you misplace Salmerons words. 2. You turn Pontifici into
Pontificis. And 3 you put conscientiae, into the construction of the dative
case, which Salmeron has in the genitive. How can this iuggling be excused?

4. You say Page 144.
: The African Fathers in the end, descended to a flat and peremptory resolution
in opposition of the Papal claim of appeals. This is a flat and peremptory
untruth: for the Africans never contested with the Pope, about appeals in
matters of faith, but acknowledged that they ought to refer them to him, as
appears out of the practice of the Counsels of Carthage and Mileuis, which
sent their decrees of faith to Innocentius Pope, to be confirmed by his
authority See above Chap. 26.
. Their contestation was about Appeals of the inferior Clergy, in civil and
criminal causes. Of them they writ to Zozimus Pope. but he being dead before
the ariuall of their letters, they writ again to Boniface his Successor,
acknowledging that they had received from him, Mandata and literas,
Commandments and letters, which, what was it else but to profess him to be
their Superior? And withal they represented to Boniface, the great troubles,
which the late appeals out of Africa to Rome had brought upon them: and that
therefore great caution ought to be used, lest other such, or worse should
happen. And because they had not found in their copies of the Nicen Council
those Canons concerning appeals, which Zozimus had sent in the instruction of
his Legates, they required time to send into the East, for authentical copies
of the Nicen Canons: but in the mean time, they observed the commandment of
Zozimus, restoring Apiarius to the communion, and to his Priesthood. Apiarius
(say they to Boniface Ep: ad Bonifac.
craving pardon has been restored to the communion. And again Ibid.
: It has pleased us, that Apiarius should retire from the Church of Sicca,
retayning the honor of his degree. And in their Epistle to Celestine: Apiarius
had been formerly restored to his Priesthood.

Nor did they show their obedience only in restoring Apiarus: but moreover in
attending the coming of the Eastern Copies of the Nicen Council, they
promised with great humility, and with all respect protested, to observe from
point to point, all that was contained in the instruction of the Popes Legates.
For Daniel, Notary of the Council, having read the first article, which was,
that Bishops may appeal to the Pope, Alipius said Conc. Afric. c. 4.
: We protest to observe these things, until the coming of the perfect copies.
And the second article being read, which was, That the causes of Priests, and
inferior Clerks were to be finally determined by the Bishop of their own
Province. S. Augustine said Ibid. c. 7.
: We protest also to observe this article saving a more diligent inquiry of the
Council of Nice. And the whole Council speaking of both these articles, to
Boniface Pope, said Cap. 101. in Ep. ad Bonif.
: These things which in the foresaid instruction have been alleged unto us,
of the appeals of Bishops to the Priest of the Roman Church, and of the causes
of Clerks to be ended by the Bishops of their own Provinces, We protest to
observe, until the proof of the Nicen Council: And we trust in the will of
God, that your Holiness also will help us in it.

By this it appears, that the Canons of Appeals to Rome sent by Zozimus were
admitted, and the practice of them in Africa allowed by the whole Council,
until the coming of the Nicen copies out of the East: which shows that
their contestation was not about the Popes right of appeals (else they would
have forbidden them absolutely, even in that interim) but about the expediency
of them, and the manner of prosecuting them by Legates, and executors sent from
Rome. Which is yet further confirmed by these their words to Pope Celestine Ep.
ad Celest.
: Wherefore premising the office of due salutation, we beseech you
affectionatly, that hereafter you will not so easily admit to your ears, those
that come from these parts, nor vestore to the communion such, as have been
excommunicated by us. And a little after: To the end that they, who in their
own Province have been deprived of the communion, may not seem to be hastily,
and otherwise then is fit, restored to the communion by your Holiness. These
words are another remonstrance of their acknowledgment of the Popes power over
them, and of their subjection to him: for they say not to Celestine, that he
had not authority to restore the Communion to those that had been
excommunicated by them, but humbly beseech him not to do it easily, and without
mature deliberation; but rather, that he will send them back into Africa, to be
judged upon the place, where their causes might be discussed more exactly, and
the truth more certainly known by the attestation of witnesses, which could
not without much difficulty and charges pass to Rome.

And whereas the Council of Sardica Can. 7.
has decreed that, if a Bishop appeal to Rome, and the Pope esteem is just
that the examination of his cause be renowed, it shall be in the Popes power, if
he please, to send Legates from Rome, to join with the Bishops of the same
province from whom the appeal is made, that by them the cause may be tried,
and judged a new, the Africans denied not this power of the B. of Rome; nor any
way excepted against the sending back of the Appella^ts into Africa, to have
their causes tried again by the Bishops of their own province, but only
beseeched him, that he would be pleased not to send Legates, who by prosecuting
the causes of Appellants too violently; did sometimes give occasion of
complaint. Wherefore beseeching Pope Celestine, they say: Conc. Afric. c. 107
That you will not send your Clerks executors, to all that demand them, nor
permit that we may seem to introduce the smoaky pride of the world into the
Church of Christ, which propounds the light of simplicity, and the day of
humility to them, that desire to see God. The motive which the Africans had to
make this petition, was the insolent carriage of Antony B. of Fussala in
Numidia, who (as S. Augustine reports Ep. 261.
for his enormous crimes being deprived of his Bishopric, by procurement of
the inhabitants of Fussala, and left with the bare title of Bishop,
fraudulently got testimonial letters of his innocence, from the Primate of
Numidia, at the very time of this sixth Council of Carthage, and appealed to
Boniface Pope; who answered with great caution, that, he should be restored si
nulla in eius narratione surreptio intercessisset; if there were no surreption
in the relation of his cause. Boniface dying and Celestine succeeding, they of
Fussala prosecuted their suite earnestly against him. And he contrarily
threatened, that Celestine would send Clerks executors, and (if need were)
soldiers to restore him to his Bishopric. He threatened them (says S.
Augustine Ibid.
with secular power, as if they were to come to execute the judgments of the Sea Apostolic, so that the miserable inhabitants being Christians, and
Catholics, feared more grievous usage from a Catholic Bishop then they did
(when they were heretics) from the laws of the Emperors.

This was the cause, why S. Augustine, and this sixth Council of Carthage
beseeched Celestine not to grant Clerks executors to all Appellants. And this
conuinceth you of an untruth in saying Page 145. fin. 151.
that, the African Fathers call that Papal presumption (of Appeals) a smoaky
secular arrogance, which they will not endure: for it is not the Popes claim
of appeals that they qualify with the name of typhe, or smoaky secular
arrogance, but partly the vexation and insolence of Apiarius, and other
Priests, despising and shaking off the yoke of Episcopal discipline; and
partly the force and military Violence which the executors, sent from Rome, did
sometimes use in executing the judgments of the Sea Apostolic. For speaking to
Boniface Pope of the insolency of Apiarius, they say Conc. Afric. c. 101.
: But we hope by the help of Gods mercy, that your Holiness governing in the
Roman See, we shall no longer suffer this typhe. And because the executors did
sometimes make use of secular forces, they beseech Celestine Ibid. c. 105.
, not to grant Clerks executors to all that demand the^, lest the typhe of the
world be introduced into the Church. Which is agreeable to the decree of the
Council of Ephesus, forbidding John Patriarch of Antioch to make use of any
military power to hinder the Bishops of Cyprus from electing to themselves an
Archbishop without his consent, lest (says the Council) under pretense of
executing sacred things, the typhe of secular power be introduced into the
Church. And in the same sense the Author Cap. 26.
of S. Fulgentius his life said, that Fulgentius commanded nothing with the
typhe of secular dominion.

And no less untruly Page 145. fin.
you make the Africans say in their Epistle to Celestine, that, they will not
endure the Papal presumtion of appeals, there being no such thing to be read
in that Epistle. For what they speak, of not enduring, has no relation to
Appeals, but to the crimes of Apiarius. As for the wretched Apiarius (say
they) he having been already cast out of the Church of Christ, for his infamous
crimes, by our brother Faustinus, we are no more in care; for as much as by the
means of the approbation, and moderation of your Holiness, Africa will no
longer endure him.

5. You say Page 155.
: This Council denounced excommunication to all, that think it lawful to
appeal beyond the seas. This is another untruth: for the Council speaks not
of Bishops, but of Priests, and inferior Clerks only: and so much you
contradicting your self, had acknowledged a little before, setting down the
very words of the Council thus Page 146.
: If any Priest shall think, that he ought to appeal beyond the sea (meaning
to Rome) let him not be received any longer into the communion of the Church of
Afric.

You reply Page 155.
, that this answer is a sophistry confuted by the consequence of the
Council: for if inferior Clergy were prohibited, much more was the same
provision made in behalf of Bishops. This consequence we deny as false
sophistry: for albeit they proposed this, among their requests to Pope
Celestine, yet they made no decree, nor provision thereof: nor (if they had)
cold it have been of force, as being directly contradictory to the Canons of
the two famous Councels of Nice, and Sardica See above Chap. 26.
; and also to the belief of S. Augustine saying, Ep. 162.
that, Cecilian might have appealed beyond the sea, because he was not of the
number of Priests, or other inferior Clerks, but of Bishops. And moreover he
represented to Celestine Pope Ep. 261.
, that whereas Antony B. of Fussala (being deprived of his Bishopric by the
Bishops of Africa, and left only with the bare title of Bishop) had appealed to
Boniface his predecessor, he would be pleased to confirm the sentence of the
Bishops of Africa, because (says he) there had been many like sentences in
Africa, even the Sea Apostolic pronouncing the judgment, or confirming the
judgment of others, as of Priscus, Victor, and Lawrence, Bishops of the
Cesarian Province.

SECT. V. Whether this Controversy of Appeals, wrought in the Africans, any
separation of Communion from the Roman Church?
TO make your argument more plausible, you say Page 148.
that by reason of this controversy, between the Africans, and the Bishops of
Rome, Aurelius B. of Carthage, and his fellow Bishops of Africa (with whom S.
Augustine did consent) were for the space of an hundred years separated from
the Church of Rome. Of all the untruths uttered in this your discourse of the
sixth Council of Carthage, this is the greatest, which therefore you have
reserved to the last place: Finis coronat opus.

For that the African Fathers, even of this sixth Council of Charthage, during
the very time of this controversy, remained still united to the Sea of Rome, is
proved: 1. By the clause of their Epistle written to Pope Celestine in the end
of this controversy Apud Bin. to. 1. page 646.
: Our Lord keep your Holiness many years, praying for us, Lord and Brother;
which were the very worlds of peace and communion used in Formed letters, that
were never given to any but to Catholics of the same communion Aug. ep.
162.163.
. 2. Out of S. Augustine, who in the current of this difference writing to
Boniface Pope, and dedicating one of his chiefest works unto him said Cont.
duas ep. Pelag. ad Bonifa. l. 1.
. Thou disdainest not, thou who art not high minded, though thou presidest
higher, to be a friend of the humble. 3. Out of the testimony which Pope
Celestine gave of S. Augustine after his death Ep. ad Epise. Galliae c. 2.
: Augustine a man of holy memory, for his life and merits, we have had always
in our communion: nor has the rumor of any sinister suspicion, ever so much as
touched him: which Epistle of Celestine to the French, is alleged by Pettus
Diaconus L. de incarn. and great.
, and by Prosper Cont. Collat c. 42.
to justify S. Augustines doctrine against the Pelagians.

4. And the same Prosper L. de promiss. and predict. par. 3. c. 38.
calls Aurelius Archbishop of Carthage (under whom the African Council was
held) after his death. A Father, and Bishop of worthy memory, and a Citizen of
the heavenly country; which praise he would not have given him, if he had died
out of the communion of the Roman Church: for Prosper in that very book Part.
4. c. 5.
says, that, a Christian communicating with that Church, is a Catholic, but
if he be separated from it, he is an heretic, and Antichrist. 5. Capreolus
immediate successor to Aurelius, writing to the Bishops assembled in the
Council of Ephesus Act. Conc. Ephesians. to. 2. c. 9.
: We pray you to resist all novelties, with such constancy, as the authority
of the Sea Apostolic, and the severity of the Prelates assembled in one, may
not seem to permit, that the doctrine of those, whom the Church has long
since condemned, come to be borne again. 6. Eugenius another successor to
Aurelius, being pressed by the Lieutena^t of Hunericus Lord of Africa, to enter
into a public disputation with the Arians, answered Victor Vtic. l. 2.
; He would not do it, without writing to his fellow Bishops, and chiefly to the
Roman Church, which is the Head of all Churches. 7. S. Fulgentius says De
incarn. and great. c. 11.
: Which the Roman Church, which is the head of the world, holdesh and teaches,
and with her the whole Christian world does, both without hesitation believe to
justice, and also doubts not to confess to salvation. And when the same Saint
was going to the wildrnesse of Thebais in Egypt to fast Author vitae S. Fulg.
c. 12. to. 6. Bibliothec. Pat.
, he desisted from his intent, when coming to Sicily, he understood from
Eulalius B. of Syracusa, that those Countries were separated from the communion
of the Roman Church, lest desiring a more perfect life, he should run hazard
of loosing the true faith. And instead of gong into Egypt, he went in
pilgrimage to Rome, to visit the Sepulchers of the holy Apostles Peter, and
Paul. 8. The African Bishops consulted S. Leo the great in their doubts of
faith; and S. Leo writ to them a famous decretall Epistle Leo ep. 87.
. 9. Almost all the African Bishops 220. in number being banished into Sardinia
by Thrasimundus the Arian King, Symmachus Pope relieved and maintained them at
his own charges Paul. Diac. l. 17. rerum. Roman.
, which he would not have done, if they had been separated from his communion.
10. Possessor a famous African Bishop writ to Hormisdas Pope Ep. ad Hormisd.
: It is fit and expedient that we have recourse to the Heard, as often as the
health of the members is treated of: for who has greater solicitude of his
subjects, or from whom is more to be required the stability of faith that is
wavering, then from the President of that seat, whose first Governor heard
from Christ. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church? 11.
Victor Bishop of Vtica reports L. 1. de persequut. Vandal.
that the Arians in Africa did call the Catholics, Romans (as you now call us,
Romanists) which they did upon no other ground, then because the African
Catholics were of the Roman Communion. 12. And that the possession which the
Bishop of Rome were in, of appeals out of Africa, was not interrupted by the
sixth Conncell of Carthage, is prou^d out of Ferrandus, a Deacon of that Church
Breuiar. Can. art. 59. and 60.
, which lived soon after that time, and has registered in his collection of
Canons, this, as the fifth, and sixth Canon of the Council of Sardica, That a
condemned Bishop may, if he will, appeal to the Sea Apostolic, and that
during the appeal no other can be ordained in his place.

By these, and many other evidences (which may be produced) it is manifest,
that by this Controversy of Appeals the Africans were not separated from the
communion of the Roman Church, and that therefore to affirm (as you do) that
they remained in the state of separation for the space of 100. years, until
the time of Boniface the second, is a notorious untruth: for all the examples
here alleged, are of African Bishops, that lived within the compass of 100.
years, after the sixth Council of Carthage.

Against this truth, confirmed by so many evident and undeniable proofs, that
the African Church was not (in the days of Aurelius Primate of Africa, and S.
Augustine) severed by Schism from the Roman Church; you urge the Epistle of
Boniface the second, wherein he testifies, that the African Church was in his
days reconciled unto them Roman. In the Body of your Counsels (say Page 148.
you) there is Apud Suriumtom. 2. Council. page 384. So you quote him falsely,
for it is Tom. 1. Council. page 1057.
extant the Epistle of Boniface the second, wherein about the year 606. the
same Pope complains, that Aurelius with his fellow-Bishops of Africa ( with
whom S. Augustine did consent) had by the instigation of Satan ( for so the
Epistle speaks) been separated from the Church of Rome, until now, after an
hundred years space, Eulalius (Bishop of Carthage) acknowledging his offense,
seeks and desires to be reconciled to the Church of Rome. Thus far the
Epistle of your Pope. Do you belicue this Epistle, concerning the
Excommunication of the Churches of Africa? Then had you best stand aside a
while, for scare of knocks. For behold there are at hand children of the Tribe
of Dan, angry fellows, that lay about them. 1. Bellarmine Bellar. lib. 2. de
Pont. Romans c. 25.
; I greatly suspect (says he) that this Epistle is counterfeit. 2. It is full
of fraud, says Binius Tom. 1. Conc. in hanc Epistolam.
Binius. 3. Which (says Baronius) some wicked Impostor has feigned etc. Do not
you believe this Epistle of Boniface to be true? Then harken to your Lindan.
Panopl. l. 4. c. 89.
Lindan: This Epistle (says he) is not supposititious, but true etc. Thus you.
And then finding in Baronius, that during those hundred years, there were
whole troops, and armias of African Martyrs, and holy Confessors, you triumph,
and bid us take Page 150.
this your Syllogism to ruminate upon:

No true Christian Martyrs dye out of the state of Salvation:

Diverse true Christian Martyrs dye, out of Obedience to the Roman Church.

Ergo, Diverse dying, out of Obedience to the Roman Church, dye not out of the
state of Salvation.

Thus you dispute in your fancy victoriously, as having by this your discourse,
and Syllogism, knocked the Roman Church on the heal. I shall first discover
the weakness and vanity of your Syllogism; then show the multiplicity of
your falsities and frauds, supposed and cunningly contrived into your relation
of the Story; lastly lay open the reasons why that Epistle may be suspected,
yea rejected as being Counterfeit.

In your Sollogisme, I grant the Mayor Proposition. That no true Martyr dies
out of the state of Salvation. In your Minor, or Assumption, Diverse true
Christian Martyrs dye out of obedience to the Roman Church, I distinguish
sundry Kinds of Disobediences. First there is disobedience Heretical, which
resists the doctrines and decrees of Faith, delivered by the Catholic Roman
Church; yea denies the prime article of Christian unity, the headship and
supreme authority of her Bishop. In the state of this Disobedience there can be
no true Martyrdom, no hope of Salvation. Secondly, there is Disobedience
Schismatical, which believing firmly the Doctrine of the Roman Church, and
acknowledging the Supreme authority of her Bishop, excepts against the present
Bishop and Pastor, as not being true Pope, and cleaves to one opposite unto
him: men dying in the state of this Disobedience, cannot possibly be true
Martyrs, nor be saved. Thirdly there is Disobedience moral, in matter of good
life and manners, against precepts enacted by the Church, for the better
avoiding and punishing of ill behavior. Now in the state of this kind of
Disobedience men may be saved: for the disobeying of these kind of orders and
commands, may proceed either from contumacy and contempt, or from error and
ignorance. If out of contempt, then is it damnable, so that none dying therein
can be Martyrs, or go to heaven. But with Disobedience of the second kind
caused by ignorance, Salvation and Martyrdom may stand: for their ignorance
may be invincible, or else probable, and grounded upon good seeming reasons. Or
if it be vincible and faulty, yet may it be abolished by their contrition for
all their sins, or falce Martyrij. by the sickle of Martyrdom done away.

This supposed, I say, the Disobedience of the African Bishops was not
Heretical; because in all matters of says they were conform to the Church of
Rome, and by manifold practice showed, that about doubts, and controversies of
this kind, they held it necessary to have recourse to Ep. Council. Mileuit. 92.
inter Epist. August.
the Pastoral Chair. and care of Peter. to the Cypr. l. 2. Ep. 10. l. 4. ep.
8.
Root, and matrice of the Catholic Church; to the Rock which the August.
Psalm. cont. part. Donat.
proud gates of Hell do never overcome; to the maine indeficient fountain,
which with the streams of wholesome doctrine waters all Christians over the
whole world. The ancient rules (say they (the four Primates of Afrike) Ep. ad
Theodor. Papam, Extat in Council. Lateran. 1. consult. 2. Bin. to 2. p. 1075.
have ordained, that whatsoever is treated in Provinces distant and far of,
should not be deemed to be ended, until first it were come to the knowledge of
the Sea Apostolic, to the en that the sentente, which should be found just,
might be confirmed by the authority of the same See; and that from thence all
other Churches, as streams flowing from their mother source, might take the
beginning of their preaching, and the Sacraments of Salvation.

Their Disobedience then could not be Heretical: nor was it Schismatical,
because they acknowledged the Pope, even that Pope with whom they did
disagree, to be their Pastor and Superior, whose August. Epist. 157. Iniuncta
nobis a Venerabili Papa Zozimo Ecclesiastica necessitas.
lawful Commands they were bound to obey; and that all Mayor causes, all
matters and controversies above Jurisdiction of greater moment, to wit, such as
concern says, and the life, and government of Bishops, are to be referred
unto him, and to be finally and infallibly decided by him.

Neither, thirdly, was their Disobedience joined with contumacy and contempt;
because though they refused to defer unto the Appeals which Priest, and
infertour Clergymen might make to the Pope: yet they do it with great humility
and respect, and by way of submissiue entreaty, in their Ep. ad Caelestin. apud
Sur. Tom. l. Coucil. page 520.
letter to Pope Celeftine: Praefato debitae Salutationis officio, impendio
deprecamur, vt deinceps ad aures vestrashinc venientes, non facilius
admittatis: The behoof of due Salutation or Reverence being premised, we
humbly beseech you, that those which come from hence (with their Appeals) you
will not admit them unto audience ouer-easily. Therefore their disobedience was
out of ignorance; for they did not doubt, but the Pope had power to command the
Bishops of Africa, to yield unto the Appeals, that were made unto him; but
they esteemed the practice of that power not to be (in those circumstances) for
the good of the Church of Africa. They saw, by appealing to Rome. that
dissolute and unruly Clergymen, would cause much vexation unto the Bishops
their lawful Judges, prolonge the cause, differ the sentence, and many times
escape deserved punishment; which impunity might easily grow into liberty, and
audacity, and extreme disorder. Wherefore the power given of Christ to his
Church, and Vicar on earth being given ^. Cor. 1^.10.
for edifying, not for destroying, they were persuaded, that the Pope could not
prudently command them to defer unto such Appeals; and if he did that they
should not be bound to obey therein.

You demand Page 150^
, whether the Pope of Rome, whom we entitle Monarch of the Church Catholic,
and Bishop of Bishops would accept it as a matter of subjection for
Protestants, with S. Augustine and those other African Bishops; to deny that
any ought to be called Bishop of Bishop; and not to yield to his demands in
point of Jurisdiction upon any pretense of Divine Law, but to exact of him
proof by a Canon of an ancient Council? I answer. The African Bishops deny
the title of Prince of Bishops, to any Archbishop or Primate within Afric,
but not to the Roman Bishop; yea they entitle him in express terms Aruob. in
Psalm. 138. Tertullian. lib. de pudicit. c. 1. Stephanus Mauritaniae in Africa
Episcopus Epist. ad Damasum.
Bishop of Bishops, the Holy Father of Fathers the sovereign Bishop of all
Bishops and Pastors; they call his Authority, the Princedome of the Apostolic
Chair, ever vigent in the Roman Church; they acknowledge that they are bound
to obey all his just commandes; that all Christians may, and must Appeal to
him about Controversies of Religion and the Catholic Faith; August ep. 1^2. A
postolitae Cathedrae principatum. Item, the four Primates of Afrike in their
Synodical Epistle to Pope Theodor. in Conc. Lateran. 1. Consul. 2. Bintom. 2
page 1078. Patri Patrum and summo omnium Praesulum Pontifici Theodoro. By which
is answered what you allege page 46. out of the 26. Canon of the Council of
Carthage.
yea Bishops also in criminal causes from the comdemnation given against them
by their fellow-Bishops. But that the Pope should admit the Appeals so easily
of every African Priest and Clergyman. hereof they doubt whether it be
expedient for the African Church. Now Bishops may be sometimes excused, if they
do not obey the Pope in matters that are extremely burdensome, and hard;
specially when they have probable reasons, that it is not prudently commanded,
nor will prove for the good of souls. But Protestants, you are disobedient
unto the Sea of Peter, and the Sovereign Bishop of all Bishops in points of
Jurisdiction, allowed unto him by ancient Counsels. Your disobedience is
joined with Contumacy, contempt, contumely, and base language. You deny
Appeals unto him in matters, and doubts about Christian Faith. Wherefore you
want that dutiful subjection to Peter's chair, without which none can be of
the number of Christ his sheep, nor consequently be saved: yea you are guilty
of that damnable disobedience whereof S. Leo says Epist. 93. c. 2.
; Whosoever shall deny unto him (Peter, and his Successor) the Princedome of
care and power; shall never be able to depresse his dignity, but puffed up with
pride shall drown himself into Hell. Your Syllogism then is vain, the Minor
thereof being manifestly false, That the African Martyrs dyed out of obedience
to the Roman Church.

I come now to your falsifies, and falsifications of the Story, and tenor of
the foresaid questioned Epistle of Boniface the Second. Two especially are very
exorbitant: first, that the Pope denounced, or thundered out Page 148. and page
150.
excommunication against the Churchs of Africa: that these (Aurelius and S.
Augustine) and all other Bishops of Africa, were excommunicate by the Pope for
their Opposition against the Church of Rome. Which notorious falsehood you seek
to make good, by a notable falsification Page 149.
, telling us, That our Costerus, and Turrian, both Jesuits, and also M.
Harding do greatly magnify our Popes, for discharging their office in
excommunicating the Bishops of Afrike. You neither cite any words, nor quote
any place of Turrian, but refer us in your margent to your Sadeel, whom we
trust as little almost as we do your self. You cite the words of the Jesuit
Costerus, Been fecerunt Romani Pontifices etc. but you pervert them, and turn
them to another matter and purpose Costerus Enchirid. Controuers. de summo
Pontifice page 159.
. Costerus proposes your Protestant Argument: The Bishops of Africa in the
days of S. Augustine, did bitterly inueigh against Pope Celestine, who after
Pope Zozimus, challenged authority over the African Churches; and admitted the
Appeals of Clergymen from their Bishops unto him. This is the objection; unto
which he makes Answer in the words by you cited, Recte, and ex officio
fecerunt Romani Pontifices etc. The Roman Bishops did well, and according to
their duty; and the African Bishops were to blame, who even then ( as does
testify Boniface the 2.) were inclining to a defection from the Roman Church,
to their own great loss: because soon after they were conquered, and came
under the Dominion of the Arian Wandals. Blessed Augustine subscribed not unto
those bitter letters, for he did ever bear singular veneration toward the
Apostolic see. Thus Costerus; affirming that the Pope did well in admitting
the Appeals of the Clergymen made unto him; and that herein he did discharge
the office of a good Pastor: but that he did excommunicate Aurelius, and all
other Bishops of Africa, and that in so doing he did discharge his duty, this
Costerus does not say. No, nor that the Africans were Schismatically divided
from the Church of Rome; bur only that they seemed even then to think upon
some such thing. M. Harding in like manner says Answer to M. Iewel^s
Challenge fol. 218. A.
; that the Churches of Africa had continued in Schism, and withdrawn
themselves from the obedience of the Sea Apostolic, through the entisement of
Aurelius Bishop of Carthage: but that all the Churchs of Africa, or any one
Church was excommunicated by the Pope, this M. Harding does not say. So that
the Excommunication of all the Churches and Bishops of Africa by the Pope, is
not recorded by any Author; not by Costerus, not by Harding, not by the
foresaid Epistle of Boniface the second; it is a mere fiction of your own
head. The Africans were no further separated from the Church of Rome, then they
eloyned themselves from it, by their own voluntarily departure and fault. But
they did not depart from the Obedience of the Roman Church, by denying the
Christian faith thereof, nor by denying the Popes power and Jurisdiction over
them, but only dissented in a Problematique An expediret ea potestate vti, and
omnibus in locis, non sine causa dubitacum est. Bellarm. lib. 2. de Romans
Pontif. c. 25.. Ad hoc eorum.
Question, about what was fit to be done by the Pope, about the Appeals of
African Clergymen of inferior degree.

Although this falsehood and falsification may seem gross enough, yet the
second is greater. The Jesuit Salmeron (say Page 149.
you) and Sanders, do confidently hold, that all the African Bishops were
severed from the Church of Rome, from the days of S. Cyprian until the time
of the said Boniface the Author of the Epistle. Can any thing be said or
devised more openly, notoriously, and palpably false then this? You say in the
words that presently follow the above cited, that, You doubt not but that we
stand half aghast. Verily so it is; we stand more then half aghast, (not, that
there be different opinions among our Authors about the said Epistle of
Boniface the second, but) that Protestants can endure, that such notorious
falsities should be so confidently uttered, and laid for grounds, and
principles in your discourse, to ius^^ly their revolt from the obedience,
doctrine, and discipline of the Roman Church. But the Jesuit Salmeron (say you)
and Sanders do confidently so hold. If this be true, we shall remain aghast at
their madness, and think their writings worthy of the fire: if they do not so
hold; if they affirm the contrary in plain terms; if these words All the
African Bishops were severed from the Church of Rome* from the days of S.
Cyprian, until the time of Boniface the second, which you allege in a distinct
letter as verbally theirs, be supposititious and forged; how ought Protestants
to remain aghast? What course ought they to take with your writings?

Sanders then, to begin with him, does not say all the Bishops, but the
contrary in these very words Sanderus de visibili Monarch. page 330. n. 247.
: Non ergo, (vt somniant Magdeburgenses, aut potius calumniantur) omnes
Africani Patres opposueru^t se Pontifici Romano; sed potius multi cupiebant rem
adipsum referri. In the Controversy about Appellations, all the African Bishops
did not oppofe the Bishop of Rome, as the Magdeburgians dream, or rather
calumniously report; yea rather many of them desired, that the matter might be
referred to the Pope. For though Aurelius Bishop of Carthage, and Primate of
all Africa, may seem to have been somewhat cross, and to have affected an
absolute Primacy in matters of discipline and behavior; yet there be many
signs, whereby it appears, that others were otherwise minded, yea that
Aurelius himself did acknowledge the Primacy of the Roman Bishop, and appealed
to him in matters of faith. Thus Sanders. Who further against your peremptory
affirming, that namely S. Augustine concurred with Aurelius in this point, he
produces the words of Bishop Faustinus the Popes Legate in the Council of
Carthage unto Aurelius, requesting him, that about Appeals made by Clergymen
of inferior degree unto Bishops, his Holiness would vouchsafe to write to
Venerable Pope Boniface, remitting the matter to his deliberation, and
conclusion ficut Sanctus Augustinus statuere dignatus est, as Holy Augustine
has been pleased to determine by his suffrage. By which words says Sanders,
it is apparent, that S. Augustine would have had the matter, of Appeals,
referred to the Pope, and ordered as he should think best. So that whereas you
cite Sanders saying, All the African Bishops were severed from the Church of
Rome, his true words import the direct contradictory; Non omnes Episcopi
Africani, All the Bishops of Afrike did not oppose the Roman Bishop. You also
allege him de visibili Monarch. page 368. n. 411. where he has nothing to
your purpose, but only alleges the words of Eulalias of Carthage his
recantation, We anathematize all those that proudly lift up their necks
against the Holy Roman and Apostolical Church. From these words can you gather
your dismal assertion that, All the African Bishops from the days of Cyprian
until Boniface the second, that is, for three hundred years, were
excommunicated by the Pope, and severed from the Communion of the Roman Church?

The Jesuit Salmeron says no more, then Salmeron tom. 12. tract. 68.. Ad
Canonem.
that in the days of S. Cyprian, the African Bishops began to be severed from
the Roman Church; and that in the days of Pope Innocent, and Aurelius Bishop
of Carthage, they were bitter and displeased against the Church of Rome. But he
does not say, that all the African Bishops were so; nor that they withdrew
their Communion and obedience from the Roman Church. Yea in the days of S.
Cyprian, though he, and fourscore African Bishops were displeased with Pope
Stephen; because he did strongely and constantly oppose their impious doctrine
of Anabaptisme; yet they never proceeded to make a Schism, and separation from
the Roman Church. Contrariwise the very same fourscore Bishops who had made a
decree for Anabaptisme, met together again, as S. Hierome does testify Hieron.
Dialog. cont. Lucifer. Illi ipsi Episcopi qui Rebaptizandos haereticos cum
Cypriano statuerunt, ad antiquam consuetudinem reu^luti, nouum emis^re decretum.
and repealed their decree, which might have caused their separation from the
Roman Church: So false is it, that all the Bishops of Africa from the days of
S. Cyprian until the time of Boniface the second were severed from the Church
of Rome, that even those very Bishops of those days were not severed.

By the Epistle of Boniface the second (grant it be true) no more is proved
then, that Aurelius Bishop of Carthage, superbir^ cepit, was somewhat arrogant
and proud against the Pope; and that Eulalius of Carthage did (against the
example of his other Predecessors) imitate Aurelius therein; as he does testify
saying in the said Epistle of Boniface, that he felt himself, Peccatis Aurelij
praegrauatum, ouer-burthened with the sins of Aurelius. But that all the
Christians of Africa, namely those many Martyrs that suffered persecution under
the Arian Wandalls, were tainted with this bitterness of distaste and
Schismatic disunion against the Roman Bishop, is a fable by your self
newly coined, and vented abroad.

Now to the third point proposed, although the Epistle of Boniface do not
justify your slander against all the Bishops and Martyrs of Africa, that they
were excommunicated by the Pope, and out of the communion of the Roman Church;
yet there be many Arguments that may seem to euince, that the same is
counterfeit, the relation thereof being incoherent. First you Page 148. The
Epistle of Boniface the second, wherein about the year 606. the same Pope
complains etc.
say, that the reunion of the Church of Africa to the Church of Rome, happened
about the year 606. and in the time of Boniface the second. These things
hang not together, and consequently are false: for Boniface the second dyed
in the year 531. that is almost an hundred years before the year 606.
Secondly the said Epistle of Boniface the Second affirms, that Eulalius his
reconciliation with the Church of Rome was performed in the days of Iustine
the Emperor, and Iustini elementissimi Principis Orientis sacrarum literarum
exemplaria ad vo^ destinauimus.
that this Emperor writ letters to the said Boniface about it. Now Iustine the
Emperor was dead three or four years before Romiface the Second was chosen
Pope. Thirdly the Epistle of Boniface is written to Eulalius Bishop of
Alexandria. But the Bishop of Alexandria, in the days of Boniface the second
was not named Eulalius, but Timothaeus, an Heretic, and an Adversary of the
Roman Church. You saw this difficulty, and to avoid it, fear not to do against
the command of the Holy Ghost Vide titulum Psalmi 58. and Augu. tract. 117. in
Joan.
Ne corrumpaes Tituli inscriptionem. For the Title of that Epistle in Surius
being Epistola eiusdem (Bonifacij) ad Eulalium Alexandrinum Episcopum, Page
248. in marg. at (x).
you change it, and make it to be, Epistola Bonifacij ad Alexandrum Episcopum,
the Epistle of Boniface to Bishop Alexander; nor do you tell us of what Church
or See this your Alexander was Bishop. Fourthly in the time of Boniface the
second, Gilimer the Arian Wandal was King of Africa, during whose reign, there
was no Catholic Bishop in Carthage, See Baron. Anno 620. and seqq.
nor in any Church of Africa, but only Arians. Finally your Apostata-Bishop of
Spalato, Antonius de Dominis, in his De Repub. Eccles. lib. 4. c. 8. n. 34.
London-writings, which he published under your nose, and with your so great
approbation and applause, does so lay about him, against the Epistle of
Boniface; that you who are so stiff a defender thereof had best to stand aside
for fear of knocks. In the Controversy about Appellations (says he) Communio
inter Africam and Romam non est abrupta.
the Communion between Africa and Rome was never broken, as Baronius and Binius
do prove very well* The reconciliation, or recantation made by the Church of
Carthage unto Boniface the Second. which some one has feigned Mara est
impostura.
is a mere Imposture, as the said Authors demonstrate.

Thus he. May you not number this man among the Children of the Tribe of Dan,
and angry fellows, who does so peremptorily auerre the Epistle of Boniface to
be a mere forgery, and a grand Imposture, with greater reason, then you have
done Bellarmine, for only saying, I suspect it is counterfeit? In fine, these
Arguments abundantly show, that this Epistle of Boniface may be questioned and
rejected; and yet all the other Epistles of ancient Popes set down in the Body
of our Counsels cells subsist firm, against which the like implicancies and
incoherencies cannot be urged. As for Bishop Lindan, he speaks against them,
who discard this Epistle voluntarily, and without evident proofs, saying, that
they might as well infringe the credit of any ancient history: which his
inference is of no force against them, who refuse it as counterfeit, not
voluntarily, but constrained by the pregnant incompossibilities thereof, with
other known undeniable truths.

CHAP. XXVIII. Whether the Britans, and Scots not celebrating Easter after the
manner of the Roman Church, were for that cause separated from her Communion.
AMONG other examples of ancient Churches, which you pretend to have been
separated from the Church of Rome, and yet in state of salvation, you produce
for your last instance Page 156. 157. 158.
, the Britans, and Scots, who kept their Easter if not wholly after the Jewish
manner, yet contrary to the custom of the Roman Church, and of the whole
Christian world: Wherein you are guilty of diverse untruths.

For first, you speak of this their custom, as ancient among the Britans;
whereas Bid L. 2. hist. Anglo. c. 19.
records, that Honorius Pope about the year 635. and John the fourth a few
years after, writ to the Britans and Scots, letters full of authority and
learning, for correcting this error^ and that Pope John in the beginning of his
Epistle Extat apud Bin. to. 2. page 1029.
manifestly declares nuperrime temporibus istis exortam esse haeresim hanc:
that this heresy was very lately sprung up among them: which Florentius
Wigorniensis also testifies, saying In Chron. an. 628.
: Eo tempore etc. At that time Honorius Pope did reprove the error of the
Quartadecimans in the celebration of Easter, sprung up among the Scots.

2. You attribute this custom to the Britans and Scots in general. as if they
had been all guilty thereof; whereas Venerable Bede attributes it not to all the
Britans, non totis, (says he L. 3 hist. cap. 25.
not to all of them, nor to all the Scots, but especially to such as dwelled in
Ireland, and also to some of them that dwelled in Britany. Besides, the whole
English Church in a manner was free from that error.

3. You assume Page 190.
as granted by us, that, the Britans and Scots were schismatically divided from
the Church of Rome, but not heretically. That their opinion was Heretical, you
have heard Bid testify, saying, that this heresy was very lately sprung up
among them. And who knows not, that (as has been proved Chap. 23.
the Quartadecimans had been long before that time anathematized by the three
first general Cou^cells of Nice, Constantinople, and Ephesus, and the
maintainers of that error, registered for heretics by Philastrius, S.
Augustine, Theodoret, and others? All which notwithstanding, you are not
ashamed to say Page 157. init.
, that, the Britan Church did Orthodoxally in following the Quartadociman rite,
contrary to the custom of the Roman Church.

4. Though the Britans and Scots, in this their observation did disagree from
the rest of the Christian world, yet because they did it not, with a
schismatic intention, but out of simplicity, and ignorance of the
Ecclesiastical computation, they living in a corner of the world, whither no
learned Catholic Calculator of times had as yet come unto them, the Sea
Apostolic did still retain them in her communion, deeming this error
pardonable in them. And therefore when the Abbot Colmanus in the famous
conference held between him, and Wilfridus, concerning this matter, urged in
defense of their custom Apud Bed. l. 3. hist. c. 25.
, that, they could not believe that their Reverend Father Columba, and his
successors, being men so beloved of God, did contrary to the holy Scriptures in
celebrating Easter, as until that time they had done, Wilfride answered Ibid.
: I deny not, but that your Fathers were servants of God, and beloved of him,
whom they loved with a rude kind of simplicity, but with a godly intention. Nor
do I think, that this their observation of Easter was greatly hurtful unto
them, so long as none had come to them, to inform them of the decrees of more
perfection, which they ought to have observed. For I believe, that if a
Catholic Calculator had come unto them, they would have followed his
admonitions etc. And therefore (says Baronius Anno 604. n. 5.
: It seemed not good to the Catholic Church, to blotout of the Catalogue of
Saints, such men, as had lived among them, eminent in sanctity, and whom God
had illustrated with miracles.

5. But to prove that the Scottish and British Churches were not subject to
the Roman, you allege Page 157. marg.
Galfridus out of the Centurists, saying: Dinothus a learned Abbot proved with
many Arguments, that they owed no subjection to Augustine, whom S. Gregory had
sent to preach the faith of Christ to the English. This is a falsification,
which therefore you vent in the Centurists name: for Galfridus has not any one
word of the Britans or Scots no-subiection to the Church of Rome, but only a
passionate and choleric speech of the Britans, not acknowledging any
superiority of Augustine over them, seeing he was sent only to the English, and
that the authority of their own Archbishop was not taken away by his coming
for ought they knew: which question of jurisdiction falls out daily between
Bishops, even where the Popes authority is most acknowledged.

Yea moreover that both the Britans and Scots acknowledged the authority of the
B. of Rome over them, Galfridus against you, and your Centurists bears
witness, reporting L. 9. c. 12. and 11.
, that on the day of Pentecost at Chester, King Arthur being present, there was
a great meeting of Princes, Lords, and Bishops for his Coronation: And that of
three Archbishops, which Britain had at that time, of Chester, London, and
York, Dubritius Archbishop of Chester, being Primate of Britain, and Legate
of the Sea Apostolic, did the office of the Church, and crowned King Arthur.

If therefore the Pope had his Legate in Britain, and that no less a man then
the Primate of all Britain, it is manifest, that the Britans acknowledged the
authority of the Sea Apostolic over them. Which is yet made more evident,
because (as your Bale De script. Eceles. fol. 30.
confesses) David that famous Welsh Bishop was canonized by Pope Calixtus the
second: and not only Bale, but S. Prosper Chron. ^n. 432.434.
, Bid L. 1. hist. c. 13. and 17.
and Marianus Scotus Chron. an. 430.
write, that Celestine Pope sent Palladius and Germanus learned Bishops into
Britain, to extirpate the Pelagian heresy, and to reduce the Scots to true
piety; and Patricius who had studied Divinity in Rome, and was a man most
excellent in learning and sanctity, to the Irish, and Scots, to defend them
from the same heresy. All which shows that as well the Britans as also the
Scots, and Irish, even before the coming of S. Augustine, were in the
communion of the Roman Church, and that the Pope had supreme care over them in
spiritual affairs, since he appointed them Bishops from Rome.

Justly therefore may we conclude, that your denying the subirction of the
British, Scottish and Irish Churches to the Sea of Rome, at the time of S.
Augustines coming into this Island to preach to the English, is grounded wholly
on falsehood, and imposture: as likewise is your affirming that the Africans
from the time of Celestine Pope to Boniface the second were separated from the
communion of the Roman Church: for setting aside all other Arguments, since you
cannot deny, that she in her Calendar of Saints, places many most glorious
African Martyrs, and Confessors of that time; what man even of common sense can
persuade himself, that she would honor them, as Saints, if they had died out
of her Communion, and obedience.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the great Reverence of ancient Christian Emperors and Kings to
the Pope.
BELLARMINE De officio Principis Christia. l. 1. c. 4. and 5.
proves that Emperors and Kings owe subjection to Bishops in sprirituall
affairs, as to their Pastors, and especially to the Pope, as to the supreme
Couernor of the universal Church, and Father of all Christians. And lest he
might seem by this Doctrine to derogate from the Majesty of Emperors or Kings,
or any way to lessen the reverence due to their persons and dignity, he proves
by the undoubted testimonies of Scripture, of S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, S.
Gregory, and other learned Fathers, as also by the acknowledgment of the most
godly Christian Emperors, and Kings themselves, that the Episcopal and
Sacerdotall dignity excels the Imperial, as far as gold surpasses lead,
and the Soul the body; that not only Constantine the great, but God himself
honoreth Bishops, and Priests, with the name of Angels and Gods; that the
Bishop is the Father, the Doctor, and Pastor as well of the Prince, as of the
people; and that Christian Princes, when they speak of the B. of Rome, or
write to him, express their acknowledgment of his supreme dignity, by giving
him the title of Holy Father, and, Most Blessed Father. From whence it must
follow, that as Disciples owe obedience to their Doctor, Children to their
Father, and sheep to their Pastor, so Christian Princes in the affairs of
their souls, owe obedience to their Prelates and Pastors, and especially to
the Pope, who is the Father, the Archpastor, and chief Doctor of all
Christians.

Upon this ground S. Gregory Nazianzen for his profound learning surnamed, The
Divine, feared not to say to the Emperor Orat. ad ciues suos timo. percul. and
Princip. irascent.
: Will you hear me with patience, to speak my mind freely unto you? which
truly you ought to do for so much as the law of Christ has made you subject to
my power, and to my tribunal for we (Bishops) have an Empire also, and that
more perfect then yours, unless you will plead, that the spirit is inferior to
the flesh and heavenly things to earthly. But I doubt not, but that you will
take in good part this my freedom of speech, you being a sacred sheep of my
holy flock and a Disciple of the Grand Pastor, rightly instructed by the holy
Ghost, even from your young years.

And upon the same ground it was, that holy S. Bernard gave this admonition to
Conradus the Emperor Ep. 183.
: I have read; Let every soul he subject to higher powers; and he that
resists power, resists the ordinance of God. Which sentence I greatly
desire, and by all means admonish you to observe in yelding reverence to the
sovereign, and Apostolic See, and to the Vicar of blessed Peter, as you will
have it exhibited to you, by the whole Empire.

These learned Fathers did understand right well the honor due to Emperors and
Kings, and that by reason of their dignity, they are to be held in great
Veneration: and yet nevertheless conceived it no vilifiyng of their Majesty,
nor abasing of their Persons, to require from them obedience in spiritual
affairs to their Bishops and Pastors; and especially to the Successor of S.
Peter, the supreme Bishop of Bishops, and Pastor of all Pastors.

This is Bellarmines Doctrine, and the sum of his discourse; which puts you
so far out of patience, that not being able to confute what he has so
solidly proved, you begin to rail at the Pope Page 160.164.
for permitting his feet to be kissed, as tasting rankly of Luciferian pride:
Which, though it be no Argument either against the faith or supremacy of the
Pope, and Church of Rome, but a frivolous cavil no way pertinent to the
question in hand, has been already satisfied to the full Chap. 10.
.

2. You go on in the same stream, telling us Page 160.
, that, we make a barbarous boast our Popes, in not admitting of two Emperors,
Henry the fourth, and Frederick Barbarossa to their presence, without a^
^^^^^me kind of subuission; the one, by appoathing upon his bare seet; the
other, by subiecting his neck unto the Popes feet; while as the Popes one may
brag of more favor then the first, and his ass, thou the second. So you: but
your scoffs rebound upon your own head, and turn to your shame: for Henry
the fourth, a most flagitious Emperor, was excommunicated by Gregory the
seventh, moved and solicited thereto, by the many complaints, and extreme
importunity of all the Princes Ecclesiastical, and secular of Germany. Henry
seeing himself for saken by them all, and fearing, least they would deprive
him of his Empire, unless he reconciled himself to the Church, and procured
absolution from the excommunication he had incurred, came of his own accord to
the Pope, and presented himself unto him, in a penitential habit, and
barefoot, craving absolution: which after three days instance the Pope
granted him, and having invited him to dinner courteously dismissed him. This
in brief is the story related more at large by Baronius Anno 1077.
, who having proved, that this penance was no way extorted by the Pope, but
freely done by the Emperor, conuinceth Ben no (that affirmed the contrary) of a
most impudent lie, told, reclamantibus omnibus Authoribus, against the agreeing
consent of all Authors. Wherefore you in alleging Baronius for your author,
that, we make a barbarous boast of the Popes not admitting this Emperor without
approaching on his bare feet, impose falsely on Baronius, as Benno did on the
Pope.

And as little truth do I find, in that your other tale of Fredericus
Barbarossa: for we are so far from making any boast thereof, that we know it
to be a mere fable; in proof whereof, you bring nothing but the bare testimony
of Massonius, who whether he report it or no I know not, nor is it worth the
examining: for you know him to be a modern, fabulous, and forbidden Author In
indice lib. prohib.
, and that this fable of his is disproued by Baronius Anno 1177. n. 86.87.
, and Bellarmine, in Apol. c. 16.
out of the testimonies of Roger Houeden an historian of that time, and
Romualdus Archbishop of Salernum, who being present, and an eye witness of all
that passed, writes, that Frederick falling down prostrate at the Popes feet,
the Pope with tears did most courteously lift him up in his arms. But what if
that Pope had carried himself proudly toward the Emperor, is that any
Argument to disprove the Doctrine and Primacy of the Roman Church, or any
excuse to you for your leaving the Catholic faith, and departing from the
Church of Christ? But such Arguments are fittest for a grand Imposture.

3. Because you cannot answer Bellarmines Arguments, nor deny the truth of
his Doctrine, otherwise then by giving the lie to the holy Saints, and renowned
Doctors of Gods Church, you pass over their testimonies, and his whole
discourse out of them, with a fraudulent reticence of the particulars, and
think to be even with him, making up by scoffing, what you cannot by arguing:
Bellarmine (say you) Page 160. sin. 161.
in his last work entitled, the Duty of a Christian Prince, dedignifieth, and
abaseth Princes, by wresting violently to a general rule of office and duty,
all the examples of honor be could rake out of the ashes of Princes, Kings, and
Emperors, yielded either to Popes, Bishops, or Priests, in the superlatiue
excess of their humility, zeal, and devotion; and with extreme dotage
exacteth very soberly a prebition, and drinking of Bishops, and Priests before
them. These are your words, in which you cunningly reduce all Bellarmines
proofs to examples, that by scoffing at the example of S. Martin (for you
mention no other) you may seem to have answered all the rest of his proofs,
in which not only Princes by their examples, but the holy Doctors with most
clear and vnanswearable words, auerre the truth of his Doctrine.

Nor, is it Bellarmine, whom you condemn of extreme dotage, but in him, that
most ancient, venerable, and renowned Bishop of Tours, S. Martin, a man of
Apostolical sanctity, that was (says S. Bernard) Sermon. in festo S. Martimi.
rich in merits, rich in miracles, rich in virtues; that raised three dead men
to life, that restored light to the blind, hearing to the deaf, speech to the
dumb; that healed the halting and lame, the withered and dry; that escaped
great perils by his divine virtue; that repelled the flames of fire opposing
his own body against them; that cleansed a leper with a kiss, cured the palsy,
euercame Devils; saw Angels, and prophesied things to come. This Apostolical
Prelate being earnestly invited to dinner by the Emperor Maximus, when diverse
of his fellow Bishops assembled in a Provincial Synod were present at Court,
and seeing them use base and object flattery to the Emperor, and other
temporal Princes, making themselves and their Episcopal Dignity contemptible
to the Laity, with no small dishonor to Gods Church, and hurt as well to their
own, as to laymens souls, he, in whom alone (says Seuerus Sulpitius) Vita
8. Martin, c. 23.
Apostolical authority remained, to admonish the Emperor and Princes there
present, of their reverence due to their Pastors, and also to let the Bishops
and all other Pastors, see their baseness, in vilifiyng themselves to their
sheep, giving them occasion to contemn, and disobey them, in things important
for the good of their souls: he (I say) when at dinner the Emperors own cup
was first presented unto him, by the Emperors command, having drunk thereof,
gave it not to the Emperor, but to his Chaplain, because (says Sulpitius) he
thought no man there more worthy to drink after himself, then his Priest.

This is the example of S. Martin, alleged by Bellarmine, reported and
commended by Sulpitius, and many other ancient and judicious authors, that have
written his life, as an heroical act of true Episcopal magnanimity and
gravity. If you, and such as vilify the Episcopal function, and lay it (as S.
Ambrose says Ep. 32.
under laymens feet, relish it not, t^is no wonder: but that being the fact of
Martin the myrror of Prelates, you should scoff at it, and at Bellarmine for
reporting it in proose of Sacerdotall dignity; who can but wonder, and think
you to fail not only in judgment, but even in point of ciuility, and good
manners, that will offer to control S. Martin, and teach good manners not only
to him, but to Seuerus Sulpitius, a man of most noble parentage, borne and bred
up in Rome, the Head and Mistres of Civil Policy and Vrbanity.

But when you say, Bellarmine has raked out of the asbesof Princes, Kings, and
Emperors, all the examples he could, of honor yielded either to Popes, Bishops,
or Priests, in the superlatiue excess of their humility, zeal, and denotion,
and wrested them to a general rule of office, and duty, I must crave pardon if
I think you to ouerlath, and that willingly: for Bellarmine could have told
you, that the holy Bishop and Martyr Ignatius Ep. ad Philadelph.
, so ancient, that (as he writes of himself) he saw our Savior in mortal
flesh, prescribing that order of obedience in Christ's Church, whereby unity may
be preserved in all, admonishes Princes and soldiers to obey the Emperor;
Priests, Deacons, and all the rest of the Clergy and people, whosoever they be,
soldiers, Princes yea the Emperor himself, to obey the Bishop, the Bishop
Christ, as Christ obeys his Father, that so unity may be preserved in all.
And in his Epistle to the Christians of Smirna headuiseth them in the first
place, to honor God, next the Bishop as bearing his image and then the King. He
could have told you, that the 318. Fathers assembled in the Council of Nice,
(one of the four, which S. Gregory reverenced as the four Ghospells) decreed
Con. 80 (...) Grac. and Arab.
as a doctrine to be believed by all Christians, that the B. of Rome is above
all Christian Princes, and people, as being the Vicar of Christ our Lord over
all people, and over all the Christian Church. He could have told you, that
when penance was enjoined to Philip the first Christian Emperor Eusebius. l. ^.
hist. c. 7.
for faults that were bruited of him, he willingly performed what was enjoined
him by the Priest showing by his deeds, that the fear of God, and a great
esteem of Religion lived in him. He could have told you, that the most
religious Emperor Theodosius being excommunicated by S. Ambrose Th^^d., ^. c.
^7.
was so far from denying the authority of S. Ambrose over him that he
submitted himself with all hum^lity, and craving absolution with hearty
repentance and tears obtained it. As Arcadius also in like case did of
Innocentius Pope Niceph. l. 13. c. 33. Cedren. and Glycas in Arcad.
. He could have told you, that Justinian writ to Pope John: We yield honor to
the Apostolic See, and to your Blessedness (which is and ever has been our
desire) and honor your Holiness, as it becomes us to honor our Father. He
could have told you of Charles the Great, who as he was inferior to no Prince
that ever was, in wisdom and valor; so he most excelled in true piety,
devotion, and zeal to Gods cause, and most especially in his filial
affection, and obedience to the Sea Apostolic, in so much that he has left an
especial Constitution, as a perpetual monument thereof, to the world Apud
Gratis. d. 19. c. 30. and in Conc. Triburieu. c. 30.
. He could have told you, that Basilius Macedo being present at the eight
general Council, in his Oration to the Fathers there assembled, made Act. 6.
append.
open profession of his obedience to be Bishop and Church of Rome; and that he
gave this memorable advice to the Laity Oras in fine Conc.
, that, whereas not they, but Bishops have the charge of government in the
Church, with the power of binding and loosing, the dignity of Pastors belongs
to them: and that as well himself, as all laymen are sheep to be fed, to be
sanctified, to be bound, and losed from their bonds by them.

And if from Emperors he had passed to Kings, he could have told you, that
howbeit in the time of Lucius the first Christian King of this Island, there
were many Churches sounded in Germany, France, and Spain, yet he desiring to
be made a Christian, required not the Sacrament of Baptism from any Bishop of
those Countries, nearer at hand, but writ, and sent Ambassadors to Eleutherius
Pope, that from him, as from the supreme Pastor and Governor of the universal
Church, himself, his Queen, and people might receive so necessary a
Sacrament, as they did by the hands of Fugatius, and Damianus, whom Eleutherius
sent for that purpose into Britain Bed. hist. Augl. l. 1. c. 4. and de sex
aesat.
. He could have told you, that Of win King understanding that the keys of
Heaven were given to S. Peter, and that the Bishop of Rome was his Successor,
resolved not to oppose him, but so far forth as he knew, and was able to obey
his decrees in all things Bed. hist. Augl. l. 3. c. 25.
. He could have told you, that Pope Adrian the first being dead, and Leo chosen
in this place, Kenulphus King of the Mercians writ to him Continuat. histor.
Bode l. 1. c. 12.
, giving thanks to God, that he had provided for his flock so solicitous a
Pastor, to whose commands (said he) I think fit to lend humbly an obedient
ear. And having asked his benediction, he adds: This benediction, all the
Kings of the Mercians, which have gone before me, have obtained. And that which
I humbly crave, and desire to obtain from you, O most holy, is that you accept
of me, as your adopted Child, as I choose, and with all obedience, reverence
you, in the place of a Father. He could have told you, that S. Edward the
Confessor writing to Nicolas Pope Alred. Rieual. in vita S. Edward.
, addressed his letter to him, with this inscription: To the sovereign Father
of the universal Church, Nicolas, Edward by the grace of God, King of England,
due subjection.

If from England he had passed to other Countries, he could have told you, that
the most Christian King of France, Lewis the eleauenth, writing to Pius the
second, saluted him with this title Ep. ad Pium 2.
: To our most blessed Father, Pius the second, Pope, filial obedieuce. And in
the Epistle: We have you that are the Vicar of the living God, in so great
veneration, that with a willing mind, we are ready to hear your sacred
admonitions (especially in Ecclesiastical affairs) as the voice of our
Pastor: for we profess, and know you to be the Pastor of our Lords flock, and
we obey your commands. And among the documents which this holy King S. Lewis,
on his deathbed left in writing to Philip his Son, this was one Nangius de
gest. S. Ludou. and Surius 25. Aug.
: Be thou devout and obedient to the Roman Church, as to a Mother; and show thy
self dutiful to the Bishop thereof, as to thy spiritual Father.

It were not difficult to add more testimonies in the same kind of other Kings
of France, as of Charles, and Hugh: of Alphonsus the wise, and Ferdinand the
Catholic of Spain: of Leo King of the Armenians; of Sigismund of Poland etc.
But these may suffice to persuade any judicious reader, that the most wise, and
godly Christian Emperors, and Kings that Christendom has bred, have believed
the Pope to be their Pastor, and spiritual Father, and themselves bound to
yield obedience to him in the affairs of their souls; and withal to show the
falsehood of your contrary Tenet.

CHAP. XXX. Whether Christian Emperors have invested themselves in
Ecclesiastical affairs.
YOU maintain the affirmative, which you prove with several examples, all of
them directly against your self.

SECT. 1. Constantine the Great invested not himself in Ecclesiastical Causes.
IN the first place you allege the example of Constantine the great, who was
so far from meddling with Ecclesiastical causes, that being solicited in the
Council of Nice, to hear and determine certain controversies of Bishops, he
answered Ruffin. l. 1 c. 1.8. Greg. l. 4 (...) 72. Baron. an. 32^.
: God has constituted you Priests, and given you power to judge of us: and
therefore we are rightly judged by you; but you cannot be judged by men.
Wherefore expect ye the judgment of God alone, and let your quarrels,
whatsoever, be referred to his divine judgment: for God has given you to us,
as Gods, and it is not fit, that man should judge Gods, but he alone, of whom
it is written Psalm. 81.1.
God stood in the congregation of Gods, and judges Gods in the midst of
them. In these words Constantine acknowledges the Episcopal power to be above
the Imperial, and that a Priest in Ecclesiastical causes has power to judge
of an Emperor, if he be in his Parish: whereas contrariwise the Priest cannot be
judged by the Emperor, more then the Pastor by his sheep, or God by men.

But you object Page 161.
Constantine judged the cause of Cecilian B. of Carthage. And this you esteem
to be so choice an Argument, that afterward you repeat it twice again, Page
^21. and 327.
but very unadvisedly; this very example alone being of it self an abosolute
demonstration of the falsehood of your Doctrine; for first the Donatists, that
required judges from Constantine in the cause of Cecilian, were heretics, who
as they had forsaken the communion of Gods Church, and (as S. Augustine says
Ep. 1^^.
were guilty of the horrible crime of erecting Altar against altars so in their
recourse to Constantine they violated the laws of the Church: for, it is (said
S. Martin ( Sever. Sulpititius ^ist. s^^^cra l. 2.
to the Emperor Maximus) a new and never heard of impiety, that a secular judge
should judge a cause of the Church. And S. Athanasius Ep. ad Solit.
What has the Emperor to do with the judgments of Bishops? Has it ever heue
heard, since the beginning of the world that the judgments of the Church did
take their force from the Emperor Ep. ad Constant extat a^ud Baron. anno 355.
? And Osius admonishing Constantius the Arian Emperor: Intermeddle not (O
Emperor) in Ecclesiastical causes, nor take upon you to command us in this
kind, but rather learn those things from us. To you, God has committed the
Empere; the affairs of the Church to us. And as he that maliciously carpeth at
our government, resists the ordinance of God; so take you heed that in assuming
to your self those things which belong to the Church, you make not your self
guilty of a most heinous crime: for it is written give to Caesar those things,
which are Cesars, and those which are Gods, to God. The like reprehension was
given to the same Emperor by Leontius, that famous B. of Cesaraea, who had been
present at the Council of Nice, and whom Cregorius Presbyter Spoud anno 32^.
^^. ^.
terms. equal to the Angels. I wonder (said he to Constantius) Suid. in
Leou^.
that you being appointed to order, and gouerneone thing do meddle with others:
you are chief commander in military, and civil affairs and you presume to
ordain what Bishops shall do in things that belong to Bishops alones. And when
the Captain of the heretical Emperor Valens required the Priests and Deacons
of Edessa, to submit to the Emperor in matters of religion, representing to
them, that it was madness to resist so great a Monarch; Eulogius a Priest of
the same City answered pleasantly Theodor. l. 4. hi^t. c. ^^.
: What? has Valens together with the Empire gotten also the place and dignity
of a Bishop? And when Dalmatius the Tribune with a public Notary, was sent by
Valentinian the younger, to summon S. Ambrose to a disputation with Auxentius
the Arian Bishop, and others of his sect, in the Emperors palace, before him,
and his Courtiers: L. ^. op. 3^.
I answered (says S. Ambrose to the Emperor) the same, that your Father of
glorious memory, not only answered in words upon like occasion but also
established by his laws, that in causes of faith, and Ecclesiastical order,
Priests only are to judge of Priests: yea further, that if a Bishop should be
questioned for his manners, this judgment should likewise appertain to Bishops
etc. When have you ever heard, m^st clement Emperor, that lay: men did judge of
Bishop in matters of faith? You are yet youg in years: you will by Gods grace,
and the maturity of age, be better informed; and then you will be able to judge
what manner of Bishop he is to be accounted, that subjects the right of
Priesthood to lay men. Your Father being a man of riper years, said: It
belongs not to me to be a Judge among Bishops: and will your Clemency now say,
that you ought to be their Judge? So S. Ambrose.

But what need we further proofs? Did not Constantine himself, whom here you
object, refuse to hear the causes of Bishops, answearing Ruffin. l. 1. c. 1.
S. Greg. l 4. ep. 72.
: That Bishops had power to judge of Emperors, but not Emperors to judge of
Bishops, showing thereby that he acknowledged himself to have no power of a
Judge in Ecclesiastical causes? Yea and this very fact of Constantine which
you object, is so far from yelding any precedent for secular Princes to judge
Ecclesiastical causes, that it manifestly concludes the contrary: for when
the Donatists required him to give them Judges in the cause of Cecilian B. of
Carthage, he stood amazed at their impudency. He durst not (says S. Augustine)
Ep. 166.
judge the cause of a Bishop. And Optatus L. 1. cont. Parmen.
: He answered them with a spirit full of indignation: you ask of me judgment
in this world; of me (I say) that do my self attend the judgment of Christ:
You would have me to make my self a Judge of the Ministers of Christ, I that
do my self expect the judgment of Christ.

Wherefore though Constantine at the importunity of the Donatists, granted them
Judges of the Gauls, as they required, he did it not without making this
protestation before hand, that it belonged not to him to meddle with the
judgment of Christ's Ministers. And notwithstanding that the Donatists who
demanded Judges, and the Judges which Constantine assigned them, as also
Constantine himself, were then all actually present in France, yet he caused
the Donatists together with the Judges which he had given them, to travail to
Rome, that according to the ancient custom and laws of the Church Athan.
Apol. ^. Sozom. l. 3. c. 9. And See above Chap. 26.
the cause might be judged by the Popes direction, and under his presidency.

And this remission of the cause from his own Court to the Popes tribunal,
was not by way of commission or delegation from himself, as from a Superior
Judge to the Pope, as to an inferior (as you falsely suppose) but by way of
remission to him, to whom he knew that judicature in right to belong: for how
could the Emperor that professed himself to have no right of a Judge in the
causes of Bishops, give power and commission unto others, to judge the cause of
Cecilian? Wherefore, although S. Augustine in regard of the Donatists intention,
call this remission, a delegation, yet withal he declares, that the reason of
this delegation, was, because the Emperor durst not judge the cause of a
Bishop: which shows, that it was not a delegation of authority, and power,
but a relegation or remission of the cause, to whom the judgment thereof in
right appertained. Nor does it import, that he remitted not this cause to the
Pope alone, but to him, and other Bishops his Colleagues: for he remitted it
not to them equally, but to the Pope, as to the chief Judge, and President,
and to the others, as to the Pope Assessors. Melchiades (says S. Augustine
Cont. Julian. l. ^. c. 2.
Bishop of the Apostolic See being President, Reticius was present as a Judge,
with others. And again Cont. Parmen. l. 1. c. 5.
: By the arbitrament of Constantine, the cause was heard by Bishops Judges,
over whom presided Melchiades B. of the City of Rome. Behold, how exactly S.
Augustine attributes to every one, what belonged unto them. Constantine was an
Arbitrator: the other Bishops present as Judges assessors to Melchiades, and as
witnesses of his proceedings: Melchiades chief Judge, and President. And
therefore he, as having full authority, did not content himself with taking for
his Assistents, the three French Bishops nominated by the Emperor; but by his
own authority, added to them other fifteen of Italy whose names Optatus
rehearses Cont. Parmen. l. 1.
: whereas if he had not been absolute Judge by his own authority, but only by
delegation from Constantine he could not have added any other Judges to those
three which Constantine nominated. Again, his authority appeared in this, that
none of the Assistants, but he in the name of the whole Council, and as
President thereof, pronounced the sentence: How innocent (says S. Augustine Ep.
^^2.
was the definitive sentence pronounced by blessed Melchlades, how entire, how
prudent, how peaceable? in so much that S. Augustine greatly commends him for
it, saying Ibid.
: O blessed man! O son of Christian peace, and Father of Christian people!

Nevertheless, those rebellious Donatists rested not but from the judgment of
the Pope, appealed again to the Emperor; which he so much misliked, that he
called it Ep. ad Episc. Cathol ad calc. gest. purgat. Cecil. and Felic.
, A great phrensy, incredible arrogance, a thing not fit to be spoken, or
heard, a mad impudency of fury, a recourse to a secular judgment from an
heavenly, and a contempt of Christ's authority. And yet out of a great desire
he had to gain them yelding to their importunity, or (as S. Augustine says
Ep. 166.
giving way to their perverseness, and hoping, that what he did would be auowed
by the Sea Apostolic, he granted them another Council of 200. Bishops at
Arles, which having duly examined their cause, confirmed the Popes sentence,
and therefore gave them no more satisfaction, then the Roman Council had done.

Wherefore from this Council, they had recourse again to the Emperor,
beseeching him to take the examination of the cause into his own hands; which
he did, but yet, A sanctis antistitibus postea veniam petiturus S. Aug. ep. 162.
, with intention to ask pardon afterward of the holy Bishops, for meddling in
a cause, that belonged not to his Court, but to theirs. But what? did
Constantines judgment appease the fury of those obstinat heretics? No: The
Emperor (says S. Augustine Ibid.
is chosen Judge the Emperors judgment is despised. But no wonder: for what
else could be expected from such rebellious spirits, but that as they had
refused to stand to the sentence of the Church, so also they should contemn
the judgment of the Emperor?

Who is there then, that sees not how far this history is from proving that
Constantine acknowledged in himself any authority to meddle in Ecclesiastical
causes since he durst not judge the cause of a Bishop? and charged the
Donatists with never heard of impudency, arrogance impiety fury pernersnesse
porensy, and contemp of Christ's authority, in flying from the judgment of the
Church to his secular tribunal? And that if in this cause he did any way
assume to himself the person of a Judge, it was with protestation to ask
pardon of the holy Bishops, and in hope it would be auowed by them, for as much
as what he did, was out of a desire to quiet the Donatists, and reduce them to
the peace and communion of the Catholic Church.

And how far this example of the Donatists is from helping your cause, or
hurting ours, S. Augustine will yet better inform you Cont. lic. Petil. l. 2.
c. 92. and Ep. 166.
: for as when they were condemned by the Church, they fled to Constantine, so
when they were repulsed and condemned by him, they despised his judgment, and
appealed to Julian an Apostata from Christian religion, and a professed enemy
to Christ, beseeching him to restore unto them the Churches which Catholic
Princes had taken from them, and to that end honored him with this Elogy Ep.
166.
That in him alone all justice remained: which gave S. Augustine cause to say
unto them Ibid.
: If it were in your power, you would not now call against us Constantine a
Christian Emperor, because he defended the truth; but you would rather raise
Julian the Apostata from hell. How far these words of S. Augustine may touch
you, for producing this example of the sacrilegious Donatists, as a precedent
of your doctrine, and Constantine as a pattern for secular Princes to meddle in
Ecclesiastical judgments, I leave to the readers censure: for if (as you
pretend) this example of the Donatists flying from the judgment of the Church
to Constantine, be of force to prove, that the Popes judgment will suffer an
higher appeal, why shall it not also be of force to prove, that the judgment
of Constantine will suffer an higher appeal to Julian the Apostata? for the
example of these Donatists is a precedent for the one, as well as for the other.

A second history which you object Page 16^.
to prove, that the Popes judgment will suffer an higher appeal, is, that in
the case of Athanasius. Constantine charge all the Bishops of the Province of
Tire, to appear before him without delay, and to show how sincerely and truly
the had given their judgments. The case is this: Diverse heretical Bishops of
the East, Arians, Meletians, and Colluthians, assembled themselves at Tire, to
accuse Athanasius of many crimes, which themselves had maliciously forged, and
suborned false witnesses to testify against him, that so they might seem to
have just occasion to abstain from his communion, and condemn him.
Constantine being informed thereof, at the entreaty of Athanasius, call's them
to him to yield account of their proceeding, Ergo (say you) the Popes judgment
will suffer an higher appeal. A false consequence: for S. Athanasius fled from
the said Council of Tyrus, unto Constantine, not as to his competent Judge,
but as to the Protector of Innocence, and of the Church, to be maintained in
the possession of his Bishopric, honor and life; against which his Arian
adversaries were with such violent and insuperable malignity bent, as he had no
means to avoid so great mischiefs, tending to the overthrow of Catholic
Religion, but by imploring the aid of the supreme secular Power. That in this
case Clergymen and Bishops may have recourse unto the arm of temporal Princes,
S. Paul Act. 28. Coactus sum appellare Caesarem.
showed by his example, as Athanas. Apolog. 2. ad Constantium.
S. Athanasius, and August. Epist. 48.50. and 204.
S. Augustine, and out of them Suarez Suarez defensio fidei lib. 4. c. 10. n. 5.
observes.

Lastly you object Page 161. fin. 162.
, that, When the cause Ecclesiastical requires, Constantine proceeds to
denounce punishment by his own authority, against whomsoever that shall honor
the memory of those Bishops, Theognis, and Eusebius. These two Bishops were
Arians, and great fyrebrands of that blasphemous sect, which had been
condemned, and an athematized by the holy Council of Nice; and moreover had
committed many other most enormous crimes, some of which Constantine having
mentioned in his Epistle to the people of Nicomedia, adds Theod. l. 1. hist.
c. 20.
: If any one shall be so temerarious, and audacious, as to go about to praise,
and honor the memory of those plagues of the Church (Theognis and Eusebius) he
shall presently be punished by me for his folly. These words of Constantine
show, that he did not threaten punishment to any Ecclesiastical person, but to
the people of Nicomedia, if they should audaciously presume to honor those
Heretics, whom the Church had condemned: which was not to assume any
Ecclesiastical authority to himself, but to do his duty, and what the laws
of God, and his Church require at the hands of every good Christian Prince,
which is to defend and maintain the authorities and judgments of the Church.

But I must advertise you, of some ignorant mistakes: you say Page 161.
out of S. Augustine, that Constantine committed the cause of Cecilian to
Melchiades Pope. But in three other places Page 221. 327. 328.
contradicting your self, and S. Augustine, you say, he committed it to Pope
Julius, showing therein your ignorance in Ecclesiastical history: for if (as S.
Augustine truly says) it was committed to Melchiades, how could it be
committed to Julius, who was not chosen Pope, till above 20. years after
Melchiades his death, and between whom, and Julius, were other two Popes,
Syluester, and Mark? With like ignorance you say Page 161.
, The Emperor charge all the Bishops of the Province of Tire to appear
before him: for Tire has not many Bishops, nor is it a Province, but a City in
the province of Phenicia, in which the Arians held their wicked Council
against S. Athanasius.

SECT. II. Doctor Mortons second Example of Theodosius examined.
THat Theodosius acknowledged no subjection to the B. of Rome, you prove by his
interesting himself in Ecclesiastical affairs. Of the Emperor Theodosius
(say you Page 161.
we read, that he gave to the Bishop Dioscorus, authority, and superiority of
place, to moderate causes in a Council. This you speak of that most godly and
religious Emperor Theodosius the elder: for here, and in your Index of the
tenth Chapter prefixed before this your Grand Imposture, you name him
immediately after Constantine, and before Theodosius the younger: and both in the
same Index, and page 167. you expressly declare that the Emperor which you
object against us immediately after Constantine is Theodosius the elder. And
finally because unless by this Theodosius, you mean the elder, you object
nothing at all out of him against us, which yet in the places alleged you
profess to do in this Chapter.

Wherefore I must make bold to tell you, that in this your instance you discover
extreme ignorance in Ecclesiastical history: for Theodosius the elder died the
year 394. which was 50. years before Dioscorus was made Bishop. How then
could he give to Dioscorus authority and superiority of place, to moderate
causes in a Council? If you had not been ignorant, and willing to lay hold of
any thing, true or false, to help your self in the defense of a bad cause, you
should have said, that Theodosius (not the elder, but) the younger, savoring the
Arch-heretike Eutyches, and seduced by his high Chamberlain Chrysaphius an
Eutychian Heretic, gave authority to Dioscorus an heretical Bishop of
Alexandria, and of the same sect with Eutyches, to moderate causes, not in a
true Council, but in a sacrilegions Conuenticle at Ephesus, in which Eutyches
was absolved, his heresy approved; the Catholic Bishops that had condemned him
in a Synod at Constantinople, under Flauianus Patriarch of that City, not
permitted to speak; all such as were known to be zealous maintainers of the
Catholic faith against Eutyches, deposed; others sent into banishment; the
Popes Legates thrust out of the Council; the holy Patriarch Flauianus by the
faction of Dioscorus barbarously misused, beaten, and wounded to death; the
Bishops that figned, compelled thereto by famine, and force of arms, the
Emperors soldiers ruling all by violence and tyranny, and many other outrageous
villainies committed: in so much that this Conuenticle has never deserved the
name of a lawful Council, but by all writers is called Synodus Piratica, and
Latrocinium Ephesinum, The piraticall Synod, and the Ephesine theeuery, or (as
Socrates terms it L. 1. c. 9. and 10.
Vesanum Ephesi Conciliabulum, The frantike Conuenticle of Ephesus: And the
Acts thereof were soon after condemned by Leo Pope Ep. 24.
, and repealed by the holy Council of Chalcedon Act. 1.
.

I appeal now to the Reader, whether you have not showed great ignorance, and
in the highest degree wronged that most religious Emperor Theodosius the elder,
in making him patron of the Eutychian heresy, and charging him falsely with
assembling that sacrilegious Synagogue of Ephesus; and most of all, in
producing him for your Protestant doctrine against the Roman Church? to which
he so firmly adhered, that he held her to be the Head, and center of Catholic
communion. And therefore intending to establish the true faith, and free the
whole Empire from the pernicious doctrines of diverse heretics, which lived in
those days, he made that famous Law, which Justinian has inserted into his
Code, and marches in the front thereof Cod. tit. 1. L. 1.
: Our will is, that all the people ruled by the Empire of our Clemency, shall
live in the same religion which the divine Apostle Peter delivered to the
Romans, as the religion insinuated by him witnesses until this present day,
and which it is manifest, that the high Priest Damasus follows, and Peter of
Alexandria, a man of Apostolical sanctity: that is to say, Peter, who being
driven out of his Seat of Alexandria by Lucius the Arian intruder, appealed to
Rome Socrat. l. 4. c. 36.
, and had been newly restored and confirmed by Damasus in the Patriarchall seat
of that City.

And the same, or not unlike to this law of Theodosius, is that, which Gratian
that governed the Empire together with Theodosius, made, to reduce all
heretics to the true Church, and faith of Christ: He made a law (says
Theodoret L. 5. hist. c. 2.
by which he commanded the holy Churches to be delivered to them, that agreed
in communion with Damasus: which commandment (as he further expresses Ibid. c.
2. init.
was without contradiction executed throughout all Nations. By this it
appears, that if Doctor Morton had lived in the days of Theodosius, and
Gratian, they would have taken from him the Church of Dutham, and delivered it
to a Bishop of the Roman Communion.

SECT III. Doctor Mortons third instance of Theodosius the younger, and
Honorius, examined.
YOu go on, obiecting Page 162.
out of the Gloss in C. Renouantes: Theodosius the younger, and Honorius, both
Emperors, say, that the Patriarch of Constantinople has the same right over
those in subjection to him, which the Pope has ever his. Why do you falsify?
The Chapter is taken out of the Trullan Synod under Justinian the younger, who
lived long after Theodosius and Honorius. Again the words of the Gloss are,
Imperator dicit, The Emperor says: but mention of Honorius or Theodosius there
is none: that's your false comment. The Gloss cites the Emperor in Authentica,
de Ecclesiasticis titulis, which was not written by Honorius, nor by
Theodosius, but by Justinian the elder. And how far he was from equalling the
B. of Constantinople with the Pope, you may understand, not only by other his
Laws See Sect. sequent.
, but even by this very Authentica, which out of the Gloss you object: We
ordain (says he) Authen. de eccles. tit. c. 2.
according to the definitions of the holy Counsels, that the most holy Pope of
the elder Rome is to be the first of all Prelates, and that the most blessed
Archbishop of Constantinople, new Rome, shall have the second place after the
holy See Apostelike of old Rome, and shall be preferred before all the other
Sees.

But you urge: the Gloss alleges the Emperor saying, that the B. of
Constantinople has the same right over those in subjection under him, which
the Pope has over his. True: but the same Gloss declares (which you
conceal) that this similitude of rights between them, is not in all respects,
but in quibusdam, in some, which the Gloss nominateth. If you compare them
precisely, as Bishops of their peculiar Dioceses of Rome, and Constantinople,
or as Patriarchs, he of Constantinople has the same rightes in his Dioces, and
Patriarkeship of Constantinople, that the Pope (considered precisely as Bishop
and Patriarch) has over his Dioces of Rome, and Patriarkeship of the West. But
besides these two dignities, the Pope is Chief of all Prelates, and Governor of
the universal Church; to which titles the B. of Constantinople has no right,
but in regard of them is inferior to the Pope, and subject to him. And so much
you might have understood, if from the Gloss, you had turned your eyes to the
texts of that, and the precedent Chapter, which declare that the Pope is above
the B. of Constantinople, and has power to depose him, when there is cause.
And you might also have called to mind, that many Patriarchs of Constantinople
have been deposed by diverse Popes, and among them Anthymus by Agapet, in the
very City of Constantinople, in the presence of Justinian, which neither he,
nor Theodora the Empress that protected Anthymus would have permitted, if they
had not acknowledged the subjection of the Patriarch of Constantinople, to the
B. of Rome.

SECT. IV. Doctor Mortons fourth instance of Theodosius and Valentinian,
examined.
THe Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian (say you) Page 162.
in their letters to Cyrill, require all Bishops without exception, to be
present at the Council of Ephesus, as they mean to avoid the sentence of
condemnation upon themselves. Whereupon Pope Leo is glad to return an answer,
excusing his not coming by the exigence of time, and his other instant
occasions, within his own Dioces, which would not permit him to be absent from
his See, and therefore hops (his own words) to obtain so much pardon, and
favor, that his Legates may be accepted of in his stead. These your words are
full of ignorance and falsehood: for first, the letters of Theodosius and
Valentinian to Cyrill were to call him, and other Bishops to the first Council
of Ephesus, which was held and finished in the time Celestine Pope, nine years
before Leo was created B. of Rome. Is it not then palpable ignorance, to say,
that, Leo is glad to return an answer excusing his not coming by the
exigence of time, and his other instant occasions within his own Dioces, when
as the letters were written nine years before he had any Dioces at all, and
were neither directed to him, nor any way concerned him?

2. If Theodosius and Valentinian called the Bishops to the first Council of
Ephesus, it was not by their own authority, but by the authority of Celestine
Pope. See above Chap. 18. sect. and 2. and Bar. anno 430.


3. Howbeit Theodosius in the year 449. which was 19. years after the writing
of that letter to Cyrill, by his own authority assembled the Piratioall Synod
of Ephesus in favor of the Eutychian heresy; yet knowing, that no Council can
be valide, which is not celebrated by the consent and authority of the B. of
Rome, he writ to Leo then Pope, inuiting him to it. And this letter it is,
which you ignorantly confound with the other written to Cyrill, who: was dead
sieve years before the writing of this to Leo. But Leo knowing the error of
Eutyches to have been condemned already in a Council at Constantinople, and to
be in it self so manifestly impious, that (as he writ to the holy Patriarch
Flauianus Ep. 1^.
, another Council might no way seem necessary for the condemnation of it; and
withal foreseeing the great mischiefs that were like to ensue out of the
Council intended by Theodosius, endeauored to divert him wholly from that
purpose, or at least to persuade him, that if a Council were called, it might
be held in Italy. But seeing he could draw the Emperor to neither of these
conditions, least on his part any thing should be wanting which might seem
available for the destruction of Heresy, and peace of the Church, he sent
Legates in his steed to preside in the Council, at which himself could not be
present for the reasons expressed in diverse of his epistles Ep. 12.17.18.
: in which also he declares that he sent them armed with his authority, either
to restore Euches to the Catholic communion, if he would renounce his errors
and ask pardon of them (as by libell presented to the Sea Apostolic he had
promised to do) or else to pronounce the last sentence of condemnation against
him.

But whereas you to make good, that the calling of Counsels belongs to
Emperors, say Page 162.
: Leo's own words are, that he hops to obtain so much pardon, and favor,
that his Legates might be accepted of in his steed, you speak not truly: for
his words are: Because you know, that my presence at Rome imports for the
common good, so that, salua Clementiae Vestrae venia* by the good leave of your
Clemency, I might not deny my self to the love, and requests of the Citizens,
think me to be present in these my brethren whom I have sent in my steed, and
given them full instructions, what ought to be observed. And it is to be noted,
that these words are not spoken by Leo to the Emperors (as out of your
discourse it may seem to our English reader) but to Pulcheria, a woman, who
(witness the Apostle 1. Cor. 14.34.
may not speak in the Church, much less assemble Counsels, or moderate
Ecclesiastical causes. Nor do they import any subjection to her in
ecclesiastical affairs; but are merely words of civil respect, and vrbanity,
fit to be used to the person of so great a Lady. And your illation out of them,
that Emperors have power to moderate Ecclesiastical causes, and assemble
Counsels, is a consequence, that suiteth not well with your judgment, and
learning.

SECT. V. Doctor Mortons fifth instance of Justinian examined.
THe last Emperor you object, is Justinian, Who (say you Page 162.
will hardly please us, because he authorized under his own hand, the Code, or
books of Constitutions, and Pandects, for the regulating of the Clergy, as
well as of the Laity. That this will hardly please us, you prove out of
Baronius, saying, that herein he is justly reproved by many, as one inuading
upon, and intruding into the office of divine Causes. He is indeed reproved by
diverse, that think him to have made ecclesiastical laws by his own
authority. But by others he is justly excused, and in particular by Baronius
Anno 528.
, alleging for his justification (as you confess Page 166.
, that he being a man wholly illiterate, his Ecclesiastical Constitutions were
made by Epiphanius and Menas Patriarchs of Constantinople, but publised in his
name, to the end they might be better observed; which was no way hurtful, but
profitable to the Church, whose laws were neglected, and contemned by vicious
Emperors, and heretical Prelates and people (which at that time abounded in
the East) and especially by the Patriarchs of Constantinople, many of them
having been infected with heresy.

This is apparent out of the express testimonies of Justinian himself, who
not once, but often professes Nou. 1 de Monast, and monach. Nou.
81.123.133.137.
, that concerning Ecclesiastical affairs, he decreed nothing, but according
to the prescript of the holy Canons: and therefore John the second Pope of that
name, in an Epistle to him Extat apud Baron. anno 534.
approves, and confirms his Laws, being informed by two Bishops Hypatius
and Demetrius his Legates, that they were made by the interuention, and consent
of Bishops, according to the Doctrine of the Sea Apostolic, and decrees of the
holy Fathers. Wherefore Justinian in those constitutions did nothing, but what a
Catholic and religious Prince might lawfully do, without prejudice to the
authority of the Sea Apostolic, or inuesting himself in any part of
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction.

Moreover that by his Laws, he intended not to derogate any thing from the
authority of the Bishop, or Church of Rome, his Laws themselves bear
witness: We preserve (says he in his law to Epiphanius Patriarch of
Constantinople Cod. tit. 1. L. 7.
the estate of the unity of the most holy Churches, in all things, with the
most holy Pope of old Rome, to whom we have also written the like: for we will
not suffer any thing to pass, concerning the affairs of the Church, which
shall not be referred to his Blessedness, because he is the Head of all the
holy Prelates of God. And in the Law Inter claras Cod. tit. 1. L. 8.
, into which is inserted that famous Epistle which he sent by Hypatius and
Demetrius, with a solemn Embassage to Pope John, against Cyrus and Eulogius,
Legates of the Acemites, he says: Yielding honor to the Apostolic See, and to
your Holiness, (which is, and ever has been our desire) and honoring your
Blessedness as it becomes us to honor our Father, we have speedily given
notice to your Holiness, of all things, that belong to the ecclesiastical
state: for we have had great care, to preserve the Unity of your Apostolic
See* and the state of the holy Churches of God etc. And thersore we have made
have to subject, and unite all the Priests of the East parts to the Sea of
your Holiness: nor do we suffer, that any thing belonging to the state of the
Churches (be is never so clear, and undoubted) be unknown to your Holiness,
who are the Head of all the holy Churches.

To these restimonies of Justinian you have devised diverse answers. 1. With
some petty Protestant Lawier you cavil at his Epistle to the Pope, and the
Popes answer to him, as fictitious Page 256.
. But this to be a calumny, is learnedly proved by the two famous lawiers
Alciatus Parerg. l. 4. c. 24.
, and Cuias Obseru. l. 12. c. 16.
. 2. By Liberatus a writer of the same time In Breu. c. 20.
, who reports Justinians embassage sent to the Pope, by Hypatius and
Demetrius, and the Popes answer to him, which are extant in the same Law. 3.
By the testimony which Justinian himself gives thereof in his Law to Epiphanius
Patriarch of Constantinople Cod. tit. 1. L. 7.
, and in his Epistle to Agapet Pope. 4. By Leunclauius a Protestant Lawier, who
has translated and printed Justinians Epistle to the Pope, and the Popes
answer to him, as the eight Law of the Code.

2. Whereas Justinian call's the Pope, The chief, and Head of all Bishops, and
the Roman Church, The Head of all Churches, you answer Page 256.
, that, we have heard how common the word Caput has been, without any sense of
Monarchy. We have indeed heard you say Page 50. and 110.
, that the similitude of Head, and Members implies no superiority of
jurisdiction, but only of order, that is, of priority of place, of voice, and
the like. But you also have heard Chap 11. and Chap. 17. sect. 2.
, how untrue, and repugnant not only to the belief of antiquity, but even to
common sense, this is.

3. You object Page 256.
: If this Rescript of Justinian be taken so rigidly, as we would have it, it is
contradictory to another Constitution of his, in which he grants the chief
right in ecclesiastical causes, to belong to the Governor of every Province.
We know, that as while Justinian was Catholic, he made no Laws, but with the
consent of Bishops, and confirmation of Popes, so if after he fell into heresy,
and contemned the authority of the Church, he made laws repugnant to the
Catholic faith, and discipline of the Church, it is no wonder. That proves
against you, that heretics are they, which make laws contrary to the faith,
and discipline of the Roman Church; and that if Justinian had still remained a
Catholic, he would have made no such laws, as he did not before he fell into
heresy.

4. You object Page 166.
: Justinian before he fell into heresy, banished two Popes, Siluerius, and
Vigilius. To prove that he banished Siluerius, you set down these words, as of
Baronius: Siluerium Papam mittit in exilium, Justinian sends Siluerius Pope
into banishment. But you abuse Baronius: He has no such words; nor attributes
the banishment of Siluerius to the Emperor, but says, he was sent into exile
by Bellisarius and Antonina his wife; partly at the instigation of the
heretical Empress Theodora, offended with him, because he would not replace
in the Sea of Constantinople, Anthymus an Eutychian heretic, and an inuader of
that See, whom therefore Agapet Pope had justly deposed; and partly for certain
crimes forged against him by her, and Vigilius. Yea Baronius Anno 538.
witnesses, that the Bishop of Patara coming to the Emperor, and showing him
how displeasing it was to God, that the Pope, who is over the Church of the
whole world, and to whom no King in the world is comparable, should be driven
from his See, he presently commanded him to be recalled from the place of
banishment, to Rome, that the accusations against him of Treason might be
examined.

But if Baronius had said, that Justinian himself, even before his fall into
heresy, had banished not only Vigilius, (as he does) but also Siluerius (as
Bozius by you cited says he did) does it therefore follow, that he had done
well? May not among Catholics, Children sometimes forgetting their duty, rise
against their Parents, and subjects against their Superiors, spiritual, or
temporal? May not Catholic Princes be in passion, and displeasure against
Bishops, and upon suspicions, mistakes, and misinformations, do against them,
that, which afterward they must repent, as King Henry the second did the death
of S. Thomas of Canterbury? Did not Constantine misinformed by the Ariaus,
banish S. Athanasius Athan. Apol. 2. Socrat. l. 2. c. 22.23. Epipha. haer. 66.
? And was not S. Chrysostom condemned by a Council of Catholic Bishops, and
banished out of a Catholic City, by Arcadius a Catholic Emperor, at the
instance of Eudoxia his wife, a Catholic Empress? And yet both he and she
were so far from not beliueing the supreme authority of the Roman Church, or
thinking it lawful to live out of her communion, that being for this fact
excommunicated by Innocentius Pope, they humbled themselves, and craving
absolution with sorrow for their fault, obtained it.

What therefore Justinian did in his wrath, either against Siluerius, or
Vigilius, is no Argument to prove his no subjection to the B. of Rome, whom he
called and acknowledged to be his Father: but it proves that in laying violent
hands on Vigilius, he behaved himself not like a child, but like an enemy, and
persecutor of the Church. For which offense, as also for the great wrongs he
offered to Eutychius, a most holy Patriarch of Constantinople, for his heresy,
avarice, and cruelty, God punished him with a sudden death. And albeit
Nicephorus L. 17. c. 31.
report, that he died penitent, and in hope thereof the sixth Synod, Agatho
Pope, and S. Gregory Apud Baron. amo 565.
with other late writers make honorable mention of him, yet Euagrius and
Procopius Apud Baron. ibid.
eye witnesses of those times, report otherwise. The truth will be known at
that day, when the secrets of all hearts must be revealed.

Lastly you object Page 256.
, that, Justinian, which made a Law declaring the Roman Church to be the Head
of all Churches, showed his authority in breaking it, when he called the Church
of Constantinople, the Head of all other Churches. This objection has no other
ground, but your mistake: for Justinian speaks of the Church of S. Sophia,
which is the Cathedral Church of Constantinople; and this he call's, The Head
of all other Churches, not of the whole world, but of that Patriarkeship, as it
appears by the contexture following, and by his other Laws Cod. tit. 1. L.
7. and 8.
, in which he declares the Pope to be Head of all the holy Prelates of God;
and ordains, that the Sea of Constantinople be second after Rome: We ordain
(says he Nou. 131.
according to the definition of Counsels, that the holy Pope of old Rome shall
be the chief of all Prelates, and that the blessed Archbishop of
Constantinople, new Rome, shall have the second place after the Sea Apostolic
of old Rome. If therefore the Church of Constantinople be the second after Rome,
she cannot be Head of the Roman Church, and therefore not Head of all Churches
of the world.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the Authority and place of Emperors in Counsels.
THAT no Council is valid, which is not called and approved by the B. of Rome,
is a truth already demo^trated Chap. 17. sect. 6.
; as also that the first eight general Counsels in particular were assembled
and confirmed by his authority Chap. 16. and seqq.
. Cusanus his Concordia, which you object for the contrary, is of no force, as
being a prohibited book, and which (you know) Cusanus himself has retracted.

Concerning Priority of place in general Counsels, whether it be due to the
Pope, or to Emperors, some guess may be had, by what already you have heard
Chap. 29. and 30.
for if the Episcopal dignity be above the Imperial, as far as gold is above
lead, and the soul above the body: and if Christian Kings and Emperors be
sheep of Christ's fold, and the Pope their Pastor; if they his children, and he
their Father: will you say, that priority of place is due to the lesser dignity
above the greater? that the sheep ought to sit above their Pastor, or the
Children above their Father? Constantine the Great said to the Bishops in the
Council of Nice Ruffin. l. 1. c. 1. Socrat. l. 1. c. 8. S. Greg. l. 4. ep. 72.
: God has placed you as Gods over us, and we being men, have no power to judge
you, that are Gods, but you are to judge us men. For Leo de Castro upon those
words of Isay Ep. 60.14.
: The children of them that humbled thee, shall come crowching to thee, out of
an ancient Record of the order of S. Benedict, concerning the customs of the
Catholic Church, reports, that Kings in ancient times going to the Synods of
Bishops, did prostrate themselves before them, and kiss the ground, not rising
until the Bishops des^eding from their seats, did lift them up in their
arms. So far were the greatest Princes in those days, from thinking, that
priority of place was due to them, either before the Pope, or other Bishops.
And upon the same motive it was, that Emperors and Kings never signed the Acts
of general Counsels, but either after all the Bishops, as Constantine
Pogonate did in the sixth Council, or at least after the Popes Legates, and
all the Patriarchs, as in some others, in which for honors sake, it was granted
to Emperors, to sign before other Bishops inferior to Patriarchs.

And if the most religious Emperors, and Kings, have held the Pope in so great
veneration, that because they knew him to be the chief Vicar, and Lieutenant
of Christ on earth, they have honored him, with kissing his feet, and
performing the office of yeomen of his stirrup See about Chap. 10.
; If, Iustine the Emperor receiving John the first Pope of that name in the
City of Constantinople adored him prostrate on the ground Spond. anno 525. n. 1.
; if Justinian the elder did the like to Pope Agapetus Spond. anno 536. n. 5.
, and the younger Justinian having his Imperial crown on his head, and
meeting Constantine Pope fell down prostrat as his feet, and kissed them
Spond. an. 710. n. 1.
; how can it be conceived, that these Emperors and Kings did think priority of
place, to be due to themselves, above the Pope?

Oh but (say you Page 163.
when we ask the question, why none of your Popes were ever personally present
in any of the first general Counsels, though they were present in the same
City, as was Vigilius, when the fifth general Council was celebrated,
Bellarmine answeareth, that the Greek Bishops would have preferred the Emperors
in place above the Popes, which was not to be endured. So you. But is this all?
Does not Bellarmine give another reason of far more weight? Why do you conceal
it? But be it as Bellarmine coniectureth, that if the Popes had been personally
present, the Greek Bishops would have given priority of place to their
Emperors, how do you prove, that in so doing, they should have done well? for
they would likewise have placed Epiphanius Patriarch of Constantinople, in a
seat equal to John the first Pope of that name, but that the supreme dignity
of the Sea Apostllike enforced them to desist from that attempt, and to set the
Pope in a more eminent throne, exalted above that of Epiphanius in his own
Church Nicephoe l. 17. c. 27.
. Nor is it likely, that the most religious Emperors of the East, who have
professed themselves dutiful, and obedient Children to the Sea Apostolic,
would have taken place of the Popes their spiritual Fathers and Pastors, if it
had been offered unto the^ by their Bishops.

But beside Bellarmines reasons, there are others. As 1. That the Popes being
aged men, and separated by a large distance of sea and land from the East, in
which the eight first General Councels were held, were not fit to undertake so
long iourneys. 2. Because (as the Fathers of the first Council of Arles said
to Siluester, Ep. ad Syluestr.
expressing their grief, that they could not have his presence at their
Counsel) his residence was more necessary at Rome, where the Apostles
continually sit, and where their blood without intermission, gives testimony to
the glory of God. 3. And for that, before the holding of those Eastern
Councels, the Pope did usually hold Councels in the West, and send his Legates
into the East, with the votes of the Western Bishops, arming the^ with
authority, to preside in his place, and with direction how to order things in
those Eastern Councels.

As for Vigilius Pope, though he were present at Constantinople, when the fifth
general Council was held in that City, he would not assist in person, because
he being then lawful Pope, by election of the Clergy of Rome, would give no
occasion of renewing the memory of his entrance into the Papacy by intrusion,
and simony, whiles Siluerius his predecessor was living; and chiefly, because
seeing the Emperor violently bent to have the Three Chapters (which were the
subject of that Council) condemned, though in his particular, he condemned
them, yet for fear of breeding a schism in the Church, he would not be
personally present at a Council, in which they should be publicly condemned,
without the assistance of the Western Bishops, who earnestly withstood their
condemnation.

CHAP. XXXII. Whether Popes have challenged civil subjection from Emperors,
and Kings, Christian or Heathen.
YOU set down Page 169.
as an undoubted principle of Catholics, that, Popes of after ages challeng
civil subjection of Princes not only Christian, but also Ethinck and Heathen,
unto them. This you prove by examples of Popes, and other arguments, which I
shall briefly examine.

SECT. I. Your first Argument, out of Innocent the third, examined.
POpes of after ages (say you) Page 169.
have challenged an absolute power directly, or indirectly, over all secular
Princedome, not only Christian, but also of Ethnic and Heathen Emperors, as
well by corporal, as by spiritual punishments, even to the depriving them of
their Kingdoms, and lives. And that they may seem to exact this plenitude of
authority by divine Law, Pope Innocent the ihird makes this Papal Decree,
concluding the Emperors to be subject to the Popes, because it is written, God
made two great lights, the Sun to rule the day, and the Moon to govern the
night.

This argument you take out of an epistle of Innocent, written to the Emperor
of Constantinople, who conceauing that Innocent in a letter had reprehended
him, for his irreuerence to the Patriarch of Constantinople, wondered thereat.
And the cause of his wonder was, because S. Peter says 1. Pet. 2.13.
, Be ye subject to every humane creature, whether it be to the King, as
excelling or to the rules sent by him, to the revenge of those that do ill.
Innocent in his answer having proved evidently, that the Emperor misunderstood
S. Peter's words, adds, that he might have learned the prerogative of
Priesthood, by what God himself spoke, not to a King, but to a Priest; Behold
I have constituted thee over kingdoms and nations etc. But in that whole
Epistle he makes no decree, either for deposing, or excommunicating Kings, or
Emperors, or for punishing them corporally, or spiritually, or for depriving
them of their Kingdoms, and lives, or concerning any other matter; but only
proves the received doctrine of the ancient Fathers, that the Episcopal
dignity excels the Imperial, as for as the Sun surpasses the Moon, and
the soul the body: Which (says he to the Emperor) if your Imperial Highness
did prudently consider, you would not cause* nor permit the Patriarch of
Constantinople, a great, and honorable member of the Church, to sit on the left
side at your footstool, being that other Princes rise with reverence to their
Archbishops, and Bishops (as is fit they should) and appoint them a Venerable
seat, near to their own persons. Nor did I write to you, by way of
reprehension, though I might with reason have reprehended; because (as there he
explicates) Christ made Peter, and in him, his Successors, Pastors of his whole
flock, not exempting Kings or Emperors.

This is the sum of Innocents Epistle, in which you see, he does not so much
as check the Emperor, but in a sweet and Fatherly way, admonish him of his want
of respect to the Patriarch of Constantinople. Is it not then intolerable
falsehood to say, this Epistle is a Papal decree, whereby Innocent and other
Popes of after ages challenge an absolute power by divine Law, over all
Christian and Heathen Kings, and Emperors, to punish them, as well by
corporal, as by spiritual punishments, even to the depriving them of their
Kingdoms, and lives? Is any such thing mentioned in that Epistle? If this be
not dishonest dealing, and excessiuely imposterous, what is?

But to justify this imposture, you say Page 170.
: Upon this Gloss the Deuines, and Canonists (the popes Parats, and Parasites)
conclude, that every Emperor borrows his power from the Pope, as does the
Moon her light from the Sun, be the Emperor Christian, or Ethnic, and
therefore is to submit himself to the Pope; and that. Not by the order of
Charity but by duty of subordination, and subjection. The Authors whom you are
pleased to call, The Popes Parats, and Parasites, and to produce as witnesses
of these your falsities, are Bozius, Bellarmine, and Carerius: Of which three,
the two first, Bozius and Bellarmine, where you cite them, are so far from
drawing any such conclusion from that Gloss, that they make no mention at all
of the Gloss. And the later sentence, deinde neque hoc habet (Papa) propter
ordinem charitatis, sed propter subiectionem, and subordinationem ad deponendos
Reges, and disponendum de regnis, which you set down Page margi.
as Bellarmines, is not his, but patched up of diners words taken out of
several places of his, and knit into one sentence, to make him dance after
your pipe, and speak as best fitteth your design. Yea Bellarmine out of that
very Epistle, and out of those very words of Innocent which you object, proves
else where L Pont
, that the Pope has no temporal dominion over Christian Princes; whom
therefore you slander falsely, fathering on him the contrary, to make him, and
all Catholics, as much as in you lies, hateful to Christian Princes. The
third author, which is Carerius, I have not seen: but how vnsincerely you have
heretofore cited him, in this very matter, F. Persons in his Treatise tending
to Mitigation, against the seditious writings of Thomas Morion Minister, has
showed long since Ch 162.17.
. And because he truly observes, that you hardly cite any Author without some
slight or other, I suspect that here you deal no otherwise with Carerius.

SECT. II. Your second Argument, out of Hieremy the Prophet, examined.
SEcondly you say Page 170.
, Popes exact of Emperors, be they Christians, or Ethnickes, subjection and
subordination (when they mean to dispossess them of their kingdoms, or
deprive them of their lives) from pretense of Scripture, alleging in their
Bulls for their warrant, that saying of the Prophet: Behold I have constituted
thee above nations and kingdoms, to plant and root ont, to build and destroy,
Ierem. 1. So they. Whereunto also accords the decree of Boniface the eight.
Good God, that the world should be so bewitched by them, as to account them
Pastors of the Church, who feed their people with thorns, swords, daggers and
pistolls. For what else mean these grosses, whereby the word of God is so
notoriously profaned for patronizing of rebellions and murders? All these are
your words, false I am sure, and slanderous; and whether not also railing, and
virulent, let the Reader judge.

My intention here is not to dispute, what authority the Pope has over Kings,
and Emperors, in temporal matters. I write against you, and my intention only
is, to show; that as in other matters, so also in this, you wrong the Popes,
and falsify the Fathers, with other Catholic authors.

And to begin with S. Bernard, you say Page 170.
: He writing to Pope Eugenius L. 2. de Considerat.
, condemns the Papal Gloss to his face, teaching, that in this text, under
the figurative speech of rural sweat, is expressed the spiritual labor etc,
showing thereby, that your Popes might have proved for their advantage, out of
that text, rather a right to become gardeners and carpenters, for roting out
weeds, and destroying of buildings, then Generals of Hoasts, for conquest, and
subjection of kingdoms. That S. Bernard out of this text gathers no power of
Popes to depose Kings, or other secular Princes or people, I grant. He only
admonishes Eugenius, that being placed in a seat of emine^cy, from whence, as
from a watchtower, he beholds all, he neither give himself to idleness,
his function being an office of spiritual labor, nor be puffed up with pride,
but govern in humility, which he calls, The chiefest gemme among all the
ornaments of the high Priest, and to that end represents unto him, the
admonition which S. Peter gave to all Prelates 1. Pet. 5.2.
, not no dominier in the Clergy, but to become paternes of the flock from the
heart, and the example of Christ, who was in the midst of his Disciples, as
one that waited Luc. 22.27.
. But yet to show against you that Eugenius had spiritual jurisdiction over
the universal Church, he says to him L. 2. de Consid.
: What person bear thou in the Church of God? Who art thou? A great Priest,
the chief Bishop. Thou art the Prince of Bishops, thou the heir of the
Apostles: thou art Abel in primacy, No^e in government, in Patriarkship Abraham,
in order Melchisedech, in dignity Aaron, in authority Moses, in judicature
Samuel, in power Peter, and by Unction Christ. Thou art he to whom the keys
were given, to whom the sheep committed. There are other porters of Heaven,
and Pastors of flocks; but thou as in a different, so in a far more glorious
manner, have inherited both those names. They have their several flocks
assigned unto them; to thee all are committed, one flock to one shepherd. Thou
art not only Pastor of the sheep, but Pastor of all Pastors. Do thou ask how
I prove it? Out of the word of our Lord: for to which (I will not say) of the
Bishops, but even of the Apostles were the sheep committed so absolutely and
without exception? If thou love me Peter, feed my sheep. What sheep? Of
this, or that City, or Country or Kingdom? My sheep, says he: To whom is it
not manifest, that he designed not any, but assigned all? where no distinction
is put, no exception is made etc. The power of others is confined within
certain limits: Thy power extends even to them, that have received power
over others. If there because, can not thou shut up Heaven to a Bishop? Can
not thou depose him from his Bishopric, and deliver him to Satan? All these
words are S. Bernards, which I have transcribed, that the reader may see, he
believed the Pope to be Pastor and Governor of the universal Church, and
acknowledged in him absolute power to depose Bishops, which you could not be
ignorant of, but conceal it, because it touches your copie-hold, and mention
only deposing of Princes, of which S. Bernard speaks not one word. Yea more
over he does not only acknowledge, that the Pope has power to depose Bishops,
but withal shows how falsely you allege him, to prove, that in the text of
Hieremy, nothing is expressed, but spiritual labor under the figurative speech
of rural sweat: for writing to the same Pope Eugenius Ep. 237.
, he requesteth him to depose the Bishops of Winchester and York, as
intruders, and wicked men, that opposed the Archbishop of Canterbury, a
religious Prelate, and of good fame; and out of this very text of Hieremy,
proves his authority to do it: for to that end (says he Ibid.
) thou art placed over nations and kingdoms, to pull up, and destroy, to
build, and to plant: which power he declares again in another Epistle Ep. 239.
, out of the same text of Hieremy, speaking to Eugenius, of deposing a wicked
Bishop of the Ruthenians.

Nor is it S. Bernard only, that interprets Hieremy in this sense: for 630.
Bishops assembled in the Council of Chalcedon In relat. ad Leo.
allege the same text, to justify their deposing of Dioscorus, and require Leo
Pope to confirm the same. The like interpretation is made by 32. Bishops in
the Council of Jerusalem, and reported in that of Constantinople under Menas
Act. 4.
, to justify their sentence of deposition against Anthymus B. of Trebizond. And
Theophilus Patriarch of Alexandria Ep. ad Epiphan. apud S. Hieron. Ep. 67.
a familiar friend to S. Hierome (as their mutual Epistles declare) out of the
same text proves the power of condemning heresies, given by Christ to his
Church, which (says he) we see now performed: for the Church of Christ with
the Evangelical sword has cut off the heads of Origens serpents. And finally
this text is alleged to the same purpose, by Petrus Cluniacensis L. 6. ep. 14.
, and Alexander of Hales Part. 3. q. 40. memb. 2.
the Irrefragable Doctor, and Master to S. Thomas of Aquine. All which
shows, that either the Fathers and Counsels understood not the words of the
Prophet, or else that you deny the true sense, misinterpreting them in favor of
your false Doctrine.

But returning to S. Bernard; That which most of all discovers your
ignorance, if not rather fraud, is, that you say, Boniface the eight prophaneth
the word of God notoriously, for patronizing of rebellions, and murders, making
from pretense of Scripture a Decree to dispossess Emperors, Christian and
heathen of their kingdoms, and deprive them of their lines. It is to be noted
that this decree of Boniface, on which you are pleased to inflict so severe a
censure, are the very words of S. Bernard, taken out of his fourth book of
Consideration to Eugenius. Wherefore you must confess, that S. Bernard
profaned the word of God notoriously for patronizing rebellions and murders,
and dispossessing Kings of their kingdoms, and lives, or else you must
acknowledge, that you wrong and slander Pope Boniface, who says nothing, but
what S. Bernard said before him, and in S. Bernards own words. I cannot but
vehemently suspect, that a man of your reading, could not but know, that the
words were S. Bernards: but because you durst not for shame of the world,
impute such horrible wickedness to so glorious a Saint, and whom Calvin
himself L. 4. de Consid. c. 11.. 11.
acknowledges to speak in those his books of Consideration, as if Truth
herself did speak, you lay it on Boniface Pope, that so you may have some
color to rail freely at him, and in his name, to charge S. Bernard with that
impiety, of which neither of them both was guilty.

The second Father whom you allege, is S. Gregory, who, as he is frequent in
Moralls, so he explicateth these words of Hieremy, in a moral sense, of
pulling up Vices, and planting virtues by preaching, in the souls of the
hearers. But that they may have another more litterall sense, the Fathers and
Counsels have informed you. Nor was S. Gregory so ignorant, as to think, he
had no other way to reform the disorders of Bishops, and others under his
charge, but by preaching only: for his writings, his practice, and your own
confessions bear witness to the contrary See above Chap. 15. sect. 3.
.

Your third proof is out of Lyra, to whose words you add gratis the aduerbe
Tantum, to infer, that Bishops have no other means to repress vices, and
remedy disorders in their subjects, but only by preaching: which if it were
true, how could the Councels of Ephesus and Chalcedon have deposed Nestorius
and Dioscorus, not to mention a thousand such examples, of which
Ecclesiastical histories are full? Yea the word denuntiare which Lyra uses,
does not obscurely import so much: for not only preachers, but ecclesiastical
Prelates denounce punishment to offenders, to deter them from sin. And so
do secular Judges, when they threaten them with corporal chastisements.

SECT. III. Your third Argument, out of the examples of Popes, examined.
SOme Popes (say you) Page 171.
have not been idle, but have put their positions in practice, by deposing
Kings and Emperors, sporting themselves with tossing the crowns from their
heads, not for any note of heresy, but only for not subiecting themselves to
the Popes dignity and dominion. Why do you not tell us, that when 200. Bishops
in the Council of Ephesus, and 630. in the Council of Chalcedon, deposed
Nestorius, and Dioscorus, they did it to sport themselves with tossing the
myters of Patriarchs from their heads? If any Popes have deposed Kings or
Emperors, my assumpt is not, either to defend, or dispute, by what right they
did it.

The first Pope, whom you accuse, Page 171. 174.
is Zacharias; who being chosen by divine ordination See Anestasius, Plati^a,
Yllescas in his life.
, performed heroical acts for the public good of the Church. He bare singular
love to the clergy, and people of Rome, and generally to all Christians, being
ready to spend his life for them. He built, repaired, and adorned with rich
furniture many Churches within, and without Rome. He reduced to peace all
Italy, which he found in combustion of wars, going himself in person to
effect it. He established and confirmed Bishoprics and settled the affairs of
Christian religion in Germany. He was of a most sweet, and malde disposition,
adorned with all virtue, and goodness, slow to anger, and most ready to mercy,
and compassion, rendering to no man evil for evil, but to the imitation of
Christ, ouercoming evil with good; in so much, that being made Pope, he
advanced to honors those, who formerly had been his enemies, and bestowed
rewards on them. And finally, for his singular virtues he is reverenced as a
Saint, and his feast yearly celebrated by the whole Church of God. Martyrol.
Roman. 15. Martij.


The second Pope you traduce, is Gregory the seventh who (say Page 171. 174.
you) deposed Henry the third. Now this Gregory, whom you so often, and so
intemperatly revile Page 40. 171. 174. 179.
, was one of the most admirable Prelates, that has possessed the chair of S.
Peter: A man (says Nauclerus Chronol. genral. 37.
religious fearful of God, a lover of justice and equity, constant in
adversity, and that for God feared not to enterprise whatsoever was just. A man
(says Schafnaburgensis Hist. rerum German. an. 1977.
of great constancy, and invincible courage against avarice. The signs and
wonders, which God did work by the prayers of Gregory, and his most fervent
zeal for God, and the laws of the Church, did sufficiently defend him against
the poisoned tongues of his detractors. He was (says Otho Frisingensis L. 6.
hist. c. 32.34.36.
always most constant in Ecclesiastical rigor; a pattern to his flock,
showing by his example; that which in words he taught: a valiant champion, that
feared not to oppose himself, as a wall, for the house of God, and whose death
bred no small grief to the Church, because she saw herself deprived of so
worthy a Pastor; who among all Priests, and Bishops of Rome, was of most
especial zeal, and authority. A man, in whose defense S. Anselme that famous
Bishops of Luca (renowned for his learning, and sanctity, and illustrious for
miracles in his life, and after his death) writ against Guibertus, the
Antipope, set up by the wicked Emperor Henry the fourth: and among other
praises, gives him the same, that S. Cyprian in like occasion gave to the holy
Pope Cornelius. I may affirm (says he) of Gregory our Father, that which
Blessed Cyprian writ of Cornelius: He was made Bishop by the judgment of God,
and of his Christ, by the testimony of almost all; nay, to speak more truly,
of all the Clergy without exception, by the verdict of the people that were
present, by the College of ancient Priests, and good men, none other being
created before him, when the place of Alexander, that is, when the place of
Peter, and the degree of the Sacerdotall chair was vacant. And how true this
testimony of S. Anselme is, appears by the formal words of his election set
down by Platina In vita Gregorij 7.
, wherein Cardinals, Bishops, Abbots, Priests, all degrees of Ecclesiastical
men, and laics, made choice of him, as of a man modest, sober, chaste, of
singular learning, of great piety, wisdom, justice, constancy, and religion.

How think you Doctor Morton? was this man likely to sport himself with
tossing the crowns of Kings, and Emperors from their heads? You plead Page 174.
, that his proceeding against Henry, was not for any note of heresy, but only
for not subiecting himself to the Popes dignity and dominion. Read the
testimonies of grave writers almost 40. in number Apud Bellar. l. 4. de Pont.
c. 13. and cont. Barcla. (...). 9. and Genebrard. in Chronico an. 1087.
, many of which lived in his time; and you shall find that Henry is censured,
as an Arch-pirate, an Arch-heretike, an Apostata, a persecutor of souls more
then bodies: and for his behavior and manners, that he contemned the Princes
of the Empire, oppressed the Nobles, exalted base fellows, and married to them
the daughters of Noble men at his pleasure: that not contenting himself with
ordinary sins, be invented and committed others never heard of before in the
world, and to many men altogether incredible. And with these authors Calvin
agrees, saying L. 4. Instit. c. 11. sect. 13.
, that he was light, temerarious, of no judgment, of great boldness, of
dissolute life, and that he had all the Bishoprics (he might have added, and
all the Archbishoprickes, and Abbacies) of Germany, in his Court partly exposed
to sale, partly to prey, and rapine. Finally so abominable was his lust, so
execrable his simony, so great his oppression of Germany, his life in all
respects so flagitious, and his person for that cause so hateful, that (as
Vrspergensis reports) Chron. an. 1106.
when he died, there was not any one found in the whole Christian world, that
sorowed for his death; nay, that did not exceedingly rejoice thereat, even as
Israel rejoiced at the drowing of Pharao in the red sea, or as the people of
Rome exulted in the triumphs of their Emperors.

Much more in this kind is reported by the afore-cited Authors, to which
Marianus Scotus an historian of that time, adds Chron. an. 1075.
, that the Catholics, which lived then in the Church, seeing and hearing the
horrible and unheard of crimes of Henry, inflamed with the zeal of God for the
house of Israel, in imitation of the Prophet Helias, sent messengers to
Alexander then governing the Sea Apostolic, and complained, expressing their
grief with sighs and lamentations, both by letters and words. Whereupon (says
William B. of L. 1. debello sacro c. 13.
Tire) Gregory his successor before he proceeded against him, sent thrice unto
him, and with the love and affection of a Father, admonished him, seeking to
reclaim him, and win him to his own good, but prevailed not.

I appeal to the judgment of any impartial Reader, whether you have not
slandered, and wronged Gregory in the highest degree, saying, that he sported
himself with tossing the Emperors crown from his head, and this not far any
note of heresy, but only for not subiecting himself to his dignity, and
dominion. Beware in time, lest you, which possess the place of a Bishop be not
punished by God, as William B. of Maestricht was, who (says Lambertus
Scafnaburgensis Hist. r^rum Germ.
being suddenly surprised with a most grievous sickness, cried outwith
miserable shrikes before all, that by the just judgment of God, he had lost
both this present, and eternal life, for having taken part with the Emperor in
his sacrilegious enterprises, and in hope of gaining his favor, wittingly
reproached the most holy B. of Rome, a man of Apostolical virtue, and
innocence. Not unlike to this, was the miraculous punishment of Imbrico B. of
Ausburg, for the same fault, related by Bartholdus In Chron.
an Historian of the same time. And finaliy, our holy Archbishop of Canterbuty
S. Anselme, if he were living, would say to you, as he did to W^lramus, that he
would refrain from saluting you, for taking part with Henry the Emperor
against Gregory, that being no less a crime, then to take part with the
successor of Nero, and Julian the Apostata, against the successor, and Vicar of
Peter the Apostle.

I have dwelled a while in this history of Gregory, because of all the four
Popes, against whom you here except, you rail most intemperatly against him:
for thereby the reader may understand, that as you slander him so you do also
the rest: for how excellent and godly a Prelate Zacharias was, you have heard:
and of the other two, Historians report no less.

Of Innocentius they write, that he was one of the most excellent Popes for
good life, and rate learning in many kinds, that for many hundreds of years
held the Sea of Rome: to which his many works full of singular erudition,
piety, and contempt of the world, give witness. By his means Liuonia received
the faith of Christ. He built, repaired, and adorned many Churches with rich
gifts. He sounded and endowed with great revenues that famous Hospital of
Sancti Spiritus in Saxia, in which so many diseased, and sick persons even to
this day are cured, and so many poor children, and orphans bred up and
mantained. He confirmed the religious orders of S. Dominick, of S. Francis, of
the Heremits of S. Augustine, of the Carmelites, of the Croched Friars for the
redemption of Captives, and others, which have yielded innumerable men, that
with their sanctity, and learning, have been a most singular ornament to the
Church of Christ, and to whom the whole world is in debted for their great
labors undertaken for the glory of God, for the conversion of Infidels,
reduction of heretics, reformation of manners among Catholics, and for the
excellent monuments of their works in all faculties of learning. Finally so
great was the fame of Innocentius his sanctity, and excellent government, that
among other authors, Blondus writes D^cad. 2. l. 7. page 297.
: Suauissimus erat in Gallijs famae odor, grauitatis, saenctitatis, ac rerum
gestarum eius Pontificis. The fame and sweet odor of this Popes gravity,
holiness of life* and greatness of his actions was most fragrant through. out
all France. And as Blondus reports that he writ libros doctrina plenos; so
others witness Geneb. in Chronico anno 1198. Cicarollus and Platina in vita
Innocent. 3.
that he writ more then almost all the Popes before his time put together.

And finally Clement the fixth, as you may read in Plation, Yllescas, and
others In vita Clementis 6.
, was a man of great, learning and eloquence, liberal to all, of most
courteous and sweet conversation, and adorned with many excellent virtues. From
whence every man of judgment will easily understand, how untruly you charge
him, with tossing the Emperors crown from his head, to sport himself etc.

SECT IV. Doctor Morton contradicts himself.
TO show your spleen yet more against Gregory the seventh, of whom, beside
what has been said, Martinus Polonus writes Apud Gened. an. 1087.
, that by his prayers he wrought great miracles, and Lambertus Schafnaburgensis
A pud Geneb. ibid.
, that he was endowed with the gift of prophesy, you say Page 174. sin. 175.
: It is confessed, that no Pope in all the succession of S. Peter, did depose
any Emperor before Gregory the seventh, that is, until a thousand and sixty
years after Christ. You bring for your author Otho Frisingensis, who (though
otherwise a learned and pious Bishop, yet) being grandchild to Henry the
Fourth, whom Gregory deposed, writes partially in his favor, and contradicts
himself: for he confesses L. 5. c ^3. and l. 4. c. 34.35.36.
, that Zacharias Pope, who lived 300. years before Gregory the seventh,
deposed Childericus King of France. And the same, you likewise contradicting
your self acknowledge Page 171.174.
, producing the same example of Zacharias, which Otho does. Nor could you be
ignorant of others more ancient alleged by Bellarmine in that place L. 5. d^
Pent. c. 8.
, from whence you took this of Gregory the seventh: but you mention not them,
that you may have the better color to inueigh against him.

CHAP. XXXIII. Doctor Mortons late Sermon preached in the Cathedral Church of
Durham, answered.
AS the maine drift of your writings, is, to make Catholic religion odious,
and to exasperate the minds of Protestants against all the professors thereof;
so there is nothing more frequent with you, then to slander Catholics in
general with seditious Tenets, which are not theirs, but the known Principles
of your brerhren, Luther, Calvin, Beza, Buchanam, Knox, Goodman, Gilby, and
others See M. Patison Monarchomacbia per toi. and Brereley Prot. Apol. Preface
to the Reader.
. The answer given you by your ancient friend P. Persons.
in his Treatise tending to mitigation against the seditious writings of Thomas
Morton Minister, might have seemed sufficient, to make you ashamed of opening
your mouth again in that kind. But I find, that in your later writings you are
as bitter, as ever; and to that end, have lately preached a Sermon before the
Kings most Excellent Majesty, in the Cathedral Church of Durham, which is
nothing, but a piece of your Grand Imposture printed long since, and now again
newly preached, and reprinted under the name of a Sermon: which I suppose some
of your Auditors, that had read your book, could not but mark, and think it
a thing unworthy of so great a Rabbin, to present his Majesty with a piece of
an old Imposture, instead of a new Sermon. Because I have undertaken the
confutation of your Grand Imposture, I will in like manner answer the
particulars of your Sermon, noting withal, the places of your Grand Imposture,
out of which you have borrowed them.

SECT. I. The sense of S. Paul's words, which Doctor Morton took for his text,
declared.
THe text of your Sermon, are these words of the Apostle, which you call A
sacred and divine Canon: Omnis anima etc. Let every soul be subject to higher
Powers etc. In these words the Apostle speaks not of all souls, and all
Powers universally, else he should command all higher Powers, (for they also are
souls) to be subject to other higher Powers v. g. the King of France, to the
King of Spain; the King of Spain, to the King of England; and the Emperor, to
the great Turk. Wherefore by higher powers be understands Superiors: and by
every soul, all subjects. But since there be Superiors of several kinds, the
next question will be, what Superiors he means, by higher powers; and what
subjects, by every soul. You by higher powers, understand Sermon. page 4.
the Temper all Magistrate that carries the sword. I deny not, but that diverse
learned expositors seem to be of opinion, that the Apostle speaks wholly, or
chiefly of temporal Princes, and other secular Powers subordinate to them. But
then it is evident against you, that as S. Paul speaks to the Christians of
Rome, and in them to all others; so he does not command them to obey secular
Princes in matters of Religion, but in temporal affairs only: for the Roman
Emperors, to whom the Christians of Rome were then subject, being Heathens,
enemies to Christ and Persecutors of his Church, to bid the Christians obey
them in matters of religion, had been to bid them disobey Christ, and renounce
their says. And this you must confess to be true: for you say Sermon. page 7.
Imposture page 175. 176. 276. 278.
, that Popes and other Christians for the space of 600. years performed this
Obedience, commanded by S. Paul; and yet they never yielded to Nero (under whom
S. Paul writ his Epistle to the Romans) or to any other Heathen Prince,
Obedience in Religion, but in temporal affairs only. And of this Obedience,
the Greek Fathers Chrysostom, Oecumenius, Euthymius, Theodoret, and
Theophilact speak, when they say, that S. Paul excepteth not from this
Obedience, Apostles, Evangelists, or Prophets: for all Christians
Ecclesiastiks, and Laics, are bound to obey the Laws of temporal Princes, in
whose dominions they live. And this Obedience was performed by the Popes of
Rome, whiles they were not temporal Princes themselves. But now being, and
having been for many years temporal Monarkes, as absolute in their estates,
as other Princes in theirs, it can no more be inferred out of your text, that
Popes are subject to Kings, then that the King of Spain, is subject to the
King of France.

There is not (say you out of Tully Page 289.
a greater degree of futility, then for any man to object that, to which, when
it shall be retorted upon himself, he shall not tell what to say. If when you
came down from the pulpit, some prudent man (that had heard you infer from
this text, that the Pope is subject to temporal Princes) had desired to learn
of you, to what temporal Prince the Pope is now subject, he being an absolute
Prince himself; what could you have answered? You must have confessed, that
you had over shot your mark, and out of a desire to be speaking against the
Pope, misinterpreted the words of your text, and wrested them to a false sense
contrary to the true meaning of the Apostle.

S. Bernard a man endowed with the spirit of God, commended by Calvin L. 4.
Instit. c. 7.. 22. and cap. 11.. 11.
and Melancthon Art. 5. and 27.
, and esteemed by your self as a Saint, was so far from thinking, that these
words of the Apostle import any subjection of Popes to temporal Princes, that
contrarily out of them, as out of a sacred Canon, he teaches the Emperor
Conradus to yield obedience to the Pope, as to his Pastor, and spiritual
Father. Legi etc. I have read (says he Ep. 2^3.
to the Emperor,), Let every soul be subject to higher powers, and he that
resists power, resists the ordinance of God. Which sentence I wish and
admonish you to observe, in exhibiting reverence to the chief, and Apostolic
See, and to the Vicar of blessed Peter, as you will have it yielded to you by
the whole Empire. And in other places he reckons up the chief Kings of the
Christian world professing obedience to Innocentius the second Pope of that
name, as to the Pastor, and Bishop of their souls Ep. 124. and 126. prope fin.
, as children to their Father, and members to their Head Ep. 125.
.

To S. Bernard, I add other ancient, holy and learned Expositors, who by
Higher Powers understand not, the Temporal Magistrate only, but also the
spiritual; and prove, that S. Paul in these words, commands obedience of
subjects to all Superiors, as well spiritual, as temporal. So Primasius, S.
Remigius, S. Anselme, Lyra, and Carthusianus In eum locuin.
. And in confirmation of this sense, Primasius by the sword given to higher
powers, understands not only the material, but also gladium spiritus, the
spiritual sword, given to S. Peter, wherewith he punished Ananias, and Saphira.
The same sense is followed by S. Basil Constit. Monast. c. 23.
who confirms the same out of another passage of the Apostle Heb. 2^.17.
, where speaking to all Christians, without exempting any temporal Power,
never so high, he says: Obey your Prelates, and be subject to them: for they
watch, as bring to render account of your souls. Which inference is also made
by that holy and learned Pope Gregory the seventh, who explicating your text
says L. 1. regist. Ep. 22.
: Seeing therefore the Apostle commands obedience to worldly powers, how much
more to spiritual, and those, that have the place of Christ among Christians?
And if these Expositors be not of credit with you, John Caluins doctrine is L.
4. instit. c. 10.. 5.
, that, if obedience must be exhibited to secular Princes for conscience sake,
it must also be yielded to Ecclesiastical Superiors.

Wherefore the more probable Exposition is, that the Apostle, by Higher Powers,
understands not the temporal Magistrate only, but speaks generally of all
Powers, as well spiritual, as temporal, and requires obedience unto them
both, in their degrees. Which being true, you can no more infer out of his
words, that the Pope is subject to temporal Princes, then the contrary:
especially, he being not noly a temporal Prince, but also a spiritual; so
great, that (as the B. of Patara admonished Justinian the Emperor) Liberat in
Breu. c. 22.
Albeit there be many Kings in the world, yet none of them, as the Pope, who is
over the Church of the whole world.

More proofs in this kind are not needful. You have heard Above Chap. 29.
the Council of Nice, declaring, the dignity of the B. of Rome, as being the
Vicar of Christ, and governor of the universal Church, to surpass the dignity
of Kings. You have heard Ibid.
the most religious Emperors, and Kings, professing obedience unto him, as
children to their Father, and sheep to their Pastor. And if S. Paul's words be
true Heb. 7.7.
, that without all contradiction the less is blessed by the greater, the
dignity of an Emperor, who is blessed, consecrated, and crowned by the Pope
must be lesser, then the dignity of the Pope, that blesses, and crowns him.
This you will better understand, if you call to mind, that the holy Martyr S.
Ignatius teaches Christians next after God, to honor the Bishop Ep ad Smyrnen.
. And that all people, who ever they be, Soldiers, Princes, yea the Emperor
himself must obey the Bishop, to the end that unity, and order may be observed
in all Ep. ad Philadelph.
. And why else do the learned Fathers S. Martin, S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, and
S. Gregory the great prefer the Episcopal and Sacerdotall dignity before the
regal, and Imperial See above Chap. 29.
? Why did S. Nazanzen Orat. ad ciues timore perculsos, and Princ. irasc.
call the Emperor, A sheep of his sacred flock, and say unto him, The law of
Christ has made you subject to my power, and to my Tribunal: for we (Bishops)
have an Empire also, and that more perfect then yours, unless you will say,
that the spirit is inferior to the flesh, and heavenly things to earthly? And
what else do the greatest Monarkes of the world, but make profession of this,
when the Priest sitting, and covered, they kneel down with all humility at
his feet, and confess their finnes unto him? Is not this to acknowledge, that
they come as persons guilty, to accuse themselves, and that the Priest in that
court of conscience, is their lawful Superior, and Judge? This S. Chrysostom
expressed, saying L. 3. de Sacerd.
that, Priests, as if they were already transported into heaven, and exalted
above humane nature, have a Princedome which gives them power to bind souls,
in comparison whereof, the power of Kings is as far inferior, as earth to
heaven, and the body to the soul. This S. Ambrose, when he said L. de dignit.
Sacerd. c. 2.
: You see the heads of Kings, and Princes, humbled to the knees of Priests, and
that kissing their hands, they believe themselves to be protected by their
prayers. This Basilius the Emperor Orat. in fine Conc. Genesis 8.
, when alluding to the words of Christ spoken to his Apostles Joan. 20.23.
. Whose sins you forgive, they are forgiven, he professed, that Bishops and
Pastors have the power of binding, and losing in the Church, and that all lay
men are to be sanctified, to be bound, and lesed from their bonds by them. And
finally, this professed Constantine the great when he said Ruffin. l. 1. c. 1.
S. Greg. l. ^. ep. 72.
, that Bishops were constituted by God, as Gods among men, and therefore had
power to judge of Emperors.

I conclude therefore, that if the doctrine of the holy Fathers of Gods Church
be true, if the most religious Christian Emperors have believed aright; the
Episcopal, and Sacerdotall dignity, and especially the Papal, excels the
Imperial, and the Pope is in the number of higher Powers, to whom obedience in
spiritual things is due, even from the greatest Kings, and Emperors, as their
practice witnesses, and the Apostle has commanded, saying Heb. 13.17.
, Obey your Prelates, and be subject to them.

SECT. II. Ancient Popes objected, and falsified by Doctor Morton.
YOur ancient Antagonist P. Persons, Treatise tend. to mitig. Chap. 6. (...).
34.
, and Cardinal Bellarmine L. 1. de Conc. c. 13.
have told you long since, that howbeit the B. of Rome was ever Head in
spiritual matters over all, even the Emperors themselves, yet in temporal
affairs, he did ancie^tly subject himself unto them, as having at that time
no temporal estate of his own, and therefore did then acknowledge them to be
his temporal Lords, and make supplication unto them, as for other things, so
particularly for the assembling of Synods in their Cities, which could not be
done without their authority, and license. And in this respect, the Popes of
those times yielded due reverence to the Emperors, and had recourse to them as
to their temporal Lords: but that any Pope ever acknowledged subjection to
Emperors in Ecclesiastical affairs, is a false Tenet, which to make good, you
misconstrue, mangle, and corrupt the testimonies of ancient Popes.

First, you say Impost. page 178.
: Liberius professed patience in suffering indignities from the Emperor, and
entreated for mercy. And Vigilius being banished, sued for peace and favor.
What then? A Christian suffering indignities from the great Turk, may sue for
mercy and favor: Does he therefore acknowledge in the Turk right to persecute
him, or to offer indignities unto him for his faith, as Constantius the Arian
Emperor did to Liberius, and Theodora the Eutychian Empress to Vigilius?

2. You object Impost. page 178. Sermon. page 5.
Simplicius, professing continual reverence to all Christian Princes. True:
but did he therefore profess that every Christian Prince was his Sovereign, or
that any Prince had right to command him in Ecclesiastical affairs? Reverence
is due from every Christian man to all Princes; and yet every Christian man is
not subject to all Princes, even in temporal affairs, much less in
Spiritual. But why do you conceal that Simplicius writes that Epistle to the
Emperor Zeno, as to his spiritual child, and professes, that by reason of his
Apostolical Chair, and government, he was bound to instruct him, and declare
the causes of faith unto him?

3. The testimony of Leo Impost. page 178. Sermon page 5.
making supplication to the Emperor to command a Synod to be celebrated in
Italy, has been already proved to make wholly against your self See above
Chap. 30. sect. 4.
.

4. You produce Gelasius Impost. page 178.
, saying to the Emperor Anastasius, that even Bishops obey his laws. Bishops I
grant obey the Laws of secular Princes for the course of tempotall government:
but withal Gelasius declares to the Emperor, that, Albeit he be chief
President in temporal affairs, he knows and acknowledges himself in
spiritual affairs subject to Priests, and especially to the B. of Rome, and
that from them, he is to receive the decisions of faith, and the heavenly
Sacraments. Why did you not in your Sermon, give notice of this to his Majesty,
and the rest of your hearers?

5. Hormisdas (say you) Impost. page 178.
takes notice of the Emperors command for gathering of a Council, as a motion
from God, and further acknowledged, that he had received warning, and that he
ought to be present thereat. In proof of this, you set down in your margent
these words, as of Hormisdas in his fifth Epistle to Anastasius the Emperor:
Futuram Synodum indicari mandas, cui nos interesse debere ijsdem literis Deo
(vt credimus) tibi imperanti, commonuisti. Ad liter as vestras respondi. In
this brief passage there are diverse untruths, and falsifications. For 1.
those words, Futuram Synodum indicari mandas, which you set down as the words
of Hormisdas, are not his, but forged by your self: there is no mention of any
command from the Emperor to him. 2. And those words, Ad literas vestras
respondi, are also feigned by your self, and show your ignorance in grammar:
for if Hormisdas had spoken to the Emperor in the singular number, saying
mandas, and, tibi imperanti commonuisti, which you cite as his words, he would
not have added in the plural number, ad literas vestras. 3. When you say.
Hormisdas takes notice of the Emperors command for gathering a Council,
acknowledging that he had received warning, and that he ought to be present
thereat, it is a plain Imposture: for in that very Epistle, he protests to
the Emperor, that whereas he had warned him to be present at a Council, there
is not in former ages any example, or precedent of such a fact, extant in
books, or in the memories of men: but yet that at his inuitation, he is
willing to impose on himself that burden, without any precedent thereof,
received from his predecessors: always provided, that the Emperor would
perform those necessary conditions, which both in that Epistle, and in the
instruction given to his Legates he proposed unto him, for the peace of the
Church, which were to abjure the heresies of Nestorius, and Eutyches, to
receive the Council of Chalcedon, with the witings of S. Leo Pope, and to blot
out of the sacred records, the names of Dioscorus, Acacius, and other
heretics. The Emperor feigned himself willing to perform the conditions,
hoping thereby to compass his intent, but never performed them; and therefore
Hormisdas would not assent to the gathering of a Council. Whereupon Anastasius
growing into a great fury, writ threatening letters to him, and raised a great
persecution against Catholics: for which, as also for his obstinacy in heresy,
and disobedience to the Sea Apostolic, he ended his life in a most horrible
manner, being stricken dead with a thunderbolt from Heaven. This is the
doctrine you ought to have delivered to your readers: and not to have deceived
them with falsities imposed on Hormisdas, to justify yours.

6. You object Impost page 178. Sermon. page 5.
Pelagius the first, saying: Holy Scripture commands us to be subjects to
Kings. That Epistle of Pelagius is written to Childebert King of France, as to
his Son, for so he styles him, and declares to him, that the holy Scripture
commands subjects to obey their Princes; which all Catholics believe, and
teach as a doctrine of faith. But where does the Scripture command Popes to
yield subjection to Princes in Ecclesiastical affairs? Or where does it
command them, fince they have stays of their own, to yield temporal
subjection to other Princes? Your Argument therefore is impertinent.

7. You allege Impost. page 179. Ser. page 5.
Martin the first, praying the Emperor to vouchsafe to read his letters. The
Epistle is not of Martin alone, but of the whole Roman Synod, which having
condemned the Monothelites, sent their decrees to Constans the Emperor,
desiring, and exhorting him for his confirmation in the Catholic faith, to
read them attentively, and by his Laws condemn, and publicly declare the
Monothelites to be heretics. Can there be a more childish illation, then to
infer from hence, that Martin acknowledged himself subject to the Emperor?
If a Provincial Synod gathered by the Archbishop of Canterbury, should send
the like instruction to a Peer of this Realm, his spiritual subject,
exhorting him to read it, would it therefore follow, that the Archbishop did
acknowledge himself subject to that Peer? Who then sees not your arguing to
be trifeling?

8. You say Impost. page 179. sermon. page 5.
, Adrian the first devoted himself to the Emperor by letters, as one in
supplication fallen down prostrate at the soales of his feet. O Imposture!
Adrian writ that Epistle to Constantine, and Irene his Mother, against the
Image-breakers, heretics of that time, whose heirs you are. And having proved
effectually out of Scriptures, and Fathers, the veneration due to sacred
Images, with all love, as if he were at Constantinople present with them, and
prostrate at their feet, beseeches and requires them before God, and
coniureth them (for so are his words which you alter and mangle) that
renouncing, and detesting the craft of those wicked heretics, they would cause
the sacred Images to be restored, and set up again in the Churches of
Constantinople, and of all Greece, to the end, they might be received into the
unity of the holy Catholic, Apostolic, and irreprehensible Roman Church. But
that it may appear how you abuse your readers, and hearers, inferring from
hence, that Adrian acknowledged subjection to the Emperor, it is to be
observed, that in that very Epistle, he often calls Constantine, and Irene,
His believed children, and exhorts them by the examples of Constantine the
great, Helena his Mother, and the rest of the Orthodoxe Emperors, to exalt,
honor, and reverence the holy Catholic Apostolic Roman Church, as their
spiritual Mother, from which all Churches have received the documents of
Faith, to embrace her doctrine, to admit of her censure, to love, honor, and
reverence the Successor of S. Peter, Prince of the Apostles, to whom our
Savior gave the keys of heaven, with power to bind and loose on earth. And as
he having received from Christ, the principality of the Apostleship, and
pastoral charge, sat first in the Apostolic See; so by commandment from God,
he left it, with all the power and authority that Christ had given to him, to
his Successors for ever: and therefore, that the sacred Scripture declares of
how great dignity that chief See is, and how great Veneration is due unto it
from all faithful, throughout the world. So Adrian, as if he had written
purposely to show your lack of judgment and honesty, that would adventure to
produce his Epistle as a selected Argument against the supreme authority of the
Bishop, and Church of Rome, and vent it for such both in your Imposture, and
again in your late Sermon before his Majesty. And not unlike to this is an
other objection you make Impost. page 179. sermon. page 5.
out of an Epistle of Agatho Pope, to Constantine in the sixth Council
general.

9. You cull certain Latin words out of two Epistles of S. Gregory the great,
and patching them up into one English sentence, adding to them, these two
adjectives of your own, Vestris and Vestrae, you make him say: As for me, I
perform obedience unto your commands, whereunto I am subject. Both the Epistles
out of which you botch up this sentence, are written to Mauritius, who though
he were a Catholic Emperor, yet S. Gregory sticks not to compare him to Nero
and Dioclesian, and reprehendeth him sharply, for his tyrannizing over the
Roman Church, the Head of all Churches, and seeking to subject her to his
earthly power, against the commandment of Christ, who committed his Church to
S. Peter, when he gave him the keys of the kingdom of heaven.

The one of those Epistles he writes against the arrogance of John Patriarch
of Constantinople, styling himself Universal Bishop. And as he praises
Mauritius for desiring the peace of the Church, to hinder the garboiles of
wars, and in the procuring thereof professes himself ready to obey his
commands; so he reprehendeth him for not repressing the pride of John, whereby
not he alone, but the peace of the whole Church, was disturbed. And if in the
other, he also professed obedience to the same Emperor, it was only in
temporal affairs, and because with humble and submissiue words, he sought to
work him to his own good, whom he cold not dissuade, nor otherwise hinder
from publishing an iniust Law, whereby he prohibited soldiers, and all such, as
had been employed in public accounts of the Common wealth, to become Monks.
And therefore in one of the Epistles, which you object Page 179. and 234.
, he declares to the Emperor, that he used not his Episcopal authority, nor
speaks in the right of the Common wealth, but writes as a private person: yet
adding that he stood greatly astonished at such a Law, because it did shut up
the way to heaven unto many. Wherefore he dealt earnestly with him to abrogate
the Law, or else permit it to be moderated so, that it might stand without
prejudice to Christian liberty. Whereunto the Emperor at length yielded, as S.
Gregory declares, saying L. 7. ep. 11. indict. 1.
: Qua de re Serenissimus and Christiantssimus Imperator omnimodo placatur:
concerning which matter, our most Clement and most Christian Emperor is wholly
pleased. And therefore S. Gregory having corrected the Law, and reduced it to a
reasonable lawfulness, and temperate moderation, to wit, that they which had
borne offices of charge in the Common wealth, and desired to become Monks,
should not be received until they had given up their accounts, and obtained
public discharge for the same: and that soldiers should not be admitted to
Monastical habit, until they had ended three years of probation in their
secular apparel. Wherefore though S. Gregory yielded to publish the Law, yet
withal he showed his Pastoral power, and care, in limiting and moderating the
Emperors law, according to the law of God. Which if you had not concealed, the
futility of your objection would have been apparent to every reader.

But you say Impost. page 179.
, Here we are arrested by your Cardinal, in the name of this Pope Gregory,
from his Deeree, concerning the Monastery of Medardus, enioyning, that
whatsoever secular Prince should violate that same Decree, should forthwith he
deprived of his honor. As if this one Act of this only Pope were so authentike,
and of so suffecient authority in it self, as to be made a Precedene for ever,
unto all Popes of succeeding ages. I dispute not of what authority this Act of
S. Gregory is: my intention only is to discover your imposture: for Bellarmine
in that very place which you mention Cont. Barcla. c. 40.
, and again before in the same book, Cap. 8.
does not only urge this one Act of S. Gregory, but also another, and that in
words more effectual, which the same S. Gregory granted at the in treaty of
Brunichild and Theodoricus, whom he calls The most excellent Kings his
children. This decree you thought best to pass over in silence, because it is
without all exception, and to persuade your reader, that Bellarmine mentions
only the former which is sufficiently vindicated from Doctor James his Cauills.
which here you oppose, by the authority of Gregory the seventh, a most holy
and learned Pope, who living almost 600. years nearer S. Gregory's ^i^^e, then
Doctor James or your self, alleges this decree as his, whole therefore
undoubtedly it is. Your railing against Gregory the feauenth I omit, as not
deserving an answer.

SECT. III. Other Fathers and Catholic authors objected by Doctor Morton.
FIrst you object Sermon. page 6. Impost. page 282.
: When the Archbishop of Sens in France challenged the privilege of immunity
from all subjection to the King, he was encountered by S. Bernard, and arrested
by virtue of this Canon, Omnis anima, saying: Forget you what is written? Let
every soul be subject to the higher powers. Qui te tentatexcipere, tentat
decipere. i. He that seeks to exempt, does but labor to delude and seduce you.
O stange imposture! O insufferable boldness! By what authority do you presume
to rake up the ashes of a holy Archbishop deceased 500. years since, and
slander him, with challenging immunity from all subjection to the King, as well
in temporal, as in spiritual affairs? for immunity from all subjection
imports as well the one, as the other. Is there mention of any such challenge
in S. Bernards epistle? No. It is a tale framed on your fingers ends, that you
may make S. Bernard reprehend the Archbishop for a fault of which you without
any ground are pleased to accuse him, and father on us that doctrine of
Disobedience to Princes, which we condemn and detest. But I see not, how you
agree with your self: for in your Grand imposture, you object S. Bernards
words, as a reprehension to Popes, for not obeying Princes: but in your Sermon,
you produce the same words, as a reprehension not to Popes, but to the
Archbishop of Sens; neither the one, nor the other being true, but inventions
of your own, to slander the Archbishop, and the Popes, and to make S. Bernard
guilty of the same fault.

The Archbishop of Sens having in great esteem the wisdom, learning, and
sanctity of S. Bernard, required some spiritual documents from him, as S.
Bernard in the beginning of his Epistle Ep. 4^.
declares; adding on the one side, his unworthiness to write unto so great a
Prelate, and on the other, the fear he had not to obey his commands. Wherefore
yiedling to his command, he writ along epistle, in which having discoursed at
large, of Chastity, and Charity, two singular ornaments of Priestly dignity, he
adds the third. which is, Humility, reprehending the pride of Clergy men,
that having obtained one place, still aspire to others of greater dignity: and
not contented with one, they strive to load themselves with many honors at
once; all which yet they will part with, for one Bishopric. Nor will they
rest there, but factus Episcopus, Archiepiscopus esse desiderat, he that is
made a Bishop desires to pass from a Bishopric, to an Archbishopric. And
then turning his speech to the Archbishop of Sens, to whom he writes, and to
other Ecclesiastical Prelates, he exhorts him and them to Humility and
Obedience, saying: Vt secure praeesse possitis, subesse and ves, si cui
debetis, non dedignement. That you may command securely disdain not to yield
obedience, if to any you owe it. And to this purpose he brings those words of
the Apostle, Omnis anima etc. If every soul be subject, yours also: Who seeks
to exempt you from all? If any one seek to exempt you, he seeks to deceive
you.

This is S. Bernards drift, and discourse. And can you infer from hence, that
the Archbishop of Sens denied Obedience to the King, in temporal affairs, or
that S. Bernard subiecteth the Papal dignity to the Regal? Yes: for presently
after (say you Impost. page 182.
) the same Father applies the same Doctrine to the Popes themselves. How prove
you this? Out of these words of S. Bernard: Sunt qui dicunt; Audite Pontifices,
seruate honorem etc. sed aliter Christus; Reddite Caesari etc. There are that
say, Hear O ye Popes, Mantaine your honor: But Christ said otherwise, Yield
to Caesar etc. So you, but most falsely: for, Audite Pontifices, are not S.
Bernards words, but forged and thrust into his text by your self. 2. If they
were his, your illation were vain: for Pontifex is not necessarely taken for
the Pope, without the addition of Summus, or, Maximus. 3. Yea S. Bernard out of
those words, as he exhorts those that owe tribute to Caesar to pay it; so he
infers that if Christ would have secular powers to be obeyed, much more
would he have the Ecclesiastical, and that they who are sedulous, and careful
in the affairs of Kings, ought much more to be subject cuicunque Christ's
Vicario, to whatsoever Vicar of Christ, and chiefly to the Pope, his supreme
Vicar on earth, as he writ to Conradus the Emperor, teaching him Ep. 183.
to obey the Sea Apostolic, out of this very text, Omnis anima, which you
produce for the contrary.

2. You object Impost. page 175. sermon. page 36.
S. Ambrose, saying, That his prayers and his tears were his weapons, and that
he neither might, nor could make any other resistance. If S. Ambrose said so,
it was to show, that when Emperors use secular forces, against the Priests of
their dominions, Priests being no soldiers, must not defend themselves by the
sword, but by tears, and prayers to God. But that S. Ambrose knew himself to
have beside tears, and prayers, spiritual power, he showed, when he
excommunicated. Theodosius the great, and first Emperor of that name. And
Theodosius acknowledged this power in S. Ambrose, obeying with all humility,
and performing the penance enjoined him.

3. You object Impost. page 175 sermon. page 19.36.
Tertullian, S. Cyprian, and S. Gregory Nazianzen, professing, that Christians
do not take revenge against the iniust violence of their enemies. We follow and
embrace their doctrine: for what Catholic Divine ever taught revenge, or
rebellion to be lawful? If any teach or practice otherwise, we abjure their
doctrine, as heretical, and hate their practice, as damnable.

SECT. IV. Doctor Morton slandereth Urban Pope, and with him all Catholics.
ARguments failing (for what hitherto you have produced are nothing but
falsifications and untruths) you break forth into such intemperate railing
Impost. page 177. ser. page 28.
, that I disdain to pass it under my pen: and I suppose, that every honest
minded reader, though never so zealous a Protestant, will be ashamed to see
such venime, together with so shameful untruths, to fall from the mouth of a
man of your years: especially, since what here you write, has no other
ground, but your unconscionable slandering of Urban the second (whom you
nickname Turbane Sermon. page ^9.
as if by a Rescript of his, he had authorized Assassines to invade and kill
excommunicated persons at their pleasure.

The case is this. Certain lewd and dissolute Clergy men excommunicated by the
Church, took arms, and were ^laine in the field in a battle fought between
the sacrilegious Emperor Henry the fourth, and Eghert Marquis of Saxony. Urban
being consulted, declared the soldiers that killed them, not to be murderers,
nor to have incurred the sentence of excommunication, pronounced against such,
as lay violent hands on Clergymen. From whence it follows, that it is no
sin to kill excommunicated persons (be they Priests or other Ecclesiastics)
in a just war, and when they invade our lives. But your inference, that it is
lawful for any man to kill excommunicated persons by Assassines, or any other
way by his own private authority, is not allowed by Urban, nor asserted by any
Catholic Divine, but an Imposture of yours, to enrage the minds of
Protestants against Catholics. Yea to show your Imposture, Innocentius the
fourth, and the whole Church assembled in the general Council of Lions, have
ordained Excommunication, and other most grievous punishments, for all persons
whatsoever, that shall murder, or go about to murder any one by Assassines.
The decree is extant in the Canon Law, which I shall set down, to the end, the
reader may see your dealing, and learn never to credit your words hereafter.
Whereas (says Innocentius) Sext. Decret. de homicid. tit. 4.
they that with such horrible inhumanity, and barbarous cruelty, so thirst
after the death of others, as that they cause them to be slain by Assassines,
procure not only the death of their bodies, but also of their souls (if they
be not fensed with abundant grace of God, as with spiritual armor) etc. We
being desirous to prevent so great a danger of souls, and to beat down such
impious presumptions with the sword of Ecclesiastical censure, to the end that
fear of punishment may be a stop to so great audaciousnesse, ordain with the
approbation of the holy Council, that whatsoever Prince, Prelate, or other
Ecclesiastical, or secular person, shall cause, or command any Christian to be
killed by assassines, although death follow not thereby, or that shall receive,
defend, or conceal them, do, ipso facto, incur the sentences of
Excommunication, and deposition from his dignity, honor, order, office, or
benefice, which therefore may freely be conferred an others by them, to whom the
gift of these things belongs. And let him with all his worldly goods, as an
enemy to Christian religion, be cast out for ever, from among Christian people.
And if sufficient proof he made against any one, that he has committed so
execrable a wickedness, let no other sentence of Excommunication, deposition,
or dissidation against him be required.

This is the decree of Innocentius, and of the whole Church assembled in the
general Council of Lions. Nor is it any obscure thing, but a Canon published
and inserted in form of a Law, into the Decretals of the Roman Church, Go
now, and rail against the Pope for quitting the consciences of them, that
shall kill others by Assassines. Tell us: Can the Church possibly devise any
punishments more grievous for any malefactors, the^ these which she inflicteth
on all them, that shall either kill, or endeavor to kill others by Assassines,
although the effect follow not? Does she grant any exemption from these
punishments to them that shall kill excommunicated persons? Is not the Decree
general, and in favor of all men, without exception, as well Heretics, and
Schismatikes, as Catholics? And as well excommunicate, as not excommunicate?
Let the reader then judge of your conscience, what censure you deserve for
slandering Urban Pope, as allowing the murder of excommunicated persons by
Assasines.

SECT. V. Doctor Morton obiecteth the Bull of Maunday Thursday.
TO make good your slanderous doctrine of our allowing excommunicated persons
to be murdered by Assassines, you say Impost. page 177. sermon. page 30.
: Go you now, and complain, that you are unjustly persecuted, or banished by
Protestants out of several Kingdoms, when as, they are all yearly
excommunicate at Rome for Heretics, and Schismatikes by the Bull of Maundy
thursday, and consequently made obnoxious unto the blind devotion of every
Romish bloody assassine, who may be persuaded that he shall merit of God, by
the slaying of those supposed Schismatikes.

Two things may here be questioned: the one, whether heretics are to be
excommunicated: the other, whether Protestants be comprehended in the number of
heretics excommunicated in the Bull of Maundy Thursday. What your opinion is
concerning the former, I know not: but I know, the practice of the Catholic
Church has ever been, to excommunicate Heretics. Why else did she in her
Primitive times. Excommunicate the Arians in the Council of Nice? the
Eunomians in the first of Constantinople? the Nestorians in that of Ephesus?
the Eutychians in that of Chalcedon? and others in other Counsels? Again, I
know, that the Church has learned this from Christ, commanding Math. 18.18.
, that he who being thrice warned, will not bear the Church, be to us as the
Heathen, and the Publican. I know that S. Paul has said Tit. 3.10.
: Avoid a man that is an heretic, after the first, and second admonition. And
again 2. Cor. 6.14.
: what participation has justice with iniquity? or what society is there
between light and darkness? and what agreement with Christ, and Beliall? or
what part has the faithful, with the Infidel? I know that S. John speaking
of an heretic says Ep. 2. verse. 10.
: If any man come to you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into the
house, nor say unto him God save you: for he that says unto him, God save you,
communicates with his wicked works. Wherefore it cannot be denied, but that
the now Church of Rome in excommunicating heretics, does nothing, but what
Christ, and his blessed Apostles have commanded, and what the primitive Church,
and Counsels have taught her to do.

But then the second question is, who be heretics, and who not? S. Augustine
De vtilit. credendi c. 1.
distinguishes between an heretic, and, one that belieueth heretics. An
heretic he defines De ciuit. Dei l. 18. c. 51.
to be one, that under the name of a Christian, professes obstinatly erroneous
doctrine in matter of Faith. For my part, I cannot conceive, but that this
definition adequately agrees to Doctor Morton: for you not only maintain
erroneous Tenets in matter of faith; but are so wilfully obstinate therein, that
having been heretofore often admonished and evidently convinced by Catholic
writers, of your shameful ouer-lashing, as also of your corrupting the
Fathers, Counsels, and other writers, in proof of those your Tenets, you
still hold on the same course in your Grand Imposture, and other your later
writings, to your own shame, and the great discredit of your cause; which if
it were good, needed not such iugling to defend it.

But the greatest part of Protestants, either wanting learning, or means to
examine the truth of points in controversy, and thinking you not to be only
learned, but also sincere in delivering the truth unto them, (which I know you
not to be) simply give credit to you, and such as you are, and think they may
safely embrace your doctrine, and rely upon your word: They (I say) are not
Heretics, but men deceived and misled by heretics, or to use S. Augustines
phrase De vtil. creden. c. ^.
, Credentes haereticis, men that b^lieue heretics, and therefore are not
comprehended in the excommunication of Bulla cana, which is pronounced against
such only, as by reason of their wilful obstinacy, are true and formal
heretics, or as S. Paul says Tit. 3.11.
, that sin, being subverted, and condemned by their own judgment.

I deny not, but that many of these men, being of excellent judgment, and
understanding, may, by what they have heard, or read, have just reason to doubt
of the truth of Protestancy: and therefore if such out of sloth and
carelessness, or for fear of dishonor, and disesteeme in the eyes of the
world, or of temporal lostes, and troubles they see Catholics exposed unto,
omit to examine the truth, I know not how to excuse them from culpable
negligence in the most important affair of their salvation, which without true
faith cannot be achieved.

SECT. VI. Other slanderous accusations of Doctor Morton answered.
YOur good will to Catholics makes you rake up in your Sermon, and Imposture,
all the examples you can call to mind, to make them hateful to Protestant
Princes, and people. To this end, you so often mention the Powder treason Sermon.
page 29. Impost. page 177. 405.
, of which some unadvised headlong gentlemen were guilty, yet other Catholics
were freed from the guilt thereof, by the long and exquisite search of Justice,
made for the discovery of all partakers therein; as also by the confessions of
those unfortunate gentlemen themselves, who being strictly, severally, and
often examined, constantly professed, that no man else was guilty of their
design, nor privy to their intentions, but they only, whose names were already
given up to the State. And finally the Protestant Minister, Author of the book
entitled, Triplici node, triplex cuneus, testifies Page 2.
that our late Sovereign King James, of famous memory (by whose allowance, or
rather appointment that book was written) did not hold other Catholics guilty
of that damnable plot, as indeed they were not. The equity of his Majesty
(says he) is such, as he professed in his Proclamation, and Parliament speech,
that he would not use other Catholics the worse for that; which shows that
he held them guiltless.

All this being true, as it is, how comes it to pass, that you make no end of
up brayding and defaming all Catholics with this action? of exprobrating to an
infinite number of innocent, that, of which a few nocent were guilty? of
slandering them with this design that had no part in it, many of them being
not borne when the thing passed? or if borne not capable of such designs? or
if capable, yet abhorred the same as much, if not more then your self?

If I were disposed to deal with you, by the art of Retorsion, which manner of
Argument you often use against us, in this your Grand Imposture, I could tell
you, of your Protestant brethren, that in our days at Antwerp they placed a
whole bark of gunpowder in the vaulted great street of that City, to blow up
the Prince of Parma with his Nobility and commanders of war, being to pass
that way. I cold tell you, of another zealous brother in Hage, that would have
blown up the State-house with the whole Counsel of Holland upon private
revenge. And I could tell you, that at Edenbrough in Scotland, the like train
of powder was laid for the cruel murder of our gracious Majesty's
Grandfather, which not succeeding, hindeath was archieued by another no less
bloody, and barbarous violence. Would you think it reason, or conscience in
me, if I should impute these temerarious actions of a few Protestants, to you
all? If I should exprobrate them to the innocent, as well as to the nocent?
Pardon me therefore if I impute to you, lack of that equity and conscience,
science, which ought to shine in a man of your rank, as in a pattern, not
only of moral honesty, but also of civil, and courteous behavior.

With like prejudice of conscience, you vpbraid us with the Massacre of Paris
Impost. page 405.
, to which not we, but your good Brethren, the Huguenors of France, by their
Traitorous plots gave occasion, and therefore are justly censured, as the true
Authors thereof. In the year 1572. August 23. Colligni the Admiral of France,
a most wicked man, and fyrebrand of the Huguenots in that kingdom, being
wounded in both his hands, and one of his arms, with a Musket discharged out
of a house in Paris, Charles the ninth then King of France, being greatly
offended thereat, used all diligence, to find out the malefactor, and not only
sent often messengers to the Admiral, to understand of his health, but went
himself in person, with the Queen his wife, his Mother, and his brethren, to
visit and comfort him, promising to punish the malefactor severely, according
to his deserts, if he could be discovered. Nevertheless the Admiral
suspecting without ground, that he had been wounded by the Kings appointment,
entered into private Counsel with the King of N^uarre (then newly married to
Margaret sister to the French King) with Prince Conde^, and other his
confederates, plotting traitorously with them, to kill the King, the Queen his
wife, his Mother, and brethren, and so at one blow to cut of the whole family,
and proclaim the King of Navarre, King of France; appointing withal, what
Navarre himself, what Conde^, what Captain Pilie, and what Montgomery his
associates were to do, and what passages to take, for the effecting of this his
treacherous design. Which being disclosed by some that were privy unto it, the
King out of hand called to him the King of Navarre, and Conde^, who confessing
the plot, and asking pardon, obtained it. But because delays were dangerous in
a case, wherein the life of the King, and of many other Princes, with the
destruction and ruin of the whole Kingdom did run so great hazard, the
Admiral by his command was killed the next day, in his own house: and the
Citizens of Paris, breaking into the houses of Huguenots killed many of them.
The like they did at Lions, Roan, Orleans, and diverse other places.

This is the history of the Massacre of Paris, reported by Surius Comment.
rerum in or be gest. anno 1572.
, out of the relation printed at Paris, and out of the King of France his
letters, written with his own hand, to the Princes of Germany. Which though it
be a lively expession of the barbarous cruelty of your French brethren, yet
they are not ashamed in their printed books, to revile the most Christian
King, and exaggerate his cruelty for this facts; when as they (witness Surius)
Ibid.
in the space of a few years, by their own private authority, without, and
contrary to all order of Law, have murdered many thousand Catholics in France,
and would peradventure rejoice, if by their hands, the King had likewise
dispatched all the rest. And what your love to the Catholics of England is,
these objections are a sufficient testimony, which serve for nothing else, but
to exasperate the King, and State against them.

SECT. VII. The same matter prosecuted.
YOu go on, obiecting Page 172. 176.
Tolosanus a Lawier, who writes, He had not read in any history, that for the
space of 300. years after Christ, Christians ever rebelled against Kings, or
plotted against their government; which Barklay extends to a longer time of
1000. years. We join with Tolosanus, and Barklay therein. And if any
Christians before, or after those times, have rebelled, or held it lawful to
rebel, against their Sovereigns, we disclaim from them, as from furies, and
plagues of the Christian Common wealth: We detest their Doctrine, as impious,
and heartily wish, that all your new Reformers, and some others more ancient,
not unlike to them, and well liked of by you, were of the same mind: for who
knows not, that Wickliffe a predecessor to you in many points of your
doctrine, and a Foxian Saint Ianuar. 2.
, teaches, that if a Prince govern ill, or fall into sin, he is no longer a
Prince, but that his subjects may take arms against him, and punish him at
their pleasure? Who has not heard of Luthers Doctrine, in his Articles
condemned by the Catholic Church In bulla Leonis 10.
, that Christians are free and exempted from all Princes Laws; and that
thereupon immediately followed in Germany, that tumultuous rebellion of the
Pesants against their Lords, wherein were slain above an hundred thousand
Sur^is Comment. rerum in or be gest. anno. 1525.
? And who is ignorant of Caluins Doctrine, that Princes Laws oblige not in
conscience, but only for external and temporal respects L. 4. instit. c. 10..
5.
? You (I know) have labored to excuse him from these, and other seditious
Tenets: But I likewise know, that Brerely has truly told you Prot. Apol.
praefa. sect. 11.
, that, your excuse consists upon violent comparing of phrases, unworthy your
judgment, unworthy your learning, and unworthy of reply thereto. Caluins words
are In Daniel. c. 6. verse. 22.25. Apud Brerel. cit.
. Abdicant se potestate terrent Principes, dum insurgunt contra Deum etc.
Earthly Princes do bereave themselves of authority, when they erect themselves
against God: They are unworthy to be accounted in the number of men, and we
must rather spit upon their faces then obey them. Can these words admit any
gloss? Are they not evidently seditious? Does not Doctor Wilkes Brereley. ibid.
object them to the Puritanes, as such? They were (says he Brereley ibid.
your Teachers, who account those Princes who are not refined by their spirit,
unworthy to be accounted amongst the number of men, and therefore rather to be
spitted upon then obeyed. They were your Teachers, who defend rebellion against
Princes of a different Religion etc.

But what need have we of Caluins, or his Brethrens words, when we have the
vnanswearable proof of his deeds? Does not M. Sutcliffe confess Brereley
ibid. sect. 11.
, that they of Geneua (at the instigation of Calvin and Farellus) deposed their
Liege Lord, and Prince, from his temporal right, albeit he was by right of
succession the temporal Lord, and owner of that City, and territory? And does
not M. Bancroft speaking of the chief Ministers of Geneua (which were Calvin,
Farellus, and Beza) say Brereley ibid.
: It has been a principle with them, that if Kings and Princes refuse to
reform Religion, the inferior Magistrates, or people, by direction of the
Ministry, may lawfully, and ought, if need require, even by force, and arms,
to reform it themselves?

From whence, but from these Principles, have Calvin, Beza, and other their
Successors to this day convinced the same unlawful usurpation? And to come
nerer home, did not King James of famous memory in his (...), complain L. 2. c.
40. and 41.
of the perturbation and confusion of the kingdom of Scotland, wrought by the
fiery spirits of your Ministers; and in particular of the calamities brought
upon his Grandmother and Mother by them, and of their seditious plots against
himself in his young age? And from whence, did the late rebels of Scotland
learn their lesson, but out of the same School, and from the same Masters?
Do not you acknowledge Sermon. page 38.
, that they defend their rising in arms against his Majesty, by the authority
of Luther, Calvin, and Beza? I know your pretend to quit them from that
imputation: but the Scots were to conversant with their doctrine, not to
understand it. And besides what has been said, it were easy, if worth the
labor, to show, that notwithstanding your defense of their innocence, all the
water of the Ocean is not able to wash them clean from the filth of those
doctrines. But if you please to be further satisfied in this point read M.
Parison Monarchomachia per tot.
, Breerley, Prot. Apol. praef. tot.
and Endaemon Ioannes Apol. pro Henr. Garn. c. 3.
, who set down so many particulars of the acknowledged doctrines and practices
of Protestants in that kind, in the express words of your own writers, that
impudency it self cannot gainesay them.

And as it is certain, that you can never free your brethren from these
doctrines, so it is no less, that you charge Catholics falsely with the same:
for who knows not the constant doctrine of all our Divines to be, that
rebellion of subjects against their Liege Lords and Sovereigns is unlawful in
any case, in any occasion, under any pretense, or to any end whatsoever? This
is taught by the Angelical Doctor S. Thomas of Aquine, not in one, but in many
places of his works. This is the doctrine of Caietan, of Sotus, Valentia,
Bellarmine, Tolet, Serarius, Becanus, Richeome Salmeron, Lessius, Gretserus,
Hessius, Eudaemon Ioannes, and in a word of all Catholic Divines Of this see
Patison page 367. and Eudaemon Joan. Parallel. Torti ac Tortoris. c. 5 page
224. and seqq.
. This they prove out of the holy Scripture, out of S. Augustine, out of the
practice of the Catholic Church, and that with solid and forcible reasons See
Valent. in 212 d. 5. q. 8. punct. 3.
.

But you tell us Sermon. page 24.
of a principle of ours, That subjects must obey, whiles they cannot resist. In
proof of this, you allege Sermon. p. 35.
Alane, In his moderate defense; but you neither mention any words of his, nor
any Chapter in particular: and with good reason; for Alane has no such
doctrine. You produce Sermon. page 24.
Creswell in his Philopater, and Bellarmine. The one, you slander falsely: The
other, you understand not, or else (which I fear) wittingly misconstrue his
meaning. For Creswell Eudaemon Ioannes Apol. pro Henr. Garn. c. 3. page 58.
has made answer long since, to Sir Edward Cook, who cited Creswell in his
Philopater, as you do, borrowing your objection from him. The answer is (and
of certain knowledge, I know it to be true) that, you temerariously vent the
fictions of your own brain, for truths. Philopater was not Creswell: He
never writ any such book. And who-euer Philopater was, the book is of a
competent bulk, and you cite out of it some nine or ten words cut off from the
frame of their contexture, divided into two different sentences, and this also
at random: for the book being divided into Chapters, and the Chapters into
numbers, you neither specify Chapter, nor number; which if you had done,
Philopater, might have spoken for himself, and showed the wrong you do him.

And no less is the injury you offer to Bellarmine Sermon. page 24.
. His opinion is, that the Church had authority to depose Nero, Dioclesian, or
other heathenish Tyrants, that persecuted Christ, but did prudently abstain
from the use thereof: for wanting forces, the use of her authority could no way
avail Christians, but give occasion of raising greater storms of persecution
against them. Which opinion of his cannot quit you from accusing, and slandering
him wrongfully: for does he ever say, or insinuate, that those Emperors were
not lawful Princes? or that they being so, it was lawful for Christians, or
any other their subjects, to rebel against them? This is the Doctrine you
impute to him, and this you should have proved to be his, but cannot, and
therefore change the state of the Question, to father on him, the seditious
Doctrine of your Lutheran, and Caluinian brethren, and to suggest to his
Majesty, that the Scots have learned the Principles of their rebellion from us,
which by their own confession Sermon page 38.
they profess to have learned from Luther, Calvin, and Beza.

Lastly, as I have admonished you, of slandering Vrbane Pope, and other
Catholics, so must I advertise you of the like wrong done to Garnet the
Jesuit, whom (say you Sermon. Ibid.
I knew at his arraignement to confess, that he heard of the powder treason
out of Confession. Belike, you knew it, by hearsay, from some one that was
deaf; or if he were not deaf, made no scruple of lying: for no man that was
present, and had his hearing, would be so shameless, as to say he heard him
confess that, which it is certain, he never spoke, but directly the contrary,
and took it upon his death; which may yet be proved by the attestation of so
many, and such witnesses, that if it were as free, for Garnets friends and
kinsfolks, to sue you with an action of slander, as it is free for you with
controlement, to write your pleasure against them, that have not freedom to
answer for themselves, your accusation of Garnet, would prove as well to your
cost, as to your shame you confess Ibid.
, that, at his death he publicly exhorted the Romish professors, to avoid all
acts of treason. And it is no less certain, that in his life time, he never
taught other Doctrine: and that when he heard of that damnable plot in
Confession, he enjoined him, of whom he heard it, to use his uttermost
endeavor, to diswade, and hinder it: yea moreover (as Eudaemon Ioannes Apol.
pro Henr. Garn. c. 1. page 8. 9.
reports from relation of them that had best means to know the truth) the
very hearing of it in Confession, was so great a torment to his mind, that he
could not sleep, nor take any rest for many days, and that with prayers and
sacrifices he did beg of the divine goodness most earnestly, to provide some
remedy for so execrable a design, which he could not disclose to the
Magistrates without violating the seule of Sacramental secrecy, which Christ
himself has commanded to be kept inviolable. I conclude therefore that Garnet,
Cardinal Alane, Bellarmine, Creswell, and other Catholics, whom you defame
with false accusations, are in the number of them, of whom our Savior said
Math. 5.11.12.
. Blessed are ye, when they shall revile you, and persecute you, and speak
all that naught is, against you untruly, for my sake: be glad and rejoice, for
your reward is very great in heaven.

CHAP. XXXIV. Doctor Mortons doctrine condemns the Saints, and Martyrs of
God.
HAVING now gone through your Sermon preached to his Majesty, out of your grand
Imposture, I return to the continuance of my answer to the same Imposture.
You had before objected some Fathers, and having parted with them long since,
now after many Chapters, you come to scrape acquaintance with some of them
again. But their Doctrine is to ancient, to have any commerce with your
Novelties.

SECT. I. S. Polycarpe objected by Doctor Morton.
YOu begin your twelth Chapter opposing Page 183.
, that S. Polycarpe going to Rome, in time of Anicetus Pope, to consult with
him about the celebration of Easter, would not yield to forsake the Asian
custom contrary to that of the Roman Church: and yet nevertheless, Anicetus
and Polycarpe, did still communicate with each other. True, but if the Asian
custom had been then condemned by the Church, and the mantayners thereof
anathematized as heretics, as afterward they were by Victor Pope, and the
holy Council of Nice, Anicetus would not have held Polycarpe in his communion,
unless he had forsaken the Asian custom, and conformed himself to the Roman,
practiced by all other Churches in the world. Nor would Polycarpe have stood
out in defense of the Asian custom, had he not seen, that Anicetus (though he
misliked it, yet) did not condemn it, but permit him still the practice thereof
until the Church defined otherwise. Which Anicetus did, being desirous to give
him all content, for the great reverence due unto him, as well for his years,
as also because he had been disciple to S. John Evangelist, and was then
actually Bishop of Smyrna a principal Church of Asia.

But how great reverence Polycarpe bare to Anicetus, and to the Church of Rome,
appears in this, that being a person of so great dignity, and very aged, he
undertake so long, so laborious, and so dangerous a journey, to declare unto
Anicetus, the reasons of his persisting in the Asian custom; which if Anicetus
had then condemned, it is not to be doubted, but that Polycarpe would have
departed from it, as all orthodoxe Bishops did when they saw it condemned by
the Church, and the defenders of it declared to be heretics.

SECT II. S. Cyprian objected by Doctor Morton.
TO prove that Cyprian believed not any necessity of union with the Roman
Church, you repeat here Page 185.188.
what you had said before, of his being excommunicated by Pope Stephen, and
contemning the excommunication: for which you bring no other proof, then the
testimony of Cassander, an heretic Primae classis, whose works you know to be
forbidden, and yet shame not to cite him as a Catholic author, that you may
call his lies, Our confessions; for that they be lies, I have already proved
Chap. 24.
.

And so much the more reproueable you are, because S. Cyprians testimonies,
which show him to have believed the Roman Church to be the Catholic Church,
and all that are divided from her, to be Schismatikes, you shift off Page 186.
, with an answer of Goulartius, that Cyprian spoke them of his own only
authority against Schismatikes* who troubled his jurisdiction. Which to be a
false, and unconscionable answer, you, and your Goulartius may learn from
the Centurists, who reprehend S. Cyprian Brerel. Protest. Apol. tract. 1. sect.
3. subdiu. 10.
, for teaching, that our Lord has built his Church upon Peter; that one Chair
by our Lords voice is built upon Peter, as upon a Rock; that there ought to be
one Bishop in the Catholic Church; and for calling Peter's chair, the
principal Church, from whence Sacerdotall unity is derived; and for teaching,
that the Roman Church ought to be acknowledged of all others, the Mother, and
Root of the Catholic Church. To these testimonies, acknowledged by the
Centurists, I add, that Cyprian L. 4. ep. 2.
exhorts Antonianus in time of Schism, to adhere to the Pope, and hold fast
his communion, that is (says he) the communion of the Catholic Church, and
expressly affirms L. de Unit. Eccles.
, that, Who-euer resists the Chair of Peter, nether holds the faith, nor
is in the Church. And speaking of some certain heretics, he obiecteth unto
them their great boldness, in presuming to sail to the chair of Peter, and
the principal Church, from whence Sacerdotall unity is derived, not
considering that the Romans are they* whose faith was praised by the voice of
the Apostle, and to whom perfidiousnesse can have no access. To this you
answer Page 186.
: No Father of the primitive times is more urged by you, then S. Cyprian; no
Epistle more insisted upon, then this; no words more inculcated, then these;
and (we may add) no Father, no epistle, no sentence more egregiously abused
and perverted: for he speaks not of perfidiousnesse in doctrine, but only in
discipline, by the false and perfidious reports of schismatic fellows etc.
If this sentence of S. Cyprian be perverted, not we, but you pervert it. And so
it will appear to any impartial Judge, that shall read the words, not cut
short, as you rehearse the^ (that the sense may not be understood) but entire,
as I have set the^ down. The Nouatians were not only Schismatikes, but
heretics, as S. Cyprian in that epistle, and else where often, calls them.
And in the words alleged, when he opposes their perfidiousnesse to the Roman
faith commended by the Apostle, by perfidiousnesse he understands error in
doctrine, or misbeliefe, which is oposite to faith, not perfidiousnesse in
discipline, for that has no opposition at all with faith. Wherefore he
reprehendeth the Nouatians, that having not only divided themselves by schism,
from the chair of S. Peter, which is the principal Church from whence
sacerdotall unity is derived, but also forsaken the Roman faith praised by the
mouth of the Apostle, they dare notwithstanding presume to sail to Rome, in
hope to deceive that Church, and get their doctrine approved by her, not
considering, that the Romans are they, whose faith being praised by the
Apostle, misbeliefe can have no access to them. Which doctrine S. Hierome
seems to have taken from this place of Cyprian, when speaking to Ruffinus, he
says Apol. aduers. Ruffin. l. 1.
: Know that the Roman faith commended by the voice of the Apostle, admits no
delusions, and that being fensed by S. Paul's authority, it cannot be altered
etc.

SECT. III. S. Athanasius objected by Doctor Morton.
THat S. Athanasius believed not the necessity of union and subjection to the
Roman Church, you prove Page 190.
, for that being excommunicated by Liberius Pope, he regarded not his
excommunication. This we deny: It is peradventure true though not altogether
certain Onuphr in Not ad Plati. Ruffin. l. 1. hist^c. 27. Sozom. l. 4. c. 14.
, that Liberius wearied out with two years banishment, and other vexations by
Constantius the Arian Emperor, yielded to sign the condemnation of Athanasius,
and entered into communion with the Arians, and thereby became a Schismatike.
But that he excommunicated Athanasius, is not reported by any writer: nor is it
true, but a fiction of yours. And were it true, the excommunication had not
only been iniust, as being pronounced against an innocent person, (and therefore
no way obligatory) but also inualid; for as much, as Liberius by forsaking the
communion of Catholics, and entering into communion with heretics, was fallen
from his Papacy, and had no power to pronounce excommunication against
Athanasius: or if he had pronounced it, Athanasius had not been bound to obey.
To prove, that Athanasius regarded not the excommunication of the B. of Rome,
you should have proved that whiles Liberius was true Pope, he excommunicated
Athanasius, and that Athanasius refused to obey; which you prove not, and
therefore your objection is impertinent, and your assertion false.

For who knows not, that Athanasius acknowledged the supreme power of the
Roman Church, when being cast out of his Bishopric, he appealed to Julius
Pope, and Julius by the dignity and prerogative of the Roman See, restored him
again to his Church Socrat. l. 2. c. 11. Sozom. l. 3. c. 7.
? And what else did he mean, when he and the rest of the Egyptian Bishops,
writing to Marcus Pope, endorsed their letter, To the holy, and Venerable Lord
of Apostolical Eminency, Mark, Father of the holy Roman, Apostolic See, and
of the universal Church? And in the letter: We desire, that by the authority
of the Church of your holy See, which is the Mother, and Head of all Churches*
we may deserve to receive the copies of the Nicen Canons, by these our Legates,
for the instruction, and comfort of the faithful, that being fensed by your
authority etc. And again Eadem Ep.
: We are yours, and with all that are committed to us, are and will ever be
obedient to you. And in his Epistle to Felix Pope: For as much as our
Predecessors, and we, have always received assistance from your holy
Apostolic See, and have had experience of the care you have of us, we
following the decrees of the Canons, fly for succor unto it, as unto a Mother,
from whence our predecessors have received their orders, doctrine, and relief.
And again Ibid.
: Which by no means we dare presume to do (to wit to define matters of faith)
without consulting you, the Canons commanding, that in mayor causes nothing be
determined, without the B. of Rome etc. For therefore Christ has placed you,
and your predecessors in the height of Eminency, and commanded you to have care
of all Churches etc. And he adds Ibid.
, that, It belongs to the Pope to judge the causes of all Bishops.

If therefore to appeal to the Pope, as to his Judge; if to acknowledge in him,
power, to restore the greatest Patriarchs to their Sees; if to profess that
the judgment of Bishops belongs to him, and that all mayor causes are to be
referred to his tribunal; if to believe the Roman Church to be the Head, and
Mother of all Churches, and the Pope to be Bishop of the universal Church; and
finally if to profess actual, and promise perpetual obedience to the Sea
Apostolic, be Arguments of S. Athanasius his belief of the sovereign
authority of the Sea Apostolic, and of his obligation to obey her, and to live
in union with her, and in subjection to her; then are you guilty of Imposture,
in omitting these, and other pregnant testimonies of the same kind, extant in
his second Apology, and obiecting in lieu of them, a false tale of Liberius
excommunicating Athanasius, devised by your self to seduce your readers.

And hereby you are convinced of another untruth, in saying Page 191.
, that, Athanasius sought not any union with Felix, who was Pope instead of
Liberius: for these his testimonies show, that he was in communion with him,
and acknowledged himself subject to him, as to the Governor of the universal
Church.

But you say Page 190.
(and that impertinently to the matter in hand, which is to prove S. Athanasius
his no subjection to the Roman Church) that, When we esteem Felix to be the
legitimat Pope, and Liberius a Schismatike removed from the society of
Catholics, and from his Papal function, we fight notably against our own
principles, which are: 1. That there cannot be two Popes together: and 2. That
no Pope can be deposed unless he appear to be a manifest heretic; which if
he be, he cease to be Pope, without any judgment at all. That there cannot
be two Popes together, we acknowledge to be a principle of ours. Nor did it
happen otherwise, in the case of Liberius: for when he returned to the Papacy,
it was by acceptance of the Clergy and people of Rome equivalent to a new
election; and this, not until after Felix his death. For as Sozomen prudently
observes L. 4. c. 14.
. God by his special providence called Felix out of this life soon after
Liberius returned to Rome, lest the Sea of Peter should be defamed with the
note of schism, two Popes governing at once, contrary to the laws of the
Church. The second principle is not ours, but an ignorance of yours: For a Pope
cease to be a Catholic, and consequently falls from his Papacy, not only
by public profession of heresy, but also by making public profession of
Schism, and outward communion with heretics, though in his heart he detest
their doctrine: for to be a Catholic, it is not only necessary to believe the
Catholic faith inwardly, but also to make profession thereof outwardly,
abandoning the communion of heretics. Wherefore the syllogism which here you
make Page 190. sin. 191.
, concludes nothing; the Minor proposition, that, Liberius notwithstanding his
consenting to the condemnation of Athanasius, and communicating with heretics,
was a Catholics Bishop, is absolutely false. And whereas you profess, to set
down this Minor as the words of Bellarmine, you falsify him: for albeit he
say, that if a Pope become a manifest heretic he cease eo ipso to be Pope,
yet in the same place L. 2. de Pont. c. 30.. Eadem est sententia.
he sufficiently expresses, that not only heretics, but also schismatikes are
out of the Church, and loose all spiritual jurisdiction over those, which are
in the Church.

SECT. IV. S. Basills belief of the supreme authority of the B. of Rome
proved; and Doctor Mortons objections answered.
IT seemed to us (says S. Basil Ep. 52.
writing to Athanasius) to be to good purpose, that we write to the B. of Rome,
that he consider the affairs of these parts, and give his judgment, to the
end, that being there is difficulty, in sending from thence persons by a common
and Synodicall decree, he may use his authority, and choose men capable of the
labor of such a journey etc. And that having with them the Acts of Arimin,
they may disanull those things which have been done by force. Bellarmine L. 2.
de Pont. c. 15.
brings this testimony: you except against him, as perverting S. Basil by
false translation, which you prove out of Baronius: for where Bellarmine
translateth, vt res nostras videas, that the B. of Rome see, or view our
affairs, Baronius renders, vt res nostras consideret, that he consider our
affairs. But who sees not this to be a mere cavil? for what difference is
there between entreating the Pope to take the affairs of the Eastern Churches
into his consideration, as Baronius reads, or, to see and look into them, as
Bellarmine translateth? Whether you follow the one or the other, it is
manifest, that S Basil thought it a fit way to redress the calamities of those
Churches, that the Pope should take them into his consideration, or have a
vigilant eye over them: the requiring whereof from him, living in a Country so
remote, and in another Patriarkship, shows, that S. Basil believed some
charge of visiting those Churches to belong to him, superior to that which the
Eastern Patriarchs had.

Nor does your answer satisfy, saying Page 195.
, He required not from the Pope, any help or visitation of dominion, or
jurisdiction, but only of confortation, of loving and brotherly consideration,
hoping, that the persuasions of stangers, especially being endued with Gods
grace, would be more preualent with the Eastern people, then the Counsel of
their own Bishops: for this evasion is convinced of falsehood, by the very
words of S. Basil. It is fit (says he) Ep. 52.
that we beseech the Pope to show his authority in the business, sending men
that may bring with them the Acts of Arimin, and disannull the things done by
force. And immediately after, he professes himself ready to be corrected by
the Popes Legates, if in any thing he had erred, and acknowledges in the Pope
authority of a Judge: We are ready (says he) to be judged by you, provided
that they which slander us, may appear face to face, with us, before your
Reverence. Does all this import nothing, but, a request of loving, and
brotherly visitation, or consideration? Could S. Basil in more effectual words
express the Popes power, and jurisdiction over the universal Church, then by
requesting him, to send his Legates with authority to annull the Acts of a
general Council, as that of Arimin was? No: they are testimonies so forcible,
that with no gloss can be eluded. But you reply Page 194.
against Bellarmine, that he will needs have S. Basil to desire the Popes
Decree, whereas Baronius reads, Counsel, or Advice. Here again you cavil:
for the Greek word is, (...), which by interpretation of Budaeus, signifies
voluntatem, sententiam, iudicium. Why then was it not lawful for Bellarmine to
say, S. Basil desired the Popes decree? for to desire him to give his sentence
and judgment, what was it else, but to acknowledge in him the authority of a
Judge, with power to sentence, to judge, to decree Ecclesiastical causes in
the East?

Which power he also declares in other places of his works: for do not both
he Ep. 73. al. 74.
, and S. Gregory Nazianzen Epist. ad Clede.
testify, that Eustathius B. of Sebaste, by virtue of Liberius his letters
presented to the Eastern Bishops, in the Council of Tyana, and by virtue of
his command intimated in them, was received into the communion of the whole
Eastern Church, and restored to his See? Eustathius (says S. Basil to the
Bishops of the West) having been cast out of his Bishopric, because he was
deposed in the Synod of Melitine, advised himself to find means to be
restored, travailing to you. Of the things, that were proposed to him, by the
most Blessed Bishop Liberius, and what submission be made, we know not: Only he
brought a letter, that restored him; which being showed to the Council of
Tyana, he was reestablished in his Bishops seat.

Again, does not S. Basil Ep. 77.
compare the Church to a body, whereof the Western part by reason of the Roman
See, is the Head, and the Eastern the Feet? And does he not from this very
Metaphor, denominate the B. of Rome, Head of the universal Church, and all
other Bishops fellow members of the same body Ep. 70. ad Episc. transmar. edit.
Paris. an. 1603.
?

Again, does he not beseech Pope Damasus Ibid.
to send Legates with order to examine the accusations laid to his charge, and
to appoint a place for him to meet them, that his cause might be judged by
them, and he punished if he were found guilty? And does he not require the same
Pope Ep. 74.
to give order by his letters, to all the Eastern Churches, that they admit
into their communion all such, as having departed from the Catholic truth,
shall disclaim from their Errors? and to renounce the Communion of them, that
shall persist obstinatly in their novelties? And lastly, declaring the Popes
authority in determining all doubts and controversies of faith, he says: In
very deed that which was given by our Lord to your Piety, is worthy of that
most excellent voice, which proclaimed you blessed, to wit, that you may
discern between that which is counterfeit, and that which is lawful and
pure, and without any diminution may preach the faith of our Ancestors.

I conclude therefore that if S. Basil believed aright, the Pope has authority
to restore Bishops deposed, to their Sees, to send Legates with power to
dissolve the Acts of general Councels, to condemn heretical doctrines, to
judge the causes of Bishops, to punish delinquents. And is this nothing else,
but charitable advice, but persuasion, but counsel? Is it not to use
authority, to exercise jurisdiction?

But you object Page 1^6.
that S. Basil in his own name, and in the name of his fellow Bishops in the
East, having written often to Pope Damasus, and other Western Bishops, and
sent to Rome four several legations, requiring help, and comfort from them
in their afflictions, could not receive any answer, in so much that S. Basil
taxes them with supercilious pride and haughtiness, and that they did neither
know the truth, nor would learn it. This you object out of Baronius, from whom
you might have taken the solution, which is, that S. Basil was oppressed, and
as it were, overwhelmed with waves of sorrow, and affliction, not only for the
common calamity of the Oriental Church, but also for his own particular; for
as much, as by Eustathius B. of Sebaste, and others, who hiding the venime of
their heresy, feigned themselves to be Catholics, he was accused, and defamed
of heresy in the East, and brought into suspicion even with his own Monks,
and his dearly beloved Neocaesarians. And this made him likewise not to be
well thought of in the West: in so much, that Damasus Pope for a time, desisted
from that familiar communication by letters (which Basil expected) and
differred the sending of Legates to examine his cause, and clear the truth,
which he had required, and greatly desired: Yet (as you Page 198.
confess) was he then a member of the Catholic Church, and held communion
with the Church of Rome, both in faith and charity. Nor was Damasus so wholly
wanting to his comfort, but that even then when he was suspected of heresy,
upon his letters he called a Council at Rome, in which he condemned
Apollinarius, Vitalis, and Timotheus Baron. anno 373. Sozo. l. 6. c. 25.
; called Vitalis to Rome, and excommunicated Timotheus, as he testifies in his
Epistle to the Eastern Bishops Apud Theodo. l. 5. histor. c. 11.
, expressing withal, the profession which they had made to him, of their
belief of the supreme authority of the Bishop, and Church of Rome. Now if S.
Basil in these afflictions (and grieuing at the intermission of such
communicatory letters from the Western Bishops, and chiefly from Damasus, as
he expected) let fall from his mouth some hasty words, as other holy men (whom
Baronius An. 373.
names) in like occasions have done, is that by you to be reproached unto him?
or is it any argument of his denial of the Supremacy of the B. of Rome, which
he has taught so clearly, so constantly, so effectually, in so many places of
his works?

Yea albeit S. Basil gave a little way to the motions of nature, yet by virtue
he soon recalled himself, retracting what he had said, as his letters full of
humility, written soon after to Damasus, and the other Western Bishops
express. You (says Ep. 1. in addi^.
he) are praised by all mortal men, that you remain pure, and without blemish
in faith, keeping entire the doctrine taught you by the Apostles. It is not so
with us, among whom there are some that presume to bring in novelties, whereby
the Churches are fallen into heresy. Wherefore, O beloved brethren, you as
Physicians, cure our souls etc. So S. Basil, freeing the Western Churches,
and especially the Roman (to which he chiefly writ) both from pride, and error.
Wherefore when you object Page 197.
, that S. Basil expressing his grief said; The Western Bishops neither knew
the truth themselves, nor would learn it, he taxes them not of error, or
ignorance in the true faith, as you falsely interpret, but that being ignorant
of the Asian affairs, they were not careful to understand them from him, and
other Catholic Bishops, that might rightly inform them, but gave to much
credit to the lying reports of heretics, who slandered him falsely, as you
have heard.

SECT. V. Whether S. Hilary excommunicated the Pope.
TO persuade, that S. Hilary B. of Poictou (so you write him, he being not
Bishop of Poictou, which is a Province of France, but of Poictiers the chief
City of that province) held it not necessary, to be in the communion of the B.
of Rome, you say Page 199.
: S. Hilary no sooner understood, that Pope Liberius (as your Cardinal has
confessed) had subscribed to have communion with the Arian heretics, but he
made bold to excommunicate the Pope out of his communion, and fellowship,
saying, I anathematize thee, O Liberius, and thy fellows. And you add, that
Hilary had just cause to do this Page 199. sin. 200.
, because it was always lawful for any Catholic Bishop to excommunicate any
heretical Bishop, that is, to abandon his fellowship, and communion. Here you
show great ignorance in the ordinary principles of Divinity: for to
excommunicate a Bishop, or any other person, is not only to abandon his
fellowship, and communion; else every man, yea every woman, may excommunicate
her Bishop, or any other person whatsoever: for she may abandon his fellowship,
and communion, denouncing Anathema unto him.

There are two kinds of Anathema: the one, judiciary, that is to say, an
Ecclesiastical Censure pronounced by an Ecclesiastical Superior, against them
over whom he has lawful power and jurisdiction, whereby he abandoneth their
fellowship and communion, and commands all others to do the like, and withal
depriueth them of the benefit of the Sacraments, and service of the Church.
This Anathema is an Excommunication. And this is so certain, that howbeit
every Protestant Minister, may at his pleasure abandon the fellowship, and
communion of any other man, and in that sense, denounce Anathema unto him, yet
never any was so absurdly ignorant, as to think, he could excommunicate any
one, over whom he had not Ecclesiastical power, and jurisdiction. And who
knows not, that when you excommunicate Catholics, or others, you do not only
deny them your own fellowship, and communion, but by virtue thereof, forbid all
others to have commerce and communication with them? In this sense, the
Council of Nice pronounced Anathema against the Arians, in these words Socrat.
l. ^. hist. c. 5.
: They that say, there was a time when the Son was not, the Catholic Church
anathematizeth them, that is, depriueth them of the use of the Sacraments, and
commands all men to renounce their fellowship and communion. In this sense S.
Hilary neither did, nor was so ignorant, as to think, he could denounce
Anathema to Liberius, being not his Superior: and therefore neither did, nor
could excommunicate him.

Another kind of Anathema there is, which is not judiciary, but only executory,
whereby every particular person ecclesiastic, or laick, man, or woman
protests, and declares to hold for Anathema, such as are excommunicated by
the Church. In this sense S. Hilary pronounced Anathema to Liberius, for having
subscribed to the banishment of Athanasius, and thereby entered into Communion
with the Arians.

The judiciary Anathema, that is, the sentence of excommunication had been
pronounced before, by the Counsels of Nice and Sardica against the Arians in
general, into whose communion Liberius was entered. There was no need of
pronouncing a new sentence of Anathema against him, but of applying the
sentence of the Counsels unto him, by abiuring and abhorring him, as one
fallen into the sentence which the Councels had pronounced against the Arians.
And therefore S. Hilary adds to his Anathema, these words, For my part, saying:
For my part, Anathema to thee, O Liberius, to show, that he spoke not with a
judiciary, but with an abiuratory Anathema. In this sense John Patriarch of
Constantinople Ep. ^ad Hormisd.
anathematized Timothy the parricide, surnamed Aelurus, whom Felix Pope
excommunicated. And In the same sense, Iustine the Emperor Euagr. l. 5. c. 4.
, denounced Anathema to all heretics, condemned by the Church, who yet being a
secular Prince, had not power to excommunicate any. I conclude therefore, that
you confound these two Anathema's; and because S. Hilary pronounced an
abiuratory Anathema against Liberius, infer ignorantly that he excommunicated
him.

But if for arguments sake I should grant, that the Anathema pronounced by S.
Hilary, was indiciary, and that he excommunicated Liberius, it would make
nothing for you against the Pope: for when Hilary pronounced this Anathema,
Liberius was not Pope, but fallen from his Papacy, and Felix substituted Pope
in his place.

This I have said, not questioning, but supposing Liberius his subscription to
the condemnation of Athanasius; which yet some have denied See Bellar. l. 4. de
Pontif. c, 9.
. But be it true: it follows not, that he was therefore a formal heretic in
his judgment, believing the blasphemous doctrine of the Arians, but only
interpretatiue, for so much as signing with them the condemnation of
Athanasius, and out wardly communicating with them, he gave to some (that
judged of him by his outward actions) occasion to think, he believed their
doctrine. And in this sense only it is, in which some Catholic writers
condemn him of heresy, and in no other. For the very Arians themselves never
pretended that Athanasius agreed in faith with them, but condemned him only for
other crimes, which they had maliciously composed against him: wherein though
Liberius for a time yielded outwardly to them, yet he was ever most constant in
the Catholic faith, as you may see testified by antiquity Apud Iodoc. Cocci.
to 1. l. 7. art. 11.
.

Lastly I must advertise you, that whereas you often repeat as an article of
our faith, that out of the Roman Church there is no saluarion, here Page 199.
, and afterward Page 345.
again you say, part of that our article is, to believe, that in matters of
faith the judgment of the Pope is infallible. This you prove by imposing on
Bellarmine your own fictions. His opinion is, that the Popes judgment in
matters of faith is infallible, and that the contrary is erroneous, and near
to heresy: but he is so far from affirming this his opinion to be anarticle
of faith, or the contrary to be heretical, that he directly says L. 4. de
Pont. c. 2.
it is defended by Gerson, and Almain Doctors of Paris, as also by Castro, and
Adrianus sextus; and that it is tolerated by the Church. Do not you then
ouerlash, saying, that Bellarmines opinion is part of our belief necessary to
salvation, when he so expressly teaches the contrary?

SECT. VI. S. Hieroms judgment, concerning the necessity of union with the
Church of Rome, and subjection to the Bishop thereof.
HE declared his judgment Ep. 77.
, when to assure himself to be in the communion of the Catholic Church, he
regarded not the communion of Paulinus, in whose Patriarship of Antioch he
lived, but professed himself to stick fast, to the communion of Damasus Pope,
that is, to the chair of Peter, upon which (says he) I know the Church to be
built. You answer Page 203.
, that, by chair he meant not the Sea, and Bishopric of Rome, but the true
Doctrine of faith then preached at Rome, even as Christ spoke of the chair of
Moses, that is (says S. Hierome) the law of Moses. This satisfies not, both
because when some Fathers expound faith to be the Rock, on which Christ built
his Church, they exclude not, but include the person of Peter; and chiefly,
because S. Hierome follows not that exposition, but ever vndersta^ds the
person of Peter, and his See, to be the Rock, on which Christ promised to build
his Church. Christ (says he Ad cap. 16. Math.
) gave to Simon, that believed in him, the name of a Rock; and according to the
Metaphor of a Rock it is rightly said to him, I will build my Church on thee.
And a little after: Christ did not then actually build his Church on Peter, but
promised to build it on him afterward, saying: I will build my Church on thee,
and I will give to thee the keys of the kingdom of Heaven. Wherefore as he
promised not to deliver the keys of the kingdom of heaven, to Faith, but to
Peter and his Successors, so on him and them, he promised to build his Church.
And the same is manifest out of the contexture of this his Epistle to Damasus:
for does he not say: I am joined in communion to your Blessedness, that is, to
the chair of Peter? upon this Rock I know the Church to be built: Whosoever
shall eat the Lamb out of this house he is profane: If any one shall not be
in the ark of Noah, he shall perish in the deluge. These words convince, that
S. Hierome by the chair of Peter, understands not faith, but the Church built
on him, and his Successors: for the house out of which no man can eat the lamb
(that is, offer sacrifice) is not faith, to which the denomination of a house
cannot agree, but the Church built upon Peter, which S. Ambrose In 1. Timoth.
3.15.
calls, The house of God, whereof Damasus was then Governor. And the same is
evident out of S. Hierome himself: for faith is not the Ark of Noah, but the
Church of Peter, out of which whosoever shall be, at the coming of the deluge,
shall perish.

And I cannot but admonish you of a fraudulent reticence: for being you make so
great account of Erasmus, and produce him for your only author Page 204.
, that S. Hierome by the chair of Peter, understands faith; why do you
conceal, that upon this very passage, Erasmus shows S. Hierome to condemn
your doctrine of falsehood? Here (says he) Anotat. in Ep. 77. S. Hieron.
Hierome seems to be wholly of opinion, that all Churches ought to be subject
to the Roman See* or surely not divided from her, which peculiarly glories in
this Apostle, that had the sovereignty among the Apostles, and which is so
Orthodoxall, that of all Orthodoxall Churches, she is the chiefest in dignity.
This you know to be the true meaning of S. Hierome, but shift it of, repeating
often, and with great variety of words, that, if S. Hierome pointed out the
Church of Rome as the Arc of Noah, yet thereby he conceived not a perpetuity
thereof; that Virgin Jerusalem may become a harlot, and that she has no
privilege never to apostatate. But this evasion I have already disproued See
above Chap. 12. sect. 1. and 2.
by the promise of Christ made to S. Peter and his Successors, that their faith
shall not fail, and that the gates of hell shall not prevail against the
Church built upon them.

To this I add, that S. Hierome acknowledges Damasus to be his Pastor Ep: 77.
, and therefore Pastor of the universal Church: for when he writ that Epistle,
he was an inhabitant of Palestine, which being in the Patriarkship of Antioch,
Paulinus that was then Patriarch of Antioch, was actually his Pastor, and he
actually a sheep of Paulinus, and therefore could not at the same time be
actually a sheep of Damasus, if the sheep of the Patriarkship of Antioch were
not actually subject to the pastoral authority, and jurisdiction of the B. of
Rome.

Yes, say you Page 202.
, He might be held a sheep of the B. of Rome, in respect of his baptism. But
this I deny: for he that being baptized in one Dioces, leaves that, and
becomes an inhabitant of another, eo ipso becomes a sheep of that Dioces
which he inhabiteth, and leaves to be a sheep of the former in which he was
baptized. And as the Bishop, under whom he was baptized, can have no authority
over him, after he has left his Dioces, unless he be superior in power, and
jurisdiction to the Bishop, whose Dioces he now inhabiteth; so neither could
Damasus be actually Pastor to S. Hierome, having left the Dioces, and
Patriarkship of Rome, and inhabiting that of Antioch, if Damasus had not had
pastoral authority over the sheep of the Patriarkship of Antioch.

Now to your objections. The first is: Page 205.
S. Hierome twited, and taunted Damasus, saying: But away envy, and let the
ambition of the Roman height depart: which he did not say so much in regard of
Damasus his own pride (otherwise an excellent godly Pope) as for the pride of
the Roman top, or height, namely the ambition of his state. This is
impertinent, and untrue. Impertinent; for were it true (as it is not) that S.
Hierome reprehended the pride of the Roman Church; pride is not an error in
faith, but a fault in manners, and therefore no warrant for you, to disauow the
faith, or forsake the Communion of the Roman Church. It is also untrue; for S.
Hierome does not only not twite Damasus, but professes himself to be joined
in communion with his Blessedness. And much less does he taunt his See, which
he acknowledges to be the Rock on which the Church is built. And indeed who
but you, would have charged S. Hierome with twiting and taunting Damasus, an
excellent godly Pope (whom you acknowledge to be his pastor, and spiritual
Father) and that not for any fault of his own, but for faults feigned by you
against other Popes? Those words, Away with envy, let the ambition of the Roman
height depart, were not spoken by S. Hierome to tax the person of Damasus, or
his Seat, of pride; but to signify, that albeit his Seat were placed in Rome,
which being the imperial City, and head of the world, gloried in her own
greatness, yet he was and ought to be free from pride, as being Successor to a
fisher man, and a disciple of the Cross. In regard whereof, he deemed it no
presumption in himself, to write unto him, that by his authority, he might
know whose communion to embrace, and whose to avoid.

Your second objection Page 206.
, is a repetition of what you have formerly said of Liberius his fall from the
Catholic faith, into heresy, by subscribing to the condemnation of Athanasius,
and communicating with the Arians. You have been answered, that Liberius
assented to his condemnation, not for any error in faith, but for crimes forged
against him by the Arians: in so much that Athanasius himself even in that
excuses him, saying Ep. ad Solit.
: He was compelled thereto by force of torments, and therefore that which terrors
and fears extorted from him, ought not to bethought his sentence, but that
which he pronounced freely, when no violence was offered unto him.

Thirdly you object: S. Hierome in despite, and indignation, calls Rome
Babylon and land of captivity, and terms it a purple whore, and strange
land, wherein he could not sing the Lords song, concerning the holy Ghost: yea
he bespots the whole Clergy of that City with the note of ignorance: and at
last (after the death of Damasus) he quit Rome, as a land of bondage that he
might enjoy his liberty in Iudaea, among the Christian Jews. Could this be
said of a City privileged with a perpetual residence of the holy Ghost, and
deserving the title of Motherhood over the whole Catholic Church? This is your
question; and my answer is, That S. Hierome, when he calls Rome, Babylon, a
land of captivity, and a purple whore, gives those names to Rome, not as to the
seat of Religion, but of the Empire; not to the Church, but to the Imperial
Court, and Senate; not to the ecclesiastical, but to the politic state of
Rome; to the troops of Courtiers, solicitors, and negotiants; and finally not
so much in regard of secular Christians, as of Monks, by reason of the
distractions, that the noise, confusion, and tumult of men, and affairs, in so
great a city, brought to Monastical silence and recollection: for so it is
plain out of his Epistle to Marcella Ep. 16.
, in which though inuiting her to leave Rome, and go to Jerusalem, he call
Rome Babylon, yet he presently adds, It is true, that in that City, is the
holy Church: there are the trophies of the Apostles, and Martyrs: there is the
true confession of Christ: there is the faith celebrated by the Apostle, and
the Christian name every day exalted by the depression of Paganism trodden
under foot. But the ambition, the power, and greatness of that City, to visit
and to be visited, to salute and to be saluted, to flatter, and detract, to
hear, and speak, nay to see, though unwillingly so great a multitude of men,
are things far from the purpose and quiet of those, that would follow a
monastical life. This shows, that when S. Hierome calls Rome Babylon, and
purple whore, he speaks not of the Church, but of the temporal state of Rome.
And when he calls it a land of captivity, he speaks it in regard of the noise,
confusion, and tumult, not suiting with the retirement of Monks: which
inconvenience he notes also in the City of Jerusalem, which otherwise (says
Ep. 13. ad Pauli. de instit. Monachis
he) by reason of the places of the Cross, and Resurrection, were a dwelling
much to be desired by Monks.

The second part of your objection, that S. Hierome bespote the whole Clergy of
that City, with the note of ignorance, is your false comment. He complains
only of a few Priests, and Deacons of Rome, who being jealous of his faour with
Pope Damasus, and enuiyng the great reverence which the devout Ladies of Rome
bare to his person, Damasus being dead, took boldness to raise slanders
against him, accusing him, that he had translated Didymus an heretical Author,
that he had conuersed too familiarly with the great Ladies of Rome, and
persuaded them to quit their Country, children, and friends, to leave the
world, and shut themselves up, as recluses, in the Monasteries of Palestine.
Which complaint no way touches the faith of the Roman Church, nor the
succession of S. Peter, nor the communion of the Sea Apostolic, nor makes
against the perpetual residence of the holy Ghost in that Church, S. Hierome
himself crying out Aduers. Ruffin. l. 3.
, that her faith suffers no delusions, and being fensed by S. Paul's
authority, cannot be altered.

Your fourth objection Page 207.
out of his Epistle to Euagrius, of the Deacons of Rome sitting in presence of
the Priests is already answered Above Chap. 15. sect. 2
. But you add to it Page 208. and 218.
as a fifth Argument, that, every Patriarch has a principality and height of a
pastoral watchtower, by reason of the greatness, and dignity of his
Patriarkship, above all Metropolitans, and Bishops whatsouer: and yet have they
not over all Bishops power of jurisdiction, but only principality of order. If
by principality of order, you understand priority of place, every Patriarch
has in that sense priority of order, over all Bishops, that are not
Patriarchs. And in the same sense the Pope has priority of order, over all
Bishops, and Patriarchs. But if by principality of order, you understand the
Sacerdotall and Episcopal dignity, conferred on them by their ordination and
consecration, your Doctrine is untrue: for the inequality of Bishops consists
not in any principality of Sacerdotall or Episcopal orders, which one Bishop
has over another, but in the inequality of Pastoral power and jurisdiction. A
Bishop in his orders is equal to his Metropolitan; the Metropolitan to his
Patriarch; and the Patriarch to the Pope himself. In this sense S. Hierome
says, Ep. ad Euag.
Whersoeuer there shall be a Bishop, either at Rome, or at Eugubium; at
Constantinople, or at Rhegium; at Alexandria, or at Tanais, he is of the same
merit, and Priesthood: because all Bishops, if we consider only the dignity of
their orders, and Priesthood, are equal; even he of Eugubium, a small City in
Italy, to the Pope. Erasmus his Comment upon this passage of S. Hierome, which
you bring Page 208.
to prove, that the inequality of Episcopal jurisdiction is not measured by
the amplitude of Diocesses, I approve not. And much less, do I allow your
inference out of his comment, that according to the divine Law, the Pope has
not any greater jurisdiction then whatsoever other inferior Bishop: for Christ,
when he gave to S. Peter the charge of feeding his sheep, and lambs Joan.
^1.15 16.
, gave him an universal Pastoral power, and jurisdiction over his whole
flock, throughout the world: which power and jurisdiction therefore S.
Augustine, and the whole Council of Mileuis Apud Aug. ep. 92.
acknowledge Innocentius Pope to have from the authority of the holy
Scriptures, that is, by divine Law, from the mouth of Christ himself.

Your sixth objection is Page 208.209.
, that S. Hierome disagreed from the Roman Church in matter of necessary and
Catholic doctrine. You told us even now Page 205.
, that, the Church of Rome was then sound in faith. If therefore S. Hierome
disagreed from her in matter of necessary, and Catholic Doctrine, S. Hierome
was an heretic: for all doctrine contrary to the Catholic faith, is heresy.
But you regard not what you say of that renowned Doctor, if you may make him
like to your self in disagreeing from the Church of Rome, in matter of
necessary and Catholic doctrine. But let us hear in what he disagreed:
Because S. Hierome says, that although formerly all other Churches in the
East, did account S. Paul's Epistle to the Hebrews, Canonical; yet it was not
received as Canonical in the Latin, or Roman Church. From whence you took
these words I know not: for no such are to be found in his Epistle to Euagrius,
out of which you allege them. Part of them I find in his Commentary upon
Isaias, and in his Epistle to Dardanus, where he says: The Epistle to the
Hebrews is received as Canonical, by all the Greek Churches, though the
custom of the Latins receive it not: But that the Roman Church receaues it
not, is an imposterous addition of yours to S. Hieromes text: for when he
says, The custom of the Latins receaues it not, that by the custom of the
Latins, he understands not all the Latin or Roman Church, he declares,
saying Ep. ad Euag.
; All the Greeks receive the Epistle to the Hebrews, and nonnulli Latinorum,
and many of the Latins. Yea when he infinuateth that some of the Latins
received it not, he speaks not of the Latins of his time, but of some that
lived before him, as Tertullian, S. Cyprian, Lactantius and Arnobius, who in
their works are not found to allege this Epistle. But since the time of
Lactantius, the Latin Fathers have been so far from making any doubt that it
is Canonical, that Philastrius In Catal. haeres.
a Latin Father and Bishop of Bressa in Italy, more ancient then S. Hierome,
ranketh them among heretics that deny it to be Canonical. And in S. Hieromes
time, Innocentius Pope Eup. ad Exuper.
, and soon after him, Gelasius with a Council of 70. Bishops Decret. de lib.
sacr. and Eccles.
, reckon the Epistle to the Hebrews in the number of Canonical Scriptures. If
therefore Gelasius Pope, with a Council of 70. Bishops, and Innocentius,
believed it to be Canonical, with what forehead do you say, that the Roman
Church denied it to be Canonical? or how can it be thought that S. Hierome
differed in any point of Catholic belief, from the Church of Rome, he that
prescribes to Demetrias Ep. 8. ad Demetriad.
, as a secure way to avoid the snares of heresy, that she hold fast the faith
of S. Innocentius Pope? And finally how cold he dissent from the Roman Church
in this, or any other point of necessary and Catholic doctrine; he (I say)
that so often commends and recommendeth Ep. 6.8.68.
the Roman faith, and defines him to be a Catholic, that holds the faith of
the Roman Church Aduers. Ruffi. l. 1.
? What follows of this, you know; namely that by affirming S. Hierome to
disagree from the Roman Church, in matter of necessary and Catholic doctrine,
you make him an heretic. Is not then your Argument a Grand Imposture?

And no less it is, that the Council of Trent having defined the books of
Hester, Daniel, Baruch, Ecclesiasticus, Wisdom, Judith, Tobias, and the two
books of the Machabies, with all their parts as they are in the vulgar
edition, to be canonical, you Page 209.
in disproofe thereof object these words, as of Bellarmine: S. Hierome said of
these books, that they were not within the canon of scriptures: for Bellarmine
in that place makes no mention of Hester, Daniel, and Baruch. And though he
grant S. Hierome to have been of opinion, that the other books mentioned, were
not canonical; yet why do you conceal his reason, which is, that S. Hierome
was of that opinion, because the Church had not then defined the contrary in
any general Council? And how do you prove that S. Hierome in that his opinion
disagreed from the Roman Church, in matter of necessary, and Catholic
doctrine, since it was no matter of necessary and Catholic doctrine, to
believe these books to be Canonical, until the Church had defined it in a
general Council, as in S. Hieromes time she had not done, saving only of the
book of Judith, which afterward he received, understanding that the Council
of Nice had so declared?

But from hence you take occasion Page 302. fin 303.
, to inueigh against Bellarmine, and other our Doctors, for imputing to the
Council of Nice, a decree, whereby they condemn Protestants as sacrilegious
persons, for not admitting the book of Judith into the number of Canonical
scriptures, and alleging S. Hierome, as a witness to prove that, which he
never spoke; and for proof of a doctrine, which himself does utterly abandon.
In this charge you are twice reproueable: first, for saying, that we falsely
impute that constitution to the Council of Nice: for that the Counsel did
make such a Constitution, S. Hierome witnesses, saying Praefat. in Judith.
: Librum Judith Nicena Synodus in numero sanctarum scripturarum legitur
computasse: The Nicen Council is read to have reckoned the book of Judith in
the number of holy scriptures. The same is testified by Rupertus De divine.
offic. l. 12. c. 25.
, who repeating S. Hieromes doctrine concerning this book, and almost his
words, says: Hoc volumen etc. This book is not canonical among the Hebrews,
but by the authority of the Council of Nice, it is received for the
instruction of holy Church.

Secondly you are reproueable in prete^ding that S. Hierome in these words,
declares not that book to be canonical: for being requested to translate it,
out of the Chaldean tongue, in which it was written, into Latin, he says: The
Jews reckoned this book among the hagiographes, whose authority is sufficient
to decide controversies. And the^ opposing against them, the authority of the
Nicen Council, he adds; But because the Council of Nice is read to have
registered this book in the number of holy scriptures, I have yielded to your
request. In these words he plainly she weth the Church to be of a different
belief from the Jews, touching this book, and to receive it, in that sense,
in which the Jews did not receive it, to wit, as sufficient to decide
controversies of faith. And in confirmation hereof he numbreth this book among
other canonical scriptures, saying Ep. ad Principiam.
, Ruth, Hester, Judith were of so great renown, that they gave names to sacred
volumes. And in other his works he often cites it, as divine scripture Ep. 9.
ad Salu. Ep. 22. ad Bustoch. and in Isa. c. 14.
.

But to prove, that he held it apocryphal, you object Stapleton Page 303.
, Salmeron, Lindanus, and Acosta, whom you call our less precipitant Authors.
Stapleton you falsify, citing him l. 2. de authorit. Script. cap. 4. for he
has no book so entitled, and much less any such words, as you set down for
his. Yea he is so far from saying, that S. Hierome denies this book to be
canonical, that he says directly the contrary: for discoursing De princip.
doct. l. 9. c. 6.
how some books of scripture which before the definition of the Church had
been held apocryphal, or doubtful, were afterward by her authority certainly
believed to be canonical, he exemplifieth in this of Judith, which (says he)
S. Hierome moved by the authority of the Council of Nice, held to be
Canonical, having formerly accounted it to be apocryphal. This is Stapletons
doctrine. Are you not ashamed to produce him as a witness for the contrary?

And as little truth has your citation of Salmeron: for he alleges S.
Hieromes words expressly declaring, that the rule to distinguish Canonical
Scriptures, from apocryphal, is the authority of the Church. Whereupon Salmeron
truly says, that, if S. Hierome should deny this book to be Canonical, his
authority alone could not be preualent against the whole stream of Ancient
Fathers, holding the contrary. Their testimonies you may read in Iodocus
Coccius. Lindanus and Acosta I have not seen: but you that have dealt so with
Stapleton, and Salmeron, may be presumed to deal no better with them.

SECT. VII. S. Ambrose his judgment concerning the necessity of Union, and
subjection to the Bishop, and Church of Rome.
S. Ambrose declared his judgment, when reporting Orat. de obitu Satyri.
, how his holy brother Satyrus in his return out of Africa, was cast by ship
wrack upon the isle of Sardinia infected with schism, he said: Satyrus not
esteeming any favor to be true, but that of the true faith, called unto him the
Bishop of that place, and asked him, whether he agreed with the Catholic
Bishops, that is (says S. Ambrose) with the Roman Church? This shows, that
S. Ambrose, and Satyrus, believed the Roman Church to be the Catholic Church,
and all that were not in her Communion to be schismatikes. You answer Page
213.
, that, the reason why Satyrus would not communicate with any Bishop that
agreed not with the Roman Church, was, because Sardinia was then divided into
diverse schisms, by heretical spirits: No marvel therefore, though Satyrus
asked of a Bishop, whose faith he suspected whether he believed as that Church
did, whose faith was known to be truly Catholic; even as if in time of
rebellion, the Citizens of some one City (for example York) were more
generally known to profess loyalty to their Sovereign, an honest man coming
into the kingdom, might ask the inhabitants, whether they agreed with the
City of York, thereby to know, whether they were loyal subjects: and yet it
would not follow, that therefore York is the head of the kingdom. This your
answer framed to puzzell an ignorant reader, is easily rejected. Satyrus did
well know, and it was generally known both in the East, and West, that at that
time, not only the Church of Rome, but also that of Milan (of which Ambrose his
own brother was then actually Bishop, and famous over all the world) was sound
in faith, and truly Catholic. Why then did not Satyrus, to inform himself
whether that Sardinian Bishop were Catholic, ask him, whether he agreed with
the Bishop and Church of Milan, but because he knew, that neither the Church of
Milan, nor any other, but the Roman, was the head of Catholic Communion, as S.
Ambrose himself teaches, saying L. 1. Ep. 4. ad Imperat.
, From the Roman Church the rights of Venerable Communion do flow to all? And
why else did he say this, but because he knew, that neither to the Church of
Milan, nor to any other, but the Roman, Christ has promised, that her faith
shall not fail Luc. 22.31.
, and that, the gates of hell shall not prevail against her Math. 16.18.
? In regard whereof it is said, that (not to the Church of Milan, but) to her
all Churches, and all the faithful from all places must have recourse Iren. l.
3. c. 3.
. And unless you can show, that York has an especial Privilege from God,
not to fail in her loyalty, as the Roman Church has, not to fail in the
Catholic faith, and profession thereof, your example is impertinent. York may
fail in loyalty, and therefore to be a citizen of York, and to be a good
subject, are not terms conuertible. But the Roman Church can neither fail in
the Catholic faith, nor in the profession thereof: and therefore to be a
Catholic, and to agree with the Roman Church (as in themselves they are so)
were they held by S. Ambrose, by his brother Satyrus, and by the general
accord of antiquity, to be all one See above Chap. 1. sect. 3.
.

2. S. Ambrose declared his judgment, when he called Damasus Pope, Rector of
the house of God, which is his Church In cap. 3. prioris ad T^moth.
. You answer, that we mistake the words (respectively) spoken to one person,
Pope Damasus, and circumstantially for one time, as if they were absolutely so
meant for the persons of all Popes, at all times. This answer is not
respectively, but absolutely insufficient: for what dignity, superiority, or
power of government had Damasus over the whole Church in his person, and for his
time, which every Pope has not had in his person, and for his time? The power
of Ruler and Governor of the whole Church which Damasus had, was by his
Popedom. And as he by the right of his Popedom was, so all his predecessors
and successors in that See, have by the same title and right, been Rectors, and
Governors of the whole Church.

This is so certain, that you passing lightly over this first answer, fly to
a second Page 212.213.
, that the title of Rector, or Governor of the whole Church, argues not
Damasus to be Head of the Church, because, Athanasius, Basil, and Gregory
Nazianzen have received titles equivalent, if not more excellent, as of Prop,
and Buttresse of the Church and faith, Eye of the world, and others; in which
ascriptions (say you) there is not any acknowledgment of authority, but a
commendation of their care and diligence, judgment, and directions in behalf
of the whole Church In the citation and application of these attributes, you
deal not uprightly, as is to be seen in Canisius, from whom you took them
Catechisinit. in Encorn. Pat.
. But leaving that to the readers examination, your own answer destroys it
self: for those ascriptions (you confess) import no authority. But does the
title of Rector or Governor import no authority? As the power and authority of
the Head of a College, or Governor of a commonwealth cannot be better or more
effectually expressed, then by saying, He is Rector of the College, or,
Governor of the Commonwealth: so if S. Ambrose, had studied to confute your
answer, and express the Popes Monarchical power and authority over the
whole Church, he could not have done it more effectually, then by stiling him,
Rector, or Governor of the house of God, which is his Church: for that title
never was, nor can ever be given to any other, but to the Pope of Rome, whom
Christ has made Pastor and Governor of his whole flock Joan. 21.15. and seqq.
And to this S. Ambrose alludeth L. 10. ep. 81.
, when writing to Siricius Pope, he calls him, A watchful, and pouident
Pastor, that with pious solicitude defends the flock of Christ from wolves,
that is, from heretics.

3. What S. Ambrose his judgment was concerning the infallibility of the Bishop
and Church of Rome, he declares, when writing to Siricius Pope of certain
heretics whom he had condemned, he says Ibid.
: Whom your Holiness has condemned, know that we also hold them condemned,
according to your judgment. S. Ambrose was fare more learned then Siricius, and
yet by reason of the infallibility of the Roman Church, in determining causes
of faith, and condemning heresies, he submits to the judgment of Siricius.
Impertinently therefore do you object Page 214.
, to prove S. Ambrose his no-subiection to the Church of Rome, that the Pope
asked his judgment concerning the day of Easter: for a Counselor may be more
learned then a King, and the King may ask his judgment; and yet the authority
of determining the cause is not in the Counselor, but in the King. And the
Counsel or though he be more learned, is subject and bound to obey the King,
as S. Ambrose was, and acknowledged himself bound to obey Siricius. Nor do you
find us to hold, that the Pope in his determinations, ought not to proceed
prudently, asking the advice of learned men.

4. To prove that S. Ambrose acknowledged no subjection to the Church of Rome,
you report Page 214.
out of Baronius, that certain Clergymen of Milan 670. years after the death
of S. Ambrose, called the Bishopric of Milan, S. Ambrose his Church, and
withstood Petrus Damianus the Popes Legate, alleging, that the Church of
Ambrose had been always free in it self, and never subject to the laws of
the Pope of Rome. But why do you conceal the truth of this history? The
ancient splendour, and beauty of the Church of Milan being defaced, and greatly
decayed, partly by the impurity of Clergymen, that being infected with the
heresy of the Nicolaites, lived incontinently, and obstinatly defended the same
to be lawful, and partly by Simoniacall Priests; the people of Milan sent
Legates to the Pope, beseeching him to commiserate the lamentable state, and
cure the desperate diseases of that famous Church. The Pope (not Leo the Ninth,
as you mistake, but) Nicolas the second (between whom and Leo there were other
two Popes, Victor and Stephen) condescending to so just a request, sent two
holy and learned men, Petrus Damiani Cardinal of Ostia, and Anselme B. of
Luca, as his Legates, to visit that Church, and armed them with his own
authority, to correct the offenders, and ordain whatsoever should be thought
expedient, for the reformation of so great disorders. The Legates being arrived
at Milan, had no sooner intimated their Commission, but the people stirred up
by those lewd, and factious Clergymen, began to oppose them, alleging that
the Church of Ambrose had been alwais free in it self, and never subject to
the Laws of the Pope of Rome. These are the only words, which you cull out of
Baronius whole narration, leaving out what precedeth, and making no mention of
what follows; which is, that Petrus Damiani stepping up into the Pulpit,
after he had quieted the people, proved effectually the sovereign authority
granted by Christ, to the Roman Church, over all Churches, and that whosoever
denies that authority, is an heretic. The people giving ear to his words,
were appeased, and with one accord promised to do whatsoever he should ordain.
There was present a great number of Clergymen, and scarce any of them, that
had not been promoted to orders by Simony. For the remedy of so great a
mischief, the Legates required from Guido the Archbishop, an inviolable caution
and promise, not to admit any from thence forward to holy orders for money; and
also to root out the heresy of the Nicolaites. Whereunto he willingly yielded,
with imprecation of Gods wrath, and revenge on himself, if he performed it
not. He gave this caution in writing, and the Priests and Clerks subscribed
unto it. Which being done, he prostrated himself on the ground, asking
penance of the Legates for his offense. And in like manner the Clergymen
admitting penance, were reconciled in time of Mass, and received new
ornaments from the Bishops hand, having first made a profession of their faith,
in which they anathematized all Heresies extolling themselves against the holy
Catholic and Apostolic Church, and particularly those of the Nicolaites and
Symonians. This is the story: and what greater folly can there be, then to
argue, that S. Ambrose a most holy and learned Doctor, opposed the authority of
the Roman Church, because a few lewd heretical Clergymen of Milan 670. years
after his death, disclaimed from the obedience of the B. of Rome, to the end
they might hold on their damnable courses, and escape that punishment which
their offenses so justly deserved? And can there be a greater Imposture, then
to allege a few rash words uttered by the people at the instigation of those
heretics, and to conceal that they together with the people and Archbishop
being admonished by the Popes Legates, acknowledged their error with hearty
sorrow, and promise of amendment, and obedience to the Sea Apostolic? By this
a judicious reader will perceive, that you neither regard what you allege,
true, or false, nor stick to patronize vice and heresy in them, that with you
will oppose the Bishop, and Church of Rome. But you that follow them in their
disobedience, why do you not also follow them in their repentance? When
Theodosius in excuse of the great slaughter he had made at Thessalonica,
alleged to S. Ambrose, that King David also had offended, committing adultery
and murder; S. Ambrose answered Paulinus in vita Ambros.
, Sequutus es errantem sequere poenitentem: As you have followed David in his
finne, so follow him in his repentance. And if he were now living, he would in
like manner answer you, that as you have followed some wicked Clergymen of
his Church, in their disobedience to the Sea Apostolic; so follow them in
their repentance: and both he and they would condemn you of great
perfidiousnesse, in proclaiming their sin, and concealing their amendment.

5. You object Page 214.215.
that S. Ambrose refused to follow the Church of Rome in the custom of washing
the feet of infants is baptized, which (say you) the Church of Rome judged to
be superfluous, but contrariwise, Ambrose and the Church of Milan held to be
necessary. Your custom is to borrow Arguments from Catholic writers, and
suppress their solutions. This you borow from Bellarmine L. 2. de Pont. c. 16.
, as you do many others. In him read the answer. It shall suffife me to tell
you, that the Roman Church obliges not other Churches, to use, or omit all the
rites, and ceremonies, which she uses, or omitteth in administration of the
Sacraments, or other Ecclesiastical offices. In such as are of themselves
indifferent, she commands nothing, as you have heard Cha^p. 2^. sect. 3.
, but leaves freedom to other Churches, to follow their own customs. Such
was the ceremony of washing the feet of infantes baptized, which though she
practiced not, she condemned not: and therefore it was free for the Church of
Milan to use it, without any disobedience at all to the Church of Rome. If you
had not been minded to trifle, you should have proved, that S. Ambrose
disobeyed the Roman Church in matter of faith, as you do. This you cannot
prove, both because S. Augustine has testified Cont. Iulia. Pelag. l. 1. c. 2.
that in the works of Blessed Ambrose the Roman faith greatly shines; and
also, because he himself defines a Catholic Bishop to be one that a greeth
with the Roman Church Orat. de obitu Satyri.
, and protests to Siricius L. 10. ep. 81.
, that whom the Roman Church condemns, he following her judgment, holds in
like manner condemned: of which number you are one.

SECT. VIII. S. Augustines judgment concerning the necessity of union with the
Church of Rome, and subjection to the Bishop thereof.
S. Augustines judgment was, that the Roman Church is the Head of all Churches,
which he professed saying Ep. 162.
In her has always flourished the Princedome of the Sea Apostolic: Princedome
(I say) not only Principality of Order (as you comment) but of true power and
authority over all the Churches of the world, as has been effectually proved
Chap. 17. sect. 2.
, and the ensuing testimonies of S. Augustine shall further confirm. For
herein he declared his judgment, when together with all the Fathers of the
Mileuitan Council (to which he was Secretary) he writ to Innocentius Pope Ep.
^2.
: For as much as God by the gift of his principal grace, has placed you in
the Apostolic See, and granted you to be such in our days, as we ought rather
to fear, that it should be imputed to us for a crime of negligence, if we
should conceal from your Reverence those things, which for the Church ought to
be represented to you, then to imagine that you can receive them disdainefully,
or negligently; we beseech you, to apply your Pastoral diligence, to the great
perils of the weak members of Christ. You deny not but that S. Augustine with
the whole Council in these words requires the Popes Pastoral diligence, for
the repressing of the Pelagian heresy in Palestine and Africa; but your answer
is Page 218.
, that, John the first writing to an Archbishop, grants, that the charge of
the Church for the help of all, in repressing of heresies, was committed to
him, as well as to himself: and that every Patriarch has a Principality and
height of a Pastoral watchtower above all Metropolitans, and Bishops: and yet
have they not over all Bishops power of jurisdiction. But these euasions I have
already proved to be vain, and not without Imposture See above Chap. 19. sect.
3.
.

That every Bishop ought to concur to the help of all in repressing of
heresy, we deny not: but we deny, that every Bishop has a watchtower of
pastoral authority to judge and condemn heretics whersoeuer out of his own
Dioces, as S. Augustine, and the Mileuitan Fathers acknowledge the Pope to have
out of his Dioces and Patriarkship of Rome, requiring him to condemn by his
pastoral authority the Pelagians in Africa and Palestine. And that the Popes
power herein, exceeds the jurisdiction of all other Bishops, S. Augustine
professes, writing to Boniface Pope Cont. duas Epist. Palag. l. 1. c. 1.
: Thou disdainest not to be afrend of the humble, though thou be placed in a
higher government. And again Ibid.
: The pastoral watch is common to us all, that have the office of Bishops; but
thou art supereminent in a higher degree. And yet further he declares this
supereminent power and jurisdiction of the Pope to extend it self over all the
world, writing to Optatus Ep. 157.
: Pelagius and Celestius by the vigilance of two Episcopal Councels, with the
help of God, who undertakes the protection of his Church, have been condemned
in the extent of the whole world, by two reverend Prelates of the Apostolic
See, Pope Innocentius, and Pope Sozimus. If then S. Augustine believed aright,
the Pope has Pastoral power to repress and condemn heretics, throughout
the whole world, which other Bishops have not; their pastoral power being
confined to the limits of their own Diocesses.

Your objections against this, are, 1. Page 219.210.
That S. Augustine speaking of Stephen B. of Rome, and Cyprian of Carthage,
calls the^, Two Bishops of most eminent Churches, Ergo, the B. of Rome has
not jurisdiction over the B. of Carthage: for there cannot be, Two most
Eminents. Your consequence is untrue: and such you must confess it to be: for
the B. of Rome, being Patriarch of all the West, the B. of Carthage is subject
unto him, as you forgetting your self afterward acknowledge Page 2^9.
. Wherefore S. Augustine calling Stephen and Cyprian, two Bishops of two most
eminent Churches, intended not to deny the subordination of Cyprian, to
Stephen; nor of the Church of Carthage, to that of Rome; but only to signify,
that as the Roman Church is most eminent, by reason of her Patriarchall power
over the West, and her Primacy over the whole world; so the Church of Carthage
is also most eminent (though in an inferior degree) by reason of her Primacy
over all Africa. And in this sense both those Churches ^^e most-Eminent, the
one over all Africa, and the other over all the world.

Your second objection of the Saturday-fast Page 220.
; your third of the denial of Appeals out of Africa to Rome Page 221.
; your fourth concerning the cause of Cecilian Ibid.
; your fifth of the Epistle to the Hebrews, whether in S. Augustines days the
Roman Church held it canonical Page 222.
, are all repetitions of your former Arguments, which in their due places have
been answered Chap. 22. sect. 3. Chap. 25.26. tot. Chap. 30. sect. 1. Chap.
34. sect. 6.
.

But to them you add here a Consideration of your judicious Casaubon Page 223.
, requiring us (who account the only note of Schism to be divided from the
Roman Church and Pope thereof), to answer, Why S. Augustine, who in seven
Books, besides many other places, confuted the Schismatic Donatists, yet
never spoke word of the Monarchy of the Pope, or of the infallibility of his
judgment, whereby to reduce them to the unity of the Church, and truth. Your
judicious Casaubon showed great lack of judgment in making this Argument; and
that he had not read S. Augustine, or if he had, that he did not understand
him; or if he had read, and did understand him, then you know what he shows
in concealing the truth. For throughout all those seven Books against the
Donatists, there is nothing which S. Augustine so often obiecteth, nor so much
urges against them, as their separation from the Roman Church, repeating the
same not once or twice, but almost in every Chapter of some of those books.
For when the Donatists did strive to defend their heresy of rebaptization by
the authority of S. Cyprian, S. Augustine answered L. 1. de Bapt. c. 18.19. l.
2. c. 1.5.6.7.9. Contra Crescon. l. ^. c. 32. l. 2. c. 3. and alibi saepe.
, that Cyprians patronage could not avail them, because they were out of the
Communion of the Roman Church, in which S. Cyprian lived and died. And does he
not in other his writings against the Donatists often urge the succession of
Bishops in the Roman Church? If (says Ep. 165.
he), the order, and succession of Bishops be to be observed, how much more
assuredly, and safely indeed do we begin our account from S. Peter himself, to
whom as he represented the whole Church, our Lord said, Math. 16.18.
Upon this Rock I will build my Church? For Linus succeoded to Peter, Cletus to
Linus etc. And so reckoning all the Popes unto Anastasius, who then sat in the
chair of S. Peter, he concludes against the Donatists. In this order of
succession, there is not one Donatist to be found: to which I add no, nor yet
one Protestant. And reckoning the motives that held him in the Church, among
them he sets down the succession of Bishops in the Sea of Rome: There are
(says he) Cont Ep. Fundam. c. 4.
many things, which with greatest reason hold me in this Catholic Church. 1.
The uniform consent of people, and nations (which is not to be found in the
Protestant Church, confined to a few Northern countries, in a corner of the
world.) 2. A certain authority, begun by miracles (which Protestants confess
themselves not to have.) 3. The succession of Priests, even from S. Peter,
until this present Bishop. Wherefore since that Church in which there is a
continued succession of Bishops from S. Peter, cannot be the Protestan: Church,
(which has no such succession) but the Roman, it follows that S. Augustine
held the Roman Church to be the Catholic Church. And therefore expressing to
the Donatists how much he grieved to see them ly cut of from this Church he
said Psalm. cont. part. Donati.
: It greeueth us to see you ly, so cut of. Number the Priests even from the Sea
of Peter, and consider in that rank of Fathers, who succeeded whom. That's the
Rock which the proud gates of hell overcome not. Here again S. Augustine
shows the Roman Church to be the Catholic Church, built upon Peter, and his
successors, as upon a rock, against which heresies and schisms, which are the
proud gates of hell, shall never prevail, and all that are out of her
communion to be as branches out of from the Vine, and deuoid of all spiritual
life.

And as he held all that are out of the Roman Church, to be in miserable state,
so contrarily he held all that live in her Communion, to be most hapy and
secure from error in faith: for so he deemed Cecilian Archbishop of Carthage to
be, notwithstanding all the plots and conspiracies of the Donatists against
him: He might (says S. Augustine) Ep. 162.
contemn the conspiring multitude of his enemies, because he knew himself to
be united by communicatory letters both to the Church of Rome, in which the
sovereignty of the Sea Apostolic has always flourished, and to other
Countries, from whence the Gospel came first into Africa.

These few passages among many others, show, that your judicious Casaubon
failed much in judgment and truth, when he adventured to say, that, S.
Augustine in his works against the Donatists, never spoke word of the Monarchy
of the Pope, nor of the infallibility of his judgment, whereby to reduce them to
the unity of the Church, and truth.

And as he urged the authority of the Sea Apostolic, against the Donatists, so
has he testified, that by the same authority taken from the authority of holy
Scriptures Aug. Ep. 91.
, the Pelagians were condemned: who therefore seeing themselves esteemed as
Heretics throughout all the Western Church in which they lived, sought to the
Churches of the East, hoping to be admitted into their Communion, as the
Protestants of Germany writing to Hieremy Patriarch of Constantinople did See
Iustus Caluinus Apol. pro Eccl. Romans page 10.
; whom therefore we may check with S. Augustines words written against Julian a
chiese mantainer of the Pelagian heresy: I think (says he Cont. Iulia. l. 1.
c. 4.
that part of the world ought to suffice thee, in which our Lord would have the
chief of the Apostles to be crowned with a most glorious Martyrdom: To the
Governor of which Church, Blessed Innocentius, if thou woldst have given care,
thou had ere this, freed thy dangerous youth from the Pelagian snares: for
what answer could that holy man give to the African Counsels, but that,
which from ancient times the Roman Church with all others perseuerantly
holds? And else where he notes L. 2. de great. Christi and pecc. orig. c. 8.
, that albeit Pelagius had drawn others into error, he could never deceive the
Roman Church: for the most Blessed Pope Sozimus considered what opinion his
predecessor worthy to be imitated, had of his proceedings, and what judgment
the faith of the Romans to be commended in our Lord, had made of him.

But you object Page 225.
, It is mere sophistry, to infer a necessity of union with the Church of
Rome, to be professed of all Christians, at all times, because the Fathers
required it in their times. By this Argument a Pelagian, a Donatist, an
Eutychian, or any other Heretic may justify his departure from the Roman
Church, pretending (as you do) that the necessity of union with her, was not
for all times. Her faith is built upon the word of Christ, promising Math.
16.18.
that, the gates of hell shall never prevail against her, and Luc. 22.32.
that, the faith of Peter's See shall never fail. Wherefore as it is impossible,
that Christ should fail in the performance of his promise; so is it
impossible, that the necessity of union with the Roman Church should not be
perpetual.

Lastly, you bring examples of antiquity Page 125.
requiring union with other Churches, as well as with the Roman. This Argument
you have prosecuted before Page 100.101.
, out of your own observations of antiquity, with many examples, some of which
you repeat here, adding others unto them Page 229.230.
. The answer you have received Chap. 15. sect. 9.
; to which I add, that your Argument is, as if you persuading rebels to join
not only with their Sovereign, but also with other his loyal subjects, I
should lay to your charge, that you hold loyal subjects* to be of equal
authority with their Sovereign. It is true, that while subjects stand loyal
to their Prince, he that ioynes in loyalty with them, is a loyal subject. But
the reason why he is a loyal subject, is not because he joins with them, but
because both he, and they join in obedience and subjection to their
Sovereign: In like manner it is true, that whatsoever Churches are in
Communion with other Orthodoxall Churches that agree with the Roman (in which
the sovereignty of the Sea Apostolic has always flourished Aug. ep. 162.
they are to be accounted Orthodoxall, and Catholic Churches; but the reason
why they are to be accounted Catholic, is not for their agreement among
themselves, but because they all agree with the Church of Rome, the Head and
original Source of Catholic communion: for which cause S. Cyprian explicating
what a Catholic is, makes no mention of other Apostolical Churches, which
were extant in his days, but absolutely defines L. 4. Ep. 2. and 8.
, that to be a Catholic, is, to communicate with the B. of Rome. And S.
Ambrose Orat. de obitu Satyri.
, that, to agree with Catholic Bishops, is, to agree with the Roman Church,
from which (says he L. 1. ep. 4. ad Imperat.
) the rights of Venerable Communion do flow unto all other Churches, she being
the source, and they streams, derived from her, as from their native fountain
Innocent. apud Aug. ap. 91.
. And S. Irenaeus L. 3. c. 3.
pronounces it necessary for all Churches (not excepting the Apostolical) to
agree with the Church of Rome, by reason of her more mighty principality, that
is, because her says cannot fail, she being the Rock on which the Catholic
Church is built Hieron. Ep. 57. ad Damas.
, and against which the gates of hell cannot prevail Aug in Psalm. cont. partem
Donati.
, as they have done against all the other Apostolical Churches.

SECT. IX. S. Hilary B. of Arles acknowledged himself subject to the B. of
Rome.
THe last witness you bring Page 225.
to prove the no-necessity of union and subjection to the Pope and Church of
Rome, is S. Hilary B. of Arles in France; who though he deserved great
commendation for his labors against the Pelagian heresy, and defense of S.
Augustines works, yet for a time he stained his glory, when exceeding the
limits of due moderation, and insisting in the steps of Patroclus an inuasor of
that See, he presumed to usurp to himself the rights of the Metropolitans of
Vienna and Narbona, ordaining and deposing Bishops in their districts; a thing
which no way belonged to him, and had been forbidden by the Council of Turin
C. 13.
. This being complained of against Patroclus, first to Boniface, and then to
Celestine Popes, and lastly to the blessed Pope Leo against Hilary, that he had
presumed to depose Celidonius a Bishop of the Province of Vienna, and he being
still living, to ordain Proiectus in his place, he was so far from persisting
in this crime to the end of his life, that he went himself in person to Rome,
in a most submissiue, and penitent manner, to make satisfaction for his
offense: He undertook (says the author of his life Apud Cuiac, obseruat. l.
5. c. 38.
a journey to Rome, on foot, and entered into the City, without any horse, or
beast of carriage, and presented himself to Pope Leo, reverently offering him
obedience, and humbly entreating, that he might ordain the state of the
Churches after the accustomed manner etc. but if it were not his will, he would
not importune. And again: Ibid.
: He applied himself wholly to appease the spirit of Leo, with a prostrate
humility. Having pleaded his cause, and being found guilty, he departed from
Rome, without staying his sentence, and returned presently to Arles, never
laying any further claim to the jurisdiction, which formerly he had usurped,
as appears out of the Epistle which Leo writ against him to the Bishops of
the Province of Vienna Leo Ep. 89.
, wherein having fully declared, and proved the supreme authority of the Sea
Apostolic to be instituted by Christ himself, he annulled what had been
iniustly presumed by Hilary, and prescribed a rule to be observed in the
creation of Bishops. And lest Hilary should raise tumults, seeking to support
his cause by force of arms (as formerly he had done) Leo required of
Valentinian the third, that if any such attempt were made, he would cause it to
be suppressed by Aetius, commander of the soldiers in France. This the Emperor
performed, writing to Aetius that famous Rescript, which afterward Theodosius
the younger inserted in his new Constitutions, intituling it, The Law of
Theodosius, and Valentinian, in which he relates the whole story of Hilary,
and professes his great veneration of the Sea Apostolic, and of the Popes
supreme authority over all Churches, and Bishops, and particularly his right to
convent them before him, and prescribe Laws unto them; ordaining withal, that
if any Bishop being summoned by him, shall refuse to appear, the Governor of
the Province shall enforce him to obey, to the end (says he) that in all
things, that Reverence be observed, which our Parents bare to the Roman Church.

This is the history of Hilary truly related out of the author of his life, out
of the Epistle of Leo, and out of the Rescript of Valentinian. Is it not then
unshamefastness in you to say Page 225.
. that we without any proof would make you believe, that at length Hilary
yielded to the Pope, making no further apology for the defense of his cause?
What? Is the relation made by the Author of his life, no proof? Is the epistle
of that renowned Pope S. Leo the great, no proof? Is the Rescript of
Valentinian inserted into the civil law, by Theodosius, and never doubted of
by any man of learning or judgment, no proof? But you tell us that Iacobus
Capella your fellow-Nouellist says Page 225.
: The Imperial Rescript is either forged by some Gnatho of Pope Leo, or else
forced from the Emperor, by the importanity of Leo himself. Good God! If the
asseueration of a faythlesse man, uttered merely upon spleen and hatred to the Sea Apostolic, may be believed, what may not be called in question? what
though never so false, may not be desended? what never so true, may not be
denied?

Your answer, that when all is done, this Rescript is but a humane
Constitution, cannot avail you: for Valentinian performing the duty of a godly
Emperor, made this humane Constitution, to defend, and mantaine that authority,
which by divine institution was given to S. Peter, and his successors, and
which (witness the Council of Mileuis Aug. Ep. 91.
, is taken from the authority of the holy Scriptures.

But you say Page 225.
: Hilary, notwithstanding the displeasure of Pope Leo, was worthy for singular
sanctity, to be registered in the Roman Martyrologe of Saints. True. King David
also is a Saint, but not for his adultery committed with Bethsabee, nor for his
murdering of Vrias. He is a Saint for his virtuous life before, and his great
penance after the committing of those siunes. So like wise Hilary is a
glorious Saint, canonized not for transgressing the limits of his jurisdiction,
but (says Baronius Anno 445.
for his zeal in the Catholic faith, for his great labors against the
Pelagians, for his pious liberality to the poor, and other his excellent
virtues: and finally, because though for a time defending (as he supposed) the
right of his See, he exceeded the limits of his jurisdiction, yet that served
him for a spur, to return to himself, with greater courage, feruor, and
humility.

And I cannot but marvel at your sharp sight, that in this history can espy
any thing to argue in S. Hilary disobedience to the Pope of Rome. Was his
entrenching upon the privileges of other Bishops, done to oppose his
authority? No. It was (as he supposed) to defend the rights of his own Church.
When he was complained of to the Pope, did he deny his authority? Nay, did he
not of his own accord, go to Rome, to give account of his proceedings to him,
as to his lawful Superior? And when he was convinced of his error, did he show
himself refractary? Did he, not presently return to Arles, desisting from his
claim, and never so much as once opening his mouth, to make any the least
complaint against Leo? If therefore a mist of hatred to the Sea Apostolic had
not obscured your eyes, you would have seen, that as this history of S. Hilary
does no way infringe, but many ways confirm the authority of the Pope; so it
does also show your inconsideration, who to disgrace S. Hilary, report his
offense, but conceal his repentance, yea and deny it; that so he may seem to
have died impenitent, because that fitteth your purpose, and suiteth best with
your spirit, which whether it be good, let the reader judge: for what spirit
can that be, which teaches you to publish the imperfections of the Saints, and
deny their virtues?

CHAP. XXXV. Of Titles attributed to the Pope.
THE Titles given to Popes by the ancient Fathers and Counsels, show, that
their universal jurisdiction was believed, and acknowledged in the primitive
times of the Church. Concerning the titles given them by Councels, you say
nothing, but what has been already answered. One only testimony you add here
Page 237.
of the Counsel of Constantinople under Menas, calling not only the Pope, but
also Menas Patriarch of Constantinople, Oecumenicall Patriarch Act. 5.
, that is to say, Universal. True: but that Title was never given to him nor
to any other Patriarch of Constantinople in the West, but in the East only: and
that not in regard of any universal jurisdiction, which those Patriarchs had
equal with the Pope, but under the Pope, and in respect of the Patriarchs of
the East only, as has been proved See above Chap. 19. sect. 4.
. And the same appears out of the seventh Law of the Code, where Justinian
calls Epiphanius Patriarch of Constantinople, Oecumenicall Patriarch; and yet
in the same Law, he calls the Pope, Head of all the holy Prelates of God. And
Constantine Pogonate in the sixth Council Ep. ad Synod. Apost. in 6. Syn. Act.
18.
, intitles the Pope, Universal Arch-Pastor, and Protothrone of all Patriarchs,
and the rest of the Patriarchs, Synthrones to the Pope.

The testimony of S. Gregory Nazianzen, which here you object Page 236.
as above also you had done Page 140.
, is borrowed out of Salmeron, whose discourse whoeuer pleases to read, will
soon find your dealing to be imposterous, and that you curtall Nazianzens
words to your own aduaritage, leaving out the later part of them.

The Titles attributed by ancient Fathers to the Pope, you seek to elude by
parallells, of equal titles, given to other Bishops. But in vain. 1. For
albeit some of the titles, which anciently were, and are still given to the
Pope, if you regard the sound of the words only, may have been given in some
occasion to other Bishops, yet you prove them not to parallel the Popes
titles, unless you can show, that they were given to any other Bishop, in the
same sense, in which they have been always given to the Pope. Christ said of
himself Joan. 9.6.
, I am the light of the world: And the same title he gave to his Apostles,
saying to them Math. 5.14.
, You are the light of the world. Again he is called a Rock 1. Cor. 10.4.
; and the same title he gave to S. Peter Math. 16.18.
. Lo here parallells like to yours: Behold the same titles, in words, given to
Christ, and his Apostles. But does this prove, that the titles of Rock, and
Light of the world, do equally, and in the same sense agree to Christ and his
Apostles? Do they import the same excellency, and dignity in the Apostles, that
they do in Christ? No: and therefore your disprouing the Popes supremacy by
parallelles of titles, like in words, given to the Pope, and to other Bishops
is mere sophistry: for as the titles of Rock, and Light of the world, if you
regard the sense, import a far greater dignity in Christ, then in his Apostles;
so like wise, though some titles given to the Pope, and to other Bishops, may
be equivalent in words, yet not in sense: for they importe a far greater
dignity in the Pope, then in any other Bishop.

The title of Pastor, may be given to other Bishops, and Priests, but in a
degree far inferior, then to the Pope. He is called, The chief Pastor, Prince
of Pastors, Universal Arch-Pastor, Pastor of all the sheep for which Christ
shed his blood, Pastor that feeds the flock of Christ committed to him,
throughout the whole world, Pastor of our Lords flock, and Governor of the
universal Church, Pastor of the sheep, not of one City, nor of one Country,
but of all the sheep of Christ, without any exception, or limitation See all
this proved above Chap. 14. sect.
. In this sense the name of Pastor was never given to any other Apostle, or
Bishop, but only to S. Peter, and his successors. The rest of the Apostles
(says S. Bernard L. 2. de confideras.
obtained each of them, their peculiar flocks: James contented with Jerusalem,
yieldes the vniuer sality to Peter. And long before him, Eucherius, that famous
and learned Bishop of Lions Hom. in Vigil. S. Pe^.
: Christ first committed to Peter his Lambs, and then his sheep, because he
made him, not only a Pastor, but Pastor of Pastors: Peter therefore feeds the
Lambs, and the sheep; he feeds the young ones, and the dammes: he governs
the subjects and the Prelates, and is therefore Pastor of all; for besides
Lambs, and sheep, there is nothing in the Church. Your evasion Page 243. n. 20.
, that, if by Pastor we understand, curam and studium, care and study, toward
the good of the universal Church, in this all other Bishops are Pastors, as
well as the Pope, is impertinent: for charity obliges not only Bishops, but
every Christian man and woman to have a care and study, toward the good of the
universal Church, according to their abilities. But the Pope is not only bound
to a charitable care and study, as all others are, but by reason of his
Pastoral office, and function, is the guide, and Governor of the universal
Church throughout the whole world. And until you can show the like Pastoral
power, and jurisdiction attributed to any other Bishop, you must confess his
title of Pastor, to be without parallel.

The like has been proved Above Chap. 14. sect. 3.
of his titles of Doctor, of Pope Chap. 23.
, of Vicar of Christ Chap. 14. sect. 2.
, of Apostolical man Chap. 14. sect. 3.
, and Apostolate, applied to his person, and function; and of Apostolical See,
to the Roman Church. Nor is it hard, to prove the same of all the other titles
mentioned by Bellarmine. He is called Father of Fathers, and Prince of Priests;
which titles, though they may, in a true sense, be given to every Patriark, and
Archbishop, in respect of other Bishops subject to them; and to every Bishop,
in respect of the inferior Pastors of his Dioces, yet not in the same sense in
which they are given to the Pope.

In like manner the name of Pontifex, and Summus Pontifex, are sometimes given
to other Bishops, but not as to the Pope: for he is called by the four Primats
of Africa See Spond anno 646. n. 1.
, and their Synods, Pater Patrum, and Summus omnium Praesulum Pontifex, the
Father of Fathers, and the chief Bishop of all Bishops. And Venerable Bede L.
1. hist. Angl. c. 1.
says of S. Gregory, that, in toto orb gerebat Pontificatum, that, his
Episcopal power was over the whole world: which S. Anselm^ also expressed,
dedicating his book, De incarnatione, to Vrbanus Pope with this inscription,
Domino and Patri vniuersae Ecclesiae in terra peregrinantis, Summo Pontifici
Vrbano: To the chief Bishop Vrbanus, Lord and Father of the universal Church
militant on earth. Where do you find any parallel to this title of the Pope?

The like I say, of the title of Rector domus Dei, Ruler or Governor of the
house of God: for albeit each of the Apostles were Rulers and Governors of the
Church (and so S. Andrew is so called in the Collect used on his festival day)
yet the ordinary Episcopal authority, and jurisdiction of none of them, nor of
any other Bishop whatsoever but only of S. Peter, and his successors, extends
to the rule, and Government of the universal Church. For which cause
Valentinian the third intituleth the Pope, Rector of the Universality of
Churches. And both he and Theodosius say Constit. Novel. Tit. 24.
: So the peace of the Church shallbe conserved by all, if the Universality
acknowledge her Rector. And Theodoret being deposed in the second Council of
Ephesus, appealed to Leo Pope, because (says he) Ep. ad Renat.
, The holy Roman See has the stern of government of all the Churches of the
world. Where do you find the title of Ruler or Governor of the Church,
attributed to any other Apostle, or Bishop, in this sense?

The same I say of the title of Head of the Church: for in the Nicen Council
Can. 39. ex Graec. and Arab.
, the B. of Rome is called, Head and Prince of all Patriarchs. The Council of
Sardica Insert. in fragment. Hilar. and citatur
expresses the same in their Epistle to Pope Julius: a Nicol. c. i^ Ep. ad
Episc. Gal.
It is very good and fit, that from all the Provinces, the Bishops have
reference to their Head, that is, to the Sea of the Apostle Peter. In the
Council of Ephesus Part. 2. Act. 2.
, when the Legates of Celestine Pope arrived thither, they gave thanks to the
Fathers there assembled, that, by their holy and religious voices, they had
showed themselves holy members to the blessed Pope, their holy Head. The
Fathers of the Council of Chalcedon In relat ad Leon.
call Leo Pope their Head and themselves his members, and acknowledge him Ibid.
to rule over them, as the Head does over the members. And his Legates in the
same Council said Act. 1.
: We have the commands of the Pope of Rome, who is the Head of all Churches:
and the Council contradicted not, but presently obeyed his commands. S.
Prosper says L. De ingrat. c. 2.
: Rome the Sea of Peter, is made the Head of Pastoral honor to the world,
possessing by religion, what it does not by force of arms: which S. Leo also
expresses saying Sermon. 1. in Nata. Apost. Petri and Pauli.
: Rome by the sacred See of Peter, being made Head of the world, has a larger
extent of government by divine religion, then by earthly dominion. Eugenius B.
of Carthage Vict. Vticen. l. ^.
calls the Roman Church, The Head of all Churches. S. Fulgentius De incarn. and
great c. 11.
, The Top of the world. And Ennodius says Lib de Synod sub Symmacho habit.
: The dignity of the Sea Apostolic is Venerable throughout the whole world,
whiles all the faithful are subject unto it, as being the Head of the whole
body. Justinian intituleth the Pope Cod. Tit. 1. L. 7.
, The Head of all the holy Prelates of God, and, the Head of all Churches. And
the Bishops of the lower Maesia Apud Bin. to 2. page 154.
profess Leo B. of Rome to be, Truly the Head of all Churches.

You answer first Page 242.
, that S. Basil calls Athanasius, Top or crown of the head of all. S. Basil
means not that Athanasius was the top, or head of all, but, omnium nostrum, of
us all, as the Latin translation has, that is to say, of all the Orthodoxe
Pastors, which in those Eastern parts applied themselves to remedy the
calamities of that distracted Church. 2. You say Ibid.
: Cyrill in a Council (the first of Ephesus) is called, The Head of the
assembly. True; he presided in that Council, as Vicar to Pope Celestine, whom
therefore Cyrill, and the whole Council acknowledged to be their Head See above
Chap. 18. sect. 1
. 3. You say Page 243.
: S. Chrysestome calls Antioch, The head City of the whole world. S.
Chrysostom by the whole world, understands not all the nations under heaven,
but the East only, as a little before he had declared, speaking of Flauianus: He
knew well, that the business (of his embassy to the Empetor) was not for one
City, but for all the East: for of all the cities seated in the East, our City
is the Head and mother. If you can show that the Fathers and Counsels, when
they call the Roman Church, The head of all Churches, and the B. of Rome, The
Head of all the holy Prelates of God, explicate themselves to speak of the
West only, or of any part of the world, your answer shall be accepted: but
until then, it shall stand for sophistry, as it is, and you well know it to
be. The rest of your answeares to the titles given to Popes by the ancient
Fathers, are of the same strain: but to dwell in the examination of every
patticular, is a superfluous labor, especially the supreme authority of the
Bishop, and Church of Rome, being vnanswearably proved, by the Titles, which I
have declared.

But you object Page 258.
, that of later times, blasphemous titles are given to the Popes by their
Parasites, and swallowed up by them, as their spirit, and vital breath. I
cannot but marvel, that a man of your learning, years, and calling, should
make such objections in good earnest, which consist merely, in your own
violent wresting of words, contrary to the sense, and meaning of them that
spoke them, and contrary (I dare say) to your own knowledge: for you cannot be
so simple, as to think, that those titles were ever given to any Pope, in that
sense, in which you misconstrue them. But your good will to the Bishop, and
Church of Rome, is such, that so you may make them hateful to your readers, you
regard not how you delude them, nor how you wrong our Authors.

First then, the Pope is called, Sponsus Ecclesiae, The bridegroom of the
Church. This title you except against Page 246.251.
, as blasphemous, because the Church Joan. 3.29.
is called, The Spouse of Christ. But why may not the name of Bridegroom,
which is one of the titles of Christ, without blasphemy and without wrong to
Christ, be given to his Vicar on earth, in an inferior degree, as the name of
Light of the world (another of his titles) is without blasphemy or wrong to
him, given to his Apostles Math. 5.14.
? Shall we think, that 500. Reverend Bishops in the second General Council
of Lions C. vbi peric. De elect. in 6.
blasphemed, when they approved that title unto the Pope? Shall Doctor Morton
now after 350. years, come to control them, and teach them how to speak? But
you ask Page 246.
, how S. Bernard did like of this divinity? He (say you) writing unto Pope
Eugenius admonishes him not to call himself the Bridegroom of the Church,
which is the spouse of Christ; for, says he, Nemo committit sponsam suam
Vicario: No man will commit his spouse to his Vicar, Can there be a more
wilful falsification? S. Bernard has no such words: They are yours, and
directly contrary to S. Bernards words and Doctrine, who in that very Epistle
Ep. 237.
, says to Eugenius, Tibi commissa est Domini tui sponsa, The spouse of thy
Lord is committed to thee. And to Innocentius Pope Ep. 191.
: To thee is committed the spouse of Christ: thou art a friend of the
Bridegroom: It belongs to thee, to present a chaste Virgin, to one man Christ.
In what sense therefore S. Bernard admonished Eugenius Ep. 237.
to call the beloved spouse of Christ, Princess, and not my Princess, these
passages of his give sufficiently to be understood, and our authors have
declared See Bellar. l. 2. de Pont. c. 31.
. Nor can this divinity seem strange to any man that is a Diuinor for although
there be but one chief Bridegroom of the Church, which is Christ, and in
respect of him, all Bishops are but Paranymphes, and friends of the
Bridegroom, yet who knows not (what Demetrius B. of Bulgaria writing to
Constantinus Cabasilas, has rightly observed) that as in carnal marriage the
Bridegroom by a ring weddeth himself to his Bride, so a Bishop has a ring
given unto him, to signify the spiritual marriage between him, and his Church.
And as every particular Bishop, without any wrong to Christ, is a Bridegroom
of his particular Church under Christ, cooperating extrinsecally with him, to
beget children unto him, by preaching his word, and administering his
Sacraments, so likewise in the same sense, the Pope is Bridegroom of the
universal Church, and she his spouse, without any wrong to Christ. 2. You
object Page 251.
out of Bzouius; Innocentius the eight was called by Abrahamus Polonus, Regno
and unction Christus prae participibus sui^: In Royalty, and unction Christ
above his fellows. This title also you will have to be blasphemous, because S.
Paul Heb. 1.9.
gives that name to Christ. But what then say you to S. Bernard, who L. 2. de
consider at.
calls Eugenius Pope, Peter in power, in Unction Christ? Did he not know how to
speak? Did he blaspheme? And if he did not, why do you misinterpret Polonus
his words, who spoke in the same sense S. Bernard did?

3. You object Page 251.
; The Orator of the Venetians called Paul the second, Celestial Majesty. But
what say you to Bassianus B. of Ephesus, who in his petition to the Emperors
Valentinian, and Martian In Conc. Chalced. Act. 11.
, says: I cast my self at your Divine feet, quatenus dignetur Vestra
caelestis Potestas etc. that your celestial Power may vouchsafe to write to
the Council etc. Et vestram Diuinitatem exoro, And I beseech your Divinity
etc. What to that learned Doctor Theodorus Studites and his fellow Regulars
saying In Ep. ad Michael. Imper.
to Michael the Emperor, If your divine Magnificence seem to doubt of any
thing, or not to believe, the declaration is piously to be required from the
Pope. What to the Bishops of the Council of Mopsuestia saying Ep. ad Vigil.
to Vigilius Pope: The things which concern the state of the Churches, are to
be referred to your Divinely honored Blessedness? Did not these men know, how
to speak? Or will you presume to charge them with blasphemy? Wherefore, as they
by Celestial power, by Divinity, and Divine Magnificence, did not understand
the increated power and Majesty of Almighty God, but the great dignity, and
power given by him to Emperors, and Popes upon earth; so if you had not been
minded to cavil, and spend paper in obiecting silly sophismes, instead of
solid Arguments, you might have known, that the Venetian Orator, by the title
of Celestial Majesty given to the Pope, understood nothing else, but the great
power and dignity of supreme Governor of Gods Church, given him from heaven.

4. You object Page 251.
; Galbus Ambassador of France, called Pius the fourth, The voice, and oracle of
Truth, proper to Christ, who says, I am the truth. So likewise Christ says
Joan. 9.6.
, I am the light of the world: does he therefore blaspheme, that calls the
Apostles, and Doctors of the Church, lights of the world? This Sir is not to
argue, but to trifle. If it be blasphemy, to call the Roman Church, or the
definitions of the B. of Rome. The oracle of truth: what think you of 289.
Bishops assembled in the sixth Council general Act. 8. and 18.
, calling the Epistle of Agatho Pope, The suggestion of the holy Ghost,
dictated by the mouth of S. Peter, Prince of the Apostles? And what of the
Bishops of France, who speaking to Leo Pope of the instructions of faith which
he had sent them, said Inter Ep. Leonis post Ep. 51.
: From the Sea Apostolic, spring forth still the Oracles of the Apostolical
spirit? which what are they, but Oracles of truth? for the Apostles were
penmen of the holy Ghost, and guided by the spirit of truth. And why did the
Council of Mileuis say Aug. Ep. 92.
, that God rules the Pope in his consultations of faith? And why S. Augustine
speaking of the Roman chair Ep. 166^
, that Christ in the chair of unity, has placed the doctrine of Verity? And
why did Christ assure S. Peter, that his successors shall not fail in their
definitions of faith See this proved above Chap. 12. sect. 1. and 2.
, but because the definitions of the Sea Apostolic are of truth?

5. If an orator of Portugal, speaking of the dignity of the B. of Rome,
called it, A dignity above all Principalities, and Powers; why may not you
understand, that he uses that manner of speech, to profess, that so great a
dignity has not been conferred on any other, either Man, or Angel? Which if
to you it be Blasphemy, is to Orthodoxall people, a certain Truth: for to be
the supreme Vicar of Christ on earth, and govern or of the universal Church,
is a dignity, that has been given to no man, nor Angel, but only to S. Peter,
and his successors.

6. If Bellarmine Cont. de Romans Pont. Praefat.
called Sixtus Quintus, The Cornerstone in Sion, proved, precious, and chief
foundation, what was it else to say, but as Christ said to S. Peter, and in him
to his successors, that he was the Rock, and foundation of the Church,
signified by Sion? and that whereas, the rest of the Apostles are secondary
foundations, Peter and his successors are in that rank the chiefest, and next
unto Christ, and therefore in a secondary sense participate with him, and as his
Vicars, the title of Cornerstone in Sion?

7. You bid us, stop our ears Page 25^.
, that we may not hear Stapleton call Gregory the thirteenth, Supremum in
terris Numen, which you english, Power, Might, and Majesty of God on earth. But
you must be put to your Grammar again, to learn, that Numen does not only
signify the increated power and Majesty of God, but any great earthly Power:
why else did Cicero say Philip. 3.
. Magna est vis, magnum Numen, vnum and idem sentientis Senatus? And why did
Justinian say, Authen. ad Joan. Pap. Vt Eccles. Romans
Necessarium duximus fontem Sacerdotij speciali nostri Numinis lege sancire?
Stapleton therefore blasphemes not, but you falsify, obtruding for his sense,
your own ignorance of grammar, or (which is worse) your wilful
misconstruction of his words.

8. You object Page 252.
that the Gloss calls the Pope, Our Lord God the Pope. This is a malicious
cavil: for the word Deus, God, is not in the Roman copy; not in the ancient
edition of Paris, anno 1522. by Thielman Keruer, Printer to that famous
University; nor in the edition of Turin per Nicolaum Beuilaquam anno 1520. Only
I find it in the Parisian edition of the year 1585. which has no name of
printer, and therefore gives cause of suspicion, that it is of an heretical
printer: or if he were a Catholic, why may it not be thought to be an error in
the print, or that, whereas the Pope is sometimes called, Dominus Dominus noster
Papa, and in the second place Dominus for breuity sake, is wont to be expressed
only by the letter D, the Printer thinking that Dominus was not to be repeated
twice, for Dominus in the second place, said Deus? But to give you your
greatest advantage, let the edition be Catholic, let the words be, as you
object them: must you presently cry blasphemy, and bid us stop our ears? Does
not Deus often signify an earthly dignity? Did not David Psalm. 81.1.
call Magistrates, Gods, when he said, God stood in the assembly of Gods, and
in the midst iudgath Gods? Did not God himself Exodus 7.1.
call Moses, the God of Pharao? Did not Christ say Joan. 10.35.
to all that are his children by grace, You are all Gods? Did not Constantine
the Great L. 1. hist. c. 2.
speaking to the Bishops of the Nicen Council, say. You are constituted Gods
by the true God, and therefore end your strefes among your selves; for it is not
fit, that Gods should be judged us us? And did not S. Gregory L. 4. ep. 31.
, alleging this testimony of Constantine, add unto it, that God himself in
the holy Scripture has honored Priests with the name of Gods? And did not our
late Sovereign King James say Praefat. monit.
that Kings are Gods upon earth? Did he, or any of the other here named,
blaspheme? I suppose you will not presume to lay so foul an aspersion on the^:
or if you do, we shall make bold to tell you that you blaspheme, whiles in your
late Sermon preached at Durham before his Majesty, you call Kings Mortal Gods.

If then the name of God, may not only without blasphemy, but in a true,
Catholic, and pious sense, be given to all Kings, to all Magistrates, to all
Bishops, to all Priests, to all Gods adoptiue Children; shall it be blasphemy
only to give it to the chief of all Priests, to the Bishop of Bishops? Did S.
Bernard blaspheme L. 2. de confiderat.
, when he called Eugenius Pope, The God of Pharao, as God called Moses? Did
Ladislaus, that famous King of Hungary, blaspheme when he called Nicolas the
fifth, A God upon earth Orat. ad Nicol. 5.
? Acknowledge then, that this your objection is an imposterous cavil against
the Bishop and Church of Rome, or rather a calumny invented to mantaine a bad
cause, which with other Arguments you cannot uphold.

CHAP. XXXVI. The nullity of Doctor Mortons answeares, to the testimonies of
ancient Fathers, discovered.
SECT. I. Some of his Answeares examined.
WHAT has been produced hitherto, out of antiquity, conuincingly proves the
universal Authority, and Jurisdiction of the B. of Rome, to have been
acknowledged from the beginning by all the Catholics of the world. Here you
undertake to answer the testimonies of ancient Fathers, alleged by
Bellarmine, but perform it not. Some of them you pass over, not only without
answer, but without any mention of them; as of Valentinian the Emperor.
Venerable Bede, S. Anselme, Hugo de S. Victore, and S. Bernard, whom yet Calvin
L. 4. instit. c. 7.. 22.
cites for himself, and acknowledges to be a Saint.

2. To the testimonies of S. Ignatius, and Irenaeus, you answer, but satisfy
not, as has been proved Chap. 15. sect. 5. and 6.
. And the like has been showed of your answeares to the testimonies of S.
Basil Chap. 34. sect. 4.
and Justinian Chap. 30. sect. 5.
the Emperor.

3. Of S. Prosper you say Page 270. fin. 271. init.
: His meaning might have been better known, if he had written in prose, and
not assumed unto him the liberty of a Poet. But who sees not this to be a mere
shift, void of truth? for as in verse he said L. De ingrat. c. 2.
, Now Rome the great Apostle Peter's seat,
Head of Pastoral Honor here below;
Has by fayths Empire made her self more great,
then she by all her armed powers could grow:
So likewise he said in prose De vocat. gentium c. 16.
; The sovereignty of the Apostolical Priesthood has made Rome greater by the
Tribunal of religion, then by the Throne of Power. Bellarmine alleges both
the one, and the other; as well in prose, as in verse. But because both of them
are unanswerable, you under color, that the one is in verse, reject S.
Prosper, as fabulous in both: for the liberty which Poets assume unto them, is
to report fables instead of truths. This is the reverence, you bear to that
holy and renowned Father: and such the solutions, wherewith you shift off the
testimonies of antiquity; and yet bear your Readers in hand, that you believe
as they believed.

4. The B. of Patara in Licia Liberat. in Breu. c. 22.
, upon the banishment of Pope Siluerius, represented to the Emperor Justinian
the judgment of God, upon the expulsion of the Bishop of so great a Seat,
saying: There are many Kings in the world, but not one of them, as the Pope,
who is Head over the Church of the whole world. You answer Page 156.
Liberatus, who reported this history, was an author deceived by heretics, and
believed not himself, what he reported for the Pope. Give us any one author
that excepted against this relation of Liberatus before your self, or that
said, he himself beliued not, what he reported for the Pope? If it shall be
lawful for you to reject testimonies of antiquity upon no other ground, but
because they are against your self, what authority may not with such answeares
be eluded? You know this not to satisfy, and therefore have invented another,
that this Greek Author must be taken in the Greek sense of Primacy of order.
This satisfies as little as the former: for the B. of Patara compares the
spiritual authority of the Pope, with the temporal of Kings, protesting that
no King has temporal power over all the Kingdoms of the earth, as the Pope
has spiritual over the Church of the wholeworld. Again, that the Popes
Primacy in the Greek sense is not Primacy of jurisdiction, but of Order only,
is said gratis, and untruly. The Greek Fathers in the Council of Chalcedon
spoke in the Greek sense, and yet they acknowledged In relat. ad Leon.
the Pope to be their Head, and to rule over them, at the Head does over the
members. Theodoret spoke in the Greek sense, when he said In Ep. ^^ Renat.
. The Sea of Rome has the stern of government, over all the Churches of the
world. Theodosius spoke in the Greek sense Constable. ^. Nouel. The 24.
, when he called the Pope, Rector of the universality of Churches. This
therefore is the Greek sense, and in this sense the B. of Patara spoke to
Justinian.

5. S. Epiphanius Haeres. 58.
reports, that Vrsacius and Valens Bishops, and chief sticklers of the
Arians, touched with remorse for their treachery against Athanasius, went up to
Rome, and presenting libels of penance to Julius Pope, craved pardon for their
offense, and promised to stand to his judgment: which shows, that they
acknowledged him to be the Head and Judge of Bishops. This testimony though set
down in your Latin margent, curtalled Page 254.
, yet in your English you make no mention of it, but pretending to answer by
a similitude, tell us a tale of a tubbe of A. R. in the County of Suffolk
craving pardon of the Sheriff of Middelsex for a notorius offense done unto
him. But (to omit that hereby the English reader can have no notice at all of
the force of this testimony) your answer is nether similitude, nor solution,
but petitio principij, a false supposition, that Vrsacius, and Valens asked
pardon of Julius for a notorious offense done unto him. Their offense was not
against Julius, but against Athanasius: and yet of this offense, they asked
pardon of Julius, because they knew that to him, as to the Head of the Church,
it belonged to remedy the disorders of the Church; and that as he had power to
punish them for their offense, so he had also to pardon them, upon their
submission, and promise of amendment, which to that end they made.

6. No less impertinent is the other flimflam, which you add Page 254.
, as an answer, to the testimony of Dionysius Alexandrinus, of two Gentlemen,
the one being a Justice of peace, agreeing to have their difference to be
ordered by another Justice of peace: for when Dionysius Patriarch of
Alexandria, was fallen into suspicion of heresy Athanas. de sent. Dion. Et de
Sin. Arim. and Seleuc.
, the Catholics of Alexandria went up to Rome to accuse him before the Pope:
The Pope admonished him to clear himself; and he obeying, presently sent up a
book of defense* and apology: which shows that both the people and Patriarch
of Alexandria acknowledged that the cause of Bishops, and of faith were to be
tried at the Popes tribunal: and that the Pope knew himself to have, and
practiced the same authority.

7. Not unlike to these, are the answeares you give to S. Athanasius Page 254.
, S. Chrysostom, Page 255.
and Theodoret, who being iniustly deposed from their Bishoprics appealed to
to Julius, Innocentius, and Leo Popes with manifest acknowledgment of their
authority over all Bishops and Churches of the world, as shall be proved.

SECT. II. Others of Doctor Mortons Answeares, to the ancient Fathers,
examined.
SOme Eastern Bishops, who with great scandal of the Church, and perturbation
of the people, refused to insert the name of Chrysostom into the Dyptikes, or
tables of public records, were for that cause excommunicated by Innocentius,
with command, that they should not be admitted into the peace, and communion of
the Roman Church, until they restored him. This though it be an Argument of
the supreme power of the B. of Rome, you wrest it to a contrary sense.

Among them, that refused to restore the name of Chrysostom were, Alexander
Patriarch of Antioch, and Acacius Bishop of Beroe: but these two, to the end
they might be admitted into the Communion of the Roman Church, restored his
name, and performed what else Innocentius in joined them Spond. anno 408. n. 11.
. Of these two you are silent: they were not for your purpose. But because some
others stood out for a time, you lay hold on them, who upon due examination
will prove as little to your purpose, as the two you conceal.

Your first example Page 258.259.
is of Theophilus Patriarch of Alexandria, who stood out until the end of his
life. But God, that would not have a man so well deserving of his Church, to
die in the state of excommunication, ordained by his providence, that the soul
of Theophilus could not depart out of his body, until an Image of S.
Chrysostom being brought unto him, he adored it, doing penance for his former
error, and by that means restored himself to the peace of the Church. This
his recantation is reported by Isidorus Diaconus, and out of him by S. John
Damascen L. 3. de imag. prope fin.
. Wherefore your denial of it, is a falsity framed without ground by your
self, out a desire, that Theophilus should have died out of the Communion of
the Roman Church, as you live.

Your second example Page 257.
, is of Atticus Patriarch of Constantinople, who being excommunicated for the
same cause, persisted sometime in his error: but at length moved by the example
of Theophilus, and Maximianus a Bishop of Macedonia making intercession for him
Baron. anno 408.
, Innocentius yielded to absolve him; provided, that he would himself ask
absolution, and restore the name of Chrysostom. Hereupon Atticus (witness
Theodoret L. 5. hist. c. 34.
sent many embassages to Rome, to obtain the communion of Innocentius, but
could never obtain it, until partly by persuasion of the Emperor, and partly
fearing a tumult of the people, he restored the name of Chrysostom, and writ
letters to Cyrill B. of Alexandria, persuading him to do the like. Wherefore
Baronius truly says Anno 425.
, that Atticus restored Chrysostom by the command and compulsion of
Innocentius, and not by the distraction and tumultuosnesse of the people only,
as you comment: for if he feared the tumult of the people, it was in regard the
people were incensed against him for not restoring Chrysostom, as Innocentius
had commanded. And if (as you object Page 258.
he called two Bishops, that had died in the communion of the Roman Church,
Schismatikes, he spoke in passion, seeing himself excommunicated by the B. of
Rome, and knew (as you also do) that he spoke untruly: for if it were thought
Schism to be in the communion of the Roman Church (as you say he did,) why did
he so earnestly desire, and send so many Embassages, to be admitted into her
communion? Was is to make himself a Schismatike? Nay was it not to free
himself from schism? Why do not you imitate him?

Your third example Page 259.260.261.
is of Cyrill Patriarch of Alexandria, who if for a time he obeyed not
Innocentius, in restoring the name of Chrysostom, it was because he judged the
command of Innocentius to be against the Canons, witness his own words
alleged by your self Page 259. fin.
. But his judgment was erroneous: and because what he did, was out of a pious
zeal, as he conceived, God reduced him by a miraculous Vision, wherein he saw
himself cast out of the Church by Chrysostom, and a troop of Saints that
assisted him therein; but that the Blessed Virgin Mary did make intercession for
him, as one that had defended her honor against Nestorius. Cyrill moved with
this vision, condemning his own judgment concerning Chrysostom, and calling a
Provincial Synod restored his name to the sacred records, as the other
Patriarchs had done.

To this you make two replies: first Page 261.
you call this, A tale of Nicephorus, a fabulous Author, that lived 800. years
after Cyrills death. But you wrong Nicephorus: for he reports it out of
Nicetas, that lived almost 500. years, nearer Cyrills time, then himself, and
out of other ancient historians. Hoc (says he L. 14. c. 28.
in arcana Nicetae Philosophi historia, and apud alios inueni.

2. You reply Page 261.
, that, Cyrills restoring Chrysostom cannot any whit serve our turn, because
he did not simply by submission to the Popes decree, but by virtue of a Vision
in a dream. Surely you seem to have been in a dream, when you devised this
answer: for there cannot be a greater Argument of the Popes authority, then
that God by a miraculous vision, should notify to Cyril, that by reason of his
resistance made to the decree of Innocentius, he was out of the Church. And in
how great Veneration did Cyrill hold the B. of Rome; he (I say) that being
greatly exasperated against other Bishops for the name of Chrysostom, yet
never let slip from his mouth any the least irreuerent word against
Innocentius? And who can be ignorant, that he firmly believed the supreme
authority of the Roman See, when he presided in the Council of Ephesus, as
Vicar to Celestine Pope See above Chap. 18. sect. 1.
? Without whose order, as he durst not depart from the Communion of Nestorius,
so he executed on his person punctually, what Celestine commanded. And finally
his belief was, that salvation cannot be had out of the Roman Church See above
Chap. 1. sect. 4.
.

SECT. III. Doctor Mortons Answer to the testimony of Acacius examined.
A Cacius Patriarch of Constantinople writing to Simplicius Pope, professed,
that the care of all Churches belonged to him. You answer Page 161. fin. 162.
: The universal care of all Churches was applied to S. Paul, in the days of
Peter, and to other Bishop, in whom there was no Monarchical Popedom. This
satisfies not: for the universal care of all Churches may be of Charity only:
this every Bishop, and every Christian is bound to have, according to the
measure of his ability. Or it may be of Justice: and such is the care or
charge, which every Bishop has of his own Dioces, and the Pope of the
Universal Church: for to him by reason of his office of supreme Pastor,
belongs not only a charitable care, but the rule and government of the
universal Church See this proved Chap. 17. sect. 2. Chap. 19. sect. 3.
. In this sense Acacius spoke, when he said Ep. ad Simplic.
, Simplicius Pope had the care of all Churches. And the Fathers evermore speak
in this sense, when they say, that to Peter, and his Successors in the Sea of
Rome, was committed the care of the universal Church. In this sense S.
Chrysostom said Hom. 87. in Joan.
: The care of the whole world was committed to Peter: and what he means by
Care, he explicateth saying Hom. 80. ad pop.
: The government of the Church throughout the whole world was committed to
Peter. Euthymius Ad c. 21. Joan.
: Christ committed to Peter pascendi curam, and gubernationem, the care of
feeding, and governing his flock. So Sozomenus L. 3. c. 7.
: Julius Pope restored to their seats Athanasius, and other Bishops banished
by the Arians, because the care of all belonged to him by reason of the dignity
of his See. S. Leo speaking to Anastasius B. of Thessalonica Ep. 84.
, and making him his Vicar in the East, To the end (says he) thou may
supply the place of my government, and help me in that care, which by divine
institution I owe to all Churches, and in person visit those Provinces remote
from the Sea Apostolic. And to Anatolius Patriarch of Constantinople Ep. 46.
: If they who have so grievously offended against Flauianus, offer
satisfaction, let relation thereof be made to the Sea Apostolic, that our
solicitude may ordain, what is to be observed. S. Gregory L. 4. ep. 32.
: To all that know the Gospel, it is manifest, that by the voice of our Lord
the Care and Princedome of the whole Church was committed to Peter Prince of
the Apostles. And again L. 7. ep. 70. indict. 2.
: By the care of our undertaken government, we are enforced to extend with
vigilance, the solicitude of our office. S. Bernard Sermon. 3. de 7. misericord.
frag.
: Witness Peter, to whom the Pastoral care of the whole Church was committed.

These and a thousand more testimonies convince, that when the ancient Fathers
speak of the care of all Churches committed to the B of Rome, by Care, they
understand the Pastoral charge and obligation of ruling and governing the
Universal Church, and thereby condemn you of falsity, who to the testimony of
Victor V^iconsis, calling the Roman Church, the Head of all Churches, answer
Page 271.
, that he calls it not Head of all Churches in power, and jurisdiction; and
that we could never prove this out of any ancient Father: for you have heard it
proved by their most express and vnanswearable words Above Chap. 17. sect. 2.
Chap. 19. sect. 3.
. If the fore to express this universal authority, and jurisdiction of the
Pope over all Churches, they use sometimes the word, Care, rather then
Government, it is because (as S. Chrysostom Hom. 3. in Act.
speaking of the Pastoral authority of S. Peter over the other Apostles, has
noted) Eminency of spiritual power is a care of subjects, not a Lord-like
dominion.

And this shows the wrong you do to Costerus Page 235.
when to disprove the Popes universal jurisdiction you allege him calling it,
Care: for with what conscience could you possess your reader, that by Care he
understands not power, and jurisdiction, but only a charitable solicitude,
knowing (as you do) that in the same Chapter E^chirid. Tract. de Pont. solut. 7.
he proves out of Scripture, and Fathers, the Pastoral charge of ruling and
governing the universal Church, committed by Christ to S. Peter, and his
Successors? He that reads this in Costerus, and alleges him for the
contrary, what can his intention be, but to deceive his readers?

You Page 262.
object Acacius his deeds full of pride and arrogance against the Roman
Church, so that Baronius ( for his defending Peter Mogg by him established in
the Bishopric of Alexandria against the will of the same Pope Simplicius)
calls him a Francirke man violently opposite unto the Bishop of Rome. I
answer: that Acacius, so long as he continued Catholic, did both by word and
deed acknowledge the supreme authority of the Roman Bishop: but it is gross
ignorance in you, not to know, that afterward he fell to be Euagr. lib. 3. c.
20. Liberatus in Breu. c 18. Niceph. l. 16. c. 17. Spondom. An. 484.488.
a stiff mantayner of the Entychian Heretics, namely of Peter Mogg in those
days the chief defender, pillar and Patriarch of that damnable Sect: for
which cause he was excommunicated by the Pope, and dying obstinate in his
sin, his name was blotted out of the Dyptiches, even Spond. An. 51^.
with the consent of the Bishops of Constantinople his successors; whereby we
learn this lesson, that men so long as they be Orthodoxe Christians, still
honor and obey the Pope and Roman Church; so they are no sooner blasted with
the spirit of heresy, but they become Frantike opposers thereof, as your Luther
was.

And whereas to make men believe, that this Acacius was of great authority and
esteem, even in the Latin Church, you bid us remember Page 263.
that the two Patriarchs Cyrill and Acacius were they that sent the Copies of
the Canons of Nice unto the African Bishops, by which our Popes were convinced
of fraud etc. We can remember no such matters but wonder how a man so learned
as you would be thought, could be so childishly mistaken, seeing Acacius was
made Patriarch in the year 472. that is, forty eight years after the sending
of the Nicen Canons to the African Bishops; the Copies whereof (sent by Atticus,
not by Acacius) to have been imperfect, wherein many Canons were wanting, we
have already demonstrated.

As for the decree and sanction of Leo Emperor in behalf of the Church of
Constantinople, and Acacius the then Patriarch thereof, wherein he terms the
Church of Constantinople, the mother of all Christians of the Orthodox
Religion; whatsoever might be the meaning of these words in Acacius (who moved
the Emperor to make that decree) his ambitious conceits which Baronius
censureth; yet according to the mind of the Godly Emperor, they import no
more, then Mother of all Orthodoxe Christians in the Church of Constantinople,
as is clear by the text, Mother (says he) unto our Piety, and unto all
Orthodoxe Christians, and of this Royal City the most sacred See. You make
the Emperor say Page 263.
. the Mother of all Orthodoxall Churches, noting the words in a distinct
letter, as the very phrase of his Sanction manifestly against his meaning. For
in that very Sanction, or Decree, he declares, that the cause that moved him
to publish it, was to disanull the attentats, and Innonations against the
Venerable Churches, as well those whereof the Patriarch Acacius has the
Priesthood, as those placed in other sundry Provinces; which second part, about
other Churchs and Provinces, you Page 26^.
leave out in your Marginal Latin, to deceive the Reader, in making him to
think, that Constantinople is styled absolutely Mother of all Orthodoxall
Churches; that thereby you may more colourably elude the like Titles,
attributed unto the Roman Church. So as nothing is related, or alleged by you
without fraudulency and falsehood.

SECT. IV. Doctor Mortons Answer to Vincentius Lyrinensis confuted.
VIncentius to prove, that the Latin Churches agreed in Doctrine, with the
Churches of the East, produces as witnesses, Felix and Julius Popes, calling
them the Head of the world, and S. Cyprian and S. Ambrose, The sides of the
world. You to put off this testimony, offer violence to Vincentius his words
Page 271.
, interpreting him to mean, by Head of the world, not the Bishop, but the City
of Rome. But knowing this to be a false comment, you add as a second answer
Ibid.
, that if he understood the B. of Rome to be the Head of the Catholic Church,
we must also believe, that Cyprian of Carthage, and Ambrose of Milan, were
always to continue the sides of the Catholic Church. This we deny: for the
Churches of Charthage and Milan, have no promise from Christ, that the gates of
Hell shall not prevail against them, nor that their faith shall not fail, as
the Roman has See above Chap. 1. sect. 1. and 2.
.

But to bolster up one falsity with another, you say Page 271.
: If Lyrinensis, by Head of the world, understood the Ecclesiastical Orb, he
cold mean no more* then that the Pope is Head of the Western part thereof. But
this has been already disproued See Chap. 17. sect. 2. Chap. 19. sect. 3.
Chap. 3^.
by the testimonies of Counsels, and Fathers, Greek, and Latin, directly
affirming, that the B. of Rome is Head of all Churches, and faithful
whatsoever, throughouth the whole world; and that his spiritual power extends
even to them, whom the temporal forces of Rome could never subdue. And to go
no further for proofs, Lyrinensis himself declared this Cap. 9.10.11.
, when he said, that all Priests in all places made resistance to the doctrine
of Rebaptization defended by Agrippinus, and Cyprian, but Stephen B of Rome
more then the rest, thinking it reason to excel all others in devotion toward
the faith, so much as he was superior to them in the authority of his place.
And what else does he throughout that whole Treatise, but declame against you,
who have brought novelties into the Church, contrary to that ancient truth
which you found in it when Luther began, and when (as Calvin professes) you
made a separation from the whole world.

SECT. V. Doctor Morton, in his Answer to Optatus, contradicts himself.
OPtatus proves the Roman Church to be the Catholic Church, by the succession
of Bishops in the chair of Rome, numbering them all from S. Peter to Siricius
that lived in his time L. 2. cont. Parmen.
, and defines all them to be schismatikes, and sinners, that are separated
from the communion of that only singular chair. You answer Page 269.
, that Optatus, by One chair meant not the particular chair of Rome, but the
whole universal Church. But the contrary is evident: for he reckons not the
succession of Bishops in any other Church, but only in the Roman, and says L.
2. cont. Parmen.
, that the Episcopal chair was set up in Rome for Peter, to the end, that in
that chair unity might be preserved to all, and that he might be a
schismatike, and a sinner, that against this only chair should set up another.
What expression can be more effectual to prove you to be a schismatike, and a
sinner, then these words of Optatus, who condemned the Donatists Ibid.
of bold and sacrilegious presumption, for fighting against this Chair of
Peter, as you do.

But you reply Page 269.
: The particular Church of Rome is but a portion of the universal Church, and
therefore Optatus obiecteth against the Donatists their want of union with the
Churches of Asia, commended by S. John in the Revelation, as well as with Rome.
This you repeat afterward again Page 273.
, and had objected the same before Page 100. 101. 229. 230.
. Your answer you have received already Chap. 15. sect. 9. Chap. 34. sect. 8.
, to which I add, that as he who should object to rebels their want of union
with their Prince, and his loyal subjects, does not thereby deny the supreme
authority of the Prince over all the subjects of his dominions: so Optatus
obiecting to the rebellious Donatists, the want of union with the Roman Church,
and other Orthodoxall Churches of Asia subject to her, does not thereby deny her
authority over all the Churches of the world.

But you say Page 270.
: Rome having departed from the sincerity of the Apostolical profession (as
Asia has done) the departure from that, must dissolve necessity of Union with
Rome. You grant then that the Asians have fallen from the Apostolical
profession, as Rome has done: and Rome (if we believe you) has fallen so far,
that her doctrine is false, impious, heretical, blasphemous, damnable,
sacrilegious, Antichristian, Satanicall etc. Ergo the Asians having fallen from
the Apostolical profession, as Rome has done, their doctrine is also
damnable, heretical, blasphemous, Satanicall etc. And yet afterward you say
Page 407.
the Asians have continued visible parts of the Catholic Church, and
Protestants stand in Christian unity with them. I conclude therefore, that when
it is for your purpose, the Asians are truly professed Christians, and parts
of the Catholic Church, and Protestants stand in Christian Union with them:
and when it is not for your purpose, they have fallen from the sincerity of the
Apostolical profession, as Rome has done: from whence it must follow, that it
is as unlawful to be in union with them, as with Rome, whose doctrine to you
is Heretical, blasphemous etc.

SECT. VI. Other untruths of Doctor Morton discovered, and his cauilling
against the Title of Holiness given to the Pope.
YOu set down Page 273.
this Thesis as of Bellarmine: When the Fathers say, that the Church of Rome
cannot err, the word (cannot) is not to be taken absolutely, and simply, but
with this cantion, so long as the Apostolical See continues at Rome. This is
not a Thesis of Bellarmine, but of a few other Deuines, who hold that S. Peter
fixed his See at Rome not by divine ordination, but by his own free election:
and therefore that if the Successors of S. Peter should remove their See from
Rome, the Roman Church in that case might err. This opinion (says Bellarmine
L. 4. de Pont. c. 4.
is not heretical, nor manifestly erroneous: but he holds and proves the
contrary, namely, that the Sea of S. Peter was fixed at Rome by especial
command from Christ, and cannot be removed from thence, and therefore that when
the Fathers say, The Roman Church cannot err, the word (cannot) is to be taken
simply and absolutely, without the caution which you falsely ascribe to him. You
add Page 273.
Bellarmine should have said with you, that the Roman Church cannot err, so
long as the ancient and sincere faith is preserved at Rome, which is to say,
that she cannot err, as long as she erres not. Bellarmine was of more
judgment, then to prove idem per idem.

But you say Page 276.
: The list of all the Fathers which Bellarmine in the strength of his learning,
and judgment has produced to guard, and defend the Monarchy of the Church and
B. of Rome, is, of the Greek Fathers, but thirteen, and of the Latin, not
above eleven, within the space of the first 600. years. This is notoriously
untrue: for in the two Chapters immediately preceding, he produces the
testimonies of above 1340. Fathers in the four first General Counsels, and
that under Menas: and of 26. Popes, the greater part of them, glorious Martyrs,
and the rest holy Confessors, as S. Julius, S. Damasus, S. Siricius, S.
Zozimus, S. Innocentius, S. Leo, S. Gelasius, S. Gregory. Were not all these
Fathers, that lived within the first 600. years, which you call the primitive
times? But what if Bellarmine had produced no more, but thirteen Greek, and
eleauen Latin Fathers? Does not Cardinal Baronius throughout his learned
Annals? Does not Iodocus Coccius To. 1. thesau. l. 7. art. 4.5.6.7.8.
? Do not Doctor Sanders Visic. Monar. tot. and Clau. David. tot.
, and other Catholic writers produce testimonies of Popes, Counsels, and of
the most religious Emperors, and Kings, that have lived since Christ, in great
numbers, all of them professing their belief of the universal jurisdiction of
the Pope, and necessity of union with the Church of Rome? Why do not you
subscribe to so great a cloud of witnesses, rather then to Martin Luther, and a
few Sectaries broaching Nouellisme, and opposing all Orthodoxe antiquity?

Lastly to close up your answers to the Fathers, you produce Tertullian Page
277.
after his defection into Montanisme calling the Pope, The blessed Pope, and
the chief Bishop of Bishops; but that he did it by Irony, and scorn. So
indeed says Massonius a forbidden author. But be it true, that he spoke it by
Irony: yet that very manner of speech shows, it was then the custom of the
faithful, to give those titles to the Pope. If Tertullian called him so by
Irorny, and scorn, it was because he was an heretic. And so you imitating
him, cavil at us, for instiling the Pope, Your Holiness: which title say you
Ibid.
being first given to Pope Leo, for his Holiness sake, and sanctity of life,
is continued to Popes, who have been most wicked, and retained only in respect
of their functions. The case is this: Benedict the cleauenth Extrau. l. 5. C.
Dudum.
calls Boniface the eight, his Predecessor bona memoria, of good memory. The
gloss says: If a Pope have defiled the Church, with exactions, simonies, and
filthy speeches, he is not therefore to be instiled mal^ memoriae, not of evil,
but of good memory, according to the civil Law, determining that regard is not
to be had, to what he did, but to what it was fit for him to do, that is (says
the gloss) not to his person, but to his dignity: for although his person have
offended, his dignity has not: and his personal offense is not to redound to
the damage of the Church. And howsoever Prelates have offended, they are
Presidents, and Fathers of the whole community, and therefore to be honored, as
the Philosopher teaches, and also the Civil Law, calling them, Gods, for the
Excellency of their Order, and dignity of their office. And for the same cause
Kings, albeit wicked in their lives, are instiled Clara memoria* vel Inclyta
memoria, of famous or renowned memory; and Emperors, Dina memoria, of
sovereign, or divine memory. To which I add Act. 24.25.
, that S. Paul called Festus President of Jury, Optime Fest^, Most excellent
Festus, and this, nor for his Virtue, or Honesty, (for he was a wicked man) but
for his Office, the custom being, that all Presidents of Provinces were so
instiled Baron. Anno 58. n. 33.
All this I suppose you will allow: for having read most of it in the Gloss,
you except not against it, or if you do, your exception is without ground.
Other Prelates therefore although they be of vicious lives, may be instiled
Bonae memoriae: Kings, Clarae, vel Inclytae memoriae: Emperors, Diuae memoriae:
Temporal governors may have the title of Optimi, yea, and be called Gods, for
so you call Kings Sermon, before his Ma. at Durham page 14.
. The Pope only (forsooth) who is the Vicar of Christ on earth, because it
displeases you must not be saluted by the title of Your Holiness, whiles he
lives, nor be said to be, Bonae memoriae, after he is dead. Other governors
must be honored by reason of their dignities, and offices: The Pope only must
be excepted: and Doctor Morton to help out the matter, must falsify the
Gloss, making it say, that an ill Pope after his death is to be entitled, Of
blessed Memory; which words, howsoever you Page 277.
set them down, as of the gloss, and in great letters, to make your
falsification more remarkable, are not of the gloss, but feigned by you.

And finally, whether an ill Pope after his death, be or be not, to be
entitled, Bonae, or Malae memoriae, what makes it to your intent, which is to
prove, that Salvation may be had out of the Roman Church? But if your volume
had not been stuffed with such impertinencies, it cold not have risen to so
Grand an Imposture.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the authority of the Epistles of ancient Popes.
AS the Arians and other Heretics have contemned the Epistles of the Bishops
of Rome; so all orthodoxe Christians have ever held them in great veneratio^.
Eusebius Caesariensis L. 3. hist. c. 12.
writes, that the epistle of Clement Pope to the Corinthians, was so highly
esteemed, that the custom was to read it publicly in the Churches: which
also he reports L. 4. hist. c. 22.
of the Epistle of Soter Pope. And how greatly these Epistles were reverenced,
may appear out of S. Irenaeus, who highly commending the Epistle of Clement L.
3. c. 3.
, sets down a summary thereof. And in like manner Clemens Alexandrinus Sermon.
l. 4. c. 7.
, and S. Hierome Ad cap. 52. Isai.
have set down certain fragme^ts of the same epistle, to the end that what
was not lost of it, might come to the knowledge of posterity. And for the
authority of the Epistles of Popes in general, we have the third Council of
Toledo (under Ricaredus King of Spain, newly converted from Arianisme) which
for the clensing of that kingdom from heresy, and restoring it to the purity
of the Catholic faith, among other decrees, ordained Capit. 1.
that the Synodical Epistles of the Bishops of Rome remain in their force. And
how great a crime it has ever been held to contemn them, the Council of
Tours, under Landramus Archbishop of that city declared Inter Ep. Lupi Ferrar.
ep. 84.
, condemning and threatening excommunication to Nomenoius Prior of Britain for
not obeying the Popes Epistle.

SECT I. Of the Epistles of Popes living within the first 300. years after
Christ.
BEllarmine L. 2. de Pont. c. 14.
in proof of the Roman Primacy, alleges the Epistles of 14. holy Popes, that
lived within the first 300. years after Christ; which though he dare not
affirm to be undoubtedly certain, yet he proves to be most undoubtedly
ancient, and conuinceth the Centuriss of a lie, in saying; That no Author
worthy of credit cited the^ before the time of Charles the Great. For he
proves that an ancient Council in the time of Leo the first, 350. years
before Charles, (which was not long after the first 300. years) cited the
epistles of S. Clement, as now they are. He proves, that Ruffinus 60. years
before that time cited other of those Epistles. And that Isidore 200. years
before the same Charles, out of a Council of 80. Bishops cited the epistles of
Clement, Anacletus, Euaristus, and the rest of those Popes. Again you know,
that Turrianus has written an especial volume in defense of the Epistles of
ancient Popes, and learnedly dissolved the cauils of heretics against them.

Of all this you take no notice, but to disprove the Epistles of ancient Popes,
living within the first 300. years after Christ, object Page 279.
Cusanus his Concordia (which you know he has retracted) and Robert Cook a
Protestant Minister, who (say you) proves the objected Epistles to be
undoubtedly bastard, and adulterate, partly by the errors that are apparent in
them, no less absurd, then to turn Cephas into Caput, A stone into a Head.
This he proves, or you for him, by the testimony of Bellarmine, out of the
third epistle of Anacletus, the first of Clement, and the first of Anicetus.
But his and your dealing is undoubtedly fraudulent: for Bellarmine in that
place L. 2. de Monachis c. 40.
makes no mention at all of Anacletus, nor of Clement; and much less, of
turning Cephas into a Head. Wherefore you, and your Cook falsify Bellarmine,
and with him those holy Popes: for Anicetus in his first epistle, makes no
mention of Cephas. Clement says; Peter by the merit of true faith was
appointed to be the foundation of the Church, and for that cause, by the divine
mouth of our Lord, surnamed Peter: but of turning a stone into a Head, or of
Cephas there is no mention at all. Anacletus says; A Domino concessum est
Petro, vt reliquis omnibus praeesset Apostolis, and Cephas 1. caput, ac
principium teneret Apostolatus. It was granted by our Lord to Peter, to be the
chief of the Apostles, that is to say, that he should have the Head and
principality of the Apostolate. If this be to turn Cephas, into Caput, why do
you not for that fault (if a fault it be) blame Optatus that most learned and
holy Bishop, highly esteemed by S. Augustine? Does he not say L. 1. cont.
Parmen. c. 2. and l 2. de doctri. Christi c. 40.
, Thou know that the Episcopal chair was first set up in Rome for Peter, in
which first sat the Head of all the Apostles Peter from whence he has been
called Cephas? Optatus alluding to the Greoke word, (...), which signifies
Head, and resembles the Hebrew word Cephas, that signifies a Rock, declared,
that because Peter was Head of the Apostles, and foundation of the Church, our
Savior called him Caphas, that is, a Rock: for in buildings the foundation is
the same, that the Head is in the body. And in this explication other learned
and ancient writers agree with Optatus. Philo Carpathius time-fellow with him,
faith: Ad cap. 5 Cant. verse. 11.
Petrus, qui and Cephas, caput Ecclesiae futurus erat: Peter who is also
Cephas, was to be Head of the Church. And Vigilius Pope Ep. 2. apud Bin. to. 2.
page 481.
: The election of all the Apostles was a like; but it was granted to Peter,
that he should be above therest; from whence he is called Cephas for as much as
he is the Head, and chief of all the Apostles. And an ancient manuscript of
the Bauarian Library Tract. cont. error. Graecor. distinct. 4. page 530.
, set forth by Petrus Steuartius, Vice chancellor of the University of
Ingolstade: Our Lord said in the Gospel to Peter: Thou shall be called
Cephas, which is in Latin, a Head, that by the very imposition of his name he
might show him to be Head of the Church. Wherefore as it were a vain cavil to
except against the writings of these ancient and learned Authors, for
explicating Cephas applied to S. Peter, to import the same that Head; so it is
in Cook, and your self, to reject the epistle of Anacletus, as apocriphall,
upon the same ground.

2. Anicetus commands Priests crowns to to be shaven: from whence you
infer Page 282.
the epistle not to be his; because Bellarmine proves out of all antiquity,
that not, Rasura, but Tonsura, not shauing, but poling, was the cut of Priests
in those days. You might have solued your own argument, together with
Bellarmines doubt, if you had pleased to observe that in the very same
sentence, the author of that epistle uses the words, rasura, and tonsura
indifferently, taking the^ both for the same. And therefore when he commands
that Priests have their heads shaven, his command it not, that it be done by a
rasor precisely, but only, that they wear not long hair, but keep it short,
by shauing, or poling. His words are Anicet. ep. 1.
: Clergy men (who ought to be a pattern of virtue, honesty, chastity, and
gravity to lay people) command them with the Apostle, not to wear long hatre,
but to shave the crowns of their heads, in form of a sphere, because as they
ought to be discreet in their conversation, so likewise to show themselves
discreet in tonsura, and in omni habitu, in their poling, and in their whole
habit. Whereby it is evident, that by shauing he means nothing else, but
keeping the hair short, either by rasure, or to^sure. And this shows your
exception against this Epistle to be of no force.

3. You except page 28^.
against the Epistle of Pius, because you will not believe him to have
commanded, that if any drops were shed out of the Chalice, in the Eucharist,
they should be licked up, and the board scraped You believe not this, because
you believe not the real presence of the body and blood of Christ in the
Eucharist, but think it reverence enough, if your Clerk take home your bread
that remains, and crimble it into his potage, and drink up the wine merrily
with his guests at dinner: and yet some of you tell the people, it is the body
and blood of Christ. Howsoever, your Argument is wholly from the matter: for
this command of Pius, is not in his first Epistle, which you deceiptfully cite
in your margent, nor in any of his Epistles, but in his decrees which the
Church approves Breuiar. Roman. Iul. 11.
: from whence to infer that his Epistles are apocryphal, is a consequence
which I suppose you will not grant, and I am sure, every one will see to be
absurd. The error which out of Baronius you mention Page 282.
in two of Pius his Epistles, might easily creep into the copies, by
negligence, or mistake of the Scribe, and therefore is no sufficient Argument to
disauthorize them, and much less the rest, in which there is no such mistake.

4. You reject Ibid.
the Epistles of Soter and Alexander, because you cannot think the use of
Incense at the Altar, nor the expiation of small offenses by holy water to be
so ancient. For your better instruction concerning the ancient use of incense
at the altar, I remit you to L. 1. de ritib. Eccles. c. 9.
Dura^tius (who shows how foolishly it is relected by heretics) to
Bellarmine L. 2. de Missa c. 15.
, and Brereley in his Liturgy of the Mass Page 40. n. 12 and page 94. lit. D.
. Concerning the antiquity of holy water for the expiation of small offenses,
casting out of Devils, and other great miracles, wrought by sprinkeling thereof,
read Baronius Spoud. Indic. V. Aquae Be^ed. antiq. vsus.
, Bellarmine L. 3. de Eccles. triumph. c. 7. and l. 2. de Missa c. 15.
, Durantius L. 1. de rit. c. 21.
, and Brereley Liturg. page 64. lit. u. and x. and page 94. l. b. etc.
: They will certify you, that both these ceremonies are Apostolical traditions
used in the Church from the beginning, and show your rejecting of those ancient
Epistles, because they are mentioned in them, to be cauilling without ground.

5. Because Cooks finds in some of those Epistles a word, or a phrase, which
some one Author thinks not to be so ancient in that sense, or (forsooth) not
so elegant and Ciceronian, you are pleased to call them all, horrid and
barbarous Page 279.
: and to help out the matter, you exemplisy in Caius, which is none of the
fourteen alleged by Bellarmine. But you consider not, that diverse of those
Epistles were written in Greek, and that the Latin phrase is not of the
authors, but of the translators. And as Nicolas the first Ep. 8. apud Bin to.
3. page 682.
, speaking to the ungodly Emperor Michaell, of Latin translated into Greek,
says: If it beget barbarismes, the fault is not in the Latin tongue, but in
the Translators, striving not only to keep the sense, but using force to render
word by word: so I say to you; if in the Epistles of ancient Popes, you find
some words, or manners of speech, not so usual, the fault is not in the
Epistles, but in the Translators, striving to render them, word by word. And to
go no further for the confutation of this cavil, you object against us Page
291.
out of an Epistle of Adrian the first, that lived almost 800. years after
Christ, these words: Consecrationes Episcoporum, and Archiepiscoporum, sicut
olitana constat traditio, nostra dioecosis existentes: in which, whether you
regard the word, olitana, or the phrases, sicut olitana constat traditio, and,
consecrationesnostrae dioecesis existentes; you may under color, that the
phrase of this Epistle is horrid and barbarous, reject it, with as much ground,
as you do the Epistles of Popes that lived in the first 300. years after
Christ. The truth therefore is, that you reject those, because they make wholly
against you; and receive this, because you find something in it, which may
serve you for an Argument against us, though without ground: for Adrian in that
Epistle most effectually proves the authority of the Roman See, whereof
something has been spoken already Chap. 33. sect. 2.
.

SECT. II. The nullity of Doctor Mortons answeares to the testimonies of Popes,
that lived in the second 300. years after Christ.
THere is no stronger Argument, then that, which is drawn from the confession
of the Adversaries: for (as Tertullian observes In Apologet.
No man lies to his own shame: and therefore he is sooner to believed that
confesses against himself, then he that denies in his own behalf. Which
truth the Father of the Roman eloquence understood by the light of nature,
saying Orat. P. Qui.
: Thy testimony, which in another man's cause is little to be regarded, when it
is against thy self is of great weight. And you acknowledge Answer to the
Prot. Apol. Epist. Dedicat.
, that the testimony of the adversary is the greatest reason of satisfaction.
Let us then see, whether you will not bear witness for us against your selves,
that the Popes of the first 600. years after Christ, acknowledged, and
exercised their authority, and jurisdiction over all the Churches of the world,
and this chiefly in their Epistles; for of most of them there are no other
writings extant. Their testimonies in this behalf, are plentifully alleged by
Master Brereley Protest. Apolog^tra. 1. sect. 3. subdiu. 10. and sect. 7.
subd. 5.
: and in particular concerning the Popes of the second 300. years, of whom our
question here is, he says: They (Protestant writers) consesse and say, that in
the fifth age the Roman Bishops applied themselves to get, and establish
dominion over other Churches. To this end they usurped to themselves the right
of granting privileges, and ornaments to other Archbishops: they confirmed
Archbishops in their Sees, deposed, excommunicated, and absolved others,
arrogating (also) to themselves power of citing Archbishops to declare their
causes before them; and that against a Bishop appealing to the Roman See,
nothing should be determined, but what the B. of Rome censured: That they
appointed Legates in remote Provinces, which were sometimes no meaner men, then
some one or other of the Patriarchs: That they challenged authority to hear,
and determine all vprising controversies, especially in questions of faith:
That they took upon them power of appointing general Counsels, and to be
Presidents in them, and even by their Deputies, when themselves were absent.

These testimonies of your own Brethren are so many sharp wedges in the heart
of your cause, and show in you either ignorance, or lack of conscience, in
denying so manifest a truth. Nor do your Writers testify this of those Popes in
general, but in particular even of those very twelve, whose testimonies you
here seek to elude. Of Julius (whom you Page 2841
call, the first man of the inquest) they say Brerel. ibid. n. 60.61.
, that whereas the Ecclesiastical canon decreed, that no Council should be
celebrated without the sentence of the B. of Rome, Julius made challenge
thereby: for which Danaeus reproves him and other Bishops of Rome. M.
Cartwright and the Centurists say of him Ibid n. 63.
, that in the Council of Antioch he ouer-reached in claiming the hearing of
causes that apperteyned not to him: and M. Symonds Ibid. n. 64.
, that he decreed, that whosoever suspected his Judge, might appeal to the Sea
of Rome. And whereas in his Epistle to the Eastern Bishops, extant in the
second Apology of S. Athanasius, he expresses the authority of the Bishop, and
Church of Rome over all others, in these words: An ignoratis etc. Are you
ignorant, that the custom is, we should be first written unto, and that from
hence the just decision of things should proceed? And that if any suspicion
were conceived against your Bishops there, you should have written to this
Church; for the things which I signify to you, we have received from the
blessed Peter? You answer Page 184.
; Julius plainly speaks of document, and instruction received from Peter, not
of dominton or jurisdiction: which may be an answer to many of the rest. But
this answer is refuted, not only by the ancient historians (as afterward you
shall hear) but also by the Centurists, who set down these very words of
Julius Cent. 4. col. 746.
, and Col. 529.
reprehend him for them; and out of that his Epistle show, that with the
authority of a Judge he summoned the Eastern Bishops, commanding them to come
to Rome, assigned them a day of appearance before him to be judged, and having
heard the whole cause, gave sentence, rebuking the Eusebians, and by the
preregatiue of his See, restored the Catholic Bishops to theirs. The same
Epistle is alleged by D. Philippus Nicolai De reg. Christ. l. 2. page 149.
a learned Protestant, who out of Socrates, Sozomen, and the Epistle it self,
witnesses, that Julius does more then once declare himself alone by especial
privilege to be Bishop of the primary See; and that by divine ordinance the
right of calling Counsels, and of judging the causes of Bishops, and other
weighty affairs of that nature belonged to him alone. I conclude therefore,
that Julius speaks not, of document and instruction, received from Peter, but
of authority, and jurisdiction.

Not unlike to this answer, is your affirming Page 284. fin. 285.
, that the Bishops of the East challenged Julius for writing to them alone, and
by his own authority: for there is no such challenge in their Epistle Extat
Ep. apud Bin. to. 2. page 401.
: Yea, as Sozomen L. 3. c. 7.
testifies, and the beginning of the Epistle it self shows, in it they
profess the primacy of the Roman Church, though otherwise falsely obiecting to
Julius, the breach of the Canons; a thing not to be wondered at: for they that
wrote, were Arians, and in hatred of him, because he had annulled their Council
of Antioch, and restored Athanasius. And as the Epistle was written by Arians,
so it is also reported by Socrates, and Sozomen, from Sabinus, a Macedonian
Heretic, who took part with the Council of Antioch against the Pope, and
against the Council of Nice; to which as also to Athanasius, and to the
Blessed Trinity it self, he was a professed enemy. In regard whereof their
Epistle is of no more weight, then if Lutherans, or Caluinists should now write
the like. And hereby it appears, how untruly you say Page 185.
that, Some (of the testimonies of ancient holy Popes expressing the universal
jurisdiction of the Roman See) may be confuted and indeed confounded by as
ancient opposisions of the Orientalls against Pope Julius etc. for those
Orientalls were heretics.

Having thus shifted off the testimony of Julius, (whom you call the first man
of the inquest) you pass immediately to S. Gregory, the last of the twelve,
which Bellarmine alleges, omitting all the rest. And whereas he out of the
works of this holy Pope, produces diverse testimonies, clearly conuincing the
subjection of all Churches to the Roman, you omitting the rest, as being
vnanswearable, find means to except against one Page 284.
, which is: Who doubts, but that the Church of Constantinople is subject to the Sea Apostolic, which the most religious Lord the Emperor, and our brother
Eusebius Bishop of the same City continually protest? This testimony of S.
Gregory you reject, upon pretense, that the Epistle is supposititious and
counterfeit. Some (of the Popes alleged by Bellarmine (say you) speak not,
but their counterfeites, as the last Iurist, Pope Gregoryin an Epistle, wherein
Eusebius B. of Constantinople is said to have been subject unto him, when as
(as our Doctor Reynolds has proved) there was no Eusebius B. of Constantinople
in the days of S. Gregory. But to Doctor Reynolds I oppose the most eminent
Cardinal Peron, a man of greater renown, learning, and authority; who
answeareth Replip. l. 1. Chap. 34.
1. That Cyriacus, which was then Bishop of Constantinople, might have two
names, and be called Eusebius Cyriacus, as S. Hierome was called, Eusebius
Hieronymus. 2. That Eusebius might be there taken adiectiuely, and signify
pious, or, religious, as when Arius A pud Theod. l. 1. hist. c. 5.
writ to Eusebius B. of Nicomedia, (...), Farewell Eusebius, truly Eusebius,
that is, truly religious. And 3. that it is an error of the Exemplarist, who of
eiusdem ill written, and blotted, made Eusebius: for the ancient copies of this
Epistle current for the space of 200. years after S. Gregory, make no mention
of Eusebius, but read simply, and our brother B. of the same City, as it
appears out of the relation of Amalarius Fortunatus, who lived 800. years
since, and sets down this whole Epistle of S. Gregory, word by word De
dini. offic. l. 4. c. 2. in Biblioth. Pat edit. Colon. to 9. part. 1.
: and his testimony alone, living 800. years nerer S. Gregory's time, then
Doctor Reynolds, or your self, is a sufficient proof of the authority of this
Epistle against you both.

But what? Though you except against this Epistle, yet in the next, which no
man has doubted of, S Gregory in like manner says L. 7. ep. 64.
: For whereas, he (the B. of Constantinople being accused of a certain crime)
profefieth himself subject to the Sea Apostolic, if any fault be found in
Bishops, I know not what Bishop is not subject unto it. Does not this testimony
immediately follow in Bellarmine? Yes, and it is so evident that Calvin L. 4.
Just. c. 7. 1^.
on the rack of truth is enforced to confess, that, S Gregory in no place of
his works vanteth more of the greatness of his See, then in these very words;
and that in them, he attributes to himself the right of punishing Bishops,
when they offend. Is it not then imposterous, to conceal this so clear an
evidence, and others brought in by Bellarmine, and reject them all, because you
have found a way to cavil at one; especially since not only out of S.
Gregory's works, and the testimonies of your Protestant Brethren, it is a
truth not to be denied, that he believed himself to have, and practiced
jurisdiction over all Bishops whatsoever?

But you say Page 285.
: If Gregory in some terms seem to speak somewhat loud, as though he were
very Great, yet be confined himself to the Constitution of Justinian. He
resolves according to the constitution of Justinian, that the trial of
Bishops causes in the first instance, belongs to their Metropolitan, as the
cause of the Metropolitan does to his Patriarch. But withal he teaches L. 2.
ep. 6.
, that they may appeal to the Sea Apostolic; and furthermore adds L. 11.
ep. 56.
, that, If a Bishop have no Metropolitan, nor Patriarch over him, then (says
he) his cause is to be heard, and decided by the Sea Apostolic, which is the
head of all Churches. And this is agreeable to the profession which Justinian
himself made in the Law Inter claras Cod. tit. ^. l. 8.
, and in the Law to Epiphanius Patriarch of Constantinople Cod. it is. 1. l. 7.
.

In the rest of this Section Page 284.
, you tell us, that ^^n of those Popes (eited by Bellarmine) call the Church of
Rome, and Bishop thereof, Head of all Churches, or one that has the care of all
Churches, or one having principality. They do so: and withal so vnanswearably
affirm the Universal jurisdiction of the Roman Church, that you thought best
not to mention their words, but to put them off, saying: The like attributes
have been anciently ascribed to other Churches, and Bishops: which how false it
is, you have already heard Chap. 17. sect. 2. Chap. 19. sect. 3. Chap. 35.
Chap. 36 sect. 3.
.

To give a good farewell, you conclude thus Page 285. fin. 280.
: There are diverse other testimonies out of Leo, Gelasius, and other Popes, who
breathed out many sentences full of ostentation of their own greatness.
Hitherto you have held us in hand, that the primitive Popes did not challenge
any jurisdiction over the universal Church: but now you say, that, S. Gregory
in some terms seems to speak somewhat loud, as though he were very Great; and
that Leo, Gelasius, and other Popes breathed out many sentences, full of
ostentation of their own greatness; but whatsoever they vented out, it was
typhus saecularis, and a swelling impostume, which was lanced (that it bled
withal) by the Council of Carthage under S. Cyprian, and the Council of
Afric under S. Augustine; and that self-love bewitching many Popes of the
more primitive times, they boasted themselves to be the only Vicars of Christ,
and have been taxed for their great arrogance* by the ancient Fathers of their
own times. And afterward Page 303. fin. 304.
you compare S. Leo, and S. Gregory to Adonias, that sought traitorously to
pull the crown from his Fathers head, and make himself King, to which he had
right. This (forsooth) is the reverence you bear to the primitive Popes, whom
antiquity has had in so great veneration, as of S. Leo, and S. Gregory in
particular you have heard Chap. 15. sect. 3.
. Truth (which enforces testimony from her enemies) compels you to confess
Page 172.178.182.287.
, that the Primitive Popes were, Holy Popes, Holy Fathers, excellently goodly,
and learned, and that many of them are glorious Martyrs, and Saints, whose
memory is blessed. And yet the same truth enforces you here to confess, that
those Popes acknowledged themselves to be, the only Vicars of Christ on earth,
to have an universal authority, and to have practiced the same: for which,
albeit you tax them with great arrogance, yet in adding, that the ancient
Fathers of their own time, did the like, you pass the limits of modesty, and
truth.

And who sees not the absurd manner of arguing which in proof hereof you use?
Your words are Page 286. in titulo sect. 13.
: Our general discovery of the vanity of your proofs of Papal Monarchy, from
the mouths of Popes themselves, who have been anciently noted of pride. Your
assumpt then is, to disprove the Papal Monarchy from the mouths of Popes
themselves. But you produce not any one testimony, nor any one word of any one
Pope, but make a brief repetition of your Arguments, which in their several
places have been proved to be partly impertinent, partly false, and partly
heretical. Impertinent, as of Tertullian: False, as of the African Council,
S. Cyrill, S. Basil, S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, S. Augustine: Heretical, as of
Polycrates resisting Victor, and of the Arians, whom (to conceal that they
were heretics) you call, The Orientalls. And finally, part of them, of such as
for a time defended the false doctrine of Rebaptization, as S. Cyprian, and his
Council of Carthage, which though S. Augustine have answered L. 6. de
Baptism. per tot.
, and confuted word by word, you take no notice thereof, but urge it as current,
and of authority, against the B. of Rome; yet that all may not seem to be
repetitions, you bring forth one new Argument Page 286.
, as drawn from the mouths of Popes themselves, which is, that one Flaccidius
relying on the greatness of the City of Rome, equalled the Deacons of Rome,
with Priests. This you object, as the testimony of S. Augustine himself,
pointing at the vain boasting of Rome: whereas it is not S. Augustines, but of
the Author quaestionum noui and veteris Testamenti, whom heretofore Page 52.
, when he was not for your purpose, you rejected as an heretical author: but
now his words are of S. Augustine himself, and an Argument drawn from the
very mouths of ancient and holy Popes. Necessity enforces you to such
absurdities: for better Arguments are not to be found in such a cause.

The blindness of your zeal permitted you not to see the inconsequence, and
contrariety of your doctrine, whiles you profess Page 287.
, that the primitive Popes were Holy men, and yet, that they were proud,
arrogant, and challenged dominion above others, beyond the limits of their own
jurisdiction. Yes (say you Ibid.
, why not? They were holy Disciples of Christ, who ambitiously wished, that
they might sit, the one on the right hand of Christ, and on the other on the
left in his kingdom. They were holy Apostles, that sought among themselves,
without any ordinance of their Lord, who should be chief. They were indeed
Disciples, and Apostles of Christ, but as yet imperfect: nor did they arrogate
to themselves, and much less seek to practice superiority over the Church of
the whole world, as the Popes from the beginning have done. Which, if it were
not given them by Christ, could not stand with Christian Modesty, and much
less, with sanctity: for such a claim is not a small blemish, nor a venial
offense, but the very height of Luciferian pride (for so you call it Page 336.
, and the very mark of Antichrist himself. Again, the ambition of the
Apostles was reformed, and they perfected, and confirmed in grace, by the
coming of the holy Ghost. But there is no testimony of antiquity, that any one
of the primitive Popes (whom you tax with pride, and great arrogance) did at
any time, before their death, relinquish that claim: yea contrarily, all of
them constantly mantained their authority, as given them by Christ, in S.
Peter, and exercised the same over all the Churches of the world until their
dying day. And if this were in them great arrogance* and Luciferian pride, they
were far from being holy Saints of God: which yet you truly confess them to
have been, condemning thereby your doctrine against their supremacy, of
falsehood, and your self of slandering Gods Saints with Luciferian pride and
arrogance.

Your last refuge Page 286.
, that Popes are not fit witnesses in their own cause, was refuted above Chap.
15. sect. 3.
.

CHAP. XXXVIII. The Universal jurisdiction of the B. of Rome proved by the
Exercise of his Authority over other Bishops.
AS among the Arguments for the Popes universal jurisdiction, there is none
more conuincing, then that from the first ages after Christ, by their authority
they have ordained, deposed, and restored Bishops, throughout the whole Church;
so there is none, which with more sleights you seek to clude. That the Popes
anciently exercised this authority, is a thing so certain, that Danaeus a
learned Protestant is enforced to acknowledge the truth thereof Resp. ad Bellar.
part. 1. page 117.
, and answer: It follows not, that because the B. of Rome used that right,
he had therefore that right: for certainly he had no right to do this, but only
tyranny, and usurpation. Which to be an unconscionable answer, no man can
doubt: for the B. of Rome, as now he does, so much more did he then, want
temporal power, to compel Bishops, especially in Countres far remote from
Rome, to obey him, which yet he must have had, if that use of his power had not
been from a true right, given him by Christ, but only by tyranny and
usurpation. Wherefore you finding this answer of Danaeus not to satisfy, have
made a bold adventure, to deny, that the ancient Popes exercised any such
power: which how untrue it is, the ensuing Sections shall demonstrate.

SECT. I. The Popes universal authority proved; by the Institution, and
confirmation of Bishops: and of the use, and signification of the Pall, or
Mantle granted to Archbishops.
YOur first position is Page 288.
: Anciently, Institutions of Metropolitans, and Patriarchs, were done by
communicatory letters to the chief Patriarch, which were letters of
correspondence, to show their agreement in faith: in which case, the B. of Rome
sent his Pall in token of his consent.

That the B. of Rome has ever accustomed to institute Bishops in the most
remote Provinces of the world, appears out of the book entitled, Vitae
Romanorum Pontificum, written by Damasus, or (as others more probably think)
by Anastasius Bibliothecarius, in which are reported the ordinations of Bishops
made by Linus, immediate successor to S. Peter, and successively by all other
Bishops of that See. The letters you mention, of Metropolitans, and Patriarchs,
written at the time of their Institution, to the chief Patriarch (the B. of
Rome) were not only of correspondence, to show their agreement in faith: for
howbeit they did contain a profession of their agreement in faith with the
Roman Church, that thereby they might be received into her communion, and have
the title of Catholic Bishops: yet moreover, they contained an oath of
Obedience, and subjection to the B. of Rome. And by the same letters, they
asked his Pal, which (S. Gregory witnesses L. 7. ep: 5. indict. 1.
was granted to none, until they did humbly, and earnestly desire it.

It is true, that the Pope by sending his Pal to Archbishops, did express his
consent to their Institution. But if they did not owe subjection to him, there
had been no need of requiring his consent, and much less, of asking his Pal:
for the Pal did not only contain an expression of the Popes consent to their
Institution, but a grant of great authority, and power, which by the Pal was
signified, and given unto them. So testified the irrefragable Doctor Alexander
of Hales 400. years since: When the Pal is given (says he Part. 4. q. 10.
memb. 5. art. 2.. 6.
there is given fullness of Pastoral power; for before a Metropolitan be
honored with the Pal, he is not to ordain Priests, consecrate Bishops, or
dedicate Churches. And before him the fourth Council of Lateran consisting of
1280. Fathers, declared C. 5.
, that after the Patriarchs of the East have taken their Oath of Fidelity, and
Obedience to the B. of Rome, and have received the Pal from him, as a token of
the plenitude of Pontifical office, they may grant it also to their
Suffragans, receiving in like manner from them an oath of Obedience both to
themselves, and to the Church of Rome. And before the Council of Lateran,
Innocentius the third Myster. Missae l. 1. c. 63.
: The Pal contains the fullness of Pontifical office, for as much as in it,
and with it, the fullness of Pontifical office is conferred: for before a
Metropolitan be honored with the Pal, he ought not to ordain Priests,
consecrate Bishops, or dedicate Churches, nor have the Name of Archbishop.
Which also was testified before him, by Honorius the second Ep. ad suffragan.
and Episcop. Tyri.
, and by S. Bernard Vitae S. Malach. cap. 19.
reporting of S. Malachias, that having founded a Metropolitan See in Ireland,
and knowing it to want authority, until it were confirmed by the Sea
Apostolic, he traveled to Rome in person, to procure the Pal, as well for
that See, as also for another, which Celsus had founded. And before him Wilfrid
an English Abbot, who for his great labors in preaching the Gospel to the
Germans, and converting that nation to Christ, has deserved to be entitled,
The Apostle of Germany, coming to Rome, and bring consecrated Bishop by Gregory
the third, and in his consecration called Boniface, after he had taken the oath
of obedience to the Sea Apostolic, as all Bishops used to do Spond. an. 723.
n. 1. and Author Vitae eius apud Sur. 5. Iunij.
, returned into Germany, and Gregory sent him the Pal, conferring on him the
authority of an Archbishop Greg. 3. ep. 2. ad Bonifac.
. And before him S: Gregory the Great L. 4. Ep. 8.
, writing to John Bishop of the first Iustinianea: The relation of our
brethren, and fellow-Bishops (of Illyria) has declared unto us, that thou art
called to the Episcopal dignity, by the agreeing consent of dall the Council,
and by the will of the most excellent Prince (Mauritius the Emperor) whereunto
we also give our consent etc. And send thee the Pall according to the custom,
and decree, by a reiterated innovation, that thou exercise the Vicarship of the Sea Apostolic. And before him, Celestine Pope sending the Pal to Cyrill
Patriarch of Alexandria Balsom. in Nomocan. Phot. tit 3. c. 1. Niceph. l. 14.
c. 34.
, made him his Vicar with full power, to preside in the Council of Ephesus,
and judge the cause of Nestorius. And again before him, Marcus Pope granted
the Pal to the B. of Ostia Vit. Romans Pontif. in Marco.
, confirming to him, and his successors, the authority of consecrating the B.
of Rome. All this shows, that the Pal which the Pope sends to Archbishops,
is not only an expression of his assent to their election, and institution, but
a grant of most ample power, and authority, which they require from him, by
asking the Pal, and receive from him, together with the Pal. And moreover, that
their letters to him, are not only to profess their agreement in faith with
the Roman Church, but also to acknowledge their subjection, and to promise
obedience to him. Which promise was likewise made by all Bishops, at their
return from Schism, to the Catholic Church, as appears by the form of
oath, which Hormisdas Pope Apud Baron. anno 517.
, S. Gregory L. 10. Ep. 30.
, and the eight general Council Bin. to. 3. page 923. Canus l. 6. c. 6. page
200.
, prescribe to be taken by them; as also, by the profession, which John
Patriarch of Constantinople Ep. ad Hormisd.
, made to Hormisdas Pope. And finally, the ancient custom (which Sophronius
Patriarch of Jerusalem Ep. ad Honor. Pap.
calls. An Apostolical tradition) was, that when Bishops were first
instituted, they should send a profession of their faith to the B. of Rome,
which he approving, did thereby confirm them in their Bishoprikes. This custom
(says Sophronius) we following, write unto you, who have the knowledge of
divine things, to the end we may give testimony of what faith we hold: We
write, I say, to you, who have knowledge not only to discern true doctrines
from false, but are able to supply whatsoever is wanting.

SECT. II. A shift of Doctor Morton rejected.
YOur second answer is Page 288.
, that as the sending of the Pall to Archbishops was only a declaration of the
Popes assent to their institution, so his deposing of other Bishops without the
Roman Dieces, was but an expression to others that he thought them justly
deposed: and that his power in restitution of others that had been deposed, was
the like manifestation of his consent to have such, and such restored; even as
other Patriarchs often did. These are words, but not an answer. For any
inferior, as a Suffragan Bishop, or a lay man, may express his opinion, or his
assent, that his Metropolitan is to be deposed, or if he be already deposed,
that he is justly deposed, and yet nether depose him, nor any way concur to
his deposition, but leave him in the state he found him: for deposition
(whether it be of an Ecclesiastical Prelate, or of a temporal Officer) is
iuridicall sentence, whereby a Superior actually exercises the authority of a
Judge, and really depriueth his inferior of a dignity whereof he was possessed;
and therefore can be performed by none, but by him, that has power of a Judge
to condemn his inferior. And so likewise, the restitution of a Bishop to his
seat, is an operative act of power, whereby the sentence of deposition
pronounced against him is reuersed, and annulled: which therefore can be
performed by none, but by one, that is Superior in power, as well to the Bishop
deposed, as to the Superior that deposed him. In this manner, the Fathers of
the Council of Chalcedon requested the Legates of Pope Leo, Presidents of the
Counsel, Act. 3.
to pronounce sentence of condemnation against Dioscorus Patriarch of
Alexandria, which they accordingly performed, deposing him in Leo's name, from
his Episcopal dignity, and from all Sacerdotall function. And the
Ecclesiastical histories are full of examples of the same nature.

SECT. III. The Popas power of instituting, and confirming Bishops, proved by
Examples.
YOur third answer is Page 288.
: You produce no one example. wherein it can appear, that the Pope could either
institute, confirm, depose, or restore any Bishop by his own authority alone,
without the help of a Council. This answer is a shift, vain, as the former
was, and withal a notorious untruth. A shift; for when his Majesty makes a
law, with the assistance of his Parliament; or the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury an Ecclesiastical decree, with a Council of his Suffraga^s, were
it not sophistry to argue from thence, that his Majesty is not supreme governor
in his dominions, or that the Archbishop of Canterbury has not jurisdiction
over his Suffragans? No less then it is to argue, that the Pope has not
jurisdiction over other Bishops, because he deposes, or restores them not,
without a Council. For as it is not necessaty, that a King in his kingdom, or
an Archbishop in his Dioces, exercise all acts of Jurisdiction, alone, without
the advice, or help of their subjects: so neither is it, that the Pope
institute, depose, or restore Bishops, alone, without the advice, and help of
a Council. And so much the more, because when Councels have proceeded to the
deposition of Bishops, they have acknowledged the last desinitue sentence to
belong to the Pope. So did the Counsel of Ephesus, professing themselves to
depose Nestorius, by the command of Pope Celestine See above Chap. 18. sect. 1.
and in reserving to him the last sentence against John Patriarch of Antioch
See Ibid. sect. 2.
. And when the Council of Chalcedon was to depose Dioscorus, they beseeched
the Popes Legates, as representing his person, that was supreme governor of the
universal Church, and Judge of all Bishops, to pronounce the sentence of
condemnation against him, which the Legates performed See above Chap. 19. sect.
2.
. And when they admitted Theodoret, that had been deposed in the second
Council of Ephesus, to enter, and take his place among the Bishops, they did
it upon this ground, that the most holy Archbishop Lee had restored him to his
Bishopric See above ibid.
.

And as this your third answer is a shift, so it is an untruth: for even
Bellarmine L. 2. de Pont. c. 18.
, against whom you write, and in that very place which you cite for the
contrary, proves, that all Archbishops, Metropolitans, and Patriarchs were
instituted, or confirmed by the Pope, and that by sending them the Pal, he
conferred on them, the plenitude of Pastoral power: which being an act of
supreme authority, and a conuincing argument of his universal jurisdiction,
and performed by him alone, proves unanswerably, that he instituted Bishops by
his own authority, alone, without the help of a Council.

And to prove the same by particular examples: When Agapetus Pope came to
Constantinople, he deposed Anthinus in the Imperial city, in the presence of
Justinian the Emperor, and this alone, without the help of any Counsel, yea
and without any support at all See this proved above Chap. 20. sect. 2.
. And Honorius the first Pope of that name (as appears out of his epistles to
Edwin King of England, and Honorius B. of Dover) Extant Epistola apud Bin. to.
2. page 994.995.
according to the petition made to him by Honorius, sent to him, and Paulinus
two Palls Beda hist. Anglor. l. 2. c. 17.
with Apostolical authority, that the Superuiuer of the two, might ordain an
Archbishop in place of him that first departed this life. And S. Gregory a
little before that time, sent the Pal to Augustine Archbishop of Canterbury Bed.
l. 1. hist. Angl c. 29.
, who converted us to Christ, giving him thereby full authority, to ordain
Bishops subject to him, and to erect a new Archbishopric at York. And does
not Socrates report L. 7. c. 35.
, that Perigenes being ordained B. of Patras in Achaia, and the Citizens not
receiving him, the B. of Rome commanded, that he should be Bishop of the
Metropolitan Church of Corinth (the Bishop of that place being dead), and that
he governed in that Church all the days of his life? And when in the false
Council of Ephesus, Anatolius had been ordained Patriarch of Constantinople,
and Maximus of Antioch, by what means was their Ordination legitimated, and
they confirmed in those Sees, but by the authority of Leo Pope alone? You wish
us Page 296.
, in good faith, to tell you, whether we can believe, that Maximus of Antioch,
was iuridically instituted, or confirmed by Pope Leo, because his own Legates
said so? We tell you in good faith, that you are quite mistaken: for not only
the Legates of Pope Leo said so, but also Anatolius Patriarch of
Constantinople, with approbation of the whole Council of Chalcedon Conc.
Chale. Act. 10.
: My voice is (says he) that none of the things ordained by the pretended
Council of Ephesus, remain firm, but only that, which was done for Maximus
B. of great Antioch; for as much as the most holy Archbishop of Rome, Leo,
receiving him into his Communion, has judged that he rule the Church of
Antioch. And because you ask us in good faith, we must needs say, that you
are no less mistaken concerning Anatolius: for when Theodosius the Emperor
requested Leo Pope to confirm him in the Sea of Constantinople, Leo answearing
Ep. 33.
, beeseeched the Emperor, not to take it in ill part, if he did not confirm
him, until he had performed the things, which he ordained. And when Anatolius
had performed them, Pulcheria the Empress giving notice thereof to Leo Ep. ad
Leo. inter Ep. pream bull. Conc. Chalced.
, he confirmed him, verifying, that by his assent Anatolius obtained the
Bishopric of so great a City. But what if there were no other proof extant,
but the bare affirmation of Leo? Was not Leo a most holy Prelate, worthy of all
credit? And when he said that Anatolius by his assent obtained the Bishopric
of so great a City, did he not speak it to Martian the Emperor, who knew the
truth of that business?

But what need we to dwell in the rehearsal of more particulars? Did not S.
Leo, alone Ep. 84.
, without any Counsel, make Anastasius B. of Thessalonica his Vicar in the
East, with full power to confirm the ordinations of Bishops lawfully made in
the Oriental Churches, and to annull those, that were made against order? And
did not S. Gregory L. 4. ep. 7.
write to the Bishops of Illyria, following the desires of your demand, we
confirm by the consent of our authority, our Brother John in the Bishopric of
the first Iustinianca? And this power it is, which S. Bernard expressed saying
Ep. 131.
: The Roman Church ^ath power is ^rect new Bishoprics, where hitherto no^^
have been: Of those that are in being, the way depresse some and advance
others, as reason is shall ^^ctare unto her: so that of Bishops, she has power
to make Archbishops; and contrarity, if is seem con^^^ient.

SECT. IV The Popes power of deposing Bishops without a Council, proved by
Examples.
IF the Pope have not authority to depose Bishops alone without the help of a
Council, why did S. Cyptian L. 2. ep. 13. ad Steph^.
write to Stephen Pope, that by his letters addressed into the province, and to
the people of Arles, Marcian Bishop of that city might be deposed, and another
substituted in his place? And S. Cyprian did so title doubt of Stephens
authority in this kind, that he beseeches him, to let him understand, who was
instituted in Marcians place at Arles, to the end, he might know, to whom to
direct his brethren, and letters. Wherefore you are much mistaken, when you say
Page 295. text. and marg.
, Stephens letters were but admonitory, signifying that Marcianus ought to be
deposed. If you will not believe S. Cyprian, believe Danaeus your Protestant
Brother, who speaking of this very example Respons. ad Bellarm. part. 1. page
317.
, finds it so conuincing, that he is enforced to confess, that the Bishops
of Rome did anciently depose other Bishops; which (says he) they had no right
to do, but only tyranny, and usurpation. So he, confuting you, and confessing
against you, and himself, that Cyprian speaks absolutely of deposing
Marcian, not of admonishing that he ought to be deposed.

This power was likewise acknowledged, when the Fathers of the first Council
of Constantinople beseeched Damasus Pope, to depose Timothy, an heretical
Patriarch of Alexandria, and Damasus answearing them said Apud Theodoret. l. 5.
hist. c. 10.
: Whereas your charity (my dear children) yeildeth due reverence to the
Apostolic See, it shall turn you to great honor etc. But what need was there
to require from me, the deposition of Timothy, seeing he was long since deposed
were, with his Master Apostimarius, by the judgment of the Sea Apostolic. And
again Ibid. paulo superius.
: Know yea brethren, that we have long since deposed that profane Timothy,
disciple to Apollinarius the heretic. And Theodoret reporting the same Ibid.
: Damasus a man most worthy of all praise, as soon as he understood that this
sect was broached, deposed not only Apollinarius, but also Timothy his Disciple.

The same appears by the authority, which the Popes of Rome have showed in
the deposition of eight Patriarks of Constantinople Nicol. primus Ep. 8. apud
Bin. to. 3. page 688.
, Maximus, Nestorius, Acacius, Anthymus, Sergius, Pyrrhus, Paulus, Petrus: for
not to dispute, whether all of them were deposed without Counsels, it cannot
be denied, that Agapet Pope coming to Constantinople, deposed Anthymus, in the
very Imperial City, in presence of the Emperor Justinian, that favored him,
and excommunicated the heretical Empress Theodora, that protected him; and
this not only without a Council, but being very poor, and without assistance;
yea contrarily the Empress tempting him with promises of great rewards, if he
would leave Anthymus in that seat, and with great threats, if he deposed him:
The Empress in secret (says Liberatus In Breu. c. 11.
promising great presents to the Pope, if he would leave Anthymus in his seat;
and on the other side tempting him with threats, the Pope persisted in not
harkening to her demand. And Anthymus seeing himself cast out of his seat,
gave up his mantie to the Emperor, and retired himself, where the Empress
took him into her protection. And then the Pope for the Emperors sake,
ordained Menas Bishop in his steed, consecrating him with his own hands. The
same is reported by Justinian himself Nouel. 42.
, and by Victor of Tunes In Chron.
, set forth by Joseph Scaliger Ad calc. Chron. Eusebius.
, adding hereto: the excommunication, which Agapet pronounced against the
Empress.

To this I add, that Celestine Pope by his authority alone commanded Cyrill
Patriarch of Alexandria to depose Nestorius an heretical Bishop of
Constantinople, writing thus unto him In Cont. Ephef^ro. act. 1^.
: Adding to thee the authority of our See, and with power the representation of
our place, thou shall execute exactly and severely this sentence, namely, that
if within ten days after signification of this admonition given to Nestorius,
he do not in express words anathematike his wicked doctrines etc. thy
Holiness shall provide for that Church without ^^ay, and decl^^^ him to be
wholly cut off from our body.

In like manner S. Leo the Great deprived Hilary B. of Arles from the authority
of ordaining Bishops in the Province of Vienne, which he had iniustly usurped.
Hilary is to know (says Leo to the Bishops of Vienne Ep. 89.
that he is deprived of all power over the Province of Vienne, which he had
usurped unlawfully. And Valentinian the Emperor acknowledging that Leo might
for this fault have justly deposed Hilary, from his Bishopric of Arles, said
Nou. Theod. (...). 14.
: The Popes clemency alone, permitted Hilary to bear still the title of a
Bishop. And Gelasius 40. years after, speaking of the power of Leo Pope, said
De anathem. vinc.
: Flauianus having been condemned by the Congregation of the Greek Bishops,
the Sea Apostolic alone, because he had not consented thereunto, absolved him:
and contrariwise by his authority condemned Dioscorus Prelate of the second
See, who had been there approved; and alone annulled the wicked Synod, in not
consenting to it; and by his authority alone, ordained that the Council of
Chalcedon should be kept.

In like manner, when John Archbishop of Larissa in Thessaly, had iniustly
condemned Adrian B. of Thebes, one of the Bishops of his jurisdiction, that had
appealed from him to the Sea Apostolic, S. Gregory exempted the B. of Thebes
from his jurisdiction. We ordain (says he L. 2. ep. 7: indict. 11.
to John Archbishop of Larissa) that thy brotherhood abstain from all the
jurisdiction which thou have formerly had over him, and his Church etc. And if
at any time, or for any occasion whatsoever, thou that attempt to contradict
this our statute, know that we declare thee deprived of the sacred communion,
so as it may not be restored to thee, except in the article of death, but with
leave of the B. of Rome.

Finally omitting other examples (of which Ecclesiastical histories are full)
to these I add the testimony of S. Bernard, who speaking to Eugenius Pope,
said L. de Considerat.
: The power of others is confined within certain limits; thine extends even
to them, who have power over others. Have not thou power if there be cause, to
shut heaven to a Bishop, to depose him from his Bishopric and deliver him to
Satan? And upon this known right of the Pope, he required him to depose the
Bishops of York Ep. 217.
and Winchester, and likewise Ep. 230.
a wicked Bishop of the Ruthens.

SECT. V. The Popes power of restoring Bishops without a Council, proved.
ANastasius Patriarch of Jerusalem that lived 1100. years since in
acknowledgment of this power, writ to Felix B. of Rome Ep. ad Belic.
: The prerogative of your Apostolic See, has ever been, to restore by the
authority of your power, them, that have been iniustly condemned, or
excommunicated, and to return unto them, all that has been taken from them,
and by the Apostolical privilege, to punish those, that condemned, or
excommunicated them, as we know it to have been done, both in our, and in
former times. The practice of this authority is no less certain, out of the
Ecclesiastical writers. Eustathius B. of Sebaste in Armenia, being deposed
from his Bishopric by the Counsel of Melitine, traveled to Rome, and
bringing letters of restitution from Liberius Pope, the Council of Tyana in
Cappadocia, obeying, received him, without inquiring of the conditions, by
means whereof he had been restored. The things S. Bafil. Ep. 74.
that were proposed to him, by the most blessed Bishop Liberius, and what
submission he made, we know not: Only he brought a letter, that restored him,
which being showed to the Council of Tyana, he was reestablished in his
Bishops seat. Again, when the Emperor Valens had driven Peter that famous
Patriarch of Alexandria (whom Theodosius and Valentinian call Cod. titulo 1 l 1.
a man of Apostolical sanctity) from his See, and placed in it Lucius an Arian
heretic, Peter going to Rome appealed to Damasus Pope, and obtained letters of
restitution from him. Peter (says Socrates) L. 4. c. 30.
being returned from Rome to Alexandria, with letters from Damasus B. of Rome,
which confirmed the creation of Peter, the people encouraged, drove away
Lucius, and restored Peter in his place. And when Theodoret B. of Cyre
bordering upon Persia, was deposed from his Bishopric by the Council of
Ephesus, he was restored by Leo Pope. Whereupon the Senators which assisted at
the Council of Chalcedon, said Act. 1.
: Let the most religious Bishop Theodoret come in, that he may take part in the
Council, because the most holy Archbishop Leo has restored him to his
Bishopric.

These examples show, that the venerable Councels were so far from thinking,
the Pope could not restore Bishops, without their help, that they made
themselves executors of his authority, and caused the letters of restitution
which he he had granted to Bishops iniustly deposed, to be obeyed.

SECT. VI. Doctor Morton, to cross the Popes Authority in restoring Bishops
deposed, takes part with the Arians, and iustifies their impious proceedings
against S. Athanasius, and other Catholic Bishops.
TO prove the Popes authority of restoring Bishops, by his letters, and
authority alone, we have for precedents the examples of the great Prelates,
Athanasius Patriarch of Alexandria, Paul of Constantinople, Marcellus Primate
of Ancyra in Galatia, Asclepas B. of Gaza in Palestine, and Lucius of
Adrianopolis in Thracia, who being iniustly deposed by the Arians, appealed to
Julius Pope, and he by his authority restored them to their seats. You not
knowing how otherwise to avoid the force of these examples, have thought best
to take part with the Arians against S. Athanasius, to iustlify their
opposition against Pope Julius, and mantaine their contempt of his authority.
To this end, you say Page 290.
: Among those Eastern Bishops (which condemned Athanasius in the Council of
Antioch) there were many orthodoxe. There were indeed in that Council
according to the relation of S. Athanasius De Synod.
and Socrates L. 2. c. 5.
, 90. Bishops: and according to S. Hilary L. de Syn.
. 97. or if we believe Sozomen L. 3. c. 5.
, 96. Of this number there were only 36. Arian Bishops. These only were they
that plotted the deposition of Athanasius; these only made the decrees of that
Council and subscribed to them, as Julius in his Epistle afterward written to
them, and out of it Athanasius Apolog. 2.
testify. These only were they, that capitulated with Julius Pope, to have
communion with him, not upon condition, that he should communicate with those
Bishops, whom they had ordained, (as you ignorantly affirm), but, upon
condition, that he should abandon the communion of Athanasius, and the other
Catholic Bishops, which being deposed by them, had appealed to him for
redress, and by his authority recovered their Churches again. And because the
decrees of that Council were made by Arians only, they have ever been held to
be absolutely heretical: The Arians (says Sozomen L. 8. c. 20.
after they had with calumnies circumuented Athanasius, and cast him out of his
Church of Alexandria, fearing lest things might be brought about again, made
this Canon, endeavoring to have their plots against him remain indiscussed.
The same is expressly affirmed by S. Chrysostom Apud Niceph. l. 13. n. 18.
; against whom, when his adversaries, that had deposed him, to justify their
fact, and blame him for returning to his Church, alleged a Canon of this
Council of Antioch, he answered; It is not a Canon of the Church, but of the
Arians. And the same is testified by the holy Pope Innocentius Apud Niceph. l.
13. c. 31.
, so much commended by S. Augustine. Wherefore you cannot be excused from an
untruth, in saying, that among those Eastern Bishops (that condemned
Athanasius, and reproved the Pope for restoring him) there were many Orthodoxe:
for none of the Orthodoxe Bishops consented thereto. But that the Arians, who
had spit in the face of Christ, and trampled his Divinity under their feet,
should also contemn the Pope, his Vicar on earth, it is no wonder; as neither
it is, that you should therein bandy with them: for no heretic ever fell from
the Church, but he took the Pope for his enemy at the same time.

2. To justify your disobeying, and resisting the authority of the Church of
Rome, and Bishop thereof, you say Page 295. lit. O. marg. and text.
: The Orientals (to wit the Arian Bishops) resisted, and excommunicated the
Pope: and in proof hereof, you set down in your margent, these words, as of
Sozomen l. 3. c. 7. Illi Iulium Episcopum Romanum, quod cum Athanasio and Paulo
communicaret, abdicarunt. Sozomen there has no such words. He says, They
objected to Inlius, as a crime, that he communicated with Athanasius, and the
Bishops that were with him; and accused him that in annulling their Council,
and abrogating their sentence, he had done against the Ecclesiastical Law (so
they called the heretical Canon, which themselves had made in the Council of
Antioch to justify their impious proceedings) and promised to communicate with
him, on condition he would confirm the deposition of Athanasius, and the
Orthodoxe Bishops, which had fled to him for succor.

3. You say Page 306. fin. 307.
: The Popes command to the Orientals (who had deposed Athanasius) to receive
him again, was answered with contempt; and they argued, aparibus, with him.
What else cold be expected from sacrilegious Arians? or what from you, but to
object against us, their resistance to the Bishop and Church of Rome, as
lawful, to make good yours, not unlike to theirs? But what did all their
arguing avail them? for notwithstanding their contempt, and all the
resistance, they were able to make by themselves, and by the power of
Constantius the Arian Emperor, their abettor and patron, Athanasius, Paul, and
the other Bishops, whom they had deposed, were by virtue of Julius his letters,
restored to their Churches, and their restitution embraced as just, by
universal consent of all the Catholics in the world; in so much, that when
the Arians meeting at Philippopolis, required the Orthodoxe Bishops assembled
in the Council of Sardica, to abstain from the Communion of Athanasius, and
those other Catholic Bishops, protesting, that otherwise they would have no
communion with them, the godly Bishops there assembled, and representing all
the Orthodoxe Bishops of the world, answered Sozom. l. 3. c. 10.
, that they never had, nor would now abstain from their Communion; and
principally, because Julius B. of Rome having examined their cause, had not
condemned them. But that the Arians were not so refractary to the Popes
authority, as you are, and would make them to be, to countenance your error, is
a truth easily proved: for at last Vrsacius, and Valens, the two principal
adversaries of S. Athanasius, departed from their pursuit, and went to Rome,
to ask pardon of the Pope: They came in person (says Seuerus Sulpitius) Hist.
sacraae l. 2.
to ask pardon of Julius B. of Rome. And themselves in the Act of their
Penance Athan. Apol. 1.
: Your Piety in your natural goodness, has vouchsafed to pardon our error.
And at the end of their Act, they made this protestation Athanas. ibid.
: Moreover we promise, that if upon this occasion, those of the East, or
Athanasius himself, shall maliciously appeal us in judgment, we will not
depart from what you shall ordain.

4. You tell us Page 306. lit. k.
out of Sozomen; The restoring of S. Athanasius to his Bishoprike again (by
Julius) was only by his communicatory letters, to declare, that he thought him
worthy to be restored: for if we inquire after the authority, whereby Athanasius
was restored, it was by the command of the Emperor Constantius, as the same
historian records. These are your words, then which none can be more untrue:
for that Julius in his letters, did not only give his advice, declaring that he
thought Athanasius worthy to be restored, but operatiuely exercised his power,
and authority, and by virtue of them effectually and absolutely restored
Athanasius and those other Bishops, is a truth not only acknowledges by your
Protestant writers (as you have heard Chap. 37. sect. 2.
, but in it self so certain, that I think no man, but Doctor Morton could
have the face to deny it. Julius B. of Rome (says Socrates) L. 2. c. 11.
by reason of the privilege of his Church above others, defended their cause,
and sent them back with letters written to the Eastern Bishops, whereby each of
them might be restored to their place; and reprehended severely those that had
rashly deposed them. And they going from Rome, and relying upon the letters of
Julius recovered their seats again. Which is also expressed in the title of
that Chapter: The B. of Rome (says Sozomen) L 3. c. 7.
having examined their complaints, and found, that they agreed touching the
Decrees of the Council of Nice, received them into his communion, and because
by reason of the dignity of his See, the charge of all belonged to him, he
restored to each of them his Church. And in the title of that Chapter:
Athanasius and Paul, by the letters of Julius received their seats again. Are
not these words clear enough? But yet moreover, does not Nicephorus say L. 9.
c. 8.
that, Julius by the greatness of his See, and out of the ancient privilege
and prerogative thereof, knowing that the charge of all Bishops whersoeuer,
belonged to him, as to a Judge, armed each of them with powerful letters, and
sending them back into the East, restored their Churches unto them? And do not
he, and Sozomen add Ibid.
, that he rebuked the Arians, for that they had rashly deposed those Bishops,
and troubled the Churches, not standing to the decrees of the Council of Nice;
and commanded, that some of them in the name of all should on a set day appear
at Rome, to give account of the justice of their sentence; and threatened, not
to let them pass without punishment, unless they did cease to innouate? And
does not Felix Pope Ep. ad Athanas. and cet. Episc. Egypt.
, who lived soon after that time deliver the same in most clear and
effectual words? And finally do not he, Theodoret L. 2. hist, c. 4.
, Sozomen L. 3. c. 7.
, and S. Athanasius himself Apolog. 2.
, out of the undoubted Epistle of Julius report, that Julius following the
Ecclesiastical Law, commanded the Arian Bishops to come to Rome, and summoned
the divine Athanasius canonically to present himself in judgment; and that as
soon as he received this citation, he transported himself in diligence to
Rome; but the Authors of the tragedy went not, because they knew, their lies
would be openly discovered.

How think you now? Did not Julius with the authority of a Judge, restore
those Orthodoxe Bishops to their Churches? and that, by the prerogative of his
See, and because the charge of all Bishops belonged unto him? Did he not
command, and Canonically cite both Athanasius, and his adversaries to appear
in judgment at Rome, and appoint them a day for it? And finding Athanasius to
be free from the crimes, which his enemies had maliciously forged against him,
did he not threaten to punish them, unless they desisted to innouate, and
trouble the Churches? Is this nothing, but to declare, that he thought those
Orthodoxe Bishops worthy to be restored? Is it not to exercise the authority of
a Judge?

And this shows the falsehood of your addition Page 306. fin.
, that the authority whereby Athanasius was restored, was the command of the
Emperor Constantius. For he being an Arian, was so far from commanding him, or
any of those Catholic, Bishops to be restored, that (as Socrates writes L. 2.
c. 12.
, when he heard that Paul B. of Constantinople was restored by the letters of
Julius, he stormed thereat, and caused the Prefect of the City, by his secular
power to thrust him out again, as he in his own person once before had done
See Spon. anno 342. n. 7. and 8.
. And the Arian crew supported by him, so molested Athanasius, that they
enforced him to fly again to Rome: and Constantius himself perseuered in
persecuting him, as long as he durst, which was (witness Sozamen L. 3. c. 19.
, and Theodoret L. 2. c. 11. and 12.
until Athanasius, and Julius made complaint thereof to his brother Constans, a
Catholic Emperor, who assisting the Ecclesiastical authority of Julius, with
his Imperial power, writ threathing letters to Constantius, and so effectual,
that he durst resist no longer, but permitted Athanasius according to the just
sentence given by Julius, to return to his Church, and affisted him therein.
And how far Constantius was, from having any power to restore Bishops, or to
forbid them from returning to their seats, appears in this, that when he
commanded the Bishops assembled at Ariminum Socrat. l. 2. c. 29.
, not to dissolve their Council, but to expect his answer, they sent a
peremptory message unto him, and neglecting his command, as of one that had no
authority to meddle in Ecclesiastical affairs, presently dissolved their
Council, and returned to their Churches.

Let the reader now judge, how many untruths you have told in this one
history; and whether you may not be thought guilty of impiety, in defending,
and canonizing the outrageous proceedings of blasphemous heretics, and
iultifying the sacrilegious violence offered to Catholic Bishops, for not
subscribing to their heresy; and finally in answearing Page 285.
, that the testimonies of ancient Popes in proof of their authority, may be
confuted, and indeed confounded, by as ancient oppositions; as of the
Orientals, against the authority of Pope Julius? Such examples we allow you, to
mantaine your doctrine, and disobedience to the Bishop and Church of Rome. But
I presume, that every understanding Protestant, will disclaim from such an
Advocate, and think that by such precedents his cause is not defended, but
disgraced, condemned, and parallalled with Arianisme.

SECT. VII. Other passages of Doctor Morton examined.
BEllarmine in proof L. 2. de Pont. c. 18.
of the Popes authority, alleges that Sixtus the third deposed Polychronius.
You say Page 195. margin lit. l.
; He numbreth him as one of the eight Patriarchs which Nicolas the first of
that name, reckons in his Epistle to Michaell the Emperor. This is another
untruth: The eight Patriarchs which Bellarmine mentions out of the Epistle of
Nicolas, were of Constantinople; namely Maximus, Nestorius, Acacius, Anthymus,
Sergius, Pyrrhus, Paulus, Petrus. All these were deposed by the Bishops of
Rome, and are so many witnesses against you, of the Popes authority,
acknowledged, and practiced over the Bishops of Constantinople. Polichronius
was B. of Jerusalem, and deposed by Sixtus Pope, as Bellarmine proves out of
the Acts of Sixtus: which acts (witness Baronius Anno 432. fin.
are cited by Nicolas the first, by Petrus Damiani, and other later writers.
And if (as you object Page 295.
Baronius found no other Records of any Polychronius, that was B. of Jerusalem
at that time, does it therefore follow, there was none such? To omit the later
writers he mentions, Petrus Damiani, and Nicolas were men eminently learned:
the one lived 600. the other 800. years nearer the time of Sixtus, then
Baronius did: and the Acts of Sixtus are yet more ancient then either of them.
Wherefore in those days Record might be extant of Polychronius, and his
deposition by Sixtus, reported in those Acts, which before Baronius his time
were lost; or if not lost, yet might not come to his knowledge.

2. You answer Page 295.
: Your Popes must be thought to have restored Bishops only, by endeavoring, and
desiring, that they might be restored. You exemplify in Basilides, whose cause
shows, it was a known truth in those days, that the Pope had authority to
restore Bishops deposed: for why else did Basilides travail from Spain to
Rome, to procure letters of restitution from him? Of this Basilides you say
Page 289. fin. 190.
: Cyprian constituted Sabinus Bishop, instead of Basilides, whom he had
deposed. But you show great ignorance in Ecclesiastical history: for Cyprian
neither deposed Basilides, nor co^stituted Sabinus in his place. Basilides was
not an African, nor any way belonging to Cyprians jurisdiction (who was Primate
of Africa only) but Bishop of Leon in Spain; and for his enormous crimes being
justly deposed by the Bishops of that Country, fled to Stephen Pope, and by a
false information of his own innocence, deceived him, that by his authority,
and command, he might be restored to his Bishopric. The Bishops of Spain, who
had condemned him* sent Sabinus and Felix into Africa to inform S. Cyprian
truly of the case, to ask his advice, and require his intercession to the
Pope, that he would not restore Basilides. S. Cyprian approved their
proceeding, and answered, that if Basilides had obtained from the Pope any
sentence of restitution, it was surreptitious, by reason of the false
information he had given; which alone was sufficient to make his restitution
void, as not only the Civil Cod. cont. ius L. Etsi.
, but also the Canon Law De Rescrip. C. Dilectus.
declares, decreeing in a case like to this of Basilides, that sentences
procured from the Sea Apostolic by surreption, are inualid, and of no force.
Wherefore S. Cyprian rightly answered, that albeit Stephen for his
incircumspection, might be argued of negligence, in giving so easy credit to a
false information, and suffering himself to be deceived; thereby yet the chief
fault was in Basilides, who with lies had sought to justify himself. This is
all that antiquity records of this controversy; which shows, that in those
ancient times, the custom of Bishops, when they thought themselves wronged by
their Metropolitans, was, to appeal to the Pope, as Basilides did: against
which custom, nor against the Popes authority to admit of Appeals, neither
the Bishops of Spain, nor S. Cyprian excepted, as appears in this, that they
blamed not Basilides, for appealing to one that had no power to reiudge his
cause, but for his surprise made upon the Pope, and the Popes want of
circumspection in suffering himself to be deceived by a false information.

3. You say Page 290.
: Cyprian confirmed the election of Pope Cornelius, whose communion both he (as
himself speaks) and his Colleagues, and fellow-bishops gave approbation
unto. To confirm the election of a Bishop, is an Act of jurisdiction, which
therefore can proceed from none, but a Superior. This authority though you deny
to the Pope, yet out of a desire to annihilate his authority, you ouer-shoote
your mark so far, as to make him inferior to all the Bishops of Africa, and to
stand in need of their confirmation; a thing, which S. Cyprian mentions not.
He only signifies to Cornelius, that Nouatianus having made a schism in the
Church, and set himself up, as Antipope, in opposition to Cornelius, and the
Africans being doubtful, which of the two they should acknowledge and obey, as
true Pope, S. Cyprian says, he exhorted all that sailed (out of Africa to
Rome) to abandon Nouatianus, and adhere to Cornelius, and procured letters from
his brethren at Rome, to those of Africa, that being fully certified of the
truth, they might (says he to Cornelius) acknowledge and firmly embrace you,
and your communion, that is to say, the communion of the Catholic Church. All
therefore that you have gained out of S. Cyprian, is to prove your self to be
out of the communion of the Catholic Church: for to be of the Catholic
communion, and to be united to the Pope, in S. Cyprians belief, is one, and
the same thing.

4. The like abuse you offer to S. Gregory, saying, Page 29^.
that he sought approbation from the four Patriarchs. As soon as this holy
Pope was placed in the chair of S. Peter, following the custom of his
Predecessors, he writ a circular, or Synodicall letter (for so anciently those
letters were called) to the four Eastern Patriarchs, that having notice of
his election, they might know, whom to obey, and whom to have recourse unto in
all doubts of faith, and other mayor causes: which was no more to seek
confirmation, or approbation from them, then if a King of Poland, or any other
electiu^ Prince being chosen, should write a circular letter to hi^ Nobles,
giving them notice of his Election, and admon^shing them of their duty and
allegiance unto him. This to have been the effect of those Synodicall letters,
is proved out of Gelasius: Because (says he to Laurence Bishop of Lignidis)
with fraternall love, you put us in mind, that we should send a form of
faith, as a certain medicine, to the Bishops throughout Illyria, and others;
although this has been most amply performed by our predecessor of Blessed
memory, yet because the custom is, that when a Bishop of the Roman Church is
newly made, he send a form of his faith to the holy Churches, I have
endeauored to renew the same in a compendious breuity, to the end, the reader
by this our Epistle may understand, in what faith he is to live, according to
the ordinations of the Fathers. And as the Popes when they were chosen, did
send these Synodicall letters, prescribing a form of faith to be observed by
all Bishops; so likewise, all Metropolitans did send to the Popes newly chosen,
a profession of their faith, to the end, it might be approved by the Sea
Apostolic. So did S. Cyprian to Cornelius Pope, calling it L. 2. ep. 10.
a divine tradition, and an Ecclesiastical institution: and moreover adding,
that he had commanded all the Bishops of his Province to do the like.

SECT VIII. Doctor Mortons ignorance concerning Excommunication: And of
heretics excommunicating the Pope.
EXcommunication is a most grievous Ecclesiastical censure, which can be
inflicted by none, but an Ecclesiastical Superior, that has jurisdiction and
power to bind, and loose, to punish, and absolve the person excommunicated. A
thing so certain, that no puny-Diuine can be ignorant thereof. Wherefore you
discover more then vulgar ignorance in defining Page 290.
, Excommunicating of others, to be, but, a denying to have communion with them.
By this definition, every subject may excommunicate his Superior,
Ecclesiastical, or temporal: for every subject of never so mean a rank,
Ecclesiastic, or laick, may deny to have communion with his Bishop, or his
Sovereign, and thereby excommunicate them: Yea by the same definition, any
Heretic may excommunicate the Pope, or any other Bishop, or Council, by which
he is condemned; for he may deny to have communion with them. Is this good
Divinity? And yet it is yours; who from this definition, as from a true
principle, deduce, that when ancient Popes excommunicated heretical Bishops of
the Eastern Church, it was no act of jurisdiction in them over those Bishops,
but Ibid.
only a disuniting of themselves from them, by denying to have communion with
them which also the same Bishops might deny to have with the Popes And upon
this ground, you justify (as well you may) the Arians, who being excommunicated
by Julius Pope, took to themselves liberty to excommunicate him, in their false
Council at Philippopolis Sozom. l. 3. c. 10.
.

And upon the same ground (when Dioscorus Patriarch of Alexandria grew to so
great a height of madness, as to pronounce a sentence of excommunication
against Leo the Great, and first Pope of that name, because he had condemned
Eutyches, and his heresy) you say Page 290. fin. 291.
, He did it upon the known judgment of the Eastern Church, and upon a common
right, and hability to do it: which as it is an answer full of ignorance, so
I know not how to excuse it from impiety: for although Dioscorus were an
Arch-heretike, though contrary to the Laws of the Church, he had by his own
authority assembled a Council at Ephesus, and approved in it the heresy of
Eutyches, and condemned the Orthodoxe Doctrine, and not only excommunicated,
but beaten, and wounded to death, Flauianus Patriarch of Constantinople, a
stout champion of the Catholic faith; yet none of these crimes were alleged
against him, as the cause of his excommunication, and deposition, but only his
presumptuous attempting to excommunicate the Pope, and his disobedience to him.
Dioscorus (says Anatolius Archbishop of Constantinople Conc. Chalced. Act. 9.
Socrat. l. 2. c. 18.
speaking to the Council of Chalcedon) has not been deposed for the faith,
but because he had excommunicated my Lord the Archbishop Leo, and that having
been thrice cited, he would not appear. And the Council of Chalcedon it self
writing to Leo Relat. ad Leon.
: After all these things, he has extended his phrensy even against him, to
whom the guard of the Vine is committed by our Savior, that is to say against
your Holiness; and has moditated an excommunication against you, who hasten
to unite the body of the Church. So enormous a crime did this holy Council
judge it to be, for any Bishop (even the greatest Patriarch of the East, as
Dioscorus was) to pronounce sentence of Excommunication against the Pope.

But to make this matter more evident, what Christian ever heard, that the
judgment of any Bishop could be valid against the Bishop of the primary See?
which (says the Council of Sinuessa Nicol. Papa Ep. ad Micha. Imper.
is to be judged by no man. The primitive Fathers thought it so unlawful to be
separated from the B. of Rome, that they pronounce all that are divided from
his communion, to be branches cut of from the Vine, which is the Catholic
Church, to be heretics of a perverse judgment, or else presumptuous
selfe-liking schismatikes, and sinners, not to gather, but to scatter; not to
be of Christ, but of Antichrist See above Chap. 1. sect. 4.
. And finally, so absurd a thing it was ever held, for any Christian, to
excommunicate the Pope, that the Emperor Martian writing to certain heretical
Monks of Palestine, who being enemies to the Council of Chalcedon, had
presumed to excommunicate Leo Pope, tells them Apud Bin. to. 2. page 144.
. that thereby they had (and with good cause) made themselves a laughing stook
to the Heathens themselves.

What you object Page 290.
out of Nicephorus, that Menas Patriarch of Constantinople excommunicated Pope
Vigilius. Cardinal Peron has learnedly proved to be a mere fable: and were it
true, it was an unlawful attempt, and inualid, as you have heard.

SECT. IX. Adrian, and Nicolas Popes, objected by Doctor Morton.
ADrian, and Nicolas, the two first Popes of those names, required of
Constantine, and Michaell Emperors of the East, the restitution not only of the
temporal patrimony of S. Peter, iniustly taken away from the Roman Church, by
heretical Emperors, their predecessors, and still withheld by them; but also
of the Ecclesiastical right of ordayning, and governing ten Provinces of the
East, as their peculiar Diocese, according to the custom of their
predecessors. This objection you Page 291. 292.
took from Baronius Anno 800.
: He has given you an answer; to him I remit you. But whereas you say. These
Popes did not think themselves to have jurisdiction over the whole Church of
Christ, it is worth the nothing, that they, even in those very Epistles, which
you object, not only affirm, but most effectually prove the jurisdiction of
the B. of Rome, over the whole Church: and of Adrian, something to this purpose
has been said already Chap. 33. sect. ^.
.

SECT. X. Of the deposition of Flauianus Patriarch of Antioch.
BEllarmine L. ^. de Pont. c. 18.
produces many examples of Eastern Bishops, deposed by the Pope. In answer
whereto, you say Page 295. fin. 296.
: The chiefest example which your Cardinal may seem principally to insiston,
is, that Pope Damasus (as he calls it) deposed Flauianus Patriarch of
Antioch. And therefore have I singled out this example, for a singular Argument
of retorsion, to prove the noiuridicall, or judicial authority of the Roman
jurisdiction, over the Patriarchs of Antioch. Bellarmines first, and chiefest
examples are of eight Patriarchs of Constantinople, which are so many witnesses
of the Popes authority against you. Among these, he chiefly inssisteth on the
example of Anthymus, whom Agapet Pope deposed in the City of Constantinople it
self, as you have heard In this Chap. sect. 4.
, and he proves out of Nicolas the first, Liberatus, Zonaras, and Gelasius.
The reason therefore why you passing over these examples, single out that of
Flauianus, is not, because that is the chiefest Bellarmine insisteth on, but
because in that you find something to quarrel at, which you find not in the
rest. But upon examination, the evidence of this very example singled out by
your self, will show how vnanswearable the rest are.

The ease is this. The Church of Antioch being in schism, two Bishops,
Paulinus, and Meletius pretending right to that Patriarchall seat, and some
adhering to the one, some to the other, not without danger of a great tumult,
they came to agreement Socrat. l. 5. c. 5. Sozom. l. 7. c. 3.
, that all such Ecclesiastics, as were thought fit to govern that Church, or
were in expectation thereof, (which were six in number) should bind themselves
by a solemn oath, not to admit of that Bishopric, so long as either Paulinus,
or Meletius lived; and after the death of either of them, to let the superuiuer
peaceably enjoy that seat alone. Meletius being dead, the Antiochians, contrary
to their oath, advanced Flauianus to the Bishopric, in opposition to Paulinus;
and he contrary to his oath admitted thereof: at which Damasus Pope, and all the
Bishops of the West were greatly offended Sozom. l. 7. c. 11.
; and not without cause, by reason of the new schism it caused, not only in
that Church, and in a great part of the East, but also because it was contrary
to the agreement made by oath, and a great wrong to Paulinus, who was very old,
and a personage of so great veneration, for his sanctity, and merit, that
Valens an heretical Emperor driving many Catholic Bishops from their Churches
in to banishment, never offered to touch him S. Hieron. Bp. 61. ad Pamach.
Socrat. l. 4. c. 2.
. Wherefore Damasus, and the rest of the Western Bishops, writ communicatory
letters to him, as to the true Bishop of Antioch, but abstayned from the
communion of Flauianus, and excommunicated Diodorus, and Acacius that had
ordained him Sozom. l. 7. c. 11.
. And whereas the Council of Constantinople under Nectarius, had confirmed
Flauianus, they (the Western Bishops) annulled that confirmation, and by their
letters accompained with others of the Emperor Gratian (using also therein the
help of Theodosius, who writ to the same effect) they commanded the Council
of Constantinople to come to Rome, S. Hiero. Ep. 27. ad Eustoch. Theod. l. 5.
hist. c. 8. fin. etc. 9.
and put the election of Flauianus again in trial, at a general Council
assembled there, giving withal to both parties assignation to appear.
Flauianus distrusting the equity of his cause, appeared not Theod. l. 5. hist.
c. 23.
, but had recourse to excuses, and to the Emperor. But Paulinus obeying,
transported himself to Rome, in company of other Bishops, and renowned
personages of the East. Whereof S. Hierome speaking says Ep. 16. ad Princip.
: The Ecclesiastical necessity drew me to Rome, with the holy Bishops
Paulinus, and Epiphanius, whereof, the one governed the Church of Antioch in
Syria, and the other the Church of Salamina in Cyprus. And again Ep 17. ad
Eustoch.
: When the Imperial letters had drawn to Rome, the Bishops of the East, and
West, Paula saw there the admirable men, and Bishops of Christ, Paulinus B. of
Antioch, and Epiphanius B. of Salamina in Cyprus. Whereby it appears, that
albeit the election of Flauianus had been confirmed by the Council of
Constantinople, Paulinus was still held to be the true B. of Antioch, and
Flauianus his competitor, in reputation of an intruder, for want of
confirmation from the Sea Apostolic. And therefore as he appeared not, so
neither did the Bishops of the Constantinopolitan Council which had confirmed
him, but by letters written to to the Pope, and Council of Rome, excused
themselves. You (say they) Theod. l. 5. hist. c. 9.
moved with brotherly charity, called us, as your members by the letters of the
most religious Emperor etc. But beside, that our Churches being newly restored,
(if we should have done this) had been wholly abandoned, it was a thing, which
many of vt could no way put in execution; for as much as we travailed to
Constantinople, upon the letters of your Reverence, sent the last year, after
the Council of Aquileia, to the most religious Emperor Theodosius, having
prepared our selves for none, but that journey of Constantinople only, and
having gotten the consent of the Bishops, remaining in the Provinces, for none
but that. And in the end of the same Epistle they make intercession for
Flauianus, fearing lest the cause of Paulinus would be favored by Damasus, by
reason he had been ordained Patriarch of Antioch, by Lucifer a Sardinian
Bishop, and Legate to Liberius, predecessor to Damasus.

The business standing thus, Paulinus died; but the schism lived still. For
his Disciples created to themselves Euagrius a new Bishop, in opposition to
Flauianus Socrat. l. 5. c. 15. Sozom. l. 7. c. 15.
: whereby not only that Church, but the whole world was shaken Amb. Ep. 78.
, and brought into danger of schism: for remedy whereof, Siricius Pope called a
Council at Capua; to which, though the Bishops of the East and West resorted
in great numbers, yet Flauianus still appeared not. Flauianus (says S. Ambrose
Ibid.
has cause to fear, and therefore he flies a trial. And again Ibid.
: One only Flauianus not subject to Laws, as it seems to him, appears not
when we are all assembled.

The Council to prevent further danger of schism, ordained, that whiles the
cause was in agitation, communion should not be denied to the Catholics, that
adhered to either party: and to make an end of that long strife, committed the
examination, and decision of the whole cause, to Theophilus Patriarch of
Alexandria, both by reason of the great authority of his See in the East, as
also because his Pariarkship bordered upon that of Antioch, where the parties
were present; and finally because he was a man impartial. The sacred Synod
(says S. Ambrose Ibid.
writing to Theophilus) having committed the right of examining this cause to
your unanimity, and to our other Colleagues of Egypt. it is necessary, that
you summon again our brother Flauianus. And moreover he aduertiseth
Theophilus, that he ought to carry the business so, as that the final decision
thereof might be reserved to the B of Rome, and confirmed by him. We conceive
(says he) Ibid.
that you ought to refer the cause to our holy brother B of the Roman Church:
for we presume, you will judge so, as cannot displease him. And al use after:
When having received the tenor of your acts, we shall see, you have judged
things so, as the Roman Church shall undoubtedly allow thereof, we will receive
with joy the fruit of your examination.

By this it appears, that S Ambrose held the B of Rome to be the supreme Judge
of Bishops, and that to him appertained the final decision of their causes.
And the same appears yet further in this, that S. John Chrysostom, who was
then Archbishop of Constantinople, and favored Flanianus, as having a little
before been a Priest of his, beseeched Theophilus L. 8. c. 3.
to labor with him, and help him, to make the B. of Rome propitious to
Flauianus; and to this end, by mutual consent of both were chosen (as Legates
to be sent to Rome) Acacius B of Beroea, and Isidore Priest. And the same is
confirmed by Sociates L. 5. c. 25.
: Theophilus (says he) sending the Priest Isidore, appeased Damasus that was
offended, and represented to him, that it was profitable for the concord of the
Church, to parson the fault of Plauianus: and so the Communion was restered to
him.

Finally, notwithstanding that the Emperor favored Flauianus, and took upon
him to plead his cause in judgment at Rome, yet he never was received as
Patriarch of Antioch; nor his Legates admitted, until the Pope at the intreary
of so great personages, had pardoned his fault, and confirmed him in that See.

This is the true history of Flauianus, which you have singled out, as an
especial example of retorsion against Bellarmine, to prove the Popes
no-iuridicall authority over the Patriarchs of Antioch; but you perform it
not: for this example evidently shows the Popes authority exercised over the
Eastern Churches, many ways; as 1. In annulling the Confirmation of Flauianus
made in the Council of Constantinople. 2. In calling those Bishops to Rome, to
put the cause in trial again: nor did they in their answer except against
his authority, to call them, but humbly acknowledging him to be their head, and
themselves to be his members, excused their not coming for want of time, and
other reasons expressed in their Epistle. 3. In calling not only the Western,
but also the Eastern Bishops to the Council of Capua, they obeying his
command. 4. By the Epistle of S. Ambrose, wishing Theophilus to procure a
confirmation of his sentence from the B. of Rome. 5. By the intercession of
Theophilus, of S. Chrysostom, and of the Emperor Theodosius himself, made to
the Pope to pardon Flauianus his fault, and to confirm him in the Bishoprike
of Antioch. And 6. by the Legates, which Flauianus himself in the end was
feign to send to the Pope, before he could be received, as true Bishop of that
See: which he needed not to have done, if his confirmation had not depended on
the Popes approbation.

All this being manifest out of Socrates, and Sozomen, (whom Bellarmine cites)
and also out of S. Ambrose, impartial relators of this cause, you mention not
any of them, but fasten upon the relation of Theodoret, who being a Suffragan
of the Patriarkship of Antioch, and a creature to one of Flauianus his
Successors, was a great fauores of his person, and has reported his cause,
with more relation to favor, then to truth. For first L. 5 c. 23.
he makes Flauianus absolute and lawful Successor to Meletius; and Paulinus an
iniust pretender to that See: whereas contrariwise Paulinus was the true
Successor, and Flauianus an in^^^der, as being bound by oath, not to permit
himself, nor any other to be ordained Bishop in place of Meletius, but to let
Paulinus enjoy that dignity alone, and peaceably, whiles he lived. 2. He
mentions not this oath of Flauianus, but signifies, that he came to the
Bishoprike, by a lawful and Canonical election, without breach of any oath.
3. To make good the cause of Flauianus against Euagrius, he reports, that
Paulinus alone, before his death, ordained Euagrius, contrary to the Laws of
the Church, when as Socrates L. 5. c. 15.
and Sozomen L. 7. c. 15.
impartial writers testify, that Euagrius was not ordained by Paulinus, but by
his Disciples after his yeath. 4. Nor is he to be credited in his report, that
Theodosius having heard Flauianus at Constantinople, did not press him to go
to Rome, but bid him return home to Antioch, and that coming himself
afterward to Rome, he undertook to answer for Flauianus, and to plead his
cause in judgment.

And yet notwithstanding, even this relation of Theodoret (partial as it is)
proves the iuridicall authority of the Pope over the Patriarchs or Antioch, if
it be taken entirely, as it is set down by him, and not mangled as you report
it: for he says L. 5. c. 23.
, The Bishops of Rome, not only that admirable man Damasus, but also after him
Siricius, and Anastasius successor to Siricius, inueighed greatly against the
Emperor, telling him, here pressed them that practiced tyranny against
himself, but left unpunished those, that by tyranny sought to overthrow the
laws of Christ. Whereupon, as the Emperor before had commanded him, so now
again he labored to compel him, to go to Rome, to have his cause judged
there. This shows that the Emperor acknowledged no less obligation in the
greatest Patriarchs to obey the Pope, then in the subjects of the Empire to
obey the Emperor; and that such Bishops, as show themselves disobedient to him,
violate the Laws of Christ, and deserve no less punishment, then subjects
that rebel against their Prince. Again: The Emperor (says Theodoret Ibid.
coming long after that time to Rome, and being blamed again by the Bishops,
for not repressing the tyranny of Flauianus, said, he would take upon himself
the person of Flauianus, and plead his cause in judgment: which last clause,
you in your relation of Theodorets words omit, because it shows, that the
judgment of Flauianus his cause belonged to the Court of Rome: for the pleading
of causes in judgment, is only before them, that have authority to judge.

Finally, though Theodoret relate partially this story of Flauianus, yet that
he intended not thereby, to deny the authority of the Pope over the Bishops of
Antioch, appears, not only by what has been here proved to the contrary, but
also because in express words he professes In Ep. ad Kenat.
that, the Roman See has the stern of government over all the Churches of the
world; and therefore he being a Suffragan of the Patriarkeship of Antioch, when
he was deposed from his Bishoprike, by the second Council of Ephesus, had not
recourse to his own Patriarch, for redress, but appealed to Leo Pope, and by
him was restored. He likewise knew that John Patriarch of the same See had been
deposed by Celestine Pope See above Chap. 18. sect. 2.
, and Maximus confirmed in that See by Leo the Great See this Chap. sect. 3.
.

All this shows, how untruly you say Page 296. fin.
, that Damasus deposed not Flauianus, nor executed any act of iuridic all
proceeding against him but that he was confirmed in his Bishoprike by the
Emperor: for Damasus annulled the sentence of the Council of Constantinople
that had confirmed him, and cited both the Fathers of that Council, and him,
to appear at Rome, to have his cause tried there; and thereupon the Emperor
once, and twice urged him to go: and Siricius successor to Damasus, gave to
Theophilus Patriarch of Alexandria, power to judge his cause. And
notwithstanding all the Emperors favor, he was not confirmed in the
Patriarkship, until at the entreaty of Theophilus and Chrysostom, the Pope
had pardoned his offense, and he himself had sent Legates to obtain his
confirmation. If this be not sufficient to prove the Popes authority over the
Bishops of Antioch, what is?

And when you ask Page 297.
, Whether the Christian Churches could be good Catholics, and in state of
samation, that communicated with Flauianus, at the time of his opposition, to
the Pope, it is a question sprung from ignorance: for the cause of Flauianus
being in agitation, it was so far from being unlawful to communicate with him,
or with them that adhered either to him, or Paulinus, and Euagrius, that for
avoiding of further schism; the Council of Capua ordained that Communion
should be denied to neither party.

SECT. XI. Doctor Morton in defense of his Doctrine, charge ancient Bishops,
with exercising Acts of authority out of the limits of their own jurisdiction.
WE have proved the Popes to be supreme Governors of the universal Church,
because they have exercised acts of jurisdiction over the greatest Bishops of
the East and West. You make your apposition (as you say Page 297.
by parallels, and examples of other Bishops in antiquity, executing Acts of
confirming, and deposing Bishops, without the limits of their own
jurisdiction: which is tacitly to contradict your self, confessing that the
Popes have confirmed, and deposed Bishops out of their own Patriarkship (to
which you confine their authority.) but that they had no jurisdiction our those
Bishops. The falsity of this answer, who sees not? for confirming and
deposing of Bishops, is an act of jurisdiction, which no Bishop has power to
exercise out of the limits of his jurisdiction. And therefore to say, that
either the Popes or other Bishops, have executed acts of confirming, or
deposing Bishops, without the limits of their own jurisdiction, is to accuse
them of pride and injustice, in arrogating to themselves liberty to transgress
the limits of their jurisdiction, executing acts of authority, where they had
no right. But as to deny the universal jurisdiction of the Popes, you wrong
them; so to make good your denial of their authority, you wrong the other
Bishops in whom you instance.

The first is S. Athanasius B. of Alexandria; who (say you) Page 300.
appointed a Bishop over the Indians. This Bishop, though you name him not, was
Frumentius, who having lived among the Indians, and returning from thence,
informed S. Athanasius of the great hope he conceived of their Conversion to
Christ, if preachers were sent unto them. The faith which Frumentius preached,
was the Roman faith, and he served God after the manner of the Roman Church and
induced all Christians that traded with the Indians to do the like Ruffin. l.
2. c. 9. Sozom. l. 2. c. 2.3.
. S. Athanasius, with the advice of his Clergy, created him Bishop at
Alexandria, and sent him with other Priests, to preach the Gospel to the
Indians, and reduce them to the Communion of the Roman Church. Where do you
find in all this, that S. Athanasius instituted, or confirmed any Bishop
without the limits of his own jurisdiction? Did he not consecrate Frumentius
Bishop in his own Church at Alexandria? Did he send him to preach, or exercise
jurisdiction, within the Dioces of any other Bishop? No. He sent him to a
barbarous people, to reduce them to the faith of Christ, and obedience of the
Roman Church; which was then, and is still lawful for any Bishop, in like case
to do, that being no where forbidden, nor contrary to any Law, divine, or
humane, nor any way derogating from the authority of the B. of Rome, but most
grateful to him, whose greatest desire is, to reduce the whole world, to the
faith of Christ, and whose approbation for such enterprises is always justly
presumed: especially since thereby the glory of the Roman Church is increased,
and her jurisdiction enlarged, as by the conversion of both Indies, in these
later times, we see.

Your second example Page 300.
is, of Theophilus B of Alexandria, laboring to ordain Chrysostom to be the
B. of Constantinople. For this you allege Sozomen, who says L. 8. c. 2.
that Chrysostom being famous for his Virtue, and learning, throughout all the
Roman Empire, by voice of the Clergy, and people of Constantinople, and of the
Emperor himself, was chosen Archbishop of that Imperial City: but that
Theophilus Patriarch of Alexandria resisted his ordination, laboring to promote
to that dignity, Isidore a Chaplain of his own. This is the relation of
Sozomen: why do you report it untruly?

Your third example Ibid.
, is of S. Gregory Nazianzen, unto whom (say you) Meletius B. of Antioch, and
Petrus of Alexandria confirmed the Sea, and Patriarkship of Constantinople. For
this you bring Theodoret L. ^. hist. c. 8.
, and Gregorius Presbyter. Theodoret says no such thing; but only that albeit
the Canons to prevent ambition, forbid the removing of Bishops from one See, to
another; yet the opinion of Meletius was, that in those circumstances, Gregory
might hold the Bishopric of Constantinople, by reason of the great damage that
Church sustained for want of a Bishop, in so dangerous a time: But that
Meletius designed, or ordained him Bishop, Theodoret says it not; nor is it
true: for he was created Bishop by the Council of Constantinople, which
Theodoret in that Chapter mentions. And the same is verified by other
historians. Gregory (says Socrates) L. 5. c. 5.
by the common consent of many Bishops was transferred from the Bishoprike of
the City of Nazianzum, to the Bishoprike of Constantinople. And Sozomen L. 6.
c. 17.
: Gregory by the voices of many Bishops, was designed B. of Constantinople: for
no Catholic Bishop, nor Church of Orthodoxe people, being in that City, the
doctrine of the Council of Nice, was in danger to be wholly exploded. How then
could you say, that Meletius, and Petrus of Alexandria confirmed unto Gregory
Nazianzen, the Sea of Constantinople? Especially since Theodoret in that very
Chapter expresses the names of diverse of those Bishops which in the general
Council of Constantinople conferred that dignity on him, and repressed the
insolency of Maximus, whom Timothy B. of Alexandria would have intruded into
that See.

Your fourth example Page 300.
, is Moses, who being a man famous for miracles was ordained Bishop by
certain exiles. It is true: for the Romans, upon agreement of peace, with
Mauia Queen of the Saracens (who desired to have Moses created Bishop of her
Nation) brought him to Alexandria to be consecrated by Lucius, then Patriarch
of that city, who being an Arian heretic. Moses refused to be consecrated by
him: and therefore the Arians were enforced to permit him to be consecrated by
the Catholic Bishops of the Roman Communion Ruffin. l. 2. c. o. Socrat. l. 4.
c. (...). Sozo. l. o. c. 38.
, who though banished by the Arians had not thereby lost their jurisdiction, and
therefore might ordain Moses, without entrenching on the liberties of other
Bishops, or passing the limits of their own. And what they did, was confirmed
by Damasus Pope, who (says Socrates L 4. c. 30.
by his letters approved the faith of Moses, and confirmed the creation of
Peter, that is to say, of that renowned Patriarch, successor to S. Athanasius,
who being expelled by Lucius, appealed to Damasus Pope, and by him was restored
to his Church of Alexandria. Wherefore this example shows the Roman Church to
be the Head of Catholic communion, and that if Moses had been brought to to
you to be consecrated Bishop, he would have shunned you, as he shunned Lucius.

Your fifth example Page 300.
is of Athanasius B. of Alexandria, deposing Bishops without Egypt. This you
report out of Socrates, L. 3. c. 20.
who has no such words, nor treats of any such subject.

Your last example Page 300.
is of Cyrill of Jerusalem, who was cast out of his Bishopric by Acacius B.
of Casarea. This makes against your self: for the B. of Jerusalem was
Suffragan to the B. of Csarea, who therefore might depose him without exceeding
the limits of his jurisdiction. It is true, that the Metropolitan cannot
without just cause depose his Suffragan: and therefore because Acacius being an
Arian, deposed Cyril merely out of hatred to the Catholic faith, and for
certain crimes which himself had feigned against him, the deposition was
iniust, and judged to be such by the Council of Seleucia Theod. l. 2. c. 27.
Sozo. l. 4. c. 24. So crat. l. 2. c. 35. Niceph. l. 9. c. 19.
, where Acacius durst not appear, to have the cause of Cyrill examined: and
therefore both he, and his accomplices for the wrong done to Cyrill, and for other
their heretical machinations, were themselves deposed, and Cyrill restored to
his seat at Jerusalem.

These are your six examples, which upon examination prove all against your
self: and therefore your horned argument, framed out of them, does nothing else,
but goare your own bowels.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of Appeals to Rome, decreed in the Council of Sardica.
SECT. I. Whether the Council of Sardica were a general Council.
IN the Council of Sardica, it was decreed Cap. 3.4.5.
. 1. That if in the cause of a Bishop, who thinks himself to be wronged, a
new judgment be required, the B. of Rome is to give the Judges. 2. That if a
Bishop deposed by the next Bishops, say, his cause ought to be judged again,
none is to be placed in his See, until the B. of Rome have pronounced upon it.
3. That a Bishop accused may have recourse to Rome, by way of Appeal.

Against the authority of the Council of Sardica you object Page 301.
1. That Bellarmine produces in this place this Council as a sound argument,
which elsewhere heranketh among those Councels, that are to be partly allowed,
and partly rejected: as if coin partly mixed, and counterfeit, ought to be
taken for good payment. This argument is an imposture: for to the Council of
Sardica came 376. Bishops, of which 300. were Catholics: the other 76. Arians
Socrat. l. 2. c. 16.
. These 76. refused to enter into the Council at Sardica, unless Athanasius,
and Paul were expelled: which condition the Catholic Bishops admitted not, but
answered Sozom. l. 31. c. 10.
: They never had, nor would now abstain from the communion of Paul, and
Athanasius, especially because Julius B. of Rome, having examined their cause,
had not condemned them. Hereupon those 76. Arian Bishops, separating themselves
from the body of the Council, held an Antisynod of their own, at
Philippopolis (a City not far from Sardica) which is reproved, as being a
Conuenticle of Arians. Of this Bellarmine speaks, when he says; The Council
of Sardica is partly reproved. But the decrees for appealing to Rome, were not
made in this mock-Councell (yea this reproved Athanafius for appealing, and
Julius Pope for admitting his appeal) but by the true Council held at
Sardica, which has ever been approved by the Church, and in no part reproved.
This Council of 300. Bishops it is, which Bellarmine alleges in proof of
Appeals. How then can you be excused in saying, that he produces this
Council in this place as a sound Argument, which elsewhere he ranketh among
those Counsels, that are to be partly allowed, and partly rejected? for he
never says, that this Council of 300. Bishops is in any part to be rejected.

2. You object Page 302.
, that this Council, is not a general Council: for (say you) though in
respect of the calling of it by Constantius, we may not unworthily say, that it
was general yet if we observe, that it was afterward distracted, and divided
into two places, we may rather esteem it particular. This urges not: for the
distraction consisting in so small a number of Bishops, and they Arians, their
absence could not take from the true Council of Sardica (which represented all
the Catholic Bishops in the world) the name of a general Council, which had
been imposed on it at the first calling; no more then the Anti-Synod held at
Ephesus in favor of Nestorius, by the Bishops of the Patriarkship of Antioch,
hindered the true Council of Ephesus, from being perfectly and absolutely
general. And in conformity to this you else where suppose and confess Page
144. sin. 145.
, the Sardican Council to be a general Council; according to the testimonies
of S. Athanafius, Socrates, Seuerus Sulpitius, Justinian, Baronius, and Binius.
To which number you might have added Vigilius that ancient. B. of Trent Cout.
Eucych. l. 5.
. Theodoret L. 2. c. 8.
, and Hincmarus Opuse. ^^. c. 20.
. Nor did Constantius alone call this Council, but also his brother Constans;
and that not by their authority, but by the authority of Julius Pope, who (as
it is plain out of Socrates) L. 2. c. 16.
called the Bishops, and appointed a day for them to meote at Sardica, to begin
the Council.

SECT. II. Other objections of Doctor Morton, against Appeals to Rome,
answered.
YOu third objection Page 302.
, that the right which the Pope can claim for Appeals, depends altogether
upon humane constitutions, has been already answered Above Chap. 27. sect. 4.
.

4. You except Page 304.
against some of the examples (which Bellarmine produces of Appeals made to
the Pope) as being of such, as were within his own Patriarkship and therefore
rather subject to him, then to others: from whence to infer, that appeals
out of other Patriarkships may be made unto him, is (say you Ibid.
as if a Proctor should say: My Client had tith in his own parish, therefore do
the next Parishes adjoining owe their tithes unto him. But this example
condemns your Doctrine: for if all that are in the Patriarkship of the West,
be the Popes subjects, and have right to appeal unto him, why do you
Protestants (who cannot deny your selves to be within his Patriarkship)
disclaim from his obedience? Why do you not submit to your lawful Superior?
Why do you forbid appeals, and all recorse unto him? And if (as here you
confess) he has as much right to the appeals of them which are within his
own Patriarkship, as a Parson has to the tithes of his own Parish, why do
you defend, that it was lawful for the Africans (whom you acknowledge to be
within his own Dioces Page 289.
, and therefore rather subject to him then to others, Page 304.
to forbid appeals unto him? Why do you so often inueigh against the Popes,
for requiring and mantaining their own right herein?

5. You except Ibid.
against other appeals, because they were of heretics, or other persons
notoriously impious, as of Basilides, Marcion, Fortunatus, and Felix, or
Felicissimus, for so you should have said. But by this Argument you may as well
prove, that a King has no right of Appeals in his kingdom: for who knows
not, that not only persons that are wronged by inferior Judges, but also
others, which have been justly condemned, do sometimes appeal: the former to
be righted, and the later in hope to procure their just condemnation to be
revoked by favor, or by misinforming their Sovereign? Wherefore as it were
sophistry, to inferie, that a King has not sovereign authority in his
kingdom, because some that appeal unto him, are wicked persons; so it is to
except against the Popes supreme authority, because some that appeal unto him,
are wicked persons, that have been justly condemned by their immediate
Superiors. Your inference should have been, that because all sorts of persons,
nocent, and innocent, have appealed to the Pope from all parts of the world,
it rightly follows, that he is supreme Judge of the universal Church.

SECT. III. Examples of innocent Appellants.
IN proof of the ancient custom of appealing to Rome, we produce the examples
of S. Athanasius, S. Chrysostom, Theodoret, and Flauianus. You answer Page
304.
: They addressed their requests to the B. of Rome, not as to a peremptory
Ludge, but as to a Patron, and arbitrary Days-man. And of Theodoret, and
Chrysostom you had said before Page 255.
: They only required from the Bishops of Rome a subsidiary help, as one King
may from another, and as the B. of Arles, may from the B. of Paris. But this to
be false sophistry, I shall easily prove, if first I give the reader a taste of
your ignorance, concerning the antiquity of Appeals to Rome from remote
Nations in general.

SECT. IV. Doctor Mortons ignorance, concerning the Antiquity of appealing to
Rome from remote Nations.
THeodoret being iniustly deposed from his Bishopric of Cyre, a City
bordering upon Persia, appealed to Leo Pope, saying Ep. ad Leon.
: I attend the sentence of your Apostolic throne, and beseech your Holiness
to succor me, appealing to your right and just judgment; and to command that I
be brought before you, and verify that my Doctrine follows the Apostolical
paths. You startling at these so vnanswearable words of Theodoret, bid us Page
255. marg. lit. m.
note, that the phrase of appealing to the Pope from remote nations, was very
uncouth in those days, giving us thereby a good testimony of your ignorance in
Ecclesiastical history: for that the phrase of appealing to the Pope from
remote nations, was not very uncouth, but very familiar in those days, and
long before those days, even from the first ages of the Church, who knows
not, that is versed in antiquity? For 1. Sixtus Pope, that lived 300. years
before Theodoret, ordayneth Ep. 2.
. that, if any Bishop be wronged he appeal freely to the holy, and Apostolic
See. 2. Marcellus the first, declares Ep. 1. ad Episc. Antioch. Prou.
, that accoding to the constitutions of the Apostles, and their successors, all
Bishops, when there is occasion, may appeal to the Sea Apostolic. 3. Felix
the second Ep. ad Syn. Alex.
: As often as Bishops shall think themselves wronged by those of their
Province, or by their Metropolitan, or have them in suspicion, let them appeal
to the Sea of Rome. 4. The same is ordained by Victor Ep. ad Theoph. caterosque
Episc. Aegyp.
, by Zephyrinus Ep. ad Episc. Sicil.
, by Fabianus Ep. ad Hilar.
, and Melchiades Ep. ad Episc. Hispan.
. 5. And what these ancient Popes decreed, the holy Council of Nice related by
Julius Ep. 2.
, confirmed; ordaining, that all Bishops accused of grievous crimes, may freely
appeal to the Sea Apostolic, and fly to it, as to a Mother, for defense, and
succor. The authority of this Canon is proved by Pisanus L. 3. Conc. Niceni
apud Bin. to. 1. page 350.
: And that the Nicen Council made such a decree, S. Leo Ep. 25.
testifies, and you else where forgetting your self, acknowledge Page 308.
marg. lit. r.
. 6. The Council of Sardica related not only by Catholic writers, but also by
the Centurists, decrees Cap. 4.
, that if any Bishop being deposed by the next Bishops, and protesting, that
his cause ought to be judged a new, fly for succor to the B. of Rome, no other
is to be installed in his See, after he has put in his Appeal, but that his
cause be sentenced by the B. of Rome. 7. And when John, surnamed Talaia,
Patriarch of Asexandria, was cast out of his See by the Emporor Zeno, and Peter
Moggus set up in his place, John (says Liberatus Liberat. 6.18.
addressed himself to Calendion Patriarch of Antioch, and having taken from
him Synodic all letters of intercession, appealed to the Pope of Rome
Simplicius. 8. When Flauianus Patriarch of Constantinople was condemned by the
false Council of Ephesus, Valentinian the Emperor writ to Theodosius his
Father-in-Law Extat Ep inter Ep. preamb. Conc. Chalced.
, that Flauianus according to the custom of Counsels, appealed by petition to
the Blessed Bishop of the City of Rome. And Liberatus Cap. 12.
: That, sentence having been pronounced against Flauianus, he appealed to the
B. of Rome, by petition presented to his Legates. 9. And Leo Ep. 8.
writing to the same Flauianus: Eutyches protestes, that in full judgment he
presented to you a request of appeal, and that it was not received. 10. And
Flauianus answering Leo Extat Ep. inter Ep. Leonis ante Ep. 7.
: Eutyches has informed you, that in the time of judgment, he presented to us,
and to the holy Council hear assembled, libells of appeals to your Holiness
which was never done by him. 11. And the same Leo Ep. 25.
writing to Theodosius the younger, beseeches him, that for as much as
Flauianus being wronged by the false Council of Ephesus, had presented a
libell of appeal to his Legates, he would command a general Council to be
held within Italy: for the Nicen Canons require this necessarily to be done,
after the putting in of an Appeal. To these I add Theodoret, testifying in
express words that he appealed to Leo Pope.

These witnesses show, that the phrase of appealing to the Pope from remote
nations, was not very uncouth, but very familiar in the days of Theodoret, and
in former ages: and that the right of appealing to the Roman See was
acknowledged, and testified by holy Popes of the primitive times, by general
Counsels, by Emperors, by Bishops, and by all ancient writers. And the same
might be proved by other examples, if these were not sufficient to show your
ignorance in denying, if not rather your boldness, in out-facing so known a
truth.

SECT. V. That S. Athanasius appealed to Julius Pope, and Theodoret to Leo, as
absolute Judges: and that by their authority, both of them were restored to
their Churches.
THat S. Athanasius appealed to Julius Pope, and by his authority was restored
to his seat, has been effectually proved Chap. 38. sect. 6.
. And to what there was said, I add here the testimony of Liberatus, who
speaking of John Patriarch of Alexandria deposed by the Emperor Zeno, says: In
Breuia. c. 18.
He appealed to the B. of Rome, as also Blessed Athanasius did. And that
Theodoret appealed to Leo, as to an absolute Judge, that had power to command
him, and sentence his cause, he himself witnesses, as you have heard Sect.
praeced. init.
. Nevertheless you taking upon you to know, what passed in Theodorets cause,
better then Theodoret himself, say Page 304.
: He addressed his requests to the B. of Rome, not as to a peremptory Judge,
but as to a Patron, and arbitrary dais-man, and one upon whose authority he
depending, acknowledges in express words his reason, to wit, the integrity of
the faith of the Pope; and promising to abide his award, with the assistance of
others. And before you had said Page 255. marg. lit. m.
: The event shows, that there was in this business no iuridicall proceeding at
all: Only Theodoret upon his confession of his Orthodoxe faith, was received
into communion with Leo, as Leo might have been with John of Constantinople, in
like case. These are your words, to prove, that Theodoret appealed not to the
Pope, as to an absolute Judge, that had authority to annull the sentence of the
Council that deposed him, and restore him to his See, but only as to an
Arbitrator, by reason of the integrity of his faith; when as he contrarily in
express words beseeches Renatus Ep ad Renat.
to persuade the most holy, and most blessed Archbishop (of Rome) to use his
Apostolical authority, and command him to appear before his Council (that
is, his Consistory) because that holy See has the guidance, and government of
all the Churches of the world. And writing to Pope Leo, he says In Ep. ad Leon.
: I attend the sentence of your Apostolic throne, and beseech your Holiness,
to succor me appealing to your right, and just judgment, and to command, that
I be brought before you etc. And I promise to stand to your judgment,
contenting my self with that which you shall determine, what ever it be: And I
beseech you, that I may be judged according to my writings. If Theodoret had
studied to express the Popes judicial authority, to sentence his cause, could
he have done it in more clear, and effectual words then these? It is true,
that as he acknowledges the Roman Church to be privileged above others, for
many causes, so especially, for that she has remained free from all blemish of
heresy, none having ever possessed that See, which has held any thing contrary
to truth, or which has not kept the Apostolical grace entyre and without
blemish. The reason why he mentions the purity of faith always preserved in
the Roman Church, is, because he had been accused, and deposed as guilty of
heresy in his writings. And therefore he appealeth confidently to the Pope, as
to one, whose judgment in matters of faith is is infallible, and to whom the
decision of all such Controversies belongs, acknowledging withal (as you
have heard) the Roman Church to be the Head of all Churches, and the Pope to be
his absolute Superior, and Judge, with authority to command him, and sentence
his cause. And Leo Pope accordingly using the authority of a Judge, declared
him free from heresy, and restored him to his See: whereupon the Senators, that
assisted at the Council of Chalcedon, said with the approbation of the whole
Council Act. 1.
: Let the most Reverend Bishop Theodoret come in, because the most holy
Archbishop Leo has restored him to his See. Who then sees not the
insufficiency of your answer, that Theodoret appealed not to the Pope as to
an absolute Judge, but made his requests unto him, as to an arbitrary Dais-man?
for appeals are not made to Arbitrators, but to absolute Judges. An Arbitator
is he, to whom the determination of a controversy is remitted by agreement of
both parties, which in Theodorets cause can have no place: for his adversaries
never agreed to have his cause remitted to the Pope. If therefore the Pope had
not been an absolute Judge, Theodorets appealing to him, had been in vain: nor
could he have recovered his seat by the Popes sentence: for a sentence
pronounced without authority, is of no effect.

And though, after the Council of Chalcedon had admitted Theodoret upon the
Popes restitution, to take his place amongst the Bishops, some of them doubting
of his faith, because he had written against Cyrill of Alexandria in favor of
Nestorius, and therefore fearing the Pope might have restored him upon
misinformation, urged him to anathematize Nestorius again, yet that no way
helps your cause, nor derogateth from the Popes authority: for when Theodoret
had anathematized Nestorius, the Council proceeded not to a new sentence of
restitution, but subscribing to that of Leo, cried out all with one voice Act.
2.
: Long live Archbishop Leo: Leo has judged the judgment of God.

SECT. VI. That S. Chrysostom appealed to Innocentius Pope, as to an absolute
Judge, and by his authority was restored to his Church of Constantinople.
S. Chrysostom being deposed from his Patriarchall See at the procurement of
Eudoxia the Empress, wife to Arcadius Emperor of the East, by a Council of
Bishops, under Theophilus Patriarch of Alexandria, had recourse by letters of
appeal to Innocentius Pope. This you deny, saying Page 307. n.
, that whereas Bellarmine and Baronius refer you to the story it self, you
can find nothing less in it, then the matter of Appeal: for (say you)
Chrysostom made his requests not to the Pope alone, but to the other Reverend
Bishops within the Roman Province, together with him. But this is a mistake
proceeding from your ignorance: for as the Syrians to express, Master, or
Lord, use the word, Rabbi, which has a plural signification, because a person
of quality contains in himself the authority of many; so when we write to an
Honorable person, it is usual to speak unto him in the plural number, to
signify that he has in himself the dignity and authority of many. So writ
Eusebius B. of Milan to Pope Leo alone Extat inter Ep. Leo. post ep. 52.
; God has placed ye Prelates of the Apostolic See, worthy Protectors of his
worship. So writ Theodoret to the same Pope alone Ep. ad Leon.
: Vos enim per ^mnia conuenit esse primos. So writ the Bishops of Syria to
Justinian the Emperor Conc. Constant. sub Mena. Act. 1.
: Our Lord preserve ye devout and zealous guardians of the faith. So writ the
Council of Mopsuestia to Vigilius Pope In Conc. 5. Act. 5.
: It is convenient, O most Holies, that since you hold the chief dignity of
Priesthood etc. And so did Chrysostom write in the plural number to
Innocentius Pope alone, as it is manifest, both out of the inscription of his
Epistle, which is singular, and directed to Innocentius alone, as also out of
Paladius In vita Chrysostom.
, who cites it, as addressed to him alone.

2. You say Page 307.
: Chrysostom made his requests to the Pope, not to cite the parties complained
against, but only to write unto them, and this not by any peremptory charge,
but only by reproof of their vmust dealing, and of admonition etc. Here I
accuse you of something more then ignorance: for the words of Chrysostom to
Innocentius are Ep. 1. ad Innocent.
: Vouchsafe to write, and ordain by your authority, that these things so
wickedly done, I being absent, and not refusing judgment, may be inualid, as of
their own nature they are: and that they who have proceeded so iniustly, may
be submitted to the punishment of the Ecclesiastical Laws: And command, that
I, who am innocent, and not convicted of any crime, be restored to my Church.
And again Ep. ^. ad Innocent.
. One thing I beseech your vigilant Soul, that albeit they, which have filled
all with tumulies, be sick of an impenitent, and incurable disease, if yet they
will remedy those things, that then they may not be punished, nor
excommunicated. What more express form of appeal, or what more evident
acknowledgment of the Popes authority, and judicial power, then this? Does not
Chrysostom beseech Innocentius, to disannull by his letters and authority, the
Acts of the Council which had deposed him? To abrogate their sentence
pronounced against him? to replace him in his Bishopric? and to punish his
adversaries, according to the Laws of the Church, but yet to spare them, if
they would repent? Is not this to acknowledge in him the power of an absolute
Judge? And is not this extant to be read in Chrysostomes Epistles, and in his
life written by Palladius? You to keep this from your readers, set not down
any of Chrysostoms words, in the text of your discourse. And though in your
margent you set down some of them in Latin, in a small letter, yet even that
you do not without imposture: for you mangle them, leaving out those, in which
he besecheth the Pope to use his authority, in punishing his adversaries,
according to the Ecclesiastical Canons, and in restoring him to his Church.

Again, you are guilty of untruth, in saying Page 307.
, that Chrysostom made not any requests to the Pope, to cite the parties
complained against. For does he not say Ep. ad Innoc. apud Pallad. in vita
ipsius.
: But yet if the authors of wickedness will declare, for what crimes they have
iniustly deposed me, let their evidences be given in: Let processes be
produced: let my accusers come: let a true, and incorrupt judgment sit: I
refuse it not: I decline it not; yea I earnestly desire it: let us be judged?
I^ his to request the Pope to write to his adversaries not by any peremptory
charge, but only by way of reproof, and admonition, for their unjust dealing?
Does he not beseech him, that his aduerlaries may appear, and bring in their
evidences against him, and that his cause may be tried a new by him, as by a
just and in corrupt Judge?

But you say Page 30^.
: When all the Pope cold do is performed, what the last refuge was, he did
signify in his letters to the Orientalls* saying: The only remedy of curing
these evils is the calling of a Council: and until then, the matter is to be
committed to the will and pleasure of God Here you are accusable of an iniust
reticence of what Innocentius did, and how he showed himself, alone, and
without a Council, to be an absolute Judge: for does not Palladius say In vit.
Chrysostom.
: Innocentius decreed, that the judgment of Theophilus should be abrogated, and
annulled? Does not Sozomen in that very place which you allege L. 8. c* 26.
testify, that Innocentius condemned those things, which were done against
John? And by this single sentence of Innocentius alone, without any Synod. John
was absolved, as Gelasius an Author of the same age reports, saying Ep. ad
Episcop. Dardan.
: A Synod of Catholic Bishops having condemned John of Constantinople, of holy
memory, the Sea Apostolic alone, because it consented not thereunto, absolved
him. Nor did he show the authority of a Judge, only, in absoluing John, and
condemning his adversaries, but especially, in that hearing of his death, he
excommunicated the Emperor Arcadius, and the Empress Eudoxia his wife, who had
been the chief causes of his condemnation, and banishment: for as Nicephorus
L. 13. c. 33.
, and Georgius Patriarch of Alexandria In vita Chrysostom.
an Author of 1000. years antiquity, cited by S. Damascens and Photius In
Georg. Alex.
, and followed by Cedrenus In Arcad.
, Glycas In Annal. in Arcad.
, and other Greek Authors testify, L. 1. de Imaginibus.
Innocentius having severely reprehended them both, for the enormity of their
offense, pronounced Excommunication against them, in these words: And therefore
I the meanest, and a sinner, as Depositary of the Throne of the great Apostle
Peter, cut off thee, and her from the participation of the immaculate Mysteries
of Christ our God, and ordain that whatsoever Bishop, or Clerk of the holy
Church of God, which shall presume to administer them to you, after he has
read this my Censure, shall be deposed.

All this is to be read in the history of Chrysostom, to which (you say)
Baronius and Bellarmine refer you. Had it not then been honesty, to take
notice of these particulars? but that was not for your purpose.

This also conuinceth you to speak untruly, when you say Page 308.
: The Pope confesses insufficiency in himself, and that the only remedy is in
the judgment of a Council: for in case of an appeal, two things are
necessary: the first is, to judge whether the cause be lawful; if it be, to
admit of the appeal; to annull the sentence pronounced against the Appellant,
and restore the cause to the same state in which it was before his
condemnation. This Innocentius performed in the cause of Chrysostom. He
admitted his appeal: he absolved him: he annulled the Council that condemned
him: he excommunicated the Emperor, and the Empress, by whose procurement he
had been condemned: and upon their repentance absolved them. All this he did
without a Council, showing that he acknowledged not insufficiency in himself,
nor thought the only remedy to be in a Council. The second thing required in
case of an Appeal, is, to proceed to a new judgment, naming Judges, either of
Bishops of the adjoining Provinces, or else by sending Legates from Rome, with
authority to judge the cause, together with the Bishops of the Provinces
adioining; or if the weight of the cause require it, to call a general
Council, in which it may be determined with satisfaction of the whole Church,
as the Council of Nice has prescribed Leo Ep. 25.
. This also was exactly performed by Innocentius Pope, in the appeal of
Chrysostom. Innocent (says Palladius) In vit. Chrysostom.
having received both parties into his Communion, determined, that the judgment
of Theophilus should be abrogated and annulled, saying: They should hold
another Synod irreprouable, of the Prelates of the West, and East. This was
Innocentius his desire, which (as Sozomen reports) he proposed by five
Bishops, L. 8. c. 28.
and two Priests of the Roman Church, to Honorius, and Arcadius, wishing them
to appoint a time, and place for the Council; but could not effect it, not for
want of Ecclesiastical authority to call the Bishops, (as you misinterpret)
but because (as Sozomen declares Ibid.
the enemies of Chrysostom opposed it, being supported by the temporal power
of Arcadius, and Eudoxia, without whose consent a Council could not be held;
the cities in which it should be held, being subject to them, and at their
command. Wherefore Innocentius did not acknowledge any Ecclesiastical authority
in the Emperor, to call a Council (as you comment) but only requested him, as
being Lord of the Empire, to appoint a time, and place, when and where in some
City of his, the Council might be held, which he by his spiritual power
intended to call.

It rests therefore, that whatsoever you have objected out of this history of
Chrysostom, against the Popes authority, is nothing but untruths, and
ignorant mistakes; among which I will score up one other, which is, that in
this matter of Appeals to Rome, you say Page 307. m.
: both your Cardinals (Baronius and Bellarmine) give for instance the example
of Chrysostom B. of Antioch. Those Cardinals were not so ignorant, as to call
Chrysostom, B. of Antioch: that is your mistake fathered on them. He was a
Priest of the Church of Antioch, and after the death of Nectarius Patriarch of
Constantinople, by a Council of Bishops chosen* Patriarch of that Imperial
City, and by means of the Emperor Arcadius brought from Antioch thither, and
there consecrated Bishop.

SECT. VII. That Flauianus appealed to Leo Pope, as to an absolute Judge.
AN other example of appealing to Rome, is of Flauianus, to which you answer
two things, showing ignorance in the one, and falsehood in the other. Ignorance,
in saying Page 308. fin 309. iuit.
, that of this same Flauianus you have said enough already. You have indeed
already spoken of Flauianus enough, to the discredit of your cause Page 296.297.
; but not, of this same Flauianus: for Flauianus of which there you spoke, was
B. of Antioch, and lived in time of Damasus Pope. But Flauianus, of which now
you speak, was B. of Constantinople, and lived in time of Leo the Great, 70.
years after the other. Is it not then too great a mistake, in a man that
professes so much learning, to shift of what we allege in proof of Appeals,
from the example of the one, by what you have said of the other, especially
their cases being far different?

To ignorance you add falsehood, saying Page 308. fin.
: It will be a hard matter for you, out of the example of Flauianus, to collect
a right of appeal to the Pope, from his appeal to a Synod. To prove that
Flauianus appealed not to the Pope, but to a Synod, you rehearse in your margen
a Latin sentence of Leo writing to Theodosius the Empetor, which you English
not; because Leo says not, that Flauianus appealed to a Synod (that is your
false comment) but expressly affirms, that he put up a petition of Appeal to
his Legates, which was not to appeal to them, but to him whose person the
Legates represented. Yea the very words of Leo, which you recite, directly
testify, that he which required a Council, was not Flauianus, but Leo
himself, yielding for his reason, the Nicen Canons, which command, that after
the putting in of appeal in causes of such weight, the calling of a general
Council is necessary.

Moreover that Flauianus appealed, and not to a Synod, but to the Pope, is a
truth declared, not only by the words of Leo, but testified also by other
writers. Flauianus (says Liberatus Cap. 1^.
appealed to the Apostolic See, by petition presented to his Legates. And the
Emperor Valentinian the third writing to Theodosius the second, Emperor of the
East In eppraeambul. Council. Ch^lced.
: We ought in our days to preserve to the Blessed Apostle Peter, the dignity
of reverence proper to him, inuiolate, that the Blessed Bishop of the City of
Rome, to whom antiquity has yielded the Priestood over all, may have way to
judge of Bishops, and of faith: for therefore Flauianus B. of Constantinople,
following the custom of Counsels, has appealed to him by petition, in the
contention moved concerning faith. And if you believe not these witnesses,
believe the Centurists, who testify against you Cent. 5. col. 778.
, that sometimes Bishops condemned in Synods, appealed to the Sea of Rome, as
did Flauianus in the Council of Ephesus.

What testimonies more express then these? Is it not manifest out of
Liberatus, out of Valentinian, out of the Centurists, yea and out of the very
words of Leo (which you produce for the contrary) that Flauianus appealed not
to a Synod, but to him? Who but Doctor Morton, could deny so invincible a
truth? And no less apparent it is, that antiquity acknowledged in the Pope,
authority, to judge of Bishops, and of faith, and that appeals unto him, were
ordained by the ancient Counsels: for why else did Valentinian say to
Theodosius his Father-in-Law, that Flanianus appealed to the Sea Apostolic,
according to the custom of Counsels?

SECT. VIII. Of Nilus equalling the B. of Constantinople with the Pope, in his
right of Appeals.
NIlus an heretical Bishops of Thessalonica, and a professed enemy to the
Roman Church (as all heretics are) against Appeals to Rome obiecteth the
Council of Chalcedon, in which (says he) it was decreed, that if a Clerk
have a cause against a Clerk, it is to be judged by the Bishop; if against a
Bishop, by the Archbishop; if against an Archbishop, by the Primate, or of the
Bishop of Constantinople. To this objection the holy, and learned Pope Nicolas
the first, answered near 800. years since In Ep. ad Michael. Imper.
, that by Primate (which is there in Greek (...), and signifies a Prince) is
meant the B. of Rome. This explication Turrianus Pro Ep. Romans Pont. l. 3. c. 4.
, Bellarmine L. 2. de Pont. c. 2^.
, and Binius Tom. 2. page 129.
confirm, both because the title of Prince more fitly agrees to him, then to
any other Primate; as also because, it cannot be showed, that in time of the
Council of Chalcedon, there were (especially in the East) any Primates,
distinct from the Archbishops, and Patriarchs. Wherefore the sense is, that if a
Bishop have a cause with his Metropolitan, it is to be judged by the Pope, or
by the B. of Constantinople, if the parties be nearer to him, and willing to
stand to his judgment. This (say you) Page 309.
it false: for the Canon uses a Climax, or gradation from Clerk, to Bishop;
from Bishop, to Archbishop; from Archbishop, to Primate, or the B. of
Constantinople: from whence you infer, that, if our exposition be true, the
B. of Constantinople is above the Pope, as a General is above a Coronell,
because in gradation of Appeals, the last is always the highest, and most
excellent. A thing, not only contrary to the Council of Chalcedon (which
acknowledges the Pope to be supreme Head of the whole Church) In relat. ad
Leon.
, but never so much as dreamed of, by any of the Greeks, nor by the Bishops of
Constantinople themselves, who by their claim of equal privileges, never
challenged authority above the Pope, nor equal with him over the whole Church,
but only, that as he by the institution of Christ is supreme Judge of all
causes ecclesiastical, throughout the world; so they in the second place,
under him, and by his permission, might have authority to judge throughout the
East, the causes of all, that should be willing to accept of their judgment:
which authority the Pope though entreated by the Council of Calcedon refused
to grant unto them, as being a wrong to the other Patriarchs. And therefore
Bellarmine L. 2. de Pont. c. 22.
out of Leo, and Liberatus, rightly observes, that this Canon objected by
Nilus, was never received in the Church, as being unlawfully made in absence of
the Popes Legates, who presided in the Council. This is the substance of this
controversy, in the prosecution whereof, you falsify the Council of Calcedon,
and are guilty of some other errors, of which I shall briefly advertise you.

1. Therefore Bellarmine truly says, that custom (the best interpreter of
laws) plainly shows, it was never lawful to appeal to the B. of
Constantinople, but only from places within his own Patriarkship: and that no
example can be given of an Appeal made to the Eastern Church, out of the
West, South, or North. You to cross Bellarmine, say Page 310.
, that the Council of Calcedon speaks generally of every Church; and in
proof thereof falsify the Council, adding to the beginning of the Canon, these
words. In quacunque Ecclesia, In every Church, putting them down in a
different character, as the words of the Canon, and citing both it and them out
of Binius, who has this Canon Tom. 2. page 129.
, of three different versions, and yet no such words in any of them.

2. You have hitherto pretended, and afterward repeat, again, that no one
man can be Head of the whole Church on earth. Yet now upon condition, that the
Pope may not have that dignity, you are contented to allow it the B. of
Constantinople. For you say Page 302. fin.
: We confess, that the supreme right of appeals is proper to a Monarke, it
being as essential a part of his Monarchy, to have the right of appeals, as
it is for him to be a Monarke: from whence it will follow, that you here
granting to the B. of Constantinople, a supreme right of appeals from all the
Churches of the world, make him a Monarke over all the Churches of the world.

3. Out of the gradation which the Council makes from Clerk to Bishop; from
Bishop to Archbishop; from Archbishop to the Pope, or the B. of Constantinople,
you infer the Bishop of Constantinople to be above the Pope which is a
senseless paradoxe, collected from a false ground: for if because an
Archbishop is to be judged by the Pope, or by the B. of Constantinople, you may
infer the B. of Constantinople to be equal with the Pope, or above him; you
may by like consequence infer, that in an army, a Coronell is equal to the
General, or above him, because a common soldier is to be judged by his
Captain, and the Captain by his General, or by his Coronell: for in this
gradation the Coronell is the last, and therefore by your rule, the highest, and
most excellent. With such sophistry you answer our arguments, and frame your
own.

4. Bellarmine says: The Council is to be understood of the first judgment:
But this (say you) Page 311.
evidently crosses the Popes exposition. False: for the Pope allows to the
B. of Constantinople permissiuely the first judgment of Eastern causes, if
the parties be willing to accept of his judgment; but not the second by way of
appeal, out of his own Patriarkeship.

5. Why do you conceal, what Bellarmine, and Binius add? namely, that if we
should grant to you, your inference out of this Canon, it would not follow,
that the B. of Constantinople is of equal authority with the Pope: for the
Popes power extends not only to right them which are wronged by their
Metropolitans, but also to judge the Metropolitans, and Patriarchs themselves,
and to right the^, even when they are wronged by whole Councels of Bishops; as
the examples of Athanasius, Chrysostom, Flauianus, Theodoret, and others
convince.

SECT. IX. The rest of Docter Mortons Arguments against Appeals to Rome.
THe rest of your instances against appeals, as of Fortunatus, and
Felicissimus Page 311.
taken from S. Cyprian, of the Council of Mileuis Page 321.
, of the cause of Cecilian Page 324.325.
from S. Augustine, have been already Chap. 25.26. and 30. sect. 2.
answered. One only remains, taken from an Epistle (as you say) Page 318.
of Damasus Pope. It is not among the epistles of Damasus, but of S. Ambrose:
and yet his it cannot be; for in it mention is made of him, as of a third
person. Wherefore whose the epistle is, is a thing uncertain. Many think it to
be of Damasus; and his you will have it to be. But the contrary is manifest:
for the epistle speaks of Bonosus, an Arch-heretike, who had been condemned
by Judges appointed in the^ Council of Capua, which was not held in time of
Damasus, but of Siricius successor to Damasus. It is therefore evident, that
the request of Bouosus (which you object out of this epistle) to have his cause
heard again, could not be to Damasus, his first condemnation being not until
after Damasus his death. When you can show this epistle to be of Damasus, you
shall receive an answer, which it were easy to give you now, if I listed to
spend time, in refuting your tedious discourse of racking the verb Competit,
to a strict sense, and which, not one, but many ways, is deficient, as all
your arguments for the most part are. Your addition Page 318. marg. l.
, that if the epistle be not of Damasus, it is certainly of some Pope, and that
all hold it so, is affirmed by you gratis, and as easily denied by me.

CHAP. XL. Whether the Eastern Churches be at this day, accordant in Communion
with Protestants.
SECT. I. The state of the Question.
THE nine first Sections of your fourtenth Chapter, you spend in proving, that
the Grecians, Egyptians Aethiopians, Assyrians, Armenians, Russians,
Melchites, and other remote nations, at this day dissent from the Roman Church,
and are accordant in Communion with Protestants. The foundation of your whole
discourse, you lay in these words Page 330.
: Whatsoever Christians have not ruinated any fundamental article of saving
faith, set down in our ancient Creeds, and are united unto the true Catholic
Head, Christ Jesus our Lord, by a living faith, all Protestants esteem them,
as true members of the Catholic Church; and (notwithstanding diverse their more
tolerable errors, and superstitions) to be in state of salvation, albeit no way
subject, or subordinate to the Roman Church. These are your words, which
contain in themselves open implication; namely, that, one may be united to the
true Catholic Head Christ Jesus by a living faith, and be in state of
salvation, and yet be out of the Catholic Church, which to be none else, but
the Roman, and that out of her there is no salvation, has been already proved
Chap. 1. sect. 2.3.4.
.

From this false principle you deduce, that the Grecians, Asians, Egyptians,
Assyrians, Aethiopians, Africans, Melchites, Russians, and Armenians,
notwithstanding their separation from the Roman Church, are at this day, truly
professed Christian Churches Page 379.
, parts of the Catholic Church Page 406. fin 407. init.
, faithful Christians, professing the faith of the ancient Fathers Page 417.
, and in state of salvation, and rail bitterly at the Church of Rome for
denying the same. But how great ignorance, and impiety you show; and how many
most shameful untruths you utter in the prosecution of this Argument, it is
easy to declare. Some of them I shall present to the Readers view.

And to proceed methodically, I will reduce what I am to say, to two heads. 1.
I will prove, that as the Christians of these remote nations anciently were, so
many of them, at this day, are accordant in belief, and communion with the
Roman Church, and yield obedience to the Pope, as to the Vicar of Christ on
earth, and as to the supreme Pastor, and Governor of the universal Church. 2.
That the inhabitants of these nations, which are not Roman Catholics, are not
of one belief, or Communion with Protestants, but wholly dissent from them,
holding most blasphemous, and damnable heresies, acknowledged for such by
Protestants themselves. From whence it will follow, that you affirming them to
be faithful Christians, of the same belief with the ancient Fathers, charge
the ancient Fathers with blasphemous heresies, and make them incapable of
salvation.

SECT. II. Whether the Grecians of the primitive, and successiue times, agreed
in faith, and Communion, with the Bishop, and Church of Rome, and particularly
at the Council of Florence.
THat the Greeks in the first Council of Constantinople, and afterward in
that of Calcedon, endeauored to give to their Patriarch of Constantinople, the
second place of dignity in the Church, next after the Pope, and before the
other Patriarchs, we acknowledge: But that they sought thereby to exempt
themselves from their obedience and subjection to the Pope, has been
effectually disproued Chap. 17. sect. 5. Chap. 19. sect. 4.
. I speak not this, to deny, that anciently there were of the Grecians, many
Heretics, which opposed the Roman Church, and by her authority were condemned;
and that eight Patriarchs of Constantinople in particular, as also Eutyches an
Arch-heretike of the same City, were anathematized, and east out of the Church
for heresy. And whereas the Western Church, by the example, and diligence of
the Bishops of Rome, was preserved from heresy; the Churches of the East (new
heresies daily springing up) were so pitifully torn, and ten in pieces, that
S. Hierome complaining thereof to Pope Damasus, said Ep. 57.
: Because the East striking against it self by the ancient fury of the people,
tears in little morsells the undivided coat of our Lord, wouen on high; and
that the foxes destroy the vine of Christ, in such sort, that it is difficult,
among the dry pits that have no water, to discern where the sealed fountain,
and the enclosed garden is; I have therefore thought, that I ought to consult
with the Chair of Peter, and the faith praised by the mouth of the Apostle.

This was the miserable state of the Eastern Churches in those days, being
governed sometimes by Catholic Bishops, that acknowledged subjection to the
Church of Rome, and sometimes by Heretics that opposed her authority; until at
length Photius having iniustly driven Ignatius Patriarch of Constantinople from
his See, and intruded himself into his place, and being for that cause often
excommunicated by Nicolas the first, and John the eight, Popes of Rome, to
mantaine his iniust title, withdrew himself from their obedience: and to the
end he might have some color to persevere in that separation, cauilled at the
doctrine of the Roman Church, which teaches that the holy Ghost proceeds from
the Father and the Son, and writ against it. And the Greeks following him in
this error, separated themselves from the Communion of the Roman man Church:
Yet not so, but that they have often (eleauen times says S. Antoninus Hist.
par. 2. tit. 22. c. 23.
acknowledged their error, and reconciled themselves to her, and especially
thrice in most solemn manner, in three several Counsels, of Barium in
Apulia, of Lions in France, and of Florence in Tuscany; but still returning to
their error against the holy Ghost, and disobedience to the Church of Rome, as
dogs to their vomit, Almighty God punished them with a heavy hand, delivering
them up to a miserable captivity, and servitude, under the Turk. And that they
might know the cause of Gods wrath against them, to be their obstinacy, in
defending their error against the holy Ghost, he ordained by his providence,
that upon the very day of Pentecost, their City of Constantinople should be
taken by the Turk, their Emperor slain, and their Empire wholly extinguished.
A thing, which S. Brigit foretold Revel. l. 7. c. 19.
, almost 100. years before it happened, denouncing to them, that their Empire,
and dominions should not stand firm, unless with true humility, they did
submit themselves to the Roman Church, and faith.

All this you were ignorant of, or if you were not, dissemble it, and quarrel
at us, for reporting that the Greeks in the Council of Florence renounced
their errors, and submitted themselves to the Church of Rome, and Bishop
thereof. Some (say you) Page 338.
would scrape acquaintance with the Greek Church, in the year 1549. You
should say 1439.
at the Council of Florence, as though all then had been subjects to the Pope.
So you: but with what conscience you know, and so do we: for not only Catholic
writers, but your Protestant brethren, M. Marbeck Common plac. page 258.
, and Osiander Epit. Centu. 15. page 477.
testify, that in the Council of Florence, the Grecians, Armenians, and
Indians were united to the Church of Rome. And the same is apparent out of the
Council it self In lit. vnionis.
; in which, after the Grecians had abiured their two chief errors, the one,
concerning the proceeding of the holy Ghost from the Father alone, and the
other of Purgatory, they made open profession of their obedience and subjection
to the B. of Rome, in these words In lit. vnionis.
: Mareouer, we define, that the holy Apostolic See, and B. of Rome, has the
primacy throughout the whole world; and that the same B. of Rome is the
successor of Blessed Peter, Prince of the Apostles, and the true Vicar of
Christ, and Head of the whole Church; and that he is the Father, and Doctor of
all Christian; and that to him was given by our Lord Jesus Christ, full power
of feeding, and governing the universal Church, as it is also declared in the
Acts of the Oecumenicall Counsels, and in the sacred Canon. Benewing moreover
the order set down in the Canons, concerning the other Venerable Patriarchs,
that the Patriarch of Constantinople be the second after the B. of Rome. And
the like profession of their belief, they had made before in a private Session
of their own, in the Emperors Palace, none of the Latins being present Conc.
Flor. sess vlt. apud Bin. to. 4 page 474. fin. 475. init.
.

To this profession subscribed the Emperor of the Grecians, and all their
Bishops assembled in that Council, he of Ephesus only excepted: and not only
they, that were then living, but also Joseph their Patriarch, who before the
end of the Council, finding himself stricken with deaths dart, set down in
writing this profession of his faith, which after his death was found in his
closet Ibid apud Bin pa. 474.
: I Joseph by the mercy of God, Archbishop, and Oecumenicall Patriarch of
Constantinople, new Rome, because I am come to the end of my life, by the
mercies of God, according to my duty, I publish by this writing, my verdict to
my beloved Children: For I profess, that I hold, and believe, and give full
assent to all those things which the Catholic and Apostolic Church of our
Lord Jesus Christ of old Rome, shall judge, and ordain. And I refuse not to
grant, that the most Blessed Father of Fathers, the chief Bishop, Pope of old
Rome, is the Vicar of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that there is a Purgatory for
souls.

Would you think, gentle Reader, that any Christian man could put on so brazen
a face, as to deny, that the Grecians in the Council of Florence were united
to the Church of Rome, or that they acknowledged themselves subject to the
Pope, as to one, whom the sacred Counsels declare to have the primacy
throughout the whole world, to be the successor of S. Peter, the true Vicar of
Christ, the Head of the whole Church, the Father, and Doctor of all Christians,
and that to him was given by Christ full power of feeding, and governing the
universal Church? Are not these their very words? And yet you, Doctor Morton,
deny all this saying Page 331.
: Upon due examination, you your selves find the Grecians there, to have been
so far from subjection to the Pope, that they would not permit him to
constitute a Patriarch among them, professing, that they could do nothing
without the consent of their own Church. So you with your wonted fidelity;
both for that you set down the first part of these words in a different
character, as the Grecians answer to the Pope, when as they are not their,
but your words, and contrary to truth: for that the Grecians united themselves
to the Latins, and acknowledged their subjection to the Pope, and Church of
Rome, is there testified by a public declaration In lit vnio. apud Bin. to. 4
pa. 476.476.
, in the Letters of Union, subscribed by Ioannes Palaeologus the Emperor, and
by all the Prelates, Greeks and Latins, that were present in the Council.
And after this perfect accord was made, the Pope calling unto him the Grecian
Bishops, not by way of command (as not willing to irritate them) but of
persuasion to that which was most decent, and convenient, exhorted them before
their departure, to choose a new Patriarch in place of him, that was deceased,
that they might not return home, without a Head. They answered, that the
custom of the Grecians was, to choose, and consecrate their Patriarch at
Constantinople; and that the Emperor, who was not ignorant of their ceremonies,
and customs, would not permit them to do otherwise. Whereupon the Pope urged
no further, but with all courtesy dismissed them. How can you infer from
this, that the Greek Bishops denied subjection to the Pope? It mattereth not
where their Patriarch was chosen, since (as you have heard) they acknowledged
both themselves, and him, as being members of the universal Church, to be
subject to the Pope, as to their Head, and to be governed by him, as sheep by
their Shepherd, and as children by their Father.

But you say Page 331.
: They were far from subiecting themselves in doctrine: for when some few
points were propounded, they answered the Pope, that they had no license to
treat of such matters. This is an other evasion, as untrue as the former. For
the next day, after that the Greeks being convinced, had yielded to the
Latins in that main controversy, concerning the Procession of the holy Ghost
from the Father, and the Son, for the decision whereof, that Council was
chiefly called, the Pope desired, to have some of their Bishops sent unto him.
They sent four, to whom the Pope said Tom. 4: page 474.
: We by the grace of the holy Ghost are united, and so fully agreed in the
chief question, which was most in controversy, that no further speech thereof
is necessary. But that our agreement may be so absolute, and firm, that
hereafter there be no difference between us, it will not be amiss, that we
treat of the fire of Purgatory, of the primacy of the Pope, of celebrating in
leauened, or unleavened bread, and of Transubstantiation. Those Bishops
answered: We, O most holy Father, have no license to treat of these things;
which words you set down as the answer of all the Greek Prelates, when as
they were spoken only by four of them, who having received no commission, to
treat of those Questions, refused to make answer unto them, in the name of all
their brethren: But nevertheless (which you conceal) they declared their own
judgment, concerning the three first, to be conformable to the doctrine of the
Roman Church; adding moreover, that of the fourth, which was
Transubstantiation, they could not treat, without the authority of all the
Eastern Church. How does this prove, that the Greeks in the Council of
Florence agreed not in doctrine with the Roman Church? especially, since these
four Bishops declared to the Pope, that concerning the three first points of
the four proposed by him, they believed as the Roman Church did: and
concerning the fourth, as at that time, they did not affirm it, so neither did
they deny it: and sone after not only they, but all the rest of the Greek
Bishops, and Abbots, together with their Emperor, in the Letters of Union,
expressly declared, that not only in the three first, (namely of the Popes
supremacy, of Purgatory, of the lawfulness of celebrating Mass in unleavened
bread) they believed as the Roman Church did, but also in the fourth of
Transubstantiation, saying, that by the Priest upon the Altar, of bread is made
the very body of Christ.

All this you could not be ignorant of, and yet blush not to deny it, and to
add another untruth, saying Page 331. fin. 332. init.
: Yea and their Emperor Palaeologus, that was so earnest to piece them
together, was himself but hardly welcomed home, to the Greek Church, which
was now much more exasperated against the Roman Church: in so much that they
did now pronounce their Patriarch of Constantinople, the supreme and chief of
all Bishops. These your words cannot be freed from a notable imposture: for you
falsify Bellarmine, alleging these words in a different letter as his: The
Greeks did now (to wit after their return from the Council of Florence)
pronounce their Patriarch of Constantinople the supreme, and chief of all
Bishops. Bellarmine speaks of their fall from the Roman Church, the year
1054. which was not after the Council of Florence, but almost 400. years
before it. You to persuade your reader, that he speaks of their fall after
their return from that Council, cunningly insert into his words this aduerbe
Now, and falsify the year, putting in stead of Anno 1054. (which Bellarmine
has) Anno 1454. Can there be more wilful fraud then this? But you show no
less folly, then fraud: for whereas you say Page 331.
, the Council of Florence was the year 1549. to prove, that the Greeks after
their return from that Council, denied the primacy of the Pope, you say Page
332.
, Now (to wit the year 1454. which was (in your account 100. years before
that Council) they did pronounce their Patriarch of Constantinople, the
supreme, and chief of all Bishops? I deny not, that the Greeks, a few years
after the Council of Florence, returned to vomit, and that a great part of
them still persisteth in the errors which then they abiured. I only speak here
of your simplicity, who to prove, that they fell from the Roman Church, after
their return from the Council of Florence, say Page 332. marg.
, they fell the year 1454. which according to your account, was 100. years
before that Council. With these impostures you delude your readers, who not
doubting of your fidelity, take your doctrine upon your word.

SECT. III. That many of the Grecians, at this day, are of the Roman Communion,
and profess subjection to the B. of Rome.
THat many of the Grecians are at this day accordant in faith, and Communion
with the Roman Church, and profess subjection and obedience to the B. of Rome,
is a thing notorious: for who is ignorant, that as in Rome there is a Seminary,
wherein many youths of our English nation are trained up in virtue, and
learning, to the end, that being ordained Priests, and returning into England,
they may help to reduce their Country to the Catholic faith; so likewise,
there has been many years another of Grecians for the reduction of Greece?
And who knows not, that (as Cardinal Peron Repliqu. Chap. 22.
advertised our late Sovereign K. James) in the Isles of Malta, Cyprus, Candia,
Xante, Chios, Naxos, and other Greek, and Asian Islands, the Roman faith, and
Communion has place, even at this day, either wholly, or for the greatest
part? And if it be true that (as you affirm) Page 335.
Russia, a good part of Polonia Dalmatia, and Croatia, belong to the Greek
Church, and are under the jurisdiction of the Patriarch of Constantinople, with
what forehead can you challenge the inhabitants of these Countries in general
to dissent in faith and communion from the Church of Rome, when it is
notorious, that in Dalmatia, Croatia, Polonia, as also in Lituania, and
Transiluania, the faith and Communion of the Roman Church, is not only allowed,
but publicly professed? And for the Russians, Michaell Hipation, and Cyrill,
with the rest of the Bishops of that Nation, have lately submitted themselves
to the same Church, as both their Epistle, and profession of faith, addressed
to Clement the eight, in the year 1595. abundantly testify Apud Cocci. to. 1.
l. 7. art. ^.
.

SECT. IV. Of the Egyptians.
YOur second example of remote nations dissenting from the Roman Church Page
304.342.400.409 417.
, is of the Egyptians. To show your error herein, these evidences may serve:
for (as Iacobus Nauarchus Ep. Asi^^.
, Coccius Tom. 1. l. 7. art. 6.
, and Doctor Sanders Monar. Visib. l. 7. n. 1121.
relate) Eugenius Pope having actually united the Greeks, and Latins, in the
Council of Florence, and wrirten to the Patriarchs of the East to the same
effect, they in their Epistles to him, writ back Honorably, Catholikely, and
resolutely of the Latin Church, and authority of the Pope. And in particular
John Patriarch of Alexandria (that is to say, of the Christians of Egypt, and
of all the countries, which first belonged to the Empire of Egypt, and
afterward to the Prefecture thereof) styleth the B. of Rome, The perfection of
Priesthood, the Apostolical Father of all Churches, the Prince of Priests, the
Guide of Pilgrims, that shows the way to the rest, the Physician of the
diseased. And his Vicar of Jerusalem, Andrew, a Syrian Abbot Nauarch. and
Sand. ibid.
, calls the Pope, Head and Doctor of the whole Church. To which I add out of
Surius, and Genebrard In Chron. anno 1565.
, that the year 1565. arrived at Colen, an ancient man, sent from Thebais in
Egypt, by Alexander then Patriarch of Alexandria, to present by letter, his
obedience to the B. of Rome. The like acknowledgment of subjection, extant in
the end of the Council of Florence, was made by Isaias B. of Jerusalem Apud
Bin. to. 4. pa. 495.
. And again, since that time, Gabriell Patriarch of Alexandria sent
Ambassadors to Rome, with letters to Clement the eight, professing in them his
belief of the Catholic faith, and obedience to the Sea Apostolic. And they,
both in his, and their own names, made solemn, and public confession
thereof, which together with the letter of that Patriarch, Baronius has set
down at large in the end of his sixth Tome, writing it in Rome, when the thing
had newly passed, Pope Clement being then living, and not only the City of
Rome, but all Europe (through which this fact was public) being ready to bear
witness of the truth thereof against you, who by carping at Baronius, as
having in this related a fable, gain naught else, but to declare your folly in
carping at that, which you wish were false, but cannot disprove.

SECT. V. Of the Aethiopians.
FOr the Aethiopians, whom you produce Page 340.342.409.
in the third place, as Christians dissenting from the Roman Church we have for
the contrary, the testimonies of Helena Empress, and David her Grandchild,
Emperor of Aethiopia, who the year 1524. Genebrard. in Chron. page 1^23. Bozi.
de ^ig. Eccles. to. 1. l. 4. c. 3.
sent letters, and Legates to Clement the seventh then Pope of Rome, promising
obedience to him, and craving his blessing; and withal declaring their great
desire, of frequent recourse to the Court of Rome, if they were not hindered by
the distance of place, and the kingdom of Mahumetans, which ly in their way.
These letters were turned into Latin, by Paulus Iouius, and Petrus Aluarez, as
also Damianus Goes, a knight of Portugal Lib. de vita and morib. Aethiopum.
, have set them down at large, together with the profession of the Catholic
faith* made at Rome by Zaga Zabo, an Ethiopian Bishop, the chief of these
Legates. And Helias Levites In lib. B^bur.
mentions, and sets down the conference he had with them. The like
profession was made by Nicodemus, and Peter, both of them Ethiopian Abbots, in
their epistles to Eugenius the fourth, and Paul the third Bishops of Rome
Cocci. to. 1. l. 7. art. 6.
.

And who knows not, that (as Iacobus Nauarchus Ep. Asiatica.
, Doctor Sanders Monar. visib. l. 7. n. 1057.1508.
and other modern historians record Franc. Sachin. hist. Soc. Jesus l. 1. n. 49.
, after that the Portugal Merchants, did not only traffic in Aethiopia, but
with license of the King married there, and both lived themselves, and
instructed their wives to live in the faith, and obedience of the Roman Church,
the Pope at the instance of John King of Portugal, sent to the Abyssines, with
the title and dignity of Patriarch, John Nunnez, a Priest of the Society of
Jesus, who had labored with great fruit in Africa, among the Saracens, and
Christians that lived there. And though Andreas Oui^do a man of singular
prudence, and fortitude, whom the Patriarch by advice of the chief Governors
of the East Indies, sent before him, was at his ariuall entertained with all
courtesy, the year 1556. yet the King that then lived, being dead, both he,
and the Patriarch found great difficulties, which they suffered with invincible
courage, until at length by their patience, industry, and labor they
converted many of the Abissines, and since their death, the King himself, and
his brother, with a great part of that nation, by their successors, have been
reduced to the faith, and obedience of the Roman Church, as the Annual
relations sent from thence continually testify.

SECT. VI. Of the Armenians.
YOur fourth example Page 340.379.
is of the Armenians, of whom Myraeus testifies De notit. Episcopat. l. 1. c.
16.17.18.
, and especially of them which are called Franck-Armenians, with the Iacobites,
and Georgians, that they have often, and lately made profession of their
obedience to the Pope, and of their accord in all points of faith with the
Roman Church. And Cardinal Peron Repliq. Chapit. 21.
speaking to King James, of famous memory, auerreth, that in Armenia the
greater (which was formerly subject to the King of Persia, but is now under the
Turk) there were, and are many Christians of the Roman communion, and many
Monasteries of S. Dominick. And the same is testified by M. Edward Grimston
your Protestant Historian, in his Description of countries Page 1050:
: In Asia (says he) there are many Christians, assisted in spiritual things,
by the Religious of the orders of S. Francis, and S. Dominick: And those of
Armenia, have their Archbishop of the Order of S. Dominick, who is made by the
Chapter of the Religious of that Order, and then confirmed by the Pope. And he
adds Ibid. page 1052.
, that they hold themselves to be conformable to the Roman Church, and
celebrate Mass in unleavened bread, contrary to the Greeks, and remember
their first conversion from the Church of Rome, in the time of Syluester Pope.
And in the end of the Council of Florence is extant the Decree of Eugenius
Pope, in which the Union of the Armenians with the Church of Rome, is testified
by their Legates sent to the same Council.

SECT. VII. Of the Russians.
YOur fifth example Page 340.
is of the Russians, no less false the^ the former: for the Bishops of Russia,
in the year 1595. submitted themselves to the Roman Church. Their epistle to
this purpose written unto Clement the eight, together with the profession of
their faith, who pleases may read in Iodocus Coccius To. 1. l. 7. art. 6.
.

SECT. VIII. Of the Assyrians.
YOur sixth example Page 338.
is of the Assyrians, like to the rest: for Abdisus their Patriarch coming to
Rome in time of Pius the fourth, to be confirmed by him in his Patriarkship,
made public confession of the faith, and primacy of the Church of Rome, and of
believing whatsoever the holy Oecumenicall Councels, and in particular, what
the Council of Trent belieueth. This profession he made, not only in his own
name, but in the names of all the Metropolitans, and Bishops subject to him,
many of them, being in the Dominions of the great Turk, diverse in the
territories of the King of Persia, and others in the East Indies, under the
Kingdom of Portugal. The truth of this is testified by Surius and Genebrard
Chro. an. 1562.
, by Doctor Sanders Mon. visib. l. 7. n. 1555.1556.
, by Coccius To. ^. l. 7. art. 6.
, and by the Protestant edition of the Acts of the Council of Trent, in which
it is acknowledged, that this profession of Abdisus was made in presence of two
Cardinals, and subscribed by them. All which notwithstanding, you Page 338.339.
reject this wholly story, as a tale of Robin Hood, and merely fabulous; which
argues in you much unshamefastness. For who is so little versed in the
histories of these times, as not to know, that albeit the Christians of the
East Indies living so many years under Heathenish, or Mahumetan Princes, were
debarred from entercouse with the Church of Rome, and run into diverse errors,
yet they thought themselves still to retain entirely that faith, which the
Apostle S. Thomas had preached unto them? And when they came to be under the
King of Portugal, being instructed by Preachers sent out of Europe, they
reformed their errors, and yielded due subjection to the Church of Rome, and in
particular those very places, which Abdisus in his Profession names, to wit
Cuscho, Cananor, Goa, Calicut, and Carangol; and many more are named by Iacobus
Payua, and Radius L. de orig. Soc. Jesus.
, who testifies, that even in those beginnings, in his time, to the number of
80000. of those Indians were reduced to the Roman Church. Who likewise knows
not, that Ormus, and other places under the Persian, which both Abdisus, and
Andradius nominate, are of the Roman faith, and Communion? and that the King of
Persia has given license to preach the faith of Christ, and for Religious men
(which go thither to that end) to erect houses, and build Churches in his
Dominions, by which means many are converted, and live in the Communion, and
obedience of the Roman Church? All which notwithstanding, you boldly pronounce,
that these Christians acknowledge no subjection to the Church of Rome, and
stand in Christian union with Protestants: which to be a grand Imposture no man
can deny.

SECT. IX. Of the Antiochians.
YOur seventh example Page 330.
is of the Antiochians, whom with their Patriarch you untruly deny to
communicate with the Church of Rome, or to acknowledge any subjection to the
Pope: for the Patriarch of the Maronites Peron Repliq. Chap. 22.
, which is one of the branches of the Patriarkship of Antioch, with all the
Bishops of his jurisdiction, has yet to this day always lived, and perseuered
in the communion of the Roman Church; whereof your Historian M. Grimston
speaking Descript. of Countries. page 1053.
, says: The Maronites have for these 400. years made profession of following
the Roman Church. And the same is acknowledged by their Patriarch in his
Epistle to Leo the tenth Cocci. to. 1. l. 7. art. 6.
. Moreover (as Genebrard records) Chron. an. 1555.
Moses Mardenns being sent out of Mesopotamia, by the Patriarch of Antioch,
and coming to Vienna in Austria, after he had procured the new Testament to be
set forth in the Syriack tongue, and character, at the charges of the Emperor
Ferdinand, went to Rome, and as well in his own name, as in the name of his
Patriarch of Antioch, made a public and solemn profession of the Catholic
faith, and Obedience to the Sea of Rome, which Andreas Masius has translated
out of the Syriack original into Latin, and both Coccius Cocc. to. 1. l. 7.
art. 6.
and Sanders Mon. vis. l 7. n. 1494.
have inserted into their works.

Moreover the Nestorians of Seleucia, who belong to that Patriarkship, having
abiured their heresy by persuasion of Julius Pope the year 1553. writ an
Epistle to him, professing their belief of the Catholic faith, and their
subjection to the B. of Rome, and sent it by three chief men of their nation,
and with them, Sind, a Monk, whom they beseeched Julius to ordain, and send
back unto them consecrated as their Patriarch Cocc. Sand. loc. cit.
.

SECT. X. Of the Africans.
YOur eight example Page 341. 406. 407. 409.
is of the Africans, among whom, the kingdom of Congo is of the Roman faith
and Communion Peron. Repliq. Chap. 21. Geneb. Chron. an. 1503.
. And an Ambassador that came from thence a few years since, and died in Rome
made public profession thereof, from before Luthers time. And it is notorius,
that all the Christians which live in the borders of Africa, under the conquest
of the Kings of Spain, and Portugal, are of the Roman faith, and Communion.

SECT. XI. Of the Asians.
YOur ninth example Page 341. 406. 407. 409.
is of the Asians, as untrue, as the rest: for the Antiochians, Armenians, and
Maronites, whom with their Patriarchs, we have already proved to be of the
Roman faith, and Communion, are Asians. And who knows not, that in Asia,
since the expulsion of Godfrey King of Palestine, and of Boemond Prince of
Antioch, the guard of the holy Sepulcher of Jerusalem, has always remained
to the Christians of the Roman Communion?

CHAP. XLI. That in the aforenamed Countries, there are no Christians that
agree in faith, and communion with Protestants.
HAVING proved, that in all the Churches of remote nations, which you have
nominated, there to be many Catholics of the Roman faith and Communion; it
rests, that your denial of so certain a truth, either proceeds from
gross ignorance, or is a grand imposture. And no less is your affirming the
same Churches to be of your Protestant Communion: for the Christians of those
nations which are not Roman Catholics are damnable heretics, and have no
communion at all with Protestants, as the following sections will demonstrate.

SECT. I. The Grecians, which are not of the Roman Communion, are absolute
heretics: and Doctor Morton falsifieth Catholic Authors to excuse them.
THat the Grecians dissenting from the Roman Church (whom therefore you
challenge as accordant in communion with Protestants) are absolute Heretics,
erring fundamentally in their doctrine of the Blessed Tinity, by denying the
holy Ghost to proceed from the Father, and the Son, is a thing most certain
out of the Council of Florence, where the chief dispute between the Greeks,
and the Latins was of this subject; and the Greeks being convinced,
acknowledged their error, as the Letters of Union extant in the end of the
Council record. The same is testified, not only by the Latin writers, but also
by Laonicus Chalcondylas a Greek Historian. The Greeks (says he De reb.
Turcicis l. 6.
in the Council of Florence, first defend, that the holy Ghost proceeds from
the Father alone: but afterward being convinced with the arguments of the
Latins, they confess him to proceed also from the Son: yet after their
return inte Greece, they obstinatly defend their former opinion. And when
Hieremy Patriarch of Constantinople sent a profession of his faith to the
Lutherans of Germany, in the first Article thereof (which is concerning the
blessed Trinity) he affirmed and labored to prove, that the holy Ghost proceeds
from the Father alone: which error of the Greeks, is also testified, and
learnedly confuted, by that famous Cardinal Bessarion, and by Gennadius
Scholarius in two special Treatises of this subject: and before them by S.
Thomas of Aquine Opusc. contr. error. Graec.
, against whom, writ Nicolaus Cabasilas, whose book is extant in the Vatican,
and was soon after confuted by Demetrius Cidoinus a Greek Catholic. And (to
omit other Protestant writers) Thomas Rogers in his book of the 39. Articles,
perused, and by the authority of the Church of England allowed to be public,
says Art. 3. propos. 3. page 25.
: This discovers all them to be impious, and to err from the way of truth,
which hold, and affirm, that the holy Ghost proceeds from the Father, but
not from the Son, as this day the Grecians, the Russians, the Muscouites
mantaine: and in proof thereof, he alleges other Authors. Finally the same is
testified by Kekerman Sistem. Theolog. page 63.
, and Doctor White Way Ep. Ded. n. 8.
, affirming, that the Latin and Greek Churches brake upon the Controversy of
the proceeding of the holy Ghost.

From hence it follows, that the Greeks, which are not of the Roman
Communion, are absolute Heretics and err fundamentally: for what error can be
more fundamental, then that which is immediately against the blessed Trinity
God himself? This you could not be ignorant of but that you may not seem to
be absurd in professing, that Protestants are accordant in communion with
heretics, you seek to free the Grecians from heresy; which you have no other
means to perform, but by falsifying Catholic Authors.

1. Therefore to this end, you allege Page 334. lit. q. marg.
these words, as of Cardinal Tolet: Gracus intelligens dicit Spiritum sanctum
procedere per Filium, quod non aliud significat, quam quod nos dicimus. And in
your text you english them thus. The understanding Greeks saying that the holy
Ghost proceeds by the Son, signify thereby nothing, but what we our selves
profess. O egregious imposture! Tolet there explicating these words of S.
John, qui a Patre procedit, expressly condemns the Greeks of error in that
point, and proves out of S. Cyrill, that these words of S. John confute their
error. Locus prasens etc. This present passage (says he) In caput 15. Joan.
Annot. 25.
does no way favor the error of the Grecians, but rather confuteth, and
overthrows the same: for out of these words, it is plain, that the holy
Ghost proceeds from the Son, and the Father; which Cyrill though an
understanding Grecian, confesses, saying, that the holy Ghost is of the Son,
and of the Father, and that he proceeds from the Father, but by the Son:
Which signifies nothing else, but what we say. These are Tolers words; in which
(you see) he charge the Greeks with error in their belief of the holy
Ghost; and thereby conuinceth you of an untruth, in saying Page 334.
, that Tolet freeth them from heresy in this point. But to make good this
untruth, you corrupt his words: for whereas he speaking, not of the later
Greeks, but only of that ancient, and Orthodoxe Father S. Cyrill, says,
Cyrillus Graecus intelligens etc. Cyrill an understanding Grecian, says in
this point, no other thing, but what we profess, you both in your Latin and
English, leave out Cyrillus, as if Tolet had not mentioned him; and translate
Graecus intelligens in the plural number, The understanding Greeks; which you
do purposely, to persuade your reader, that Tolet speaks not of S. Cyrill,
nor of any particular man, but in general of the Later Grecians, and freeth
them from that error of the holy Ghost, with which you have heard him so
expressly charge them. Can there be a more wilful falfication then this?

2. But your dealing with others, is no better: You cite Page 331. lit. a.
Castro to prove, that the Greeks have been divided many hundreds of years
from the Latins. But because you would have your Reader conceive, that Castro
holds them not to be heretics, and out of the state of salvation, you set
down these words, as his: Per multas annorum centurias Graci a Latinis diuisi,
with is a plain falsification: for Castro's words are: Duodecima haeresis est,
quae negat Spiritum sanctum procedere a Patre, and a filio. Hanc haeresim
docuerunt, and tutati sunt Graeci per multas annorum centurias, itae vt haec
fuerit vna ex praecipuis causis, propter quas a Romana and Catholica Ecclesia
diuisi sint. The twelth heresy is that which denies the holy Ghost to proceed
from the Father, and the Son. This heresy the Greeks have taught, and
mansained many hundreds of years, in so much, that this is one of the chiefest
causes, for which they are divided from the Roman, and Catholic Church. Here
therefore you ma^gle Castro's words. And to mantaine your undertaken falsity,
that the Greeks notwithstanding their division from the Roman Church, are
parts of the Church Catholic, and in state of salvation, you conceal that he
affirms them to be heretics, and that the chief cause of their division
from the Roman Church, is their heresy concerning the holy Ghoast.

3. With like prejudice of conscience, you cite Page 335.
Azor, who in that very place Instit. l. moral. part. 1. l. 8. c. 20.. Decimo.
, directly affirms the Greeks to be heretics; and that although some
think, that concerning their belief of the fire of Purgatory, and some other
few points of faith, they differ not from the doctrine of the Roman Church,
really, and in sense, but only in words, and in that respect are not heretics
but schismatikes; yet he concludes, that whatsoever their belief concerning
these articles is, they are Heretics, and perhaps in these very points,
because they err culpably in them; but that we often call them Schismatikes,
because we retain the ancient manner of speech: for first the Greeks divided
themselves often from the Church by schism, and in progress of time brought
heresies into the Church.

4. You cite Page 334.
Suarez, saying, that the Greeks are schismatikes, because they err in those
things which belong to the unity of the Church, though indeed they be heretics
also, because they deny the unity of the Head. And immediately before he had
alleged out of S. Hierome, that all Schismatikes feign to themselves some
heresy, to the end they may seem not to have departed from the Church without
cause. Again he expressly says De Deo trino and vno l. 10. c. 1. n. 2.
that the Greeks err in holding the holy Ghoast not to proceed from the son,
and that for this error among many others, the Greek Church has divided it
self from the Roman Church, denying obedience to the Pope.

These are the Authors, which you produce to save the Greeks from the infamous
note of heresy; wherein you have done nothing, but bring witnesses against your
self: for all of them condemn the Greeks of heresy, and convince you of a
notorious untruth, in saying (l), Page 336.
that in our judgment the Greeks are no heretics, excepting for the denying
a necessity of subjection, and union to the Church of Rome. Nor do these only
censure them for their heresy of the holy Ghost; but other writers more ancient
condemn them, as guilty of other errors.

SECT. II. Of the Lutherans of Germany writing to Hieremy Patritriarke of
Constantinople, to be admitted into the Communion of the Greek Church: and his
answer to them.
THe Pelagians being condemned by the Roman Church, pretended to be of the
communion of the Church of Greece; which S. Augustine speaking of to Julian the
Pelagian Cont. Julian. Pelag. l. 1. c. 4.
said: I think that part of the world ought to suffice thee, in which our Lord
would have the chief of his Apostles to be crowned with a most glorious
Martyrdom: to the President of which Church, blessed Innocentius, if thou
would have given ear, thou had ere now, freed thy dangerous youth from the
Pelagian snares. The same we say to you, who have imitated the Pelagians in
your pretense of union with the Greek Church. Your German brethren writ to
Hieremy Patriarch of Constantinople, sending him a prosession of their faith,
and desiting to be admitted into the communion of his Church. He answered
them, addressing his letters to the Protestants of Prague in Bohemia. These
letters of Hieremy, set forth by the Lutherans of Wittemberg, you object Page
334.
, to prove that Protestants accord in faith, and communion with the Greek
Church; but with your wonted syncerity: for as it appears out of the edition
of Stanislaus Socolouius, Divine to the King of Poland, printed at Colen Apud
Maternum Cholinum 1582. that epistle, as it is set forth by the Lutheran
Deuines of Wittemberg Anno 1584. is corrupted, and falsified, and for that
cause justly forbidden In Ind. lib. prohib.
. Nevertheless, that very edition of Wittemberg, is sufficient to show the
claim you make to the Grecians, as to men of your communion, to be a Grand
imposture: for it expresses, that the Greek Church to this day teaches
inuocations of Saints and Angels, veneration of Relikes, worship of Images,
Transubstantiation, with the Mass, and significant ceremonies thereof,
Auricular Confession, enjoined satisfaction, all the seven Sacraments, and in
particular Confirmation with Chrisme, and extreme Unction, prayer, sacrifice,
and alms for the dead, free will, Monachisme, Vows of chastity, the fast of
Lent, and other set fasting days, that Priests may not mary after orders
taken, that the tradition and doctrine of the Fathers is to be kept; with many
other things, as M. Brereley Prot. Apol. tract. 1. sect. ^ sub. 12. page 202.
shows, setting down exactly the Page, and part of the Page, where every one
of these particulars, is to be read in that protestant edition. And the same is
confirmed out of Sir Edwin Sands, who in his Relation of the estate of Religion
used in the West parts of the world, in the fifth leaf before the end,
affirms, that the Greek Church agrees with Rome in opinion of
Transubstantiation, and generally in the sacrifice, and whole body of the
Mass, in praying to Saints, in auricular Confession, in offering sacrifice,
and prayer for the dead, Purgatory, Worshipping of pictures etc. And I must not
omit the testimony of Iustus Caluinus, who being brought up in Protestancy, was
afterward converted to the Catholic faith: and being taxed for it by many of
his friends, writ a Book to satisfy them, and the world; in which he declares
the moriues of his conversion, and among them, the agreement of externe
Churches with the Roman in condemning Protestants. And he insisteth
particularly on this Epistle of Hieremy Patriarch of Constantinople, and the
censure which in it is given of the Protestant doctrine, acknowledging that
thereby he was greatly confirmed in his belief of the Roman Church. For (says
he Page ^. fin. and seqq.
the Greeks, and Latins agree so precisely in the chiefest Heads of doctrine
that, I wonder much, the Nouellists have not the same opinion of the Patriarch
of Constantinople, that they have of the Pope: for if the one be Antichrist,
the other must of necessity be Antichrist, by reason of their accordance in
doctrine And so much more to be pitied is the simplicity of some of them, who
dreaming still of I know not what accorda^ce with the Greek Church* cease not
to inquire of the doctrine of the East, by sending letters and Catechismes.
What? have they so soon forgotten, how fatally the Confession of Augusta was
rejected, and how deeply censured by the Patriarch of Constantinople? Let them
go to Tubinga, and inquire: Crusius will inform them. Or if the journey seem
teadious, let them read the Oration of Chytraeus, printed at Francford, Of the
estate of the Churches in Greece, Asia, Bohemia etc. There p. 113.115.116.133.
They shall find something to this purpose: but chiefly page 132. where out of
Crusius he sets down a sum of that Censure, in these few propositions.
First the Patriarch laboreth to prove, that the holy Ghost proceeds only from
the Father. 2. He attributes too much to freewill. 3. He holds that man is
justified by faith* hope, and charity. 4. He allows seven Sacraments. 5. He
inuocateth Saints deceased, and Mary the Mother of God, and the holy Angels,
and adoreth their sacred Images, not with Latria (for that is due to God alone)
but coniunctiuely, that is, not in regard of the matter, but of the Saints
represented by the matter, and with an amicable affection, declaring the
veneration, and honor due to the Saints. 6. He defends Monastical institute,
as an angelical profession. 7. He takes his proofs out of the Fathers, and
Counsels. 8. He inuiteth us courteoussy to agree with them. This is the sum
of the whole Censure related by Crusius; which if any one with us please to
read at large throughout, he shall find more and greater arguments, to condemn
the new Faith, and especially these words, which the Patriarch adds for a
conclusion: We had resolved absolutely to be silent, and give no answer to
these your writings, which so manifestly wrest both the Scripture, and the
expositions of the holy Doctors to your fancy since we have this exhortation
from Paul; Anoid an heretic, after the first, and second admonition. But
because with our silence, we might seem to assent unto you as if you did
understand, and believe a right and that you had the Scriptures, and holy
Fathers on your side; we have thought good to set down these things, in
defense of the truth, albeit we are fully satisfied, out of your writings, that
you can never accord with us, or rather with truth. And in the same place, in
the end of the third answer, page 370. Wherefore we desire you not to trouble
us hereafter, nor to write, nor send to us any writings concerning these
things* for you treat the Divines, which were lights of the Church, otherwise
then is fit: you honor, and extol them in words, but with your deeds reject
them, seeking to wrest out of our hands, their holy and divine words, with we
might use to confute you. Wherefore for as much as concerns us, you have freed
us from care: and therefore going on in your own ways, write no more to us of
your Doctrine, but only for friendships sake, if you please.

All these are the words of Iustus Caluinus, related out of the Censure, or
Epistle of Hieremy Patriarch of Constantinople, by Chytraeus, and Crusius two
chief Protestants of Germany, where Iustus Caluinus lived, and writ, Chytraeus
and Crusius being then living; who might, and would have taxed him of falsehood,
if he had misalleaged them. Wherefore I cannot sufficiently admire your
boldness, who to prove that the Grecians accord in doctrine with Protestants
and dissent from the Church of Rome, dare adventure to allege this Censure of
the Patriarch, out of which it is so manifest, not only by the Catholic
editions, but even by that of Wittemberg, and by the relations of Chyrtraeus,
and Crusius, that the Greeks in very few points of those which are in
Controversy between Protestants and us, dissent from the Roman Church; and that
they condemn the contrary doctrines of Protestants, as heretical, and avoid
them as heretics, for so you have heard the Patriarch call them.

But yet, as Iustus Caluinus Page 1^. fin.
rightly observes, the accordance of the Greeks with the Roman Church in so
many chief Heads of doctrine, is not sufficient to excuse them from schism,
and heresy: for if they were not guilty of other errors, their obstinate
denying the holy Ghost to proceed from the Son, is alone sufficient to make
the^ absolute schismatikes and heretics, incapable of salvation, as S.
Athanasius has expressly declared in his Creed. You therefore have told a most
solemn untruth, in saying Page 330.
that the Greeks which dissent from the Roman Church* have not ruinated any
fundamental Article of saving truth.

SECT. III. A particular instance of Ignatius Patriarch of Constantinople,
produced by Doctor Morton, to prove that he dissented from the Roman Church,
examined.
FOr the corroboration of your former Arguments, you produce Page 387.
Ignatius Patriarch of Constantinople, as an especial pattern of disobedience
to the Roman Church The case is this: The people of Bulgaria, having sent for
preachers to Rome, and being instructed by them in the faith of Christ,
submitted themselves voluntarily to the Pope, and in spiritual things were
governed immediately by him, as part of his Roman Diocese Spond. anno 869. n.
13.
. Nevertheless, because the Grecians challenged the temporal state of that
Province to belong to the Emperor of the East, Ignatius supposing the
spiritualty of it, to belong in right to his Diocese, usurped it to himself,
and consecrating a Bishop by his own authority, sent him thither, with other
Priests: for which he was checked by Adrian Pope Spond. anno 871. n. 1.
, and afterward excommunicated by John the eight, if within thirty days after
notification of the sentence unto him, he did not desist from that usurpation.
He died before the arrival of the sentence at Constantinople Spond. anno 878.
n. 1. and 8.
; which if he had received before his death, it is not to be doubted, but that
he would have surceased from that claim which he made, not out of any desire,
or intention of opposing the Sea Apostolic, whose authority over the Church of
Constantinople he acknowledged, both in appealing to it against Photius, who
had intruded himself into his Church, and also in his epistle to Nicolas Pope
Extat Ep. in Syn. 8. Act. 3.
. And finally that he always lived and died in communion of the Roman Church,
appears by diverse letters of John the eight, written after his death Spond.
anno 878 n. 8.
. His example therefore can be no help to your cause.

SECT. IV. The Egyptians, Aethiopians, Armenians, Russians, Melchites,
Africans, and Asians which call themselves Christians and be not of the Roman
Communion, are absolute Heretics.
THe Egyptians and Aethiopians, that are not of the Roman faith, and
communion, embrace the Heresy of Eutyches, which holds but one nature, one
will, and operation in Christ, and was for that cause anathematized, and cast
out of the Church, by the holy Council of Chalcedon, twelve hundred years
since. And they, which are not of the Roman communion, still persist in the
same error, in so much, that when of late years, Go^saluus Rodericius of the
Society of Jesus was sent into Aethiopia Pran. Sachin. Hist. Soc. Jesus l. 1. n.
49.
, to prepare the way for Ioannes Nunnez, whom the Sea Apostolic had sent
thither, honored with the title and dignity of Patriarch, Claudius then King of
Aethiopia answered, that he had no need of a Patriarch from Rome, having in
his own kingdom, men that were able to govern the Patriarkship of Rome it
self: Moreover that he would by no means approve the Council of Chalcedon,
nor allow of Leo Pope; and that Dioscorus had done well, in excommunicating
him. Finally the obstinacy of the Aethiopians, and Egyptians, in this
particular error of Eutyches, is the sole cause of their continuance in
schism, and separation from the Roman Church: for as Cardinal Peron Repliq.
Chap. 63.
answered our late Sovereign K. James, they have often offered, and are all
ready at this day to acknowledge the Pope, whom they confess to be the
Successor of S. Peter Prince of the Apostles, if they might be received into
his communion, without obliging themselves to anathematize Eutyches, and
Dioscorus.

The Armenians which are not of the Roman faith, and communion, are guilty of
many heresies. They acknowledge but one Nature in Christ with the Eutychians.
They deny his divinity, with the Arians. They affirm the holy Ghost to proceed
from the Father alone, with the Grecians. They rebaptize them that have been
baptized in the Roman Church, with the Donatists. And finally, they hold many
other gross and damnable heresies related by Prateolus L. 1 tit. 67.
out of Guido Carmelita, and Nicephorus Calixtus, who therefore rightly terms
them, A sink of all heresies.

The Russians agree with the Grecians, in deniing the holy Ghost to proceed
from the Son. So has confessed your Minister Thomas Rogers Art. 3. propos.
3. page 25.
. Moreover they defend other heretical Tenets, to the number of 40. related by
Ioannes Sacranius Elucid. error. and rit. Rhuten.
, and Prateolus L. 6. tit. 4.
. Whereunto I add, that Stanislaus Socolouius, in the attendance of the King of
Polonia, whose Divine he was, visiting those Northern countries, and coming to
Leopolis, the Metropolitan city of Russia, reports of it Praefat. Censura
Orient.
, that although it has embraced many other errors, yet it deserves this
singular praise, that by the special gift of God, it has kept it self free
from the heresies of this age, and with greatest care, and diligence made
resistance unto them.

And how far the Russians, even those which are not of the Roman communion,
are from allowing your Protestant doctrine, you may learn from M. Grimston,
who in his Description of Countries Page 697. 698.
, writes that the Russians have the Mass, that they pray to the Virgin Mary,
and the Saints, and keep their Bodies with great reverence; that they never
pass by any Cross, but they kneel down, and pray; that they often bless
themselves with the sign of the Cross; that they have many Monasteries of
Monks of S. Basils Order, who in their quires in the night sing praises to
God; that they use the Sacrament of Confession, and receive absolution, and
penance; that they keep the holy Sacrament in their Churches in one kind for
the sick, and in that kind alone administer it unto them; that they say Masses
for the faithful deceased.

And not to conceal, what other Protestants write of the doctrine of the
Russians, and all the other nations, which you affirm to be of your belief,
and communion, Osiander Epit. Centur. 16. page 970.
speaking of all the Eastern Churches, ingenuously confesses, that they have
not sincere Religion, but are in most part of their articles, Popish. Doctor
Philippus Nicolai testifies L. 1. de regno Christ. page 22.
, that not only the Greek Churches, but also the Ruthens, Georgians,
Armenians, Indians, Aethiopians that acknowledge Christ, hold the real
presence of his body, and blood in the Eucharist. And speaking of the Armenians
in particular, he reckons Page 35.
among their errors, Invocation and intercession of Saints, and oblation of the
Sacrament. Of the Indians, he says Ibid. page 45.46.
, that they offer the sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ, preparing
themselves unto it by confession of their sins; that at their entrance into
the Church, they sprinkle themselves with holy water, as the Papists do; that
they pray for their dead, and bury them with the same ceremonies the Papists
use; that their Priests shave their Crowns; that they observe strictly the
fastes of the four Ember weeks, as also of Aduent, and Lent; and that they
have Monks and sacred Virgins reclused in several Monasteries, where with
great religion, they strictly observe Abstinence, and Chastity.

These doctrines, though they be in themselves Orthodoxall, and Catholic, yet
Protestants reject them as false, and superstitious: and your self in
particular censure the doctrine of the real Presence and sacrifice of the
Mass as idolatrous Page 403.
, not blushing to compare Christ in the Eucharist, to the Idol Moloch, and
calling our adoration of him, The adoration of our Romish Moloch in the Mass.
Whereby it appears, that albeit you condemn these doctrines in us, as
heretical, and Idolatrous; yet you are contented to allow them in the
Russians, and other nations, which you claim to be of your Communion, and to
canonize their blasphemous errors against Christ and the holy Ghost, with other
their impious heresies, for Orthodoxe doctrines; and to tell your reader, that
the Russians, Aethiopians, and other nations, which profess themselves to be
Christians, and diffent from the Church of Rome, are truly professed Christians
parts of the Catholic Church, in state of salvation, and in accordance of
communion with Protestants.

Of the Melchites, your Historian M. Grimston in like manner reports Page
1051.
, that they hold all the errors which were condemned in the Council of
Florence, and that there are also Nestorians among them. And this shows, how
untruly Page 341.406.407.409.
you affirm, that the Asians, and Atricans are not guilty of fundamental
errors: for the Egyptians, Aethiopians, Melchites, and Armenians, what are
they but Asians, or Africans? And so likewise are the Iacobites, of whom M.
Grimston reports Page 1052.
, that they follow the heresy of Dioscorus, and Eutiches. Of the Persians he
likewise writes Page 797.
, that among them there are Nestorians. And of the Tartarians, that they follow
the heresy of Nestorius, and hold him for a Saint, as also Paulus Samosatenus,
Theodorus of Mopsuestia, and Diodorus Tharsensis; and that they condemn S.
Cyril of Alexandria, and reject the Council of Ephesus: And yet nevertheless,
all these are to you, good Christians, and members of your Protestant Church.

But among all the untruths, which you have uttered in your discourse of the
Churches of remote Nations, there is none more remarkable, then that speaking
of the Christians, which in those nations are not of the Roman Communion, you
say Page 336.
, that in our own judgments they are not heretics, excepting for the denying
of this false Romish article, Of necessary Subjection, and Union to the Church
of Rome. And enlarging this untruth, you add Page 340.341.
, that we dare not directly charge them with heresy, and that there are scarce
any among them chargeable for any fundament all heresy: for (to omit the error
of the Grecians, denying the holy Ghost to proceed from the Son, which if you
believe the Creed of S. Athanasius makes them incapable of salvation) the
heresies of Nestorius, and Eutiches against Christ are against the most
fundamental doctrine of the Church of which S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 3.10.
None can lay any other foundation beside Christ. And S. 2. Joan. 7.
If any confess not, that Jesus Christ income in flesh, he is a seducer, and
Antichrist. And again Ibid. verse. 10. and 12.
: If any one bring not this doctrine, receive him not into your houses, and say
not to him, Well be it with thee: for whosoever says to him, Well be it with
thee, communicats in his wicked works. I conclude therefore, that the heretics
of remote natios, of whom we have spoken, err fundamentally, if any error can
be fundamental: and that, as you, by professing your self to accord in
Communion with them, show your self to be of their spirit, and to be out of
the Church of Christ, as they are; so on the contrary, the Roman Church by
excluding them, and you, from her communion, she weth herself to be the true
Catholic Church, and of the same belief with the holy Counsels of
Constantinople, Ephesus, and Chalcedon, in which those heretics were
anathematized, and condemned.

CHAP. XLII. Doctor Mortons plea for his Protestant Church.
AS profuse as you have been in your inuectiues against the Church of Rome; so
brief and succinct you are in setting forth your Protestant Congregation,
which affords you so little matter of discourse, that coming to treat
professedly of her Page 341.
, you confine her praises, to less then a small leaf of paper. You commend
her, for four things: for great Extent; for the purity of her Doctrine; for
her freedom from Vice; and from Schism.

SECT. I. The small extent of the Protestant Church proves her not to be the
Catholic Church.
When first you began to appear in the world, Luther complained Pref. in 1.
tom and cont. Reg. Augl. fol. 497.
, that he was alone, that he alone stood in the battle forsaken of all, and
helped by none. The Centurists Sleid. praef. hist.
confess, that your beginning was slender, and almost contemptible, Luther
bearing the brunt of all the world. Then you boasted your selves to be the
Pusillus Grex, which Christ speaks of in the Gospel Luc. 12.31.
. But now, Luthers brood being increased, partly by his disciples, and partly
by the accession of many new Sects sprung from him, and knowing that the
Catholic Church, according to her name must be universally spread throughout
the whole world whersoeuer Christ is acknowledged, you have thought best, to
lay claim to all those Sectaries, and to shake hands with ancient heretics,
that you may seem to have a Church of large extent. If (as Bellarmine Cap. 14.
Apolog.
advertised our late Sovereign) you draw into your Church all the Nestorians,
Eutychians and other heretics of the East, and South, of which I have spoken,
if all the Hussites, Lutherans Zuinglians, Suinkfeldians, Anabaptists,
Confessionists, Caluinists, Brownists, Familians, Arians, Samosatens, and many
other Sects, with are at this day in the Provinces of Europe by you named Page
341.
, they will (I confess) make a great rabble of Sectaries, that are so far
from being one Church, that they anathematize, and damn each other, to the
very pit of hell See Coccius to. 1. l. 8. art. 7.8.9.10.
.

Again, these sects being confined, some to one, and all which here you
claim as parts of the Protestant Church, to a few Provinces of Europe, (and
yet those not wholly theirs) none of them, nor all of them together, can be
the Catholic Church, for she (says S. Augustine Ep. 170. ad Sever. and cont.
Gaud. l. 3. c. 1.
must be (...), secundum totum, that is, diffused through out the whole world,
as well where these Sects are, as where they are not. The Catholic Church
(says he Cont Lit. Petil. l. 2. c. 104.
has this certain mark, that she is known to all nations: the Sect of
Donatus is unknown to many nations, and therefore that cannot be she. So
likewise the sects of Luther, of Calvin, of Zuinglius etc. are unknown to many
nations, and therefore no one of them, nor all of them together can be she. By
this Argument Optatus proved the Donatists, (and by the same we prove
Protestants) not to be the Catholic Church, because she is not only in a
corner of Africa, or in a few Provinces of Europe, where they are, but in many
other places of the world, where they are not. Which passage of Optatus
therefore I know not to what end you allege Page 342.
, unless it be to prove your Church to be a Conuenticle of heretics. The same
Argument S. Augustine uses De unit. Eccles. c. 20.
: The Catholic Church by the denine, and most certain testimony of holy
Scriptures, is designed to be in all nations. And therefore whatsouer is
alleged unto us, by them, that say, Here is Christ, there is Christ, if we be
his sheep, we must rather hear the voice of our Shepherd, who says, Believe
them not: for these are not to be found in many places, where she is; and she
who is every where, is also whersoeuer they are. This therefore evidently
proves the Roman Church to be the Catholic Church: for she is not only in
England, Scotland, Denmark, Norway, Swedland, in a part of Germany, Polonia,
Bohemia, Hungaria, France, Heluetia, and Ireland, which are all the Provinces
you cold name for the extent of your Church, but in the rest of the world,
where you have no footing: for her Communion has place either wholly, or in
part, in all the Nations of Europe, in the East, and West Indies, in the
Philippines, in Iaponia, in Chyna, in Persia, in all the islands of the Ocean,
and Medeterranean, and in many of the South Sea, in Greece, Egypt, in
Aechiopia, Armenia, Assyria, and finally in all the four parts of the world,
whersoeuer the Christian name is acknowledged. And until you can show your
Protestant Congregation to have the same extent, you must confess, that she is
not (...), not universally spread over all the parts of the Earth, and therefore
not the Catholic Church. Whosoever (says S. Augustine Ibid. c. 4.
do so dissent from the Church, which is the body of Christ, that their
communion is not with the whole whersoeuer diffused, but with themselves
severally, in some part, it is manifest that they are not the Catholic Church.

SECT. II. Whether the Protestant Church be free from Error in Doctrine.
TO prove that your Church is free from Error in doctrine, you say Page 342.
: The greatest error you can impute unto Protestants, is that they for their
faith immediately depend upon Christ Jesus, as the Head of the Catholic Church.
In these words you seem tacitly to insinuate, that we depend not immediately
upon Jesus Christ, as the Head of the Catholic Church: which is an untruth,
that needs no refutation. We impute not that to you, as your greatest Error,
nor as any Error at all; we steadfastly believe, that Jesus Christ is the only
principal immediate Head of the Catholic Church. But we impute to you, as an
Error in faith, that you believe not the B. of Rome to be the Lieutenant, and
Vicar of Christ, and under him the secondary, and ministerial Head of the
Catholic Church on earth. But this is not your only error in faith: for you
hold many other old condemned heresies; as with Simon Magus, that only faith
justifies: With Acrius, you deny Purgatory, and prayer for the dead: With
Iouinian you equal Marriage with Virginity, yea and prefer it, surpassing him
therein. With Virgilantius, you deny invocation of Saints, and all religious
Veneration of their relikes. With Manichaeus, you deny free will: With the
Iconoclasts, you pull down, and break the Images of Christ and his Saints,
and deny that honor is to be exhibited unto them: With Berengarius, you deny
Transubstantiation. All these (to omit that you reject five of the Sacraments,
and race out of the Canon of holy Scripture, diverse canonical books) are
heresies anciently condemned, and anathematized by the whole Church of Christ.
And if S. Augustine say De haeres. fin.
, that whosoever holds any one heresy, is not a Catholic Christian, and S.
Athanasius In Symbolo.
that, whosoever holds not the Catholic faith entire and inuiolate, cannot
be saved; what may we think of them, that hold so many certain and undoubted
heresies? or what Christian heart can forbear to compassionate their estate?

SECT. III. Doctor Mortons pretended purity of Manners, in his Protestant
Church.
TO prove that your Protestant Churches are free from Vice, you say Page 342.
: The greatest Vice you can impute unto Protestants, is, that they impugn the
Popes indulgences, the nourseries of all Vices. Your denying and impugning the
Popes indulgences, we reckon not among your Vices, but among your Errors
against faith. Of your Vices. I forbear to speak: your own men both abroad,
as Luther, Calvin, Melancthon, Brentius, Bucer, Eberus, Wigandus, and diverse
others; and at home M. Geffrey, M. Stubs both of them great Preachers, and the
Puritans in their Mild defense have done it for me. Read them, and they will
inform you, that, under the Papacy, men were religious, and given to the
practice of good works; but that the professors of your Gospel relying on
their justification by only faith, are become careless of good works,
dissolute, proud, envious, malicious, disdainefull, covetous, ambitious; that
your eyes ought to gush out with tears, to behold the misery of your supposed
Church, the great ignorance, the superficial worship of God, the fearful
blasphemies, and swearing in howses and streets, the dishonor of Superiors, the
pride, cruelty, fornications, adulteries, drunkenness, covetousness, Vsuries,
and other like abominations; that youth among you becomes daily less
tractable, and more bold to commit those vices which in former times men of
years knew not; that instead of fasting you have brought in bibbing, and
banketing, and instead of praying swearing. And finally, that you equal the
Jews in hypocrisy, the Turks in impiety and the Tartars in iniquity. All
this, and much more to the same effect, is the free confession of your
Brethren, faithfully set down in their own words, in a late Treatise of the
Protestant private spirit. Chap. 9. sect. 8. subdiuis. 4.
And it is so strong an Argument against your pretended reformation, that your
learned brother Eberus sticks not to say Praefat. Comment. Philip. in Ep. ad
Cor.
, that in regard of the enormous wickedness of your Ministry, and Church, any
man may justly doubt, whether you be the true Church. And yet you blush not to
say, that the greatest vice we can impute unto Protestants, is, that they
impugn the Popes indulgences, which you falsely call, the noursery of all
Vices: for by this it appears, that not the Popes indulgences, but your new
Protestant Gospel is the noursery of all Vices; and that in lieu of a
reformation, which you pretend, calling your selves The reformed Churches, you
have made a deformation of the Church of Christ.

SECT. IV. That Protestants by Schism have divided themselves from the
Catholic Church.
TO prove that we censure your Protestant Church of Schism, iniustly, you say
Page 341.
: The greatest schism you can impute to the Churches of Protestants, is, that
they will be divided from the Church of Rome, which proudly and impiously
divides herself from all other Churches of the world. And a little before Page
340.
, you had taxed Bellarmine, for holding, that if those of the East were but
only Schismatikes, by denying subjection to the Church of Rome, yet that alone
without any suspicion of heresy, might be sufficient to conclude them in the
state of damnation.

Two things may here be disputed: the one, whether schism alone, without
heresy, exclude men from salvation: the other, whether Protestants be
Schismatikes. Concerning the first, that Schismatikes though no way guilty of
heresy, for the very fault of schism alone, are incapable of salvation, is a
thing so certain, that no man that understands even the ordinary principles
of Divinity, or is versed in the writings of the ancient Fathers, can be
ignorant thereof: for schism being of it self, a division or separation from
the Catholic Church, as it is impossible, that he who is out of the Catholic
Church be saved; so it is, that a schismatike dying in schism be saved. God
(says S. Irenaeus L. 4. c. 62.
shall judge those, that make schisms in the Church, ambitious men, not having
the honor of God before their eyes, but rather embracing their own interest,
then the unity of the Church; and for little, and light causes dividing the
great and glorious body of Christ etc. For in the end they cannot make any
reformation so important, as the evil of the schism is pernicious. S. Cyprian
L de Vnitate Eccles.
: Do they that assemble themselves without the Church, think Christ to be with
them in their assembly? Although they should be dragged to death for the
confession of the name of Christ, yet this spot is not washed away from them,
with their blood; the inexpiable and inexcusable crime of discord is not purged
with death it self: he cannot be a Martyr, that is not in the Church. S.
Chrysostom In Ep. ad Ephesians Hom. 11.
: Nothing does so much stir up the wrath of God, as the division of the
Church. Although we should do innumerable good works, if we divide the Unity
and fullness of the Church, we shall be punished no less severely, then they
who tore his (natural) body. S. Augustine Ep. 152. ad popul. factio. Donat.
: Whosoever is divided from the Catholic Church, although he think himself
to live never so laudably, yet for this only crime, that he is divided from the
unity of Christ, the wrath of God abides on him. And speaking of Emeritus an
heretical Bishop Sermon super gest. cum Emer.
: He cannot have salvation, but in the Catholic Church. Out of the Church, he
may have honor, he may have Sacraments, he may have the Gospel, he may have,
and preach belief in the name of the Father, and the Son, and the holy
Ghost; but salvation he can find no where, but in the Catholic Church. And
again Ep. 204.
: Being out of the Church, and divided from the heap of Unity, though thou
sholdest he burned alive for the name of Christ, yet thou sholdest be punished
with eternal death. S. Fulgentius Dofide ad Pet. c. 39.
, Believe this, as most certain, and undoubted, that no heretic, nor
schismatike, though baptized in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the holy Ghost, though he give never so great alms, yea though he shed his
blood for the name of Christ, can possibly be saved.

It being now certain, that a Schismatike dying in schism, cannot be saved,
the question is, whether Protestants be schismatikes. And certainly, if S.
Augustine Ep. 170. and cont. Gauden. l. 3. c. 1. and cont. lit. Peti. l. 1. c.
104.
rightly concluded the Donatists to be schismatikes, because they had separated
themselves from that Church, which was spread over the whole earth, his
Argument has the same force against Protestants: for if (as he has taught)
the Catholic Church is universally spread over the whole earth, and thereby, as
by an undoubted mark, is known, and distinguished from all other
congregations; it follows by inevitable consequence, that the Roman Church
(and none else but she) being universally spread over the world, as well in
Europe, where Protestants are, as in all other parts of the world, where they
are not, either she is the Catholic Church, or else that there is no Catholic
Church on earth. And therefore with great reason all antiquity has held the
Roman Church, and the Catholic Church to be terms conuertible, and that
whosoever is divided from her, is a schismatike, and incapable of salvation.
The testimonies of the ancient Fathers in this behalf I have copiously
alleged in the first Chapter of this Apology, which to repeat here, were
actum agere.

And this shows, how falsely you slander the Roman Church, with dividing
herself proudly, and impiously from all other Churches of the world. S.
Augustine said to the Donatists, L. 2. cont. lit. Petil. c. 52.
that with sacrilegious fury they had separated themselves from the Chair of
S. Peter: and I wish the same might not be truly said of you: That Church, when
you began, was, and still is, and shall ever be spread over all the world where
Christ is known. You first lived in her, and afterward divided your selves
from her, as all Heretics have done, she (says S. Augustine) De Symb. ad
Catechum. l. 1. c. 6.
remaining still in her root, in her Vine, in her charity. From hence it is,
that the same Father having reckoned by name all the Popes from S. Peter to
Anastasius, who was then B. of Rome, compares that Church to a Vine, and the
Donatists, to branches cut off from her, as you likewise are. Wherefore as he
said to them Psalm. cont. part. Donat.
, so we say to you: Come brethren, if you please, that you may be ingrafted
into the Vine. It is a grief toys, to see you lie so cut off. Number the
Priests from the very seat of Peter etc. That is the Rock, which the proud
gates of hell overcome not. And you must remember, that the same S. Augustine
is he, that said Tract. 8^ in Joan.
, A branch cut off from the Vine, is fit for nothing but the fire.

CHAP. XLIII. Of the Head of the Roman Church, compared to the Body thereof.
You compare the B. of Rome, who is Head of the Roman Church with the Body
thereof, in many respects Page 343. 344. 345.
: all which you attribute to us as Articles of our faith, to be believed
necessarily, under pain of damnation.

SECT. I. Whether it be matter of Faith, that the Pope is above a Council.
WE believe, that the Pope is the Vicar of Christ on Earth, and Governor of
the Universal Church: to which you add Page 344.
, that according to our faith, there is a necessity of believing, that the Pope
is above a Council. In proof of this, you allege Ibid. marg.
Bellarmine l. 1. de council. c. 7. who in that very place expressly teaches the
contrary: and you afterward, contradicting your self acknowledge so much Page
355. lit. e.
, setting down these words of his; The matter is still questionable until
this day: which also you prove Page 116. init.
out of Stapleton, saying, It is not yet defined by any public Decree. And in
confirmation hereof, you add Page 115. fin.
that the contrary is mantained by our Doctors of Paris. When therefore it is
for your purpose, it is an Article of our faith necessarily to be believed with
divine faith, that the Pope is above a Council: and when the contrary is more
for your purpose, then it is no Article of our faith, nor yet defined by any
public decree, but matter of opinion and questionable until this day. These
are your propositions: Reconcile them.

SECT. II. Whether it be matter of faith, that this indiuidual person, v. g.
Urban the eight, is true Pope, and true Head of the Church.
YOu set down here Page 345.
. and afterward again Page 351. 353.
, as a received Article of our faith, that it is necessary for every man, to
believe with divine faith, that this determinate man, for example Urban the
eight which now sits in the Chair of S. Peter, is true Bishop, and true
Head of the Church. In proof of this you allege Salmeron, and Suarez, but
very deceiptfully: for although that be the peculiar opinion of Salmeron and
Suarez (whose proofs you mention not, because it passes your skill to
answer them) yet they deliver it not, as matter of faith, defined by the
Church, or taught by all Catholic Divines, which you cold not be ignorant of:
for Suarez in that very place which you cite Page 24. and 345.
, professes the contrary opinion to be taught by Turrecremata, Albertinus,
Caietan, Bannes, Canus, Vega, Corduba, Castro, and other Catholic Divines,
mantaining, that we cannot have divine faith of this individual man, that he
is true Head of the Church, but moral certainty only. And this they hold
sufficient to oblige all men to yield perfect obedience unto him, and to
believe his definitions ex Cathedra. And you contradicting your self, had
formerly acknowledged Page 2^.
this to be the opinion of many of our Schole-Doctors. With what conscience
then, do you now charge all Catholics, with holding the contrary as necessary
to be believed with divine faith, and under pain of damnation, which so many
of our learned Schole-Doctors deny, and which in them was never censured by the
Church, nor even by their adversaries, as any way opposite to faith?

But what censure you deserve for doubting of the ordination, or election of
Gods Priests, not I, but S. Cyprian shall tell you, who says L. 4. Ep. 9.
, that it is no other thing, but to believe that Priests are not appointed in
the Church from God, nor for God; that it is not to believe in God, but to be
rebellious against Christ and his Gospel.

SECT. III. Whether the Church of Rome be at any time a Body headless.
It is a Thesis of yours Page 34^.
that the Church of Rome is a Body headless, so long as there is a vacancy in
the Sea between the death of one Pope, and the election of another: Which to
affirm, is as ridiculous, as if you should call the Empire An headless
Empire, because there is no Emperor, between the death of one, and the
election of an other. And by the same argument, you may prove Bohemia, Polonia,
and other kingdoms, and States, whose Princes are elective, to be headless
kingdoms, and states. There is not always so precise necessity of a Pope in
the Church, but that, as it was governed 300. years without Councels; so if by
reason of schisms, or other difficulties it fall out, that after the death of
one Pope, some time pass before the election of another, God may not for that
time govern his Church without a Pope, especially all other Bishops, and
inferior Pastors remaining in full possession of their authority over their
several flocks. Nor is the Church for that time left so wholly destitute of an
universal governor on earth, that the elergy of Rome may not in many things
supply his place, as you may learn from S. Cyprian, who in sundry occasions
advised with the Clergy of Rome, witness his epistles to them L. 3. ep. 5. and
21. l. 5. ep. 4. and 5.
, and theirs to him L. 2. ep. 7. l. 5. ep. 13.
.

But here Page 346.
you take occasion to calummitate Bellarmine, for saying, that by the Keys,
which Christ gave to S. Peter, and in him to his Successors, in understood, the
principality of Ecclesiastical power over all the Church; and that when the
Pope dies, this power remains not formally in the Church (excepting only so
far forth as it is communicated to the inferior Ministers) but immediately in
the hands of Christ. And when a new Pope is chosen the Keys are nether brought
by him, nor given to him by the Church, but by Christ; and this not by a new
donation, but by the ancient institution: for when he gave them to Peter, he
gave them to all his Successors. These are Bellarmines words, which you cut
from the example he adds, for the explanation of his doctrine, that you may
have occasion to exclame against him, and scoff, saying Ibid.
, O depth of delusion! Will you see a Iugler? Yes: we see him but too perfectly
in Doctor Thomas Morton: for does not Bellarmine say; It happens in this
case, as if a King, when he makes a Viceroy of any Country, should declare
his pleasure to be, that the Viceroy being dead, they should nominate another,
and that he grants unto him, now, the same power, he gave to his Predecessor?
What depth of delusion, or what iuggling do you find in this case? And is not
the other wholly like to this? And does not Bellarmine declare it, with this
very example?

Wherefore your question Ibid.
. Whether the keys of S. Peter do indeed fly into heaven, at the death of
every Pope, though you make it (forsooth) to show your self acute, and witty,
is (God wot) a silly conceit; to which that renowned Doctor Theodorus Studites
has answered Ep. de imagine.
, saying: that when we speak of keeping Peter's Keys at Rome, it is not to be
understood, that Christ gave any material Keys to him, but only, that by his
mouth he gave him* power to bind and loose. And as it is a poor conceit; so
it is a cavil, to which your self must answer in the other example of
temporal power: for tell us: Do then indeed the Vice-Royes keys, when he
dies fly to the Kings Court?

But you go on asking Page 346.
: What power then is it, which remains formally in the inferior Ministers of
the Church, at the death of the Pope? If it be the Keys of Principality, then
is every inferior Priest, a Pope: If it be the Keys only of Order, and
absolution, then shall it not be lawful for any Bishop to exercise any power
of jurisdiction by precept, or punishing by excommunication, during all the
time of the Vacancy. So you, either not understanding, or wittingly concealing
Bellarmines doctrine: for does he acknowledge no Ecclesiastical power, but
only of principality over the whole Church, which is proper to the Pope, or else
of Order and Absolution, which is common to every Priest? Does he not, with all
Catholic Divines, hold, that every Bishop besides his power to absolve in the
inward Court of Conscience, has also power of external jurisdiction, to
govern, and command his Diocesans, and inflict punishment upon them by
excommunication, and other Ecclesiastical censures according to the measure of
their offenses? And does he not sufficiently express this power, when speaking
of the Popes authority over the Church, he says, that the Pope being dead, it
still remains in the Church, so far forth as it is committed to inferior
Ministers, which are the Bishops, and other Pastors under the Pope?

And by this it appears, how untruly you add Page 347.
, that Bellarmine is driven (forsooth by this your subtle Argument) into a most
uncouth, and extreme corner, where never any ancient Father before him, set so
much as the least print of his shoo. This you prove Ibid.
out of Binius, whom you make to say, that in the Inter-regnum, or vacancy
between the death of Pope Agapetus, and his Successor, there was called a
general Council at Constantinople, which is an Act proper to the Papal
primacy. But as in the rest, so in this you want fidelity: for Binius says
not, that this Council was general, but directly the contrary, to wit, that
it consisted of such Bishops only, as were near to Constantinople, and some
others, which at that time were resident in the city. Wherefore it was no
general, but a particular Council, in which Menas presided, not as Vicar of
the Sea Apostolic (as Binius mistaketh) but only as Patriarch of
Constantinople. And much less did any Legates of the Pope preside with him:
for albeit the Italian Bishops, which had been Legates to Pope Agapetus,
assisted at the Council; yet they assisted not, as his Deputies (for their
legation was finished, and their commission expired before that time, by the
arrival, and especially by the death, of Agapetus at Constantinople) but for
honors sake, and as Exlegates, and not as Legates. It is not therefore
Bellarmine, but you, that are driven into such an uncouth and extreme corner,
that you have no way to get out, but by fathering on Binius your own fiction
of a general Council, which Binius never dreamed of, and (which is yet worse)
by contradicting your self: for before Page 238. lin. 11.
you had said that this was not a general Council. These then are your words:
The Council under Menas was a general Council: The Council under Menas was
not a general Council. Agree them.

It rests therefore, that according to Bellarmines Tenet, a general Council
which has authority to decide controversies of faith, cannot be called without
the Popes authority; you having not been able to produce any one example, or
proof to the contrary, but only your ignorant mistake of a particular Council
for a general.

SECT. IV. Whether the Roman Church have, at any time, a false Head.
YOur assertion is affirmative: for proof, you remit us to your former
argument already answered, to which you add here Page 349. init.
, that God never ordained a Head no bigger then of a wren to stand upon the
sholders of a man; and so little (in respect) is one Bishop of one City of Rome,
to be set over the Church universally dispersed throughout the whole world. But
you confider not, that the Church of Christ being the most perfect of all
common wealths, ought to have the most perfect government, which is
Monarchical. S. Cyptian De unit. Eccl.
, Optatius L. 2. cont. Parmen.
, and S. Hierome L. 1. cont. Iouin.
have taught, that our Savior made S. Peter Head of the Apostles, to the end,
that all being subject to one, occasion of schism among them might be taken
away. This passage you alleged out of S. Hierome, in your la^e Sermon preached
at Durham before his Majesty Page 42.
, to prove the necessity of Bishops, against the Scots. A Bishop then is
necessary, to appease the contentions, that may happen among your Ministers.
But contentions, and strifes may also arise among Bishops: An Archbishop
therefore is necessary, to quiet them. But they may likewise arise between
Archbishops, as they did between Theophilus, and Chrysostom; Flauianus, and
Dioscorus; Cyril, and Nestorius: who shall end them? If you say a general
Council; who shall summon that Council? Not a temporal Prince, for no one
has power over all nations, from whence the Bishops are to be called: besides,
that temporal Princes are often at variance among themselves. And when a
general Council is called, what if the Bishops agree not, or decline from the
truth, as in the Council of Ariminum, and the second of Ephesus they did? Who
shall compose their differences, and judge their causes, unless some one Head
of the whole Church be appointed by Christ, whose judgment is infallible, and
to whose censure all are bound to submit? Wherefore the Puritans argument
propounded by M. Cartwright Second Reply part. 1. page 58^.
concludes evidently against you, that, This point of keeping peace in the
Church, is one of those, which requires as well a Pope over all Archbishops, as
one Archbishop over all Bishops, in a Realm.

From this unity of the Head, the Church of Christ universally spread over the
earth, takes her unity. Even as there are (says S. Cyprian) De unit. Eccles.
many beams of the sun, and one light, many bows of one tree, and yet one
strength founded in one root, and many brooks flowing from one fountain, and
a unity thereof conserved in the spring: even so, the Church of our Lord casting
forth her light, displaieth her beams every where, throughout the world, and
yet her light is one: she extends her bows over the whole earth, and spreads
her flowing rivers far and near, and yet there is one Head, one beginning,
and one fruitful and plentiful Mother. And lest you might answer, that this
one Head of the whole Church mentioned by S. Cyprian, is none other, but
Christ, he declares himself, saying Ibid.
: Our Lord to manifest unity has constituted one chair, and ordained by his
authority, that unity should have beginning from one. And explicating who this
one is, he says Ibid.
: Upon Peter being one, he builds his Church, and to him commends his
sheep to be fed etc. The primacy is given to Peter, that the Church may be
showed to be one. And therefore he calls the Chair of Peter Ep. 55.
, The principal Church, from whence Sacerdotall unity proceeds. S. Augustine
L. de pastor c. 13.
: Our Lord committed his sheep to Peter, to commend unity in him. There were
many Apostles, and to one it is said, feed my sheep. S. Leo Sermon. 3. de
assump. sua.
: Peter being one, is chosen out of the whole world, to be constitated over the
vocation of all nations, over all the Apostles, and all the Fathers of the
Church, to the end that although there be many Priests, and many Pastors in the
people of God, yet Peter may peculiarly govern them all, whom Christ also
principally rules. And S. Bernard speaking to Eugenius Pope L. 2. de consider.
: Thou being one, art Pastor not only of the sheep, but of all Pastors etc.
Christ committed all his sheep to one, to commend unity in one flock, and in
one shepherd. Where there is unity, there is perfection.

If therefore Christ committed his whole flock to Peter being one, if one Head
among twelve Apostles were necessary, to take away occasions of Schism among
them, their number being but small; how much more necessary was it, that for
the same cause, the whole Church (which by reason of the multitude of Bishops,
and people, is more liable to schism) should be governed by one Head? Who
although he be a weak man, Christ praying for him Luc. 22.32.
, has secured us, that his faith shall not fail; and to the end, he may
confirm all his brethren, has placed him Aug. ep. 166.
in the chair of Unity, in which even ill men are enforced to speak good
things* And though he be but one, yet he is assisted by other Bishops, as his
Coadiutors, and they by inferion Pastors, that so the Bishops watching over the
inferior Pastors, and the supreme Pastor over the Bishops, the government of the
Church, and labor thereof, might be divided among many, and yet chiefly
committed to one, to whom the rest were to have recourse, as the Apostles had
to Peter. Among the most Blessed Apostles (says S. Leo Ep. 84.
there was in the likeness of honor, a difference of power: And although the
election of them all was alike, yet it was granted to one, that he should be
above the rest in authority: from which model, the distinction of Bishops has
proceeded, and with great providence it has been ordained, that all should not
claim all things to themselves, but that in several Provinces, there should
be several Bishops, whose sentence should hold the first rank among their
brethren: and again, that others constituted in the greater cities should have
a more ample charge; and that by them, the government of the universal Church
might flow to the seat of Peter, and that none might ever dissent from their
Head. This was the doctrine of that renowned Father; and the same has been the
belief of all Orthodoxe Christians. And you that oppose it by telling us a
tale of a wrens head placed upon the sholders of a man, show your self not to
understand the things of God Math. 16.13.
* but to measure them by your shallow capacity, not considering that according
to his promise, the supreme Pastor to whom he has committed the charge of his
flock, is governed by the holy Ghost in his consultations of faith; and that as
without his assistance, no multitude of Prelates is able to govern the whole
Church; so with his help, one may perform it, as experience teaches.

But you object Page 350.
, 1. That we cannot have certitude of any B. of Rome* because his ordination
depends upon the intention of the Ordainer, then which what can be more
uncertain? This you had objected before, and have received your answer Chap.
5. sect. 7.
. And S. Cyprian L. 4. ep. 9.
has told you, that to raise such doubts is to doubt of the providence of God,
and to rebel against his ordination.

2. You object Page 350.
, John the twelth wanting years, and other conditions necessary for that
dignity, took possession of the Roman Church, by intrusion, and that therefore
in his time the Church had no true visible Head (such as we require) because of
him it could not be said, This is the B. of Rome This objection you borrowed
from Baronius Anno 955.
, who though he acknowledge, that the elect^on of John was void, because no
true form was observed in it, yet you pass over what he adds, as not being
for your purpose, namely, that the Church afterward consented to his election,
whereby the defects that interuened in his former election, were supplied, and
he received, and reverenced, as true Pope by the whole Church. And whereas you
say, that this Pope was for his life monstrous, it has been proved About Chap.
12. sect. 2.
, that the ill lives of Popes, or other Bishops, are not Arguments, to disprove
their authority. God is able to teach by Balaams Ass, and the Evangelist tells
you Io^^. 11.49.
that notwithstanding Caiphas was a wicked man, yet because he was high Priest
he prophesied, or rather God by him. And our Blessed Savior foreseeing, that
Cauillers would arise, has by S. Augustine Ep. 165.
long since answered this your Argument, to a wrangling Donatist, and in him to
you, saying: If any traitor in those days had by surreption crept into that
rank of Bishops which is deduced from S. Peter himself, even to Anastasius
(or Vrbanus) who at this present sits in that chair, it could work no
prejudice to the Church, and to innocent Christians, for whom our Lord
provides, saying of wicked Prelates: Do ye what they say, but what they do,
do it not; for they say and do not etc. And speaking to Petilianus another
Donatist, after he had reprehended him for separating himself from the Roman
Church with sacrilegious fury, he adds Cont. lit. Petil. l. 2. c. 51.
: Why do thou call the Apostolic See the chair of pestilence? If in respect
of the men, whom thou think to speak the Law, and not to fulfill is, did
our Lord Jesus Christ for the Pharisees (of whom he says, they say and do not)
any way wrong the chair in which they sat? Nay, did he not commend that
chair of Moses, and reprehend them, preserving entire the honor of the
Chair? If you would think upon these things, you would not for the men whom
you defame, blaspheme the Apostolic Chair, with which you do not communicate.
So S. Augustine to Petilianus; and so we to you.

SECT. V. Whether the Roman Church, at any time, be divided into many Heads.
HOw ill advised you are to object either the multitude, or the long
continuance of Schisms, which have been in the Roman Church, you have heard
See above Chap. 7. prope sin. and Chap. 12. sect. 7.
. But because in time of Schism when there are two or three that pretend right
to the chair of S. Peter, the faithful cannot certainly know, which of them
is true Pope, you ask, Page 352.
. What resolution our Church can have in such a case? adding moreover Page 353.
, that our article of believing this only singular Roman Pope, without which
faith none can be saved, damneth two of the three parts of our Roman Church at
that time. Your question is a doubt springing from ignorance, and your addition
an untruth. To your question S. Antoninus Part. 3. ^is. 21. c. 2. and seqq.
has answered; who treating of the schism, which happened in time of Urban
the sixth (against whom the French Cardinals, ^earing his severity, and flying
to Anagnia, created a new Pope, calling him Clement the seventh) prescribes
this rule, that in time of Schism, when two or more at the same time, hold
themselves to be true Popes, it is not necessary for salvation, to believe any
one of them determinatly to be the true Pope, but disiunctiuely him, that has
been Canonically assumpted: And which of them determinatly that is, faithful
people are not bound to know, but may follow the judgment of their Prelates,
and Superiors. To which Gerson De modo hab. se temp. Schism.
adds, that in this case, it is temerarious, iniutious, and scandalous to
hold as excommunicated, or out of the state of salvation, those, that adhere to
either part, or that carry themselves noutrally: and that it is lawful to
communicate with either party, and to obey either of those Popes, as occasion
shall serve, while the right of neither is certainly known. And this he
confirms by the answer which S. Ambrose gave to S. Augustine concerning the
lawfulness of fasting, or not fasting on Saturdaies, according to the
diversity of times, places, and persons.

I conclude therefore, that your so often repeating as an article of our faith,
that for salvation it is necessary to believe that this determinat man is true
Pope, and true Head of the Church, if you speak of believing it with divine
faith, you confess the contrary to be held by many of our learned Divines; and
that their opinion has never been censured by the Church. But if you speak of
believing it at least with moral certainty, it is granted by all Catholic
Divines, when there is but one determinat person, whom the whole Church
receaueth and obiecteth, as her undoubted Head, and as the Vicar of Christ upon
earth. But yet neither that is necessary in time of Schism, when of two or
three, it is doubtful, which is the true Pope: for then it is sufficient to
believe him to be true Pope, which is Canonically chosen, without determining
any of them in particular, as S. Antoninus, and Gerson have taught, instructing
you, how to carry your self in such a case. But I fear, you have no desire to
learn.

SECT. VI. Whether the Roman Church be doubtfully headed.
TO prove that the Roman Church is doubtfully headed, you allege Page
354.355.356.
, that after 1600. years, it is not yet determined, whether the supreme Judge
in our Church, be the Roman Pope, or a Council: collecting from thence, that
the Roman Church should not take upon her to determine Controversies of faith
against, Protestants, before she have satisfied Protestants in this one,
whether Pope, or Council be indeed the supreme Judge. So you, as you are wont:
for you are not ignorant that this division is inadequate, since beside the
Pope alone without a Council, and a Council alone without the Pope, there is
a third member, which is the Pope together with a Council, whose judgment in
matters of faith all Catholics hold to be infallible. Nor did any ever defend,
that a general Council confirmed by the Pope can err, either in definitions
of faith, or manners. This is the sense and meaning of Catholic Doctors, when
they say. The Church cannot err: for by the Church, they understand not the
Pope alone without a Council, nor a Council alone without the Pope, but both
of them together, as they make one whole Church, consisting of the Pope as
Head, and of the Council as the representative body thereof. This is that
supreme Judge, which condemned the Arians in the Council of Nice; the
Macedonians in the first of Constantinople; the Nestorians in that of Ephesus;
and the Eutychians at Chalcedon. And the same has condemned you in the
Council of Trent, and in others formerly, in which some of your Protestant
Tenets have been censured as heretical. To the sentence of this Judge all
Christians are bound to submit, our Blessed Savior having commanded Math. 1^*
17.
, that whosoever hears not the Church (that is to say, the Prelates of the
Church, for so the Fathers expound) be esteemed as a Heathen, and a Publican.

But you cunningly divert from this, which is certain and out of dispute, to
another question, whether the Pope be above a Council, or a Council above the
Pope: And although you had said above Page 115. fin.
, that to hold the Pope to be above a Council is a flat heresy long since
condemned by our Counsels of Constance and Basil, because then that was best
for your purpose; yet here Page 355. fin. 356.
because the contrary fitteth you better, you say, It is no matter of faith,
but a thing disputable on both sides among us: and you make a pitiful
complaint, that so principal a case as this, after 1600. years, should not be
resolved by the Church. And why is all this your solicitude? mary to the end,
you may take occasion to traduce Stapleton, whom you will have Page 356.
to be our foreman and to speak for us all, saying, that, although this case
have not been decided by any absolute Decree, yet it is defined by the tacit
and secret consent of the Doctors of the Church, scarce any one Divine holding
any other opinion herin, then that which (before that of late this controversy
was moved) was anciently in force; namely, that the Pope is above a Council,
as the Head is above the Body. As if he should say, Sirs, if the question be,
whether John an Oak, or John a Style be heir to that land, because the
witnesses conceal their meaning, without question they by a tacit consent are
for the Complainant, that John an Oak must carry the land. O Quack-saluer! So
you; who whiles you strive to play upon Stapleton, make your self ridiculous:
for you cite those words out of Stapleton Doctr. pr^^. l. 13. c. 15. who in
that work has no more but twelve books in all. Wherefore the words are either
coined by you, or if they be Stapletons, he is not only miscited, but
egregiously abused by you: for does he not say in express words, that among
Catholic Divines scarcely any one is of another opinion, then that the Pope is
above a Council, as the Head is about the Body? What else is this to say, but
that Catholic Divines in their books published to the view of the world, have
expressed themselves, and unanimously declared, that the Pope is above a
Council? And this their accord expressed in their writings, Stapleton with
great reason calls, A tacit definition, that is to say, an expression and
accord equivalent to a definition: even as he who should tell a man, that he
speaks often untruly, (as you in your Grand Imposture do) should tacitly, or
virtually tell him, that he were not a silent witness, nor a dumb Judge
against you; so nether are the Divines alleged by Stapleton, silent witnesses,
or dumb Judges in the question proposed. I conclude therefore that Doctor
Stapleton is not the Quack-saluer, but Doctor Morton; and your Argument so
poor, that John an Oak, or John a Style might easily have framed a better.

SECT. VII. Of the Council of Constance, defining a Council to be above the
Pope.
TO prove that a Council is above the Pope in matters of direction of faith
and manners, you object Page 356.357.
the fourth Canon of the Council of Constance, which Council (say you) was
expressly confirmed by Pope Martin, to be held inuiolabia in matters of faith.
True. But your dealing is not true: for as Turrecremata, Campegius, Sanders,
Apud Bell. l. 1. de Pont. c. 19.
Caietan Opusc. de autho. Papae and Conc.
and Canus L. 5. c. 6.. Ad octau.
have observed, the Council when that decree was made, was not a general, but
a particular Council: and the decree it self was not universal for all
times, but only for that time of schism, when it was uncertain, which of
three that actually pretended right to the Sea of S. Peter, was true Pope; or
indeed whether any of the three were true Pope or no. And were it granted, that
in a case of uncertainty, as this was, whether there were any true Pope in the
Church, a Council is superior to the doubtful Popes, and has authority to
depose them, and provide a certain and undoubted Head for the Church, it would
not follow, that when an undoubted Head is chosen, the Council is superior to
him: for he has not his authority from the Council, but from Christ.

Again, whereas no decree of any Council can be of force, if it be not
confirmed by the Sea Apostolic See above Chap. 17. sect. 6.
, this was not only not confirmed, but rejected, and (as you know Bellarmine L.
1. de Council. c. 7.
and Binius In not. ad hoc Council.
have noted) absolutely condemned by the Councels of Florence, and Lateran. And
lastly, it was inualid, because the Bishops that adhered to two of the three,
which held themselves to be Popes, consented not to it Bellar. ibid.
.

The decrees of faith which Martin Pope confirmed, were only those the Council
made against the heresies of John Wiclef, John Hus, and Hierome of Prage
(Saints of your Protestant Calendar See P^xe Ian. 1. May 2. June 1.
, as appears out of his Bull of confirmation annexed to the Council, in
which this decree of the Councels superiority to the Pope, is not mentioned,
much less confirmed.

But you object Page 357. sin.
; when the Council of Constance faith, The Council has its authority
immediately from Christ, the meaning is* (as you are taught) that the Popes
authority is not of divine, but of humane institution. This is your comment,
false in it self See aboue^ Chap. 19. sect. 9.
, and directly contrary to the meaning of the Council of Constance, which
sets down this your proposition Sess. 1^.
, as the ninth article of John Hus, and condemns it as heretical, together
with other articles, in which Protestants agree with him. And in like manner it
defines Sess. 8.
against the articles 37. and 41. of Wiklef, that the Pope is immediate Vicar
of Christ, and that for salvation it is necessary to believe his authority over
all Churches, and that the Roman Church is the chief of all others: In which
condemnation whether Protestants holding the same errors, be not inuolued, I
leave to your judgment.

Finally, the same Council (as you read in the last session) was dissolved by
authority and command of the Pope (the Council it self so requiring) and the
condemnation of all the errors of Wiclef, and Hus, ratified, and confirmed by a
special Bull of the Pope, with command that all suspected of those heresies,
should be demanded whether they believe that S. Peter was the Vicar of Christ
having power to bind and lose upon earth; and whether they hold, that the Pope
canonically chosen (his proper Name expressed) is the Successor of S. Peter,
and has supreme power over the Church of God. These are the doctrines of that
Council, which show, that your obiecting it against the authority of the Pope,
and Church of Rome over all other Bishops and Churches, is a Grand Imposture.

SECT. VIII. The same matter prosequuted out of the Council of Basil.
THere was (say you) Page 358.
a Council gathered at Basil by the authority of Pope Martin the fifth. What?
A general Council called by authority of the Pope? Then it appears, that the
Pope is supreme Head, and governor of the universal Church: for as a King
cannot by his authority call a Parliament of those, that are not his subjects;
so neither could the Pope by his authority have called a general Council, had
not his authority extended it self over the universal Church. So unadvisedly
are you caught in your own snares.

You add Ibid.
out of Binius, that this Council was after confirmed by Eugenius. How
confirmed? Were the Acts, or decrees of that Council confirmed by Eugenius? So
would you persuade your reader. But Binius speaks not of the confirmation of
any Act, or Decree of the Council, but only of ratifying the calling, and
beginning of it, under the presidence of Iulianus Caesarinus his Legate,
according to the Order of his predecessor: which is also observed, and proved
by Canus L. 5. de loc. cap. postrem.
.

It was therefore begun, and for a time continued by lawful authority, but
afterward became schismatic, and was justly condemned by the general
Council of Lateran Sub Leon. 10. sess. 11.
as a Conuenticle schismatic, sedition, and of no authority. 1. Because (as
Turrecremata a learned writer of that time, aduertiseth Sum. de Eccl. l. 2. c.
10^.
, contrary to the custom of all general Counsels, they refused to
acknowledge the authority of those, whom the Pope had sent to preside in the
Council. 2. For that they presumed to pronounce a sentence of deposition
against Eugenius Pope, and that in a most temerarious manner, because there was
then no Legate of his in the Council; all the chief Bishops being departed,
and a certain Cardinal of Arles, by his own authority, had usurped the place
of President: and because there wanted voices of Bishops, to make up number,
they took into the Council, a great multitude of Priests; so that now against
all order and form of Counsels, it was not a Council of Bishops, but of
Priests. 3. (as Turrecremata witnesses Ibid.
, the decrees of that Council (even such as they were) were not unanimously
agreed upon, both because many Prelates, and Doctors, as well of Canon, as of
civil Law, made resistance unto them; and also because understanding, that
Ambassadors sent by the Kings of England, and Castile, were on their way, and
near at hand, they hastened fraudulently to define such things, as they knew
those Legates would not assent unto. 4. Because (as S. Antoninus reports
Part. 3. tit. 22. c. 10.. 4.
, Iulianus the Cardinal, whom Eugnius had appointed President, leaving that
schismatic Conuenticle, returned to the Pope, who by Apostolical authority
dissolved their assembly. But they stopping their ears, began to summon
Eugenius, being solicited theru^to, by the Duke of Milan, his professed enemy.
On the other side, Sigismund the Emperor, and the Venetians dissuaded them from
any further proceeding: Which notwithstanding, they pronounced sentence of
deposition against Eugenius, and erected to themselves a new Idol Amadaeus
Duke of Sauoy, calling him Felix the fifth, to whom obedience was yielded in
his own territory. Thus S. Antoninus. Whereby it appears* that Felix, whom the
Council created, being acknowledged no where but in his own Dukedom, the
whole Church adhered still to Eugenius, believing, that the Council had no
authority to depose him: Yea Felix himself See Binius in Not. ad hoc Council.
page 406.
acknowledging the same, resigned his usurped title, by persuasion of the
Emperor, and even by his own judgment, condemned all the Acts of that Council
(by which he had been chosen) as of a schismatic Assembly.

And hereby is discovered the falsehood, of what you allege Page 359.
out of a Synodicall Epistle of that Council, demanding, whether the Pope will
condemn for schismatikes, all the Cardinals, Bishops, and the Emperor
himself, with Kings and Princes, yea and the whole Church, which did approve
that Council? This (I say) is a shameful untruth: for all the chief Prelates
seeing that Council grew to open Schism, had forsaken it: there was remaining
one only Cardinal See Bin. to. 4. page 121.
, and he an enemy to the Pope; the mayor part of them that remained, were not
Bishops, but Priests, and they disagreeing among themselves, as appears out
of another Synodicall Epistle of theirs Apud Bin to. 4. page 146.
; in which also they confess the paucity of their number, partly excusing it
by reasons, and partly laying the fault on Eugenius, that he had drawn away so
many Prelates from them. How then is it true, that all the Cardinals, Bishops,
the Emperor, with Kings and Princes, and the whole Church were present there,
and approved this Council? How is it true, since it is certain that three
years before the dissolution of this Conuenticle, was assembled that famous
general Council of Florence, in which this Basilean Synagogue was condemned,
and the Union between the Greek and Latin Church established, Pope E^genius
himself assisting in it, as President, the Emperor of the Grecians being
present in person, the Emperor of the Latins by his Legates, together with all
the most famous Prelates of the Greek and Latin Church, above 1400. in number.

This shows which of these two assemblies was the lawful Council, which the
schismatic: yea, and God himself interposing his verdict, declared the
same: for those Schismakikes obstinatly refusing to break up their assembly,
so often annulled by the Pope, he according to his promise made to S. Peter
Math. 16.19.
, and in him to his Successors, confirming the sentence of Eugenius from
h^auen, son^ among them a most horrible plague, of which many of them dying,
the rest were enforced to break up, and depart, as Aeneas Siluius records In
histor. Conc. Basil.
, who having been present at that Council, and seeing their ^emerations
obstinacy against the Roman See, forsook it, and detesting it, writ earnestly
against it.

All this being true, as it is, with what fidelity do you say Page 350.
, that in this case, the Pope is the schismatike, and not the Council? But I
wonder not that you take part with Schismatiks: Belike you are of opinion, that
some obstinate Puritans in Parliament standing out against his Majesty, he and
not they, are the rebels: for the case is alike, saving only that this is a
temporal cause, and that a spiritual.

But you demand Page 360.
with Nilus, and Erasmus, to what end general Counsels should be called, with
so much cost, trouble, and labor, if the Pope have infallibility of judgment?
I answer; to the same end, that S. Peter the first Pope of Rome,
notwithstanding he had infallibility of judgment, called a Council at Antioch
Act. 15.6.7.
. If you desire more reasons you have them in Bellarmine L. 4. de Pont. c. 7.
, who has answered this Argument: but you were wise enough, to take no notice
thereof.

SECT. IX. Doctor Mortons instances of France, and England, to prove the
no-necessity of Union, with the Church of Rome.
THere has been published by some of your Nouellists, a pamphlet, entitled,
Fasciculus rerum expetendarum, and fugiendarum, stuffed with so many lies, that
the Author was ashamed to have his name known. It is prohibited Indic. libro.
prohib.
, and therefore what you report out of it, not to be regarded. But your addition
Page 361.
, that the Council of Trent is not admitted within the Kingdom of France, and
that therefore the French are yet at liberty to believe as much thereof as they
list, is a famous untruth: for although that Kingdom have not admitted
generally all the decrees made by that Council for the reformation of
Ecclesiastical discipline; yet who knows not, that as the Catholics of the
world have, so has that most Christian kingdom with them admitted, and
embraced all the decrees of faith, made in the Council of Trent, and that the
most Christian King, with all his Catholic subjects, belieueth them no less
steadfastly, then the decrees of faith made in the four first general
Counsels, which you admit.

Not unlike to this, is your addition Page 361. fin. 361.
out of B. Gardiners Oration of true obedience, that, in the time of King Henry
the eight, all sorts of people (in England) were agreed upon this point, with
most steadfast consent, learned, and unlearned, both men and women, that no
manner of persons bred, or brought up in England, had ought to do with Rome:
for albeit some persons infected with Lutheranisme, and some flatterers for
their own ends, soothed King Henry in his opposition to the Sea of Rome; yet
who knows not, that the face of the kingdom was then generally Catholic, as
for the space of almost 1000. years before it had been? And who can be
ignorant, that in defense of the authority of the Sea of Rome, B. Fisher, and
Sir Thomas More, writ most learned books, which are yet, and will ever be most
highly esteemed throughout the Christian world; and that what they writ with
their pens, they sealed with their blood? And who knows not, that Cardinal
Pole (a man of so great worth, that he wanted but two voices for the Popedom)
not only writ most learnedly in the same kind, but suffered (and his friends
for his sake) great vexations, and persecutions at the hands of King Henry for
the same cause? And that many persons of worth suffered imprisonment, and death
for the same cause? among which, were all the Charter House Monks of London,
with their Prior? It is therefore a famous untruth to say, It was then the faith
of the Church of England, that, no person bred, or brought up in England, had
ought to do with Rome. Moreover you know this Oration of B. Gardener to be
prohibited by the Church In indic. lib. prohib.
, and that he ashamed of it, retracted it; which yet you are not ashamed to
object.

CHAP. XLIV. Whether Luther, and his followers, had any just cause, to separate
themselves from the Roman Church.
WE are come to the last Chapter of your Grand Imposture, in which to free your
self from the note of Schism and heresy, you brand the Roman Church with
both, and labor to prove that Luther had just cause to separate himself from
her Communion; and that you continuing in the same separation, are more
justifiable then Luther was in his departure from her, and may more justly
plead souls salvation, then any of them that remain in Union with her. Your
Chapter you divide into four parts, and these parts into Theses; which I shall
examine the more briefly, because many of your proofs are repetitions of your
former Arguments already answered.

SECT. I. Whether any Protestants have held, that the Catholic Church before
Luthers fall, was wholly extinguished.
YOur first Thesis is Page 364.
: Many Papists in their aduersnesse to Protestant, whom they seek to traduce,
do impute unto them this faythlesse Paradoxe, as to say, that the Catholic
Church is sometimes extinguished: A false doctrine (say you) which Protestants
never taught.

If Protestants never taught this faithless doctrine, why did Luther when he
began to erect your new Church, say Praef. in 1. tom. and cont. Reg. Angl. fo.
497.
, He had none to assist him, but was left alone, and alone stood in the
battle forsaken of all? Why did Calvin say Ep. 141.
, It is absurd, that since we have been enforced to divide our selves from all
the world, we should now in our very beginnings disagree among our selves? Why
did he say, Respons. ad Sadolet.
, It is public, and notorious to all, learned and unlearned, that when the
Principality of the B. of Rome was erected, the kingdom of Christ was
prostrated, his glory extinguished, Religion abolished, the Church destroyed,
and hope of salvation utterly overthrown? Why did Milius say August. Confess.
explic. art. 7. de Eccl. page 137.
, If there had been right belieuers before Luther, there had been no need of a
Lutheran reformation? Why Morgensterne Tract. de Eccles. p. 141.
; It is ridiculous (to think) that in the time before Luther, any had the
purity of Doctrine, and that Luther should receive it from them, and not they
from Luther: It being manifest to the whole Christian world, that before
Luthert time, all Churches were overwhelmed with Cymerian darkness, and that
Luther was divinely raised up to discover the same, and to restore the light of
true doctrine? And in regard thereof Luther boasted, saying Ep. ad Argentin.
anno 1525.
: Christum a nobis primo vulgatum audemus gloriari. Why did Camierus say Ep.
Jesuit. part. altera Geneu. 1601.
, That error did not only possess a part of the Church, as in time of the
Arians, but that the whole body of the Church by Apostasy was fallen from
Christ? Why did Simon de Voyon a Geneuian Minister in his Catalogue of Doctors
Praefat. ad Lect.
say, That in the year 605. falsehood prevailed, and then was the whole world
overwhelmed in the dregs of Antichristian filthiness, abominable traditions,
and superstitions of the Pope? And of our English Protestants, why did Iuel say
Apol. part. 4. c. 4.
, The truth was unknown at that time, and unheard of, when Martin Luther, and
Hulderick Zuinglius first came unto the knowledge, and preaching of the
Gospel? Why Perkins Expos. of the Creed. page 307.
, That during the space of 900. years, the Popish heresy spread it self over
the whole world, and for many hundred years an universal Apostasy ouerspread
the whole face of the earth?

I conclude therefore, that when you deny, that the Church of Christ was
extinguished before Luthers time, you outface, and co^tradict your best
learned brethren, domestic, and foreign. Nor is it a sufficient answer, to
tell us Page 406.
, of a sentence of Calvin, in which he acknowledges the Church not to be
perished in Afric, Egypt, Asia, and among the Grecians: for you have heard
the testimonies not of Calvin only, but of many others. If Calvin deny that,
which together with them he affirmed, he contradicts himself, And since both
he, and you hold the Church to be invisible, I desire to know, how you came to
find out, and see in Africa, and Greece, a Church that is invisible, and indeed
that is not in being? for in those nations, there is no Church but of Roman
Catholics, all the rest which in them bear the name of Christians, being
absolute heretics See above Chap. 41. sect. 4.
.

But you say Page 369.
, To charge Protestants with holding a decay, and error from faith in the whole
Catholic Church, unto Bellarmine seemed in effect to be a lewd slander. You
understand not Bellarmine, or else wittingly misinterpret his meaning. He
rightly observes L. 3. de Eccles. milie. c. 11.
that Protestants hold two Churches; the one visible, the other invisible:
whereof you speaking, say Page 10. fin. 11. init.
that by some you are slandered with making two Churches. But this to be no
slander Bellarmine proves out of the Centurists, whose doctrine it is. And the
same I prove against you, out of other Protestants: We say (quoth Whitaker
Cont. 2. q. 1. c. 14. fol. 125.
there are two societies of men in the world, that is, two Churches: To the one
the predestinat belong, to the other, the Rebrobate. The one of these he
affirms to be wholly invisible; the other, visible Ibid. q. 2. c. 1. and q.
1. c. 3.7.8. and q. 4. c. 1.3.
. The same is stiffly mantained by Fulke In cap. 3. Math, sect. 3. and in c. 22.
sect. 3.
. When Calvin and other Protestants say, The Church cannot perish, they speak
of the invisible Church, which Bellarmine and all Catholics hold to be a
Platonicall idea, and a mere Chimaera, no where existent but in your deluded
fancies. The true Church of Christ all Catholics with the holy Council of
Nice hold to be One: and that Bellarmine proves to be visible. And you (says
he) hold that to have perished, and your invisible Church only to have
remained, which in his doctrine, and in verity, is to say, that the true Church
of Christ on earth wholly perished, nothing remaining, but a Chimaera of a
supposed invisible Congregation, which has no real existence, but only
fantastike in your imaginations. And that you wrong Bellarmine, in producing
him as a witness, that an absolute decay of the Catholic Church was never
taught by Protestants, you may not deny: for afterward Page 406.
you confess, and prove out of his words, that he (as also Bozius) parifieth
you with the Donatists, which held the Catholic Church to have wholly perished
throughout the world, and to have remained only in a few Professors of their
Sect in a corner of Africa: which doctrine differs not from yours, who hold
the Catholike-Church to have been utterly destroyed for many years, and now to
have no being, but where your Protestant professors are. Wherefore I ask you,
as S. Augustine L. 3. contra Parmen. c. 3.
did the Donatists: How can you vaunt to have any Church; if the have ceased
for so long time? And again De bapt. l. 3. c. 2.
: If the Church were perished so long time, from whence did Donatus (or Luther)
appear? From what earth is he sprung up? From what sea is he come forth? From
what heaven is he fallen? I conclude therefore, that we may justly exclaim
against you, as S. Augustine did against the Donatists In Psalm. 101.
: Gods Church of all nations is no more, she is perished: so say they that are
not in her. O impudent Voice! They say the whole Church is perished, and the
relickes remain only on Donatus (on Luther, or Calvin) his side. O proud, and
impious tongue Aug. de agon. Christ. c. 29.
!

SECT. II. Whether the Catholic Church, assembled in a general Council, may
err in the definitions of Faith.
IN your second Thesis Page 369.
you define, The Church Catholic properly so called (as it is militant) to be
multitude of all Christian belieuers, whenever, and whersoeuer dispersed
throughout the world. This, you say, cannot err. But your third Thesis is Ibid.
that the representative body of this Church, that is to say, all the Prelates
of this Church assembled in a general Council may err in their decrees of
faith. This thesis destroieth the former: for if all the Prelates of the
Church, which are the lights of the world Math. 5.15.
, and whom God Ephesians. 4.12.14.
has provided as Pastors and Doctors, unto the edifiing of his Church, and
given to us, that we be not like little ones wavering, and carried away with
every blast of erroneus doctrine, may themselves be carried away, and seduced
with false doctrine; they may also preach the same to the people* and lead
them into error. What means then is left to preserve the whole Church from
erring?

But you say Page 366.
: That general Counsels may err in their decrees of faith, some of your own
Romish School have avouched. These some (if we believe you) are Cusanus,
Occham, Turrecremata, Gerson, and Canus. But we cannot believe you: for those
works of Cusanus, and Occham are forbidden Ind lib. prohib.
: and Cusanus has retracted his. Turrecremata speaks not of the Church
representative, that is to say of Counsels, which consist only of the Pastors,
and Prelates of the Church, but of the whole body of the Church, as it
comprehends all the faithful, both Pastors and people, which (says he)
cannot err in faith, though some members thereof may. But withal he proves
against you Sum. de Ecc^e. l. 4. c. 2.
, that the verities of faith defined by the Church in general Counsels are to
be held infallible, though not expressly contained in the Canon of holy
Scripture: and that no definitions of Counsels can be of force, unless they
be confirmed by the B. of Rome; and Ibid. l. 3. c. 5.8 30.
that all former Counsels have required their doctrines to be confirmed, and
authorized by him. Why do you then produce him as a witness for the contrary?
Gerson and Canus are both falsified by you: for Gerson in the place you cite,
has no such doctrine, but the contrary, which else where he expresses To. 1.
in Consider. de pa^^. Consid. 1.
saying: Constat quod in materijs fidei terminandis, error non cadit in
Concilio generali etc. It is manifest, that in deciding controversies of faith
a general Council cannot err: And the Doctors yield the reason; because of
the special assistence of the holy Ghost and of Christ governing the Church,
and not permitting it to err in those things, which it cannot attain by
humane industry. Canus says, that general Counsels lawfully gathered may
err in faith, as the second of Ephesus did. This is his second conclusion;
which you lay hold of, concealing that in his third conclusion, which he
presently adds, he says, That a general Council confirmed by the Pope
cannot err; and condemns your doctrine as absolutely heretical. Is it not
then extreme perfidiousnesse, to Father on him the contrary, and to make
Catholic Doctors Patrons of your Errors?

But to declare, what is necessary, that a general Council may not err, you
add Page ^66. fin. 367.
: The difference between the Roman Church, and the Church of the Protestants,
is no more, but this, that the Romanists say, that all general Counsels may
err, except they be confirmed, and authorized by the Pope: but Protestants
say, that all general Counsels may err, except they be directed by the
spirit of Gods word. This indeed you say, and yet leave the question
vnansweared: for we likewise say, that every Council, which is not directed by
the spirit of Gods word, may err. The question is, how it may be known, when
a Council defines according to Gods word, and when not: for Gods word may be
misinterpreted: Whereof Tertullian speaking truly said L. de praescrip.
: An adulterate gloss does as much outrage to the truth, as a false pen. And
S. Hilary L. 2 de Tri^. init.
: There have been many, who have interpreted the heavenly words otherway^^ then
the truth did require, according to the sense of their own will, not for the
establishing of truth: for heresy, is not in the writing, but in the
understanding: the fault is not in the word, but in the sense. And does not S.
Hierome likewise say In Ep. ad Gal. c. 1.
, The Gospel is not in the words, but in the sense? And does not S. Augustine
cry out In Joan. tract. 13.
, Heresies and perverse doctrine which entangle souls, and cast them headlong
into hell have their birth nowhere, but from good Scriptures ill vndeestood?
And again De Genesis ad lit. l. 7. c. 9.
: Heretics were not heretics, but that misunderstanding the Scripture, they
defend obstinatly their own false opinions against the truth thereof. And in
another place Ep. 2^^.
: All heretics which receive the Scriptures, think they follow them when they
follow their own Errors. Of the same subject Lyrinensis discourses largely
and learnedly Chap. 1^.30.37.
, showing that, the Devil alleged Scriptures against Christ, and that all
Heretics allege them against the Church in defense of their errors: which
made S. Hierome say In Ep. ad Gal. c. 1.
, that there is great danger in speaking in the Church, for fear lest by a
wrong interpretation, the Gospel of Christ be made the Gospel of man, or
(which is worse) the Gospel of the Devil. And speaking of the Luciferians
Aduers. Lucifer. versus fin.
who boasted of the Scriptures, as Protestants do: Let them not statter
themselves to much, because they seem to have Scripture for what they affirm:
for even the Devil has alleged Scriptures, which consist not in reading, but
in understanding.

Wherefore it is not sufficient to allege Scriptures: We allege them, and you
allege them: but we disagree concerning the true sense, and meaning of them:
from whom shall we learn it? If Luther may, as your foreman, speak for you
all, you, and none but you, and that by your private spirit, must deliver the
true sense of them. We (says Luther) L. de ser^^ arbit.
receive nothing but the Scriptures, and them so also, that we our selves only,
have certain authority to expound them. As we understand them, so was the
meaning of the Holy Ghost: what others bring, be they never so great, never so
many, preceedeth from the spirit of Satan, and from a mad and alimated mind.
So Luther. And as he challenged to himself this privilege of delivering the
true sense of Scripture, so his disciples have challenged the same to
themselves. This spirit it is, which has hatched so many viperous sects, no
less disagreeing among themselves, then all of them straying from the truth.
And yet you all boast of Scripture, and all proclaim, that you follow the word
of God. And no marvel: for the Devil (says Lyrinensis) Cap. 37.3^.
knows right well, that when wicked errors are to be broached, the readiest
way to deceive, is to allege stiffly the authority of divine Scripture. What
then shall Catholic men, and Children of our Mother the Church do? Let them
interpret the divine Canon according to the tradition of the universal Church.
The truth of Scripture (says S. Augustine Cont. Crescon. l. 1. c. 33.
is held by us, when we do that, which pleases the universal Church, whom the
authority of the same Scriptures recommendeth. And again Ibid. c. 31.
: Whosoever fears to be deceived through the obscurity of this question, let
him consult with that Church, which the holy Scripture has designed, without
any ambiguity. This Church it is, of which God pronounced by the mouth of Isay
Isa. 54.17.
, Thou shall judge every tongue, that resists thee in judgment. Of this,
Christ has promised Math. 16.18.
, that the gates of hell (which are Errors) shall not preu^ile against her. Of
this he has said Math. 18.17.
that whosoever hears her not, is to be held as a Heathen, and a Publican. In
this he has placed Ad Ephesians. 4.11 17.
Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists. Pastors, and Doctors etc. that we may not be
little Children, wavering, and carried away with every blast of doctrine. This
Church, these Pastors, these Doctors, all Christians must hear, and embrace
their exposition of Scripture, as the true meaning of the holy Ghost, Christ
himself having said Luc. 10.6.
. that who hears them, hears him; and S. John ^. Joan. 4.6.
by this mark distinguishes Orthodoxe people from Heretics: that the
Orthodoxe hear and obey the Pastors and Doctors of Gods Church, which
heretics refuse to do. We are (says he) of God: he that knows God, hears
us: He that is not of God, hears us not. In this we know the spirit of truth,
and the spirit of Error. And if at all times the Pastors of Gods Church are to
be heard, then surely most of all, when they are assembled in a general
Council, Christ professing himself to be then in the midst of them Math.
18.20.
. By their authority the says is maintained, and heresy condemned. When
Firmilianus and Cyprian, with many other Bishops defended the Error of
Rebaptization by testimonies of Scripture (but, as Lyrinensis notes Cap. 10.
, glossed after a new, and naughty fashion) by what authority was that error
condemned, but by the custom and tradition of the Church, the prohibition of
Pope Stephen chiefly cooperating thereto? for (as S. Augustine truly says L. 5.
de Bapt. c. 23.
the Apostles had delivered nothing in writing concerning that point. And when
the Arians in the Council of Nice alleged, and misinterpreted Scriptures in
proof of their heresy, by what means were they confuted and condemned, but by
the tradition of the Church delivered by the Venerable Bishops assembled in
that Council Se^ above Chap. 16.
and chiefly by the authority of the B. of Rome, by whom that Council was
called and confirmed Ibid.
, and without whose confirmation no Canon of any Council can be of force S^e
above Chap. 17. sent. 6.
? And from hence it has proceeded, that as all the general Counsels which
the B. of Rome has confirmed, are held by the whole Church to be of infallible
authority, no one Father or Doctor ever doubting thereof; so contrarily the
Council of Ariminum, the second of Ephesus, and all others, which he has
reproved, have been ever reputed spurious assemblies, and of no authority. And
with great reason: for his authority in defining controversies of faith, Christ
himself declared to be infallible See above Chap. ^^. sect. 1. and 2.
, when he prayed for him, that his faith might not fail, and commanded him to
confirm his brethren: and likewise, when he promised that heresies, which are
the gates of hell, shall not prouaile against the Church built upon him.

I conclude therefore that you mistake the state of the question. We agree with
you, that a Council which is not directed by the spirit of Gods word, may
err: but the difference between us is, who is to be the Judge, whether a
Council proceed according to the direction of Gods word, or no. Luther, and
you his disciples casting of the yoke of obedience to your lawful Pastors, and
refusing to hear them, will have no other Judges, but your selves; to the end,
that if a general Council condemn your doctrine, as that of Trent has done,
you may reject it, upon pretense, that it has not been directed by the spirit
of Gods word; which is an excuse common to all Heretics: for what heretic
will not (and may not, with as fair color as you) plead, that the Counsels
which condemned him, were not directed by the shirit of Gods word? Upon this
pretense the Arians, that of Ephesus: the Eutychians, that of Chalcedon: the
Monothelites, the sixth Council: the Image-breakers, the seventh. Upon the
same pretense you reject the Council of Trent, and make profession to reject
all Counsels whatsoever, that shall not allow you to be the only Judges of the
sense of Gods word, and grant unto every one of you, that infallible authority,
to expound it, which you deny to a whole general Council. When Counsels have
defined, (says Luther Art. 11^.
then will we be Judges, whether they be to be accepted, or not. And the same
is the doctrine of Calvin L. 4. instit. c. 9. tot.
. We contrarily insisting in the steps of all Orthodoxe antiquity (whose
testimonies are plentifully alleged by Coccius To. 1. l. 7. art. 21.
acknowledge, that the Pastors, which are the representative body of the
Church, assembled together with the B. of Rome, as their Head, is an infallible
Judge of the true sense of Gods word, and that what they define in matters of
faith, is of vn^o^^^^^d authority, and to be reverenced as the Ghospells of
Christ: for so antiquity reverenced the general Councels which have been held
before their time See Coce. (...).
: and so we reverence the rest, that have been held since their time, all of
them being assembled, and confirmed by the same authority of the Sea
Apostolic, and directed by the same Spirit of truth, that the first Counsels
were. And who sees not, that you denying this authority, take away all the use
of Counsels in the Church, making controue; sies of says indeterminable, and
arguing Christ of lack of wisdom, and providence, in not leaving any certain
means to end dissentions, and preserve Unity in his Church.

SECT. III. Whecher Protestants hold the Church of Christ to be invisible.
YOur fourth Thesis is Page 167.368.369.370.
: Protestants hold not any greater inuisibility, or rather obscurity of the
Church Catholic, then that, which the Romanists are forced to confess. This
Thesis is manifestly false: for you have heard your grand Master Calvin, and
other your brethren Here above sect. 1.
confessing, that before Luthers time, the Church was wholly destroyed, even as
man's life is, when his throat is cut: that it is ridiculous to think, there
were any true belieuers when Luther began: that not a part, but the whole body
of the Church was fallen away by Apostasy. And you cannot be ignorant that
other Protestants have testified Brereley Prot. Apol. tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 11.
sub. dict. 3.
that she was not only obscured as in the time of the Arians, but invisible,
and could not be showed. Iuell Ibid.
: that the truth was unknown at that time, and unheard of. Perkins Ibid.
: that a^ universal Apostasy ouerspread the whole face of the earth, and that
your Church was not then Visible to the world. Milius Ibid.
: that if there had been any right belieuers before Luther, there had been no
need of a Lutheran reformation. Francus Brerel. Ibid. tract. 2. c. 1. sect. 4.
: that for 1400. years the Church of Christ was no where external, and
visible. Napper Ibid.
: that for 1260. years, Gods true Church was most certainly latent, and
invisible.

These are the confessions of your brethren, conuincing you to speak untruly,
when you say, Protestants hold not any greater inuisibility, or rather
obscurity of the Church Catholic, then that, which the Romanists are forced to
confess: for our Tenets, which we have learned from the holy Scripture, are;
that the Church of Christ is a magnificent throne, as resplendent as the sun
Psalm. 88.38.
; A lofty City placed upon a mountain Math. 5.14.
, which (says S. Augustine) Cont. Parm. l. 3. c. 5.
cannot be hid, but shall be known to all the coasts of the earth: To a
mountain prepared in the top of mountains elevated above the little hills;
unto which all nations shall flow Isa. 2.2.
; to a Tabernacle seated in the sun Psalm. 28.6.
; of which S. Augustine speaking, says In ^um Psalm.
: He placed his tabernacle in the sun, that is to say, his Church, in
manifestation, or open view, not in a corner, not such as is hidden, as if it
were covered etc. In the sun he placed his tabernacle: what do thou mean,
O Heretic, to fly into darkness? To a light that is not hidden under a
bushel, but set upon a candelstick: Which if Protestants see not. How (says
S. Augustine) Tract. 2. in 1. Ep. Joan.
can I call them other then blind, that see not so great a mountain, and shut
their eyes against the Lamp set upon the candelstick? But what marvel: for
(says he) L. 2^ co^^. Parm. c. 3.
it is the condition of all heretics, not to see the thing which in the world
is most clear, constituted in the light of all nations; out of the unity
whereof, whatsoever they do, can no more warrant them from the wrath of God,
than the spiders web from the extremity of cold. Finally we believe with S.
Augustine Cont. lit. Petil. l. 2. c. 104.
, that the Catholic Church has this certain mark, that she cannot be hidden.

This is the doctrine and belief of all Catholics: Do you herein accord with
us? Do you hold the Catholic Church to be always visible, and always as
conspicuous as a lamp^ upon a Candelstick, as a city upon a mountain, as a
tabernacle in the sun? Why then do you say, that she was so many years
latent, and invisible, that she could not be shewad; that she was unknown, and
unheard of; that she was no where external, and visible; that she was wholly
destroyed? With what modesty then can you say, that Protestants hold not any
greater inuisibility, or rather obscurity of the Church Catholic, then that,
which the Romanists are forced to confess?

But in proof of this Thesis, and in opposition to the holy Scripture, and S.
Augustine, you say to us Page 367. fin.
, you regard not, that the Church of Christ, as it is sometime in luster
glorious as the sun, so again, it is (according to the judgment of S.
Augustine, and S. Ambrose) sometimes as the moon, which has her increases, and
decreases. Yes, we regard it well: and you ought to have regarded, that
although S. Augustine compare the Church to the moon, in this respect, that
her external luster is sometimes diminished by persecutions, and her glory
obscured by the ill lives of some of her children, yet he frequently compares
her to the sun, and belieueth with the Prophet Isa. 60.29.
, that her sun shall never set, and her moon shall not be diminished: and
Ep. 48.
that, when by scandalls her light is most obscured, etiam tunc in suis
fortissimis eminent even then she is eminent in her most steedfast Champions,
and in them remains resplendent, and glorious, displaying beams of light
over the whole earth. So far is S. Augustine from your absurd paradoxe of the
inuisibility and total decay of the Church. And in what sense S. Ambrose
compares her to the moon, he declares, saying L. 4. Hexam. c. 2.
: The Church has her times of persecution, and of peace: she seems to decay,
as the moon, but decaieth not. She may be shadowed, she cannot perish: because
she is diminished by the fall of some in persecutions, to the end she may be
filled with the confessions of Martyrs, and that being illustrated with
trophies of the blood shed for Christ, she may diffuse greater light of her
devotion, and faith throughout the whole world.

If Costerus, Castro, Lindanus, and Stapleton affirm, that the Arian heresy in
a short time infected almost all the Churches of the world; so have
Lutheranisme, Caluinianisme, Zuing lianisme, with other new Sects sprung from
them in these later times, infected many provinces of Europe. But therefore is
the Catholic Church in those Provinces invisible? How then do you see
Catholics to persecute them, to imprison them? And even so, and much more,
when the Arian heresy was in the greatest ruff, the Catholic Church was every
where still eminently visible, as that very passage of Liberius proves, which
here you produce for the contrary: for Constantius the Arian Emperor having by
threats drawn many Bishops, especially of the East, to subscribe to the
condemnation of Athanasius, and (as Theodoret out of his Apology reports) L.
2. histor. c. 15.
the rest that refused to subscribe, either concealing themselves for fear, or
being sent into banishment, he called Liberius unto him, and urged him not to
communicate with Athanasius, saying, he was condemned by the whole world, and
defended by none, but by him. Liberius answered Theod. l. 2. hist. c. 16.
: Esto, quod solus sim etc. Be it, that I am alone; the cause of the faith is
not therefore the worse: for there was a time, when there were but three
Children to resist the Kings commandment. These three Children were brought by
Nabuchodosor out of Jury, into Babylon. As then there were none in Babylon, to
defend Gods cause, but only those three; so (says Liberius, and out of him
Salmeron here objected by you) be it, that I am now left here alone, to desend
the cause of Athanasius, the cause of the faith is not therefore the worse. This
you bring to prove, that the Church was then, or may sometimes be brought to so
low an ebb, that there be but three, yea only one Orthodoxe man remaining. But
it is an ignorant mistake: for albeit there were then in Babylon three only
Children to resist Nabuchodonosor, yet in Jury there was remaining a numerous
Church of Orthodoxe people. And so likewise, though there was then no other
Bishop present, to withstand Constantius, yet there were in the Church of God
at that time, many Catholic Bishops, renowned for their learning, and
constancy, and diverse of them then actually in banishment, whose restitution to
their Churches Liberius in that very Dialogue often demanded of Constantius.
And who knows not that beside many Catholic Bishops reckoned by S.
Athanasius Apud Theod. l. 2. hist. c. 14.15.16.
there lived at the same time other most eminent Prelates, and Doctors, as
Saint Hilary, Pacianus, Didymus, Titus Bostrensis, S. Cyrill of Jerusalem,
Optatus, Eusebius Vercellensis, S. Ephrem, S. Gregory Nazianzen, S. Epiphanius,
S. Basil, S. Gregory Nyssen, S. Ambrose, and many others? And as there were
many Catholic Pastors, so were there Catholic people governed by them. Yea
who knows not that both the Roman, and all the Western Church at that time
was full of Orthodoxe Pastors and people; in so much that after the Roman
Matro^s by advice of their Husbands Theod. ibid. c. 17.
, had presented themselves before Constantius, and obtained Liberius his
return from exile, the Bishops of the East sent Legates unto him, and to all
the Bishops of Italy, and of the whole Western Church, humbly craving to be
admitted into their communion; and to declare themselves free from suspicion of
heresy, with which they had been charged, protested, that they did not believe
otherwise, then the Fathers of the Nicen Council did; and that they had held
formerly, did still hold, and would ever hold till their last breath, the same
faith with them. Whereupon Liberius willingly admitted them into the communion
of the Western Church, and addressed a letter to fifty nine of them by name
and to all the rest in general, expressing the great joy he conceived, to
understand, that they had always agreed in faith with him, and with the rest
of the Bishops of Italy, and of all the other Western countries: for so are
his words.

This is the story truly set down. What relief do you find here for your
invisible Church, since in the very height of the Arian heresy (which is the
greatest wayne you can sinde in the Catholic Church) she abounded, and shined
like a sun most gloriously, with orthodoxe Pastors and people, both in the
East and West? Show us such a Protestant Church before Luther, or else confess
the truth, that you had no Church before Luther.

But you tell us Page 369.
, with how great a cloud of obscurity the Church shall be covered in the time of
Antichrist, and prove it out of the Rhemists, who make wholly against you: for
albeit they grant, that then there shall be no public seat of government in the
Church, nor public exercise of Ecclesiastical functions, nor public
intercourse with the Sea of Rome, (as there is not this day in Cyprus, nor in
England) yet there shall not want Orthodoxe Pastors, and people, remaining in
due obedience to the Roman Church, and communicating with her, not only in
heart, but practicing the same in secret, and making public profession thereof
of, if occasion require it. This is the doctrine of the Rhemists, and of all
Catholic writers. Wherefore, as Catholics are not in England at this day
invisible, nor yet so obscure but that their co^staney is known and renowned
throughout the Christian world; so likewise shall the faithful be in the days
of Antichrist. Nor do Costerus, Ribera, Pererius, Acosta, Viegas, or any of the
Fathers which you object Page 370.
, teach ought to the contrary.

The testimony of S. Hilary which you object Page 3^8.
S. Augustine has answered long since Ep. 48.
: for it was objected to him, by Vincentius the Rogatist, of whose spirit and
belief you show your self to be, urging against us the same testimony he
urged against S. Augustine, who not only in that place (as you have heard)
teaches that, if the Church be sometimes obscured, and as it were shadowed with
clouds, by the multitude of scandalls, that is, persecutions, when sinners
bend their bow to wound her in the obscurity of the Moon; yet even then, she
is eminent in her most constant professors, but also in his books Of the City
of God L. 20. c. 8.
, speaking professedly of the state of the Church in the days of Antichrist,
he says, she shall not be so obscured, that either Antichrist shall not find
her, or when he has found her, be able with his persecutions to overthrow her;
but that even then faithful Parents shall with great devotion procure baptism
for their children; and that, as many shall fall from the Church, so others
shall stand constant, and others shall enter a new which before were out of
her, and in particular the Jews, who toward the end of the world shall be
converted to Christ S. Aug. ibid. c. 29.
. And the same is testified by S. Gregory Hom. 12. in Ezechiel.
, whom you miscite Page 370.
: for the words you object out of his Moralls on Job, are not there to be found.

SECT. IV. What causes may suffice to depart from the Communion of a particular
Church.
YOur fifth Thesis is Page 370.
: All particular Churches are not to be forsaken for every unsoundness in
either manners, worship, or doctrine. In the first part of this Thesis, we
agree with you, but you agree not with your self: for before you told us Page
11.12.
, that the Catholic Church is in every part perfect, and consists only of
the sanctified elect of God. But here you say Page 371.
, that there is scarce to be found any one example of any particular Church
consisting only of sanctified professors. It scarce any particular Church can
be found consisting only of sanctified professors, how is it true, that the
universal Church consists only of the sanctified elect of God? for the
universal Church consists of all the particular Churches in the world.

Again here you inueigh against the Separatists, for dividing themselves from
you, for only scandal taken at the wicked lives of your professors. May not
we then justly except against you, for obiecting so often the vices of some
few Popes, to make your departure from the Roman Church more justifiable?

The second part of your Thesis is false: for no worship, no rite, or ceremony
which the Roman Church allows, or permits to particular Churches, in the
administration of the Sacraments, or in any part of their service, is unsound.
And therefore as such difference is not a sufficient cause for one particular
Church to separate it self from others; so on the contrary, if a particular
Church use any Ecclesiastical observation, or ceremony disallowed and
condemned by the Church of Rome, the Mother of all Churches, that worship is
unsound, and such a Church is schismatic, and to be forsaken: and if it
persist obstinatly in that schism, becomes heretical. So many of the Asian
Churches persisting obstinatly in the celebration of Easter according to the
Jewish custom, after the prohibition of Pius the first Pope of that name, were
justly condemned, and cut of from the universal Church by Victor a boly Pope,
and Martyr: and his sentence was confirmed by the Council of Nice, and many
others; in so much, that the obseruers of that custom have ever since been
judged heretics, and registered as such under the name of Quartadecimani by all
Ecclesiastical writers, that have made Catalogues of heresies.

The third part of your Thesis, that all particular Churches may err in some
points, as the Corinthians did in denying the Resurrection, and the Galatians
in teaching a necessary observation of the Law of Moses together with the
Gospel of Christ: and yet S. Paul 1. Cor. 1.2. Galat. 1.2.
calls them both Churches, and Churches of God, because they were ready to be
reformed, and being admonished of their error, to abandon it, and obey the
truth. But not to be willing to learn, and not to yield to truth sufficiently
proposed, is proper to the Synagogues of Satan, and the Churches of the
malignant. All this you allow as true doctrine taken out of Bellarmine. What
then may we think of your Protestant Congregation? For many of your Tenets
have been condemned in ancient Heretics, and held ever since for heresies See
above Chap. 42. sect. 2.
And yet that you are not ready to be reformed, but are most obstinate in your
defense of them (which is the essential character of heresy) is most easily
proved: for it we speak of Luther, he acknowledged his new Tenets to be
contrary to the doctrine of the ancient Fathers, and Doctors of Gods Church:
For (says he Colloq. mensal. Cap. de Patr. Eceles.
In the works of Hierome, there is not a word of true faith in Christ, and
sound religion: Tertullian is very superstitious: I have held Origin long since
accursed: Of Chrysostom I make no accomp^: Basil is of no worth, he is wholly
a Monk, I weigh him not a hair: Cyprian is a weak Divine. Again he
prefers his own collected sense of Scripture before the expositions of all
the Fathers, saying Tom 2. Witemb. l. cont. Reg. Aug. fol. 34.^ b.
: The divine Majesty makes for me, so, as I care not, if a thousand Augustines,
a thousand Cyprians, a thousand King Henry Churches stand against me; and
concludes saying Tom. 2. Witemb. printed 1554. fol. 290. b.
: Be it that the Church, Augustine, and other Doctors, also Peter, Apollo, yea
an Angel from heaven teach otherwise; yet my Doctrine is such, as sets
forth Gods only glory etc. Peter the chief of the Apostles did live, and teach
extra verbum Dei, besides the word of God. And speaking of all the ancient
Fathers in general, and preferring his own judgment and doctrine before
theirs, he says Tom. ^. Witemb. (...) no 1551. l. de seruo arb. sol. 434.
: The Fathers of so many ages have been plainly blind* and most ignorant in the
Scriptures: they erred all their life time, and unless they repented before
their death, they neither were Saints, nor appertained to the Church.

And if we come to the Counsels, he regarded them as little as he did the
Fathers; and was resolved with a most perverse and obstinate mind to deny, and
contradict whatsoever a Council should determine though never so true; and to
maintain stiffly the contrary, though never so impious, and damnable: for
speaking of communion in both kinds, he says De formula Missae and Hospin.
hist. Sacramen. part. 2. fol. 13. a.
: If a Council should in any case decree this, then least of all, would we use
both kinds: yea rather in despite of the Council, and that decree, we would
use either but one kind only, or neither, but in no case both. In like manner
he teaches Tom. 2. German. fol. 214.
, that if a Council should grant Churchmen liberty to marry, he would think
that man more in Gods grace, who during his life, should keep three whores,
then he, that should marry according to the Councels decree: and that he would
command under pain of damnation, that no man should mary by permission of such
a Council, but should either live chaste, or if that were not possible, then
not to despair, though he kept a whore. And speaking of the elevation of the
Sacrament In parua Confessione.
: I did know the elevation of the Sacrament to be Idolatricall, as making for
sacrifice: yet nevertheless, I did retain it in the Church at Witemberg, to
despite the Devil Carolstadius. Finally, notwithstanding he himself
acknowledged, and many of your Protestant brethren confess See the next
Section.
, that he learned the chief points of his doctrine from the Devil, he was not
ashamed to say Apud Zuing l. to. 2. ad Luth. confess. fol. 478. a.
, If I be deceived, God has deceived me etc. I am certain Luth. to. 2.
Witemb. fol. 333. a.
, that I have my opinions from Heaven etc. They shall continue. I would have
you know Aduers. falso nominat. Eccles. stat.
, that hereafter I will not vouchsafe you so much honor, as to suffer either
you, or the Angels of heaven, to judge of my doctrine etc. For seeing I am
certain of it, I will in respect of it, judge both of you, and of Angels. And
yet for all this vaunting that he had no persuasion of the truth of his
doctrine, is a thing manifest; both for that he had great remorse of Conscience
To. 2. Ger. Ien. fol. 9. b. to. 2. Witemb. anno 1562. l. de abrog. Missa priu.
fol. 24.4. b. and tom. 5. Annot. breuiss.
, his heart beating within him, and reprehending him, that he being a sole man,
and of no account, should alone oppose himself against the Church, the
Fathers, the Counsels, the customs, the multitudes and greatness of wise men,
censuring them all to have lived in ignorance, and error, and himself only to
be wise; as also because he offered to submit to the Pope To. 1. Witemb. fol.
215. b. M. Cooper Chron. printed 1565. fol. 278. a.
, and to suppress his new doctrine, so that he might not be compelled to
recant. Whereby it is manifest, that he was resolved to go against his own
knowledge, and conscience, either in preaching his new doctrine, knowing it to
be false, or else in offering to suppress it, knowing it to be true.

If leaving Luther, we come to Calvin, whereas the holy Scriptures instruct us
in our belief of the Divinity of Christ, and of the truth of that most sublime
and incomprehensible mystery of the Blessed Trinity, and the holy Fathers out
of them prove the same; Calvin accuses them of misinterpreting the Scriptures,
and by his blasphemous doctrine, destroieth those divine mysteries, the first
Principles and ground of Christian religion. The particulars are set down at
large, and very punctually by M. Brereley Caluins life sect. 3. page 136. and
seqq.
out of Caluins own works, and confirmed by the testimonies of other
Protestants. And the thing is so certain, that (as Iacobus Andreas,
Schlusselburg, Hunnius, and Pelargus testify Ibid.
the troops of Arians now raging in Transiluania, Poland, and Hungary, are but
Colonies sent from Geneua; all the chiefest of them having been at first
Caluinists, and so continue to this day, in other points of their doctrine
Gratianus Prosper Instrum. doctri. printed Loschi 1586.
, reputing themselves to be the most pure reformed Caluinists, by reason of
their denial of the Blessed Trinity, which they reject Osiand. Cent. 16. l. 2.
c. 22. page 209. fin.
, as being the three-headed Cerberus, the device of Antichrist, and the chief
part of Popish Antichristian corruption. From this known foundation of the
Arians Doctrine, Adam Neuserus a Caluinist, and chief Pastor at Heydelberg
(who revolted from thence to Arianisme) writ from Constantinople to Gerlachius
a Protestant preacher, saying Osiand. ibid. page 208.
: I know none in our time, to have been made an Arian, that was not first a
Caluinist, as Seruetus, Blandrata, Paulus Alciatus, Franciscus David, Gentilis,
Gribaldus, Siluanus, and others, all of them Caluinists revolted to Arianisme.
Wherefore (says Neuserus) whosoever fears to fall into Arianisme, let him
take heed of Caluinisme.

And as Calvin opposed the holy Scripture, and all Christian Antiquity in their
belief of the Divinity of Christ, and the blessed Trinity; so did he in the
rest of his doctrines to the number of 23. confessing point by point, that the
contrary was held by the primitive Church, and Fathers thereof, whom he names,
notes of error, and rejects in a scornful and contemptible manner, as you
may read in his life Sect. 5. a. page 146. ad 265.
, in which the particulars are faithfully expressed in his own words. And
Iacobus Gaulterius Tab. Chronog. saecul. 16. a page 757. ad 795.
has related more of his errors, to the number of 100. showing, that in many
of them, he iumpeth with ancient condemned heretics.

These two are the Maister-builders of your Protestant Church, whom you (to
honor them) call In your late Sermon. at Durham page 38.
Stellae primae magnitudinis, and Protestants generally have in great esteem,
as men raised by Gods extraordinary providence to enlighten the world. Their
doctrines you follow, and with them reject the ancient Fathers as Papists: for
that you acknowledge the Fathers to be against you, in the chief heads of
Doctrine wherein you differ from us, is exactly proved by your own confessions
expressed in your own words Brereley Prot. Apol. fere per tot.
.

I appeal then to any impartial Judge, whether you be not justly accused of
error, and of obstinacy in the mantainance thereof: for to confess, that you
hold against the primitive Fathers, and Church, and yet not to reform your
selves, after so many admonitions given you by the Church, which has condemned
your errors, and learnedly confuted them by her Doctors; what is it, but to
confess, that you err and are obstinate in error? especially since many of
your Tenets are precisely the same which primitive heretics have held See
above Chap. 42. sect. 2.
, and in them have been confuted by the primitive Fathers, and anathematized by
the primitive Church.

If therefore (as you profess) not to be willing to learn, and not to yield to
truth sufficiently proposed, be proper to the Synagogues of Satan, and the
Churches of the malignant, I leave it to your judgment, whether your Churches
may not be justly reckoned in that number.

SECT. V. Of Luthers Excommunication, and of his Conference with the Devil.
YOur seventh Thesis is Page 373.
: No unjust excommunication out of a true Church can prejudice the salvation of
the excommunicate. So far we accord with you, and allow what you bring out of
Tolet Joan. 9.34.
, that the blind man, whom the Jews cast out of their Synagogue, was happy
therein: but whereas you add, that Luther whilst he continued in our Church,
was as one borne blind, and when Christ opened his eyes was excommunicate by
our high Priest, for acknowledging the divine light, you are to remember S.
Augustines words, Tract. 45. in Joan.
that, There are many who boast, not only that they see, but will seem to be
enlightened by Christ; and those are heretics. Luther speaking of his own life
and manners before his revolt from the Catholic Church said of himself To. 2.
Witemb. fo. 233. a.
, that during that time he was, iuuenis and monachus, pietatis studiosus, a
young man, a Monk studious of godliness, and lived in his Monastery Voyon
Catal. of Doct. printed in English 1598. pa. 180. Luth. upon the Galat.
Englished. in c. 1. verse. 14. fo. 350.
, punishing his body with watching, fasting, and prayer: that he honored the
Pope Luther ibid.
of mere conscience, kept chastity, poverty, and obedience; and whatsoever I
did, (says he) I did it with a sincere heart, of good zeal, and for the glory
of God, fearing grievously the last day, and desirous to be saved, from the
bottom of my heart. In so much, that Erasmus Ep ad Thom. Card. Ebor.
reports of him, that for some small time after his revolt, there remained yet
in him some relics* or sparks of former sanctimony. But afterward, he was
much altered, and so far transported from the observance of Chastity, that
now he professes to the contrary In Proverb. 31. verse. 1.
: Nothing is more sweet, or pleasing upon earth, then the love of a woman if a
man can obtain it. And again Tom 7. Wittem. Ep. ed Wolfing. fol 505. a.
: He that resolves to be without a woman, let him lay a side the name of a man
making himself a plain Angel, or spirit. And yet more Brer. Luth. life Chap.
3. sect. 6. page 71. h. Luth. Colloq. German, cap. de matrim.
: As it is not in my power, to be no man, so it is not in my power, it be
without a woman etc. It is more necessary, then to eat, drink, purge, make
clean the nose etc. In so much that he acknowledges Colloq. mensal. fol. 526.
a. and 400. a.
himself to have been almost mad through the rage of lust, and desire of
women; exclaming out yet further To. 1. Ep. Latin. fol. 334. ad Philip.
, and saying: I am burned which the great flame of my untamed flesh etc. Eight
days are now past, in which I neither write, pray, or study, being vexed
partly with temptations of the flesh, partly with other trouble. But (says he
Ibid. fol. 345.
it suffices, that we have known the riches of the glory of God: from him
sin cannot draw us, although we should commit fornication, or kill a thousand
times in one day. And finally, not long after, with breach of his vow, he
married Katherine Bore, a runnagate Nun Melancth. Ep. ad Ioac. Camer. de Luth.
coning. inter Theol. Consil. Melancth. part. 1. page 37.
: for which by the most ancient Imperial Laws, made soon after Constantine
the Great Sozom. l. 6. c. 3. fin. and lex extat Cod. l. de Epise. and Cler.
, he should have lost his head. These were his beginnings: and by degrees he
grew to be so wicked, that Calvin was enforced to confess, Magnis vitijs
laborat, that Luther was subject to great vices. And in the end, he grew to be
so dissolute, that he was censured by his own followers; who, when they would
give themselves to dissolution, were wont to say Morgenstern. tract. de Eccles.
printed 1598. page 221.
, Hodie Lutheranice viuemus: This day we will live Luther-like. Which
corruption springing from Luther, as from the root, grew and spread it self
so far, among his followers, that as he himself confesses Postil. in Euang.
Dominic. 1. Aduentus.
, they grew daily worse, being more reuengfull, covetous, licencious, then they
were before in the Papacy. And what testimony hereof other Protestants give,
you have partly heard already See above Chap. 42. sect. 3.
: and who pleases to read more of the same kind, let him peruse a late book
entitled, The trial of the Protestant private spirit, where Chap. 9. sect. 8.
subdiu. 4. page 333. and seqq.
he shall find the ingenuous confessions both of English, and foreign
Protestants to the same effect.

By this it appears, that if Luther were blind whilst he was with us, and
his eyes opened when he went from us; it was not Christ that opened them, but
his familiar friend the Devil, who (witness Ioannes Manlius, Luthers own
scholar, and Physician) Loc commun printed at Basil 1562. Luth. tom 1. Germ.
ad Senate. Ciu.
haunted him from his youth, and appeared often to him in the night, in form
of flying firebrands. And Luther himself speaking of these his visions, and
familiar conversation with the Devil says Colloq. Germ fol. 283. and Calu.
ad. mon. vlt. ad West ^ha cit. a Schlussel. l. 2. Theol. Calui. art. 1.
: I have a Devil, or two, that wait upon me diligently, and they are not
petty Devils, but great ones, yea and Doctors of Divinity among the rest of the
Devils. And again Tom. 2. Germ. Ien. fol. 77.
: Believe me, I know the Devil very well; for now and then, he walks with me
in my Chamber: When I am with company be troubles me not: but when he takes me
alone, then he teaches me manners. And showing that he was so familiar with him
that they did eat together, at the same table In^^^oncio. Dom. Reminiscere fol.
19. apud Cochlaeum.
: I am (says he) thoroughly acquainted with the Devil; for I have eaten a
bushel of salt in his company. Yea he acknowledges that he was his bedfellow,
and lay with him oftener, and closer to his side, then his Kate the Nun did
Colloq. German. fol. 275.281.
. And yet more, that the Devil did sometimes dance to and fro in his brains, in
such sort, that he could neither write, nor read In lit. ad Elect. Saxoniae.
.

But that which most of all shows, who it was that opened his eyes, is the
long Conference, or Disputation, which the Devil had with him Luth. to. 6.
Ger. Ien. l. de Missa ang. fol. 28. and tom. 7. Witerub. anno 2558 l. de Missa
ang. and vnct. Sacerd. fol. 2^8.
, and therein persuaded, and overcame him with his Arguments, to abandon the
Mass, invocation of Saints, and some other points of the Catholic faith:
which conference is set down at large by Luther himself (b), and acknowledged
by many of your best learned, Protestants. For first Calvin cited by Conradus
Schlusselberg L 2. Theol. Calvin. art 1.
says: Luthers doctrine concerning the supper, is an opinion suggested by the
Devil. Secondly Hospinian Hist. Sacr. par. 2. fol. 131.
recites our of Luthers works a part of his conference with the Devil,
saying: Luther tells many things of this disputation; the sum of which is,
that he was taught by the Devil, that Mass was naught, and that being
convinced with the Devils Arguments, he abolished it. And in his first
Alphabeticall table, prefixed before his book, among other Colloquies, or
Conferences, be sets down this of Luther under the title of, Colloquium
Lutheri cum Diabolo, in quo instruitu, de erroribus Missa: The conference of
Luther with the Devil, in which he is instructed concerning the errors of the
Mass. Thirdly David Paraeus said In praelect. Catechist. l. 5. c. 17. page 257.
: Luther affirms, that he learned from the black spirit the Devil, his
reasons to condemn the Mass, Ergo (says Paraeus) he was the Devils
disciple. 4. Erasmus a man of esteem among Protestants. says Cont. Ep.
Luther. non sob.
, that Luther brings in the disputation of the Devil in his book, De Missa
angulari: affirming moreover from Luthers words, that the Devil did impugn
Luthers mind about the Mass. 5. The Caluinian Deuines of Zuricke, in their
Page 25.26.127.
Confession, term Luther; The minister of Satan, and say, that he writ his
books impulsu spiritus Satanae etc. by the suggestion of Satan, with whom he
disputed, and (as it seems) was therein overcome by Satan.

I know that you out-facing all these witnesses, and denying the truth of their
report, say Apol. Cath. part. 2. c. ^1. and in your direct Answer to
Theophilus Higgons page 5.
: Since that time (to wit of Luther) have risen up spirits of a lying
malignancy, that have blurred and bespotted his life with all the reproachful
notes of monstrous infamy; as if he had familiarity with the Devil, and was a
wine-bibber. But whether you be not guilty of that lying malignancy, which you
impute to us. I leave to the censure of any impartial Judge, being that Luther
in so many places of his works gives evidence against himself of his great
familiarity with the Devil, and sets down at large the whole Conference he
had with him, concerning the Mass; and that so many of your best learned
Protestants, who living nearer Luthers time, and that had better means to know
the truth then you, are herein witnesses against you. Why do you conceal all
these particulars? Why do you not deal ingenuously, giving your Reader notice
of them? Nay, why do you profess (o), that you had seriously inquired into
Luthers confession hereof, with a purpose, that if any such thing should
sensibly appear, then utterly to abhor Luthers name, and suspect all his
doctrine? We find, and it is manifest, that your meaning agrees not with your
words: for undertaking to answer for Luther, you answer not, but confess
the thing, and instead of answearing, object another story, which Delrius
reports of the Devil appearing to an Abbot, in form of an Angel, and
persuading him to say Mass. If this were true, it could be no relief to
Luthers cause. But to make it true, you falsify Delrius: for he says not, that
the Devil persuaded an Abbot to say Mass, but that he persuaded a Monk, that
was not a Priest to say Mass: which as it was a persuasion fit to proceed from
the Devil, so is it a very fit example to justify Luthers instruction and
doctrine received from the Devil.

It is therefore most certain, that the Devil appeared to Luther, and disputed
with him, and that Luther being overcome with his arguments, abandoned the
Mass. And his Disciples of Wittemberge, moved by his example, did the like:
and, as he did, so also did they set forth a book of their reasons, which (as
Brereley has noted) Luthers life Chap. 1. sect. 2. page 20*
are the very same the Devil proposed to Luther, and which Protestants at this
day allege against the Mass.

Finally other Protestants are not wanting to testify, who it was, that opened
Luthers eyes. Your Tigurine Divines Tract. 3. cont. suprem. Luth. confess.
protest, that he was full of Devils, and of such speeches, as are hardly
thought to pass from the furious Devil himself. No marvel the^ if
Oecolampadius in his answer to Luthers Confession of faith, pass this
verdict on him: He began his former book with the Devil, and now he ends
this with the Devil. No wonder, if Conradus Regius Lib. cont. Joan. Hess. de
coena Dom.
testify of him that, God for his great pride did take from him the spirit of
truth, as he did from the Prophets mentioned in the third book of Kings, Chap.
22. and in place of that his spirit, gave him an angry, proud, and liyng
spirit. And (to omit other testimonies) Ioannes Campanus a famous Zuinglian In
Colloq. Lat. Luth. to. 2. fol. 351.
passes this censure on him: Quam certum est Deumesse Deum, tam certus and
Diabolicus mendax est Lutherus: As certain as it is, that God is God, so
certain it is, that Luther is a liar and belongs to the Devil. And therefore
in the end he took him, as one that belonged to him: for having one evening
eaten, and drunken very liberally, he was the next morning found dead, in a
most horrible manner Cochl. in vita Luth. and alij passim.
, so ugly and deformed, that it was not hard to guess at the author of his
death; which was such as he himself expected when he said Ep. ad Spalat. to.
2. Epist. Latin.
not long before: I daily wait for death, and for the deserved punishment of an
heretic. I conclude therefore with Origin Hom. 3. in Exodus ante med.
: Orandum nobis est etc. We are to pray, that our Lord vouchsafe to open our
mouth, that we may be able to convince the^ that contradict, and stop that
mouth which the Devil opened.

SECT. VI. Whether the Roman Church, be as subject to errors, as any other
Church.
YOur Thesis is affirmative Page 374.
: your Proofs, repetitions of arguments already answered. One only you add
here, and repeat afterward again Page 397. and 400.
, which is, The Church of Rome has erred in matter of faith, Ergo she may
possibly err. I deny your Antecedent. You prove it: The administration of the
Eucharist unto infants upon necessity of salvation, was taught, and continued
in the Church of Rome, for the space of 600. years together: but you confess,
there is now no such necessity, Ergo, in those former times the Church of Rome
erred. It is a known principle in Schools, that he argues absurdly, who
proposes an argument, that makes as much against himself, as (...) his
adversary, and to which therefore himself in (...) is bound to answer* Such
i^ this of yo^^^ (...) of Rome erreth not now in (...) the Eucharist to (...)
^^testants herei^ (...) no such necess^^^ profess, tha^ (...) error in fay^h
for (...) Page 276. 178.
hold now the (...) leeued the doctri^^ (...) charist to infants upon (...)
ding to your principles) ^^red (...) you can make, I know not. Sure (...)
denying, that the real administration (...) ^^fants, is necessary for their
salvation, can g^^^ (...) solution to this difficulty; which yet in the
princ^^^^ (...) Catholic doctrine is easily answered.

We have learned two sacred principles from the mouth our Savior: The former
is Joan. 3.5.
: If one be not borne again water, and the spirit, he cannot enter into the
kingdom of Go^^ If therefore we will enter into the kingdom of God, we mu^^
receive the Sacrament of baptism really, or at least i^ (...) Whosoever is
grown to perfect age, when he ca^ (...) ceaue it really, it is sufficient for
salvation, to (...) intentionally in desire, by faith, and other good Act^, of
which infants are not capable; and therefore the re^^^ ^eceauing of the
Sacrament of baptism is necessary for them to salvation. If thou will be a
Christian Catholic (says S. Augustine) De anima and eius orgi. l. 3. c. 9.
neither believe, nor say, not teach, that infants dying without baptism can
be saved. And the contrary doctrine he reports L. de haeres. ad Quodvuls.
haer. 88.
as an Article of the Pelagian heresy.

The other principle is Joan. 6.34.
: Unless you eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, you
shall not have life in you. It is therefore necessary to salvation for all, as
well infants, as others, to receive the holy Eucharist either really, or at
least in vow. And this vow may either be explicit, that is a desire of
receiving it, when it cannot really be had; or else (...) as in the Sacrament of
baptism: for that in bap^^ (...) vow of the holy Eu^^ (...) the first Rescrip.
ad Council. Mileuit. Ep. 25.
, S. Augu^^ (...) ^^omas of Aquine, as (...) proved by the great (...) ^^e two
most Eminent (...) ^^n Repliq. l. 2. troiseme Obseru. Chap. 11.
. To. 3. in 3. part. disp. 40. sect. 2.. Hinc 4.
The words of (...) ^^s purpose: It is in no (...) him Tom. 6. in c. 10.1. ad
Corinth.
Ven. Tom. 3. Contr. l. 1. de Euchar c 7.
Bade) (...) partakerof the body and (...) ^^er of Christ in baptism; (...) of
that bread, and of that (...) ^^d, and drink of that cup, (...) ^^d in the
unity of the body (...) ^^pation and benefit of that (...) which the Sacrament
sig^^ (...) ^^ius, and S. Augustine (...) ^^essity of baptizing in^^ (...) for
them, to receive (...) ^^ceaued before the be (...) ^^aptisme, which is the
(...) all the ^^^^^aments, ^^righ^^y follows against the ^^lagians, tha^
Baptism is absolutely necessary for infants, to the end that thereby they may
receive the Eucharist at least in vow, without which they cannot be saved.

In this sense, and in no other, these Fathers, and the Church of Rome with
them, have taught a necessity of administing the Eucharist to infants, to wit,
so far forth, as it is contained implicitly, and virtually in Vow, in the
Sacrament of baptismer: for that a real administration of the Eucharist unto
them was necessary for salvation she never taught; which you, and other
Protestants not understanding, impute the contrary doctrine to her, assuming it
as an argument, that she has erred in varying from that doctrine which once
she taught.

To this Thesis you add an other Page 375.
, that, The Roman Church is more subject to error, then any other Church
Christian: which to be a shameful untruth, appears out of the promise of our
Savior made to S. Peter, and his successors, that the gates of hell (which are
errors in faith) shall not prevail against the Church built on them; and out
of his prayer made for them, that their faith shall not fail: for that this
promise of Christ, and this prayer were not made to S Peter, nor for him, as he
was a private man; but as he was Head of the Church, and therefore extend to all
his successors in the Roman See, to secure them from error in their definitions
of faith, has been the belief of all Orthodoxe antiquity See above Chap. 12.
sect. 1. and 2.
. Nor do you produce here any thing to the contrary, which has not been proved
to be imposterous, excepting only that here you charge the new Church of Rome
(for so you call it) with believing, the conclusion of the Pope in matters of
faith to be infallible, albeit he use no diligence at all for the directing of
his judgment; which is (say you) the strong breath of an Anabaptisticall, and
Enthusiasticall spirit. We are well assured, what spirit guydeth your pen. Do
you find this doctrine authorized by the Church of Rome? In what Council? By
what Pope? In your margent you cite Valentia in the seventh Chapter of his
Analysis: which is to cite at random, and falsely: for that work of Valentia
consists of eight books: you specify none of them; nor are the words, you
object, to be found in the seventh Chapter of any one of those eight books. I
find some such in the third Chapter of his last book; where, as also
afterward again Analy. l. 8. c. 10.
, he professedly disputes, what means the Pope is bound to use in his
definitions of faith, and whether the infallibility of his judgment depend upon
those means? In which question Valentia teaches nothing, but what is the most
received opinion of Deuines, and most agreeable to truth.

There seems to be some disagreement in this point among the Schoole-Doctors,
some saying, that the Pope cannot err, if he proceed maturely, hearing the
counsel of Pastors, and Learned men: Others (of which number Valentia is)
affirming, that he cannot err, though he define alone, without deliberation,
and consultation. But these two opinions differ in words only, not in reality
of truth: for when the authors of the former opinion say, that to define, the
Pope is bound to proceed maturely, taking the advice of a Council, or of men
wise, learned, and skillful in the matter which is to be determined, to the end
he may not err; they say not this, to signify, that the infallibility of his
definition consists in, or proceeds from the wisdom, and learning of his
Counselors, but only to show, that he is bound to proceed prudently, and
maturely. And so likewise, when Valentia, and authors of the second opinion
say, that if the Pope should define alone, without a Council of Bishops, or
advice of other learned men, he could not err; they say it not to deny, that
he is bound to use such means, but to signify, that the infallibility of his
definition consists not in them, but in his own authority and warrant which
he has from Christ of not erring. And this is the meaning of Valentia, as in
that very place he expressly declares. Nor do I see, what you can find therein,
either absurd or untrue.

But if you curiously demand: Whether the Pope may err, in case he proceed to
define inconsideratly and rashly? Valentia, and all Catholic Doctors will
answer, that your Question implies a Condition impossible: for the Pope in
his definitions cannot proceed immaturely. The Philosophers say, Qui dat
formam, dat consequentia ad formam: He that gives the form, gives also the
dispositions necessary for the form. And he that gives the end, gives also
such means as are necessary for the attaining of the end. Wherefore Christ
having made promise to the Sea Apostolic, that the gates of hell shall not
prevail against her, and that the successors of S Peter shall not fail in
confirming their brethren, it belongs to his divine providence, so to direct,
govern, and assist him, that he proceed not to define, without sufficient
deliberation, and maturity. If (says S. Augustine) De vtil. ered. c. 10.
the providence of God be not the Gouernesse of humane affairs, no regard is
to be bad of religion. But if all this variety of Creatures do, I know not with
what interior knowledge, move us to seek God, and to serve God; surely we
ought not to be diffident, but that there is some authority constituted by the
same God, whereon we relying, as upon a certain step, may ascend unto God.

SECT. VII. Whether there be in the Scripture any Prophesy, that the Church of
Rome shall fall from the faith.
THat Christ has prophesied of the Church of Rome, that she shall never fall
from the faith, has been already proved Chap 12. sect. 1. and 2.
. Your third Thesis to the contrary is; that there is not in all the Scripture
any prophesy of the fall of any Church Christian from the faith, Page 377.
but only of the Church of Rome, from which it may sometime be necessary to
depart. Which is in effect to say, that there is in the Scripture a prophesy,
that the Church of Rome shall fall from the faith. In proof of this you remit
us to the testimony of two Jesuits Ribera, and Viegas, that the city of Rome
shall in the end of the world be the seat of Antichrist; which is not their
doctrine, but a calumnious slander of yours. They hold with the ancient
Fathers, that not Rome, but Jerusalem shall be the Seat of Antichrist. The
Evangelist (says Ribera) Ad cap. 11. Apocalyp. n. 20. fin. 21. init.
calling Jerusalem a great city, signifies not obscurely that she shall be
great at that time in power, and in number of Citizens, to wit, when Antichrist
shall reign in her, being received of the Jews, and honored as the true
Messiah. This city both because she killed our Lord, and because then she
shall be the Court of Antichrist, full of all wickedness, and impiety, he
calls Sodom, and Egypt etc. for what sin and impiety will she not be
guilty of, Antichrist reigning in her? So Ribera; from whom Viegas dissenteth
not. Say now; Can there be a more shamfull imposture, then to impute to these
learned Authors, your own falsities, and thereon to ground your calu^nies
against the Church of Rome, as upon truths asserted by them? Such Arguments
are indeed fit proofs to justify your departure from her. But were it true,
that the City of Rome in the end of the world shall be the Seat of Antichrist,
does that any way justify your present departure from the Roman Church? Look
back upon what has been said, and you shall find, how little those words, Go
out of Babylon my people, make for you, and that even according to your
Protestant Expositors they are wholly against you.

In your fourth Thesis Page 378.
, which is, That the Church of Rome has long been, and still is, the most
schismatic Church of all other Churches Christian, that carry in them a
visible face of a Church, you bring nothing, but what has been already
answered point by point.

SECT. VIII. Whether Luther were justly excommunicaeed.
TO prove, that he was iniustly excommunicated, you say Page 381.
: Luthers excommunication by Pope Leo, must have been either for manners, or
doctrine. I answer: for both; and that most deservedly. If we look into his
manners, he was a sacrilegious Apostata, that fled out of his Monastery: he
cast off his religious habit, and burning with flames of raging lust, to
satisfy his fleshly desires, married a vowed Nun; a crime so heinous, that
according to the ancient Imperial laws, he was to be punished with death
Sozom. l. 6. c. 3. Cod. L de Episc. and Cler.
. His pride was such, that he preferred himself before all the Doctors of Gods
Church, contemning a thousand Cyprians, a thousand Augustines, a thousand K.
Henry Churches, so far, as that he scorned to be judged by any man, but would
himself be Judge of men, and Angels. His railing was most intemperate, base,
and scurrill, traducing and reuiling even the greatest Princes. One example of
K. Henry the eight may suffice, against whom he ragingly acted the part of
H^^cules f^rens, tearming him, an envious mad fool; babbling with much spite
in his mouth: a damnable rotten worm, a basiliske and progeny of an adder, a
lying Sycophant covered with the title of a King, a clownish wit, a doltish
head, most wicked, foolish, and impudent Henry: saying yet further, He does not
only lyelike a most vain scurre, but equalleth, if not exceeds a most wicked
knave: thou lie in thy throat, foolish and sacrilegious King. These and many
other like speeches against K. Henry, are his; some of them being so base, and
beastly, that modesty forbids to english them. If from Princes, we come to
other his adversaries, he called them insathanized, supersathanized, and
persathanized, and that the Devil was infused, perfused, and transfused into
their mouths; in so much that your Tigurines sticked not to say of him, that he
was full of Devils, and used such speeches, as could hardly be thought to
proceed from the furious Devil himself. He was void of all conscience, being
obstinatly resolved to condemn whatsoever a Council should determine, though
never so Orthodoxe, and holy; and to allow, and defend whatsoever a Council
should condemn, though never so wicked and heretical. To which I add, that
to spite Carolstadius, he retained in the Church of Wittemberg, the elevation
of the Sacrament, which he thought to be idolatrous. He was inconstant in his
doctrine, teaching one day one thing, another the contrary; in so much, that
Iodocus Coccius To. 1. l. 8. art. 6. page 1038. and seqq.
has faithfully taken out of his works, and set down 80. Articles, in which
he had contradicted himself, gainsaying what before he had taught, and showing
himself to be guided by the spirit of contradiction, and lying: Of which, as
also of his contentious and wrangling spirit, his life affords you good
examples Brereley Luthers life Chap. 3. sect. 2.
. Finally to show, that Luther was no very great Saint, his familiar
conversation with the Devil is a sufficient evidence. I insist not in the
proof of these particulars, having spoken of some of them already, and
especially because Brereley, in Luthers life, has proved them all out of
Luthers own works, and by the testimony of other Protestants. Nor can I find,
that you with all your study have been able to produce any thing to the
contrary, but only these few words Page 381.
out of Erasmus, Si Luthero fauerem, vt viro bono, quod fatentur and hosts;
which how truly they are cited, I know not: for I know that Erasmus said In
s^o^^i^ ad (...) ton.
Christum agnosco, Lutherum non agnosco. But howsoever, Erasmus is a partial
witness, of whom it was said, Erasmus laid the eggs, and Luther hatched the
Scorpions; and whom Doctor Humfrey, and Doctor Reynolds challenge as a man of
your religion, and Fox has placed in your Calendar of Saints. And finally, if
by Luthers enemies, you understand Catholics, you cannot nominate any one,
that has ever esteemed other wise of him, then as of a most wicked, and
sacrilegious Apostata. If you could, you would have been ready enough to do it,
without any provocation from us.

If leaving his wicked life we come to his doctrine, we shall find it
answearable to his manners. First he taught, that Governors of Churches, and
Pastors have power to teach, but that the sheep must be Judges of their
doctrine; and that the Bishops, and Counsels ought to give place, and
subscribe to the censure, and judgment of the sheep. 2. He taught to the great
danger of Christendom, that to war against the Turks, is to resist God
visiting our sins by them. 3. He cut of from the Canon of holy Scriptures,
the book of Ecclesiastes, saying, there is in it never a perfect sentence; the
Epistle of S. Paul to the Hebrews; the Epistles of S. James, and S. Jude; the
second of S. Peter; the second and third of S. John, with the Apocalypse. 4. He
held the heresy of Simon Magus, that man is justified by faith alone; and in
proof thereof corrupted the text of S. James. adding to it this word alone: and
being admonished thereof, he raged, protesting, that he repented himself, he
had not translated worse. 5. He taught, that Good-workes are not only not
necessary to salvation, but hurtful: and that the ten commandments belong not
to Christians. 6. That if the wife will not come, or cannot by reason of
infirmity, let the maid come. 7. That among Christians, no man ought to be
Magistrate, but that each one is equally subject to each other. 8. He makes
the power of administering the Sacraments common to lay men with the Clergy. 9.
He taught that Christ in his passion, did not only suffer in his human, but
also in his divine nature. 10. Concerning the Blessed Trinity, he had the
divine nature to be threfold, as the persons are 11. That God works
wickedness in the wicked; and that it is not in the power of man, to avoid it:
which what is it else, but to make God the Author of sin? 12. He makes
Virginity inferior to marriage. 13. To prevent praying to Saints, and Purgatory,
he affirms the soul to sleep with the body. 14. He denies that there is
any local hell, before the day of judgment. All these doctrines are proved to
be his out of his own works, and out of the Confessions of many other
Protestants, exactly and faithfully related in his life, by M. Brereley Chap.
2. per tot.
From whence I conclude, that if ever any man was, or may be justly
excommunicated for wickedness of life, or for heretical and blasphemous
doctrines, Martin Luther, by both these titles, has been most justly
excommunicated, and cast out of the Church.

SECT. IX. Of the first occasion of Luthers revolt from the Church: and that
Doctor Morton to defend his doctrine against Indulgences, falsifieth sundry
Authors.
POpe Leo the tenth having given out certain Indulgences for the people of
Germany, that would contribute any alms to the building of that sumptuous
Church, which Julius his predecessor had begun in honor of S. Peter, Cardinal
Albert B. of Mentz, and the Marquis of Brandeburg (to whom the publishing of
the Indulgences, and collecting the alms was committed) for the publishing of
the indulgences, made choice of Tetzelius a famous preacher of the Order of S.
Dominick: Whereat the Friars of S. Augustines Order, and especially Staupitius
the Vicar general, and Martin Luther being offended, opposed themselves,
hoping by favor of Frederick Duke of Saxony, to get the place for themselves.
But missing of that, they began to reprehend the abuses committed (as they
pretended) in the promulgation of those indulgences. But Luther being of a
fiery nature, and of a contentions spirit, rested not here, but published in
print 95. propositions about the nature, institution, end, and effect of
indulgences; diverse of which were censured by Tetzelius as heretical, and
Luther thereupon complained of to the Pope, and cited to appear at Rome. But by
mediation of friends which he procured, the hearing of his cause being remitted
to Cardinal Caietan, who was then the Popes Legate in Germany, Luther appeared
before him, and gave up a protestation of his submission, promising to follow
the holy Roman Church in all her sayings, and doings, present, past, and to
come. But nevertheless being gotten from the Cardinal, he went forward in his
former contentions, and beside a public disputation, which he held with Eckius
at Lipsia against indulgences, he diuulged many other scoffing pamplets, and
treatises, to call in doubt, and bring in contempt, diverse other points of
religion: from whence has followed all the calamity, that in these parts of
the world has ensued since that time, in the Church of God.

This was the occasion, these the beginnings of Luthers revolt, proceeding
merely from his covetousness, pride, envy, and grudging, that the promulgation
of those indulgences was not committed to him, and his Order: for he protested
afterward, at that time he neither intended nor dreamed of any change, but
fell into those contentions casually, and against his will, not well knowing
then, what Indulgences meant See Brerel. Luthers life. Chap. 1. sect. 1.


Now you come in, to act your part Page 381. fin. 382. init.
and promise to prove by a cloud of witnesses, the falsehood and impiety of the
Popes doctrine concerning indulgences, and the iniquity of his practice,
heaping up riches by them. And first you except against the Pope Page 383.
, for condemning this proposition of Luther, It is not in the power of the
Church, to make new articles of faith. This has been alleady answered See
above Chap. 4.
, and declared what power the Church has, or has not herein.

2. To prone, that the doctrine of Indulgences is a new article of faith, you
produce many Authors Page 382. 383. 384. 385. 386. 389.
, which may be reduced to three classes. The first is of heretics, as
Cornelius Agrippa, a Magicians; Paul, a Venetian Friar, condemned a few years
since for heresy; Fasciculus rerum expetendarum; Acta Concilij Tridentini;
Controuersiae memorabiles; all of them being Treatises of Protestants, set
forth without names of their authors, and prohibited. To these you add Thuanus
Page 385.
whom you call our noble Historian: but we bequeath him to you, as one whose
writings show him to be yours. Nor are you contented to cite him, as a
Catholic author, but falsify him. He raileth against Pope Leo, for ordaining,
that when a Bishopric or Abbacy in France is vacant, for the avoiding of
simony, and other inconueniencet, a person fit for those dignities be presented
by the King, and ordained by the Pope. His words in Latin, as you cite them,
are, Peccatum in sacris muneribus dispensandis Leo mox grauiore cumulauit etc.
In which words he makes no mention of indulgences, but only of conferring
sacred or Ecclesiastical dignities, and offices. But you, to make them serve,
your turn against indulgences, corrupt them, translating in sacris muneribus
dispensandis, thus: of ill dispersing indulgences. Leo (say you) to his sin
of ill dispersing indulgences, added a far greater. Is not this a great
imposture? And the like you commit again Page 389.
, when speaking of Luthers separation from the Roman Church, you say: Luther
was a passive therein, as appears out of the proceedings of Pope Leo against
him: Else why is it, that your own Thuanus speaking of this separation, said,
That some in those days laid the fault upon Pope Leo. This is a greater
imposture then the former: for Thuanus speaks not those words of Luthers
separation from the Church of Rome, but against altering the custom formerly
observed in the election of Ecclesiastical Prelates in France; which he
attributes to Antonius Pratensis, Chancellor of that kingdom; though out of
his own spleen against the Pope, he add, that there were not then wanting
some, that laid the fault upon Pope Leo. What connection has this with Luthers
revolt from the Church of Rome, or with the doctrine of indulgences? You cannot
excuse it from a Grand Imposture.

To the second class, may be reduced Massonius, Polydore Virgill, and Erasmus,
who speak not aggainst the doctrine of Indulgences, but against the abuse of
them. And for as much, as in many other things, and particularly, in that very
point, they speak temeraiously and ouerlash, those their works, you know, are
forbidden by the Church: Why do you allege them, as of authority against us?

The third class is of approved Catholic Authors, of whom you first produce
Page 384. fin.
Roffensis, saying: There was no use of indulgences in the beginning of the
Church Christian. But you change the state of the question, passing from the
use of indulgences (of which Roffensis speaks) to the doctrine of
indulgences; and infer, that because Roffensis found not the use or practice
of them, in the beginning of the Church, he denies the doctrine, and
lawfulness of them, which in that very article he effectually proves out of
the power of binding, and losing, given by Christ in the Gospel to S. Peter,
and his Successors. 2. He yeildeth the reason, why there was not so much
necessity of using the^ in those beginings, as afterward. 3. He shows, that
Catholic Deuines prove the use of them, to be most ancient, out of the
stations so much frequented in Rome; and that S. Gregory the great granted some
in his time. 4. His own opinion is, that it is not certainly known, when they
began first to be used in the Church: from whence it must follow by the rule of
S. Augustine L 4. de Baptism. c. 24.
, that the practice of them is from the Apostolical time.

The second author you produce Page 135.
, is Alphonsus de Castro, who says: Neque tamen hac occasion sunt
contemnendae (indulgentiae) quod earum vsus in Ecclesia videatur sero receptus:
which words you pervert changing videatur, into fit; but most of all, by
translating them falsely: for you render them thus; Indulgences are not therefore
to be contemned, as being admitted but of late: which is not only a false
translation, but a manifest perverting of the sense: for Castro speaks not of
the doctrine or lawfulness of granting indulgences, but de earum vsu, of the
use of them, which therefore in your english you cunningly omit, that ou^ of him
you may prove the doctrine of them to be new. Yea, and concerning the very use
of them, he proves it to be most ancient, by the same arguments Roffensis
before him had done, concluding, that you, and all others which contemn a
thing practiced so many hundreds of years by the Catholic Church, and
established by general Councels, are justly accounted heretics. So far is
Castro from favoring Luthers cause.

The third Author is Bellarmine, out of whom you cite these words Page 385.
: Thesaurus Ecclesiae spiritualis est fundamentum indulgentiarum: Which words
you english Thus: The ground of indulgences is the spiritual treasury of
works, consisting in the satisfactory, and meritorious works of
supererogation, done by the faithful. Which treasury to have been anciently
wanting, you prove also out of Bellarmine, setting down these words as his:
Hoc caruisse dicunt Ecclesiam Doctores Louanienses. This your Doctors of
Louaine, and some Scholemen (as you know) affirm, was anciently wanting in the
Church. So you: and then you tell us Ibid.
out of Suarez, who those Schole men were, namely Mayzo, and Durandus. In this
short passage of yours, there are almost as many untruths, and falsifications,
as words. For first the Latin words are not Bellarmines, but your own fathered
on him. And so also are the English, (which nevertheless you set down in a
different character as his) and not only disagree from the Latin, but contain
false doctrine repugnant to all Catholic Divines, and in particular to
Bellarmine, who in that very place L. 1. de Indulg. c. 2. proposit. 2.
teaches, that meritorious works, as such, cannot be applied to others, nor
belong to the treasure of the Church, but only as satisfactory. 3. You falsify,
making Bellarmine to limit the spiritual treasure of the Church to works of
supererogation only; which is ignorantly spoken, and not taught by Bellarmine,
nor any Catholic Divine. 4. You father on him falsely those last words, Hoc
(thesauro) caruisse dicunt Ecclesiam Doctores Louanienses: for they are not
his, nor does he attribute any such doctrine to the Deuines of Louain, nor so
much as once name them in all that Chapter. Is it not then great
perfidiousnesse, so to abuse and falsify both him, and them?

Nor is your dealing better with Suarez: for (to omit that in the place you
cite, he treats of no such matter) nether he, nor Bellarmine ever say, that
Duraud denied this treasure of the Church, but only, that he held it to consist
of the satisfactions of Christ, and not of the Saints. Which yet he speaks by
way of doubt, and Theological dispute, rather then affirmatively: for coming
to deliver his own opinion, he says plainly and resolutely 4. Did. 20. q. 3.
: Est in Ecclesia etc. There is in the Church a spiritual treasure of the
passion of Christ, and his Saints, who suffered far greater torments, then
their sins deserved: And therefore the Church out of this treasure may
communicate to one, or more, so much as may suffice to make satisfaction for
their sins, either in part, or in whole, according as the Church shall please
to communicate this treasure, more or less, which is nothing else, but the
sufferings of Christ, and his Saints communicated to us, to satisfy for our
sins. Wherefore indulgences avail by way of payment, for so much, as by
Christ, and his Saints, the pain, to which we are liable, is paid. But if he
had held that the spiritual treasure of the Church consists of the
satisfactions of Christ only, that would avail you nothing: for he defends
Indulgences, which you deny: and if he erred in any thing, he errred not with
obstinacy, as you do, but submitted all his works to the correction of the
holy Catholic Roman Church, as you have read in Bellarmine, but conceal it.

I conclude therefore, that the great cloud of witnesses, which you have brought
to justify Luthers doctrine against indulgences, is either of Heretics, or of
Catholics in works prohibited by the Church, or if not prohibited, abused and
falsified by you.

SECT. X. The causes given by Doctor Morton, in excuse of Luthers departure
from the Roman Church.
THe causes you have devised to justify Luthers departure from the Roman
Church, are partly impious, partly false, and imposterous. Impious, as your
excepting against the Mass Page 387.
, to which Luther was persuaded by the Devil, calling it Idolatry, as you do.
And not unlike to this, is your example of Firmilianus Page 388.
, who being for the time an obstinate mantainer of Rebaptization, was
excommunicated by Stephen a holy Pope; and notwithstanding that Stephens
sentence was embraced by all the Catholics of the world, and the doctrine of
Firmilianus condemned by the holy Council of Nice, and ever since esteemed
heretical, not only by Catholics, but also by Protestants; you shame not to
justify Firmilianus Ibid.
, and all the rest, that followed the same heresy with him, and to condemn
Pope Stephen, as a Schismatike, for excommunicating him. Such examples. I
confess, you may find to defend Luthers departure from the Roman Church.

The rest of the causes, which you allege Page 387.
, are false, and imposterous: as that the Roman Church mantaineth new articles
of faith, and Satanicall doctrines; that she blasphemeth the truth, and
tyrannically forces men to subscribe: which as they are false, and slanderous
accusations, so you utter them gratis, and without any proof at all, and say
nothing to justify Luther, but what a Donatist, an Arian, or any other heretic
never so blasphemous will say for himself, and may, with as good ground, as
Luther, or you for him.

But you allege Page 389.
Cassander whom you call our Cassander, notwithstanding that heretofore you
have had a double admonition See above Chap. 2.
, that he was a wicked heretic Prima classis, whose works being condemned and
prohibited by the Church are of no more authority with us, then your Grand
Imposture. And not unlike to this, is your other example of Stephen Gardener B.
of Winchester, as already has been showed Ibid.
. And as little to your purpose is another example, which here you add Page
392.
of an Epistle of Robert Grosthead B. of Lincoln, taken out of the history of
Matthew Paris, which was set forth corruptedly by English Protestants, and then
by the Tigurine Lutherans, who have added many things both in their marginall
notes, and in the text in self against the authority of the Roman Church See
Bellar. l. de Scriptor*
. Out of this Epistle of Grosthead to Innocentius the fourth, you object a long
passage, in which he acknowledges in most effectual words his belief of the
supreme authority of the B. of Rome. For in the very first words of his
Epistle, he says: Be it known to your Wisdom, that I obey the Apostolic
mandats, with filial affection devoutly, and reverently, and that I make
resistance to those things, which are against the Apostolic mandats, zealing
the honor of my Father; for to both I am bound ex diuino mandato, by the
commandment of God: for the Apostolic mandats neither are. nor can be any
other, then the doctrines of the Apostles, and of our Lord Jesus Christ,
Master, and Lord of the Apostles, whose place and person our Lord the Pope
chiefly holds in the Hierarchy of the Church. A judicious reader would think
it a hard matter, for any man out of these words, and doctrine of Grosthead, to
frame an argument against the authority of the Pope and Church of Rome; and yet
are you so witty, that you have done it: but by what art? By cutting, and
mangling the Bishops words, as the reader will see, if he please to compare
them with the Latin set down in your Margent: and even that Latin mangled, and
falsified as it is, you thought best not to english, because it would have
given light to a judicious reader, to see your dealing. What you add Page 394.
, of the Bishops not receiving a Provision sent by the Pope, makes nothing for
you: for by the whole discourse of his Epistle, it appears that he judged the
Provision, to be procured fraudulently by surreption, and therefore not to be a
true mandate of the Sea Apostolic, and upon that ground he made resistance
unto it, which the civil Cod. Si cont. ius L. Etsi.
and Canon law De rescript. C. Dilectus.
in such cases declare to be lawful. without any impeachment to the authority
of the Pope, and Church of Rome.

SECT. XI. Whether Protestants had any Professors of their faith before Luther.
THere is no way more expedite, or effectual, to convince heretics to be
such, and their doctrines to be profane novelties, then to require of them a
Catalogue of primitive Fathers, and learned men, which have agreed with them,
and dissented from the Roman Church in all those points, in which they dissent
from her: as contrarily there is no way more effectual, for an Orthodoxe man
to prove himself to be such, then to show, that the Fathers and Doctors of
Gods Church, in all ages from the beginning, have professed and taught the same
doctrine, he professes and teaches. To this trial S. Athanasius challenged
the Arians: Behold (says he to them) In decret. Nic. Syn. cont. Eusebius.
we have proved the succession of our doctrine, delivered from hand to hand;
from-Father, to son: you new Jews, you children of Caiphas, what
predecessors of your names can you show? To the same trial that most religious
Emperor Theodosius provoked the heretics of his time: for (as Sozomen
records) L. 7. c. 11.
having called together the chief of the Nouatians, Arians, and Macedonians,
he demanded of them, whether they thought, that the ancient Fathers, which
governed the Church before those dissensions in matter of Religion fell out,
were holy and Apostolical men? whether they did allow of their expositions of
holy Scripture, and would accept of them, as of competent Judges, for the
trial of their cause, and ending of all controversies? Those Heretics highly
praised the doctrine, and expositions of the Fathers, but yet could not agree
among themselves, to have the books of the Fathers produced, and their own
doctrines tried by them. Whereupon Theodosius forbid them all exercise of their
religion, and inflicted other punishments upon them.

With him accorded herein the Emperor Justinian, publishing by an especial Law
L. 5. and 6.
, that to confute the lies of impious Heretics, and repress the madness of
those, that give assent unto them, it is necessary to manifest unto all, what
the most holy Priests of God have taught, and to follow them, How often does S.
Augustine stop the mouths of the Pelagians Cout. Iul. Pelag. l. 1. c. 2. l. 2.
versus fin. l. 5. c. 17. and cont. duas Ep. Pelag. l. 4. c. 12.
, with the testimonies of almost all the famous Bishops, and Doctors both of
the East and West, specifying them by their names, sometimes twelve, sometimes
fourteen together, and adding to them the rest in general? The same kind of
Argument was used by S. Leo the Great Ep. 97.
, when having urged against the Nestorians and Eutychians the testimonies of
the holy Fathers Athanasius, Hilary, Ambrose, and Chrysostom, Theophilus
Alexandrinus, Basil the great, and Cyril, he concludes thus to the Emperor, to
whom he writes: To these testimonies if you vouchsafe to attend, you shall
find, that we teach no other thing, then what our holy Fathers have taught
throughout the whole world, and that no man dissenteth from them, but impious
heretics. Lastly the same manner of arguing from the testimonies of Fathers
was used in the sixth general Council, against the Monothelites, in the
second of Nice, against the Image-breakers; and in the Council of Florence,
against the error of the Grecians, denying the holy Ghost to proceed from the
Son.

To this trial learned Catholics have often challenged the Sectaries of this
age: and to that end have set forth Catalogues of the most learned Doctors of
Gods Church, from the very time of Christ, showing them to have been members of
the Roman Church, and to have believed and taught the now Roman faith, not only
in the general heads, wherein Protestants agree with us, but also in each of
the several points, in which they dissent from us; and to have held them to be
heretical, and confuted them as such, even as we do, alleging their
testimonies at this day against Protestants. The truth of this is to be seen
in Iodocus Coccius a German, who (as it is declared in the Preface to his first
Tome) being in his youth a Lutheran, afterward partly by frequenting the
Sermons of Catholic Preachers, partly by hearing disputations in Schools,
partly by observing the marvelous concord of Catholics, and the fatal discord
of Protestants in matters of faith, partly by considering seriously, and
weighing with himself, that the Churches of Protestants were confined to a few
Provinces, and not spread over the whole world, as the Church of Christ Isa. 49.
was prophesied to be, and that they wanted succession, and continuance, being
newly sprung up; and lastly by a diligent perusal of the writings of ancient
Fathers, whom be found to agree wholly with us, and dissent from Protestants,
abandoned them and abiuring their doctrine, east himself into the arms of his
Catholic Mother the Roman Church. And as well for the confusion of heretics,
and confirmation of Catholics, as also to yield unto all men, a reason of his
faith, he undertook an immense labor (in which he spent 24. years) of reading
the works of all the ancient writers of the Greek and Latin Church, and out
of them, has in two large Volumes (which he entitled (Thesaurus Catholicus)
demonstrated most exactly, that they were all of the belief of the now Roman
Church, and detested the contrary doctrine of Protestants, as heretical; no
less then at this day the Roman Church does. The like has been performed by
the most eminent Cardinals Baronius, and Bellarmine, the one in his Annals;
the other in his learned Volumes of Controversies. The like pains has been
taken by Doctor Sanders in his Monarchia visibilis, by Iacobus Gaulterius in
his Tabula Chronographica, against the French Huguenots, and by Doctor Norrice
in his Antidote and Appendix against English Protestants. The like have other
learned writers done out of the works of diverse ancient Fathers; in particular
Theodorus Petretus, out of S. Cyprian. S. Leo, S. Gregory, and S. Bernard;
Ioannes Nopelius, out of S. Ambrose; Cornelius Schultingus, out of S. Hierome;
and Hieronymus Torrensis, out of S. Augustine, intituling their works the
Confessions of those Fathers, and conuincing clearly in them, that they were
all Roman Catholics, and in all points of the same belief we profess at this
day.

This it is which we so often require of Protestants, a Catalogue of learned
men, who in all ages since Christ, have agreed with them, and dissented from us
in all those Tenets, which they mantaine against the faith of the now Roman
Church. This the best learned Protestants knew they could not perform, and
therefore were enforced to say (as you have heard See here above sect. 3.
the Church of Christ was altogether invisible, yea for many ages utterly
perished, and extinguished. But you with other late English Protestants ashamed
of so faythlesse a paradoxe, mantaine that the Church of Christ (which you hold
to be yours) was never wholly(...)

Errors in the Print, to be corrected.
In the Text.
Page 13. line 11. Ermodius read Ennodius. Page 14. lin. 37. true, read the
true. Page 18. lin. 21. then read men. Ibid. lin. 24. which read with. Ibid.
lin. 37. also read them also. Page 21. l. 28. his read if his. Page 24. lin.
15. nouthes read months. Page 29. l. 38. Nicolaus Augustus read Iacobus
Augustus. Page 50. l. 31. being read bring. Page 65. l. 10. Church read
Churches. Page 68. l. 19. misplacing read misco^struing. Page 75. l. 37.38. to
the thing read of the thing. Page 78. l. 3. ingeniously read ingenuously. Page
80. l. 11. misbelieue read misbeliefe. Page 94. l. 15. this read his. Page 98.
l. 19. odorned read adorned. Page 106. l. 33. a great Non seq. read as great a
Non seq. Page 108. l. 13. first of read first Bishop of. Page 110. l. 23. The
third read The first. Page 112. l. 35. which read with. Page 118. l. 38. piuat
read private. Page 125. l. 14. Augustine to Zozimus read Aug. to Bonifacius.
Page 134. l. 38. Samleron read Salmeron. Page 141. l. 20. first time to
Jerusalem read the first time from Antioch to Jerusalem. Page 148. l. 37. him
read them. Page 153. l. 27. contentions read contentious. Page 164. l. 18. no,
read nor. Page 169. l. 6. but read out. Page 169. l. 12. the read her. Page
171. l. 10. Christian read Christians. Page 178. l. 19. blot out (k) and put a
(*) in place of it, and in the margent over against it, read thus (*) Apud
Vincent. Lyrin c. 26. Page 179. l. 13. whom read when. page 184. l. 25. speak
read spoke. Page 188. in the 7. line, add (k) corresponding to the margent.
Page 189. l. 36. (says he) read (says he Epist. 48.) Page 190. l. 2. present
laws read present Emperors. Page 191. confired read confidered. Page 202. l.
27. which read with. Page 325. you read your. Page 334. l. 5. of mediocrity,
read of our mediocrity Page 338. l. 23. second Epistle read third Epistle. Page
349. l. 31. out read your. Page 372. l. 30. the Patriarchs read their
Patriarch. Page 373. l. 13. The 150. read That the 150. Page 374. l. 26. seud
read sent. Page 380. l. 28. fouored read fouored. Page 389. l. 6. defaining
read defaming. Page 399. l. 10. nistaken read mistaken: Page 407. l. 7.
retraction read retractation. Page 419. l. 16. Epistle read Epistles. Page 425.
l. 36. this very point, read this the very point. Page 428. l. 10. as the read
as of the. Page 429. l. 3. had notice read had had notice. Page 431. l. 1.
Bishop read Bishops: Page 436. over against the 18. line, add in the margent
Council. Ephesians to. 2. c. 4. in append. Page 439. l. 6. which read what. Page 493.
l. 7. dele and. Page 442. l. 31. above read about. Page 444. falsifies read
falsities. Page 457. l. 21. prebition read prebibition: Page 458. l 4. object
read abject. Page 466. l. 3. authorities read authority. Page 470. l. 34. as
Socrates read as Euagrius. Page 475. l. 2. our read your. Page 476. l. 38
lawier read lawiers. Page 480. l. 33. For Leo de Castro, read, And Leo etc.
Page 493. over against live 32. add in the margent Anselm. l. de ferment. and
azim. init. Page 499. l. 15. noly read only: Page 502. l. 3. Apostolical
chair, read Apostolical charge. Page 514. l. 29. which some read which though
some. Page 516. l. 29. Pilie read Pilier. Page 519. l. 3. co^uinced read
continued. Ibid. l. 12. do not you read do not they. Page 521. l 20. with read
without. Page 528. l. 17. undertake read undertook. Page 538. l. 21. But away
read Put away. Ibid. l. 25. his state read his seat. Page 544. l. 26. sufficient
read insufficient. Page 567. l. 4. they approved read they gave. Page 569. l.
18. are of truth, read, are oracles of truth. Page 570. l. 18. anno 1520. read
1620. Page 576. l. 17.18. if it were thought schism read if be thought it were
schism. Page 582. over against the 9. line add in the margent Calvin. ep.
141. Page 589. l. 13 after the words by S. Augustine, add (c) and in the line
following instead of (c) put (d) and over against it in the margent add Optat.
l. 2. cont. Parmen. Page 590. l. 10. it not, read is not. Page 597. l. 26.27.
had right, read had no right. Page 602. l. 3. bring read being. Ibid. lin. 31.
Gregory the third read Gregory the second. Ibid. l. 34. Gregory sent him, read
Gregory the third sent him. Page 615. l. 20. acknowledges read acknowledged.
Page 618. l. 28. Record read Records. Pa. 629. l. 18. yeath read death. Page
655. l. 11. is easy read is not easy. Page 664. l. 17. kingdom read kingdo^es.
Page 667. l. 18. and Radius read Andradius. Page 668. l. 31. Sind a Monk read
Siud a Monk. Page 672. l. 28. with read which. Page 702. l. 1. obiecteth read
obeys. Page 714. l. 30. be multitude read be the multitude. Page 719. l. 23.
the Arians, that of Ephesus, read the Arians rejected the Council of Nice; the
Macedonians, that of Constantinople; the Nestorians, that of Ephesus. Page 727.
l. 7. your Thesis that, read your Thesis is, that. Page 731. l. 3. it be, read
to be. Page 738. l. 20. the new Church read the now Church. Page 745. l. 12. al
her sayings read al his sayings. Ibid. l. 16. pamplets read pamphlets. Ibid l.
38. To prone read To prove. Page 760. l. 5. haer. 60. read haer. 60. and in
Anacephal.

In the Margent, to be corrected.
Page 12. (u) l. 1. ep. 30. corrige l. 10. ep. 30. Page 13. (d) c. 36. corrige
c. 80. Page 22. over against the line 22. add in the marge^t Bed. l. 5. hist.
c. 19. Page 46. (*) disp. 9. n. 6. cor. disp. 9. sect. 1. n. 6. Page 48. (*) d.
9. n. 11. cor. d. 9. sect. 1. n. 12. Page 70. (k) in psalm. 106. and l. 5.
decurand. etc. cor. in psalm. 116. and l. 9. de curand. Page 80. (d) ep. 74.
cor. ep. 75. Page 89. (d) l. 9. ep. 38. cor. l. 9. ep. 39. Page 90. (h) tom. 2.
c. 10. cor. tom. 2. c. 16. Page 96. (g) In cap. 2. Act. cor. In cap, 2. ad Gal.
Page 104. (z) see above nu. 24. cor. see above cap. 9. n. 3. Page 108. (*)
Above n: 21. cor. Above cap 7. Page 117. (i) and Page 120. (x) cor. Epad
Micae^lem Imper. cor. Ep. ad Micae^l. Constantinop: Ibid. (t) l. 4. ep. 3 cor.
l. 4. ep. 32. Page 121. (a) Ad cap. 22. Luc. cor. In psalm. 43. Page 124. (q) l.
1. Apol. cor. l. 3. Apol. Page 129. (r) sermon. 10. deverb. Dom. cor. sermon. 13.
de verbis Dom. Page 143. quasi diceret cor. quasi discretione. Page 155. (o) l.
1. Apol. cor. l. 3. Apol. Ibid. Page 155. (p) Ep. 6. cor. Ep. 65. Page 178. (i)
cont. Gaudent. l. 1. c. 23. cor. l. 1. c. 33. Page 187. (g) l. 1. Apol. cor. l.
3. Apol. Page 196. (g) cont. Gaudent. l. 3. c. 1. cor. l. 2. c. 2. Page 198.
(s) Ibid. cor. Ibid. l. 3. Page 199. (x) Ep. 6. cor. Ep. 65. Page 301. (b) anno
451. n. 34. cor. n. 33. Page 314. (a) ep. 42. cor. ep. 24. Page 349. (u) l. 7.
ep. 65. cor. l. 7. ep. 30. indict. 1. Page 376. (e) page 347 cor. tom: 2. page
470. Page 407. (g) Eusebius. l. 5. hist. cor. l. 7. hist. Page 432. (m) In 1.
part. cor. In 1. Petri. Page 442. (q) Bin. to. 2. page 1075. cor. page 1073.
Page 459. (x) Can. 80. ex Grec. cor. Can. 19. ex 80. Grec. Page 459. (y) Eusebius.
l. 6. hist. c. 7. cor. c. 17. Page 459. (a) Niceph. l. 13. c. 33 cor. c. 34.
Page 462. (l) and Page 664. (z) Ruffin. l. 1. c. 1. S. Greg. l. 4. ep. 72. cor.
Ruffin. l. 1. c. 2. S. Greg. l. 4 ep. 31. Page 471. (d) Socrat. l. 4. c. 36
cor. Socr. l. 4. c. 30. and Sozom. l. 6. c. 39. Page 471. (f) Ibid c. 2. cor.
Ibid. c. 3. init. Page 478. (k) Socrat. l. 2. c. 22.23. Epiphan. haer. 66. cor.
Socrat. l. 2. cap. 23. Epiph. haer. 68. Page 480. (u) Ruffin. l. 1. c. 1.
Socrat. l. 1. c. 8. S. Greg. l. 4. ep. 72. cor. Ruffin. l. 1. c. 2. S. Greg. l.
4. ep. 31 ibid. page 480. (y) ep. 60.14. cor. cap. 60. 14. Page 485. (n) Chap.
5. n. 161.171.172. cor. Chap. 5. page 171.172. Page 489. (e) l. 4. de consid.
cor. l. 4. instit. Page 493. over against the line 23. add in the margent,
Anselm. init. lib. de ferment. and azimo. Page 525. (c) Apol. aduers. Ruffin.
l. 1. cor. l. 3. Page 532. (f) Theod. l. 5. hist. c. 11. cor. c. 10. Page 536.
(z) ep. 77. cor. ep. 57. Page 540. (m) ep. 16. cor. ep. 18. Page 558. (l) c.
13. cor. c. 2. Page 576. (f) l. 5. hist. c. 34. cor. c. 24. Page 570. (z)
Spondom. cor. Spondan-Pag. 587. (u) sermon. l. 4. cor. strom. l. 4. Page 606. (l)
Epistola cor. Epistolae. Page 613. (p) Niceph. l. 13. n. 18. cor. cap. 18. Page
ibid. (q) Niceph. l. 13. c. 31. cor. cap. 32. Page 622. (p) Socrat. l. 2. c.
18. cor. Euagr. l. 2. c. 4. Page 626. (l) Ep. 17. ad Eustoch. cor. ep. 27. Page
627. (t) l. 8. c. 3. cor. Sozom. l. 8. c. 3. Page 632. (k) Sozom. l. 2. c. 3.
cor. c. 23. Page 675. (u) page 200. cor. Page 203. Page 682. (z) page 797. cor.
712. and 797. Page 690. (l) l. 2. cont. lit. Petil. c. 25. cor. c. 51. Page
714. (o) l. 3. cont. Parmen. c. 3. cor. c. 2. Page 717. (s) ibid. c. 31. dele
c. 31.

FINIS.

