Certain new inventions and profitable experiments necessary to be known of
all Farmers, and others, that endeavor to procure benefit to themselves, and
plenty to the Commonwealth.
WHereas many men in this land have found by good experience that Wheat,
Beans, Peason, and other corn and seeds of diverse sorts, being set at
convenient depth and distance, do yield a wonderful great increase and
benefit, more then by being sown the common way, and thereupon many of them
have attempted diverse ways for the speedy dispatching of that work, but have
failed hitherto in their attempts and enterprises.

These are to certify all men, that are desirous to reap the benefit of such
practice, that now there is an Engine or Device brought to perfection, which
does excel all practices heretofore known for the setting of corn, as much as
printing excels writing for expedition; and is to be seen at Mr. Huffes
house, at the sign of the Claw in the street called the Bowling alley, near
to Westminster Abbey.

Whosoever has any friends in the counties of Sommerset, Gloucester, or any
other country, where they do generally set their Beans and Pease by one at
once, he may do them a friendly office, to inform them of this new invention.

All Farmers, which have such great Farms, that they cannot possibly set their
corn, may be there instructed in several experiments for the ordering of
Seed-corne, where dung is wanting, that it will yield an increase almost double
to the common way, though it be sown after the accustomed manner.

Also they may be instructed, how to choose and order some particular grounds,
that the purchase of them may be clearly recovered at one crop: Whereby any
man may gain as much yearly by a small quantity of Land, as others get by
thrice as much used the ordinary way.

Also they may be instructed in many notable experiments, for the improving of
diverse sort of Land, whereby they may get a good advantage to themselves, and
procure an inestimable benefit to the Commonwealth, being generally practiced.

As also how to convert to the best uses, diverse things, which have in all ages
heretofore been fondly cast away, whereof one load will be as effectual for
the enriching of barren land, as twenty loades of dung.

Those that love themselves or the common good, are invited and desired to
learn the knowledge of this new invention for the expeditious setting of corn,
against the time of dearth and scarcity; For, when corn is at an high price,
any Farmer that usually sows twenty quarters of corn yearly, may set the
same Land with three quarters, and may have a far better increase at harvest,
then if he had sown the whole twenty quarters, so that he may sell seventeene
quarter of seed corn, put forty or fifty pounds in his purse, though he pay
his workmen at an higher rate, then they have for their common employments, by
which means he shall not want workmen: and befides the corn thus spared, being
used for bread-corne, in the same country, will keep that wealth at home,
which must otherwise have been exhausted in buying corn brought from foreign
parts. So that this skill well learned before hand, may be a better prevention
against dearth, then all Storehouses and provisions heretofore devised.

Whosoever shall procure dearth or scarcity the people will curse them, but
blessing shall be upon the heads of those that endeavor to cause plenty.

April. 6. 1640.
Those that dwell in any country far distant, and desire to reap the
benefit of these new inventions, may join many together in the charge, and
send a capacious man to the place above appointed, who shall presently receive
full satisfaction, concerning the truth, and certainty of all the experiments
above menrioned.

FINIS.
Gabriell Plattes (that made the 2 Books I sent you.) has a Book ready for
the Proses of these experiments, I have read it over and seen his Engine but
-- more of that hereafter; if you think fit./


