A DECLAration of the Prince of Conde and his associates to the Queen, upon
the Judgment of rebellion, set forth against the^ by their enemies, terming
themselves to be the Court of parlamente of Paris, with a protestation of the
evils and inconveniences which may thereof ensue.

Imprinted at London in Paul's Churchyard by Lucas Harryson.

Although that the wrytyngs heretofore published in the name of the Prince of
Conde, and all the Princes, Lords, gentlemen and other which are of his
company, do sufficiently declare the equity of the cause which has armed
them, as well for the service of the King and conservation of his authority,
as for the mayntayning of his edictes or proclamatyons, concerning the holy
liberty and quietness of conscience of the reformed Churches within this
realm: nevertheless seeing that the enemies of the honor of God, and
public quietness, daily set forth new sclaunders, whereby they pretend to
oppress the innoce^cye of the said Prince and his associates, it stands with
good reason, that if the wicked cease not to assail equitye and justice, the
good also should not cease to defend it.

Now for because that the 27. day of July last past, judgment was given in the
Court of parliament of Paris, whereby they pretend to declare them rebels,
that have taken armor for the service of ye King, the conservation of the
states authority, and to resist the violence and tyranny of ye Duke of Guyse
and his adherentes: it is necessary that the iniquity of this judgment
should be manifested, as well to those of this kingdom, as to strangers: and
namely that it should be represented to our posterytie by this declaration. For
it shall serve for an example of remembrance, wherein may be seen, how much
the enemies of God and persecutors of his Church, are of corrupt understanding
and judgment and far from all righteousness. We may (I say) perceue, that
men which prefer their lies and errors to the sacred truth of God, are so
far blinded, that they judge those seditious, which go about to seek (as much
as in them lies) the public union and tranquillity: and condemn those for
rebels, which forsaking their commodities, giving over their goods, do hazard
their lives, to the end yt the King may remain obeyed, and the authority of
his Edictes may be inuiolably kept.

And to the end that such declaration of rebellyon may be ye better co^uinced
of manifest injustice, and be holde^ for the sclau^der of an enemy, and not for
the sentence of a Judge: behold what ye Prince of Co^de and his associats shall
declare to this effect, following their first protestations and writings
concerning the verification of their innocence.

First as concerning the exception of the person of ye said Prince, he is so
much affected to the service of the King, that he feels himself wounded and
burdened with that, which they lay to other, whom he knows never meante
any such thing in taking armor, nor tended to none other end, but to the
conseruatio^ of this crown. And the said Prince is so far from being pleased
with this exception, that rather he is offended: in that they would separate
him from so many good and faithful servants of the King, and from as good and
holy a company, as ever was assembled together in this realm. For this cause
being assured both before God and Man, that their innocence is such, that all the lies and scla^ders of ye wicked ca^ not stayne with one only spot of
disobedience and rebellion, either ye said Prince or his associates: he
desires to have the same condition with them which are joined with him in the
same goodness of cause, the same religion, the same will to bestow their lives for
ye Kings wealth, conseruatio^ of his estate, and the establyshyng of the pure
service of God in his Kingdom.

And even as ye said Prince cannot, nor ought not to be forsaken or denied of
those at whose commandment he has iustlye taken weapon in hand: no more
would he depart from those which have (at his request) taken arms with him,
and with whom he has like intent and will. Furthermore, he has sufficient
experience in the crafty sleyghtes of his enemies, to perceive what they brue
under such color and pretense of exception: as it is easy to be judged by ye
lettres missiue, sent through the provinces, wherein he is generally comprised
with the others. Now yt it may appear that ye crime of rebellion ought to
light upon those, which of their own authority have taken weapon, to break
the Edicts of ye king, and to trouble the quietness of ye whole realm, and
not upon any other, which have taken armoure to withstand so pernicious an
e^trepryse, we will brieflye rehearse yt which we have amply discoursed in
our former writings.

Each man knows yt the Edict of January, brought such quietness throughout al
France, that it seemed that the estate of this realm being before tossed
with infinyte troubles and tempests, was (as it were) arrived at a happy and
quiet port. At that time when the Duke of Guyse, through the slaughter which
he made at Vassy. gave openly to understand, that he had sworn war against the
estate of the King and the wealth and quietness of his people. The which with
good right was thought very strange by the said Prince, who for ye place which
he holds ought of duty to co^serue and maintain the authority and highness
of the King: who^ the said Guyse has always gone about to bring to extreme
ruin. That (I say) was thought marvelous strange, that a subject durst so
manyfestly break an Edicte of his Prince, yea such an Edict as was made by the
delyberatio^ of the estates, authoryzed by ye Kings Counsel, with the most
notable company that could be gathered and chosen out of all the Courts of
Parlemente of this realm, And although ye said Prince, had of his own right,
occasion just enough to withstand so manifest a vyole^ce and oppression to ye
King and his Edictes, yet he withheld him self to entreprise any thing to this
effect until he received commandment.

In consideration whereof the said Prince most humbly besecheth the Queens
Majesty to remember that being at S, Germayne in Lay, she was advertised to
what end the Duke of Guyse tended: which was to depose her from her authority,
and to banysh from about her, her most faithful and loving seruau^ts, yt they
might the easlyer obtain ye government of this realm. Whereto they have
always cast their eye and aspyred, since the time that they have had any
maneging of affairs in their hands. Which being come to the Queens
knowledge, and likewise the faction that by the means of the Embassadoure of
Spain they practiced, in favor of their entrepryse: she conceived such grefe
thereof, as the great and eminent danger required. Which gave her occasion one
evening, to desire the said Prince, to gather together the greatest number of
Gentlemen that he could, that the effect of so dangerous an enterprise
might be prevented. Which he faithfully went about, having respect to the
commandment of the Queen, and of his duty toward the kings majesty and
co^seruatio^ of his crown. Now this obedience was the beginning of all that,
which has since continued, in resisting those which the Queen judged to be
her enemies, and of who^ she would take heed. And for greater witness of ye
doubt which she had of them, it may please her to remember the charge which
she once gave to the said Prince, touching the secretary Marseille. Now when ye
said Guyses by their demeanours as well at Paris as elswher, had brought openly
to light that which before they had hidden: ye Queen confirmed and repeted
again to the said Prince, as well by letters as messangers, the commandment
which she had already made, to resist the force and violence which they
determined to make against her Majesty. Who^ in this behalf he most humbly
besecheth and so far as the word of a Queen ought to remain sure and
inviolable, to call to mind ye things which she has written with her own hand:
the which he is now constrained to set forth to all men's eyes, that they may
al read his innocence in the very lettres of the Queen. For he is assured that
she has not forgotten that which she wrote to him from Fou^tainebleau, in the
month of March last past: recommending unto him the conservation of the Kings
person and of hirs, in these words: I reco^mend unto you the mother and her
children. And consequently that which she wrote with her hand by Monsieur de
Bouchauannes, when ye force of the Guyses was in Paris: yt is that he should
not dysarme himself, until his enemies were disarmed, and yt it might be
seen to what end their co^spiracy would tend. And here upon the said Prince
desires that it will please her Majesty to remember, how often she has given
him to understand, that she esteemed that which he did for very agreeable
service the which she would so print in the Kings memory, that (being come
to age,) he might gratefy him according to his desert.

Whereunto likewise agrees that which she said to the lord Admiral, not long
before he departed from the court, that she knew him so faithful a servant
of ye Kings and also so loving toward her majesty, that if need required, he
would not let by all means possible, to endeavor himself to defend her from
the conspyracy of the Guyses. As she also now last writ unto him by Monsiur
Re^bouillet, that she esteemed him so good a servant of the Kings, and desirous
of the conseruatio^ of his estate, that she would use his counsel for ye
pacifyi^g of ye troubles which were in those days. And furthermore the talk
which she had besides Baugency with the said Prince and ye Lords which were in
his company, is so clear witness of her consent and approving thereof, that it
should be to superfluous to allege infinyte other proves, which might be brought
forth to this effect. For then in ye presence of.7. Knights of the order, and
certain secretaries of ye estate, she largly thanked ye said Prince and his
company, for the service and pleasure that she had received of them: using
these terms: yt she acknowleged yt the Kings life and hirs were conserved and
kept through their mean.

These things being considered as behooves, what reason may remain to the
enemies of the said Prince and his associats, yea so much as to gather a
simple conjecture of rebellion, much less of grounded judgment? By whose
authority shall they be declared rebels? Shall it be by ye King and Queen's
authority, which have caused them to take arms for ye conseruatio^ of their
majesty's? which has had recourse to them in her danger? which therein has
encouraged them by words and letters? and with thanks for their service has
approved and accepted that which they have done, as a mean of ye co^seruation
of this whole realm? Furthermore, there is none but knows, yt the ennemies
of ye said Prince abuse ye name of the King and Queen, whose will they keep
forced and subject to their wylles. Which is the cause why the said Prince
and his associates have protested hitherto, and now again protest, neither to
hold nor acknowledge any Edict, statute or ordinance, made under the name of
the King, whileste his liberty is taken from him by the vyolence and arms of
their enemies.

And for that they take for proof, besides these things heretofore written,
yt which so often ye Queen has sent them word of: yt is that she could not
agree to ye which they demanded, because yt ye contrary part was ye stronger,
and ye people armed. And although yt since the month of April the Kings
Majesty has been forced, and they have bego^ne to abuse his name and authority,
yet since that time ye thing has been more clearly known and manifested, by
that which is contained in a letter of the Queens to Monsiur de Vieillevile
and the Countye of Villars, dated the 14. of May last. Where she write with
her hand, that she committed the king her son into the hands of the other:
meaning by the other, ye enemies of the said Lord Prince. Whereby it appears
that the judgment of rebellion and al other things made under the name and
authority of ye king against the said Prince and his company, ought to be
esteemed to be made by their enemies: seeing that the king is under their
hands, as it appears even by the witness of the Queen.

Now then I leave to be considered, of what weighte that judgment of
co^demnatio^ is, which is given by ye parties and enemies of the condemned? but
yet let us see what that great crime is which they call rebellion, and whereupon
they ground that, which they lay to ye said Princes charge and his company?
It is (say they) because they will not give over their armor. If it be so, I
demand what shall they be caled, which coming to the court in armoure, though
they had none enemies armed against them, would not nevertheless give over
their armoure, although they received co^mau^demente from the king, and which
yet hold them with the same boldness that they took them at the beginning. Now
who is he that would give over his armor at the request and insta^ce of his
enemy, which has the sword ready in his hand to fight with him? what other
thing is it, to demand yt the said Prince should disarme himself his
adversaries remaining armed, but only to will that his enemies should be his
masters, that his goods should be subject to their greedye covetousness, that
his life should be given over to their cruelty? To be short, that he should
receive the law of those, which having none, ought to receive the same of others?

And furthermore is it not to break the wall which it has pleased God to set
about his poor Church of France, and afterward to give it over to ye rage
and fury of those, which can not be satisfied with suckyng of Innocents blood.

Furthermore it is not unknown yt the said Prince has always offered to unarm
him self, if his enemies would unarm them first, and wythdrawing them selves
from the King, would leave him in his first liberty. Now is it not reason yt
they which first took armor with out commandment, without authority, and against
ye Kings will, against ye Edicts, against the express commandment of ye
king: should lay down their armor, before ye other which were armed after the^:
armed (I say) by co^ma^deme^t, authority and knowledge of ye king and Queen, for
the conservation of their Maiestyes and of their Edictes, against the
oppression and violence of the other?

To be short let al yt the said Prince has done be examined, and it shall be
found that his answers, and protestations, his offers, and all his doings,
are sufficient witnesses, of his innocence. For has he not gone about by all
means to set this realm at quiet? and to deliver it from ye peril which
seems to threaten it with an extreme and utter ruin?

What condition of peace being any thing reasonable was ever refused, or not
rather sought by the said Prince and his company? How often has he gone about to
let the entry of strangers into this realm, fearing the inconveniences that
might thereof ensue? Has he not given to understand the desert of his cause,
to strange Princes, and namely to the confederates of this crown, beseching
the^ to take up the matter, and to be mean of the quietness and tranquillity
of this realm? With what modesty has he behaved him self, in the towns
wherein he might conserve the liberty of their consciences, and the exercising
of their religion, following the permission and ordinance of the king? Has he
used any one point of violence or injustice? When his enemies forcing towns,
and not being content to bereue them of the benefit and liberality of the
king touching religion, have committed so many murders and spoils, that the
streates have been paued with dead corpses, and the earth stained with the
blood of the Innoce^tes which they have shed. Let men the^ judge without
affection, who they be which by their works and effects, have deserved to be
declared rebels: either the Prince and his company, which have armed the^
selves to maintain the Edictes of the King, made according to the advise of
the estates (which ought to take place during ye minority of his said Majesty)
his liberty, the Queen's liberty, and the quietness of the commonwealth: or
their e^nemies, which taki^g arms, without authority of ye King, have broken
his Edictes, sacked his towns, murdered his subjects, and set forth ordinances
quite contrary to the Kings, and namly to ye Edict of January made so
sole^nely, as we have said, receued with whole consent throughout ye realm, and
likewise greatly co^me^ded of strangers. If then with indifferent eye all the
parts of this cause be marked, it shall be found, yt the said Prince and his
company have been falsely called rebels by those which are very rebels
themselves: they have been declared sedicious by those, which since ye death of
ye late King Henry, have been cause of all ye troubles which have happened in
this realm: and have been declared gilty of treson by those, which oppress ye
Kings majesty, abolish his ordinances and abuse his name and authoryty, to
magnify themselves to his overthrow. Those, yea those ar gilty of divine
treason, whose works have always showed that they hold Ambicion for their
God, Covetousness for their religion, and the pleasures of this world for
their paradise and greatest felicity: which have sworn war against the
son of God, against his word and those which maintain it: which show ye
works of Anabaptistry in baptizing again those children, which be already
baptized according to the institution and ordinance of our Lord Jesus
Christ: which have their houses full of spoils, and their hands embrued with
bloody cruelty.

They also are guilty of humane treason, which have broken ye Edictes of the
king, have approached and seized upon his person with arms against his
commandment, which are great friends, and have made those to be their
instruments in this feat, which would violently have taken away the second
person of France, and have oppressed the king, and brought his estate to
confusion and ruin. And to speak further, I say that they are guilty of
treason, which made of late yt cursed co^spiracy in Province, by the hands of
Lauris presidente in the court of parlemente at Aix, and conjoined with Fabrice
Cerbelome Gouernoure of Auignon for the Pope, which tended to assemble xv. M.
me^ which should march (as they were sworen, at the commandment of ye said
Guise. Whereof the said Fabritius furnished a thousand footmen, and.CC.
horsemen. Which conspiracy being come to knowledge, and veryfied by the court of
parliament of Province, Entrages, and Laidet, two pri^cipal captains of this
faction, were behedded by judgment given in the same court. And if this suffyce
not, I will add more: that the said Guyses have made the like co^spyracy in
Dauphine, by ye captain Mantill: hoping by this mean to make Dauphine to take
arms with Province to martche together at their pleasure. In so much that
these co^spiracies made to abolishe ye preaching of the Gospel, these takings
up of men, these oaths taking to martch at ye co^maudeme^t of the Guyse, cry
out, that as well the said Guyse as his co^spiratours are rebels, and gilty of
treason both to God and man. And contrariwise yt those are true and faithful
servants of ye King, which have withsta^ded and stoutly do withstand their
rebellio^s, seditions and atte^pts, against the Kings Majesty and estate of
all this realm. And besides this that I have spoken, let the ouerwhelming of
the government and justice of this realm be witness, and namely that court
of Parliament of Paris: which they have made their instrument in this false and
pernicious judgment of rebellion: because they could not find any other
company so corrupt and depraved, so bo^de and slave to their wills and appetites
as that.

As in effect all those that remain there at this day, do either hold
their estates through the favor of the said Guyses and their adherentes, or else
hope to have some other by their mean. And even the principal amongst them
are plainly comprysed in the conspiracy and faction made by ye said Guyse and
his adherentes: whereof we at this day feel the lamentable and miserable
effects. And we must in deed truly confess, that amongst all the plagues that
God long has scourged this poor and afflicted realm withal, this ought to
be accounted ye greatest: that such a court of parliament, which ought to be
the seat of Justice, the refuge of ye oppressed, the bridle and punishment of
al vice, should be so far from his right and natural use, yt it should open
the gate to al injustice and oppression, to al impunitie and license of evil
doing. Whereby is come to pass, that ye principal head of the government of
France being so sick, has spread her disease upon all the parts and members
of this kingdom. And for proof hereof, mark not only the particular wrongs
done by the said court to infinite persons, ye cries, ye plaints, the blood of
so many poor innocents as it has oppressed, condemned, and murdered.

But principally mark this false and perverse judgment of rebellion, which is
a general wrong done to infinite persons, whose life and conversation has
made proof of the most humble obedience which they bear to ye kings
majesty. Now to the end that these corrupt judges should leave behind no one
point of injustice, they have pronounced this judgment, the cause not being
heard, the reasons not debated, the proves of justifying and innocency not
understand. And although they were refused by ye said Prince and his company
(which was duly notified unto them) they nevertheless left not to attribute
unto themselves the knowledge of this fact, to give al me^ to understand, that
in ye seats of the court of parlemente of Paris, there are now none other
judges, but corruptions, hatreds, and private affections, and there is now none
other law but contemning and abolishing of the kings laws and customs of
this realm.

Whereupon my masters, you which are called Judges, I demand what injustice and
manifest corruption is, if this which you have done in this judgment be not?
For where is ye form of justice observed? Where are the reasons with which the
condemned have been overcome? Where is that ancient and righteous law, that ye
ca^ not both be judges and particular enemies? Why have you thrust your selves
in to ye judgment of those, which have refused you for judges, having as much
reason to do it, as there are faults of apparaunte wrongs in you? And to be
short were you not ryghtly refused, which have driven out of your company, al
those which you perceived not to be of your faction? You which by the decree
the last of June now passed, put weapon in the hand of ye furious people,
against both GOD and man's laws, yea against your own laws, against the
common wealth and universal quietness of this realm? You which have proclaimed
ye mynysters of the reformed Churches guilty of treason, whom nevertheless the
king by his proclamation has received to his protection, and who for this
effect have taken the oath at your hands? You which durst declare to ye king
yea with threatninges, by Monsieur Chambon and Monsieur Fay your deputyes,
that ye thought strange and would not suffer ye agreement which he would have
made between the said Prince and his contraries? By this mean taking away all
doubt, that ye are the sworen enemies of the said Prince and his company, and
consequently shuttyng your own mouths, that ye might not pronounce any
sentence against them? And what needs any more? Look upon the head city of
this realm, where your abiding is, and mark the extreme cruelties which are
daily committed by the people, and yt before your eyes, to your knowledge,
will, and provoking. Let men consider the refuse that you made to ye Lord of
Brissac, to make any ordonaunce to repress these tumultes of the people. Let
it be weighed as appertains, yt the most part of you, the better to show that
they will no longer use justice, but force, ar of Presidentes and counselers
become men of war: have changed their pens into swords, and their long
gounes into corcelets, they themselves play the captains, and go publicly
armed, with other such insolenties, as unworthy of their estate, as very mete
to the corruption of their life. Let all these things (I say) be considered,
and if it be so that rebels can not judge of rebellion, that ye troublers of
the common quietness can not know of sedition, and yt the breakers of ye
Kings Edictes, are not able to judge of giltinesse of treason: if so be (I
say) that those which deserve to be condemned, ought not to condemn others: Ye
ca^ not deny but they which ye have condemned, have sufficient reason, not only
to refuse you, but also to cause you to be punyshed in time and place,
according to ye desert of your injustice. Which thing the most part of this
realm greatly desires, being assured that god will show us his merciful
face, when he rayseth up in France good and faithful judges which shall
condemn and rightly punish those, which unjustly have condemned other:
executi^g upon your persons, ye sentence which you have pronounced against the
innocents.

All these things tha^ being equally weighed, shall plainly show, to al those
which in this cause shall give judgment free from all particular affection,
that although there be nothing set forth for the defense of the said Prince
and his company, against the intolerable injustice, and the unworthiness
which has been showed the^ by this judgment, yet nevertheless their innocence
is so apparaunt, yt it is able to speak it self, and beelye the false and
shameless slanders, of their ennemie judges.

Now I leave to thynk, how just grief it is to ye said Prince when he has
faithfully obeyed all things which were commanded him, for the tuition of the
King and Queen, and when he had done the duetye of that place which he holds
in this realm, as behooved a most faithful and loving servant of the King,
and necessary for the wealth and profit of al this realm: that his desert
should be paid with so great unthankfulness, yt the duty which he has
showed to the King should be turned to crime, and that his obedyence should be
called rebellion. This certainly is with good right not only grievous unto him,
but also intolerable.

And although this vile spot wherewith they would have burdened him, can not
in any wise fasten upon him, but returns to those which brought it,
nevertheless he feleth himself so bound in duty, not only to his honor, but
to his company, yt he is resolved to bestow all the means which God has put
and hereafter shall put in his hands, to cause the innocence of them al, to be
known, not only to the people of France, but to strange nations: and to
leave the memory to our posterity. And forasmuch as by the wicked and corrupt
judgment, given against him and those of his company, and by the manner that
they have used in ye said judgment, and namely the ouerwhelming of ye justice
of France done by his enemies, he well enough knows, that the way of justice
being shutt up from him, he can not thereby cause the edictes of ye King to be
observed, and consequently show forth his innocence: for this cause he is
constrained to have recourse to ye last remedy, of arms. Which having in his
hand at the Queens commandment, and likewise for his own office and duty
(considering the place which he holds in this realm) he will never leave of,
till he has made the King peasibly to be obeyed in his country, his edictes
observed, and the innocence of the said Prince, and his company manifestli
acknowleged. And the said Prince declares that although they (whose authority
and commandment has caused him to begin this enterprise,) should now come
and allege their contrary advise and opynion, yet though they change their
wills, he can not change his: as also he can not slacken his duty toward
the King, nor forget the place which he holds in this realm.

Therefore the said Prince and all his company proteste, before the majesty of
God and the King, and before all people and nations to whom the knowledge of
this fact has come or shall come, that they confess and acknowledge themselves
most humble and obedient subjects and servants of ye King their sovereign
Lord and Prince. and that their arms are not, nor never shall be against his
majesty, but against his enemies. Whom they hold for rebels, setiouse, and
giltye of treason to God and man: because they have overthrown the laws and
customs of this realm, have broken the Edictes of ye King, and violate the
authority of ye estates, in thrusting themselves into the counsel of his
majesty, (from which they were excluded by the advice of the said estates)
and have driven out the faithful and lawful counselers of the King.
Furthermore because they defend themselves with his person, enforce his liberty,
abuse his name, to color their ambition and insaciable cruelty, they have
made and daily do make conspiracies, factions, and practices as well to
maintain their usurpation, as to undo the most part of the Kings faithful
subjects. And namely to banysh out of France the pure preaching of the
Gospel, to spoil and destroy those which make profession thereof. Against
those the^ only, and for these causes, with the other that depend on the^, the
said Prince and his company protest to have weapon in hand, and yt for great
need, having none other mean to keep the Kings majesty, his edictes, his
highness, ye estate of his croune, the authority of his estates, the life and
goods of an infinite number of his poor subjects, and principally the pure
service of god established in this realm by the authority of the King. The
importance of which things does so touch the said Princes heart and his
company, that foreseing the horrible calamity and desolation that might happen
to this realm, and that all France should bathe in his own blood, if their
ennemies might continue the murders and cruelties which they have exercised
these.v. months, they all determine to let for no pain, to establishe the
quietness of this realm, but to ve^ter their lives, to assure the lives of so
many good, and faithful subjects and servants of ye king. And are not
hindered but rather encouraged by that pernicious judgment of rebellion: the
which they protest not to hold as judgment, but slander practyzed and set
forth by their enemies. So that withstanding it, they mean not to wtstande
the will of the King, or any judgment given forth by a court of parliamente
lawfully assembled: but a violence, force, oppression and inuading of their
goods and lives, by the Kings enemies and theirs. The said Prince desires not
only all those of this realm which ought to esteem the Kings service, but
also all strange Princes which love equity and justice, to wtstande with him
so violent oppression made to a young King: whose great virtues already shini^g
in him, give certain hope, yt being come to age, he will acknowledge the service
and succor which has been done to him, in his great and urgent necessity. And
namely ye said Prince desires al strangers, as well Almaines as Switsers,
that are come into this realm, and do aid his enemies, that they remember the
title of equity, the memory whereof has at all times honored their aunceters:
yt they will not suffer such reproach to light on them, as that they have
fought for an evil cause, against a good cause: for ye enemies of the king,
against his faithful subjects: for Princes ye be but strangers, against a
Prince of the blood of this croune: for ye favorers of the Pope and ye Church
of Rome, against those which profess the Gospel of our lord Jesus Christ.
And herein the said Prince, caleth before the judgment seat of god ye
consciences of ye said strangers, which profess ye gospel, to take heed that
they be not cause that ye said gospel be banished out of this poor kingdom,
and yt all they which profess the same, be spoiled and murdered. He prays
them also to consider, yt his ennemies whatsoever they speak of rebellion,
assail him nevertheless for none other cause, but for that following the edict
of the king, he mayntayneth the pure preching of the word of god. So the said
strangers ought to preuente, (that ye ennemies of their religion and of ye
Princes and his companies) should think in mockage (as they already do) yt
they have begiled the^: and have brought to pass by their practices, that
their own country me^ which maintain ye gospel, are come to fight against
them in France. Furthermore ye said Prince prays them to consider what will
follow of this matter: least if the ennemies overcome the gospellers in this
realm, that their enterprise should stretch out beyond ye Ryne, and so they
themselves may be assailed in their houses, according to the confederacy which
they have made with ye Pope and diverse other strange Princes. And though
hitherto ye said Prince has deferred to call any strau^ges to the succor of
the king, and of them which it has pleased him to permyt to live according to
the reformation of the gospel, nevertheless seeing yt his ennemies have begone
to call them in their evil cause, he protests yt herafter he will not let to
use their aid for the maintenance of his right. And so much the rather because
he is assured, that the conservation of the king and of this realm, is joined
with the conservation of his innocency.

Whereupon forasmuchas such war, which kyndleth daily more and more, can not
but bring great calamities with it, the said Prince and his company protest
before God and man not to be guilty therein, but they which have been the
mouers and authors thereof. To ye end that ye blame of all the euels and
inconuenie^ces of this present war, may redou^de upon their ennemies which are
the beginning and cause thereof.

Finally the said Prince wills and desires, yt this present protestation may
serve also to confirm the associatio^ which is between him and ye Princes
Lords, gentlemen and other, which follow him, and shall hereafter follow. To
who^ the said Prince promyseth, yt as he has this honor to be their head, and
seeing yt all the reformed Churches of this realm have thrown themselves into
his arms to conserve the^ according to ye kings edicte, against their
adversaries and enemies of this croune: he will be ye first yt shall give his
life and his goods, yt the service of god may be established in his purity,
those which profess it maintained, the king set again at his full liberty,
his ennemies driven away, and his counsel restored according to the laws and
customs of this realm: and namely the last request of the estates.

Likewise ye said Prince exhorts and prays al his company to march with him
foot by foot in ye execution of so good and holy an enterprise, having respect
to ye righteousness of the cause, and putting al their force in ye strength of
god: so ye being certain yt fighting for the advancement of his glory, the
releuing of his Churches, the conseruatio^ of their king, and the quietness of
their country; they shall feel the assistaunce and succor of God. Whom ye said
Prince and his company most heartily besecheth to take in hand ye defense of
their cause and for this effect to sit in throne of his justice, before ye
which they present the horrible blasphemies spued out by their ennemies
against his majesty, the cruelty which they use against his Churchs, the
blood of so many innoce^ts which they have spilt, and their bloody co^spiracies
and damnable enterpryses, against his glory and ye life of his children and
servants. So that receiving into his protection his poor people and those
which maintain them, he may place his power, justice, and wisdom, against
the boldness, iniquity, and subtle devises of such as assail them, and
that so by the delyueraunce of his, he make manifest to all the world, that
he is the succoure of the oppressed, the preserver of his Church, and the
judge of his ennemies.

Given at Orleance the 8. of August. Anno. 1562. Jews of Bourbon.


