THE ORDER OF ORTHOGRAPHIE:

OR, Sixty six Rules shortly directing to the true writing, speaking, and
pronouncing the English Tongue.

Necessary for all sorts, for want whereof Strangers blame our English Tongue
of difficulty: many of our own Nation speak it corruptly, many write it
falsely, and many are discouraged from learning to write it; and others that
can write are ashamed to write to their best friends.

LONDON, Imprinted by Augustine Mathews for William Lee, and are to be sold at
his shop in Fleet street, at the sign of the Golden Buck, near Seriants
Inn. 1622.

To the Reader.
REader,
the sundry complaints that I have heard of many, and the great offers, that
they would give much, so they could write English truly, and read it
distinctly and perfectly; has made me venture into the Press, and to publish
for thy benefit this little Book; which though it contain much in effect, yet I
have contrived into this small Octauo, that thereby I might become a sociable
companion for every man's pocket; and therefore I have shut out all verses in
laudem Authoris, and tedious Dedicatories, which now a days will cost the
buyer as much as the Book it self. And if I find my endeavor accepted, I
shall endeavor to continue worthy thy friendship.

Thine as thou use me, IOS. PRAT.

THE ORDER OF ORTHOGRAPHY.
1 THe first and least thing in writing, is a Point or tittle, which is marked
thus (.) without length or breadth.

2 By artificial extention or drawing forth of which, enlarging the form is
made a Letter, as a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, k.

3 The ordinary number of Letters is four and twenty.

4 The Letters are two sorts, the one called Vowels, and the other Consonants.

5 These five, a, e, i, o, u, are Vowels, all the rest are Consonants.

6 A Vowell makes a full and perfect sound of it self. A Consonant, or diverse
Consonants without a Vowell, spell not any thing.

7 A Syllable is a perfect sound made of so many letters as are speld or
sounded together in a word, as in this word la-men-ta-ti-on you see are five
syllables.

8 Any of the five vowels will make a syllable alone; as in these words,
amongst e-vils I-dolatrie o-verthroweth v-nitie.

9 When two vowels come together in one syllable, it makes a sound called a
dipthong or double sound, which must not be divided, but sounded together; and
they are in number eight, which are these, ai, ei, oi, au, eu, ou, oo, ee, as
in these words: Faith, height, moist, taught, neuter, ought, foot, feet.

10 There are two Latin dipthongs used in English writing, ae and oe, as
Aeneas, Oedipus, which you must sound as if they were written with E only, as
Eneas, Edipus; not Aneas, Odipus.

11 Aa and ao make no dipthongs, and therefore must be divided when they are
found in a word, as Ba-al, Na-omy.

12 J or V coming before another vowell in the beginning of a word or syllable
make no dipthongs, but changing their sound are turned into Consonants, as in
these and the like, James, Jeremy, Jupiter, vain, verily, viper, vocation.

13 Ie has the sound of ee dipthong in these and the like words, chief,
Shriefe, brief, siege, shield, field, atchieue, etc.

14 Vi in these and the like words, is no dipthong, but is pronounced like u
long, as suite, fruit, brute, bruise, sound them as lute, suit, confute.

13 Y is a Greek vowell, and naturally ought to be used but in words borrowed
of the Greeks, as hypocrite, mystical: yet it is used for i vowell,
especially if the syllable following begin with a vowell, as saying, flying;
also in words ending in ie, as deny, or deny, leaving out e, and ordinarily in
words of one syllable, as by, thy, why; not bie, thie, why.

16 When y begins a word, it it made a Consonant, as yet, yet, your, which
differ in sound from ies, iet, iour.

17 Observe that th has two manner of sounds, as you may observe in these
words the, thief, thy, thigh, thine, thin, and many other.

18 Ca, co, cu, sound always like ka, ko, ku, bu; but ce, ci, like se, si.

19 Ph is sounded always like f, as Physic, Prophet, Philosophy, Phillip.

20 Ga, go, gu, keep always one and the same sound; but ge and gi change, as
agent, get, giddie, Giles, but there is no certain rule found to know when to
change the sound.

21 This sound si, may be expressed five diverse ways, as si, ci, sci, xi, and
ti.

22 ti before a vowell, ordinarily spells si, as in these words affection,
action.

23 If s come before it, it keeps the ordinary sound, as question, digestion.

24 Some words by changing their manner of writing, change also their
signification and yet not their sound, as. A Prophet, much profit. The Sun, a
Son. He heard, it is hard. The Reign of a King. The rain that falls. The
reine of a bridle. He ought to do it often.


25 Some words are written with one and the same letters, and yet are different
in signification, as The heart of a Man. A beast called an Heart. A Foul in the
air. Foul weather. Thou art skillful in Art. He may live till May.


26 Sometime the same writing is diversely sounded, as to use, an use, an abuse,
to abuse: where s is sounded also like z, amassed which differs from chased.

27 Ow is likewise diversely sounded, as know how a bow to bow.

28 Some words are written diversely, and yet change not their sound, nor
signification, as Broune, or Brown.

29 Some change both the writing and sound, and yet not the sense, as a
bottell, or botle.

30 Words ending in or, are indifferently written with our; as honor, honor;
savor, favor; except dor, for, nor, abhor, etc.

31 Mark for your next rule what Consonants follow one another in the
beginning of a word, as after, b will follow only l or r, as bla, bre; for bsa,
or the like, will spell nothing.

32 The Consonants that will follow one another in the beginning of a word are
these, bl, br, cl, cr, ch, dr, dw, fl, fr, gh, gl, gr, gn, kn, pl, pr, ph, ps,
sc, scr, sh, shr, sk, st, sm, sn, sp, spl, spr, sq, st, str, sw, tr, th, thr,
tw, wh, wr.

Here mark that with those letters that you cannot begin a word, you must not
begin a syllable.

33 Mark next those words and syllables that are shortened in English writing
by a stroke over the head, for m or n, as a^ for am or an, co^ for com or con;
and sometimes a word is shortened by leaving out e in the last syllable, as
hanged for hanged: other abreuiations also there are, as yt for that, you for
thou, ye for the, with for with, wc for which, etc. for and so forth.

34 The use of this letter e when it is not sounded in the end of a word is
diverse.

35 First it is used rather for beauty then any necessity after i in the end
of a word, as bie, nor by; but not after y as by.

36 Secondly, it is used to draw the syllable long, as may be seen by the
difference between these words man and mane, mill and mile, hid and hide.

37 Thirdly, it both draws the syllable long, and changes the sound of these
letters c, u, g, as pac is sounded like pak, but pace like pase; so rag, rage,
hau, have, and if d be put before g, the syllable is pronounced short as ledge,
lodge, etc.

37 For more distinct pronunciation mark that which the Gramarians call
accent, which is the lifting up of the voice higher in one syllable then in
another, as to offer incense, to incense or provoke.

38 Thus much for letters and syllables, and their pronunciation: now for the
dividing of long words of many syllebles, the general rule is ordinarily to
mark how many vowels a word has, so many syllables it has, as
re-ge-ne-ra-ti-on.

39 First, except such words where e is little or not at all pronounced in the
end of the word, as mad, made, hide, etc.

40 Secondly dipthongs, as vain, may, our.

41 Thirdly, words ending in es, as James, hones, names, hides.

42 Lastly, after qu and g, as quick languag^.

43 Mark next for your division of words, if you have two vowels come
together, and both fully pronounced, you must put the first to the former
syllable, and the next to the latter, as auoy-ance, tri-umph, mutu-all.

44 But here take heed of dividing the vowels ea, as some corruptly do,
pronouncing Whe-at, me-at, be-ans, pe-ase, for Wheat, mea^, beans, pease.

45 When the middle Consonant is doubled, divide them as com-mon, com-mand,
let-ter, ac-cord.

46 Except they be needlessly doubled in words of the plural number, as plumms
for plums, hills for hills.

47 Thus much for division of words and syllables: for your more distinct
writing and reading, observe those marks called stays or stops in reading,
which are three.

48 The first betokens a small stay and is called a Comma, and marked thus (,)

49 The second shows a longer stay, and is called a Colon, and is thus marked
(:)

The third is marked thus (.) with one point, and shows a full and perfect
stop or stay, as if the sentence were ended, and it is named a Period.

51 When a question is asked in writing, it is noted with this mark (?) called
an Interogation.

52 When some words may be left out of a sentence, and yet the sense perfect,
it is marked thus () and called a Parenthesis, as suffer me (I pray you) a
little while.

53 When a word ends, and the next begins with a vowell, the ending vowell
is sometime left out, and both the words joined together, as the intent for the
intent, which exactly should be written with a mark called Apostrophu^ thus,
the intent.

54 For your more commendable writing, begin always the Sentence with a great
letter; and likewise the names of Persons, Places, and Times, as Robert,
London, April. Likewise, when you put a letter for a word, as B. for Bishop, L.
for Lord; and ordinarily when you put a letter for a number, as V. for five, X.
for ten L. for fifty, C. for an hundred, D. for five hundred, M. for a
Thousand.

55 Next take heed of the barbarous speech of the common people, as of writing
or pronouncing yarbs for herbs, stompe for stamp, Dater for Daughter, twonty
for twenty, Feale and Fineger for Veale and Vinegar, and such like.

56 Mark further that some letters must be written, but not pronounced in some
words,

57 As C. ordinarily when it comes before k, is not pronounced, as back,
pack, Rock, where it only makes the syllable short.

58 G is not pronounced in sign, resign, phlegm, sovereign.

59 H in Ghost, John; p in receipt, nor s in Isle, and many such like which you
must mark by reading with observation.

60 Note that all words that may have this Article a or the put before them,
are called Nounes, or names of things, as a Man the house.

61 And whereas I spoke before of words of the plural number, note that in
Nounes there be two numbers, the single or singular number, which speaks but
of one, as a Man, the House, a Tree, and such like.

And the plural which speaks of more then one, as houses, men, trees.

62 The plural number is made by putting s to the singular, as one pot, many
pots; a Jewel, two Jewels.

63 Except words ending in fe which make the plural by changing into ves, as
wife, wives; knife, knives; Calfe, Calves.

64 Some plurals vary or change from all rule, as a man, two men, a brother,
brethren, so Oxen, teeth, feet, kine, lice, mice.

And some that make the singular and the plural all one, as a sheep, two
sheep, one mile, twenty mile.

65 The singular and the plural have ordinarily syllables alike, except words
ending in ce, ch, g, dg, s, or sh, as graces, places, Churches, cages, hedges,
roses, fishes.

66 Note last of all when the Article a or my come before a word beginning with
a vowell, you must change a into an, and my into mine; as an Ox, mine or thine
Ox.

FINIS.

