Numb. 49.

THE ^^NTINVATION (...) the Foreign Avisoes for two weeks last past,
containing many very remarkable Passages of Germany, France, Spain, Italy,
Sweden, the Low Countries, and other parts of the World.

Bannier demanded Quarter for three Months in Saxony, which puts the
Country to great extremity.

The treaty about the Prince Palatine and Duke of Bavaria is deferred till
March.

The Swedish General Major Pfull does great harm to the Imperialists and
Saxons in Saxony.

The Dunkerkes have lately taken diverse French and Dutch Vessels richly laden.

General Bannier is suddenly risen, and by all appearance will visit the
Emperor at Ratisbone very shortly.

Bainniers Letter and account of all his Winter Actions.

The Rebellion and Revolt of Catalonia, and Portugal continues, and the
discontent of Naples daily increases.

(...) ^anuary, 23. 1640. (...) at St. Austins gate.

THE Foreign Avisoes continued, etc. for two Weeks last past. Containing
(besides these following particula^s) many extraordinary passages.
From Voytland the 7. 17. of December.
IN these parts we had some rest for diverse months, but now we are like to be
again over-runne and ruinated by both Armies, because all the Imperial
forces, which were gone already to their Winterquarters, have received express
order from Ratisbone to march toward Bohemia; whereof 6. Regiments of foot
and 4. Regiments of horse lying enquartered about Swinefurt, are broke up
already whilst General Bannier is marching forward with great speed, the
Swedish General Major demands quarter for three months in Saxony for his
troops, and besides great sums of money of all the Cities in Saxony, and yet
it is to be feared, when those sums shall be paid, that General Bannier
(who is likewise coming hitherwards with 6000 horse and 12000 foot) will
demand as much or more which will be the utter undoing of these Countries. The
said Gen: Bannier has left 6000 men on the River of Wesar, for the most part
enquartered in the County of Shaumburg, what way he will take with his army is
not known as yet, some say he will march toward Egra, some toward Bohemia to
prevent the Imperialists, and to cut off the passage from them, and to make his
forces the more willing to incommodate the Imperialists with this Wintermarch,
he has promised to give 3 months pay unto every soldier for the
Winterquarter.

Ratisbone the 8. 18. of December.
Here are daily expected the Luneburgish and Hessish Ambassadors, and some do
assure that as soon as they shall be arrived, the treaty of peace, which has
been put aside for a time, by reason of the enquartering of the Imperial
Army, shall be reassumed, mean while the Imperial cities are much afraid, that
in case the Princes of the Empire, which are very liberal in their promises,
do condescend to great contributions, the payment will afterward be laid upon
the said cities necks, and the Princes shift it off from themselves: The
particular treaty so much spoken of but not believed, betwixt both the
Palatinate and Bavarian houses, is said to be delayed and appointed for the
month of March; The truth will appear with the time.

Brunswick the 8. 18. of Decmeber.
In these Countries we have now again the Wars, because the city of
Wolffenbuttle is blocked up by the Luneburgish forces and the trained Bands,
and with Sconces and Redouts, that no body can more get in or out to fetch or
carry in the contribution, and the report goes here for certain, that the
Duke of Luneburg to make the besieged the sooner to yield, is resolved to
change his blocking up into a siege, to which end, some Artillery is to be
brought before it to cast Grenades and fireballs into it. Diverse reformed
Officers about 20 in number for fear to be cooped up in the said city did
attempt and endeavor to break thorough, but they were apprehended by the
Luneburgish trained Bands and some of them were slain and the rest taken
prisoners, the said trained Bands being very ready forward to revenge the harm
and loss, which they suffered by the Imperial garrison of the said city, and
to be free themselves at last of such ill neighbors.

Basel the 9. 19. of December.
On Sunday last Baron de Oissen ville took out of all garrisons as many as
could be spared, and marched toward the French County to succor and releeve
there a Castle, in which lies a French garrison, and is besieged by 1500
Burgundians. The Imperial Colonel Keller, is come back again from Inspruck
to Constance, and has reduced the rest of the Spanish troops into one company
of horse and two Companies of foot, and cashiered for the most part the
Colonels, Lieutenant Colonels, together with the rest of other Officers, of
all those new leavied forces, there remains no more but 150 horse, and 400
foot, which are gone now to their Winterquarter, and Colonel Keller has the
command over them.

Leipzigk the 11. 21. of December.
The 5. 15. of this month the Swedish General Major Pfull with his troops,
having presented himself before the Castle of this city, is since marched away
toward Rochlitz, leaving in Grimme one Regiment for garrison. The 7, 17. of
this month the Swedish troops mastered the outworkes before the Castle of
Heldrungen, whereupon the Governor in the Castle desired immediately to come to
a composition, and yielded upon discretion standing to the mercy of the Swedes,
who (against their own expectation) took the strong Castle without y^ loss of
one soul dier, the Swedes have likewise besieged the castle of Wendelstein,
which lies upon a high Hill. In this city we have for a garrison 1000
musketeers and some 100 horse, and we are also well provided with victuals and
ammunition.

Leipzigk the 13. 23. of December.
The Swedish General Mayor Pfull with his troops has been about Dresden,
Meissen and Oshatz, where he caused all Market Towns, Villages and Noblemens
houses to be pilladged and all the cattle and horses to be driven away, and
the city of Meyssen and Oshatz he forced to pay a great ransom. Now he is
marching toward Koditz and Bornaw and drives along with him some 1000 heads of
cattle and horses of the city of Torgaw, he demanded likewise a great ransom.
We receive also advise, that he is breaking up with all his forces to join
with General Banniers army, some thinking, that General Bannier will march
toward Franconia, others are of opinion, that he will march toward Egra and
the upper Palatinate, this is certain, that Bannier carries along with him
great store of fireworkes, which makes men to presuppose that he has a great
design in hand.

Franckford the 14. 24. of December.
As for news we have but little to write from hence, the Weymarish army is
mustered, and found stronger, then it was thought, whereof some Regiments are
already come again into the Wetteraw, there taking some contributions yet due.
What other design they have is not known as yet. The city of Creutznach has
been kept blocked up from a far off for a time by the Imperialists, but now
the Imperialists are departed from (...) every man both of horse and foot as
well common soldiers as Officers should receive every month, and that they
should receive their pay half in money, and the other half in provision, as
likewise that every horseman should daily receive for every horse six pounds
of Oats, 10. pounds of Hay, and three bundels of straw.

Paris the 17. 27. of December.
It is written from diverse parts, that Prince Thomas has fully agreed with the
Princess of Savoy, and that thereupon the French Army went presently to field,
and took by a stratageme the City of Ast, and batters now the Castle: If the
report of the accommodation be true. The said Prince Thomas will be expected
here in a short time. General Major Erlach Governor of Bryssack is yet here
expecting order and commission to leavy four Regiments of horse and six
Regiments of foot.

Vlussingen the 17. 27. of December.
All our men of War here are preset to go to Sea with all speed and this day
six ships are to go to Sea from hence and 2. from Ter veer under the command
of our Vice. Admiral John Everts. The Dunkerck men of War are for the most
part in the Sea, if they meet one another, bloody blows will fall out betwixt
them.

Erfurd the 16. 26. December.
This afternoon General Bannier arrived here in person accompanied by many
chief Cavalliers, who is to continue here for some few days, and then to
follow his Army which is marching toward Misnia, whether he will assault one
place or other, or what his design is, is not yet known.

From the River of Rhyne the 19. 29. of December.
Three Imperial Regiments of horse, and one of foot of Fieldmarshall Hatzfeld
his forces, enquartered about the city of Collen and in the country of Gulick,
use the Inhabitants most cruelly, they take from them all their provision,
pulled down the houses, some they burn down, break down their baking
Ovens, and ruinate the Mils, in a word, what the enemies have heretofore
spared, is now fully ruinated by our friends, we hoped every day, that they
would depart and pass the River of Rhyne. The Hessens in Ratverwald strengthen
themselves very much, and fetch great contributions out of the Bishopric of
Collen. At Collen the Drum is beaten for General Mayor Lamboy, who takes up
fresh soldiers to make his Regiments complete, but they can get but very few,
that are willing to serve.

The Imperial General Major Saradetzky at the command of the Electour of
Collen, has put a garrison into Wevelkoven, but presently after, he pillaged
the same, and forsook it again, and marched with two Regiments of horse and
two Regiments of foot toward Gladbeck to besiege the same place, which is
guarded by four companies of foot of the Duke of Newburg his forces.

Erfurd the 19. 29. of December.
The Castle of Windelstein was forced to yield unto the Swedes upon discretion,
which is burned down to the ground, the report goes also, that the Hessish
forces have taken again by a Stratageme the city of Friedwald, the castle of
Weissenfels is likewise surrendered unto the the Swedes together with the Castle
of Moritzburg at Hall, that the Swedes have now free passage again there over
the River of Saala.

The 16. 26. of this month the Weymarish Army under the command of Conte de
Guebrian, Fieldmarshall Shmitherger, General Major Tupadell are likewise
passed by this city, and followed Genesis Banniers Army, and at this instant we
receive advertisement, that Genesis Bannier is risen with his Army from Butstat
and arrived this day at Jena, and that he intends totake his way toward
Altenburg. The Swedes themselves give out, that they are to march toward the
upper Palatinat^ or Egra, General Banniers Army together with the Weymarish
Army consists of 50. Regiments of horse and 16. Brigads of foot in all 28600
strong, and the report goes, that Colonel Rosa with his troops is likewise to
follow the said Army through this Country.

General Bannier marches forward very speedily by this cold and frosty
weather to put his design in to execution, and being he carries along with
him a great Artillery, many are of opinion, that h^e will fall upon the City of
Leipzigh, which time will show, He has been sick here for some few days,
but now svery well again and follows the Army. Before Wolffenbuttle is
arrived a Regiment of horse more, and two Regiments of foore and 2000 soldiers
of the Hessish forces more are daily expected before it, the Duke of Luneburg
continues still to make great preparations to assault the said city by force,
being resolved to have the place though he should all burn it before.

Antwerpe the 19. 29. of December.
From Lions is written, that the 4, of this month are passed through the said
city in the name of the States and Peers in Catalonia three Deputies, one from
the Clergy, one from the Nobility and one from the commons, which are going to
Paris to treat of weighty matters with the French King: The said King is said
to be resolved to aid and assist the Catalonians against the next spring with
12000 men both of horse and foot, and with them shall join 20000 Catalonians,
which are every day trained and exercised.

From Millaine of the 2. 12. of this month is written that great forces are
leavied in the said Dukedom for the King of Spain.

The French in Piemont enlarge daily their quarters as far as Cuneo,
wherefore the Cardinal of Savoy has sent a Regiment of Switzers from Nizza to
Cuneo, to secure the same passage: At Legorne is arrived a ship; which came
from Catalonia with some passengers, many women and children, relating, that
the Duke of Cordona, together with the Bishop of Tortosa, labor very hard to
moderate the differences betwixt the King of Spain and the Catalonians, but
seeing Monsieur de Plessis Bisanson has taken his residence in Catalonia in
the name of the King of France, there is but small hope of any agreement, and
the Catalonians continue to make great preparations for War. The Prince
Cardinal Infan^^ h^th chosen the Count of Isenburg to be Governor of
Diedenhoven, and Col: Metternich Governor of Tryer.

Collen the 19. 29. of December.
The Gallish Regiment which lay enquartered at Bretheim not far from
Creutznach to keep in the Weymarish garrison there, for fear of being
surprised, has forsaken Bretheim and is retired toward Meysenheim, in the
mean time the Weymarish in Creuznach have surprised the castle of
Waltbeckelheim, and found in it great store of corn and other provision. The
Weymarish Colonel Rosa has taken his quarter at Heuttenberg near Giessen.

From Nordlingen of the 10. 20. of this month is written, that Arch Duke
Leopold William, General Piccolomini and Marquis de Grana are in persons
there, the said city must monthly contribute unto them 20000 Florens, and
though they made their complaints to the said Arch Duke Leopold William, that
they were not able to raise such heavy taxations, but all the answer they
received was, that they shouldmake it known to the Jmperiall Counsel. The 6.
16. of this month the Luneburgish and Hessish Ambassadors arrived at
Ratisbone, what they treat now with them time will show. The Turks have done
again great harm in Hungary with burning, robbing, and carrying away
prisoners many Christians, wherefore the Emperor has sent an Express to
Constantinople to make complaints.

Collen the 20. 30. of December.
The Imperial Fieldmarshall Hatzfeld continues yet here, his horsemen are
enquartered in the Country of Gulick and hereabout the city, and do great
mischief, notwithstanding the Hessish troops straggle continually within two
leagues of this city, and no longer then yesterday they pillaged a Village
within two hours going of this City. In Holland great preparations for War
are made both by Sea and Land to give work next Spring to the Spaniards in
Flanders and Brabant, the like does the French King, who brings great forces
together to fall again (as is said) the next summer into the Country of
Artoys, and to send again another Army toward the River of Rhyne, and to
attempt some thing against the city of Mentz and Tryer.

Lower Saxony the 20. 30. of December.
The Duke of Longueville is arrived at Bremen, from thence he intends to go
from Holland and so for France, the report goes, that he has given order for
six thousand Suits of clothes to be made at Lubeck and Hamborough. The
blocking up of Wolffenbuttle is still continued, in the said City lies a strong
Imperial garrison. From all places is confirmed, that the Elector of
Brandenburg departed out of this life, at Coningsberg the first of December new
style, betwixt 6. and 7 of the clock in the evening, his Death will much
hinder and perhaps bring the new leavying of forces in Prussia to nothing. The
Brandenburgish troops, which were commanded toward the Lower Marquisate of
Brandenburg, are returned back again without any expedition, because they had
received intelligence, that the Luneburgish troops were marching thitherwards
to surprise them in their quarters.

Franckford the 21. 31. of December.
The Castle of Wendelstein is likewise surrendered to General Bannier, together
with the Castle of Weyssenfels, some Swedish parties are gone toward the
County of Henneberg to surprise the Imperialists, that lie enquartered there.
At this instant we receive advise out of Duringen, that General Bannier is
marching toward Dresden, and that he has taken along with him from Erfurd 10
great Mortar pieces and his whole Artillery.

Ratisbone the 23. of December, the 2. of January.
Here are preferred daily many complaints about the enquartered forces,
because they feel the burden almost in all places intolerable, which can now
not be remedied, in regard, that we must keep a watchful eye to the Enemies
actions, and we are forced to keep together the Forces as much as possibly can
be, for we cannot know as yet which way Bannier will take, who has received
of the circle of Lower Saxenie three or 400000 Florens, in lieu whereof he has
promised to remove the seat of War into the Emperors here ditary Countries.

Norimberg the 25. of December. the 4. of January.
The 3. Imperialists Regiments, which lay enquartered hereabout this city have
received order to break up, and to go toward Egra, to secure that place.
This day arrived here the foot post, which came from Newmarck in the upper
Palatinate, who bring news, that Gen: Bannier with the most part of his army
is arrived already about Hoff and Culumbach, which causes great terror and
fear in the upper Palatinate and Bavaria, many are of opinion, that Bannier
will directly march toward Ratisbone, whereby he will quickly make an end of
the Dyete there, it is reported that the King of Denmarck has sent a very
moving letter to the Emperor to persuade him to a peace, and that the treaty
betwixt the Princ Elector Palatine and the Duke of Bavaria may be taken in
hand, which he thought would be a great means to procure a firm peace in
Germany, but it is likewise reported that the Spanish golden arguments prevail
yet so much that most men are out of hope of any peace.

Amsterdam the 26. of December, the 5. of January.
Whereas the Hessens stragled continually with strong parties into the Country
of Liege, and carried away many Prisoners, which they made pay great ransomes;
therefore the Magistrates of Liege have summoned all their trained Bands and
mustered them, and have given a strict charge and command to give quarter to no
Hessish soldier, but kill as many as they could meet withal.

This week are arrived in the Vlie 150 sail of Ships, which came from the
East Countries and from Norway.

The last letters from Paris bring no other news, but that in Catalonia a hot
encounter has passed betwixt the French and Spaniards, the French having got
the better of the Spaniards in the beginning of the fight, and put them to
flight, they pursued with 800 horsemen after the Spaniards so far into the
Country, that they could not come back again, but were environed by the
Spaniards, dispierced and many of them slain.

The Portugals continue still in their Rebellion, and will yield in nothing to
the King of Spain.

At Barcellona the Catalonians have slain fourteen of the chiefest of the
Town, because they kept still correspondence with the King of Spain, and went
about to persuade the people to come to a composition with the said King.

The Prince Electour Palatine is safely arrived at Gluckstatt, and is now with
the King of Denmarck. (...)

Extract of a letter from Cassell of the last of December. 1640.
Although this winter weather (which proves exceeding cold in these parts)
seems fitter for consultations than for action, yet do the Commanders of the
Union go on in their designs and activitie, leaving for the Imperialists (if
they will take it) that part of consulting and providing what to do against
the Spring. Howsoever because I have as yet no extraordinary news (besides
the blocking up of Wolfenbuttle, and the marching of Bannier with his Army) of
action for you at this time: I will supply the want thereof by communicating to
you the copy of a letter written by General Bannier, dated at Erford the 25.
December. last 1640. saying thus:

Be pleased to understand, that on the 23. of November last I broke up with
mine Army from Pickenburg and am now here arrived: And having on the second of
this month had a conference at Duderstat with the French and Wymarian
Commanders, they thereupon took resolution and order with their Forces to march
on, and follow me. Concerning mine army, I can say (and thank God for it) that
the little rest, which the same has by my care enjoyed in those quarters I
provided for them in Westphalia, Brunswig and Luneburg, both my Cavallerie and
Infanterie has much been mended and restored, so that I am come again into
the field with much stronger and better Troops than I had before: whilst I am
advertised from diverse places by prisoners, that the enemies remain still in
an ill condition, and are now dispersed into their quarters. Therefore I am
resolved nothing to neglect, but observing and following my reason of war, to
take speedily my way toward those parts, where by the power and help of God I
hope to effect my designs: wherein, although I am not so presumptuous as to
despise or neglect the enemy; yet nevertheless I am resolved, in case he come
forth to stop, or hinder my endeavors and progress, upon any occasion that he
shall offer me, still to be ready and in a good posture to give him battle, and
to do my uttermost for the good Cause, wishing only and praying heartily,
that Almighty God by his hand do so conduct and prosper the arms of her
Majesty of Sweden, and all other Protestants, and so resist those of their
enemies, that at length we may attain the desired scope, namely, a firm
honest peace for all those that stand for the Gospel. The Forces of Brunswig,
Luneburg and Hessen, are at this time in their quarters in Westphalia,
Freesland, and other Dukedomes of their own for particular designs, which
nevertheless do conduce us in general. But I hope (according to their
promises) in case our enemies should again so increase against the future
Spring or Summer, that my army should grow inferior to theirs, our said
friends and allies will then again be ready to join, and march with us
together, as necessity shall require: that we may with a general resolution
get a general victory and honor together.

Thus much says Bannier, who since that time is arrived at Seitz, and gone
from thence to Altenburg, and so in Voitland, and the Wymarian Forces are two
leagues from him, at Newstat: Their march being said to go directly to the
upper Palatinate, and to visit the Diet at Ratisbone.

Genoa 8. 18. of December.
The Governor of Millaine, Marquis de Leganez, having expected a long time
moneys, promised for the payment of his Soldiers, but not sent, went himself
to Millaine to urge the sending thereof for fear of want thereof the five
thousand foot and two thousand horse, which are yetremaining of his army, might
perhaps change Master. Don Carolo de la Gatta is passed by this City, and gone
for Naples.

Lions 10. 20. of December.
The Catalonians have caused to be bought here armours for three thousand men,
because the Spaniards have now made an invasion into the County of Rousillion,
and burned down about Conflance three Market Towns, wherefore Monsieur
d'Espenan has desired of the Prince of Conde, who is at Narbona, a speedy
succor of some thousand men to oppose them.

Millaine the 16. 26. of December.
The French have sent again two thousand men to Cazall to change the French
Garrison there, wherefore the Spaniards reinforce likewise all the Garrisons
in the next neighboring places, thereabouts: The Catalonians cause all the
silver to be taken out of the Churches, and to be coined, to make a great
provision of money. In France they continue still to make great preparations
for war to go betimes into the field, and the French King is said to have
likewise renewed his league with the Crown of Sweden.

Naples the 14. 24. of December.
They are here laboring to take up many ships and galleyes for the service of
the King of Spain, but it seems that there wants either money or hearts. The
galleyes of Livorne are departed almost all out of this Harbor, craving leave
of the Viceroy of this Kingdom, that they might follow their own occasions,
which he granted: hereupon he has nominated the Counselor Capecelato an
able man to go forthwith upon Embassage to Madrid, to make remonstrance, as
well of the necessities, as of the dangerous state of this Kingdom, who is to
depart with the first opportunity in the galleyes of this Kingdom, that are
to carry some Infanterie into the Dukedom of Millaine: There departed not
long since three other galleyes of them laden with Soldiers, to srengthen the
Garrisons along the Seacoasts, which the King of Spain holds upon the
frontiers of Toscany.

The Viceroy of late carries himself more temperate and more pliable toward
the Gentry of this Kingdom, than formerly he had done, some fearing, others
hoping, that this his alteration of disposition comes too late.

The Duke of Laurenzana departs forthwith for Spain, to be employed against
the Catalonians: the Marquis of Toralto has been declared Governor of
Sabionette: They talk here of a Parliament General to be held in this
Kingdom occasioned by the unreasonable demands that are made of five Millions,
which if the Viceroy and other Officers shall press to levy; it is to be
feared, that the Catholic King will keep as few good subjects in this
Kingdom, as he has in Portugal or Catalonia.

From Dresden the 18. 28. of December.
The sixteenth of this instant month, the Swedish General Major Pfuel made
some turns about this City, whence he drove away a great number of Horse and
other Cattle, but in his retreat the Saxon Colonel Vngar made a sally out upon
him, and took prisoners some of his Soldiers, which were led into this City,
amongst whom was found one Horse Captain, and one Corporal, both of the
number of those that burned the village of Grumpach, whereupon our Electour
greatly incensed against them, caused to the number of nineteen, that were
condemned as Incendiaries, to be burned alive; the which execution was
appointed to be done as yesterday; but as the proverb says, Many things
happen between the cupp and the lipp, and as death many times comes
unexpected, so does sometimes life, for just as the Hangman was ready with his
linck flaming, and the said nineteen prisoners all fastened together with a
long iron chain, every man with a bundle of reeds set in a pitch caske
before him, and each two faggots behind him, and standing thus in this
dreadful posture, expecting every moment to feel the merciless rage of that
cruel element, having just ended their confession, the last work of men
leaving this world, behold two Trumpetters arrive from the Swedish General
Major Pfuel, who then approached very nigh with his Troops, which brought this
message from the said General Major, namely, that without mercy he would put
all to fire and sword, if his Soldiers were thus handled: This threatening
message caused our Electour to surcease this execution, and to send back the
condemned again to prison, which he scarce could find in his heart to do,
having taken a solemn oath, that he would cause all those, that should be
taken and proved Incendiaries, and burners of houses, to be burned alive, but
he was at last hereunto persuaded, through the entreaties and intercession of
his Lady the Electrice, and the other young Princes, and whole Council, who
apprehending the sequel of so extraordinary a punishment, saved the lives of
those prisoners.

Frankford the 18. 28. of December.
It is confirmed from all parts, that General Bannier with his Army is passed
the river of Saala, and that the Weymarish Army follows him, and that he
took his way not toward Leipzygk and Wittenberg, as some did write, but
directly toward Voitland the upper Palatinate, carrying along great store of
ammunition and Artillery of an hundred pieces. In Saxony and Misnia he has
left behind him General Major Pfuel with diverse Regiments, to keep the Saxon
Troops in awe, and to fetch in the contribution of the said Country, as also
to bring the rest of the Towns under the same contribution, so that Saxony
will be totally ruinated.

From the river of Rhyne the 19. 29. of December.
It is confirmed now, that the Hessish Troops have taken by a stratagem the
City of Friedwald, and made the Impetialists that lay in it, to take service
under them; they have also taken the castle of Terburg, where they made the
Imperialists to do the like. Field Marshall Hatzfels Troops, which had laid
for some few days together a siege before the City of Gladbach, have now
forsaken that siege, and are returned to their old quarters.

Erfurd the 18. 28. of December.
The other day I certified you, that the Swedish Army marched from hence
toward Genu, whom the Weymarish Army followed yesterday in like manner passing
by this City, the Regiments are reasonably strong, and the Horsemen all
bravely mounted, the Artillery was drawn by very fair and strong horses,
the said Army is in the mean time commanded by Colonel Ohei^^, and the Count
of Nassaw: Colonel Rosa with his Troops is to follow the Army to morrow, or
next day after: Yesterday a months pay was given to the said Weymarish Army,
and all dismounted Horsemen were mounted again. The French Troops are
commanded by Conte de Guebrian and the General Commissarie Chousy: Field
Marshall Shmitberger and General Major Tupadoll are yet here, the said
Shmitberger, we hear, is to command the Weymarish Army, as Lieutenant
General: Both Armies carry along with them upon Wagons a great number of
Boats, that they may pass any Rivers where they come. Of Banniers army were
told thirty eight Regiments of horse, and twelve Brigads of foot: of the
Weymarish army twelve Regiments of horse, and four Brigads of foot, which is
confirmed by this weeks Posts.

Franckford the 25. of December, the 4. of January.
Here were have no other news, but that the Weymarian troops, under Colonel
Rosa are gone after General Bannier, and from Basel they confirm, that Prince
Thomas of Savoy, is fully agreed with the French King, and expected at Paris
there to receive 400000 pound Turnois. It is also reported, that the Duke of
Parma stands likewise in a Treaty with the French King. But all this must yet
be confirmed before we can believe it.

Hamborough the 26. of December, the 5. of January.
The new levied forces, which Lieutenant General Arnheim, has taken up in
Poland and Prussia for the Emperors service, run all away, and of nine
thousand men, he has not left above one hundred men more: This levying has
cost a great sum of money, and comes all to nothing, so that Pomerania needs
now not to fear any invasion, which those new forces seemed to threaten.

The Duke of Luneburg makes yet great preparations, especially of fire-workes,
to assault next Spring the City of Wolffenbutle by force: The Imperial
Governor in it (Baron of Rustenburg) defends himself stoutly, and fortifies
the said place more and more, and is resolved to defend it to the last man; the
besieged sally daily forth with some troops.

From the River of Rhyne the 26. of December, the 5. of January.
The 28. 30. of December departed from Coesfield fifteen hundred Soldiers,
with many Scaling-Ladders, and other instruments: what their design is, is not
known.

In the Country of Beryk lie above one thousand Musketeers and fire locks,
with fix hundred Horsemen of the Holland forces: the report goes, that the
Imperial Field Marshall Hatzfeld will fall upon them, and force them to depart
from thence; his Troops lie yet before Gladbach: at Collen are made ready three
thousand suits of clothes for Hatzfelds Soldiers.

Erfurd the 26. of December, the 5. of January.
The Duke of Luneburg with his troops continues still the blocking up of
Wolffenbutle, and fortifies his quarters more and more before it: he has
likewise summoned in his Country a great number of Peasants, which as soon as
the great Frost shall be past, are to fortify the quarters on the side toward
Halberstat; diverse of his souldiets run away, because of the extreme cold
weather; in the mean time the besieged sally continually forth, and do some
harm to the Luneburgish.

The Swedish troops about two thousand strong, which lay enquartered in the
Bishopric of Halberstat, besieged some few days ago the City of Tangermund
on the River of Elve, belonging to the Elector of Brandenburg, the besieged,
after they had endured the battering of the Swedish Canons for some few hours,
yielded upon discretion, and the Brandenburgish soldiers, which have been
130. in number, were forced to take service under the Swedes. The King of
Denmark is now at Coldingen, and the Queen Dowager of Sweden at Gottorff, with
the Duke of Holstein.

The four and twentieth of this Month, General Bannier rose with his Army
from Newstat on the River of Orla, and marched toward Shlatz, where he
intended to keep his Christmasse: his forces we hear are arrived already about
Hoff, Wonsidle, and other places thereabouts, the report goes yet strong, that
he will march toward the upper Palatinate and Bavaria, some Regiments under
the command of General Pfuel he has left in Misnia to fetch in the
contribution.

Antwerp. the 26. of December, the 5. of January.
From Naples is written, that in the same Kingdom for the reinforcing of all
the Companies, a free releasement is published for all prisoners what fault
soever they have committed, with condition that they shall serve faithfully
under the King of Spains troops. The Vice-Royes son takes likewise up some
companies, and intends to put them under the command of Don Giofeppo Spagna;
all Millitary Officers serving under the King of Spain, are summoned to come
to Naples, to leavie with all speed some new Troops, because the they guard
those Frontiers more than ever they have done, especially all places on the Sea
costs of Toscanie, and they secure well the two Harbors Orbetello and
Portorallo belonging unto the King of Spain. At Naples are likewise mustered
twenty Companies, which are commanded by the Prince of Bizignano.

At Paris are now at this presens the Deputies of Catalonia, which treat with
the King of France as States of a free Republic: The siege before Tortosa is
still continued by the Catalonians. At Marseilles are made ready diverse Galleys
to transport four thousand Soldiers more to Catalonia.

From Italy is confirmed, that the French have taken the Castle of Ast, but the
City is yet defended by the Spaniards, and both parties shoot fiercely one
against another. It is confirmed (how true we know not) that Prince Thomas of
Savoy, is agreed with the French K. and is expected at Paris within few days;
and the Cardinal of Savoy is likewise treating his agreement with the French.
The Count of Harcourt is expected at Paris every hour; many Nobles and
Gentlemen are to meet him in the way.

From Spain is confirmed, that the Marquess de Terracusa has defeated some
Troops of the French and Catalonians, and afterward befeiged the City of
Terragona; some will say, that he has brought again the said City under the
King of Spains subjection.

From Lion of the 5. 15. of December. they write that the Catalonians and French
after many affaults, had taken the city of Tortosa, and that on both sides
were lost about 4000 men, amongst which was the Lieutenant of Monsieur
d'Espinan. They confirm also, that the common people at Barcellona have killed
diverse great men, which took yet the King of Spaines part, whereupon the
Castillians have fallen upon some Catalonians in Perpignano, pillaged their
houses, killed the men, and chased their wives and children stark naked out of
the City.

Collen the 27. of December. the 6. of January.
Field Marshall Hatzfeld his Troops, which lie hereabouts, intended to take
their quarter in the little city of Munch Gladbach, but a company of the Duke
of Newburg his Soldiers, which lies there in Garrison, has beaten off the
Imperialists by force; wherefore the Imperial Colonel Sparre, who lies at
Mulheim, is gone against it with three thousand men, but the besieged defend
themselves not withstanding stoutly, and with their shooting do great harm
amongst the Imperialists, and have killed already diverse high Officers, and
many common Soldiers. The Imperial Colonel, Count of Ridberg, who has
served these many years under the Emperor, died here in this City.

An Extract of a Letter from the Hague, the 31. of December. the 10. of Ian.
With the last letters from Emden, we have no other news, but that the Prince
Electour Palatine was yet there, from whence he intended to go to Gluckstat,
thinking that the King of Denmark was there, but understanding that the King
was at Coldingen, he resolved to go the next day after with Count Volmar, the
Kings natural son to Coldingen. We have in these parts such a frost, that
almost all the rivers are frozen over, so that men and horses can go over the
ice without danger.

Franckford the 3. 13. of January.
It is confirmed from all places, that General Bannier with the most part of
his Army is arrived about Hoffe and Plan, wherefore speedy order is given, that
nine Bavarian Regiments, and diverse other Imperial Regiments, which are
nearest at hand, shall march with all speed toward Erga, to secure that
passage, and to all other Regiments that lie enquartered here abouts, in the
Lower Palatinate, Wirtenberg, Franconia, Swaben, Mentz, and other parts, is
likewise given speedy order to draw together from all places, and make head
against General Bannier; but seeing the Imperial Soldiers have been so tired
out and weakened, they have no great mind to it, and are very unwilling to
forsake their quarters, especially in this cold and frosty weather, and
doubtless many will run away before they come to the Randevouz; and albeit the
Emperor sees himself now so weakened, and withal the whole Empire so wasted
and ruinated, and in a most miserable state and condition, yet notwithstanding
we hear not the least motion of any peace; but most men believe, that Bannier
when he comes now into Bavaria, will persuade them with stronger arguments to
change their minds.

An Extract of a Letter from Norimberg, the 1. 11. of January.
It is most certain, that General Bannier is passed with his whole Army by
Hoffe and Plan, himself in person has been in the strong Fort and Castle of
Pleissenberg near Culinbach, where he left his Lady, and himself follows
the Army, being above 30000 strong: no question but he has some great design
in hand, because he makes such haste in his march. The King of Denmark having
tried all means, and sent sundry letters to the Imperial Diet held at
Ratisbone, to persuade the Emperor, States and Peers (if it were possible) to
conclude an universal peace thorowout the whole Empire, but having understood
now, that the Protestant States and Peers there could not prevail with the
Emperor and Prelates, that a constant peace might be concluded, has sent
another to the Protestant States and Peers, wherein he intimated unto them,
that in case the said Prelates would continue to stand thus upon their own
heads, and not conclude a peace, they would force him to take another
resolution, and to join again with his old Confederates, to try whether they
jointly could procure what hitherto has been refused: The Emperor and
Prelates having heard of that letter, used the Protestant States and Peers
more kindly than formerly, and we hope that this will moderate matters so,
that we shall again hear of some proposition for a peace. At the conclusion
of this letter we receive certain advise, that General Bannier has divided
his Army into three parts, one part whereof he has commanded toward Egra,
which City is already said to be taken by the Swedes; another part he has
commanded toward the upper Palatinate, some Troops whereof have been a
Gnadenberg, four Germane miles from this City of Norimberg, where they
pillaged a Cloister; the third part he has commanded toward Franconia, to
hinder the Imperial Forces of their conjunction, which are summoned to draw
together from all parts, though the frost be never so great, and they never so
unwilling to march in this cold weather, and in so unseasonable a time, having
hardly recovered themselves a little since the last march, which had wearied
and tired them out so much: It is certain, that this unexpected and speedy
coming of General Ba^nier, causes a great alteration and confusion amongst
the Imperialists, that they do scarce know what to do.

With the last letters from France they write (but how certainly we know not)
that the Pope has put forth in print two Bulls, in one whereof he confirms
and establishes the new crowned King of Portugal in his Throne and
government: In the other he threateneth all those that shall offer the said
new King in his reign and government, with excommunication. They write also
from thence, that a great stir and confusion is likewise in Castillia, and
other Kingdoms of Spain, which the Duke of Medina being borne of the Spanish
blood lays claim to, pretending to have proper right to it, as if they would
have no King more of the Germane, but only of the Spanish blood. The Imperial
General, John de Werth, who was detained prisoner at Paris a great while, is
now sent from thence to Nancy, to be exchanged for Field Marshall Gustavus
Horn, who comes from Ingolstat. In holland are taken up for the French King
some thousand Soldiers, where or which way they shall be employed, the next
Spring we shall hear in time. The loss which the French had in Catalonia is
likewise confirmed from Paris, and that their Lieutenant General was taken
prisoner, and sent (after promise to bear no more arms against Spain) to
Biscay.

FINIS.
Jan. 19.
Imprim^ licet.

G R. Weckerlin.


