The 27. of August. MANSFEILDS ARRIVAL IN THE DVKEDOME of BRABANT, and is
already come on this side Bruxelles, Burning, Spoiling, and Ransoming the
Country.

Also Gonzales coming toward him with great Forces, with the rest of their
Proceedings.

With the destruction of Spinola's Forces before BERGHEN op ZOOM; As also the
marching of the English Forces of the Regiment of the Lord VAVS from Antwerpe
to Bergen, with the number of them.

Likewise, a true Relation of the Proceedings and Circumstances, touching the
Royal Coronation of the most illustrious, most mighty Princess, Lady
Eleonora, Empress of Rome, Queen of Hungaria, Arch-dutches of Austria, and
Duchess of Mantua.

Moreover, the strait Besieging of Mamora by the Hollanders, with the invasion
made by the Protestant Grisons upon the Country of Tyro^^e, and the obtaining
of great store of Cattle.

Lastly, the courageous Sally made by the Garrisons in Glatts, upon the
Emperialls; with the delivering up of Hagenaw to Leopoldus; As also
Klingenbergh to the Emperor.

LONDON Printed by I.D. for Nicholas Bourne and Thomas Archer, and are to be
sold at their Shops at the Exchange, and in Pope's Head Palace. 1622.

MANSFEILDS ARRIVAL IN THE DVKEDOME OF BRABANT, and is already come on this
side Bruxells, Burning, Spoiling, and Ransoming the Country.
From Rome the 16. of July.
FRom Constantinople is written, that the Spahie commit daily great
insolences, and diverse murders, and that lately there were sundry great
persons put in prison, looking daily for more, which are likely to take an ill
end. The great Turk, with some of his principal officers labor hard to take
the matter up, and to bring all to quietness, and to the same effect, he goes
many times openly by water to recreate himself also, and shows great
liberality, by throwing of coin amongst the people.

The Astronomers and South-sayers do Prognosticate great shedding of blood in
the Moon of Haban (as they call the same) and begins in June. The Jews
likewise being much threatened, do hide their goods.

The King of Spain has granted his brother the Cardniall of Toledo, to keep
a Court, and has appointed for him six principal officers, eight grooms,
and made the Marquis of Esse his Stuward. There are made over for Flanders
400000. Crowns. And for Millane 100000. Crowns.

The Marquis Pinello, walking with a Knight, and his men, through the City of
Naples, one accompanied with a Lay Friar came to them, and would have shot the
Knight with a Pistole, but he mis-tooke his mark and escaped, but the Lay
Friar was taken by the servants of the said Marquis, and being carried into the
Palace of the Popes Nuncio, he sent presently diverse officers to his Sell,
where they found one Paulus Ambrosius of Cremona, which likewise being an enemy
unto the said Marquis, was apprehended. And they found there instruments fit
for thirty persons to coin withal. The lay brother, offers to reveal great
matters, if they will save his life.

From Hagenaw in Alsatia the 23. of July.
This day is our garrison of Count Mansfeild departed quite from hence, to
join with his Army, having taken certain men of note and ability, as
likewise some rich Jews, and desire 120000 Ducats for their ransom.

By Letters of the twenty six, from the same Town is written in this manner.
We hoped after the departure of Mansfeilds forces to live a little at rest, but
we have gotten a new garrison of the Archduke Leopoldus, and though we
suffered them peaceably to come in, yet we fear they will take from us what
is leaft by the former.

From Rome the 23. of July. The Viceroy of Naples, has dismissed the soldiers
that were in the Gallyes of the Pope, sailing to Messina.

Likewise the Counsel is agreed by consent of the King of Spain, with the
Ambassador of Venice, The Ship called the Moon, taken the last year, with
all the wares that were in the same; and have begun to do it already, but
many pieces of cloth are spoiled, and the things lost, the Duke of Ossuna is
to make good.

The Duke of Modena, has resigned his Government unto his eldest Son, and
prohibited the wearing of Pistols, upon pain of death, with many other things.

The Duke of Savoy has sent one of his Secretaries toward Valisuna, to leavie
certain Companies of Soldiers: At the other side the Governor of Casal in
Montferat has dispatched twenty thousand men toward Trino, to raise certain
Forts in those places, and increased the Garrison of Casal aforesaid.

There are likewise seen certain Horse of the Duke of Savoy upon the Fronters
of Vorcelli.

From Avignon are marched eight hundred Soldiers, with eight Pieces of
Ordinance toward Languedoc, against the Protestants, and the King has
besieged Nimes, with the same.

The Duke of Guyse, has commanded at Marsilia certain Galleys, and Ships, to
be made ready against the Rochellers. Don Octavio di Arragona, is sailed from
Sicilia, with 7. galleys against the Turks.

We understand here, that a Turkish Basshaw, of the late strangled Turkish
Emperor, being twenty Galleys strong, is joined with the Cossacks near the
black Sea: which combining together, do great hurt unto the Turks, and rob
them as far as Adrianople.

From Venice, the 22. of July.
The Duke of Mantua, has 3000. foot, and 600. horse in readiness, which are
to be sent to the fronters of Monferat, and he gets daily more aid from
Florence, being the great Duke of Florence, appointed by the King of Spain, to
appease all commotions of Italy, to which purpose he is to maintain 4000.
men, and the Duke of Vrbino, as likewise he of Parma, every one 3000. men, in
time of war.

From Venice, the 29. of July.
The Grisons having recovered Engadine, are passed the Mountains, and have
invaded the County of Tyroll, and driven a great number of Cattle from
thence; whereupon the Archduke Leapoldus prepares to resist them.

The Governor of Millane, has promised pardon to the Spanish forces; that are
fled from Veltoline, if they will be enrolled again within a fortnight, the
other that will not do the same shall be slain, and killed, wheresoever they
are found.

Letters of Genua, relate the Arrival there, of the Venetian Ambassador from
Spain, and that he brings news, that Mamora, is very straitely besiedged by
the Hollanders, and Mores of Barbary, and that it will be shortly surrendied,
unless they get speedily aid.

The Montafoner have made a league with the Grisons, reserving their liberty,
and are called the fourth confederation. But Captain Pianta holding with the
Enemies of his Country, has burned of late diverse places in Engadin.

From Vienna the 27 of July.
Yesterday is the Coronation of the Empress at Edinburgh happily solemnized,
and the Diet (as we understand) ended, so that we hope to see the Emperor
here next Saturday. The Empress going to the Church, wore her own Crown, and
the Palatine of Hungary his. And the Emperor and Empress went both afterward
with their Crowns adorned to the Imperial Palace, from whence the Crown of
Hungary wat shown to the people, and from thence they went to the Counsel
house of the Town, where was a Feast prepared, and a Maskeacted.

The 22. of this month are here passed by seven Companies of the Regiment of
Saxony, going to the siege of Glatz.

The 23. of the same month, is here the Church of Saint Michael robbed of he^
Pictures, silver Images, and gilded Crucifixes, and other ornaments.

From Prague the 28. of July.
Those of Glatz have lately again gotten one thousand Cattels, and great store
of Salt and other Provision in their walls, and slain 100. men of the
Imperials, and strengthen themselves daily.

Likewise there are secretly leauied Soldiers in Silesia, and are mustred
near Frankford at the River of Oder, and to the same effect are here diverse
horses bought at great rates, and sent out of the Country.

Those of Klingenbergh are still of the same resolution, viz. They will not
surrender the Town, unless they be assured that they shall depart with their
Baggage, Arms, displayed Ensigns, and burning Matches, and have a conuoy to
conduct them safely at Glate: whereby it seems that they are not very desirous
to surrender the place.

From Prague the 2. of August.
The nine and twentieth of July are arrived here, the Lord Frederick Gelhern,
one of the privy Counsel of Silesia, and the Lord Isaac Slackher. Treasurer
of the said Country, the Count Lichtenstein (Deputy of the Emperor in
Bohemia) having sent for them, to be better instructed of certain affairs in
that Country, and thereupon to give them directions.

It continues still that diverse of the Lords, Gentry, and Magistrates, shall
be cited and accused by the Procurator, or Solicitor of the Emperor, how they
will speed God knows. Klingenbergh is surrendered of late upon certain
conditions (which we hope to receine by the next Messenger) and the
Imperialists have put Garrison in the same. And the same forces which lay before
it, besides those in Morauia and Austria, are to go with all speed before
Glatz, to use all possible might and means to take it. For that Garrison within
does not only rob and pillage all the way toward Kenings graitz, and there
about, but likewise takes all the grain in those parts from the Country
people.

From Bordeaux the 16. of August.
The low Country Merchants which are Subjects of the States of the united
Prounces, and are now resident here, have petitioned unto the Court, that
seeing they were daily abused both by words and deeds by certain persons, it
would please the same to remedy it by her Authority. Whereupon the Court has
taken them in the safeguard and protection of the King, prohibiting all and
every one not to wrong them, neither by words or deeds, declaring that he
that shall contrauent the same, shall forfait one thousand pounds sterling,
besides charges and damages, which are to be paid. This Proclamation is
published and affixed at the usual places.

From Bergen up Zome this 17. of August.
The Marquess Spinola intending to take very earnestly in hand the siege of
Bergen up Zrme, has written to Antwerpe for more Ordinance: He is likewise
busy to raise certain Sconses betwixt this Town and Antwerpe, to lodge in
times of necessity, and principally in the night the connoyes with munition,
and prouant, seeing the Garrisons of the States, do many times annoy the same.

And lately certain Soldiers of Captain Deuenter lying within Gorkem, have
taken eleven horse of the Spanish Camp before this Town, and brought them
prisoners into their Garrison.

Every thing grows in the Enemies camp daily more dear and dear, a Can of
Becre cost four Stuyr, a pound of Butter 14. Stuyr, a pound of Cheese six and
eight Stuyr, which causes many from thence to come to us, who have every thing
good cheap, and in great abundance in the City.

We Fortify daily our outworkes and walls, and raise also diverse Batteries
against the Enemy, sparing at neither side their Gunoowder, which causes
diverse on both sides to be hurt.

From Antwerpt the 16 of August.
Since your departure from hence there has been many and often assaults made
by this side upon the Forts and half Monnes of the Enemies at Bergen up Zome:
But the Soldiers that came from thence, and have been themselves in the Fight
report indifferently thereof, some saying they have taken in the half Moon,
other reporting the contrary, some reporting they had it, but were beaten out
of it forwant of Powder, their Bandiliers being all shot out, others say they
had it but durst not stay in it for fear^ that it was undermined, so that it
seems they have it not. But so^uer it is a miserable thing to see those two
last C^nuoyes that are come from Bergen, whereof the one came the last week
with at least 300. men some say 400. or 500. some whereof have lost their Arms
some their Legs, and others surely wounded, the rest very weak and sick,
whereof within three days 40. of them dyed. And yesterday came a Conuoy with
Four or five hundred in the like case, so that the Easterling house is made a
Guest house, wherein is already Four or five hundred Soldiers wounded and
Sick, all Englishmen and Spaniards, each a part, and in the Guest house is as
many Wallons and Dutch. It is so pitiful a thing to see them come so wounded
that I am not able to write you.

This day the English Soldiers of my Lord Vaus are gone to the Leaguer, a
great part of them I perceive are of this Religion, and with this Conuoy is
gone 8. pieces of Ordnance each drawn with 18. Horses. There is about 400.
Soldiers run away, and yesterday is 38. of them taken, which are all
chayned, and led this day with the Conuoy to the Leaguer where it is reported
they should be executed.

The Boores come daily from far with their Household Stuff and Corn, flying
with fear to this place for safety; so that the Packhousen, art here hard to
be had, and the yards of the linen Whitsters by the Easterling House, and
other the like places within the walls of the City, serve now for Barnes to
put their Hay in, what I have writ you in this former part of my Letter, if you
were here your self, you might be an eye witness there of as well as my self.

Yesterday the Enemy took about Pit 30. of our Horsemen on the Highway. I
think if many of our Englishmen were in England again they would be better
advised, before they would come hither to take Bergen in. But I refer the
further relation of such, of them as shall be able to get for England again to
report it.

The number of those English Soldiers which are gone this day with the Conuoy
to Bergen, is as is said about 15. or 1600. men, but of better sort then those
you saw at your being here.

The opinion of taking Bergen is diverse, some think within two Months, others
not in a year, and some suppose it will never be taken in.

Some that came thence with Conuoy affirm that 3. days past, this side shot
through the Church as they Preached and did much hurt, which was done upon this
occasion. That whereas this side lost many men, in seeking to take in the
Sconce or half Moon, and that in the same place, the other side lost diverse
men also, a Truce was made in the said place, for each side to fetch their Dead
from thence: But when this side came to fetch theirs, the other side shot at
them, which they did in regard that some of this side did undermine in the
mean time in that Quarter or place, while the other came and fetched their Dead.

I might write you many particulars of both Captains and Ensignebearers of
English, Italians, Wallons, and others, all worthy men brought dead from the
Leaguer to this Town, some to friends houses, and some to the Easterlings
house, whereof I my self have seen some whose Names are made known, but
other of greater Houses have had their names concealed, and are suncke by
Night, some at Bregard, some at the Deminicans, some at the Gray Friars Minne
brothers, and some at other places.

From Middleburgh the 17. of August.
Captain Klenter of Amsterdam, has a great while shot against the
Viceadmitall of Duynkirken, but he got yet at last his wished Port of
Disynkerken aforesaid.

A Pirate out of North Holland, sailing with a Turkish Pirate to try their
Fortunes upon the Coasts of Spain, did loose one another, and the Hollander
got afterward a rich Spanish Ship, whereupon he sailed to Holland. But being
met by the aforesaid Turk he set upon him, and being become Master of his
Ship, he told him that he was his friend, and loved him dearly, but that the
Prize was a great deal dearer unto him.

The Prince of Orange gathers his Army at Harwynen, betwixt Bommell and
Gorkin^, and the Gates were commanded to be shut at Dordrocht, and at the
Ferries they had charge to land none, on the side of the City.

It seems that he has an enterprise in hand. His Excellency himself lies
yet near St. Hert^genbosh. Count Henry of Nassaw about Reas. And Count Henry
vanden Lergh at Goch.

A Post newly arrived here in London on Friday night last, being the 23. of
August, brings certain news, That coming from the Palatinate toward
England, as he passed through Brabant, he came through Mansfields Army, lying on
this side Bruxels, not far from the same place which Grave Henricke of Nassau
invaded lately: here he saw Mansfield with seven or eight thousand horse,
burn and spoil the Country exceedingly: but still where he comes, he
first shows them this courtesy, that those Cities, Towns. Villages, or any
rich particular Gentlemen, or any others, that will ^ansome themselves and
goods upon reasonable sums, he lets them rest quietly: but contrariwise,
those that will not, he gives the ordinary spoil to his soldiers, and he
takes most of the coin to himself.

Likewise here was then news, that Gonzales coming toward him with great
speed, being sent for by the Arch-Duchesse, he is almost already there, so
that there will be shortly some great bickering between them: this is
certain, that Mansfield was in treaty with the French King, but it was
always thought his end was, but to get some opportunity; which now is come to
light. It is thought, he will take the spoil of the Country, before Gonzales
comes, or any resistance can be made against him, he already has obtained
great sums of money: all his footmen he has left with the Duke of
Brunswicke, a little beyond Bruxels. This incursion of Mansfield, made upon
Brabant, if Gonzales comes not the sooner, must of necessity either make the
Marquess Spinola suddenly remove his siege from Bergen up Zome, or otherwise
enforce Grave Henrick Vandenberg to leave the frontiers of Gilderland, who now
lies about Wesel: so by this means the Prince of Orange, who is constrained
now to attend him, and to keep all those Forces in a manner idle for the
safety of his Country, may then put those Forces to a better use.

Concerning the Marriage of the Emperor: First, his Imperial Majesty and the
Empress going unto the Church of the Franciscane Friars, they were accompanied
by diverse Ambassadors, besides the Nuncio of the Pope, and diverse Lords and
Ladies walking all in very good order: After many of them followed the
Marshall, who carried the Sword before the Emperor, who being arrayed in in an
Imperial habit, was adorned with his Crown, and had his Scepter in his right
hand, and the Globe of the Empire in his left. Before the Empress, who
followed them close, went the Palatine of Hungary, with the Crown of the said
Kingdom, the Lord Esterhasie with the Scepter, the Lord Setsy with the Globe
of the Kingdom aforesaid, besides a Bishop, who carried her Majesty's Crown:
The Ladies of the Court, and the Maids of Honor, being all richly attyred, and
adorned with precious Stones, came immediately after.

Secondly, as soon as both Majesty's were entered into the Church, they kneeled
down before the high or principal Altar. Whereupon the Archbishop holding a
Book before his Majesty, he continued his Prayers for a while, being still
adorned with his Habit, Crown, Scepter, and Globe aforesaid. And from thence
he went to the Quire (where a Seat was prepared for him) kneeling there
likewise down. But the Empress remained still kneeling upon the first place;
where, at the beginning of the Service, were diverse Ceremonies used, and
Music heard: afterward the Epistle being read, the great Letanie was sung;
during which, she lay with her face downwards upon two pillowes of Cloth of
Gold, before the Altar aforesaid. The ^e ended, the Lord Archbishop anointed
^er before she rose, betwixt her elbow and hand, as likewise her cheeks.

Thirdly, the Ceremonies being finished, the Empress went away, being
conducted by her Steward, the Lord of Didrichstain, besides other Lords, as
likewise her she Steward, the Countess of Portia, and diverse Ladies of her
Chamber: But she came presently back to the Altar, arrayed in Cloth of
Silver, being adorned also with a rich Chain and a Medall. Before her went the
Lord Setsy, with the Globe of the Kingdom of Hungary; the Lord Esterhasie
with the Scepter, and the Palatine aforesaid with the Hungarian Crown: she
followed them with her own Crown, being set upon her head by another
Hungarian Bishop, which is very richly adorned with Pearls and precious
Stones, and very artificially made. Afterward, the Lord Esterhasie gave the
Archbishop the Scepter, the Lord Setsy the Globe, the Palatine the Crown; and
he gave her Majesty the Scepter in her left hand, the Globe in the right, and
the Crown he set upon her right shoulder, and during the time that the
Angelical Salutation was sung, she kept the same: afterward they were taken
from her again, and laid upon the Altar; whereupon was sung Te Deum laudamus,
and the Empress having her own Crown upon her head, and the Hungarian
Scepter in her right hand, and the Globe in her left, was conducted to her
ordinary Seat in the middle of the Quire, where a Theatrum was erected, and
adorned with rich Tapistrie and Hangings of Cloth of Gold. At the left hand his
Majesty continuing kneeling in his prayers, without changing his Imperial
habit, the Marshall aforesaid kept his Sword, and two other Lords the Globe of
the Empire, and the Scepter. The Ceremonies, besides the usual Rites and
Customs finished, the Emperor and Empress were conducted back to the
Palace by the Lords aforesaid, both Spiritual and Temporal, as well
Hungarian as German, besides the Ladies, their Majesty's being both still
attyred in their habites, and their train going in good order, as before:
where there was prepared a stately Banquet for all these Guests, as well Hungar
iuns as Germans.

During the Coronation, a Citizen, who clombe upon the Cross of the Steeple of
the Church aforesaid, flourished an Ensign, standing upon the same without
falling, and the same was likewise afterward done by diverse Germans and
Hungarians; and amongst them, a German Soldier put all his clothes from his
back unto his shirt, being upon the same.

The Emperor, with the Empress, sat first down at the Table: at the right
hand took the Popes Nuncio place; after him, the Spanish Ambassador; then,
the Ambassador of Mantua, at the left hand; besides the Archbishop of
Hungaria, and the Palatine aforesaid. At this Banquet were diverse Hungarian
Lords attending; and amongst other the Lord Esterhasi, the Lord Setsy, and the
Count of Achot. The Banquet being ended, they went to the Councell-House of the
Town; where, in the presence of both Majesty's aforesaid, and the most part of
the principal Lords of Hungary and Germany, besides the Ladies of both
Nations, was for the space of seven hours great reuelling and dancing, with
much joy, and great respect performed.

FINIS.

