blazon of the Earl of Pembroke

Wm. Herbert.

April, 1773

Ex Libris Bibliothecae Facultatis Iuridicae Edinburgi

The Araignement, and Execution, of a wilful and obstinate Traitor, named
Eueralde Ducket, alias Hauns: Condemned at the Sessions house, for high
Treason, on Friday, being the 28. of July, and executed at Tiborne, on Monday
after, being the 31. day of the same Month. 1581.

Gathered by M. S.

printer's or publisher's device

Imprinted at London by John Charlewood, and Edward White,

The Araignement of an obstinate Traitor, named Euerald Ducket, alias Hauns,
at the Sessions house, on Friday, the xxviii. of July. 1581.
Upon Friday, being the eight and twenty day of July, there was brought to the
Sessions house, to be araigned before the Queens Majesty's Justices, one
Euerald Ducket, alias Hauns, Englishman, being a Priest, and not long since,
come from beyond the Seas. This wicked fellow, contrary both to the fear of
God, and duty, which he should by right bear, to our most gracious Queen
Elizabeth: erred from the true and perfect doctrine of the word of God, and
lived in obscure and Sathanicall determination of life, as his own
protestations has sufficientlye made apparent, and the obstinate lives of the
rest of like sect, gives daily example. He having received the orders of
Preesthood at Rheimes in France, a place, where (the more is the pity)
diverse and many young youths of England, are somewhat fed upon the Popes
pention, who maintains there a Seminary, to allure and entise the hearts of
sundry her Majesty's obedient Subjects Children, to come unto that place, where
in steed of learning, they are instructed to dishonor God, to disobey their
Prince, and to sell their souls wilfully, into the detestable slavery, of that
blasphemous Antechristian Prelate From this aforesaid place came this obstinate
fellow, and being brought before the Justices to his answer, of certain
absurd and devilish Articles by himself mainetayned, which are these ensuing.

1. That no Prince in all Europe, ought to have any supremacy, but the Pope
only.

2. That the Pope was endued with the holy Spirit, and therefore he could not
sin.

Albeit a terror to any Christian heart to hear it, and a devilish obstinacy
in himself to pronounce it, yet he traitorously said.

3. That our most gracious Sovereign Lady, Queen Elizabeth, was an
Heretic, and therefore not worthy of any government.

4. And that the Pope has as great sway and authority in this Realm of
England, at this day, as he had a hundred years ago.

With other such like wicked and abominable arguments that he maintained, and
being there examined of them: he began with this protestation. The Popes
holiness. At which, not only the Honorable Bench, but also all that stood by,
entered into a great laughter: which caused him to break of the grave
discourse, that else they should have heard. Then was he demanded of the former
Articles, to which he answered. What I have said, I have said, and will stand
to, using himself very fond and full of derision, even like all of that sort,
whom God has given over into a reprobate sense.

After diverse questions by the Benche, and aunswers of himself, not here to
be spoken of: The Quest of twelve men was panneled upon him, whom he was willed
to see, if he would challenge any of the^. No (quoth he) there is some
indifferent men among them, or else it goes hard. So he still troubling the
Benche with over many words, as concerning how many souls he had saved since
his coming over, and what good he had done in his commanded labor: That
the Benche commanded him to silence, until the Quest were come to give up
their verdict. Who being come, and finding him guilty, for that before he had
put himself to God and the Country: he was demanded what he could say for
himself, that judgment should not proceed upon him? He frumpingly answered,
you have put me to silence, and now I will say nothing. Then the Benche
commanded him to hold up his hand, and he held up his left hand. Why quoth
the Justices, is this your Roomish order? then he held up the other, and
scoffingly said. Now Sir, I pray you, is not one hand as good as ye other for
you? At length ere judgment was pronounced, the Benche rehearsed unto him, how
B. Stephan Gardener reca^ted. He answered, the greater was his sin. Then
they said, how Cardinal Poole recanted, the greater was his sin (quoth he
again) John Nichols (quoth the Bench) the other day recanted from his great
impiety of life: he answered, the more his sin, and greater his pains in
the world to come. At last they told him, how the Papists great God Bishop
Bonner, recanted at his death. That is not so (quoth he) for he never recanted.
After many horrible speeches by him passed, and by the Honorable Benche
answered: Judgment of high Treason proceeded upon him, to be drawn, hanged
and quartered. He answered them again, though you have condemned me of
Treason, yet do I know that I am void of sin in this. So was he carried from
thence to Newgate, where Master Crowley a godly Father, remained all the
afternoon with him in conference of the Scriptures, and found him altogether
unlearned, not able to answer any thing directly, but meruaylous obstinate and
very impious.

ON Monday being the 31. of July, he was brought to Tiborne the appointed place
of Execution, being drawn from the prison of Newgate, upon a hurdle, and godly
Preachers all the way exhorting him, but no sign or motion of repentance
might be perceived in him. Being come to Tiborne, there was a Prisoner
executed before him, who had otherwise trespassed, and he very mildely and
penitently took his death, praying zealously that God would turn the heart of
this perverse wretch, and so with sundry godly prayers, ended his life. Then
was this Ducket brought up into the Cart, where were with him, Master
Shakelton, Master Fidens, and other godly Preachers, still exhorting him: who
after ye noise of people was some what appeased (which was no small company) he
began in this manner. I am brought hither this day to confess my fault,
believing and assuring my self in the death of Christ, who shed his blood for
the Catholic church, whereof I am a member, and hope therein to be saved: for
the Catholic Church, is and has been, from the beginning of the world unto
this day, the true prefiguration of Christ: And whereas these Ministers
(speaking in derision) have protested that I said, Treason is no sin: I
beseech you all yt are here, be witnesses with me (for these are the last
words, yt I shall speak) that I said not so. These were my words, that this
which you call treason, and that for which I here die to day, is no sin before
God, though you please to term it so. And I beseech all Catholics that are
present here to pray for me. The godly Preacher answered, if there be any
here, I trust the number is very small, or none at all, quoth he, in time I
trust the number will be increased. For through ye Catholic Church is the way
to salvation, and the Popes holiness is the head of that Church. Then he keeping
close his eyes, as though he were in his prayers, the Preachers rehearsed unto
him the Lords prayer, quoth he, vain words, away with the ravening wolves.
Master Sheriff Woodcoke, then bad him ask the Queen forgiveness, whom he had
offended, and all the present company. Quoth he, it is needles, I am a Subject,
and I grant my self to be a Subject. Why (quoth Master Sheriff) she is
supreme head of ye Church, therefore you ought to submit thy self to her. Not
so (que he) she is a woman, and she may not, neither can not speak in the
Church, and therefore ought not to bear any authority in it. With that, their
godly ears not abiding to hear these blasphemous words: drew away the Cart,
and let him hang sca^t two turns, but cut him down, to abide the farther
pains, appointed for him,

FINIS.
To the Christian Reader, true obedient duty, both to God and Prince,
continually wished.
IF our hearts were not hardened, and our senses dulled, with over much care of
the world, and no respect to our obedient duty: we might perceive the great
mercy and love of our God, and the too little regard that we make of it. For
let us but argue upon the daily and present examples, as the care he has to
his Church, the mild favor he bears to his people that put their trust in
him, that although Satan seek to build a bank about it: yet arises the Lord
and says, Justice is mine. How has God looued us, in sending us such a
gracious Princess, such a peaceable tranquillity, such a happy light of his
Gospel? And when Antichriste has spread abroad his Champions, and even
thrown out his fiery Darts of his devilish inventions: yet has the Lord
stepped between them and home, and caused their shame to redound in their own
faces, that when they have gone so far forth, as they have boastingly said: We
will prevail, the Lord has stood up in the midst of his Congregation, and
said: I will defend my chosen. And yet to behold, how small account we make of
it, how slenderly we regard it, and how unnaturally we run from him: might
move us, if we had any grace or fear in our selves, to return with pierced
hearts, and sobbing consciences, and even out of the bowels of our souls to
cry: O Lord have mercy upon us, miserable offenders. That we faithfully and
unfeignedly may do this: let us every one heave our hearts and hands to the
Lord, and be inwardly entirely sorry, for our so manifold offenses, and pray
that long may his Gospel shine among us, long may our most Gracious Queen
govern us, and long may we faithfully serve him, truly and obediently honor
and love her. And all that do repine at her gracious continuance: may either
change their minds, or be speedily cut off. Amen.

GOd preserve and bless our most gracious Queen Elizabeth, and increase the
number of true and faithful Subjects. Amen.
FINIS.

