NATURAL and Moral Questions and Answers. Intermingled with many pretty and
pleasant Riddles, and dark sentences, Written by A. P. With a manner of
ordering the body for health through every month of the year, and for dieting
it for a seuen-night after blood-letting. Written in Latin verse by Ioachimus
Camerarius.

LONDON, Printed by Adam Islip. 1598.

Natural and Morrall Questions and Answers.
WHy has Nature not given a sting to the king of the Bees, and has furnished
all other Bees therewith?
Answ. To teach Princes that nothing becomes their dignity less then
tyranny, and that their only defense should consist in the strength and force
of their subjects.

Quest. What is that which owes most, pays least, and of all evils is the
worst?
Answ. Ingratitude, for that monster receives good turns and pays vengeance.

Quest. What thing in this life is not accompanied with fear?
Ans. A good conscience.

Quest. What are pleasures?
Ans. Enemies to chastity, leaders to poverty, the daughters of dishonestie,
and baits of extreme misery.

Quest. What thing is begotten of a mother and anon the mother is begotten by
it again?
Answ. Ise turning to water.

Quest. What is man?
Ans. An example of imbecility, the spoil of time, an image of inconstancy, a
captive of calamity, a prisoner to pains, a servant to covetousness, and
finally a food of worms.

Quest. When is fortune most to be feared?
Answ. When she most flatters.

Quest. What thing is old ere it be hatched?
Answ. A secret grudge and malice long conceived ere it be put in execution.

Quest. Who believe more other men's words then their own eiesight?
Answ. Women, for they give more credit to them that fainedly call them
beautiful, then to their looking glass that does gainesay it.

Quest. What is beauty?
Answ. A gift of small continuance.

Quest. What good thing breeds lothsomnesse?
Answ. Plenty.

Quest. What water is in the sight of God most precious, and in the taste of
men most vnsauerous?
Answ. The unfeigned tears of a penitent sinner.

Quest. What is it that grows with the head downward, and with the root
upward?
Answ. An isesickle.

Quest. What is that which most delights and most deceives a woman?
Answ. A man's dissimulation, which has such a sweet passage through his tongue
as it delights as the Siren songs, and turns to as deceitful a conclusion
as the Crockadiles tears.

Quest. Wherein is covetousness only commendable?
Answ. In sparing and not ill spending his time.

Quest. What is it that chiefly sustaineth labor?
Answ. Hope of rest.

Quest. Who deny their own request?
Answ. They that demand things impossible.

Quest. Who is most like unto a mad man?
Answ. A drunkard.

Quest. What is that which wounds the heart, and is worshipped of the eye?
Answ. Beauty?

Quest. How ought clemency to be moderated?
Answ. So that it breeds not our overthrow.

Quest. What is sobriety?
Answ. The father of good counsel.

Quest. Wherein is a woman most constant?
Answ. In her inconstancy.

Quest. Of what three things repented himself Cato done in his life time?
Answ. To have ouerslipt a day and not to have increased his knowledge, To have
gone by sea, where he might have gone by land: and thirdly, To have committed
his secrets to a woman.

Quest. Why ought we not to disclose our secrets unto women?
Answ. Because they cannot keep their own.

Quest. Why are there so many that live discontented in wedlock?
Answ. Because their first love was grounded upon lust, or else in making of
their rash choice they had more regard to the woman's dowry then to her
conditions, or else the woman respected more the man's purse then his personage,
or more his body then his good or ill qualities.

Quest. Why was Diogenes called a dog?
Answ. Because he did bite indifferently both his foes and his friends, but
his friends to their good and amendment, and his enemies to their shame and
confusion.

Quest. What men are very dangerous in a Commonwealth?
Answ. Those that affect novelties?

Quest. What three things are the life and death of life?
Answ. Bathes, wine and women, for as the use of them is restitution, so is the
abuse of them life and healths destruction.

Quest. What is stronger then death?
Answ. Fame and renown, and therefore a certain Philosopher did call fame the
daughter of immortality.

Quest. What is the reason that Wine mingled with water provoke vomit?
Answ. Because watered Wine hurts the stomach, and weakeneth the retayning
virtue or strength of the Wine, whereas pure Wine does strengthen and comfort
it.

Quest. Why do old folks neese with great difficulty?
Answ. Because of the weakness of their nature, and the narrowness of their
passages.

Quest. Why is man more subject to diseases and infirmities then any other
creature?
Answ. By reason of his intemperancie, and therefore Schola Salerni says, Esse
cupis sanus, sit tibi parca manus. That is, if thou will live in health, have a
niggerly hand, Idest. Use temperance of diet.

Quest. Why do Physicians say that it is dangerous to let a fat man blood?
Answ. Because those that are fat have lesser veins, and are more hidden and
appear not so much, moreover they have but little blood.

Quest. What is the reason that the Camelian changes so oftentimes his color?
Answ. By reason of his great fear, and because he makes much of his blood.

Quest. Why do men use to lay lime at the foot of a Cherrietree?
Answ. To have ripe Cherries before their season.

Quest. What man is worthily called bold and courageous?
Answ. He that loves his life, and yet fears not death.

Quest. What is the reason that some die for very joy, and some by too much
sadness?
Answ. Great joy does cool too much the inward and vital parts of the body,
and sorrow and sadness does eue^ choke them.

Quest. Why has nature made the lungs of all creatures spongious, or full of
holes, like unto a sponge?
Answ. To the end it might receive the air the better to cool the heart, and
drive away from it all such vapors as are hurtful unto it.

Quest. Why is our heart placed in the midst of the body?
Answ. To quicken equally all the members thereof, even as the sun gives light
equally to all things being in the midst of the heavens.

Quest. Why were Judges in times past painted without hands?
Answ. To signify thereby that Justice ought not to be corrupted with bribes.

Quest. What is a sign of a good Judge?
Answ. If he departs from his office with more gain of good fame then
riches.

Quest. In what sort should a man seek profit of the Commonwealth?
Answ. As at a fire, which if one sits too near unto, does scorch himself,
and being too far off it, sustayneth cold.

Quest. What thing makes a good Soldier?
Answ. Discipline.

Quest. What causes despair in a soldier?
Answ. Beggary.

Quest. What is the cheifest stratagem in war?
Answ. Ripe deliberation, and present execution.

Quest. What is the cheifest policy in peace?
Answ. To fear civil discord and to prevent it, and by foresight to resist
foreign invasion.

Quest. Who are only to be called resolute soldiers?
Answ. Those that are determined either to die, or else to obtain the victory.

Quest. What is a chief fault in war?
Answ. Fear of death.

Quest. How did antiquity represent unto us the issue of good things?
Answ. They made an image holding in the right hand a cup, and in the left hand
an ear of corn with a sprig of Poppy, signifying thereby that he easily is
brought asleep, that is contented with the fruits of the earth.

Quest. What service is most in request, and being performed, is least
considered and most hated?
Answ. Treason.

Quest. What time is most desired, and obtained is most accused?
Answ. Age.

Quest. What men are cheeflie deceived?
Answ. Those that look for two contrary things at one time, namely for
pleasure and the reward of virtue.

Quest. What is that in the morning goes upon four legs, at noone upon two,
and in the evening upon three legs?
Answ. Man, for in his infancy he creeps upon hands and feet, in his youth
he goes straight without any help or stay, and in his age uses besides his
legs the aid of a staff to support his body.

Quest. What thing is in the day time as round as a hoope, and at night long as
a
Answ. A girdle about a man or woman's body.

Quest. How many ways is violence chiefly committed?
Answ. Two ways, either by deceit or by force: the one is the practice of the
Fox, and the other of the Lion, and both of them are most far from humanity.

Quest. Why is virtue had in so small account?
Answ. Because she is plain and cannot dissemble.

Quest. Why does virtue reject all glosings?
Answ. Because truth needs no shadows?

Quest. What men are most ungrateful to themselves, and least hurtful to
other men.
Answ. Those that are covetous and envious, for as these pine away at other
men's welfare and prosperity, so the other endanger their souls to leave rich,
and perhaps unthankful heirs behind them.

Quest. Why is heaven said to have a low gate?
Answ. Because those that shall enter into it must first stoop low and learn
humility.

Quest. Why did Antiquity in their churches place a cross upon the entrance
of the quire?
Answ. Because the body of the church did represent the church militant upon
earth, and the quire the church triumphant in heaven, to teach us hereby that
no man would come from the one into the other unless he did suffer first
crosses and persecutions?

Quest. What is a friend?
Answ. Another selfsame.

Quest. What is commonly the end of a dissolute life?
Answ. A desperate death.

Quest. What is a chief sign of a Princes clemency, and a token of his great
courage and magnanimity?
Answ. To despise the whisperings of unthankful men, and patiently to suffer
the rage of envy.

Quest. Which are the cheifest ornaments of women?
Answ. Shamefastness.

Quest. How might a fool resemble a wise man?
Answ. In hiding of his folly by silence.

Quest. What three things do men most covet?
Answ. Riches, Pleasure, and Honor. Riches be the nurses of sin and
iniquity. Pleasures the guides to calamity. And Honor the pomp of worldly
vanities.

Quest. Why are pleasures so much to be abandoned?
Answ. Because their first entering is counterfeit and deceitful, and their
departure is grief and repentance.

Quest. What thing in this world is always without rest?
Answ. A guilty conscience.

Quest. What is it that men most do hunt after, and oftentimes proves most
deceitful?
Answ. Women's favor.

Quest. What is it that women most fear, and yet of it do most desire the
occasion?
Answ. To be with child they most desire, and fear most the hour of their
delivery.

Quest. What do children most hate, and yet is most profitable unto them?
Answ. Correction.

Quest. What is lesser then a Mouse, and has more windows then a house?
Answ. A Thymble.

Quest. What vice is most likest to the apples of Tantalus?
Answ. Hypocrisy, For as the Apples of Tantalus seemed in sight most
beautiful, and yet proved but shadows: so this vice although it bears a
glorious show of perfection, yet is nothing else but a mere and a deceitful
illusion.

Quest. Why is it amongst men now adays so much practiced?
Answ. Because it is the highest degree of dissembling, and therefore is
accounted a sure step to promotion.

Quest. What men transform themselves into angels of light, and are nothing
but Devils incarnate?
Answ. Hypocrites.

Quest. What men promise themselves many vain things?
Answ. Courtiers, and such as live in continual hope.

Quest. What thing in the latter minute of his age waxes young again?
Answ. The Moon.

Quest. Who is the mother of all mankind?
Answ. The earth, even by the Oracle of Apollo: for this Oracle being demanded
by certain Princes that were in controversy for the kindome of Egypt, who
should succeed the late King deceased; answered, that he should not only be
installed King of the kingdom of Egypt, that first should kiss his mother,
but should likewise become monarch of all Asia. This answer being reported by
the Priest unto the Princes that were then attending without upon the Oracle;
Darius having heard it, stepped suddenly from his horse and kissed the ground,
saying that the earth was the mother of al mankind. The princes that could not
deny it made and created him King, who afterward conquered all Asia, and became
quiet monarch of many kingdoms.

Quest. What is it that takes least pleasure in company?
Answ. Pride, for it hates his betters, enuieth his equals, and despises his
inferiors.

Quest. What is it that being alive is altogether dumb, and being dead,
yields a most sweet harmony?
Answ. A Lute, or any kind of instrument made of wood.

Quest. Which is the best remedy for things that are not to be recovered?
Answ. Oblivion or forgetfulness.

Quest. What is chiefly to be commended in a warrior?
Answ. To be in fight terrible, and in conquest mild.

Quest. What surfeit is most dangerous and least avoided?
Answ. The surfeit of sin.

Quest. Who kill their mother ere they be borne, in the revenge of their father
that begot them?
Answ. Vipers, for as the male and femall engender by the mouth, so the damme
being kindled with lust in the art of Venery, bites of the males head, and the
young ones ere they be borne gnaw their mothers belly open to come forth, and so
do kill her.

Quest. What is it that soonest waxes old?
Answ. A benefit, for nothing is sooner forgotten then a good turn, and
nothing longer remembered then an injury.

Quest. What are Usurers?
Answ. The Horseleeches and Caterpillars of the Commonwealth.

Quest. What is the least and yet the profitablest thing in a Garden?
Answ. A Be.

Quest. What wind blows no way to profit, and is noisome to all the
neighbors?
Answ. The foisting of a dog, the smell whereof is noisome to all the
company that are near it.

Quest. Upon what men are alms deeds worst bestowed?
Answ. Upon blind men, for they would be glad to see him hanged that releeues
them. I would not that any man should interpret them in earnest, which is only
written in a merriment, and that for this they should withdraw their charity
from such poor men.

Quest. Why do most men delight more in flesh then in fish, and why it is more
wholsomer unto the body?
Answ. Because it strengthens more and is of sounder nourishment, or else
because it agrees better with the substance of our bodies.

Quest. What is the Law?
Answ. A net.

Quest. What are the Lawyers?
Answ. Burdars.

Quest. What are the Clients?
Answ. Birds.

Quest. What is the Court where the Law is pleaded.
Answ. The place where the nets are spread to take the simple and silly birds.

Quest. Whereby does a woman's love resemble the shadow of our bodies?
Answ. Even as our shadow if we run toward it does fleet away from us, and
if we run from it does follow us: so the love of a woman, if we fondly
pursue it, will disdain us, but if we set light by it or seem to run from it,
will most earnestly desire us.

Quest. What is a chief stratageme in war?
Answ. Expedition, and not to ouerslip occasion.

Quest. Why did the Ancients find fault with Zeuxis liberality?
Answ. Because he gave and bestowed gifts to receive double again.

Quest. What is the cause of greatest devotion and the greatest replenisher of
hell?
Answ. Ignorance, which makes men to worship stones and dishonor God.

Quest. What is the greatest friend to men at liberty, and the most enemy to
such as are condemned?
Answ. Hope, which encourages men at liberty to attempt great matters, and
makes such as are condemned unprepared for death.

Quest. What seasoneth and sweetneth the bitterness of war.
Answ. Hope of victory.

Quest. Why is favor bought with money, most uncertain?
Answ. Because by discontinuance of giving it breeds inward grudging, and by
the ceasing of liberality, it bursteth out into open hatred.

Quest. Wherein is an envious man like unto iron?
Answ. Even as iron is consumed with his own rust, so an envious man pines
away by his own folly.

Quest. What is least to be respected in an Oration?
Answ. Glosing words, for as in coin the bravery of the stamp is little or
nothing regarded but only the weight and the substance: even so it is no
matter how eloquent the Oration be, but how grave and profitable.

Quest. What is an Hystory?
Answ. A testimony of time, a light of verity, the maintenance of memory, the
schoole-mistresse of life, and the messenger of antiquity.

Quest. What is the hardest thing to be learned?
Answ. To learn to know himself.

Quest. How might one eschew envy?
Answ. By living abject and miserable.

Quest. What is Idleness?
Answ. The Father of Lechery, and the highway to poverty.

Quest. What are riches?
Answ. Diogenes called them the vomit of fortune.

Quest. What does cast from it a greater heat then fire?
Answ. Beauty, which sets not only on fire those that touch it, but also
those that a far off do behold it.

Quest. What is death?
Answ. The end of travels, and the beginning of life.

Quest. What is the duty of a wise man?
Answ. To mistrust the ignorant, and to know how to skirmish with adversity.

Quest. Who is sometimes a mother and sometimes a stepdame?
Answ. Fortune.

Quest. What are the most precious ornaments of a City?
Answ. The virtues of the Citizens.

Quest. What makes men constant against all humane affections?
Answ. A good disposition of the mind.

Quest. Why are laws said to be like unto spiders webs?
Answ. Because they catch small flies, but waspes and bees fly through them.

Quest. What is the reason that for to see the better we are wont to shut one
eye?
Answ. Because the other might be aided with the sense of the eye which is
shut and closed.

Quest. What is the cause of Hydropsie?
Answ. The great cold of the liver.

Quest. Why do those that have the yellow yandars find honey to be bitter in
taste?
Answ. By reason of the great color wherewith their tongue and the palait of
their mouth is infected:

Quest. Why do musk, millions, and cucumbers, provoke urine?
Answ. By reason of their great humiditie.

Quest. What is the cause that old men and women dote?
Answ. By reason of the great coldness which is in them.

Quest. Wherout does it proceed that men become pale when they are seized with
fear?
Answ. Because the blood retires to the vital parts of the body.

Quest. Why has a Scorpion his poison in the tail?
Answ. Because the poison is his excrement.

Quest. Why did Hypocrates permit those to drink wine that had a burning ague?
Answ. It was for to help digestion, and to strengthen the parties.

Quest. Why are the extremities of the body more subject to cold then the other
parts thereof?
Answ. Because they are not so solid or so well knit together, and are farther
removed from the heart.

Quest. Why do Pullets (their throtes being cut) survive after it longer then
men?
Answ. Chickens and Pullets have smaller sinnewes and veins, and therefore
life cannot so soon leave them.

Quest. Why are men more taller then women?
Answ. By reason of their natural heat.

Quest. Why do women make water stooping, and men to the contrary?
Answ. Because their bladder stands higher then men's does.

Quest. Why have men more teeth the^ women?
Answ. Because they abound more in blood and heat.

Quest. What is the reason that when maidens breasts begin to grow, they begin
to change their voice?
Answ. Because then the Organs of the voice are wider and lesser closed.

Quest. Why are twins not so strong as others be?
Answ. Because the seed which should have served to one, is parted into two.

Quest. Why do eager things provoke appetite?
Answ. Because they dry up the humors, and consequently close the stomach
faster up, which does cause appetite.

Quest. Why do Lettuce provoke sleep?
Answ. Because they engender gross humors?

Quest. Why is Iuie always green?
Answ. Because the heat of it is tempered with humiditie and viscositie.

Quest. Why have Birds no teeth?
Answ. Because the substance which teeth do grow of, does turn into their
bills.

Quest. When is vice past al hope of remedy?
Answ. When it is grown into a custom.

Quest. Why do matters well executed, please but few men?
Answ. Because most men are rather guided by affection then by reason.

Quest. What is idleness?
Answ. A nurse of lasciviousness and the wel-spring of all vices.

Quest. What thing metamorphoseth a man into a beast?
Answ. Lust.

Quest. Which is the highest degree of vncharitie?
Answ. To make of him a laughing stock besides, who by our means has been
afflicted.

Quest. Which is the chiefest felicity?
Answ. To be released of a wicked woman.

Quest. What men are least to be trusted?
Answ. Those that have been disloiall to their own country.

Quest. What thing spends most prodigally that which covetousness has most
wickedly scraped together?
Answ. Ambition.

Quest. What is a chief comfort to the conquered, or to those that are
overcome?
Answ. Hope of revenge.

Quest. What is the life of Courtiers?
Answ. A continual hope.

Quest. By what honest means may poor men increase their stock?
Answ. By sparing.

Quest. Why did the Lacedaemonians sacrifice a Cock when they had obtained
victory against their enemies by maine force: and an Ox when they had
overthrown them by subtletie, surprise, orintelligence?
Answ. Because they preferred Prudence and wit before force or bodily strength,
and therefore a certain captain of Grecia was wont to say, If a lions skin
cannot prevail, add unto it the skin of a fox, meaning thereby; if force
cannot, use policy.

Quest. Which are the fruits of pleasure?
Answ. Grief and repentance.

Quest. Which is the first step to adversity?
Answ. The highest degree of prosperity.

Quest. Why does men neese sooner being in the sun then being near the fire?
Answ. Because the heat of the sun does only dissolve the humor, and consumes
it not: but the fire does both dissolve and consume it.

Quest. Why do the eyes of Cats and wolfes shine in the night and not by day?
Answ. Because the greater light does darken the lesser.

Quest. Why is the white of an Egg of so hard a digestion?
Answ. By reason of the great coldness of it.

Quest. Why does Burrage laid in wine rejoice those that do eat it?
Answ. Because it does increase blood, and strengthens the heart.

Quest. Why did Nature make rather the brain cold then whote?
Answ. To temper and moderate the heat of the heart, to the end it might serve
it in stead of a cooler.

Quest. What passion is that which tormenteth a man most and has least power
to overcome?
Answ. A woman's inconstancy, which greeueth a man, and cannot be overcome by
women themselves.

Quest. How ought we to use prosperity?
Answ. Not to trust unto it, for we ought to use the gifts of fortune for our
necessity, and not to rely upon them.

Quest. What is pleasure?
Answ. A bait to take men as hooks and nets do fishes.

Quest. What poison ought Princes to avoid chiefly?
Answ. The poison of flattery.

Que. What is the reason that the bottom of a Kettell being full of boiling
water and hanging over the fire, is cold notwithstanding?
Answ. By reason of the hot vapors which continually do mount upwards,
wherewith the higher parts being warmed, the bottom remains cool for the
continuance of the water that is upon it.

Quest. Why do those that oftentimes weep piss seldom?
Answ. Because the humiditie taking his passage by the eyes does ease so much
the more the other parts and members of the body.

Quest. Why did Nature ordain neesing?
Answ. To purge the superfluities of the brain, like as the lunges are purged
with coffing.

Quest. What makes pleasures most sauerous?
Answ. A rare and seldom use of them.

Quest. What is it that consumes his mother that bare him, eats his nurse that
feeds him, and then dies, leaving all them blind that saw him?
Answ. The flambe of a Candle.

Quest. What men if cause do move them, do soonest forswear themselves?
Answ. Those that are wont lightly to swear without a cause.

Quest. Which is the only physic in misery?
Answ. Patience.

Quest. Whereby does a man please a woman best, and yet displease himself most.
Answ. In giving her her will.

Quest. What is best to be done for a rich man falling sick?
Answ. Not to make his Physician his heir.

Quest. What is Love?
Answ. An idle bodies pastime or business.

Quest. How might one avoid love?
Answ. By eschewing idleness.

Quest. How ought we to use love?
Answ. As a fool to sport, or a minstrell to make us merry.

Quest. Who are the best creatures upon earth.
Answ. Women next unto men and Bees.

Quest. Who is rich?
Answ. He that is contented.

Quest. How might one learn to be content?
Answ. To unlearn to covet.

Quest. What men do least fear death?
Answ. Those that feel least comfort in this world.

Quest. What ought we chiefly to learn in prosperity?
Answ. How we might best endure adversity.

Quest. Wherein is the life of man like unto iron?
Answ. Even as iron if it be used does wear away, and if it be not used does
consume with rust: so our life if it be never so well exercised does decrease
by time, if not, yet does it wast away with idleness.

Quest. What is the immoderate use of too much liberty?
Answ. An occasion oftentimes of bondage and slavery.

Quest. What men are most unthankful?
Answ. Those that can tell how to receive a benefit, and not how to requite it,
or else those that deny the receipt of it, but chiefly those that have forgotten
it.

Qu. What shadow is most deceitful?
Ans. Hypocrisy.

Qu. Which is the chiefest revenue for one that has no lands?
Ans. Sparing.

Qu. When is clemency most hurtful?
Ans. When rebels are most obstinate.

Qu. What thing is most dangerous, least avoided, and most desired?
Ans. The pleasures of this world.

Qu. What soil bears both the best and the worst fruit?
Ans. The womb of a woman.

Qu. What ought a servant chiefly to practice to obtain his masters favor?
Ans. Diligence, continuance, and secrecy.

Qu. Where is silence most to be practiced?
Ans. In matters of secrecy, and amongst pots and Cannes.

Qu. How or what are the gifts of fortune?
Ans. Such as are the minds of those that possess them, a help and comfort to
them that can use them, and a ruin and overthrow to them that know not how to
use them.

Qu. What men are most unfortunate in adversity?
Ans. Those that never learned to be crossed in prosperity.

Qu. What feeds a doubtful life, or him that is by law condemned to die?
Ans. Hope of pardon.

Qu. Why were it better to be among Ravens, then to live among flatterers?
Ans. Because Ravens pray not upon men but when they are dead, but flatterers
devour them even when they are alive.

Qu. What bitings are most sorest and most grievous?
Ans. The bitings of necessity.

Qu. What men ought chiefly to be without faults?
Ans. Those that are always most ready to epsy faults in others.

Qu. What is it to lend money upon usury?
Ans. To kill a man.

Qu. Why did Solon establish no law against Paricides?
Ans. Because he thought that such an enormity could not be committed by a
child, and therefore (because he should not seem rather to remember men of
such a wickedness then to forbid it) would in no wise appoint any punishment
for it.

Qu. What maintains a Commonwealth?
Ans. Reward and punishment.

Qu. How should parents take the death of their children?
Ans. As Anaxagoras and a lady of Lacena did: for news being brought to the
one, of his sons departure out of this life: answered the messengers, That he
knew long since that he had begotten a mortal man. And this lady whose
constancy deserves no less praise and commendation, having heard that her
son was slain in the battle, said to those that first brought her the
tidings hereof: To that end have I brought him to the world, that there should
not be wanting one that should doubt and refuse to spend his life and blood in
the defense of his country.

Qu. Wherein did Cyreneus and Theodorus courage and magnanimity most chiefly
shine and appear?
Ans. In his resolute answer to king Lysimachus when he did threaten him with
death, for then boldly speaking to the Tyrant, Bid him to fear his Courtiers
with these bugs, for Theodorus is indifferent (quoth he) whether he rots under
or above the ground.

Qu. Who may be said to suffer water continually to be drawn out of his
spring, and yet for it has nothing the less himself?
Ans. He that gives good counsel to them that demand it, or he that bestows
a benefit upon another without any hinderance to himself.

Qu. Which may be called a double injury?
Ans. To be defrauded of deserved praises, and pursued with undeserved
reproaches.

Qu. By what means shall one become rich quickly?
Ans. In being poor of desire: and therefore Seneca said, If you have respect
wherewith nature is sufficed you shall never be poor, but if you look unto
that which opinion craves you shall never be rich.

Qu. What men may be said to live only and longest?
Ans. Those that live only and longest in ease and quiet: And therefore Adrian
a most puissant Emperor, who by great travel and intercession obtained
license in the end of his days to dwell in a little village of his, where he
lived seven years in great rest and quiet, dying, left an aparant token and
testimony, that the life led in honor and dignity was not the true life, for he
caused words to be graued on his tomb, Here lies the wight whose age is of
many years, but he lived but only seven.

Qu. What child is the only heir of a wise and worthy Parent?
Ans. He that inheriteth and is heir unto all his fathers virtues.

Qu. What is marriage.
Ans. A Paradise on earth if her laws be observed, but a hell in the house if
her statutes be broken.

Qu. How many chief powers are there of the soul?
Ans. Three, Intendment, Will, and Memory.

Qu. What three deserts of the body stop the passage of these three powers of
the soul?
Ans. Ignorance of that which is good, Covetousness of that which is evil,
Infirmity and langor of the body.

Qu. What are the remedies against these three evils and defects?
Ans. Wisdom, Virtue, and Necessity; which to chase these three evils are thus
ordered: Wisdom against ignorance: Virtue against covetousness and vice:
Necessity against infirmity.

Qu. What is it that of men is least esteemed, and of God most honored?
Ans. Chastity, which is precious before God, and a laughing stock before men.

Qu. What is ignorance?
Ans. A grave which burieth life.

Qu. What four things have continual residence in a Noble mind?
Ans. Courage to repel the incroching enemy: a heart to consider a loyal
friend: a hand to reward the gifts of the simple: and clemency to accept and
pardon a well meaning mind.

Qu. How many kinds of Sages be there?
Ans. Three. The sage wise man, the sage fool, and the sage herb.

Qu. Wherein is a flatterer like unto a hawk?
Ans. Because as a Hawk will not come to an empty fist, so a flatterer to an
empty purse.

Qu. Which is the first step of love?
Ans. The loss of liberty.

Qu. Who after their death, live in the life of their children?
Ans. Such parents as have brought up their children, as they may choose the
good and forsake the evil.

Qu. Who is alone a worthy and a valiant man?
Ans. He who never does bow his shoulders at the burden of misfortunes, nor he
who never panted at his chance.

Qu. What answered Gorgias being demanded, what manner of diet he used that he
lived so long?
Ans. That he never did eat any thing for pleasure or wantonness.

Qu. Why did Zenocrates (assigning all the parts of the day to some business)
appoint likewise to silence his due part?
Ans. Because he might then privately discuss with himself what manner he ought
to keep in speaking.

Qu. What did never speak well of any man?
Ans. Evil will.

Qu. Wherein did Artemisia declare her great chastity toward her husband
deceased?
Ans. In her entire love toward him, for when her husband Mansolus King of
Caria was dead, she caused his heart to be dried in a vessel of gold into
powder, and by a little and little drank it all up saying, Their two hearts
should never depart asunder: and that she thought there might be no worthier
sepulcher made for it but her own body. Notwithstanding she made for his body
such a sepulcher, that for the excellent workmanship, beauty and costlinesse
thereof, it was taken for one of the meruailes of the world: and for the notable
fame of it, all sumptuous and great sepulchers were afterward called Mansalca.

Qu. Which is the best haven to him that is penitent?
Ans. Confession of his faults, and change of counsel.

Qu. How might a man become master over himself?
Ans. In amending that in himself which he rebukes in another body.

Qu. Wherefore made nature man naked and without weapons to defend himself?
Ans. Nature having bestowed wisdom upon man, has given him means enough to
arm himself at his own pleasure, as well against the cold and heat of the
air, as against the blows of his enemy.

Qu. Why are Judges and Lawyers more honored of those that go to law, then
Physicians are of their patients?
Ans. Because the gain of the cause does depend of the Judge and advocates:
but giving of health to the patient lies not in the hands of the Physician,
but in God only.

Qu. Why does a Swanne being near his death sing more sweeter then at any
other time?
Ans. Nature has taught this to the bird, to teach us the good which we
receive by death, which serves us for a doom or passage to everlasting life.

Qu. Why do men seek to avoid poverty?
Ans. Because it causes them oftentimes to decline from the right way of
virtue.

Qu. Why do men drink water, which notwithstanding does not nourish?
Ans. Water does spend the digestion of the meat through all parts of the body.

Qu. Why are those that are drunk, cold?
Ans. By reason of the Wine taken immoderately, which quenches and
ouerwhelmeth the natural heat of the body.

Quest. Why do Physicians not minister medicines when the sickness or disease
is at the cheifest?
Ans. Because they should not oppress or hinder nature.

Qu. What is the cause that children who are moist by nature are not bald
notwithstanding?
Ans. Because their humidity is intermingled with a temperate heat.

Qu. Why does Rue being planted under a fig tree grow the better, and
receives more nourishment?
Ans. Because it draws unto itself the sweetness of the fig tree, or else the
fig tree suckes away from the Rue a part of his bitterness, and so being
somewhat sweetened it grows the better.

Qu. What is the reason why teeth do come again, and not any other bones of
the body?
Ans. All other bones are made and engendered of a natural humor and moistness
in the mothers womb: but the teeth are engendered by a nourishing humor, which
daily does increase.

Qu. What is the reason that when we see others to yawne, we are provoked to
do the like?
Ans. This proceeds to my judgment by the virtue of our imagination.

Qu. What did move nature to give us ears?
Ans. Because thereby men might judge of the difference of sounds and voices.
Through the ears likewise is purged the color which is in the brains, as
through the nose is the phlegm.

Qu. Of what stuff are women's tongues made of?
Ans. Of an aspen leaf, for they never leave wagging.

Qu. What is most praised and least practiced?
Ans. Honesty, or else the virtue of liberality.

Qu. Which is the first step to wisdom?
Ans. To know himself, and the second to fear God.

Qu. What is the Magistrate?
Ans. The mouth of the Law.

Qu. What is honor?
Ans. The reward of virtue.

Qu. What is the property of folly?
Ans. To see other men's faults and to forget her own.

Qu. Which is the only sauce of meat?
Ans. Hunger, as thirst is of drink.

Qu. What is shamefastness?
Ans. The tincture and die of virtue.

Qu. Which is the cheifest pleasure in this world?
Ans. Liberty.

Qu. In contracting of marriage what ought first to be regarded?
Ans. Virtue and not riches: and therefore Themistocles a worthy Duke of
Grecia being asked why he had rather to bestow his daughter upon a poor and an
honest man, then upon a rich man ill conditioned: I (said he) had rather a man
without money, then money wanting a man.

Qu. How might one best learn to discern a knave?
Ans. In comparing him by an honest man.

Qu. What ought a wise man to practice?
Ans. How to accomodate himself to the time.

Qu. What is a chief cause of our own overthrow?
Ans. Selfeloue.

Qu. Whom chiefly hurts poverty?
Ans. Him that cannot carry it patiently.

Qu. Which is the sauce of labor?
Ans. Rest.

Qu. Who lives most safely?
Ans. He that does not discover his own secrets.

Qu. What is the state of a rich churl, or of a covetous man?
Ans. A continual torment, and by extreme desire of gain, accompanied with a
fear to loose thar which he has gotten.

Qu. What thing gets friends?
Ans. Prosperity, but adversity tries them.

Qu. Why ought we in requiting of a good turn, imitate the earth?
Ans. Because it gives more then it receives.

Qu. Why ought we not to blame, nor likewise to praise our selves?
Ans. Because the one is a sign of folly, and the other a token of inconstancy.

Qu. What are riches?
Ans. Nets to entrap men, and thorns to pierce the heart.

Qu. Which is the surest guard of a Prince?
Ans. The love of his subjects.

Qu. What two things do chiefly bridle and encourage men?
Ans. Reward and punishment.

Qu. Why have wise men always hated anger?
Ans. Because it is a spice and kind of folly.

Qu. Wherein is war better then peace?
Ans. War stirs up the minds of men to virtue, and peace draws them to
idleness and lasciviousness.

Qu. Why do old men die almost without pain?
Ans. By reason that all their senses are debilitated and weakened.

Qu. Why does sorrow and grief make men to look old before their time?
Ans. Because they dry up the moistness of the body, and age is nothing but a
kind of dryness.

Qu. Why must Wheaten bread chiefly be salted and leauened?
Ans. Because that Wheat by nature is sopping and very, and salt does dry the
great of it, and the leaven makes it more lighter.

Qu. Why are fat things not subject so soon to corruption?
Ans. Because they participate so much of the air and the fire.

Qu. Why is a Diamond not so soon burned by thy fire as any other precious
stone?
Ans. By reason of his soliditie.

Qu. Why does oil swim above any kind of liquor?
Ans. Because of his fatness, and all fat things do much participate of the
air.

Qu. What is the reason that some men are more able to endure longer then other?
Ans. Because some of them are more choleric and some more flegmaticke.

Qu. What is the reason that when we are a hungered, our spitting is more
salter then otherwise?
Ans. Because hunger increases choler, which easily becomes bitter by reason
of his sharpness.

Qu. Why are women commonly more fatter then men?
Ans. Because they are more colder of complexion, and do less exercise.

Qu. What is the cause that the milk of pale or white women is not so wholesome
as that of them that are brown?
Ans. Black women are more whoter of nature, and therefore by consequent their
milk is better digested.

Qu. Of what conditions is man?
Ans. Of all conditions of fowls and beasts that God has created. Bold as a
lion, sportful as an ape, dumb as a fish, prating as a parret, filthy as
aswine, neat as a swanne, swift as a heart, slow as a snaile, proud as a
peacocke, gentle as a lamb, chaste as a turtle, loyal as a horse, fearful as
a hare, ignorant as an ass, subtle as a serpent, angry as a waspe, and
lecherous as a Moonky.

Qu. Of what metal are women's tongues made of?
Ans. Of Virgils brazen flaile, which struck both friends and foes.

Qu. What difference is there between a scold and a harlot?
Ans. As there is between the Viper and the Crockadile, for the scold with
outrage destroieth her husband, and the harlot with dissembling love.

Qu. What is that which is coldest clad in freese, and warmest attired in
precious stones?
Ans. Pride, which has no grace but in bravery.

Qu. What is life without literature?
Ans. A man's grave, or an image of death.

Qu. What wicked mother has brought forth a good child the only prop and stay
of all gouernements?
Ans. Ill manners have brought forth good laws, to the establishment of
virtue, and the subversion of vice.

Qu. What ought we to think of the time which we have here?
Ans. That we have little enough and loose much.

Qu. Where ought marriage not to be enforced?
Ans. Where love cannot be compelled.

Qu. Which are the titles and epithets of the sun?
Ans. To be parent of the day, governor of the world, a quickner of the body,
the eye of the firmament, the heart of nature, the king of the stars, and the
visible son of God.

Qu. Which are the wings of time?
Ans. Time past, present, and to come.

Qu. Which are the teeth wherewith time consumes all things?
Ans. The night, the day, life and death.

Qu. What is the cause that in our age there are not so many excellent men, as
there were in times past?
Ans. By reason of nature which daily decreaseth, or because virtue is not so
much esteemed of now adays as it was in times past, or else it is the custom
of all ages to complain.

Qu. What is anger?
Ans. A short madness, or else the beginning of foolishness.

Qu. What is virtue?
Ans. A sweet harmony of nature, to the found and time whereof al good men give
an ear unto.

Qu. What difference is there between wisdom and a ready wit?
Ans. The wise man gives good counsel, and the witty man presently conceiues
and judges of it.

Qu. What privilege have brave and courageous knights above other men?
Ans. Not to be subject nor to be daunted by fortune.

Qu. What shadoweth nay darkeneth the great virtues in Philip, and Alexander
the Great, his son?
Ans. Drunkenness.

Qu. What is Wine immoderately taken?
Ans. The blood of the earth turned to poison.

Qu. What is Wine moderately taken?
Ans. A whetstone to memory.

Qu. Why did the Egyptians ordain that commoniesters and plaiers should bear
no witness in any cause?
Ans. Because such kind of people are commonly given to wickedness, and for a
trifle ready to do a mischief.

Qu. What is nobility without virtue?
Ans. A bladder puffed up with pride and violence.

Qu. Which are the virtues that do conduct us to heaven?
Ans. Faith, hope, charity, piety, religion, and godliness.

Qu. Which is the poison of friendship?
Ans. Flattery.

Qu. What kind of ignorance is most dangerous?
Ans. Not to know God, and then not to know himself.

Qu. Wherefore is virtue so amiable?
Ans. Because she is always conformable to reason.

Qu. What war is lawful?
Ans. That which is conducted to obtain peace.

Qu. Wherefore is the first counsel of a woman which she gives without
thinking on it, far better then that which she has studied upon?
Ans. Even as all unreasonable creatures are by instinct of nature driven to
their actions: so a woman although she be ill, yet the intelligence which
nature has given her, which will not be deceived, nor abuse any body, compels
her by the first motion to good: But if she gets leisure to use her own
nature, all that she shall do will be naught.

Qu. Wherefore are women commonly more covetous then men?
Ans. Because they know they should be no body without riches.

Qu. Wherefore are those that have great heads more given to sleep then those
that have little heads?
Ans. The greater the thing is the more vapors it does contain, and humiditie
does cause sleep.

Qu. Why are lentiles and cabages so ill for the eye sight?
Ans. By reason of the melancholic blood which they engender.

Qu. What is the cause that many die with too much joy?
Ans. Because the vital spirits abandon the heart.

Qu. Wherefore ought we not to fast long?
Ans. By reason that by too much fasting a mass of ill humors is engendered,
and provoke vomit.

Qu. What is the cause that we have better stomachs to our meat when the wind
is at the North, then at other times?
Ans. By reason of his coldness which knits together and holds within us the
natural heat of our bodies.

Qu. What is the reason that Vinegar is very wholesome to those that are
choleric, and is of contrary operation to those that are melancholicke?
Ans. Because it asswageth choler by his coldness, and dries up melancholy.

Qu. What is the reason that in tract of time Wine becomes more whote?
Ans. Because the aquosity thereof euaporeth and vanishes away.

Qu. What is the cause that some wines sower so lightly?
Ans. Because that in the time of Vintage the grape was full of superfluous
humors.

Qu. Why does the wild Bore use to piss before he runs away?
Ans. To unlade him of the burden of his water for to run the swifter.

Qu. When is it nothing discommendable to exceed the mean?
Ans. When it is used to exercise and drive drowsinesse out of sluggards.

Qu. What husbands do not love their wives?
Ans. Those that love their bodies and their goods, and not their minds and
good conditions.

Qu. What is chiefly to be regarded in a witness?
Ans. His honesty, as in a Lawier eloquence and good utterance.

Qu. Why can young men hardly keep a mean?
Ans. By reason of the natural heat abounding in them.

Qu. How might a fool seem and be accounted wise?
Ans. If he goes brave in attire and speaks little.

Qu. What is the reason that some have hard and some have soft hear?
Ans. The greatness and smalnesse of the Pores is cause of it, for soft hear
comes by reason of the smalnesse of them, and hard hear for the contrary.
And therefore women have commonly softer hear the^ men, because their natural
cold does restrain and close the Pores.

Qu. What is the reason that Garlic and Onyons do bud although they are not
in the earth?
Ans. Because of their great abundance of moistness and heat.

Qu. Why is a dead body heavier then that which has life within?
Ans. A body alive is full of air and fire which do hold it upright, for
their nature is always to mount upwards, and a dead body is nothing but a
lump of earth, whose nature is heavy and always tending downwards.

Qu. What does prevent an occasion of murmuring?
Ans. Equality.

Qu. Why do vices shadow themselves under the color of virtues?
Ans. Because if they should come in their own shape, but few would give them
entertainment.

Qu. Why ought Parents to be very curious in seeking of good tutors and
masters for to instruct their children?
Ans. Because as their Parents are the fathers of their bodies, so the masters
are the fathers of their souls: and as children do imitate the nature of
those that have begotten them; so out of their masters manners as out of a
nurses breast, they suck their virtues and vices, their good and ill conditions.

Qu. What is it that in loving too much turns to mortal hatred?
Ans. Jealousy.

Qu. Who murdereth the living and the same of the dead?
Ans. A Slanderer.

Qu. Wherein is our enemy commonly better unto us then our friend?
Ans. Because our enemy spears not to tell us our faults, which friends seek
for the most part to hide from us.

Qu. What is as seldom found as the Phoenix of Arabia?
Ans. A trusty friend.

Qu. What is it that Kings cannot conquer?
Ans. Men's affections.

Qu. In what place is flattery a Jewel?
Ans. Where dissembling swaies the scepter.

Qu. What ought we in this life most to remember, and least to fear?
Ans. The hour of death.

Qu. What is man's life?
Ans. A thing more brickell then glass, more lighter then the smoke, and
swifter then the wind.

Qu. What garment is the best?
Ans. That which couers malice.

Qu. What are dice?
Ans. Fortunes whelps, which consume a man's wealth, and empaire his patience.

Qu. What are women's vows?
Ans. Words written in the wind.

Qu. What are their promises?
Ans. Carracters figured in the air, and figures graven in the snow.

Qu. What is a beautiful strumpet?
Ans. An Adamant that draws, and a Panther that with her painted skin does
allure men, and he that surfets with it, drinks deadly poison and so does
perish.

Qu. What are women's looks?
Ans. Kalends, that can determine no certainty.

Qu. Of what nature and condition is a woman?
Ans. Of the nature of quicksiluer, for as this metal wheresoever it meets
with gold it mingleth with it: so women they chiefly respect in a man his
wealth, and always will they prise gold for beauty or for any other internal
or external felicity.

Qu. Which are the two only means to win women's favor?
Ans. Sweet words and high praises.

Qu. What men are in one of the highest degrees of misery?
An. Those that are wise by their own woes, and those can make a right anatomy
of misery by their own distress.

Qu. What is a bad woman?
Ans. A painted continent of flattery, of deceit, of inconstancy, and the very
guide that leads men unto the pernicious labyrinth of endless misery.

Qu. What are women's courtesies?
Ans. Sharp showers.

Qu. Who slew the fourth part of the world?
Ans. Cain slaying his brother Abel.

Qu. What flower is in sight most beautiful, in smell most sauerous, and in
operation most deadly?
Ans. The pleasures of this world.

Qu. What is man?
Ans. The image of Christ.

Qu. What is a woman?
Ans. The similitude of man, and a cabinet of much good and evil.

Qu. What is a young man?
Ans. A burning candle soon perceived and quickly quenched.

Qu. What is more swifter then the wind?
Ans. A man's thought.

Qu. What is mote swifter then the thought of a man?
Ans. Time, for it tarrieth for nothing.

Qu. What is seldom seen and never prevented?
Ans. Destiny.

Qu. Which is the chiefest touchstone to try a man's friend and his own
patience?
Ans. Adversity.

Qu. What vices did darken Marcus Antonius his great liberality and patience
in adversity?
Ans. Dicing, drunkenness, gluttony, and too much familiarity with his
domestike servants.

Qu. What are the effects of Poetry?
Ans. Spurs and enticements to virtue.

Qu. Why did the Romans forbid the drinking of Wine to women?
Ans. Because it does provoke them to lust, and does altogether extinguish
reason in them.

Qu. What ought a servant chiefly to practice for to gain his masters favor?
Ans. Diligence, continuance and secrecy.

Qu. Who kills a man friendly?
Ans. A flatterer.

Qu. What soil bears both the best and the worst fruit?
Ans. The womb of a woman.

Qu. Why are Angels painted with wings?
Ans. To signify their quickness.

Qu. What might men do to be believed?
Ans. Wet their tongues on their hearts.

Qu. What difference is there between love and friendship?
Ans. As much as there is between beauty and virtue, substance and shadows,
for when adversities flow then love does ebb, but friendship stands always
fast in every storm and tempest.

Qu. What pleasure is chiefly bought with repentance?
Ans. The love of a strumpet.

Qu. What are the discommodities attending upon travelers?
Ans. To be forced to fit their humor to every place and person, to bear
many men's braues or feel the force of their weapon, to be often in danger of
thieves, many times of wild beasts, and ever of flatterers.

Qu. Why did the Caldies when they would set forth the picture of a Gentleman,
describe him with his hands always open?
Ans. To signify that liberality was the only imprease of a Gentleman, and
that to give was always heroical: and therefore Titus Emperor of Rome was
wont to say: Give, if thou will be worthy the worlds Monarchy.

Qu. What things are most welcome, most sweet, and best liked of?
Ans. Inexpected chances, losses recovered, and things seldom seen.

Qu. Whereunto may flatterers be compared?
Ans. To trencher flies, that attend more upon a man for hope of gain then for
any perfect love. To doves that flock chiefly where the house is fairest. To
empty vessels that have loud sounds, and have nothing within but wind. To
painted sheaths that have rustie blades. To glorious flowers that have no
smell: because they pretend much friendship, and contain nothing but
superficial flattery.

Qu. What is Love?
Ans. A passion full of Martyrdom, Misery, Grief and Discontent, having
pleasures but tempered with pains, and a short delight mixed with a long
repentance.

Qu. What is beauty?
Ans. A fading flower, to day fit for the eye, and to morrow withered and to
be cast into the grave.

Qu. Why did the ancients in old time past mislike of those that wished and
desired to be most happy and fortunate?
Ans. Because that too much fortune breeds forgetfulness, a contempt of God
and of all godliness.

Qu. For what cause were women being met at Rome in the streets by any of
their kindred, kissed by them?
Ans. For to know if they had drunken wine, for it was forbidden unto them to
drink any, as it appears by one Egnatius that slew his wife, because she had
drunk a cup of wine.

Qu. What was the reason that king Agesilaus would never suffer his picture to
be drawn or shadowed?
Ans. Because his only intent was to leave after him his deeds to serve in
steed of his picture, and so rather to represent the perfections of the mind,
then the external lineaments of the body.

Qu. What are open praises?
Ans. Secret flatteries.

Qu. Which are the three chiefest virtues of a souldior?
Ans. Prudence, Fortitude, and Liberality.

Qu. What is Wisdom?
Ans. A divine influence infused into the minds of men, which keeps them from
committing that whereunto they are forced by sensual appetite.

Qu. Why is virtue placed by equal proportion between two vices?
Ans. Because that the mean which is kept between two extremes, is that
laudible action which by no other name can be termed but by the title of
Virtue.

Qu. What makes men in earth famous, in their graves glorious, and in the
heavens immortal?
Ans. Virtue.

Qu. What is prodigality?
Ans. A fire of the mind, which is so impatient in heat, as it cease not
while any matter co^bustible is present to burn necessary things to dust and
cinders.

Qu. Who is only to be accounted a valiant man?
Ans. He that without any furious or rash resolution fears not to hazard
himself in the greatest perils whatsoever, for the welfare of his country.

Qu. What is the greatest prejudice that may happen unto a Commonwealth?
Ans. To be governed by an unwise prince.

Diverse pretty Riddles with dark sentences.
Question.
IVdge of me by perfect skill,
My youth restord by casting bill.
Solution.
An Eagle.
Question.
When I am old I cast my skin,
Whereby I do come young again.
Solution.
A Snaile.
Question.
What Judge on the earth did give,
The greatest sentence when he did live.
Solution.
Pilate when he pronounced sentence of condemnation against Christ Jesus.
Question.
White I am and black withal,
I have eyes and yet am blind,
Gain and loss not without brall
I do procure, as you shall find.
Solution.
Dice.
Question.
I wound the heart and please the eye,
Tell me what I am by and by.
Solution.
Beauty.
Question.
I am within as white as snow,
Without as green as herbs that grow,
I am higher then a house,
And yet lesser then a mouse.
Solution.
A Walnut hanging on the tree.
Question.
A maid there was that married a man,
By whom were many children gotten,
Yet all them died and went away,
Before their mother was begotten.
Solution.
It was Eve and her children who all died ere she was begotten, for she was
neither borne nor begotten, but created.
Question.
What mother a child does beget
And she of it is gotten again,
Which although strange it seems to be,
Yet it is true I tell thee plain.
Solution.
Water turning to Ise, and Ise again turning to water.
Question.
It Is black without and black within,
And has four corners as I win.
Solution.
A dry Turfe.
Question.
Oedipus that whilom have resolved a greater doubt,
Unfold this Riddle unto me which now I shall put out.
When I did live then was I dumb, and yield no harmony,
But being dead I do afford most pleasant melody.
Solution.
Any musical instrument that is made of wood.
Question.
Yet once again I mean to prove thy skill but in a jest,
Which if thou do resolve to me thou setst my mind at rest:
Whether was man created first before the beard, or else
The beard before the man, that show, and thou shall win the bells.
Solution.
All creatures created were before man in their kind,
And so was eke the bearded goat as we in books do find.
Question.
In at the window when I look
(Beat not your brain long about this)
Then in the house about I go,
Now tell me quickly what it is.
Solution.
The shining of the sun.
Question.
She set her back against the wall
And took up petticote smock and all,
There came a young man with a gin,
And put it in a handful in.
Solution.
A shoemaker put a new pair of shoes on a woman's foot.
Question.
There dwell four sisters near this town,
In favor like and like in gown
When they run for a prize to win
All at once they do begin
One runs as fast as does the other
Yet cannot overtake each other.
Solution.
The four wings of a Windmill.
Question.
When it through the wood does go
It touches every twigge below.
Solution.
It is the Snow.
Question.
When it does go through the wood,
It touches never a twigge forsooth.
Solution.
A penny in a man's purse.
Question.
I lay in bed and woe I was,
So did my wife but worse she was,
She bid me rise and put it in,
And thus we were both well again.
Solution.
A man with his wife lying in bed together heard some thieves about their
house, whereupon both being afeared, the good wife prayed her husband to rise
and sparre the door.
Question.
What is it that most nooses has,
Within the house made of a plate.
Solution.
The hangers where the pothookes hangs upon.
Question.
I am foul to be lookd unto,
Yet many seek me for to win,
Not for my beauty nor my skin,
But for my wealth and force to know:
Hard is my meat whereby I live,
Yet I bring men to dainty fare,
If I were not, then ale knights should
To sing this song not be so bold,
Nutmegs, Ginger, Sinamon and Cloves,
They gave us this jolly red nose,
The fourth parts of the earth I show
The time and hours as they do go.
As needful am I to mankind,
As any thing that they can find.
Many do take me for their guide,
Who otherwise should run aside.
Solution.
It is the loadstone, for without it no Pilot were able to guide a ship in the
Occean seas.
Question.
I am a chief strength of the land
When upon four pillars I stand
And if these four should fail indeed
Then should I find two more at need,
Four lights I have to be my guide,
And the fist shall not stand aside,
For it is more brighter then the sun,
And does remain when life is done,
And though one corpse two heads does wear,
No monster yet is it I swear.
Unknit this knot, and tell to me,
At leisure sir what I might be.
Solution.
A horseman being a horseback, who has four eyes with those of his horse:
and first is his reasonable soul, whereby he is chiefly guided nor is not
subject unto death.
Question.
Six Hares did run within a plain,
whom hounds had started out the nest:
Hill up, hill down, they ran amain
till they were weary, and then did rest.
They caught them once and scapd again
more eager went they then before.
And took more pains then (as I win)
to bare away the game and more.
The hounds and hunters all were one,
each liked his game and took his pray
But when the sport was past and done
they left the Hares, and came away.
Solution.
It is a match at bowls played in a bowling alley.
Question.
Ten men's length, and ten men's strength, and ten men cannot rayre it.
Solution.
A cable or rope which ten men cannot break by force.
Question.
Aman I was, man I am
But yet as tame as any lam.
Though I am blind the way I show,
Which all men that see me must go.
And to put your mind out of doubt,
Eight legs I have that bear about
My burden, more then any has
Unless he be in my estate.
In time therefore do learn of me,
As I before have done of thee.
If he had known that brought our woe
Ventred had not upon his foe,
But for his fault we subject be
To this estate where you see me,
I am that which you least desire,
But yet that you should most require,
Guess what I am good fit, therefore
Before you do knock at my door.
Solution.
It is a dead man and those four that do carry him to his grave, with Adam our
first parent who brought death into the world.
Question.
It swallows raw flesh stones and all
And in the midst it has a tongue,
Which never spoke ill of old or young.
Solution.
It is a Hawk that takes his stones for to cast.
Question.
Over a hole two stones there lie,
Stiff it went in, limber comes our,
Beloved it is of women all
And of our neighbors here about.
Solution.
It is corn that comes of the mill.
Question.
Sharp are my clothes as any pin,
be not rash therefore me to win.
But bring me naked to thy mill,
and then with me thy mind fulfill.
And though sweet thou findst me to be,
yet surfeit not sir upon me.
But for a change use me somewhile,
so shall thou not thy love beguile.
Solution.
It is a Chessenut, and by the mill is meant the mouth.
Question.
In open field I cannot lie,
And yet I may rest quietly,
Within a box of luory.
Solution.
It is a feather in a windy day.
Question.
Stiff standing, ruff hanging
Between a maids legs
In a frostie morning.
Solution.
It is a distaffe.
Question.
I am as little as any nit,
And serves the king at every bit.
Solution.
Salt.
Question.
Who wears his end about his middle
Once in his time, tell me this Riddle.
Solution.
A thief whose arms are tied with the halter wherewith he shall be executed.
Question.
My flesh and skin is red,
But white is all my heart,
Where round about a wall is set,
Beaten with every dart.
Solution.
It is a Cherry and a cherristone.
Question.
Yonder is it, and here I have it.
Solution.
A man's breath, or any other living creatures.
Question.
What wight is he that many does feed
And yet himself does die for need
Solution.
A preacher instructing others, and does quite contrary to his own doctrine,
and by these means starueth his soul.
Question.
Tell me sir whom I might be,
a father I had, but mother none,
Yet many a mother have had of me,
who all to earth with me are gone.
Solution.
Our first parent Eve who had no mother, and no other father then God almighty.
Question.
What is most likest to a horse
(Besides a Mare he means)
That feeds upon hay and grass,
Upon Pease, upon Beans.
Solution.
A Gelding.
Question.
My husband gives two gowns to me
of sundry colors every year,
Green is the one, which I do wear
So long till it be all thredbare,
White is the other as the Swan,
of many pieces up and down,
Yet like to that few workmen can
devise to make another gown.
The wiser sort (wherein they dote)
do call me fool upon a toy,
But yet of me they take a note
That death is past when I do joy.
Solution.
It is a Mulbery tree, green in the Summer, and white with Snow in the Winter,
who in Latin is called Morus, which signifies in Greek a fool. This tree is
of this nature, that it will not cast any buds before all other trees have,
whereby we certainly know when she begins to bud that the cold and Winter is
altogether past for that present season.
Question.
A ship there drives upon the tide,
that sails do bear, she has no masts,
But one oar she has of each side,
her sails the snow in whiteness pass.
In her front wears too lanternes bright
but when she is upon point to fall
Then lend an ear, for great delight
of music she affords to all.
Solution.
It is a Swanne, who being near her death sings most sweetly, as authors do
record.
Question.
God speed wife, and good speed dame,
Shall I put my rough rombello in your rough hame,
Put him in, and clap to the gate
For new shaven it was of late.
Solution.
A horse put into a new mowen meddow.
Question.
Round I am, yet cannot rest,
When I am spited of the best.
Solution.
A Tennis ball when two good players play together.
Question.
What man is he of wit so base
That wears both his eyes in a case
For fear of hurting them it is,
And I do find it not amiss.
Solution.
It is he that cannot well see without spectacles, and does carry them about
him in a case for fear of breaking them.
Question.
My prey I seek the fields and woods about
and have more teeth the^ beast within the la^d,
And whensoever my grave I have found out,
then safe I bring it to my masters hand,
Upon my back the dear he lays
and there does kill one, sometime more,
He shuts me up and goes his ways,
Better contented then before.
Solution.
It is a comb and a louse killed upon the back of it.
Question.
A tree there is that boughs does bear
in number five as I do know,
Of equal length they never were,
and on their tops do horns grow,
Yet they are tied about with gold
except the longest without doubt,
Which for use sake might be controld,
if it with gold were hoopt about.
Solution.
It is ones hand and his fingers that are full of golden rings, the middlemost
excepted, because a ring does not fit that finger.
Question.
I was Not, I am Not, and shall Not be,
yet I do walk as men may see,
I run and speak to get a fee
though I am not in my degree.
Solution.
It is a man whose surname was master Not.
Question.
Deaffe I am and cannot hear,
and when I work I feel no pain,
Some do curse me, some speak me fair
though well they know it is in vain.
Solution.
Dice and dicers.
Question.
What bloody Tyrant was that wight,
That with a murthring blow
The fourth part of the earth did slay:
Which thou can tell I trow.
Solution.
Cain in slaying of his brother Abell.
Question.
In what place of the earth
does the sky seem to be
No larger then a yard or twain,
which I pray tell to me.
Solution.
In the bottom of a well.
Question.
A thing that I take that I loose,
yet nothing to my woe,
And that I take not, that I keep,
yet would it feign forgo.
Solution.
He that is lousie, all those lice which he takes throws them away, and those
that he cannot take keeps them still, and yet would feign be rid of them.
Question.
What thing is only upon this earth not subject unto fear,
Nor does not weigh the threatenings of Tyrants, pin or hair?
Solution.
A good conscience.
Question.
What does with his root upwards grow,
And downwards with his head does show.
Solution.
An isesickle.
Question.
What is lesser then a Mouse,
And has more windows then a house.
Solution.
A spider in the midst of his web, or else a thymbell.
Question.
Belly to belly
Hand upon back,
I put a raw morsel
In a gaping gap.
Solution.
A mother or nurse that gives suck unto her child.
Question.
I do walk yet do not go,
I do drink yet no thirst slake,
I do eat yet do not feed,
I do work yet no work make.
Solution.
It is a man that dreams, who in his dream seems to do all these things, yet
in deed does none of them.
Question.
As bitter as gall,
As sweet as milk,
As high as a hale, and hard withal.
Solution.
A Walnut upon the tree.
Question.
I am nor fish, nor flesh, nor voice,
Yet when I am borne I make a noise.
Solution.
A fart, or else the thunder.
Question.
When we by the way do go,
Upon our shoulders we bear our way
If we were not then many should be
Wet to the skin in a rainy day.
Solution.
Masons, Tylers, and men of such like occupation, carrying ladders upon their
shoulders to build and tile houses.
Question.
M. and I. did make great moan,
When C. upon C. was left alone.
Solution.
Mary and John made great moan,
When Christ upon the cross was left alone.
Question.
When I to the wood do go,
Then my head homewards I do show.
Solution.
An axe.
Question.
In me and in my shining light.
Solution.
It is a burning candle.
Question.
In the last minute of mine age
I do wax young again,
And have so still continued,
since world did first begin.
Solution.
It is the Moon.
Question.
I do owe most yet nothing do I pay,
Evil I am, and the worst I say.
Solution.
Ingratitude, which monster receives good turns and paieth vengeance.
Question.
What men are those that backwards gain,
Their small living, not without pain.
Solution.
Gardeners and Ropemakers.
Question.
Old I am ere I am borne
And when I am hatched, take heed of me,
Or else thou may soon be forlorn
If thou do nothing look to thee.
Solution.
The grudge of a secret enemy long conceived in mind ere it is put in
execution.
Question.
What is it that God commanded to be done,
was not done, and yet God was well pleased.
Solution.
The sacrificing of Isaac.
Question.
My belly to thy side I lay,
And the hole is a sporting when we play.
Solution.
It is a Bagpipe.
Question.
Hitty pity within the wall,
And hitty pity without the wall,
If you touch hitty pity (my joy)
Hitty pity will bite the boy.
Solution.
It is a nettle.
Question.
Clincke clancke under a bancke,
Ten above four and near the flancke.
Solution.
A maid milking of a Cow.
Question.
Trip trap in a gap,
As many feet as a hundred sheep.
Solution.
It is the hail when it falls.
Question.
Red within and red without,
It is as ruff as a Bears snout.
Solution.
A strawbery.
Question.
A wicked father did beget
A daughter fit unto his hand.
But such good children she did get
That are the props of every land.
Solution.
The devil begot sin, and sin procured good laws which are the stays of
all gouernements.
Question.
God speed fair ladies by one and by one,
I am sent I cannot tell to whom,
And I do bring I cannot tell what,
I count her wise that tells me that.
Solution.
A lover sent to his love a messenger to put her in mind of her promise as to
come unto him, and she sent back this answer unto him.
Tell thy master in my name
Wheen trees are turned and wels be dry
And dead upon quick then come will I.
Meaning at midnight, when the fire brands should be turned upwards, and the
pots should be empty, and the fire raked up with the cold ashes, the^ she
would come.
Question.
I went and I could not tell whether,
I met and I wot not with whom,
He gave me that I shall never forget,
And yet I came a maiden home.
Solution.
A child that went to christening.
Question.
I have a smith without a hand
He works the work that no man can
He serves our God and does man ease
Without any fire in his furnace.
Solution.
It is a Be that makes honny and wax.
Question.
Foul is my fault that feeds me full,
To gorge on mothers bowels still,
I went abroad to seek my fire,
And my wives son I do desire
Such a one the man must be
As is the son of wife to me.
Solution.
Joseph went to seek Christ, when he found in the Temple Preachers amongst
those of the Synagogue.
Question.
What is it that in the morning
upon four legs does go,
And about noone it stands fast
upon two and no more:
I make all blind as did delight.
Question.
I am called by the name of man,
yet am as little as the mouse,
When Winter comes I love to be
with my red gorget near the house.
Solution.
A Bird called Robin red breast.
Question.
Although my body little is,
yet I do please the hearers ear
If I were tame it were not amiss,
Then I should live in lesser fear.
Solution.
The Nightingale.
Question.
What is it that more eyes does wear
then forty men within the land,
Which glister as the crystal clear,
against the sun when they do stand.
Solution.
A Peacockes tail.
Question.
When I go to the water side
at home my heart I leave behind,
Tell me what I am without pride,
if it by any means you find.
Solution.
It is a pillowbeare.
Question.
My head is round, my body small,
And I hold that, that savors all.
Solution.
A Salt seller and Salt.
Question.
Head and eye I am only,
What I may be now tell to me.
Solution.
A button of copper or of any metal.
Question.
A Bird upon a house I saw,
six legs it had, yet but one tail,
Two heads besides more then a daw
name me this Bird and win the ale.
Solution.
A hearnshaw had taken a frog and brought it to her young ones in the nest made
upon the top of a house.
Question.
All my body belly is
And lesser then it my mouth is not
I do contain that makes men mad
What I am sir now tell me that.
Solution.
A malt sack full of malt wherewith strong drink is brued.
Question.
My belly is bigger then all the rest
Wherein men use to put the best,
Broad is my foot, short is my neck,
If ill ye use me then fear a check.
Solution.
A bottle of glass.
Question.
My coat is green and I can prate,
Of diverse things about my grate,
In such a prison I am set
That has more loopholes then a net.
Solution.
A Parret in a cage of wyar.
Question.
I do assemble many wight,
Yet I keep me out of their sight,
And do not come once where they be,
Yet every day they may see me.
Solution.
A bell touling to a sermon.
Question.
What mill is it that has two wings
which fly about without the wind
A greasy miller looks to all things
whiles it does turn and does not grind.
Solution.
It is a jack, and the greasy miller is the cook.
Worthy sayings and ready answers, compyled into one book out of sundry
Chronicles, by A. P.
A very fit and fine comparison made by a Gentleman of Genua.
LOdowicks force willing to exact a great and an extraordinary sum of money
upon the inhabitants of the city of Genua. His ambassador was bid by one of
the cheifest of the city to dinner, and a little before dinner as they were
walking in the garden together, and the Citizen espying the herb Basil said
unto the Ambassador: Run softly my Lord with your hand over this herb, and
then smell unto it, which he did, confessing it to have a most sweet and
comfortable savor. Now my lord (quoth the Citizen) strain and bruise this
herb in your hand and then smell unto it, which he did, affirming it to have
a noisome and foul smell. Whereupon the Citizen said unto him, my lord, if
the Duke Lodowick runs softly with the hand of his power and authority over
this city without either force or violence, he shall find her of a good smell
and wonderful obedient, but if he does oppose himself against her and does
strain and force her, she will yield him a sower and a hard taste and savor
by disobedience and rebellion. The humanity of Princes makes obedient and
tractable Citizens.

The answer of Iouian Pontanus.
IOuian Pontanus a very excellent Poet and Philosopher being demanded upon a
time wherefore he did eat but of one dish at meals, and of that yet very
soberly: answered, To the end I should have no need of the Physician.

All Physicians affirm that the diversity of meats hinders digestion, and
breeds diseases.

A comparison made by a Spaniard.
THe lord Gonsalues playing at dice and being a great looser, perceived his son
Alexander to be grieved at it, whereupon he said unto certain Gentlemen there
present, The Hystories record that Alexander the Great being a child did weep
when he heard that Philip his father had obtained the victory of a battle, and
besides had conquered a kingdom all at once: And being demanded wherefore he
wept, answered that he feared that his father would win so many realms and
countries that he should leave him none for to conquer. And quite contrary
(quoth the lord Gonsalues) is it with my son Alexander now ready to weep
for my cross luck and great losses, because he fears that I shall loose so
much that I shall leave him nothing for to loose.

A pretty quippe given unto two Cardinals by a Painter.
RAphell Vrbin being a very excellent and skillful Painter, upon a time hearing
two Cardinals (with whom he was very familiar) to reprove and find fault
(only for to anger him) with a certain picture of S. Peter and S. Paul, which
he had very artificially painted and finished, saying that the pictures faces
were too high colored and too red, without further studying gave them this
answer: My lords marvel not hereat, for I have purposely so painted them as
they are now in heaven, and not as they were here upon earth, for this redness
comes unto them blushing even for very shame to see the church so ill
governed by such and such like as your lordships.

The answer which the great Turk gave to the Ambassadors of the King of
Hungary.
Bajazet Emperor of the Turks, inuading with a great army Bulgary a part of
Hungary, The king Sigismondus sent his ambassadors unto him to desire him not
to molest and trouble his subjects and country, whereunto by no law he had not
any right claim or title. Bajazet to answer hereupon, caused great store of
armours and other warlike instruments to be brought into a certain hall
appointed for that purpose, and having sent for the Kings Ambassadors, said
unto them: Lo here (my lords, pointing with his finger upon the armours) the
titles whereby I do claim, and am to possess the crown and kingdom of
Hungary.

Right and equity have no place in the court of a Tyrant.

A pleasant reproouing of the Marquis of Mantua.
FRederick Marquess of Mantua, as he did sit at dinner among many Gentlemen,
one of them having almost made an end of his porrige, supt up the rest, and to
excuse his inciuilitie craved pardon of the company. The Marquess in presence
of them all gave him this ready answer, sir, ask pardon of the Swine, for
unto us you have done no offense or injury.

A worthy deed of an Italian knight.
AN Italian knight as he was sitting at dinner, saw two Gentlemen that had
always behaved themselves most valiantly in the wars and had done good
service to their country, to stand as abiects of the company, because all
places were taken before: whereupon he did rise, and so caused all the rest to
rise with him for to make place unto these two Gentlemen, saying: Give place
unto these two Gentlemen for to eat their meat, for if they had not been with
us in such a fight (naming the place) we should at this time have had nothing
for to eat.

The tyrannical sentence of Prospero Colonna.
PRospero Colonna Collonell of the Italian infanterie within the Garrison of
Milan, a Citizen of the twon came unto him complaining against the exactions
spoils and forceable robberies of his soldiers, unto whom he gave this
answer: Mylan is like unto a Goose, for the more he is pulled the fairer will
be his feathers.

Of Pope Sixtus the fourth and a Friar.
POpe Sixtus the fourth having been a Friar of S. Francis order, and being
advanced to the Papal dignity, was visited upon a certain time by a Friar of
his Order, who had been one of his chiefest friends and familiars: the Pope
willing to show him some private favor, brought him into his cabinet, wherein
he had a very rich treasure, and smiling said unto the poor Friar: Now Frater,
I cannot say that which S. Peter my predecessor said: Aurum nec argentum habeo,
I have neither gold nor silver. It is most true (quoth the Friar) but holy
Father you cannot say likewise as he said to the impotent, creple and lame,
Surgite and ambulate, Arise and walk.

The wise saying of Charles the fifth Emperor.
News being brought unto the Emperor as he sat in counsel, that the Marquis
of Guassa was with all his forces disco^fited by the Frenchmen, Cardinal
Grandelle his Chancellor, fearing that the affairs of the Realm should
succeed the worse for it, said to the Emperor: Sacred Majesty, this ill
reencountre is to be kept secret. Whereupon the Emperor answered, It is not
possible to keep things close done before so many witnesses, but that which
is yet to be done and attempted, is not to be revealed.

It is very dangerous to a Realm when the enemy knows the secrets as soon
as they are determined.

Of the humility of Godefrey Duke of Buillon.
When the Duke Godefrey of Buillon with consent of all the Christian Princes
was chosen king of Jerusalem, and thereupon the royal crown was offered and
presented unto him, he did refuse it, saying: It is not meet for me a
Christian Prince to wear a crown of gold, whereas Christ King of Kings did
wear but one of thorns.

The last will of Saladin King of Asia.
SAladin King of Asia, Syria, and Egypt, declared upon his death bed how
miserable he knew the nature and state of man to be: and therefore commanded
that being dead they should cause his shert to be carried upon a lance
through all his camp, and insight of all the lords, captains, and soldiers of
his army, and he that should carry it should cry with a loud voice, Saladin
subduer and vanquisher of all Asia amongst all his riches which he has gotten
and conquered, carries nothing with him but this only linen.

The greatest triumphs of man in parting out of this world, are the works of
charity and godliness.

The wise answers of Antonius Panormus to King Alphonsus.
ANtonius Panormus being demanded of the King what was most necessary and
requisite unto them that would live together peaceably in the state of
marriage, because that most commonly as the Poet says:

Semper habet lites alternaque surgia lectus
Inqua nupta iacet,
that is,

With quietness is seldom blessed,
The bed wherein a wife does rest.
Answered, that there were two things most requisite: The first, that the
husband were deaffe, for not to hear all the follies, scolding words, and ill
reports of his wives disordered life: The second, that the wife were blind, for
not to see the great enormitie and excessive intemperance of her husband.

Of King Lewys of France and a soldier.
KIng Lewys in his wars against the Emperor being on a time in one of his
battles somewhat far from any of his companies, a certain Germane knight
thinking to make himself rich by the present opportunity, surprised the king
unawares, and staying his Majesty's horse by the bridle, cried out with a loud
voice, The king is taken. The king full of courage and magnanimity drew his
courtelax, and gave the poor soldier such a blow that he fell dead upon the
ground; and then said, Now you may see bold and aduenterous knight that at
chesse the king was never taken alone.

Of the said King and the Chauncellor of Bourgony.
THe said king Lewys having heard that the Duke of Bourgony his Chauncellor,
being a very rich and wealthy man, had founded and erected in his country a
very sumptuous and a costly hospital as well in building as in moouables, said
that it was more then reason that the Chancellor of Bourgonie (who had in his
life time made many poor men) should at the end of his days build an
Hospital for to lodge and to relieve them.

The subtle answer of Edward King of England unto John King of France.
DVring the truce which was between Edward King of England, and John King of
France, the Englishmen by composition and a great sum of money took the
castle and the town of Guines, whereupon King John complained, saying that the
King of England had broken the truce of peace so solemnly confirmed by oath, and
had done contrary to the contract thereof. The King of England gave him this
answer, I have not (quoth he) broken the least point of the contract, for in
it is never an article contained, whereby it is forbidden to traffic
together, and to exercise the truce of merchandise one with another.

Touching a benefice.
A Certain Ecclesiastical man having but one benefice, railed and inneighed
most sharply always against those that were Non residents. It came to pass by
tract of time that he happened to join one benefice to another, and as he was
for it reproved by some of his friends, who oftentimes had heard him speak
and preach against it, and had known him always to be of a contrary opinion:
gave them this answer, I crave pardon for it sirs for it was but for want of
sight, for he that has but one eye sees not so clear as he that has two.
My benefice which I had first was but one eye wherewith I did see, but now
having two eyes I perceive things more apparent then before.

The words of Pope Julius as touching the exercise of wars.
THis Pope was a man that loved wars, which purposely he nourished between
kings and Princes, and as upon a time some of his friends did say unto him,
Holy Father, many noblemen find it very strange to see you to maintain wars
and civil broiles, seeing the estate where God has called you unto should be
a place of peace and quietness, saying that you do carry the keys to that end
for to shut out all discord and dissension, and to let in all brotherly unity,
whereas now they accuse you to do the contrary. Hereupon he answered and said,
Those that have spoken hereof unto you, know not what they say: Have ye not
always heard that S. Peter and S. Paul were companions (and in very deed they
had but one church) my predecessors have always used S. Peter's keys, but I
will aid me with the sword of Saint Paul. One amongst them replied hereupon
and said, you know holy Father that our Lord said unto S. Peter, Put up thy
sword into his sheath: It is true (quoth the Pope) but it was after the blow
was given.

By these words he declared that he was Martial altogether.

Of King Alphonsus and his iester.
ALphonsus King of Naples, had in his court a certain iester who was wont to
write in a book all such follies which in his judgment seemed worthy to be
noted, which such as were courtiers did oftentimes commit. It happened that the
King himself had occasion to send a Blackamoore whom he had had long about
him, into the East countries with ten thousand Ducats for to buy horses. The
ieaster according to his ordinary use did enregister this act likewise among
his other writings, as if he had accounted it but a mere point of folly. Not
long after the King called for his book, because it was long since his Majesty
had read in it, and as he was perusing every thing, found at last the
history of himself, of his Blackamoore, and of the thousand ducats in it.
The king being herewith offended, asked of his iester to what end he had put
this in his book, or what occasion had moved him so to do: Because, answered
he, your Majesty has not done wisely in my simple judgment to trust your
money with a stranger, whom perhaps you are like to see no more. But if he
returns (quoth the king) and brings with him the horses, what will thou say
then to it? Will thou then further accuse me of folly? When he shall be
returned, answered the iester hereupon, I will blot your name out of my book,
and will put in his instead of it, for then he shall prove a greater fool
then your majesty.

Of the Archbishop of Colen and a laborer.
A Certain labourer as he saw upon a time the Archbishop of Colen riding all in
arms, and accompanied with a great troop of soldiers, did heartely laugh at
it. Hereupon being demanded why he did laugh, answered simply that he did
laugh, maruelling that S. Peter Christ's vicar being himself very poor had
left his successors thus rich and wealthy, and were rather accompanied with
Soldiers and Courtiers then churchmen. The Archbishop willing to instruct him
better in this point, told him that he was a Duke by birth and an Archbishop by
calling, and that he at that present as Duke went thus in arms and guarded
with soldiers, but when he had occasion to be in the church, that then he
used himself as a Bishop. My lord (quoth the labourer, I would to God then you
would tell me that if the Dukes grace should happen to fall to the devils
share, what should then become of my lord the Archbishop?

The sentence of the Duke of Britane.
John the eight Duke of Britane willing to marry his son Francis unto Isabell
daughter to the king of Scotland: the young Prince inquired what she was for a
lady, answer was made him that she was a very fair Damsel, well favored,
comely of body, and well disposed for to bear children, but that she wanted
utterance. She is such a one as I desire quoth the young Duke: for I account a
woman wise enough when she can make a difference between her husbands shert
and his doublet, and knows his bed from another man's.

The answer which Empress Barbara late wife to Sigismundus Emperor gave to
those that gave her counsel to remain a widow.
AFter the Emperor Sigismundus decease, madame Barbara his late wife was
counseled by some of her familiers to continue in that blessed estate and to
remain a widow, immitating the example of the Turtledoue, which after the
death of her mate coupleth no more with any of her kind, but keeps a
perpetual chastity. Hereupon the Empress answered, If you counsel me to
imitate and follow the conditions and nature of the birds, in whom there is no
reason, why do you not as well allege unto me the example of the Pigeons and
Sparrowes which are birds in their kind, as well as of the Turtledoue?

Even as the Turtledoue after the death of her mate does couple no more with
any other of her kind, even so the Pigeon and the Sparrow are always in love
indifferently with the birds of their nature and feather.

The ancient ceremony which was used in the creation and anointing of Kings.
When any King was crowned in times past (which was commonly in that place
where his predecessors were buried) the Bishop that should anoint and install
him, carried before him in his left hand a small bundle of tow, and in his
right hand a burning torch or waxen candle, and as he was putting the fire unto
the flax, turned his face toward the king, and said unto him with a loud
voice. Sic transit gloria mundi, So the pomp and glory of the world does
vanish away, which he repeated three times.

It was for to join humility to authority.

The answer which the Earl Lazaram gave to the Tartarian Ambassadors.
THe king of Tartary willing to invade with a great power the kingdom of
Hungary, sent his ambassadors to the court of Lazaram with a Mule laden with a
sack full of corn, to demand of him free and quiet passage through his
country, so to enter into the kingdom of Hungary. The ambassadors performing
their commission, found the Earl upon one of his castles called Archforme: and
being well informed of their charge, demanded of him free passage for their
lord and his army with such due and faithful obedience as it became unto him:
their lord and king was else determined to send into his territories more
Soldiers then there were grains of corn within the sack that was upon the
Mules back, and therewith they scattered the corn over all the court of the
castle. The Earl having heard them with patience, gave them likewise a most
bountiful entertainment, and appointing to give them answer the third day,
caused in the mean time to be gathered a great store of Cocks, Hens, and
Chickins, and to be shut up for his purpose three days without meat, which
being immediately executed by his servants, at the time expired, the Duke caused
all these fowls to be brought into the court of his castle in presence of
the said Ambassadors, which in less then half an hour had picked up all the
corn thus scattered by the Tartarians. Hereupon the said Earl said to the
Ambassadors, Tell to your lord in my name, that notwithstanding the great
number of his men, yet shall he nor be able to set out so many as shall
suffice to overcome and conquer us, as you have seen by the similitude of my
Chickins. God also gave to the Earl the victory.

The answer which Erasmus of Roterdam sent to king Francis.
KIng Francis having earnestly solicited by some of his ambassadors, that
worthy and renowned personage Erasmus of Roterdam, that it would please him to
come into France, and receive of him the best entertainment which he were able
to give him: for this king did account it one of his cheifest felicities to
have diverse learned men about him. Erasmus sent his Majesty this answer,
Learned men (my sovereign) resemble fair tapistries, which the further they
stand removed from the eye, the fairer and perfecter they seem to be, but if
they are viewed and regarded near by, they loose much of their former grace,
beauty and perfection. And therefore (my soueraign) pardon me if I had rather to
remain your humble servant in these parts where I am, in such reputation with
your majesty as I am already, then nearer unto your highness in less favor
and estimation.

A most Christian act done by the Earl of Anion.
FOokes the fifth of that name Earl of Anion, as he had won a great battle
against his enemies near the town of Sees, his Soldiers had taken a great
number of prisoners, whom they had bound, chained, and had lodged them within
the church. The Earl in the morning willing to hear service, and seeing so
many prisoners within the church, wonderfully displeased with it, turned his
face toward his soldiers saying unto them, My fellow-souldiors and friends,
what have you done, do ye not know that the church is the house of God and a
place of prayers and of liberty? And you have made it a prison, and a den of
thraldom; wherein you have been very much ouerseene: and hereupon caused all
the prisoners to be loosed and set at liberty, and having given them meat
and drink sent them all away without paying any ransom.

A Pasquill of Leo the tenth.
PAsquil is an old pillar of stone standing in the market place of Rome,
whereupon every first day of the year called New Years day, every man fasteneth
(closely notwithstanding) many scrols, libels, and writings, in praise and
dispraise of Princes and great potentates. It happened that in Pope Leos days
the tenth of that name, there was set upon this pillar a white paper wherein
these seven letters stood written.

M. C. C. C. C. L. X.
THe Pope being very desirous to understand the signification hereof, and
knowing that every man would interpret them by virtue of the letters
numerable, 1460, being the date of a time past already, and knowing that these
letters should have some other signification and intelligence, caused a
diligent inquiry to be made for to find him out that had set up this scrol,
and with much ado the party being found out at last and brought before the
Pope, and earnestly demanded and examined upon the interpretation of those
letters, did promise to declare and expound them upon condition that his
holiness would vouchsafe to pardon him and never to trouble or molest him for
it. This being promised, he said unto the Pope: Holy Father, these seven
letters will be thus interpreted.

Multi Cardinales Caeci, Creauerunt Caecu^, Leonem, Decimum. A worthy act of
Galatius Duke of Milan.
IT was told to Galatius that there was in Milan a very crafty and subtle
Lawier for inuenting of means to prolong causes, and to make them never ended
whenever he had undertaken to do it either for favor or else for money. The
Duke desirous to try his skill, inquired of one of his stewards if there were
nothing due to any that furnished his house with provision and necessaries. The
books of account being perused, there was found a hundredth pounds to be due to
the Baker. Hereupon the Duke caused the poor man to repare before the Senate,
and addressing himself to this advocate, demanded counsel of him for delaying
the payment of this money. The Lawyer promised the Duke that he would find
means and law that the Baker should finger no part of that money in a whole
year, or else in two, if it seemed good unto him. The cause being debated and
ready to be judged, the Duke himself demanded of the Lawyer if it were
possible to find some further remedy to delay the payment of the said sum. To
whom the crafty Lawyer answered, that the cause should not be ended yet in
two years. O wonderful injustice (quoth the Duke) and man full of iniquity?
Know thou not that I owe the man this money? Will thou against my conscience
and thine own wilfully frustrate the poor of their right, and of that which
is due unto them? Shall a man go to law for that which he owes, Take this
villain hence, said he, unto his men, and let him presently be executed
without further judgment, and let his body be quartered, to the end that other
may take example by his fall to beware of the like, and that hereafter the
Commonwealth be no more corrupted by him. This sentence with the full consent
of the Senate was presently executed.

The great charity of a Duke of Sauoy.
A Certain Duke of Sauoy being asked by the ambassadors of the king of Naples,
where his Gray-hounds were which he fed for the chase, and moreover that it
would please him to let them have a view of them: The Duke did defer it till
the next day, saying, that if they would the^ take the pains to come unto him,
they should have a sight thereof. The next day as they came at the time
appointed, he brought them into a great and large hall, where a great number
of poor people were eating and drinking at a long table. Behold now, quoth the
Duke to the Ambassadors, the Gray-hounds which I feed, wherewith I pretend to
chase and to take (next that which my Savior has purchased for us all) the
kingdom of heaven and life everlasting.

The works of charity are of so great force that the Scripture in every place
does most earnestly commend them unto us, with such an assurance of reward,
that a cup of cold water shall not be given for Gods sake without a tenfold
recompense.

The pleasant answer of a Gentleman.
A Young Gentleman whose mother was lately deceased, did mourn for her, and
being seen upon a certain time in the kings court mounted a horse back with
his foot-cloth of crymson velvet, the ladies and other damsels of the court
laughed him to scorn, saying, that they found it very strange to see his horse
decked with a foote-cloth of red velvet, whereas he himself did mourn for the
death of his Mother. My ladies (replied the Gentleman hereupon) you have herein
some reason, but yet ye ought to consider likewise that the mother of my horse
is not yet dead as that he should mourn for her.

Of Cardinal Cossa that made himself Pope by force.
THe Cardinals being assembled together in the city of Bologne upon the
election of a new Pope immediately after the decease of Pope Alexander,
Cardinal Baltasar Cossa (bishop of the said place) came also there in counsel
accompanied with a great number of soldiers, saying to all the Cardinals there
present, if they did not choose a Pope according to his mind and liking, that
he would make them all to repent it. The whole assembly being astonished at
these threatenings, and seeing so many soldiers about the counsel house, named
diverse unto him, but none did like orcontent him. Hereupon as they were all
taken with a great fear, willed him to name one himself, and if he were fit
for the place, they said that they would accept of him. Cossa hereupon called
for the Papal cope for to put it upon him whom he would have chosen, which as
it was brought, took it, and casting it over his own shoulders said, Ego sum
Papa. The Cardinals although it was an act against custom, were
notwithstanding constrained to consent to this extraordinary election, and
called him Pope John the thirteenth.

Ambition in all estates causes great troubles, and brings the ministry in
great contempt.

Of a request presented to king Alphonsus.
BEcause king Alphonsus was known to be a Prince delighting greatly in the
hearing and saying of words well and readily spoken. A certain man of base
degree and somwhar needy, addressed himself to the king, saying, My sovereign
do justice unto me and give me the law, I have a creditour to whom my father
now lately deceased did owe a debt, my father left me nothing wherewith to pay
him, yet notwithstanding upon his earnest suit I made shift to pay it him, and
he so instantly demanded the same again afterward of me, that I was forced
to pay him the same debt again: He yet not contented herewith, did molest me
afterward again for the same debt, and yet at this present sues me most
vehemently for it. I have left nothing wherewith I should pay him, and if your
grace does not assist me in this extremity, I shall be undone for ever. Truly
(quoth the king) this is an unreasonable and a most cruel creditor, What is he
for one? My liege (answered the poor man) it is my belly, to whom I have
paid the debt so long and so oftentimes, that nothing is remained wherewith to
content him any more, these are therefore humbly to entreat your grace to
assist me in my wants, and to help me for to give him his due. I have such
another creditor (said the king:) your grace speaks most true answered the
poor man, but God be thanked you have always enough wherewith to pay him, and
not I. The King hearing this request so well invented, commanded a piece of
money to be given him.

King Lewis sayings touching those that had benefices and offices.
He was wont to say that asses had for the most part better days and lived
more at hearts ease then horses did, for horses (quoth he) run in post to Rome
for prebends and benefices, whereof many asses are already provided.

Of king Alphonsus.
THis king as he heard upon a time that a certain king of Spain had said that
literature was not greatly to be required in a Prince, answered, That this was
bellowed as an ox, and not spoken as a king: and that they were not the words
of a man, but of a crowned ass.

Of the same king, and one begging another man's office.
A Certain officer of his having with an amorous potion lost his wits, one of
the Courtiers did beg for his office and living, as if it were unmeet that his
place ware supplied by a mad man. It were a most ungodly deed (answered the
king) to take the substance and living from him whom God has barred from all
means to get and gather any more hereafter.

The last will and Testament of a Lawyer.
A Certain Lawyer having in his life time gathered together great riches, and
having no kindred to who^ he might bequeath his wealth, as he lay upon his
death bed, disposed all his goods to be employed in the building of an
hospital, wherein no other diseased persons should be received but such as
were mad and lunaticke, and allowing every man a large and ample portion to
their mainteinance, willed that upon both the gates of the hospital this
poesy should be ingraued in golden letters, Of mad men I got it, to mad men I
leave it.

The counsel which Cosme de medicis gave to a certain officer.
A Certain man as he had gotten an office not far from Florence by the mean
of Cosme de medicis, demanded and asked counsel of the said Lord how he were
best to behave himself in his place for to keep himself in authority. The
lord Cosme gave him this answer, Apparel thy self richly, and speak little.

He that speaks little cannot be reproved of folly, and brave attire
increases reputation.

A bold answer which a captain gave to king Charles the seventh.
A Certain Captain being sent from the camp to Charles the seventh, King of
France, for to show unto him the whole estate of the Army, and that for want of
victuals, money and other necessaries of war, the Frenchmen had lost some
holds, towns and battles, against the Englishmen. The king willing to use some
private familiarity with him, showed him all his dainty fare, delicious
provisions and furniture, all his pastimes, his ladies and sumptuous banquets,
and all other such like things wherein he took his cheifest recreation and
felicity. And as he demanded how it did like him, the Captain boldly and
without fear gave him this bold and resolute answer, My sovereign (quoth
he) I never saw Prince that lost his own more pleasanter then your Majesty.

He is very blind that sporteth when the roof of his house is on fire.

The saying of Pope Urban the fifth of that name.
CHarles king of France willing to void his Realm of all outlandish and
foreign soldiers, who after the contract of peace did straggle and range
abroad and lived upon the spoil of the poor Farmers and husbandmen: The lord
Bartrand obtained a commission of the king for to lead them into the kingdom
of Granada against the Turks and Sarrazins. And as Pope Urban had
excommunicated all this desperate crew of soldiers for their violence and
robberies by them committed under the name and title of the Great companies,
The lord Bartrand being General of the Army brought them through Auingnon
where Pope Urban was resident, who immediately here upon sent one of his
Cardinals unto them for to know what was their demand. Unto who^ the lord
Bartrand said, Tell our Holy father that these men demand a full pardon, De
culpa and poena of all their sins, and chiefly for them which they are now
excommunicated for: And besides five thousand crowns for their conduct money
upon this voyage and journey, which is to the establishment and enlargement of
the Christian faith and religion. The Cardinal having done this message to the
Pope, he gave him this answer and said: These are a strange kind of people
that desire both money and absolution, whereas we are always wont to receive
money for our pardons and obsolutions.

A worthy sentence of Solomon the great Turk to Villiars master of Rhodes.
When Villiars grand-maister of Rhodes, was forced to yield the city and
Island of Rhodes unto Sultan Solomon, and as he came to the said Prince to
compound and agree with him upon the taking of his leave for his return into
Christendom, the Turk spoke a word unto him answereable unto his greatness
and calling. The loss of cities, principalities and kingdoms, is a thing so
common amongst men, that it only might suffice to testify that we are all
subject to infinite myseries.

Of Pope Boniface.
POpe Boniface ere he was chosen to be Pope of Rome, used a very strict kind
of life, for his ordinary diet was for the most part nothing else but a crust of
dry bread with a cup of cold water, and in steed of a linen cloth caused
always his table to be covered with a net. And being demanded of his friends
why he used so sober diet, answered, that Panis and aqua, was Vita beata. But
as he was now come to the papal dignity, and as his servants were ready to
serve him according to his former order, away (quoth he) unto the^ with this
kind of diet, for know you not that Aqua and panis, est vita canis? And
further, said he, seeue me with a napkin in steed of a net, for now the pray is
taken. It is said of this Pope, that he entered as a Fox, reigned as a lion,
and died as a dog: for by hypocrisy he came to that place, behaved himself
in his government most cruelly, and at last was hanged out of a window, and so
these three sayings were verified.

King Alphonsus answer to a prodigal Gentleman.
A Certain Gentleman having wasted and spent all his stock and patrimony upon
the pleasure of his body, and moreover being greatly indebted to his creditors
who did sue him by law and imprisonment for to come by their own, his friends
came to the king humbly requesting his highness, that it would please him to
command that the Gentleman might not be molested with imprisonment, unto
whom the king made this answer (...) had spent his (...) entertain^^ (...)
^^nce of hi^ (...) her (...), I (...) only, it is great reason that his body
also smart for it.

An act of the Duchess of Bourbon.
THe Duchess of Bourbon having in her court a certain waighting maid, who
for love had forgotten her self, and so was gotten with child: as she was
chidden and reproved for her fault, said to excuse it and to save her honesty,
that a Gentleman of the house had forced and defloured her against her will.
The Gentleman hereupon being called for to appear and clear himself before
the duchess, she finding him (...) should never have fallen into this
inconvenience, where you are in at this present by your own fault and folly.

Of King Francis and a Friar.
FRancis the first of that name King of France, as he was playing at Tennis
with a Friar, for whom purposely he had sent, because his Majesty knew him
to be a very good and skillful plaier: as they had played together a pretty
while, at last the Friar took a Ball with so great a dexterity and so good a
nimblenesse of body that it was not done without great wondering of all the
beholders. The king himself seeing it, by my truth (quoth he) most bravely
done of a Friar. It shall be of an Abbot (replied the Friar upon it) whensoever
it shall seem good to your grace. The king being thus twice at one time
surprised by a Friar, and the Abbey of Bergomoy being vacant at that present,
made him for them words (so well and readily spoken) Abbot of it.

The ready wit of a Venetian Gentleman.
A Young Lawyer coming before the Senate of Venice for to debate a cause and
matter in law, partly with fear and partly with shame, his tongue upon the
sudden failed him: Many of the assistants hereupon began to laugh at him. A
Gentleman there present not unprovided of a pleasant reason said unto them,
Marvel not sirs, that his speech thus fails him, for naturally (as the
Philosophers say) man apperceiuing a Wolf suddenly loses his speech, and no
marvel then if this young advocate seeing so many people in this place is thus
suddenly taken and tongtied.

The verses which the Emperor Frederick sent to the Pope, and the Popes answer
upon them.
Frederick Emperor of Germany, upon his excommunication by the Pope, sent
unto him these verses. Roma diu totubans varijs erroribus acta
Corruet and mundi desinet esse caput.

The Popes answer. Niteris incassum nauem submergere Petri:
Fluctuat, at nunqua^ mergitur illa ratis.

The Emperor. Fata volu^t, stellaque docent, auuimque volatus
Quod Fredericus ego malleus orbis ero.

The Pope. Fata volu^t, scriptura docet, peccata loqu^tur
Quod tibi vita breuis, poena perre^nis erit.

The Emperor being at last reconciled again, and coming to Rome to submit
himself to the Pope, as he was thither arrived and did humble himself at his
feet, the Pope most arrogantlie treading upon the Emperors shoulders, and
using these speeches unto him, Super aspidem and Basiliscum ambulabis and non
inficient calceaneum pedis tui. The Emperor moved at this extreme pride, said
to the Pope again, Non tibi, sed Petro. The Pope most presumptuously answered
unto it again, Et mihi and Petro, and so dismissed the Emperor.

An act of a Duke of Sauoy.
PEter Duke of Sauoy as he went to the Emperor Otto the fourth, for to give
him thanks for his lands which he had restored again unto him, attired
himself in a coat half of male and half of tissue. The Emperor demanding
him why he did wear so strange and disguised a cote of tissue and half of
male, answered that he did wear the cloth of gold on his right side for to
honor therewith his Majesty. And as touching my left side (quoth he) it
signifies that if any man seeks to wrong or injury me I am ready to answer
him in any place, and defend my self as long as a drop of blood shall be
remaining within me.

The answer which the Emperor Maximilian gave to him that sued unto him for
to be a gentleman.
THe Emperor Maximilian as he was at Bologne, a certain Citizen of that
place being of no gentilitie, otherwise very rich of substance and possessions,
came to the Emperor and desired his grace that it would please him for to make
him a Gentleman, saying that he had wealth enough to maintain the state of
it. The Emperor answered him, saying. I can make thee (my friend) far richer
then thou art, but I am not able to make thee a Gentleman, for unto this degree
of honor thou must attain either by thine own or else thy ancestors virtue and
valiantness.

VICTVS ET CVLTVS ratio exposita quatuor in singulos menses Versibus, Per
Ioachimum Camerarium.
JANVARIVS.
MEnsis amat tepido ianidocurrcre victu,
Et refici grato saepe liquore iubet.
Vena tibi nullos exudet secta cruores
Sed calida fas est mergere corpus aqua.
FEBRVARIVS.
Februae olus, volucresque cibis odere palustres
Esseque inertifica Febre timenda solent.
Pharmaca tunc hauri tunc scinde in pollice venam
Et calido multum flumine membra foue.
MARTIVS.
Martius humores and terrae and corporis auget,
Tunc ratio est pari magna tuenda cibi
Dulcia tunc prosunt acri condita sapore.
Pharmaca non prosunt venam aperire nocet.
APRILIS.
Frigore vim lent reuocat telluris. Aprilis,
Tunc etiam est tenuis perque forata cutis.
Tunc intus sunt aucta magis suntque omnia plena
Soluere se venture, vena apperire iubet.
MAIVS.
Omnia iam florent iam formosissimus annus
Jamque sibi cuncti mollius esse volunt.
Balnea nunc cole, nunc sit pharmaca sumere cura
Et tibi nunc misso sanguine vena fluat.
JVNIVS.
Iunius and gaudet gelidis and pascitur herbis
Viuifico humori tunc inimica fuge.
Laetitia and recreet tunc mentem blanda voluptas
Affligat corpus nec medicina tuum.
JULIUS.
Aeris ignufluos intendit Julius aestus
Hoc brcuior somno tempore danda quies
Balnea vitentur nec venam tangere ferro
Nec dominae petulans accubuisse velis.
AUGUSTUS.
Ipse etiam Augustus somnum restringit and escas
Et veneris cupidos gaudia far vetat.
Pharmaca nemo bibat laceret neque corpora ferro
Nec gelidas intra delicietur aquas.
SEPTEMBER.
Poma dat and gratos September ab arbore fructus
Tunc etiam presso pascere lacte caprae.
Phaermaca nil prohibet tunc sumere, scindere venam,
Nec tuus externum vitet aroma cibus.
OCTOBER.
Octobri offertur venatio viua, volucres:
Vtere, nec dubites non tenuisse modum.
Sic tamen vt ne oneres nimio praecordia victu.
Cumque modo studeas non tenuisse modum.
NOVEMBER.
Esse salutaris perbibetur Mulsa Nouembri
Gingiber and dulci fissile melle natans.
Tum neque saepe laues, veneris neque sacra frequentes,
Ante senex tempus ne videare suum.
DECEMBER.
Juxta mense focum calidis vtare Decembri.
Tunc iaceant mensis gramina nulla tuis.
Incidas capitis defensi a frigore venam,
Cinnameoque tuus fragret odore calix.
De ratione victus salutaris post incisam venam and emissum sanguinem ad
Armatum Epigramma Anastasij.
VEnam Armate tibi medici incidere, timenti
Nescio ventriculi qualia damna mali.
Nunc quo vita modo fuso peragenda cruore
Sitque dieta tibi qualis habenda, rogas:
Illi morborum dicant Armate, periti
Haec non est nostra falce metenda seges.
Non m^ssum facis and cupio ex te audire diserti
Atque aliquid tua quod Pieris ornet, ais.
Accipe qua idoquidem nugas ad seria ducis,
Quae facias octo versibus octo dies.
Prima ^aena die sit misso sanguine parca:
Lux abeat laetis aucta secunda modis
Tertia sed placidae debetur tota quieti:
Quarta and quinta sibi mollius esse volant.
Balnea sexta petit: mox septima colligit auras
Fertque vagos circumrura nemusque pedes.
Octaua amplexus dilectae coniugis, and quae
Ante fuit, vitam restituisse solet.
FINIS.

