A Continuation of MORE NEWS FROM THE PALATINATE, the 13. of June 1622.

Relating the surprising of the Landtgrave of Dermstadt, with the skirmish
between Count Mansfield and Mounsieur Tillye in the return.

Together with the expedition of the Duke of Brunswicke: And the reason of the
preparations of Bethlem Gabor against the Emperor.

In the end is added a comparison of two soldiers letters concerning former
occurrences; and some news from other places.

LONDON, Printed by I. H. for Nathaniel Butter, and are to be sold at his shop
at the Pide Bull at Saint Austins Gate. 1622.

TO THE READER.
WE had rather a great deal (gentle reader) present you with the happy news
of the Articles of Agreement between Christian Princes, and that they would
once listen to the prudent advice of our English Solomon who labors to make
all Countries happy like his own, that in his days there might be abundance
of peace. But since God is yet pleased for the sins of Christendom to set
every man's Sword against his Brother; We therefore knowing all men desirous
of news, be it either good or bad, have purposed (so far as the power of
Authority shall license us) to publish the weekly occurrences which come to
our hands: Our chief intention being to stay the uncertain reports of
partial newes-mongers, who tell every thing as themselves would have it; And
in this Continuation, though we cannot hope to make every reader believe what
we write, yet nevertheless we will not publish any thing, but either from a
sure hand, or some relation, seconded and confirmed by others: What we receive
in doubtful terms, we will not report peremptorily, but you shall have it as
we receive it, neither will we print every report. And although to confess
truth, we wish well, yet that we are not partial, you may perceive by our
relating this skirmish between Count Mansfield, and Mr. Tilly. We write a
continuation, that you may see by the proceedings, that there is good
dependancy between the relations, wherein we purpose to keep nere to the
Laws of History, to guess at the reasons of the actions by the most apparent
presumptions, and to set down the true names and distances of places, and
times, that you may perceive, there is probability in the several
Atchieuements. And thus much we care not to divulge, for we fear not that any
pamphletter of news, will take the like pains: And where we err in the
terms of War, we desire all Gentlemen Soldiers to understand it their way.
This we thought good to tell you of: That you may understand what you buy, and
thus we bid you farewell.

A CONTINVATION of more News from the PALATINATE.
AFter that defeat of the Archduke Leopoldus, and his flight into his own
Alsatia, and his journey thence into Brisgoia, to try what forces he could
gather among the Grisons and Switzers, for the reenforcing of his lost Army:
The whole country thereabouts, with the Bishopric of Spyres, was left to the
devotion of the King of Bohemiah, now by this victory of Hagenaw, made sole
master of the field; whereupon the Mansfeldians made what rauage they pleased
in that delicate and most fruitful country: And the Count Van Hannow of the
lower Alsatia (neighbor to Leopoldus) taking into his due consideration, that
rule of war; When two powerful Princes are either declared or engaged in a
war, it has been still observed to be a dangerous thing, for any third man
to stand as a neutrall, who is not able against either of them to stand of
himself: For still the Victor when he has overthrown the enemies, falls next
upon the weaker Neuters: So that if the Victor has leisure afterward to
prosecute them, it is as safe almost, for to have been a dependant on the
vanquished, as to have been only a looker on: whereas a third man that is of
equal power to either of the two Antagonists, shall be sure to be solicited by
either side; First for his assistance, and if that be denied, then seeing he
pleases not to be a friend, that he would not assist the enemy, neither by
suffering any of his troops to pass through his country, nor that the Camp
be supplied with meat, munition, Arms, etc. from him: And he may still take
his advantage to choose whom to side withal; or after the victory he may yet
be welcome to the Victor, or remain still a Neuter: whereas an inferior
Prince, must either come in to the Victor or be ruined, when he that is too
strong for him, purposes to make neutrality occasion of a quarrel. This
consideration peradventure this Count Van Hannow, made use of, which made him
offer his service to the King: who speedng well, as being received both into
friendship and protection, yet so into protection, and upon such conditions, as
free Princes use to accept a dependancy upon a stronger party, that is, not to
be made a subject, but an Allie and Confederate: Whose example has been such
a leading case to others, that a Captain of much experience, good
intelligence, and able judgment in those affairs, who (in his letters from
Manhem May. 22.) has related this story, infers thus much thereupon in his
very next syllables. And I hope (says he) ere long of a greater fortune.

The 18. of May, they took in Buswester, next to Hagenaw, and in it 250
Centeries of Powder, 200 of Match, with some Bullets, a murdering piece, and
certain other Ordnance. Thence he went to Cotton and took that in. Alsatia
thus left behind without an enemy, and with some friends in it, coming nearer
home toward the Palatinate; The King and Count Mansfield wnet to Spyers the
chief City (and a fair one too) in that Bishoprike; and besides that the very
chamber of the Empire, where (by this passage it seems) they were as safe, as
they had been in Heidlebergh. For thither came the Marquis of Baden to them,
where upon a counsel of War it was agreed that their two Armies should thus
severally be disposed of: That the Marquess Spiers being near his Baden,
should a while stay to secure those parts either against a revolt, or an enemy
that should pass through that way, His Leaguer (a short one though it were) he
was to make at Gersham, and withal, to block up Eddenham, the only place of
the Bishop of Spiers in those parts, which it seems he did in some 7. or 8.
days; for this agreement being made about the 12. the King passed the Rhine
and Neckar with his Army at Manhem on the 20. And the Marquess (having all
sure at his back) passed the Rhine at Germersheim the 21. to fetch his Army
which yet was in his own Country, and about the 23 or 24. was to pass to
follow the Kings Army into Dermstadt: (of which we gave you an Item in our
last news printed the 3. and 5. of June.) But before we tell you what has
there been done, will you please to take some of the reasons of the invasion
of this Country abroad before the Palatinate were cleared of enemies at home.
It Is judged, that now this growing time of the year any Warrior had rather
live upon his enemies Country, then destroy his own; Again, for that de
Tilly is not first meddled withal, may be, for that the Mansfieldians, think
it better to fetch their victual and provision out of this rich and untouched
Country, then to lie starving in a Summer Leager, before a full enemy.
Again, the Prince of this Dermstadt, though he be of the house of the
Landtgrave of Hessen, who is a Caluinist; yet is he a Chatholick, and as some
say, a Bishop too, and has hitherto furnished and befriended the enemies of
the Palatinate; which they purpose by this invasion, to disable him from doing
hereafter. And there, again, was the place of meeting appointed between the
King and the Duke of Brunswicke, the day prefixed being the 26. of May past
(after the old style.) The place, upon the River Main toward Franckford, as
we before told you. And indeed this expedition was chiefly intended to open the
passage for him, and withal to hinder the Baron of Anhalts coming to Dirlandt
in Hessen, and so to M. Tilly: that so by joining of 3. fair Armies, the King
may be at once, absolute Master of the field therabouts, and be able to give
laws to all Germany if he please: And the Armies kept together, or divided,
according to their best advantage. But it seems that the Duke has something
diverted his Arms to pursue other designs. For about the 10. of May he gave
the overthrow to the Baron of Anhalt, and slew 2000 of his men; which battle,
(as the advice from Cullen written the 19. of May after the old style, says)
was struck near Soltkott between Gezek and Paderborn.

And next, on the 18. of May he went to Lisfelt, where he demanded 150000.
dollers of the Cannons of the Abbey; and they offered 80000, but how they sped,
judge you. And by letters from the Hage the 20. of May, it appears he was
since again at Hildeshem, which he has reduced: And the 26. of May being
appointed for the meeting with the King about Frankford; It seems that some
project of his upon the rich Abbey of Fulda, which stands at the City of Fuld,
upon a river of that name too; which is in Hessen; about the degrees, 32. 51.
This City being well watered, is rich in pasture, and in flocks, and
especially their commodity comes in by wool; which was the reason of the
planting of a famous Monastery there, accounted amongst the greatest and
richest of Germany; and amongst them is the Duke; whether to sing Mass or no,
I know not. But at this place he was yet about the 28. of May, it being some
ten or twelve German miles from Franckfort the appointed place of meeting. Yet
nevertheless the King and Count Mansfield, (the Marquess of Baden following
within three days) went on into Dermstadt; which journey was rather a
progress of pleasure, (as if the Army had gone only to take the air) then a
warlike expedition; for as they were not meddled withal in their march, neither
by Cordoua, who (we told you) had sent all his horse to Tyllye, nor by Tyllye
himself; who lying to expect some forces of Bucquoyes, and Dampiers old
Regiments, thought himself not yet strong enough to disturb them, but kept his
leager about Heidleberg: So in the country it self they found never an enemy
to resist them; which made the taking in of the town of Dermstadt it self,
rather a sport then a siege. And in the Castle was the Landtgraue and his son
with him surprised at unawares, for he never so much as suspected an invasion;
either so secret was that resolution of Spiers kept, or he so secure and
negligent. But seeing his land full of soldiers: which once discerned not to be
his own, nor his friend Tillyes, he offers an escape; upon which as if he
had confessed guilty, and something withal under his own hand being showed
against him, he was made prisoner, and brought to Manhem. This being done as
suddenly as he did that, who wrote veni, vidi, vici, that is, in some four
days; in which time the soldiers would want no victuals, there being such
store of cattle in the country, that at the city of Franckford, (as by
letters from thence the 26. of May appears) whither these boote-halers drove
their pillage, a Calfe was sold for two shillings, and a sheep for one shilling
English, and yet they wanted chapmen at that price too; so that the soldiers
are very flush: And upon the 25 of May many thousands of Ricks dollars were
taken upon the water at Ouenbach, by 10. Rijters or horsemen. And it is
reported that Count Mansfield will have 4. Tun of gold of these cities
hereabouts, and the Papists and the Jews goods with us in Franckford, are like
to pay for it. The Mansfieldians have taken here, the Commissioner for the
Enemy, who swagger'd it up and down in his red skarffe, but the red color is
now changed to Orengetawney, and none of the Bavarians or Spaniards here, dare
show their heads. Neither has this only made an impression of fear amongst
us, but the City and Country of Mentz have taken the affright also.

And thus, the Country, City, Castle, and Landgrave of Dermstadt being taken,
and all easily, and all suddenly: The General Mansfield having intelligence,
that M. Tilly had received those succors which he looked for, being some 7000.
foot and 800. horse, from Bohemia; and that withal the Baron of Anhalt with
some 5000. more, of the forces of Cullen, was come up to him, whereby his Army
was become 24000. strong at the least; and withal forecasting his purpose to
possess himself of the passages of best advantage, to hinder them in their
return. He therefore through his own, and the Marquess of Badens
indisposition of body to fight (having both been for some days before, sick
of the gowt) was not so willing now, as he has been at other times, to fly
on, and hazard a battle; where the two Generals were so much disabled from
giving personal directions: But especially he considered, that he had
something weakened his Army, by putting in of Garrisons into those Towns which
he had lately taken in; And that the enemy was more in the field then he; And
that new comers are still forward to venture and put on at first, to get
themselves honor and reputation; and he had rather peradventure let their
bravery and fury spend it self upon some light skirmishes with his Rear,
which he well knew they would fall upon; then to force his own passage through
the whole and fresh body of their maine Battalion. Therefore there was this
course agreed upon; That the Prises and Purchases, with all the baggage, and
luggage of the Army should be sent home into the Palatinate aforehand, and that
the Marquess of Baden should go before to take the passage over the river
Main at Reusburgh some Dutch mile and a half below Frankford; But the town
belonging to the Marquess of Dermstadt and having corresponde^cie with Tilly,
had assurance from him (upon their sending to him the news of Badens march
thitherward) that he would withal speed come in to their rescue, if the town
Garrison could but make good the place, some few hours. So that the townsmen
being confident of succors, the Marquis perceiving his passage that way
stopped; and that all the Army could not pass the River, before the enemy would
be ready to fall upon those that were passing, or not yet passed; came off
fairly, and Count Mansfield who kept the Rear with the greatest part of the
Army, retired in good order and leisure, as being before freed of their
Carriages. And yet nevertheless, the Vauntgard of the Bavarians being come up
to the rear of the Mansfieldians, followed them, and skirmished with them,
almost two days together; In which to confess the truth, and no more but the
truth; The General intending homewards, was unwilling to turn faces about,
and to make a stand with the whole body of his Army, (so at once to receive the
whole shocke of the battle upon him) there were some 600. foot, and 60. horse
of ours, cut off; And because I would be impartial, I have here spoken with
the most, although those that could wish them ten times so many, will
peradventure at least have four times so many slain; so partial are many
reporters, as some have not let to give out, that the Marquess of Baden had
the defeat of 15000, and the Archduke Leopoldus they would have to loose but
400. But believe it, as I hear, so I speak nothing under the number of common
soldiers here slain: And of Commanders, on the Kings side, one Colonel
Gulstein of the Marquess of Badens was killed; a Palsgraue, and a Count
Mansfield (of the same house with the General Mansfield) are carried hence
prisoners; which two great names, will no doubt make a great noise, being so
nere in title to the King of Bohemia, Palsgraue of the Rhine, and to the Count
Mansfield General of the Army. But to inform these men: let them know, that
all Princes of the Empire have this privilege, that their Paternall titles do
descend to all their younger Sons; although to keep up the house, the Lands
are only entaylde to their eldest. The rest, having for their portions, either
some purchased Lands, or Sums of Moneys; and withal the honor of Governor
of some Country or State in the Country; which makes them still both to be
employed and accounted of: Or else, they must make themselves up a fortune by
the Wars. And thus there are at once diverse Dukes of Saxony, diverse
Palsgraues of the Rhine, and diverse Marquesses of Brandenburgh: the chief of
which 3. great Families, are distinguished from the second houses, by the
addition of Kurfurst, or Elector, put to their styles: And thus is it possible
(not comparatively to instance in any) that these two prisoners should be no
greater personages, then that Duke of Saxony, whom after the defeat of the
Archduke Leopoldus, Colonel Overtraut took prisoner at Strasburgh. On the
Enemies party there were many slain too; and amongst the rest, one brave horse
captain, who being hemd in, did with one Cornet of Horse, adventure to charge
through a whole Regiment of the Marquess of Badens horse: where being oppressed
with multitude, he was killed, ere he could tell his name; some others are
here prisoners with us too, men of good fashion, and the best forwardnes in
the battle: and this skirmish continued the 29. and 30. of May. The next day
the Enemy proud of it to have had once the better, came on in the heat of
blood, and in a brauado presented himself in Battalia sometimes, and sometimes
in some loose troops flying up and down before the Trenches of the Kings
Rear, who had not yet passed the Neckar at Manhem bridge, but were by the
River parted from the rest of the Camp. And this they did again the first of
June; but by their actions we know not whether they be friends or enemies, for
they have attempted nothing upon the kings Folk; who lie still, either to be
ready to receive them if they have the courage to charge, or else to wait upon
them whither soever they stir. And thus have we described enough of the
expedition of Dermstat, with the adventures and skirmishes in the return from
thence.

The two Armies lie now at the gaze one upon another: which it is expected they
will not do long: For there will be extreme hot service if either the Duke of
Brunswick shall come up hither to join with our two Armies; or shall resolve
to march up into Bauaria: which it seems the two Princes on the Emperors side
already stand in doubt of: For the Prince Elector of Saxony musters his
troops in Turing; and the Duke of Bauaria makes a Camp at Dunawert; which
stands upon the Donaw or Danubius; and as Hondius Map sets it, much about the
middle of the borders of the upper Palatinate, Bauaria and Wittenberg. So that
if he goes on, the Duke of Bauaria is likelier to have need of his own forces
under Mounsieur Tilly, and to leave Don Cordoua and the Spaniards in the
Palatinate, to the mercy of the King of Bohemiah. Or if he comes hither, the
King is absolutely and vncontrouleably, Master of the Field. And which of these
he next does, the next Post shall bring news of. In the mean time, he
enricheth himself wonderfully. The country about Eichfield so much fears
him, that they offered him 100000. Dollers to spare it; but he asks a far
greater sum.

And thus is this side of Germany, wholly embroyled; there being at this time
already these Armies all at once, and all at this present, in the poor
Palatinate. First the King himself with the General Mansfields Forces. Then
the Marquess of Baden: both these in the field and joined: Then the General
Vere in Garrison of Hidlebergh, Manhem and Franckendall, and peradventure by
this time the Duke of Brunswick also come, or a coming, and all on our side.
On the other side; Don Cordoua in the Garrisons; and General Tilly with his
old Army of Bauarians, and new supplies out of Bohemia, and the Bishop of
Cullens General, the Baron of Anhalt joined with him. And the other side of
the Empire, in much suspicion of the great preparations of Bethlem Gabor, ready
either to fall upon Bohemia, Austria, Bauaria, or some other part or Prince of
the Empire. So that unless it will please God to give good success to those
pious endeauours of our gracious Sovereign laboring for an universal
Christian peace; we shall peradventure shortly see, either Bauaria or some
parts of the Empire, as miserable as the Palatinate is at this day.

In some letters May 20. out of the Palatinate, we had an inckling, that
Bethlem Gabor was then almost in a readiness, and altogether in a resolution
to come down into those parts. And the 22. of May were letters written from
Manhem again, which reported what they there heard; that Bethlem Gabor was
said to be with a great Army marching toward Bauaria; And that the Count de
Turn (who is on the King of Bohemiaes side) began to stir on the borders
of Bohemia; and that Iegerensdorff Marquess of Brandenburg, was as forward as
the foremost.

Now that Bethlem Gabor has been all this while quiet, and now begins to
bussle again; These reasons have been given.

The Turks expedition into Poland failing of that victory which they bragd of
before they won; Bethlem Gabor, being not supplied with those forces from the
Turks and Tartars, which were hereupon drawn out of those parts of Europe;
and the countenance of the Grand Signior, upon which he something depended,
being by his retreat, flight, or slaughter of his soldiers, less feared in
Christendom, and in the Empire for that time; Bethlem Gabor was willinger to
hearken to those conditions of peace propounded unto him by the Emperor, so
that all the time of the treaty, while the Articles were consulted upon, and
afterward till the time of performance was expected, he was content to lay
down Arms. But conditions being (as he affirms) not performed on the
Emperors part, he unwilling that more time should be gained upon him,
resolves it seems to fall upon the Emperor and his friends on that side, while
most of his forces are embroyled in a tedious war, on this. But that you may
have something worth your observation, and may not only see the bare events,
but the secret counsels also, of these motions; we have here imparted to you a
prime piece of intelligence, from a person resident with Bethlem Gabor himself,
for the service of the King of Bohemia, written to an English Gentleman, a
friend of his, in Germany, and by that Gentleman himself translated out of
the original Dutch: whereof these following are the very sillables.

Concerning the Agreement betwixt the Emperor and the King of Hungary, it is
past on these conditions.
THat the King shall deliver over the Crown to the States of Hungary, which
shall be kept in the Castle of Trenchshin, and the King has appointed six
persons to look unto it, three of the States of Transiluania, and three of
Hungaria: and at the Diet or Land-day, which is to be held at Edenburk in
Hungary the 1. of May, it shall be resolved how the Crown shall be disposed
of.

2. The Emperor shall consigne unto the King for his security, Cassaw, the
Castle of Gratz, Warrakin, the Dukedom of Oplin, and Rateboye in Silecia; and
to that purpose for performance are deputed certain Commissioners by the
Emperor: but the States of Silecia will by no means give consent hereunto.
The Emperor, they say, has promised them to protect and defend them in their
privileges, and so has no power for to give away any of their Country, being
against his own promise.

3. It is likewise agreed that the Emperor shall free 14. towns in Tzips,
which he has pawned to the King of Poland; but the King of Poland will not
give way hereunto.

4. It is agreed, that the Emperor within one month, should send to the King
of Hungaria 4. hundred thousand ducats; but the time is already past, and no
money come.

5. It is concluded, that the Emperor as long as he lives shall remain King
in Hungaria, and after his death Bethlem Gabor, and yet nevertheless he also
shall have the name and title of King.

6. The King of Hungary has likewise reserved to himself liberty, to
acquaint the Great Turk with this agreement, betwixt him and the Emperor; and
in case that he will not consent thereunto, but shall go about to attempt any
matter of hostility against him for it, the Emperor binds himself to defend
him, and to send unto him at his requisition, as many forces both of horse and
foot, ordnance, or other munition, as shall be necessary for his defense. And
the Turk is not contented with this agreement; whereupon he has sent to the
Emperor a designation, That is to say, of forty thousand foot, and fifteen
thousand horse, 24. great pieces of Ordnance, and five hundred Centeries of
powder, and ten thousand great bullets, which he desires to have forthwith for
his defense: but how they will be provided, let the Emperor take care; so that
it is impossible for the Emp. to hold any one of all these Articles: and that
the bitterness betwixt him and the Hungarians is like to be far greater then
ever. Moreover, the Hungarians have taken an express resolution to visit the
Emp. at Vienna in June next, and for that purpose long for nothing more then to
see the grass and Oats on the ground, that I believe there will nothing come
of this peace or agreement, which I could likewise confirm unto you by other
arguments, which I am forbidden to trust the feather withal, but you shall
shortly receive aduertisements more at large by word of mouth.

Transylvania April 18. stilo veteri.
And now (gentle Readers) for that you have bought what is new, we give you
what is stale into the match; which is two Letters, one from an Ancient, and
another from a Gentleman of a Company; which had they been published when they
were news, would have been much esteemed of: And for that they agree together
in so many particulars, and the Ancient was personally in the battles, we have
here exhibited their own words; the Gentlemen to whom they were written, can
testify that we have not mis-reported them.

The Gentleman's Letter begins thus:
The King crossed the Rhine at Gernsheim, with Count Mansfields Army, marching
toward the Duke of Bavarias Forces, then pilling and spoiling the Country
twixt Heidleberg and Heilbrun, the 16. of April they approacht and quartered
nere the enemy, who lay at Wisflow. The 17. in the morning, the enemy fell
upon Obertrauts Regiment of horse, and Colonel Grayes Regiment of foot. The
Alarm being given there, the whole Army drew to their rescue; And as they
marched, Obertraut was commanded to quit his quarter, and to set it on fire;
which being done, the King advanced under the cloud of that smoke, with his
Army; whereas the enemy certainly made account he had retired, but contrary to
their expectation he fell on: Obertrauts and Grayes Regiments changing their
retreat into a stout and resolute charge. For half an hour there was a
doubtful fight, but the fortune and valor of the King exhorting every
battalion to play the men, who answered him presently by drawing their swords
on the Enemy, who at their coming on quailed. General Tilly saved himself by
the swiftnes of his Horse. There is a Colonel, a Serieant-Maior, and many
Captains taken Prisoners, and Cornets, and many Ensigns found amongst the
dead bodies, which are esteemed to be 3000. men. There was also taken four
pieces of Cannon. The Marquess of Baden with his Army marched to cut off the
enemies bridge which is at Wimpfen, on the Neckar; but failing of that project,
fell upon some of their scattered troops, put many of them to the sword, and
took 5. pieces of Ordnance.

Which here now the Ancient confirms, who was one there himself.
The 20. of April last the King and Count Mansfield with our Army in the Vant,
and Turlach in the Rear, fought with all the Bavarian forces and put them to
flight; we killed in the battle near 3000. of the Enemy, and after Turlachs
Horse in the Rear slew many as they fled, besides many Officers, and men of
note which we took prisoners: The K. and Count Mansfield charging bravely
when the battles joined; that it was enough to make a coward valiant. We took
all their Ordnance they had there, which were six pieces; where our English
behaved themselves so bravely, that the King rewarded many in particular with
Gold. We lost in the battle not 200. men, whereof there were but 50. English
and Scots: we have an English troop of Horse which behaved themselves wondrous
bravely in the fight, but they engaged themselves so far in the enemies
Battaliaes, that they lost their Leiutenant, an English Gentleman of worth, and
Twelve Horsemen more, besides those that were shot, which are ye^ living; we
took some 9. Colors and Cornets. Turlach with his Army cut off almost two
Regiments of Gonsales foot, who upon the news of the Bavarians overthrow,
marched through the hills, toward the remains of the Dukes forces, but before
he could come, Turlach met him, and cut off those men.

Here the difference is only in 4. and 6. pieces of Cannon taken.

The Gentleman goes on:
The 21. the King took in Sintzen, (which is half a days journey by Coach
above Heidlebergh toward the Duke of Wittenberghes Country, and near to
Wimpfen and Wifflow,) which when the enemy took, he put man, woman, and child
to the Sword. To this place most of the enemies foot fled for refuge. Don
Gonsales marched presently with his whole Army to the relief of Mounsieur
Tilly, who lay at Wimpfen, leaving Oppenheim, Treitznach and Allshime with very
small or no Garrisons.

The Ancient confirms this report thus.
The 21 of April we beleagred Sintzen a Town of the Enemies, and took it in
by composition to depart without Arms, and many of them took entertainment
with us, and diverse other Castles and little towns have yielded to the King.

The Gentleman goes on.
About the 25. of April the King left the Marquess of Baden to confront the
Enemy, and marched with his Army through Heidlebergh, and sat down before
Laudenbergh; which he took in on the 28. Most of the soldiers that were there,
to the number of 600. have taken entertainment under the King Much about that
time Don Gonsalez and Mounsteur Tilly rowted the Marquess of Badens Army but
they bought the victory deate, with the loss of as many men as the Marquess
lost; but they took his Cannon and the m^st of his baggage. His horse played
the lades, and ran away without much loss; which caused his foot to lie close
within their Barracadoes till night; and under covert of the night fled and
gained a wood which was not far from them; so that the loss is only in his
Cannon and Baggage.

This taking in of Laudenberg, and the defeat of the Marquess of Badens Army,
The Ancient thus describes.
The 25. of April we beleaguered Laudenberg a town of the Kings that the
enemy had took in, and manned it strongly, we mounted ten pieces, and in two
days and one night, we made a breach that twenty might go in a front: they of
the town would have given it up the first day, but the King would give them no
quarter, which made them fight desperately, knowing no way but death, but the
breach being made, the Army threw dice, and the lot fell to the French, who
went on so coldly that the English and the Scots got in the town, crying
Vilegainee of the other side of the town which made the Garrison soldiers in
such a maze that they came running upon the Pikes at the breach, where were
slain more then two hundred; many of the Officers seeing the town was won,
blew themselves up wi^h gunpowder. And howsoever the Kings mercy was such, that
after the breach was entered he gave fair quarters, which they gladly took,
and most of them took entertainment of the King, many of the chief are
prisoners for ransomes, Turles with his Army cut off almost two Regiments of
Gonsales foot, which came to Tillyes rescue: But after the same day by
negligence, and not well encamping, Turlach lost 400. men, and was forced to
retreat, and leave three pieces of Ordnance behind him: but not without the
loss of as many men on the enemies side.

The Gentleman goes on.
The First of May, the King rose from Laudenberg, and passed his Army over the
Neckar and Rhine here at Manheim, and quartered about Frankendall, Wormbes, and
Oppenheim, where he lay still two days, whether to amuse the enemy or no, I
know not. His General (Mansfield) is one of the subtillest men in the world.
The fourth of May he rose again and quartered about Germisham, marching
Countermount the Rhine, to the relief of Hagenaw.

The Ancient confirms this.
There is an Ambassador come from the Duke of Brunswick, who lies beneath with
a brave Army; whereupon the King is marched, leaving his Garrisons well manned,
to Turlach, (the Marquess) but Leopoldus with his Army has beleaguered
Hagenaw, a brave strong town of the Bishop of Spiers; which caused the King to
leave all and is now gone to relieve it.

And thus far these two Gentlemen agree in their relations: which we impart
to you not for News, but for certainty of a report, whereof there have been
so many tales.

Because the Printer showed us a blancke page at the end, we therefore have
filled it up with foreign relations which are nothing to the continuation of
our discourse.

THe Grisons now carry themselves manfully, and have taken again some of the
passages, and killed a great number of Spaniards. The Suisse arm to assist
them; so that this month is noted to be unhappy to Leopoldus: Count Mansfield
also sends 2000 men to assist them.

The Duke of Brunswicke having driven Count Henry Vanderberg with his 8000 men
into an Island which the Rhine makes between Wesel and Rhineberck: the Count
seeing himself too weak, is upon his calling back now in Bruxels, where the
Merchants say money is not too plentiful.

The Spaniards under Spinola have besieged Ham in the land of Mark, wherein the
States have a very strong garrison: which lies above toward Germany between
Emmerick, Rees, and Wesell, where the last summers leaguers were.

The Spaniards have appointed three Randezvous; at Lier, Mastrick, and
Rhineberge.

The States hope well this summer, that if Spinola sends out any more forces
into Germany, that they shall be masters of the field at home.

By letters from Franckford the 26. of May was certified, Sir Arthur Chichester
Lord Belfasts, with Master Burlemacks safe arrival at Mentz next to the
Palatinate.

FINIS.

