A DIRECTION TO DEATH: TEACHING MAN THE WAY TO DIE WELL, THAT being dead, he
may live ever.

Made in the form of a Dialogue, for the ease and benefit of him that shall
read it.

The speakers therein are, Quirinus and Regulus.

SYRACH. 38.20, 21. Remember the last end, forget it not, for there is no
turning again.

Mors sceptra ligonibus aequat.

LONDON. Imprinted for Thomas Man. 1599.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, SIR THOMAS VANE, Knight, Lieutenant of her Majesty's
Castle of Dover, grace and peace in this life, and everlasting felicity in the
life to come.
IT being my hap (right Worshipful) to be abroad of late, more than usually I
am, it was also my chance to hear more than otherwise I knew, (for mine own
part till then, I did but know you ex facie.) And that which then I heard, it
being spoken by some of good credit (if not great calling) emboldened me to do
what now you see a doing: for bethinking my self to whom I should dedicate
what your Worship sees here following, that good report which I heard of you,
both for sincerity in Religion, and integrity in conversation, made me to
resolve my self upon you. For well I know those two good qualities would fit
this simple piece of work, made more for the profit of many others, than the
praise of any one. If I be too bold with your Worship, having no acquaintance
with you, pardon me of your piety. Neither did I purpose to offend you
willingly, neither do I think this way to hurt you hastily: If I be no
bolder than I may, take well in worth what is done, of your courtesy: neither
is it unfitting you to defend, what is committed to your patronage, you being a
Knight; nor unbeseeming me to seek your patrocinie, I being an inferior
person. For the first, a sword was given you, for the second, a tongue was
given me. As I use that now, so I pray you (if need be) use you the other
hereafter: as I have heard, you have done well in the field. As I wish, do
also well for the faith: that which I commend to your Patrocinie, (though I
speak not to commend it) is nothing I hope repugnant thereto. If it may please
your Worship to deigne it the reading, you shall soon find whether I falsify
or no. In labor (the proverb is) there is no loss. In this it may be there
will be some gain. If so, your good shall not be my grief. I would what is
done might benefit you, and any: that I might have somewhat the better hope, I
commit it to your Worship to patronize. Often the Patron of the thing, works
good for the thing. Whatsoever your Worship procures for this, account it as
purchased to your self. If it may prove any thing, and worth any thing, I
shall be nothing sorry, whosoever else be something glad. If it will prove
nothing, or as nothing, so your Worship be contented, I shall be nothing
discontented. While that is a working, whatsoever it be I will make bold to
leave this which you see with you, and so humbly for this time take my leave
of you. The welspring of all blessings so bless your Wor*whilest you are here,
as well and ever blessed you may be when you go hence.

Your Worships henceforth ready to be commanded: William Perneby.

To the Christian Reader.
COurteous and Christian reader, I know not thy conceit: it may be good, it
may be bad, it may be indifferent, if thou answerest either of the titles J
have given thee, it cannot be bad. Jf courtesy cannot compel thee, yet
Christianity may counsel thee to think and judge the best; here is nothing
done to the prejudice of any: if it please God to bless, there may be
something to the benefit of many. Though some others have written of the same
matter that J have written of, yet that lets not but J may do the like: as
diverse Musitions may play upon one instrument, so diverse men may write of one
thing. J hope J have injured no man in writing. Jf I have imitated any (as J
deny not but J have) J think in so doing, J have rather honored them than
hurt them. For as J take it, it is an honor to be imitated. Whatsoever it is
that J have done, I refer it to thy Christian courtesy, or thy courteous
Christianity to judge. Judge I pray thee the best: my purpose was not to
offend thee, be not thou offended with me. What is given thee with the right
hand to do good with, take not thou with the left to do hurt by: thou can
never hear too often of that thou may here read of. Man is never so
mindles of any thing, as of his own death: for that cause God has bidden thee
remember thy end; some have had those that have put them in mind of their end,
and I have collected this as thou see to direct thee to thy end. As thou
dislikest not the mark that shows thee thy way, though it goes not with thee
in the way, so dislike not of me for directing thee to death, though J go not
with thee to death. Statutum est omnibus semel mori: It is appointed to all men
to die once: and sure I am that therefore once J must die. Certius nil morte:
Nothing more sure than death. Whether thou or I shall soonest tread the track
to death, is utterly to either unknown. Nescit homo finem suum: Man knows
not his end. And as that ancient writer says: Mortis hora incertius nihil:
Than the hour of death nothing more uncertain. Jf thou go before me, ego
te sequar, J will, nay shall follow thee. Jf J go before thee, assuredly thou
can not deny, but that thou must follow me. That we may go both well when we
go, God give us grace to prepare thereto, and for ere we go: though it be
the last to us in action, yet it ought to be the first with us in meditation.
First, because it is certain it will come. Secondly, because it is uncertain
when it will come. Thirdly, because it is the greatest work we have to do
when it does come. Fourthly, because there remains nothing but judgment when
it is come and gone. Js it ever amiss think thou to be put in mind hereof?
If thou so think, thou think not right: the better shall thou die,
whenever thou do die, if often thou be made to remember thou must die.
Seldom does he die well, that thinks not often to die once: and ever dies he
ill, that never thinks to die at all. Jf not therefore for courtesy, which
thou will deigne many men, yet for Christianity (which thou should not
deny any man) take it in gree, that thus J have admonished thee. This if thou
do, J shall think my self beholding: if not, J must and will be contented
with that which is assigned. Howsoever thou handlest me, God bless thee
whilst thou read, that thou may be blessed when thou have read, and when
thou remembrest, that so thou may be too when thou endest. And thus for this
once J bid thee farewell in Christ.

Thine in the Lord. W.P.

A DIRECTION TO DEATH, TEACHING MAN the way to dye well, that he may live ever.
Made in the form of a Dialogue: in which the speakers are QVIRINVS and REGVLVS.
Quirinus. ALL hail to your person good Master Regulus: and here you are well
met.


Regulus. The same to you, my old friend Quirinus: for you are as well met. I
am a glad man to see you alive. For it was told me, that you were in great
peril of death: yea some said you would never go abroad again.


Q. I thought not otherwise my self: but you may see the doings of God are
contrary to the judgments of men. I that was ere while very like to dye, am
now something like to live.


R. Thanks be to God therefore.


Q. Even so say I: for that is my part: for as it was he that brought me
almost to my grave, so it was none but he that has again set me upon my
feet, the Physicians they all forsook me, my friends all, they took their
leave of me, my worldly goods and substance would nothing at all comfort me,
in my self I found little that might encourage me to hope any thing either of
holding life in me, or of putting death from me.


R. What gather you of this the Lords dealings with you?


Q. That either the time of my departing hence was not come, or else that I was
not then ready.


R. Whatsoever may be said of the second, I am sure what you have said is sure
of the first: for had your time been come, you must have gone: for the power of
death no man can withstand.


Q. That I think, if he be fit therefore.


R. Death stands not upon the fitnes or unfitness of any. When it comes be he
fit or unfit it takes him.


Q. In as much then as I was not fit when it did seem to come, God enable me to
be fit against the time it will come.


R. It is good to wish so, that if it may be, you may in the end have it to be
so: for as Paul says: Philip. 2.13.
It is God which works in you, both the will and the deed, even of his good
pleasure.


Q. That made me to say as I did.


R. It must move you also to do more then you had said.


Q. I do not deny that: for it must move me to be both humble and thankful.


R. So Much in deed that of Paul must move you to, but the unfitness to dye,
that you say was in your self, must move you to more.


Q. What Is that?


R. To make your self fit to dye. For as a man prepares himself to work ere
he works; to hear ere he hears, to pray ere he prays, to receive ere he
receives: so must he prepare himself to dye ere he dies. Better comes death to
him that is prepared to dye, then to him that is nothing at all made ready to
dye. The unlooked for peril is ever most perilous.


Q. We both agree that it is meet for a man to prepare himself to dye.


R. It is very right that so we should. For why should not a man prepare
himself to dye as well as he does to sin. A man is no less to prepare
himself to the wages for his work, than to his work, but says Paul, The
wages of sin is death. Romans 6.23.
As a man therefore in times past has prepared himself to sin, so now must
he learn to prepare himself to dye. For as he has sinned so must he dye: if
sin goes before, death of necessity must follow after, the cause being put,
the effect must also be given. As Paul the servant therefore says, Romans 5.12.
By sin death entered into the world: so Christ the Master says, Luke 12.40.
Be ye therefore also prepared.


Q. But why should a man prepare himself to dye?


R. It is but vain to ask why, the reasons thereof be so many.


Q. Many? how many?


R. Five at the least.


Q. What may they be?


R. 1. The community of death: 2. The proximitie of death: 3. The uncertainty
of death: 4. The extremity of death: 5. The authority of Christ and his
Apostles.


Q. Except you explain your meaning, I shall not be much wiser then I was.
For why, your words to me seem dark and obscure.


R. In playner terms then I will express my mind: 1. Cor. 14.19.
for as Paul says, I had rather speak five words with understanding, than ten
thousand in an unknown tongue.


Q. In so doing you shall both pleasure me, and profit others.


R. First then therefore a man is to prepare himself to dye, Heb. 9.27.
because it is appointed unto him once to die: for as David says, What man
lives, Psalm. 89.48.
and shall not see death? shall he deliver his soul from the hand of the
grave? As though none should, he asks the question; and as if none might;
both Elihu in Job, Job. 34.15.
and Solomon in Ecclesiastes do give answer. For Elihu says, Eccle. 12.7.
All flesh shall perish together; and man shall return to dust. And Solomon
says: Dust return to the earth as it was. After ye same manner do others give
forth their verdicts, says an old Poet.

Est commune mori, mors nulli parcit honori.
Debilis and fortis veniunt ad limina mortis.
It is a very common thing to dye,
Death spares none be he never so high,
The weak together with the strong,
Comes streaming to death all along.
Says Augustine. Now dies one King, now another, now one Duke, now another:
one Earl, one Baron, one poor man, one rich man, death spares no man,
because with an even law it smites all things. Says Petrus Blesensis upon
these words in the book of Job; Job. 42.17.
So Job dyed being old and full of days. Death concludes all the felicity of
men for when thou have published the faith of Abraham, the piety of Joseph,
the charity of Moses, the valor of Sampson, the virtue of David, the miracles
of Elizeus, the wisdom and riches of Solomon, the conclusion is one, and he
dyed. After this manner therefore should every man conclude of necessity, I
must dye; of duty therefore I must prepare my self to dye: for duly must a
man prepare himself to that which necessarily he must do. Duly a man
prepares himself to eat, because necessarily he must eat, he that daily
eats not, long time lives not: duly a man prepares himself to work,
because necessarily he must work: 2. These. 3.10.
he that will not work should not eat: even so duly should a man prepare
himself to dye because necessarily he must dye, he that prepares not himself
to dye, dies ill fauouredlie. But this is enough for this first reason why a
man that must dye, is to prepare himself to dye.


Q. Somewhat then of the second, for the second is next after the first, as the
first is next before the second.


R. So I intend: for the first cannot be without a second. As therefore first I
said, a man is to prepare himself to dye, because necessarily he must dye, so
secondly I said he must prepare himself thereto, because continually he is
dying.


Q. What, whilst he lives is he dying?


R. Yea whilst he lives, and when he flourishes. For why (as one says) all his
life is but a race to death. Every day death is nigher him by a day. His day
passes, and his death approaches. As soon as he begins to live, so soon he
begins to dye. As Paul therefore said of himself, 1. Cor. 15.31.
I dye daily, because either daily he was in danger of death, or daily
there was diminished some part of his life. So the woman of Tekoah said of all.
2. Sam. 14.14.
We do all dye and are as water spilt upon the ground that cannot be gathered
up again. And well said she what she said: because either daily we are in
peril of death, or daily there is diminished from us some part of our life.
At the end of every day we have less time to live by a day. Both Augustine a
divine writer, and Seneca an human do testify as much as is said. Says the
first: Where we begin to live, Sap. 5.13.
there by and by we begin to dye, according to that of the wise man, as soon
as we were borne, we began to draw to our end: And says the second: We dye
daily: Seneca. Epist. 24.
for daily is some part of our life done away, and even then also does our
life decrease, when we our selves increase. Our Infancy we have lost, after
that our childehoode, thenceforth to yesterday our youth. What time soever is
past, is perished. This very day which now we live, we divide with death.


Q. But what of all this? should a man therefore ever the more prepare himself
to dye?


R. What else?


Q. And why?


R. because it tells him that of necessity he must dye. For fall one day will
that tree that every day is a falling; and once dye certainly shall that man,
that every day is a dying: for death permittes no truce.


Q. All this I grant; yet I see not how the other does thereupon follow?


R. You may if you will. See you not how a man prepares himself to fight with
that enemy with whom he can conclude no peace?


Q. Yes.


R. Then may you soon see how a man is to prepare himself to stand against
death, with which he can enter no covenant.


Q. Belike then death is an enemy?


R. 1. Cor. 15.26.
So says Paul: The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death.


Q. No marvel then though a man be to prepare himself to encounter with
death. For no man must be careless of his enemy. His enemy is ever too
careful of him thereto. But pass from this to the next if you please.


R. As you please, for what pleases you shall not displease me.


Q. Say not so at every time and turn.


R. No more I do. As you are a man, that sometime may please you, which
displeases me: and as I am another, that may sometime displease you, which for
the time greatly pleases me. But now because it pleases you that I should
pass from that which was last said, to that which is yet to be said, letting
these things pass, I will pass. As first then I said, a man is to prepare
himself to dye, because necessarily he must dye, and secondly because
continually he is dying. So now thirdly I say, he must therefore prepare
himself to dye, because he certainly knows not either when he shall dye,
or where he shall dye, Sir. 18. 8.
or after what sort and manner he shall dye. For as Sirach says: no man has
certain knowledge of his death. Eccl. 9.12.
And as Solomon says. Man does not know his time, Act. 9.12.
but as the fishes which are taken in an evil net, and as the birds which
are caught in the snare: so are the children of men snared in the evil time
when it falls upon them suddenly.


Q. But what? ought the ignorance of a man's time to incite him to make
preparation for his time?


R. What else? both Christ and others seem to say so. For thus says Christ:
Luke 12.40.
Be ye also prepared therefore. Wherefore? Because the son of man will come
at an hour when you think not. This gives as much as I seek. For Christ
comes as well at the particular Judgment of a man (which is at his death) as
at the general, which shall be at the dissolution. And yet you see his reason
is from his coming at an hour when he is not thought of, be ye therefore
prepared: for the son of man will come at an hour when ye think not. And
thus says Augustine. Thou know not in what hour he may come: Always
(therefore) watch, that so because thou know not when he will come, he may
find thee prepared when he shall come. It may be for this cause thou art
ignorant, when he will come, that thou may be ready whenever he does come.

Augustine in quad. Epistola.
The last day is unknown, that all days may be observed; then are remedies
prepared too late when deaths perils hang over the head. Thus also says
Gregory: Gregory. Lib. 12. moral.
To this end our maker would have our end hidden, and the day of our death to
be unknown, that whilst it is always unknown, it might always be thought
to be nigh at hand; and that every man by so much might be the more fervent in
working, by how much he is uncertain of calling, that while we are uncertain
when we must dye, we might always come prepared to death. Brandmil. Con.
funebr.
To the like effect in like sort says another. Therefore to no man is the
hour of death known, that ever we might watch and be ready, least being
unready, and in ill sort secure we should be found sleeping. And this is
his reason.

If men did foreknow when they should dye, they would show their diligence
about that time, that they might not therefore be diligent only in that time,
but continually, he foresheweth neither a general hour, nor a particular,
that in always looking for him, they might always watch. For as Theophylacte
well says upon the first chapter of the first of Paul's Epistles to the
Thessalonians. Theophylact. in. 1. ap. 5.
If man knew his last day, he would endeavor himself to do any mischief
other days, then, the end of his life approaching he would be baptized.
Moreover many if they knew they should dye to morrow, would bethink themselves
how many ways they might molest and afflict their adversaries, as though now
they did despair of themselves, and did desire to refresh themselves with
their enemies blood. Which thing is not now done for the fear of death staying
them, and the love and desire of eternal life recalling them. For the hour of
death is always uncertain and unknown to thee.

That thou may fear, be fervent live well, and fly evil. As though there
were four causes which moved God to make death uncertain: 1. Fear. 2. Love.
3. Life. 4. Evil. Fear of him, love to his word, preservation of life in man,
and declining of evil. Touching the. 1. Gregory says in an homely of his.
Our Lord would therefore have our last hour to be unknown, that always it
might be suspected, Gregory in hom.
that whilst we cannot fore see it, without intermission we might make have
unto it. And hence is it yt he said. Watch therefore: Mat. 15. cap. 13.
for ye know neither the day nor the hour when the son of man will ceme.
Touching the 2. another says. The hour of death is uncertain, that thou
might work the more fervently. Were it not so thou would grow
slothful, and desist from many things which are good for others. And hence
it is that an Angel said once to a Bishop, Greg. in Dialo^
Do what thou do; work what thou workest. Touching the 3. says the same
author last spoken of: Therefore is the day of thy death unknown, that thou
may live the more purely and warily. For as Cyprian says: What kind of
one the Lord finds thee when he does call, such kind of one he does judge
thee (when thou art gone.) But it is a foolish thing for a man to live in that
estate, in which he would not dye. Touching the 4. says the foresaid writer.
Therefore is the day of thy death unknown that thou may eschew many euilles
which of the certainty of death would ensue. For did men know they should live
long, they would commit many evils, purposing afterward to repent: but did
they know they should dye soon, they would live so much the more vnhumanelie,
determining to have some pleasure ere they were for the preventing of these
mischiefs, the Lord has made both death uncertain, and the time thereof
unknown. Thus now you see how the ignorance of death, both in regard of time,
place and manner ought to make a man prepare himself to death.


Q. I do so, I thank you. But I pray you is there yet any thing more that may
do the like?


R. If you remembered but what ere while I said, this question might have been
spared, for I told you that for five causes, a man was to prepare himself to
die, ere ever he came to die, and yet we have spoken but of three of them.


Q. In deed you did so. Speak therefore of the two last I pray you, as you
have done of the three first.


R. So I mean God willing. In the fourth place therefore, a man is to prepare
himself to die ere ever he comes to die, because the greatest work a man
has to finish in this world, is to die. As after death there is no work, so
greater then death there is no work, he which has overcome death, has
overcome all things: Aristotle.
Of all terrible and fearful things death is the last.


Q. And why should this move a man ever the more to prepare himself to die.


R. Because as the wise man says, Sir. 5. 16.
He should not do rashly, either in small things, or in great.


Q. Why, but is it a doing rashly to dye without preparation thereto?


R. What else? For what, is it not a doing rashly, to set upon any thing
without aduisement?


Q. Yes surely.


R. The like it is to die without preparation.


Q. As a man then prepares himself to the doing of any great work, so is he
to the undergoing of death.


R. Right so.


Q. But why so?


R. Because death is not the least of a man's works in this world, Brandmil.
Con. fun.
(though it be the last,) For to die is the greatest work a man has to
finish upon earth.


Q. May you not thereto add the greiuousest too?


R. If I die, the matter were not great, for there are more pains in death,
Vincent.
then in any work under the sun. As one says, for then so diverse kinds of
diseases are wont to meet, and so to molest every member, that sometimes
there are more diseases than members. In a sickness that was not mortal but
grievous, David said there was not one whole part in his body, how much more
might another so say in a sickness that is mortal, and therefore exceeding
grievous? For no sickness so grievous as a mortal sickness. In the separation
of a man from his wife there is much grief and sorrow, in the separation of
the soul from the body there must needs be much more. The conjunction of the
two last is greater and of greater continuance, than the conjunction of the two
first, and where there has been the longer continuance in affection, there
must needs be the greater grieuances upon separation, in experience we see,
that so much the greater the sorrow is at the parting of friends; by how much
the longer the continuance together has been from the meeting of friends: and
by that we may guess how great the grief is in the parting of soul and body.
For soul and body are as two friends, but what prosecute I this point so
far? Now have I little leisure, and less occasion so to do: and it may be I
shall have more of both hereafter.


Q. I would you might, and I wish you may. For it will not be more yrkesome to
me then to hear of these things, than it is now. And now by seeing my silence,
you may judge of my delight. But to let this pass seeing you would so feign
pass, what other reason have you for the first and last place by which a man
should be moved to a preparing of himself to death, ere ever he comes to
yield himself thereto?


R. The fundrie precepts of Christ, and his Apostles, and prophets tending to
that purpose.


Q. Why? have either the one or the other of these given any precepts touching
this matter?


R. Have they? what a question is that? thus said I say the Prophet to Hezekiah
the king. Put thine house in order, Esa. 38.2.
for thou shall dye, and not live. And what is yt, but to prepare to die,
because thou must die. Thus said Christ our Savior to Peter and Andrew, and
other his Apostles and disciples: Wake therefore, Mat. 24.42.43.
for ye know not what hour your master will come. Of this be sure that if the
good man of the house knew at what watch the thief would come, he would surely
watch, and not suffer his house to be dug through. Therefore be ye also
ready, for in the hour that ye think not, will the son of man come. And
what is this but to prepare to dye, because you must dye? for Luke the
Evangelist recording the same history says: Be ye also prepared therefore:
Luke 12.40.
For the son of man will come at an hour when ye think not. 1. Pet. 1.1.
And thus said Peter the Apostle to the strangers that dwelt here and there
throughout Pontus, Pet. 4.7.
Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia and Bithynia, now the end of all things is at hand
be ye therefore sober and watching in prayer. And what is this but to prepare
to dye, because ye must dye. For a man cannot prepare himself aright but he
must be sober and watching in prayer.


Q. Is this reason think you as forcible as the former?


R. If it be not, it should be. For this I am sure is Christ's saying, Ioh.
15.14.
John the fifteen: Ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I command you. And
this as I have showed, is his commandment as well therefore, because he has
commanded it, as also for other reasons which already I have expressed,
preparation to death should be used.


Q. God grant it may so be.


R. Amen I wish. For in as much as we have all sinned, we must all dye. For as
there is a time to be borne in sin, so there is a time to dye for sin. And
to that that must be done, it is better that we prepare our selves then not.
That comes daungerously that comes unlooked for. Eighteen were slain, when
the Tower in Siloam fell, but more perished in the gaynesaying of Corah, Jude.
11. Number. 16.32 1. Pet. 3.20.
and the deluge spared none but eighte. Now death is like a thief. A thief
comes unawares, and so does death. A thief comes when he is not looked for,
and so does death. A thief comes suddenly, Barnard.
and so does death. As nothing is more certain than death, so nothing is more
uncertain then the hour of death. A Thunder crack comes on the sudden,
even so does death. As one says, our life is like a ruinous house, always
ready to fall, like a thin thread, always ready to rot, like a running cloud
always ready to drop. This cloud sometime melts in the cradle, sometime
in the chair, death is like the sun, whenever it shines, it melts our
cloudie life, be the cloud thereof never so thin or thick in years. Our
life then being as uncertain, as the weathercocke which turns at every
blast, or like the wave which mounteth at every storm; or like the reed which
boweth at every wind; ours it is to prepare our selves to leave it, to forgo
it, to lay it down, to entertayne yt which does dissolve it.


Q. You say true, ours it is to do so, but our blindenes is such and our
senselesnes so much, as we think we have here a continuing city, and
therefore we little provide for that which is to come; we think we shall live
long, and therefore we prepare not to death, which shortly and vncertainlie
will ensue; we put death far from us (oh I may live twenty years yet, etc.)
and therefore we neglect what we should regard, and despise what we ought
to embrace.


R. In regard of nature, this is our dealing, but in respect of grace, it
should not be so, and sure I am, that they whom God has endued with grace
have not done so. As they have thought of death, so have they provided for
death. Hence is it, that some of them bought burying places in their lives,
there to be buried, when they were dead. Hence is, it that some of them fitted
their toombes ear they dyed, in which they were intoombed, when they were
dead. Hence is it, that some of them both appointed what sheets they would be
wound in when they were dead, and what they would have given to the poor that
then should be living. Abraham bought him the cave of Machpelah both to bury,
and to be buried in. Joseph in his life provided himself of a tomb against
his death. So have many others done, and so now amongst us many do. By the one
and the other it is easy to learn what every one should do. What is one man's
duty in this regard, is every man's. As no man lays himself to sleep
without preparation, so no man should yield himself to death without
preparation: as, one says, Death and sleep are brethren. Diogenes awaking out
of sleep, being asked by his physician as he lay upon his death bed, how he
did, answered: I do well man. Stob. sermon. 115.
For brother embraces brother. To like effect did Gorgias Leontius answer his
friends, when they asked him what he did as he lay drawing on, and sleeping.
For he said, Now sleep begins to deliver me to his brother. As Moses therefore
once said, even so now say I, Oh that men were wise, Deuteronomy. 32.29
and would understand their latter end. Oh that we would remember the
certainty of our death, the uncertainty of our life; the ieopardie we are in,
if death take us unawares; then no doubt, but as Joseph laid up in the seven
plentiful years, what might minister relief in the seven dear years; so we
in the time of this our uncertain life, would store up what might comfort our
yearning souls in the bitter agony of our most certain death. For wondrous
comfortable it is to be prepared for death, before death. As Gregory says.
Greg. in hom. sint lumbi. v. 1. Seneca in extrema part epist. epist. 20.
Maximus sermon. 36.
So death it self when it comes is conquered, if before it comes it ever
be feared. No man well welcometh death when it comes, but he which long time
before has disposed himself thereto. Hence is it, that Musonius being once
asked who it was that could finish his last day, best answered, He that ever
propounded to himself that the last day of his life was present and at hand.

And hence is it, that man should prepare for his end before his end, that so
he might assuredly speed well at his end.


Q. Oh would to God that man either could or would what man should. As his
might is weak, so his mind is wicked. And through the weakness of the one
and the wickedness of the other, often is that neglected which much should be
regarded.


R. So it seems, when preparation to death is neglected. As death is the last
thing in this world a man shall undergo; so preparation thereto is the first
thing he ought to ouergoe.


Q. It is not now the duty we stand upon, but the time. The first is
confessed, the second is suspected, that man should do this you speak of it
is not denied: but when he should do it, it is somewhat controuerted.


R. More without cause, than with cause. For there is no cause the time should
be doubted when the truth cannot be denied.


Q. You speak as if there were as much truth for the time, as there is in the
thing.


R. I speak then but as I ought, for the truth is as much for the one, as it
is in the other.


Q. When is it then that a man should prepare to dye, since that prepare he
must?


R. When? when not? there is no time which thereto and for, is not a time;
because we all are ever uncertain of our time. He which now lives may by and
by be dead. Sudden death we know seiseth upon many.


Q. I, many in regard of themselves, but not many in regard of others, for
more dye deliberately upon their beds, than suddenly at their boards.


R. The greater is the mercy of God toward us that it is not so. Lam. 3.22.
Dan. 9.7.
For his mercy it is that we all dye not suddenly, we have deserved worse, and
therefore that.


Q. I deny not that.


R. Presume not then upon the other.


Q. Neither will I for the works of God are merueilous, and his judgments
past finding out. Romans 11.33
But I will enquire when a man is to prepare himself to death. Whether in
sickness, or in health, or in both.


R. And I will answer in both, and neither in health alone, nor in sickness
alone.


Q. And why that?


R. Because there is a twofould preparing to dye; a preparing in health, and a
preparing in sickness: a preparing in health, because then we are very unsure
to live. For the healthiest man in the world cannot promise himself one hour
of life. Much less can he say, To day or to morrow I will go into such a
city, Iam. 4.13.
and continue there a year, and buy and sell and get gain. A preparing in
sickness, because then we are all like to die. There is but a step between the
sick man and death. As one says of men, and young men: so say I of sickemen
and sound men: Bern. de Conuers. Cler. c. 14.
To sick men death is at the gate, to sound me^ death is lying in wait. Both
in health therefore, and also in sickness, he that knows he must dye, must
prepare himself to dye.


Q. What needs he prepare in health, will it not serve well enough in
sickness?


R. Truly no. For first the time of sickness is not the fittest for such a
purpose: First because all the senses are then occupied about the pains of the
disease. And Augustine says: Scarcely will he come to true satisfaction,
Aug. ser. 36.
whom sickness does urge and pain terrify, especially when the children
whom he unlawfully loved are present, and his wife and the world do call him
unto them: Secondly, because then the devil is most busy to draw a man from
all goodness, as knowing that if then he hold him, he shall for ever keep him.
Olympiodorus in the 9. chapter of Ecclesiastes.
For as Olimpiodorus says: Such as the day of death does leave him, such
shall, and will the day of judgment find him. And you know it was said to the
serpent (which was more subtle than any beast of the field) touching himself
and the woman's seed. Genesis 3.15.
He shall break thine head, and thou shall bruise his heel. Which (as one
says) is as much as thou shall lie in wait against the latter part of his
life. And well may it be so; for that ancient writer Gregory says: Greg.
lib. 6. moral.
The ancient enemy of mankind, in the time of death is mad through the
violence of cruelty to snatch up the souls of sinners: and whom he deceived
while they lived by his flatteries, them he tormenteth when they dye, by his
cruelty. Secondly in the time of health it is very needful, because as in
summer the lilly has a worm in the root that does consume it, so in health
man has a worm that does dissolve him. Wheresoever he goes, he carries death
with him. As the lilly that flourishes in the morning, is not sure to stand
till the evening, so man that triumphs in the health of his youth, is not sure
to live to the infirmity of his age. Absolon dies in his health as well as
David in his sickness. And the proverb is, When health is highest, death is
nighest. Many even now as it were, are alive and merry, yet in a moment they
are dead and gone. Sometime death warnes ere she strikes, and sometimes again
she strikes ere ever she warnes. As therefore it is evil to delay till
sickness, so it is good to prepare in health, The wise man says; Sir. 18. 20.
Humble thy self before thou be sick, and whilst thou may yet sin,
show thy conversion. In health the wit of man is greater, and the fear of
death lesser than in sickness. In health therefore also to prepare for death the
time is somewhat fitter.


Q. Why: but it is never to late to repent? For a man may repent when he will.


R. The proposition is true, if a man does truly repent. But the proverb is:
It is scarce true, which is not due. It is sick like him that uses it. As you
heard before out of Augustine: August. sermon. 36.
He whom sickness constrains, and punishment affrighteth, hardly to true
repentance atteyneth.


Q. But are you of that mind?


R. Of what other mind should I be?


Q. If so you are, and other you cannot be of, what reason have you for being
of that?


R. Reason enough, and forcible enough to content any man reasonable: First
repentance should be voluntary, as all other obedience to God should be: But
repentance in sickness is usually constrained: The fear of death, hell, and
judgment does enforce it: Zeal, love, and religion, do not then always
effect it. And there is a learned writer that says: Enforced services are not
pleasing unto God. Greg.
Secondly, in true and sound repentance, men that repent, Ambros.
do forsake their sins. For as Ambrose says: True repentance it is to sease
from sin. Hugo. lib. 3. de Mist. ecle.
And as Hugo says: Repentance is called as it were a punishment, because the
man himself that repents, does by his repenting punish in himself what
wickedly he has committed. For the three things which are in the smiting of
the breast, to wit the breast, the hand and the sound, do signify that
repentance is of those things, which we have offended in, by heart, voice and
work. But in this repentance both raised by sickness, and never used but in
sickness, the sins forsake the men, for therefore then many forsake their
sins, because their sins forsake them, and not because they forsake their
sins. For why their mind is toward them as much as ever, though their might
serves not to follow them so well as ever. The history of Andronicus and the
lion, of both which it is written, This lion is this man's host, and this man
is this lions physician or chirurgian, does argue that in sickness the lion
(the Prince of Beasts) does leave his cruelty: and experience does testify,
that in sickness man (the Lord of lions and other creatures) does lay down his
iniquity: but as the one did leave his cruelty, to the end he might be cured
of his malady; so does the other lay down his iniquity, to the end he may
be freed from his misery. The truth of what I say is apparent in Antiochus
the proud. 2. Machab. 2.11. 2. Machab. 9.5.
For before that a pain of the bowels that was remediles came upon him, he
said in his pride. I will make Jerusalem a common burying place of the Jews;
But after that it, and some other misery had something molested him, he began
to leave off his great pride, and self will, and came to himself by the
scourge of God, and then said. It is meet to be subject unto God, and that a
man which is mortal should not think himself equal unto God, through pride.
As it fared with him, so it fares with sundry others. They never think of
leaving their sins till their sins take their leave of them. By this you
see that what I said, I say not without reason.


Q. Yet is it not so strong, but that a man may reason against it.


R. With small reason if he does.


Q. Why? As though a man might not repent when he will?


R. As though he might or may? Is it in a man's own power to become righteous
when he list, or is it in God alone to make him righteous when he will? the
Apostle I am sure says: It is neither in him that wills, R^^ 9.16.
nor in him that runs, but only in God that shows mercy. And that as the
Apostle there says, to whom he will show mercy, And this saying of the
Apostle will I believe sooner than the saying of any man whatsoever. For as
Isaie says, what is chafe to wheat? so say I, what is the saying of a
natural man to the saying of Divine Paul?


Q. You will not believe then that a man may repent when he will?


R. No more will you neither, if you be wise. For man cannot repent when he
himself will, but when God will. The scriptures every where make repentance a
gift of God, and not a work of man. Paul the Apostle to his son Timothy
says: 2. Tim. 2.25
The servant of the Lord must not strive, but must be gentle toward all men,
apt to teach, 26.
suffering the evil men patient lie, instructing them with meekenes that are
contrary minded: proouing if God at any time will give them repentance, that
they may know the truth. Peter the Apostle to the whole council assembled
against him and his company on this wise aunswering said: Act. 5.30.
The God of our fathers has raised up Jesus whom ye slew and hanged on a
tree, him has God lift up with his right hand to be a Prince and a Savior to
give repentance unto Israel, and forgiveness of sins. 31.
They of the circumcision in Jerusalem, when they had heard of Peter the cause
of his going to the Gentiles both approved it, and glorified God, saying,
11.18.
Then has God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life. And the
whole company of the afflicted Church, Lamentations the fifth says: Lament.
5.21.
Turn thou us unto thee O Lord, and we shall be turned. Not unlike to that of
Ephraim Ier. 31.18. Ier. 31.18.
Convert thou me, and I shall be converted for thou art the Lord my God: Thus
Peter, thus Paul, thus a part of the Church, thus the better part of the
Church acknowledge repentance a gift of God. This being so, a man cannot
promise it unto himself when he will, but when God himself will. For gifts
go not ever at the minds of the receivers, but after the will of the
bestowers. As therefore it is unsound to say, it is never too late to repent;
so it is absurd to say, August. super psalm. 91.
a man may repent when he will. Says Augustine upon one of the Psalms: man is
apt and able to wound himself, but he is not apt and able to heal himself.
When he will, he may be sick; not when he will, he may rise, or can be whole.


Q. Since you conclude as you do, I must confess as you would have me. Yet me
thinks, how much soever you carpe at this, a man may repent when he will; you
cannot so easily cavil at that, repentance is never too late. For why? so
long as life does last, hope does also last.


R. Men's thoughts are not ever truths. The Lord knows says David, that the
thoughts of men, are but vain. Whatsoever you think, I neither carpe nor
cauil otherwise than Gods word does allow me. Say not therefore you must
confess what I conclude; except I conclude what every christian must
confess. Their open confession shall go before my private conclusion. Neither
yet let it stick in your stomach that I say it is unsound to say, it is never
too late to repent. For you know it is too late to repent when a man is dead.
August. ad Pet. diac. c. 3
As a learned writer says: howsoever then repentance may be had, yet it cannot
then be done. If you know it not, Ignat. epist. 6.
you may learn it of Ignatius, of Cyprian, of Augustine, of Hierome, and
almost of any among the learned. Says Ignatius: after Death there is no place
or time to confess our sin. Says Cyprian: Cipr. tract. 1. aduer. Demet.
after we be once departed out of his life, there is no more place of
repentance there is no more effect or working of satisfaction: life is here
either lost or won: everlasting salvation is here provided for, by the due
worshipping of God, and the fruits of faith. Says Augustine: August. epist.
54. ad Ma^ed.
there is no other place to correct our manners and conditions, but only in
this life. For after this life every man shall have that, that he has
purchased unto himself in this world. Says Hierome. The dead has no part in
this world, nor in any work under the sun, etc. The dead can add nothing
unto that which they have taken with them out of this life. For they can
neither do good, nor sin, neither increase in virtue nor vice. And says
Olympiodorus as before I have showed you; In what place or state soever a man
shall be found when he dies, in the same state and degree he shall remain for
ever. Thus they all say as I say, repentance may come too late.


Q. I confess so much if it comes after this life, but of such a repentance I
speak not: I speak of repentance in this life, not after.


R. Of which soever you speak, it will not be utterly untrue which I have
spoken. For repentance in this life may come too late, if either the repentance
be imperfect, or God will not accept it. Esaus repentance came too late, and
Judas his repentance came too late, and so many others repentance comes too
late.


Q. Why, but of the two thieves that were crucified with Christ, one even then
repented when he was crucified.


R. Yet it neither follows thereupon, that a man may repent when he will, nor
that his repentance is never too late if it comes. For that one thieves
repentance was altogether miraculous and extraordinary. And you know it is not
good for men to make an ordinary rule of an extraordinary example. Of two you
see there was but one that repented, and in scripture you read of no more that
were accepted which so repented.


Q. But that more are accepted, may thereof be collected?


R. But that all shall, can no ways be concluded. There is reason more why he
was, than there is, that others shall. As Christ that was crucified, was
crucified that man might be saved; so while he suffered, he would needs show
the virtue of his suffering, that all which saw the one with their eyes, might
acknowledge the other in their hearts. And therefore the thief was then
called, which in former times did seem to have been despised. There is no such
reason now. For why? Christ has suffered, and the virtue of his suffering is
perceived.


Q. I infer not that all shall, but I enforce that some may. And herein do I
amiss? for may not a man find grace at the last if he repent?


R. Neither say I, that herein you do amiss, for I deny not but a man may
find grace at last, I avouch not that he shall. He may; for Chrysostom says;
Ch^y^^st. (...) 7. sup. ^^n.
The thief on the Cross needed not so much as one day to repent himself:
what speak I of one day? no he needed not one hour: so great is the mercy
of God toward us. And again, I^^^ (...) de (...) ^^p^.
that thief that hung upon the cross, needed not any length and prolixitie of
time, that he might win entrance into paradise, so much time served his
turn as he might be dispatched in, whilst he might utter one speech; so that
within one moment of time being freed from the offenses of his whole life, he
gatte favor to go before the Apostles into paradise. Cyprian also says.
C^^^^^ (...).
Although thou do at thy very departing out of this world, and going down
of this temporal life, pray unto God for thy sins, who is the true and only
God, calling upon him with a faithful confession, and an acknowledging both of
thine offenses and of his truth, thus confessing and believing, thou have free
pardon and forgiveness given and granted unto thee, of the mere goodness and
mercy of God. And in the very death as soon as thou have given up the ghost,
Ibid.
thou passest unto immortality. And again; no man is let either by sins
or by years, to come to the obtaining of salvation, as long as a man is yet
abiding or remaining in this world, no repentance is too late: the gate is open
unto pardon and forgiveness, and they that seek the truth shall have an easy
access unto it, etc. As before. In another place: Idem in ser. de cena dom.
Heb. 12.17. Genesis 25.33.
In that very moment of time: even when the soul is ready to depart from the
body, and is even at the lips of the party to yield up the spirit, the
goodness of our most merciful God refuses not repentance. And whatsoever is
truly done, is never too late done. But all this notwithstanding I say not that
he shall: for he that will not when he may, when he would says reason shall
have nay. Ye know (says the Apostle to the Hebrews) How that afterward (to
wit when Esau had sold his birth right for a mess of pottage) when Esau
would have inherited the blessing, August. sermon. 36.
he was rejected. For he found no place to repentance, though he sought the
blessing with tears. Augustine of this very matter in hand says thus: If any
man set in the extreme necessity of his sickness, would take repentance, and
does take it, and is by and by reconciled, and so departs hence. Whether he
went well hence or no, I know not: repentance we may grant him, but security
we cannot give him. I say not truly that he shall be condemned, neither do I
yet say, that he shall be saved. Will thou therefore be freed from the doubt?
hold that which is certain, let go that which is uncertain. Work thou
repentance whiles thou art whole and sound. If thou do so, I say unto thee,
that thou art safe, because in that time thou repentedst in which thou might
have sinned. If thou will then repent when thou can sin no more, thy sins
have then forsaken thee, and not thou thy sins. And by this is made manifest
what I desired to manifest. But if I must further manifest it, Ibid.
Augustine again says: He whom sickness and pain scarreth, rarely to true
repentance comes: for latewarde repentance uses to deceive many. Experience
also testifies, that there was one thief rejected, as well as one received;
one damned as well as one saved; one punished as well as one pardoned.


Q. Presently then it seems you would have a man to prepare for death?


R. I would so, and in so willing I hope I would nothing but what I may well
will, and should willingly wish. For the scripture in many places both wills
and wishes. To day (says David) if ye will hear his voice harden not your
hearts. Psalm. 95.7.8. Eccles. 9.10.
All that thine hand shall find to do, do it with all thy power. In the
morning sow thy seed, and in the evening let not thine hand rest: for thou
know not whether shall prosper this or that, or whether both shall be alike
good. Eccles. 12.1.
And again, Remember now thy creator in the days of thy youth, whiles the
evil days come not, nor the years approach, wherein thou shall say, I have
no pleasure in them. Sir. 5. 7.
Make no tarying (says Syrach) to turn unto the Lord, and put not off from
day to day, for suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord break forth, and in thy
security thou shall be destroyed, and thou shall perish in the time of
vengeance. And again. 18.20.
Humble thy self before thou be sick, and whilst thou may yet sin,
show thy conversion.

Quae fecisse voles hoc tempore quo morieris,
Haec facias quando corpore sanus eris.
Says an old Poet What thou would have done at such time as thou shall dye:
Those things do in such time, as thy health shall be hye.



Q. But if I may ask, why do you and the scripture will thus much?


R. The reasons thereof, and for, are many. If I shall recount some of them
unto you I will.


Q. Do so I beseech you. For this talk is more wholesome than yrkesome.


R. The scripture therefore does persuade a man in the present time to prepare
himself to death, and not to delay till the future, first because the present
time is certain and ours: the future is uncertain, and none of ours. For who
can assure himself of one day to live, that has already many days lived?
surely no man. As Seneca says: Seneca.
Young men have death behind their backs, old men before their faces. This
therefore is the saying of Christ our savior, Be ye therefore prepared.
Wherefore? because the son of man will come in an hour when ye think not.
Luke 12.40.
This also is the saying of Seneca, whom I mentioned even now. Thou know not
in what place death does expect thee; therefore expect thou it in every place.
Since man knows not in what place death ought to meet him, he knows not in
what place he ought most to wait for death, in every place it is to be
expected. This therefore should be every man's practice, he should not delay to
provide for death: for this cause first, because every man is uncertain of his
life. For as Solomon says, Man knows not his end, etc. Eccles. 9.12.
Secondly because it is good presently to make provision for the latter end.
For as Jeremy says: Lam. 3.27.
It is good for a man that he bare the yoke in his youth. What liquor sweet
or sour the vessel first does take the smell thereof does aye remain or
hardly it forsake. Pro. 22.6.
A child taught in the trade of his way, will not depart from it when he is
old. By so much he lives the more securely so long as he lives. 15.15.
For as Solomon says: A good conscience is a continual feast. And thereupon
Seneca says. It is good before death to make the way thereto, and then to
wait securely for the other part of the time. By so much he dies the more
blessedly when he dies. For he dies doubtfully that prouides not for death till
he dies. If any man in his last sickness will take upon him to repent, and does
repent, and so departes hence, I confess unto you we deny him not what he
desires; but we presume not. Repentance we may give him, salvation we cannot
promise him. I say not that he shall be condemned, neither do I say that he
shall be saved. Will thou therefore be put clean out of doubt? repent thee
whilst thou art well. If thou do so, I say thou art safe, because thou
then repentedst, when thou might have sinned. If thou will repent when thou
can not sin, thy sins have forsaken thee, not thou them. Thirdly because
it is more difficult to do it heareafter than now: for then the heart is more
hardened, man is more weakened, sin is more strengthened, and the devil is
more hardely removed. And of these things thus say ancient writers, as now and
successively I will declare unto you, first of the heart Bernard says:
Bernard. in sermon.
A puffed up heart is hard and void of Godliness, Ignorant of compunction,
dry from every dew of spiritual grace. A hard heart is that which is neither
disseuered with compunction nor softened with religion; Id. ibid. Sup. Cantica.
nor moved with petition, which yeeldes not to threatenings, but is hardened
with scourgings, is ungrateful for benefits, unfaithful for council, cruel
in judgments, unshamefast at filthy things, unfearful at perilous things,
inhumane to humane things, rash to divine things, forgetful of things past,
careless of things present, nothing foreseeing things to come, that it is, to
which of things passed there is nothing which passes not but only injuries;
of things to come there is no foresight, but only of revenge. Secondly, of
man, Basil says, Basil. in sua Regula. Maxim. in ser. John Baptist. Gregor.
lib. 4. moral. August. Sup. psalm. 30.
He which acquaints not himself with virtue whiles he is young, knows not to
depart from vice when he is old. When sin comes into use, the mind then more
weakly resists then ever, though much it desires. For as Augustine says,
to conquer custom is a most hard combat: Custom changes vice into nature.
Jeremy the prophet therefore says, Can the Blackemore change his skin, or
the Leopard his spots? Isidor. lib. 2. solit. Ier. 13.23. Greg. lib. 15. moral.
then may ye also do good that are accustomed to do evil. Evil customs
hold fast whom once they have caught: daily also they grow more difficult to
withstand, and are not ended but with the end of the sinners life. 3. Of sin
says, as I remember the same father last mentioned. Gregory.
That sin which by repentance is not done away, by his own weight draws
another. Forthly, of the devil says Beda: The devil by how much the longer he
possesses, Beda sup. Lunam.
by so much the hardlier he dismisseth. These sayings of the learned, if none
of them severally can move any thing to that which is moved, yet all of them
jointly should move much, for who should be more unsure day by day of preparing
against his dying day, then he is almost at the beginning of his living days?
Surely none, none therefore but while he has time, should provide for his
latter time. He which delayeth this matter, sins more and worse then
ordinarily, and against more then usually. For first he sins against God;
secondly against the Angels, thirdly against himself, fourthly against his
neighbor, fifthly against the inferior creatures, against God: 1. because he
mingles gall with his meat, according to that saying they gave me gall to eat.
A good work is meat unto the Lord: for he is fed among the lilies, that is
among good works. But a bad is as poison. psalm. 5. Says David: Thou art not a
God that loves wickedness, Psalm. 5.4.
neither shall evil dwell with thee. And Job says: If I have sinned, Job.
10.14.
then thou will straightly look unto me, and wilt not hold me guiltles of mine
iniquity. I have done wickedly, woe unto me. 15.
Secondly, because he brings that before him which worst and most displeases
him, to wit sin. For first he hates nothing, which he hates but for sin,
had not sin been he had loved the devil as he did before sin was.
Secondly, he has none so good a friend either in heaven or earth, but he
hates him for sin. For sin he threw Lucifer from heaven: for sin he cast
Adam out of paradise: for sin he expelled Judas from the society of his
disciples: thirdly, he spared not his own son, that he might be revenged of
sin. It is his own saying. Esai. 53.8.
For the wickedness of my people I have smitten him. Him therefore he had
crucified, that sin with him might be crucified: As Augustine says, The
innocent is murdered, August. super. Col. 2.
and sin is crucified. Thirdly, because he contemns him whch most
mercifully calls him. For God cease not to call the sinner, though the
sinner lists not to hear him. Matthew. 9.13.
Mat. 9. Christ says. I came not to call the righteous but sinners. But Prou.
1.24. Prou. 1.24.
the same Christ says, I have called, and ye refused. Fourthly, because he
vexes him with his slackenes which expects him with goodness. For as old
Tobit counted the days of his son Tobias his absence; Tobit. 9.4.
so God counts the days of the sinners delay. And as Tobias said of Tobit,
If I tarry long he will be very sorry, so may the sinner say of God; Luke
19.41.
If I tarry long, he will be very sorry. Luc. 19. Luke says: Jesus wept over
Jerusalem. And in one place of his works Chrysostom says: God is compelled
against his mind with great grief to condemn sinners. Fifthly, because he
reserues the worst part of his life for God, and offers the best part thereof
unto the Devil. For his youth (which is as the flower) he consecrates to
Satan; August. de. catechi. rudib. Innocent. de vilitate condi. huma.
and his age (if he comes to it) which is as the branch, he promises to God.
Says Augustine: When men wish themselves age, what other thing wish they than
a long infirmity? As Innocentius says: An old man is easily provoked, and
hardly revoked, he quickly believes, and slowly he leaves believing what
once he did believe. Holding he is of that he has, and desirous of that he
has not, Sad he is and querulous, swift to speak, and slow to hear, he
prayseth the men that are gone, and he despises those which remain. Things
present he desprayseth, and things past he commends, he fetches his wind,
and is troubled, he grows lazy and is weakened. Hear the Poet: many
discomodities compasses in an old man. Hugo de claustro animae lib. 3. cap. 10.
But as Hugo says. In that age, when the hairs wax yellow the flesh
glittereth like brass, the roseall face is adorned with the eye pearls, the
health ministers strength to the body, the youthful age promises some space
of longer life: when reason flourishes, the senses of the body also flourish,
the seeing is sharper, the hearing readier, the going vprighter, the
countenance pleasaunter; they which in this age tame them selves, and join
themselves to God, expecte the reward of John. Such kind of ones offer the
living sacrifice, pleasing unto God, immaculate, lacking neither ear, nor eye,
nor foot, nor tail. Let the late conversion of old men mark this, whose
ears are stopped through the defect of old age, their eyes troubled, and that
I may briefly comprize all, they themselves decay in themselves, through
themselves. These offer not an immaculate lamb, but that I may so say, a
curtaylde Swyne. For as an hog has line in the filthiness, so has an old
man in vices: and as an hog is fed with husks, so is an old man delighted
whih tales and rumors. As Cyprian says: Cipri. de 12. abusionibus.
As there is not fruit found on the tree, on which there has not first
appeared a blossom, so in old age he cannot obtain lawful honor, which in
youth has not labored in the exercise of some discipline. Without obedience
therefore how can any discipline be had? a young man therefore without
obedidience, is a young man without discipline. Cassio. in epist.
As Cassiodorus in one of his epistles says: Youth ilfauouredly spent makes
old age odious and hateful, but their former life well lead, attayneth to
great honor. For what does old age advantage him, whose youth has not been
blameles and vnreproouable? old men's riches are not their graye hayres, but
their great labors suffered and sustained in their green years But what
stand I thus long upon this, when it is more than time to go on with that
which remains touching the point in hand, which is, that much he sins
against God, which provides not in time, for his latter time? I had forgotten
my self, but I will remember you, and proceed. Sixtely, therefore he that
takes not time in time to provide for his latter time, sins against God
because he thence takes occasion to impugn him, whence he should take
occasion to obey him. For of that he looks, that God will deal mercifully
with him, he determines to deal injuriously with God. Romans 2.4.
He purposes to offend him, As though he knew not, that the bountifulnes of God
leads to repentance. But in as much as the Apostle reprooueth him, 5.
when he says, Thou after thine hardenes, and heart that cannot repent,
heapest unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath and the declaration of
the just judgment of God. I will no further displaie his sin against God,
but proceed to show that he sins in like sort against the creature, either
superior to himself, as the Angels; or equal with himself, as his
neighbors; or inferior to himself, as the unreasonable creatures. For sin
against God he cannot, but that in so sinning he sins also against them. As
God goes they go. With whom he is offended they are offended too. Against
the Angels he sins first, because he defraudes them of the joy they should
have in his timely conversion and opportune provision. Luke 15.10.
For there is joy in the presence of the Angels of God for one sinner that
conuerteth. But Solomon says, Prou. 13.12.
The hope that is deferred, is the faynting of the heart. Secondly, because he
frustrates them of the fruit of their labors. Heb. 1.14.
For they are ministering spirits sent forth for the salvation of the elect.
Thirdly, because he gives not that reverence to the Angels which is meet for
him to give, because he dares do that in their presence, which he durst not
do if either I, or any other mand did behold him. Thirdly, against himself
he sins, because he will have himself rather evil than good; sick than
sound, dead than living; bond than free, in the estate of a thief, than in the
state of a king; having nothing, than with the Church enjoying all things. All
this could I easily explayne, if some other thing did not restrain. Seneca.
For first Seneca says: A man has nothing that is good, unless he himself be
good. Unto the pure (says Paul) are all things pure, Tit. 1.15.
but unto them that are defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure, but even their
minds and consciences are defiled. Secondly, Augustine says. Augustine.
I did defer to live in thee, but I deferred not to dye in my self. Thirdly,
Barnard says. Is not he a servant over whom iniquity rules. Ioh. 8.34.
And to that Christ answers, Yes: for he says, Whosoever commits sin is
the servant of sin. Fourthly, against his neighbor he sins. First,
because he corrupts him with his example. Gal. 5.9.
A little leaven leauenth the whole lump. Augustine. li. de pasto.
And a great sin is that, says Augustine. For thus he says, He which lives
amiss in the view of the people, as much as in him is, kills him of whom he
is seen. Secondly, because he defraudes him of the help that is due unto him.
For whereas he ought to help him in his work with the devil, he rather
hinders him. And as one says; It is great iniquity in war for a man to
forsake his fellow. Eccl. 4.9.
For as Solomon says; Two are better than one, for they have better wages for
their labor: 10.
for if they fall the one will lift up his fellow. But woe to him that is left
alone: for he falls, and there is not a second to lift him up. Thirdly,
because for his sins sake his neighbor is often punished. Joshua. 7. for the
sin of Achan, Josh. 7.4.
the people of Israel was punished. There went up to Ai about three thousand
men, but the wrath of the Lord being kindled against the children of Israel
for the trespass committed by Achan in the excommunicate thing, they fled
before the men of Ai, and the men of Ai smote of them upon a thirty and six
men. Against the inferior creatures he sins, because they for the sin of
man are after a sort punished. For as the Apostle says, The creature is
subject unto vanity, Romans 8.20.
not of it own will, but by reason of him which has subdued it under hope.
For we know that every creature groaneth with us also and trauaileth in pain
together unto this present. In so much that every of them in the day of
judgment may put up his bill of complaynte against such a driving and delaying
mate. And the Sun may say, for his sake I lost my light; the moon, for his
sake I became dark; the Stars for his sake we fell from heaven; the Earth
for his sake I became cursed; and brought forth thorns and thistles; the Air,
for his sake I became corrupt and breed plagues and pestilences; the Water for
his sake I became polluted, and brought forth frogs even in kings chambers: all
creatures; for his sake we became rebellious, and yielded not that obedience,
which, had not his sin been, we both would and should have yielded. What man
now is he of any wit and discretion, that sinning would sin against all the
forenamed; his God; himself; his neighbor; the Angels; the other creatures?


Q. For my part I think none; I hope none; I know none.


R. Neither should there then be any of any wisdom, that should delay till
death, to prepare for death. For in so doing he sins as I have said against
all these of whom I have said, and in so doing he hurtes himself more than
now can be said. The estate of such a man is perilous. Whiles he lives: the
sword of Gods justice hanges drawn and ready to fall over his head: and when
he dies; it serves to sever his soul from his body, and to cast it into
hell. Ioh. 3.36.
For he that obeys not the son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God
abides on him. While he lives; he lives in the land of his enemies; and when
he dies (if he dies as he lives) he falls into the hand of his enemies. For
the devil is the God of this world; Origin.
and is seized and possessed of all those that remain in ignorance. Into his
hands also fall all they which dye either out of the Lord, or against the Lord.
While he lives; there is but a wall of glass, that stays his enemies from
having him in their hands. This wall of glass is his body, behind which the
devil stands, and this wall you know is soon broken and beaten down. One
little stone of a three or four pounds weight batters it in pieces, and lays
it level to the ground. When he dies; the wall is broken, and his enemies
enter to make spoil of all they find within. While he lives; as his days
go from life, so he goes to death. His whole life is but a course to death.
When he dies, as his days are ended, so is his life. For he lives no more to
his own joy or others comfort. The way of sinners is made plain with stones
(says Syrach) but at the end thereof is hell, darkness and pains. Whiles he
lives; Sir. 21. 10.
he stands at the gates of death according to that saying. They drew near unto
the gates of death. Psalm. 107.18
But when he dies, he goes soon into hell: Job. 21.13.
according to that saying; They spend their days in wealth, and sodeinlie they
go down to hell.


Q. If his state be so perilous, it is good for him to think of his ways,
and to turn aside his steps, least evil take him unawares, and he perish in
the time of vengeance?


R. It is so, and a fool he is if he does not so.


Q. A fool, may say not so. Matthew. 5.22
Whosoever shall say fool, shall be worthy to be punished with hell fire.


R. I, if he says it With a mind to hurt, and a will to destroy. But I have
no such mind, such a mind be far from me. I that cannot make a man, what
should I mar one?


Q. Still then you deem him as you did?


R. I do so: for he is a fool that being fallen into the mire makes no have
to get out; such a fool is he that being fallen into sin, makes no have to
rise from it. For there is no greater uncleanness than the uncleanness of sin.
Before sin the devil was a most beautiful creature to look upon (An Angel
he was of light) but since his sin no man is able to abide the look of him;
so ugly and monstrous is he now become. Again, he is a fool, that having a
journey to go, makes no have to begin it: such a fool is he that having to
travel from earth to heaven, makes no have to set upon his way.


Q. But why if a man may ask you, is he a fool?


R. Job. 14.1.
First because the time he has to go this journey in, is but short. For the
days of man are but short and it is folly to think a man may go a great
journey in a little time. Secondly, because the way is long, as much as from
earth to heaven, and it is folly to think a man may go a long way in a short
space. To Elias it was said, up and eat, for thou have a great journey. And
yet his journey was but from the wilderness of Bersheba unto Horeb the Mount of
God; 1. Kin. 19.7.
a journey of forty days and forty nights walking; a journey nothing
comparable to the journey from earth to heaven; for more is the distance from
earth to heaven, than was the distance between the desert of Bersheba, and
Horeb the mount of God. There are that express it, but how truly I mind not
here to examine. It is mine here rather to show why he is a fool that having
to travel hence; thither makes no have to set upon his way than that, and that
(since I have begun to do it) I mind to do. Thirdly, he therefore is a
fool, because he is looked for of great persons; for the whole host of
heaven expects his coming; and it is folly to make great persons stay for a
mean man. Genesis 19.20.
When Lot prayed that he might escape to Zora that there his soul might live,
God bad him have thither, to save himself there; for he could do no thing
till he were come thither, Haste thee, save thee there, Genesis 19.22.
for I can do nothing till thou be come thither. Fourthly, because he is looked
for to his great good. For he is looked for to a kingdom. Math. 25.34. Mat.
25.34.
Come ye blessed of my father, inherit ye the kingdom prepared for you, etc.
And it is folly not to hasten for a kingdom. Know ye not, says Paul, 1. Cor.
9.24.
that they which run in a race, run all, yet one receives the price? so
run, that ye may obtain. And every man that proves masteries, 25.
abstaineth from all things: and they do it to obtain a corruptible crown:
26.
but we for an incorruptible. I therefore so run, not as uncertainly: so
fight I, not as one that beats the air. Fifthly, because of the lettes and
hindraunces that he may have as he goes. He that went from Jerusalem to Jericho
fell among thieves, Luk, 10.30.
what he may is unknown. It is folly to presume. Keep thy servant (says
David) from presumptuous sin. Sixthly, Psalm. 19.13.
because the gate may be shut against him if he comes late. Mat. 25.10.
The five foolish virgins could not enter when they would, into the bride
chamber, because they would not when they might. And it is folly to come when
he cannot get in. To come in time is the chiefest of al things. Seventhly,
because he must make the more have when he begins. They which delay longere
they go, must recompense their stay with speed when they go. If not; they
shall never come whither they labor to go. And it is folly to labor to
effect that in an hour, which asks for the well doing of it no less than the
life. Hardly is that done in a short time, which is to be in doing all the
time.


Q. That a man then may never be unprepared at every time he is to prepare.


R. It is just so. For he which is ever in preparing therefore, shall never be
unprepared therein.


Q. But why, ought a man at every turn to prepare himself?


R. First, because it is a meet thing for a man so to do. For it is a meet
thing to do the commandment of God. Mat. 24.44. Luke 12.40.31.36.
And this God has commanded. Mat. 24. and Luc. 12. Mat. 24.44. Therefore be
ye also ready Luc. 12.40. be ye also prepared therefore. Luc. 12.36. watch
therefore, and pray continually. If a man be to go from one city to another,
it is good to prepare himself to his journey, much more then is it good so to
do when he is to go from this world to heaven. It is no less meet that he
prepare himself to go, that is to go to Jerusalem which is from above, than
it was for the Israelites which went but from Egypt to Canaan which was here
below: yet Exodus, 12. Exodus 12.
they made great preparation therefore. 2. because it is honest and laudable
for a man so to do; for it is laudable, Luke 16.8.
in the time present to provide against the time to come. Luc. 16. Christ
commends the unjust steward for doing wisely, and Prou. 6. Pro. 6.6.
the Lord sends the sluggard to the pismire to learn husbandry. Now the
wisdom of the first consisted in this, that while he was steward he provided
against the time in which he was to be no more steward: and the husbandry of
the latter consisted in this, that in summer she provided her self of
victualles for winter. The saying of the wiseman therefore is this, Sir. 11. 25.
In thy good state remember adversity, and in adversity forget not
prosperity. When thou have enough remember the time of hunger; and when thou
art rich, 18.24.
think upon poverty and need. From the morning to the Evening the time is
changed, and all such things are soon done before the Lord. Thirdly, because
it is a pleasant thing for a man so to do; for it makes him to dye so much
the more willingly; To him that is unprepared for death it is yrkesome and
troublesome to dye. O death (says Syrach) how bitter is the remembrance of
thee to a man that lives at rest in his possessions, Sir. 11. 1.
unto the man that has nothing to vex him, and that has prosperity in all
things, yea unto him that is yet able to receive meat. Fourthly, because it is
profitable for a man so to do: Luke 12.43.
for says our savior. Luc, 12. Blessed is that servant, whom his master when
he comes shall find so doing. Blessed are those servants whom the Lord
when he comes shall find waking And, Theophilact.
says Theophilact, Blessed is every one that shall be found waking, in what
watch soever (that is age) he be found walking, not behauing himself
negligently in working that which is good. Fifthly, because it is necessary
for a man so to do: for why as Christ himself says. Luke 12.40.
The son of man will come in an hour when ye are not aware of him. And as
Chrysostom says. Chrisost.
With the overthrow of those that sleep is that day to come. For as a thief
spoileth the master of the family which watches not, so does death spoil us
which are not prepared for it. Before death therefore, and in life whilst a
man does live, and may live, he is to prepare for death, least death in death,
and at death does take him vnprepard, and so make a worse dispatch of him than
he would. For as one says of this very point: Brandmil. con. funeb.
If any man will then first of all prepare himself, when he ought in deed to
be prepared, let him take heed that he comes not too late with the foolish
virgins, which had the gate shut against them when they would have entered,
while they went to buy oil for their lamps, that they might have entered;
Repentance in death is dangerous enough. And the reason thereof is at hand,
because in holy scripture there is but one found which truly repented in the
end. He truly; that no man might despair: he alone; that no man might
presume. He therefore is propounded as a pattern of consolation, not as an
example of imitation, that thence we may learn that no repentance is too late,
if it be true and unfeigned; according to that of Cyprian. Cipri. tract. 1.
contra. de metrian.
So long as a man remains in this world, there is no repentance too late.
Thus now I have answered your question, and satisfied your request.


Q. You have so I thank you. But yet I have not done.


R. What will you further?


Q. That thou speak as well of the manner how a man is to prepare himself to
death, as you have done either of his preparing, or the time of his preparing.


R. I will not deny you this, no more than I have done the former.


Q. How then I pray you should a man prepare himself to death?


R. According as his condition is: after one sort in health, and after another
in sickness.


Q. Why is there a double kind of preparing to death?


R. Yea that there is. For there is one, a general preparation, and another a
particullar.


Q. What is the one and the other; the first and the second, the general and
the particular.


R. The general is that, by which a man does prepare himself to dye, through
the whole course of his life in this world. But the particular is that, by
which a man does prepare himself to dye in the time of his sickness only.


Q. To begin with the first then, what course should a man take in his life,
that he might ever be prepared for his death?


R. That course that is fitting for that purpose.


Q. What is that?


R. This: first let him meditate upon death in the prosperous time of his life.
Secondly, let him daily endeavor to take from his own death the power and
strength of death. Thirdly, let him strive by all means he may to enter into
the first degree of eternal life. Fourthly, after he has once gotten entrance
thereinto, let him inure himself by little and little to dye before ever he
comes indeed to dye. Fifthly, and lastly, let him do presently, whatsoever his
hand shall find to do, and not with the crow procrastinate from this day till
to morrow.


Q. That I may now question with you touching each of these; why is he to
meditate upon his death in the prosperous time of his life?


R. Because the whole life of a Christian ought to be nothing else but the
meditation of death: because also in the best time of his life, he is
uncertain of his death. For man knows not his end; Mar. 15.43.
the one and the other of these reasons made Joseph of Aramathea (an honorable
counselor, which also looked for the kingdom of God) to make his tomb in
his life time in the midst of his garden. And this did he to put himself in
mind of death, in the midst of his delights and pleasures; and also to teach
others by his example what they should do. For what is the duty of one this
way, is the duty of every one. For once it is appointed for every man to dye,
as it is for any man. As therefore Paul says of all men; It is appointed for
all men once to dye: Heb. 9.27. Sir. 38. 21.
so Syrach says to every man; Remember thy last end; forget it not.


Q. And what will this minding of death in the time of life, work any good in
him that lives?


R. It either will, or should.


Q. I speak not of the duty, but of the virtue.


R. If so it does, for first it humbles him that thinks thereof, under the
mighty hand of God, remembering himself thereby to be but dust and ashes. Thus
therefore said Abraham unto God: Genesis 18.27.
Behold now I have begun to speak unto my Lord, and I am but dust and ashes.
Thus did he humble himself unto God by remembering what he was. Thus no doubt
will others do that think as he did. For what should dust and ashes be
proud? Sir. 10. 9.
As it is one of the lowest things upon earth, so it is one of the lightest. It
is troad under the foot of every thing, and blown away with a small blast.
What should it exalte it self against God? the clay is not to rise against the
potter, neither is man to huffe against his maker: as the clay is in the hands
of the potter; so is he in the hands of his creator. As the clay therefore
submits it self to the potter, so must he himself to his maker. The clay,
because it is clay; and he because he is dust. Genesis 2.7. Eccl. 12.7.
Dust of dust. Genesis 2.7. and dust to dust. Eccl. 12.7. Secondly, it furthereth
him to repentance. For he would be loath to be taken in his sins. Jonah had
no sooner cried to Nineveh forty days, Jonah. 3.4.
and Nineveh shall be destroyed; but Nineveh repented. As the remembrance of
Niniuehs destruction wrought Niniuehs conversion: so the remembrance of man's
dissolution, works man's salvation. For he cannot do wickedly that thinks to
dye presently. August. lib. exhortat.
Nothing does so much recall from sin, as the often thinking of death the
wages of sin. For what, Romans 6.23. Luke 18.11. 1. sa. 25.14. 2. Sa. 13.1.
Number. 11.29.
can the Pharisie be proud, if he remember he is but dust? can Naball be
covetous; if he remember he must go naked? can Ammon be voluptous; if he
remember he shall be worms meat? can Iehoshua be envious; if he remember he
shall be without life, 1. Sa. 22.9.
and despised of these whom he most envied in life? can Doeg be sclaunderous;
if he remember he shall be tongles, and most talked of by those himself talked
most against? finally can any man be vicious; that remembers he shall be
infamous; and lapped in the bosom of his inglorious mother earth? surely no.
For Syrach says: Sir. 7. 27
He that remembers his latter end, shall seldom or never offend. Esai. 38.2.
Hezekiah the king no sooner heard by I say the Prophet. Set thy house in
order, for thou shall dye; but straight way he turned his face to the wall, and
wept, and prayed, and said; I beseech thee Lord remember now how I have walked
before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is
good in thy sight, etc. Thirdly, it stirs him to contentment in every estate,
and condition of life that does befall him. For he cannot be discontente with
any thing, Hierom.
that remembers he must go from every thing. As Hierome says: He does
easily despise all things which always thinks he must dye. As another
says: If any man remembers the last things of his life, easily refuses all
things which are upon the earth. For Seneca says, Seneca.
Nothing will so much profit thee for the moderation of things as the often
cogitation of death. In the midst of all his afflictions (which were both many
and mighty) righteous Job comforted himself with this: Naked I came out of my
mothers womb, Job. 1.21.
and naked shall I return again: The Lord has given, and the Lord has
taken away, even as it pleased the Lord so are thongs come to pass; blessed
therefore be the name of the Lord. As Job did so may we. What was his comfort,
will also be ours. If there be any fault, it will be in the applying, and that
because it is either not applied at all, or else because it is not applied
aright. If it be applied, and rightly applied, good is ever thereby effected.
Greg. lib. 12. moral.
He which considers what kind of one he shall be in death, will always be
fearful in his work, and thereupon live ever in the eye of his maker, he
desires nothing that passes; all the desirs of life present he contradicts;
and he considers himself almost dead, because he knows certainly he must
dye. For a perfect life is the meditation of death: which while the just
diligently buzie themselves about, they escape the snares of sin. For as
another says: To remember that this our life must be ended, destroys pride,
extinguisheth envy, drives away lechery, auoydes vanity, erecteth discipline,
and perfecteth prayer. Hence an holy man in his contemplations of death says:
O most merciful Lord Jesus Christ, Idiota in suis contemplationibus de morte.
the continual remembrance of death profits much to the humiliation of a
man. Whereupon our forfathers willing to humble themselves did put ashes upon
their heads in remembrance of death, and that they were to return to ashes
according to that which is written: Remember man that thou art ashes, Sir. 10.
12.
and shall return to ashes. And other where: Earth and ashes why art thou
proud. O Lord Jesus Christ it profits also to the dryuing away of sins; for
nothing does so recall from sin as the often meditation of death. 7.36.
According as it is written: Whatsoever thou take in hand remember thy end,
and thou shall never do amiss. And says another: By right does he abhor sin
which thinks of death because he knows that it was brought in for sin. Hence
a certain abbot says. Be thou always mindful of thine end, and there shall
never be sin in thy soul. Furthermore O Lord Jesus Christ it profits to
the depressing of carnal desires, and to the driving away of diverse tentations
which separate the soul from thee. For nothing does so much avail to the
taming of lusts, as to think what kind of thing death it self will be. Also
O Lord Jesus Christ, it profits to the giving of alms: for Lord, those are
not the goods of a man, which he cannot carry with him, for only mercy is
the companion of the deceased. But O most loving Lord Jesus, to what does it
furthermore profit to the provoking and inducing of a sinner to repentance?
Effrem.
For as Effrem says. It is impossible that he should not repent which did
ever see death to be present. When Hezekiah had heard that he must dye, he
wept bitterly, and then thou Lord proroguedst the sentence of death against
him, and gave many years of life unto him. Thus now you see the profit that
comes to a man by meditating upon death.


Q. I do so, and I am nothing sorry for it, but how I pray you shall a man be
induced to meditate of his own death; that so much the sooner he may come to
receive profit by his meditating thereon?


R. How? by well regarding of two things.


Q. What are those?


R. These. 1. that he cannot here continue long, but that shortly he must go
hence. 2. that often he is to make his prayer unto almighty God, that every
day and always he may be enabled to resolve himself to dye.


Q. But how shall he be induced to either of these?


R. Well enough. To the first, two ways. 1. by express scripture. 2. by
manifest experience. For. 1. the scripture goes thus: Job. 14.1.
Man that is borne of a woman has but a short time to live; his days are as
the days of an hireling, yea a wind, and nothing. So says Job. Job the
fourtenth and the first verse; and Job the seventh and the first. Again, All
flesh is grass, Esai. 40.6.
and all the glory of man as the flower of grass, Psa. 103.15.
as soon as the wind goes over it, it is gone, and the place thereof knows
it no more. So says I say; I say. 40.6. so says David; Psalm. 103.15.16. Our
life is even a vapor that appears for a little time, and there vanishes
away. So says James; James. 4.14. Iam. 4.14.
Our days on the earth also are but as a shadow, and there is none abiding,
they are like a bubble on the water; like a weauers shittle; like a smoke; they
are like a thought, soon conceived and soon ended. So says David; so says
Syrach; so say others. Experience also says no less. For with our eye we
daily see, that by some storm or other, the green Apple falls before the
mellowed fruit, the lamb is brought to the slaughter house as well as the
sheep; the chicken is killed for the broth, as well as the cock and sooner
too: young men pass away as well as old. So short is our life, so swift are
our days. Luc. 12. there was one that persuaded himself he had a long time to
live, and because his goods increased exceedingly, he therefore says, Luke
12.17.
I will pull down my barnes and build greater, and therein will I gather all
my fruits and my goods, and I will say to my soul; Soul thou have much goods
laid up in store far many years, live at ease, eat, drink, and take thy
pastime; but God said unto him, O fool, this night will they fetch away thy
soul from thee, and then whose shall these things be, which thou have
provided? arguing thereby, they are but fools, that think they may live long,
and not soon possess the grave. There are too many such fools: but I will
leave them to their folly: if neither Scripture nor experience may weane them
therefro: for whom these two will not persuade, (that long they cannot tarry
here, and that soon they may depart hence) nothing will persuade. And what
should a man spend time with those whom he cannot persuade though he does
persuade? Speak not in the ears of a fool, Pro. 23.9. Sir. 32. 4.
says Solomon. Power not out words where there is no audience, says Syrach.
And give not that which is holy unto dogs, Matt. 7.6.
says Christ. Hearing ye one, marking the other, and obeying the third, I
cease. For by that which I have said, it may easily be perceived, how to the
first of the twain that mooues a man to meditate of death, a man may be
induced. And now I must to the second, to which by two means again a man may
be induced. First, by the necessity of death. 2. by ye practase of the godly.
For first, necessarily a man must die, and therefore dutifully he is to think
of his death. For by so much he shall dye the better by how much he resolves
himself to dye. The sooner the expected death is the more blessed death. He
seldom dies happily, that dies vnpreparedly. 2. dutifully the godly have
prayed, that they might be resolved to die, and therefore carelessely he is not
to pass over his life, without some serious meditation of death. For what was
not unseemly for the^, is not unsightly for him. For death is more fitting any
of us now, than it was any of them then. For we live to increase our sin, and
to do no good; they lived to diminish their sin, and to do muh good. The
glory of God, the benefit of his Church was the chief of their study, the
offense of God and the hindrance of his church is not the least of our
practice. If therefore they labored to be enabled to resolve themselves to
dye, much more should we; but for this they much labored; for for this they
much prayed, David's prayer is to be seen Psalm. 39.4. Moses his prayer is to be
seen Psalm, 90. and 12. Tobits prayer is to be seen Tob. 3. and 6. The first
man's words were these: Psalm. 39.4.
Lord let me know mine end and the measure of my days what it is, let me know
how long I have to live. The second, these. 90.12.
Teach us so to number our days that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.
The third, these, Tob. 3.6.
Deal with me as seems best unto thee, and command my spirit to be taken
from me, that I may be dissolved, and become earth, for it is better for me to
dye than to live. For this therefore should we both labor and pray; a work of
nature it is not to be prepared for death, but a work of grace must proceed
from God not from man. That which proceeds from God, must by prayer be asked
of God. That man therefore may meditate of his death, he must crave grace of
God to enable him to frame himself to death, that so he may not altogether be
unprovided for death, and thus you see by what a man may be induced to think
of his death, which is the first thing that he is to regard in his life, that
he be not taken unawares by death.


Q. I do so, and I remain your debt our therefore. But now having seen what
was there well worthy to be seen, I will crave that we may pass to the
second, that there I may also see what meet is to be seen.


R. Your will be done.


Q What therefore may be the sting of death, which you said he was daily to
take from death, which was desirous in life to prepare for death?


R. Nothing else but sin. For as the Apostle Paul says. 1. Cor. 15.56
The sting of death is sin.


Q. But why is sin compared to a sting?


R. For the likeness that sin has with a sting. For as those things which
have stings do wound by their stings: so does death by sin. For death entered
into the world by sin. Romans 5.12.
Had not sin been, death could never have done hurt. Again, as those things
which have stings can do no hurt, if their stings be out (for a man may carry a
snake in his bosom the sting being out) so no more can death, if her sting be
out, sin being gone, death has no more dominion.


Q. But how shall a man get this sting out?


R. By two means. 1. by humbling himself in the time present for all his
sins past, partly confessing them against himself with the prodigal child;
Luke 15.21.
and partly craving pardon of them at Gods hands, with the poor Publican. 2.
18.13.
by turning of himself unto God for the time to come, ever carrying as in him
lies, a purpose, resolution and endeavor in all things to reform both heart
and life, affection and action, will and work, according to the direction of
Gods most blessed word.


Q. Are you sure of what you sayt


R. I were else to blame so to say. For it is written, Deuteronomy. 27.18
Cursed be he that makes the blind go out of his way. And he makes the
blind go out of the way that teaches the ignorant contrary to the right way.


Q. Can you make it to me to appear?


R. I verily, if you will see when it does appear.


Q. I pray you do it then for I will see it, if you do it.


R. And I will do it that you may see it. For the first therefore thus says
Solomon: He that hides his sins shall not prosper: Pro. 28.13.
but he that confesses them, and forsakes them shall have mercy. Psalm. 32.5.
Thus also says David: I acknowledged my sin unto thee O God, neither hid I
mine iniquity. For I thought I will confess against my self my wickedness
unto the Lord, and thou forgauest the punishment of my sin; Selah. Therefore
shall every one that is godly make his prayer unto thee in a time, when thou
may be found: surely in the flood of great waters they shall not come near
him: Romans 10.13.
Selah. Thus also Paul: Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be
saved. And I think by the undoubted testimony of these three, that very thing
does appear which I would have to appear: for where two are enough, three
will well serve. But to proceed, because I must not dwell where I am; Ezekiel.
18.21.
for the second Ezekiel says thus: If the wicked will return from all his
sins that he has committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that which
is lawful and right, he shall surely live and not dye; all his transgressions
that he has committed shall not be mentioned unto him, but in his righteousness
that he has done, he shall live. Have I any desire that the wicked should dye
says the Lord God? or shall he not live if he return from his ways? Again.
When the wicked turns a way from his wickedness that he has committed, and
does that which is lawful and right, he shall save his soul alive, because he
considers and turns away from all his transgressions that he has
committed: he shall surely live and shall not dye. And Daniel counselling
Nebuchadnezar the king how to escape the wrath which he feared and saw
threatened, says thus; Dan. 4.24.
Break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquities by mercy toward the
poor; lo let there be an healing of thine error. Besides, by these means
the Prodigal son took away the sting of his death; the Publican the sting
of his death; and Zacheus the Tribute-taker the sting of his daeth the one had
no sooner said, Luke 15.21.
Father I have sinned against heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to
be called thy son: but his father says to his servants, bring forth the best
robe and put it on him, and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet, and
bring the fat calfe and kill him, and let us eat and be merry. For this my
son was dead and is alive again, and he was lost, but he is found again.
The other had no sooner said, 18.13.
O God be merciful to me a sinner: but it was said of him, this man departed
to his house justified. The third had no sooner said; 19.8.
behold Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor: If I have taken from
any man by forged cauillation I restore him fourefolde; but Jesus again said
unto him; this day is salvation come into thine house, for as much as thou also
art become the son of Abraham. By the same means also some others did the
like. By their doings others also may learn. For what was effectual in them,
will not be unfruitful in others, so others be as faithful as they. For as
the Apostle says, Romans 15.4.
Whatsoever things are written before time, are written for our learning, that
we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might have hope. But it may
be I have spoken enough of this matter, and you have a good mind to hear
somewhat of some other.


Q. You are to use your own skill for all my will, for I may mind what is not
meet; and you may wish what is more convenient. Your enough is nothing too
much: for that which you said, was both pleasurable to hear, and profitable to
learn. And it may be, my mind is little amiss. For I would learn what I
know not, and get what I have not. For my part therefore I can be contented to
proceed, can you so too?


R. Yea verily, for I am now at your direction.


Q. We will now then to the third thing, you say, he was to regard which in
prosperous time of life was desirous to prepare against perilous day of death.


R. As you please for that. But do you remember what it was?


Q. Very well I thank you. For this it was. He must strive by all good means
he may to enter into the first degree of eternal life.


R. You say true: but what would you touching this point?


Q. I would first know how many degrees of life eternal there are; for your
naming of the first argues that there are diverse. I would secondly learn what
it is to enter into the first degree of eternal life. For you say he must
strive, and striving argues it is not common nor easy to enter into it.
Thirdly, I would know by what means a man may come to enter thereinto. For
enter a man cannot into any thing without means.


R. And these things in some sort will I manifest unto you. Touching the first
therefore, there are three degrees of life eternal. The first is in this life,
when men being justified and sanctified have peace with God. The second is in
the end of life, when the body freed from all diseases, pains, and miseries,
is laid to rest in the earth, and the soul is received into heaven. The third
is after the day of Judgment, when body and soul being reunited shall be
both advanced to eternal glory. Now to enter into the first of these. 3.
degrees of life eternal, is to have such peace with God through Christ, as he
that has it, can say with Paul, I live not, but Christ lives in me. The means
to enter heereinto are three. Repentance of sin, Faith in Christ and Newenes of
life. For none can enter heereinto, but he that repents him of his sins,
believes in Christ and rises to newenes of life. He that repents not,
perishes; He that believes not is condemned; He that walks not in newnes of
life, is yet in his sins. Hence it is, that Peter said unto the Jews; A
mende your lives and turn, that your sins may be put away when the time of
refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. Act. 3.19.
Hence is it that Paul said unto the Iayler, 16 31.
Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved and thine household.
Dan. 4.24,
Hence is it that Daniel said to Nebuchadnezar. Break off thy sins by
righteousness, and thine iniquities by mercy toward the poor. Lo let there be
an healing of thine error. Hence it is that as Peter said of Joining virtue
with faith and with virtue knowledge, 2. Pet. 1.5.
and with knowledge temperance, and with temperance patience: and with patience
godliness, and with godliness brotherly kindenes, and with brotherly kindenes
love: if ye do these things ye shall never fall. So may I say of mixing
repentance with faith; and with faith obedience, and with obedience, more: if
ye do these things, ye shall never fall, for as John the Evangelist says:
Apoc. 20.6.
Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first resurrection; for on such
the second death has no power. By which is signified, that he which will
escape the second death must be made partaker of the first resurrection, of
which none is in deed partaker, but he that is regenerated, justified and
sanctified; regenerated by the spirit of God; justified by the death of Christ;
and sanctified with the gift of the holy ghost, for none but such can say with
Paul, I live not now, but Christ lives in me.


Q. I but others than such have part in the first resurrection?


R. In show they may, but in truth they have not.


Q. How then may a man come to be able to say with Paul, I live not now, but
Christ lives in me?


R. By three especial graces, in which the first degree of everlasting life
consists.


Q. What three are these?


R. The first is a saving knowledge, by which a man does truly resolve
himself that God the father of Christ is his father; Christ his son his
redemer; and God the holy ghost his sanctifier, for as Christ says. This is
life eternal to know thee the only God, Ioh. 17.3.
and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. The second is peace of conscience, Pro.
15.5. Philip. 2.
which (as Solomon says) Is a continual feast, And as Paul says, Passes all
understanding. For as the same Paul says: The kingdom of God is righteousness,
Romans 14.17
peace of conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost. And no marvel, for the
horror of a giultie conscience is the beginning of death and destruction. Sir.
25. 14.
The greatest heaviness is the heaviness of the heart says Syrach, and the
greatest trouble is the trouble of conscience say I. As Syrach also says, Give
me any plague save only the plague of the heart: So say I, give me any
trouble, save only the trouble of conscience. For as the plague of the heart
passes all other plagues; so the trouble of conscience passes all other
troubles. Pro. 18.14.
The spirit of a man, says Solomon, will sustain his infirmity, but a
wounded spirit who can bear it? As one in Plautus says: Seruus in Mustellaria.
There is nothing more miserable than a man's own guilty mind. In a proverb
it is. Seneca. lib. de moribus. Ibidem.
A guilty conscience is as good as a thousand witnesses. As Seneca says: The
conscience goes beyond all the evil the tongue can speak. An evil conscience
is often safe without danger, never sure without care. Hmbros. lib. 2. de
offic. Bernar. in sermon. Bern. 3. considerat. ad Euge.
But says Ambrose. The peace of conscience makes a blessed life. And says
Bernard. He prepares a good dwelling for God, whose reason neither has been
deceived, nor will perverted, nor memory defiled. The opinion of good men with
the testimony of conscience is ever sufficient against the mouth of them that
speak evil. Horat.
Hor. Judges it an happy thing for a man to know no evil by himself, nor to
wax pale through some default. Hugo. lib. 2. de Ani-cap. 9.
Hugo therefore speaking in the praise of a good conscience says, A good
conscience is the title of religion; the temple of Solomon; the field of
benediction; the garden of delight; the declinatorie of gold; the joy of
angles; the arc of covenant; the treasure of the king; the house of God; the
habitation of the holy ghost; the book sealed and shut; and to be opened in
the day of judgment. But enough for this, if not too much, for I had almost
forgotten my self, and now if I look not back, it may be every one will not
look right: the third grace therefore of the three I told you of, is the
regiment of the spirit, by which the heart and life of man is ordered
according to the word of God. For Paul says that, They which are the children
of God, Romans 8.14.
are led by the spirit of God: But if any man has not the spirit of Christ,
the same is not his; 8.9.
that is not Christ's. By these three, as I told you, shall a man come to be
able to say with Paul; I live not now, but Christ lives in me, for why? to
have Christ in him, is to have Christ by his spirit to guide and govern him.


Q. But when may Christ be said to do that?


R. When the thoughts, will, and affections of man, together with all the powers
of body and soul, are ordered by the word of God. For then is man guided by
the spirit of Christ, when these things forenamed are all directed by the word
of Christ.


Q. So may it well be, because the word is the rule after which a man must
direct his goings.


R. And so is it for that cause, for when David asked the question whereby A
young man should cleanse his ways, Psalm. 119.9.
he straight way returned this answer, even by ruling himself according to
thy word.


Q. So much I acknowletdge, to make no more words therefore about this, when a
man has attained to this grace, by these graces which you have spoken of what
must he next do that he may be so much the better prepared against death?


R. He must inure himself by little and little to die before ever he comes
in deed to die. For the more a man in health inures himself to die, the less
unwilling in sickness he shall be to die, for death after affliction is lesser
than before, hence is it that Paul says in his first epistle to the
Corinthians, 1. Cor. 15.31
By the rejoicing which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord I die daily, daily,
because he was often in danger of death, by reason of his calling, and daily,
because in all his dangers he inured himself to die: from this example should
all that would well die, learn daily to die, this daily dying is the right
way to well dying, for he that dies daily, when he dies, dies happily, he
never puts death far from him; he never makes death a stranger to him; he
never thinks death altogether against him, oh that men would more inure
themselves to die? then would they be more religious, and less superstitious;
more virtuous and less vicious; more bounteous, and less covetous, more
appliable to good, and less inclinable to evil, and to say at once, then
would they have lesser affection to live, and greater delight and desire to
dye, their not acquainting themselves with death, makes them seldom when well
prepared for death. Of another mind than many, and of a better then was that
good man, and Martyr, the Martyr Bilney in the days of Queen Marie: for he to
the end he might well suffer, did often ere he suffered, inure himself to
suffer; often before he was burned did he put his finger into the flame of a
candle, not only to make trial of his ability in suffering, but also to arm
himself against greater torments in death, Of the like mind before death
should others be in life, that so they might never be unprovided against death.


Q. I acknowledge as much as you affirm. Men should be thus minded in life
that they might never be overtaken by death. But how should a man inure
himself to dye, that so he might not be overtaken.


R. How? many ways. By thinking of his own death; by calling to mind his
friends death; by preparing of things necessary for death; by frequenting the
funeralles of those that have yielded to death; by viewing the faces of those
that are at the gate of death. For by all these and many more he may gather
and conclude, that necessarily he must dye.


Q. And what then?


R. That as much as he may, he is to inure himself thereto. For who does not
buckle himself to that he must needs do?


Q. I think there is none which does not,


R. Neither should there be any which should not inure himself to death.


Q. Neither do I deny that. For the duty of all is one. But when should a
man inure himself to dye?


R. When not? daily, hourlie, continually.


Q. Why that?


R. Because death is ever uncertain unto him, uncertain in regard of time,
uncertain in regard of place, uncertain in regard of manner: for no man
knows either the time when he shall dye, or the place where he shall dye, or
the manner how he shall dye. The time of his death is as uncertain as the
place; the place as uncertain as the time; the manner as uncertain as either
place or time. He may be taken to night before to morrow; at his board as well
as in his bed; with that that should preserve him, as with that which will
destroy him. He is void of security at each time, in every place, after all
sorts. No time can warrant him, no place can privilege him. Nothing can
preserve him.


Q. But what must he do nothing in the time present, but inure himself to dye,
that well he may dye?


R. Yes. Whatsoever good thing else he does, he must do it in the time
present; he must not delay till the time to come. For why? this is the advice
of Solomon Eccl. 9.10. Eccl. 9.10.
All that thine hand shall find to do, do it with all thy power. That is,
with all speed, as soon as thou can, without delay. This also is the
counsel of Paul. Gal. 6.10. Gal. 6.10.
While we have time let us do good unto all men: arguing thereby, that ever we
shall not have time. And as good is the counsel of the one, as the advice of
the other. For as he gives twice, which gives quickly, so he does a thing
twice, which does it quickly. Twenty to one it is, but he that takes not
time, while he may have time, shall miss of time when he would have time. For
occasion is bald behind. The foolish virgins that would not enter when they
might, could not when they would. Sir. 5. 6.
The watch word of Syrach therefore fits one man as well as another, and each
convert as much as one. Make no tarying to turn unto the Lord, and put not of
from day to day: for suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord break forth, and in
thy security thou shall be destroyed, and thou shall perish in the time of
vengeance. If it may fit you, and me, and him you cause me to speak of, I
shall be glad.


Q. If it does not, I pray God it may.


R. Even so do I. For he it is that must fit it, and none there is besides him
that can fit it.


Q. While it is a fitting, and while he does fit it, let us proceed to make
some other thing fit for the thing we have in hand.


R. As you will, if so be you be satisfied for that which is past.


Q. If I were not, I would neither say as I do, nor wish as you hear. For
resolution I crave of each thing as I go.


R. If you have what you crave, it is nothing troublous to me. Would to God I
could do both more than I do, and otherwise than I do.


Q. Thanks for that you can. More of the cat than her skin cannot be had.
Hitherto you have resolved my doubts, and answered my demaundes. And still I
would have you go on as you have begun.


R. So will I if you will. Bern. in epi. 129.
For it is better to go on than to begin. Without perseverance neither he which
fights does get the victory, nor he which conquereth wear the garland. Idem
ibi.
Not he which begins but he which continues to the end shall be saved.


Q. As you have therefore showed what course a man is to take in health; that
he might be prepared for death: So I pray you in like sort show what course he
is to take in sickness therefore. For that is the time wherein more particularly
a man is to prepare himself thereto, for death is then far more nigh at
hand, then before,


R. What you wish I will; for it is not good to have a man unprepared for
death at any time, when death is nighest, no man knows. The proverb is, when
health is highest death is nighest, and the truth is: It is nigher to us in
sickness then in health. Then we see those signs thereof, which in health we
neither nor can see. But when indeed it is nighest to any, God only knows,
who has the keys of life and death in his hand for many we see die suddenly in
health, as some we know die lingringly by sickness. In sickness death shows it
self to be nigher; but when it is nighest it does not always show. To be
always therefore prepared for death is the best medicine against death: but
because that either ever is not, or ever will not be I will to the question you
have propounded as fast as may be, that in sickness therefore a man may rightly
prepare himself to die in sickness three sorts of duties he duly is to look
unto. One concerning God, another concerning himself, and the third concerning
his neighbor.


Q. What is the duty that concerns God?


R. That he seeks to be reconciled unto him in Christ.


Q. It may be that he was long before.


R. All the better: so much the sooner he shall be reconciled now. Though long
before he has been assured of Gods favor, yet then he is to seek his
favor, without this there is small comfort for him in death against death.


Q. How shall he seek and obtain this reconciliation.


R. By a renewing of his former given faith, and his long before practiced
repentance. For by the renewing of these it must be both sought for and
obtained. For without the first it is impossible to please God. Heb 11 6. Luke
13.5.
Heb. 11.6. And without the last there is nothing but perishing. Luke 13.5.


Q. How shall he renew these.


R. By considering with himself, whence his sickness does arise and wherefore
it comes?


Q. It may be here his imagination wilbee diverse, and soon he shall not
light upon the truth touching either other. For some think one thing, and some
another.


R. Whatsoever men think, there is but one truth.


Q. That's true. But about that many much contend.


R. In this, as in some other, much more than they need.


Q. I do think so too. But that a man may be resolved touching these points, I
pray you show me the truth?


R. Why? I do not think you to stand in doubt.


Q. It may so be, but the more a man is confirmed, the better it is. The more
he shall be able to withstand his adversary.


R. That is true in deed. Concerning the first point therefore of these two:
sickness comes not by chance or fortune to any man, but by the providence
and appointment of almighty God. For as Hannah says, 1. Sam. 2.6.
It is the Lord that kills, and makes alive, it is the Lord that brings
to the grave. As Moses says, Deuteronomy. 28.21.
It is the Lord that makes the pestilence cleave unto a man; it is the Lord
that smites with a consumption and with the fever, and with a burning ague,
and with fervent heat, and with the sword. As the whole scripture shows, it
is the Lord that imposes diseases upon men. Genesis 20.18 Exodus 9.10. 1. Sam. 5.6.
It was the Lord that shut up every womb of the house of Abimilech king of
Gerar. It was the Lord that smote the Egyptians; It was the Lord that smote
Ashod with Emerods and the coasts thereof. Psalm 78.50.51.
Speaking of the Egyptians David says, He made a way to his anger: he spared
not their soul from death, but gave their life to the pestilence, and smote
all the first borne in Egypt, even the beginning of their strength in the
tabernacles of Ham. Thus though before you doubted whence sickness comes, yet
now you see by what you may be resolved.


Q. I deny not but that I see, what you say I see: and by seeing I am therein
confirmed, whereof before I was resolved. But when this thing is found (as
found it will soon be to him that has skill) what use thereof is the
sickeman to make?


R. Much and good. First he is thence to gather, that he must not ascribe his
sickness to fortune or chance but to Gods good will and pleasure. Psalm. 135.6.
For he does whatsoever pleases him, in heaven, in earth, in the sea and in
all deepes. Secondly, he is thence to collect, that he must not look too much
to the means by which his sickness came, but lift up his eyes to heaven,
remembering God that sent it, and thereupon say with Job: Job. 1.21.
The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken. Thirdly, he is thence to draw
that he is not to storm against his sickness with murmuring and impatiencie.
For what should he murmur against the Lords doings? he can no ways resist it;
Romans 9.19.
who has resisted his will? Fourthly, he is thence to conclude, that to God he
is to seek for remedy, if he will have it. For as it was he that sent it, so
it is he that must take it away. Hos. 6.1.
So it is said Hos. 6.1. Come and let us return to the Lord for he has
spoiled, and he will heal us; he has wounded and he will bind us up. So it
is practiced. Ps. 38. For David lying sick of some grievous disease there,
acknowledges himself to be chastised of God, Psalm. 38.
and therefore prays unto him to turn away his wrath saying; O Lord rebuke
me not in thine anger, neither chastise me in thy wrath. For thine arrows have
light upon me and thine hand lies upon me. There is nothing sound in my flesh
because of thine anger; neither is there rest in my bones because of my sin,
etc. By both, what I said may well be concluded, for in both, to God for
remedy in sickness it is repaired. Psalm. 38.
To the Lord the people in the first place calls; come let us return to the
Lord, etc. To the Lord the Prophet in the second place goes; O Lord rebuke me
not in thine anger. etc.


Q. But what will you not that the physician be gone to in sickness?


R. Yes the good physician; but not only the physician.


Q. Why say you the good, but not only?


R. The good; because the bad is not to be sought unto at all, for Ahaziah is
rebuked for that in his sickness he sent to ask counsel for his recovery of
Baalzebub the God of Ecron. 2 Kin. 1.3.
Not only; because in sickness a man is more to rely upon the author of
health, than the means to health. For it is noted for a sin in Asa, 2. Chro.
16.12.
that being diseased in his feet, he sought not the Lord in his disease, but
the phisician, that is, the phisician only.


Q. In sickness then against sickness, you would neither have a man seek ease
by unlawful means, nor yet depend much upon lawful means?


R. You say very true; I would neither. Both are abominable in the sight of
God, both are a forsaking of the living Lord, the fountain of living waters,
and a digging to himself cesternes that will hold no water, and what the Lord
says of these two evils, is to be seen in the second chapter of the Prophet
Jeremiah. There I now wish you to look. Ier. 2.12.13
For it may be I shall have better occasion to speak of this matter hereafter.
Though I have not, yet have I now no mind at al to make any more words thereof.


Q. Let it either go then, or stay til you have some better mind, and fitter
occasion to speak thereof.


R. So it is like.


Q. Now then concerning the second thing, which you said a man was to consider,
for the renewing of his faith toward God, and his repentance touching his
sins, what is your judgment?


R. That sickness comes for sin. For as this question is asked Lament.
3.39. wherefore is the living man sorrowful? so this answer is returned; Man
suffers for his sins. Lam. 3.3^.



Q. Why? but when the disciples asked Jesus touching him that was borne blind,
Ioh. 9.2.
who did sin that he was borne blind, whether he or his parents? Jesus
answered them thus, neither has this man sinned nor his parents, 3
but that the works of God should be showed on him; as though sin had not
been the cause why he was borne blind.


R. What then? yet does not that make, but that sickness comes upon man for
sin. For first there may be more causes of sickness than sin, and yet sin a
cause too, neither did I say that sin was the sole cause, or that sickness
came only for sin. For I know God is not bound to one thing; and one thing may
have many causes. Secondly, I say there is difference between my answer to
you, and Christ's answer to his disciples. For he answered them of an unknown
cause, and therefore he said, that the works of God should be showed upon him
was he borne blind: but I answered you of a known cause, and therefore I
say, for sin is man sick. For sin is the most known cause. So much I am
sure the scripture yields and proves. In the six and twenty of Leuiticus
it is thus said, and that by the Lord himself: Leuit. 26.14.
If ye will not obey me, nor do all these commandments, and if ye shall
despise mine ordinances, either if your soul abhor my laws, so that ye will
not do all my commandments, Psalm. 15.
but break my covenant, then will I also do thus unto you, I will appoint
over you fearefulnes, a consumption, and the burning ague, to consume the eyes
and to make the heart heavy. In the ninth of Matthew, Mat. 9.2.
it is thus said, and that by Christ himself to one that was sick of the
palsy. Be of good comfort; thy sins be forgiven thee. In the fifth of John it
is thus said, Ioh. 5.14.
and that by the forenamed, to one that had been sick eight and thirty
years: Sin no more, least a worse thing happen unto thee. In the eleventh of
the first of Paul's epistles to the Corinthians it is thus said and that by
Paul the Apostle of the Gentiles (who said of himself, 1 Cor. 1.40 11.30.
and I think that I have also the spirit of God) for this cause (that is for
abusing the sacrament of the Lords supper) many are weak and sick among you,
and many sleep. And what other thing may thereof be collected, than that which
I have said, (to wit that sickness comes for sin) cannot for me at this
time be readily perceived what hereafter may, will not now be discerned. If
through these apparent proofs this matter be not sufficiently proved, by
examples of scripture it may be further manifested. For why? Number. 12.10
for sin was Miriam smitten with leprosy. (She murmured at the marriage of
Moses.) for sin was David's people plagued. 2. Sa. 24.10.
(For his numbering them the Lord sent a pestilence among them) for sin was
Gehezi dealt withal as Miriam was, 2. Kin. 5.27.
besides his other offense he lied to his master, and his master had therefore
no sooner said unto him, the leprosy of Naaman shall clean unto thee, and to
thy seed for ever, but he went out from his presence a leper as white as snow.
For sin was Iehoram smitten in his bowels with an incurable disease: 2 Chr.
21.18.
for this writing came from Eliah the Prophet to him saying; Thus said the Lord
God of David thy father, because thou have not walked in the ways of
Iehosaphat thy Father, nor in the ways of Asa king of Judah; but have walked
in the way of the kings of Israel, and have made Judah and the inhabitants of
Jerusalem to go a whoring, and have also slain thy Brethren of thy Fathers
house, which were better than thou; behold with a great plague will the Lord
smite thy people, and thy children, and thy wives, and thy substance, and thou
shall be in great diseases, in the disease of thy bowels, until thy bowels
fall out for the disease day by day. Psalm. 38.3.
Thus much also that good man David the beloved of God acknowledged: for being
sick he said unto God, There is nothing sound in my flesh, because of thine
anger: neither is there rest in my bones because of my sin. But what should I
produce more examples, when these are sufficient to explain what I propound?
whom these will not content, little or nothing for this point will content.


Q. I think so too. You shall not need therefore about this further to
trouble your self. I nothing doubt of the truth of what you say. But one thing
by the way, when the sick man is come to this point, that he is resolved,
that for his sins he is visited; what by him is to be performed, that so to
death he may the better be prepared?


R. Many things more than one?


Q. How many?


R. Four: and all concerning his sins.


Q. What be they?


R. These which here follow. First he must make a new examination of his life
and conversation, according as the Israelites did, when in their affliction
they said, Lam. 3.40.
Let us search and try our ways, and turn again unto the Lord. Secondly, he
must make a new confession unto God of his new and particular sins, Iam. 5.16.
as God sendes new corrections and chasticements: so did David when he had the
hand of God very heavy upon him for his sins, Psalm. 32.5.
so as his very bones and moisture consumed within him, and thereupon obtained
he his pardon, and was healed. Thirdly he must make new prayer and more earnest
than ever before, with sighs and groans of the spirit, for pardon of the same
sins, and for reconciliation with God in Christ; thus did king David in his
sickness. For he made certain psalms either when he was sick, or else after
he had been sick. As namely the sixth, the two and thirty, the thirty eight,
the thirty nine; all which are psalms of repentance, psalms wherein upon
distress of body and mind, he renewed his faith and repentance, bewayling his
sins, and entreating the Lord for pardon of them. Thus also did Hezekiah in
his sickness. Esa. 38.
For when he lay sick as he thought (and as the Prophet told him) upon his
Deathbed, he wept as for some other causes, so also for his sins, and withal
he prayed unto God to cast them behind his back. Thus also in his sickness
should he do that is sick: for as James asked the question, is any man
afflicted? so if there be, Iam. 5.13.
he answers (showing him his duty) let him pray and in prayer what shall he
ask, but the free pardon and full remission of all his sins? therefore says
David, wherefore? Psalm. 32.6.
for the remission of his sins shall every one that is godly make his prayer
unto thee in a time when thou may be found, that is in the time of
tribulation. For the Lord is nigh unto those that are of a broken heart, and a
troubled spirit. Yea the Lord is with them that are in tribulation, and makes
all their bed in their sickness. In that form of prayer which Christ has
delivered unto us, one of the maynest petitions is, forgive us our trespasses,
as though the heart of our prayers should be the forgiveness of our sins. For
that petition is placed even in the heart of that our prayer, to signify what
petition should euerly upon our hearts. As therefore he that is sick must pray
in seeking to be reconciled unto God, so in praying he must ask the pardon and
forgiveness of his sins. For in the remission of his sins consists the
salvation of his soul.

Psalm. 32 1.
Blessed is he, says David, whose wickedness is forgiven, and whose sin is
covered. Blessed is the man, unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity. And
thus much for the third thing the sick man must perform touching his sins.
Now for the fourth in the fourth place he must by all means avoid all those
sins which incense his God to wrath, Psalm. 34.14. Esa. 1.16.17.
and torment himself with grief For when Christ had cured him that had been
diseased eighte and thirty years, this was his saying unto him: Behold thou
art made whole: sin no more, least a worse thing happen unto thee. Ioh. 5.14.
The same saying must the sick take as spoken to himself. To the sick it was
spoken when he was healed; by the sick it must be practiced ere ever he will
be healed. If man will not care to eschew sin the cause of sickness, there is
no reason that God should care to remove sickness the fruit of sin. As
commonly the effect follows if the cause be given; so most what the effect
ceases not till the cause be gone. This is a matter so well known as it needs
not much proof. If you of your self will not yield me it, I will labor
further to confirm it.


Q. You shall not need to prove it, I willingly yield it.


R. Neither will I then. It is good sparing of time and labor.


Q. Yea in things needeles as is this. Psalm. 34.12.14.
For as David says He that desires life, and loves long days for to see
good, must eschew evil and do good, seek peace, and follow after it, But you
shall spare never the more of either for that. For if you have done with the
sick man's duty that concerns God, I will desire you to pass to that his
duty which concerns himself, and therein to spend some time and labor.


R. I shall be contented with that, if you have done touching the other.


Q. I have done, but that one thing comes now to my mind which I think meet
to demand of you, ere wholly for this I dismiss you?


R. What is that?


Q. Whether the sick doing as you say, shall come to be reconciled to God, as
you wished?


R. Yes fear you not. For that point the scriptures are plentiful.


Q. Produce some part of their store.


R. What may be profitable to you shall not be displeasing to me. For this
matter therefore thus they go. Ezekiel. 18. Act. 16.31. 1. Cor. 11.11. Josh.
1.19. Mat. 7.7. Ezekiel. 18.30 Ephesians. 5.14. Ezekiel. 33.5.18.27. Ioh. 6.35.3.15.16.37.
Esa. 28.19.
Return and live. Believe and be saved. Judge your selves and ye shall not be
Judged. Give glory to the Lord and make confession unto him. Ask and it shall
be given. Seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you.
Depart from your wicked ways, and iniquity shall not be your destruction.
Awake thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give
thee life. He that receives warning, shall save his life. When the wicked
turns away from his wickedness, which he has committed, and does that which
is lawful and right, he shall save his soul alive. He that believes in
Christ, he shall never hunger nor thirst, nor perish, but have eternal life.
Whosoever believes in him shall not be ashamed. Act. 10.43. 1. Cor. 11.31
To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his name all that believe in
him shall receive remission of sins. If we would judge our selves, we should
not be judged. Let every man prove his own work, and then shall he have
rejoicing in himself only, and not in another. Gal. 6.4. Mat. 7.8. Ioh,
16.23.14.13.
Whosoever asks, receives, and he that seeks finds, and to him that
knocks it shall be opened. Whatsoever ye shall ask the father in my name, he
will give it you. Whatsoever ye ask in my name, that will I do, that the
father may be glorified in the son. And again: Whosoever shall call upon the
name of the Lord shall be saved. The prayer of faith shall save the sick, Romans
10.13 Iam. 5.15.
and the Lord shall raise him up: and if he have committed sin, it shall be
forgiven him. For the prayer of a righteous man avails much, if it be
fervent. And last of all thus: He that hides his sins, shall not prosper:
Pro. 28.13.
but he that confesses and forsakes them shall have mercy. If we acknowledge
our sins, 1. Ioh. 1.9.
he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness. And thus I have produced some part of that you wished. Now if
you think your question answered, my speech to the sick man's second duty
shall be converted.


Q. So let it. For as my question is answered, so my mind is satisfied.


R. I am nothing sorry therefore.


Q. Nor I any thing grieved thereat. Now then what may be the duty that lies
upon the sick in regard of himself?


R. You might rather have said what be the duties? for they are many. For man
consists (it is well known) of two parts; a soul, and a body. And according
to these several parts, there lies upon him several duties. But for so much
as his soul is his principal part, his principal care must be for that.


Q. And concerning that, what must he principally care for?


R. Two things over and above that which has been said touching his
reconcilement unto God.


Q. What be those?


R. The first this; that he munites it against the pains of his sickness,
least they provoke him to impatiencie. The second this; that he arms and
fences it against all immoderate and inordinate fear of death, least that
incites him to despair, and so he comes to miss what he should most aim at.


Q What is that?


R. A good and happy death. Because that after that there follows a most
happy and blessed life For they which dye well; dye not to dye, but to live
eternally.


Q But how shall a man that is sick munite and fence his soul against the
pains of his sickness?


R. By considering six or seven things both then and other when worthy much
and good consideration, but especially in his pains and upon his pains?


Q. What may those things be?


R. These which here follow. The first this, that his sickness and disease is
sent unto him of God, which is rich in mercy and plenteous in goodness and
truth, and also loves him in Christ. The second this, that the pain which he
suffers is nothing to that which the Lord could lay upon him. The third this,
that the pain which he suffers here upon earth in his mortal body, is
nothing to that which he has merited to suffer. The fourth this that there is
not any almost of all the Saints of God, which has not been subject to the
like pains, sickenesses and diseases. The fifth this, that the pain which he
suffers (how great soever it be) is nothing to the joy which he expects, if
so in Christ Jesus he believes. The sixth this, that Christ himself suffered as
many and as great pains as he does or may, and more and greater, ere ever he
entered into glory. The seventh and last (though not the least) this; that
Christ his captain now in glory sees and beholds all his servants which are
in misery.


Q. All very good things I assure you. But what? will each and every of those
do as much as you pro-duce and propound them for?


R. You need never make question of that to what other end have I either
produced or propounded them?


Q. Many things are frustrated of their end, and so may these things be.


R. If it be so, the fault is not in the things themselves but in those that
pervert and abuse the things.


Q. Where the fault is I well know not, but often times so it is.


R. I deny not that; but when that is, it is through the ignorance of the
things, or through the mis-applying them.


Q. Why? think you these things propounded so good, that effect according they
will take, if both they be known and well applied?


R. Yea that I do, and good reason I have so to think.


Q. Show that for each of them, and I so will ever after the more think of
them, and the better esteem them.


R. Upon that condition I will. For well I would have you to think of them,
and worthily I wish you may esteem of them.


Q. Begin then.


R. And I will. What should the creature resist the creator? the clay the
potter? the work the worke-master? when God himself the creator of man,
inflictes sickness upon man the creature, what should man grudgingly,
unwillingly and impatiently take either it, or the pains thereof? Pro. 27.6.
The wounds of a lover (says Solomon) are faithful. Much more should the
stripes of the almighty be counted friendly, since he himself is wondrous
loving. And what should a man strive and storm against him that beats him in
love, and for love? from thence he should rather gather, first, that God
corrects him of love as a father, and punishes him not of hatred, as a
judge. For whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, Heb. 12.6.
and he scourges every son that he receives. If ye endure chastening, God
offers himself unto you, as unto sons, for what son is it whom the
father chasteneth not? Secondly, that God will lay no more upon him, than he
will make him able to bear: for says Paul, God is faithful, 1. Cor. 10.13
which will not suffer you to be tempted above that you be able to bear.
Thirdly, yt God will give good event in his time. Ibidem.
For God will give the issue with the temptation, that ye may be able to bear
it. And these things considered, what should he impatiently bear what
necessarily must be borne? when that which is laid, is nothing to that which
might be laid, and that by him that lays, what is laid, what should it
unwillingly be borne? with him that is sick the case is so. For what does one
member pain him? God could cause all to torment him. Does his heart grieve
him? God could enlarge his heart, and therein augment his pain. Is he troubled
in soul? God could cast him into desperation. Is he afflicted both in body and
soul? God could cast both body and soul into hell. Esa. 38.18.
And out of hell there is no redemption. They which are there once, must be
there ever. Hence he may thus reason, does my head ache, my heart ache, my back
ache, etc. Yet is not my case like Jobs. Job. 2.7. Satan departed from the
presence of the Lord, and smote Job with sore boiles from the sole of his foot
unto his crown. Job. 2.7.
Is all my body pained; yet is not my case like David's, when being distressed
in soul, Psa. 55.4.
he cried, Mine heart trembles within me, and the terrors of death are fallen
upon me. Am I distressed in soul? yet is my case unlike theirs which are in
hell. 2.49.14. Luke 16.24
Death gnaweth upon them, and they cannot get so much as one drop of water to
cool their tongue. What therefore though one of my members suffer? yet is not
that to trouble me, for God could make all my members suffer as that one, and
with that one. What though my heart pains me? yet is not that to disturb me.
For God could enlarge my heart, and therewithal increase my pain. What though
my soul be disquieted within me? yet is not that to dismay me. God could give
me over to desperation the height of all sin. What though I be afflicted both
in body and foul? yet is not that to astonish me. For God could cast both body
and soul into hellfire; and what should then become of me? but see how
mercifully the Lord deals with me. Where he could do much, he does but
little; where he could torment me a thousand thousand ways he troubles me but
one, where he could afflict me in every part, and so leave me sound in no part,
he spares me in all the rest due, and punishes me but in one, Psalm. 42.5.
etc. O my soul then, be not thou cast down, nor much disquieted within me.
Wait on God, for I will yet give him thanks for the help of his presence. If
I did suffer more than I do, yet would not that be half so much as I have
deserved to suffer, no more than that which I do suffer, is. For what suffer
I? the aching of my head? the pinching of my heart? the stopping of my lungs?
the stuffing of my breast? the weakness of my stomach? the griping of my
bowels? the torments of my belly? or what else, the shaking of my joints? the
quaking of my bones? the dimnes of mine eyes? the dulnes of mine ears? the
streightnes of my pipes? the loss of my taste? the want of my legs? etc.
Though I suffer some of these; many of these, most of these, yea all these,
Romans 6.23.
yet all is nothing to that which I have deserved to suffer death (For death is
the wages of sin) and that that death which is the curse of God, the fire of
hell, the confusion both of body and soul, which far exceeds the other
more than either tongue is able to express or heart sufficient to conceive.
For why it is infinite? it is unspeakable. Oh what a happy change is this, to
change eternal death into a temporal sickness? great odds between a
temporal sickness and eternal death. There is no comparison between the^: too
too much to blame were I if I would not take patiently, what the Lord does lay
upon me wisely and lovingly. As David says: by this I know that thou love
me, because mine enemy does not triumph over me: so may I: by this I know that
thou o God do love me, because thus and thus thou now do punish me. Heb.
12.6.
For the Lord chasteneth whom he loves. Which of all the Saints of God
(whom he nevertheless loved well) has not in his life time been subjected to
the like pains, sickness and diseases, that I now am? Genesis 48.1.
verily none. Jacob the patriarch was greatly beloved of God, yea so well as
God himself said of him, Jacob have I loved: yet was he visited with sickness
as I am. Job the patient was an upright man, one that feared God and eschewed
evil, yet so well as James the apostle propoundes him as a pattern of
patience to the whole church, Job. 1.1.
yet was he smitten with sore boiles from the sole of the foot, to the crown
of the head. Elizeus was an holy Prophet of God, 2. Kin. 13.14
one upon whom the spirit of Eliah was doubled, yet that notwithstanding he
both fell sick, and also died. Lazarus was a good man, 20.1.
(so his name signfies, for it is as much as the help of God) and one whom
Christ loved well (behold how he loved him. Ioh. 11.1.
) Yet all this nevertheless he sickened and died. What should I then once
look to be free? by this my comfort is greater then my cross; my consolation
better than my affliction. Upon this I may better say, my portion is among the
Saints of God; then look how I am hated and abhorred of God. For after this
sort were they tormented and afflicted, and yet all their torments and
affliction notwithstanding highly were they esteemed, and singularly well
beloved of God. And so may I for all my sickness, pain, and grief. August.
John.
That which the Lord permitts me to suffer, is a whip of him that corrects,
not a punishment of him that condemns: by it I am trained up to an eternal
inheritance, shall I then disdain to be whipped? Nothing is that which I
suffer to that which I expect? It is but sorrow which I suffer, it is joy which
I expect, the sorrow which I suffer is but temporal, the joy which I expect is
eternal. Of all temporal pains the Apostle says: Romans 1.10.
The afflictions of this present time, are not worthy of the glory which shall
be showed. But of eternal joys the same Apostle says: The things which eye
has not seen, nor ear has heard, neither come into man's heart, are which
God has prepared for them that love him. 1. Cor. 2.9.
Why therefore should I not possess my soul in patience? what will not a man
do or abide for a kingdom? yea for a kingdom earthly and transitory? for
that a man will go, ride, run, sue, serve and spend. What therefore should
not I suffer for a kingdom that this heavenly, eternal and everlasting? alas
what not, if well I weigh and consider, what weigh and consider well I should.
As Well may I now say, as once one said. Here burn, here cut, that for ever
thou may spare. One that was always as dear to thee, as I now am, or may
be, suffered once, as many and as great things as I now suffer, and more and
greater too, ere ever he entered into glory; August. in lib. de. 8. virtu.
charita.
as Augustine says. The son of God is lead to the cross, he is vnpalmed,
which is the true palm of victory, he is crowned with thorns, which came to
break the thorns of sinners; he is bound, which looseneth those that are
bound, he is hanged upon a tree, which lifts up those that were thrown down,
the fountain of life had his thirst quenched with viniger, discipline is
beaten, salvation is wounded, life is killed death for a time slew life, Bern.
in quodam sermon.
that death for ever might be slain of life. And as Barnard says. The head
that the Angelical spirits tremble at, was pricked with thorns, the face
fayrer than the sons of men, was defiled with the spittle of the Jews: the
eyes which are brighter than the sin, were dimmed in death: the ears which
hear the Angelical songs, did hear the speaking against of sinners: the
mouth which teaches the Angels, was filled with viniger and gall: the feet
whose footestoole is adored, were fastened to the cross with a nail: the hands
which made the heavens, were stretched upon the cross, and thereto fastened with
nails: the body was beaten with rods, the side was thrust through with a
spear: and what more? there remained nothing but the tongue in him, that he
might therewith pray for sinners, and commend his mother to the disciple whom
he loved. What now? shall I look to go hence in peace? no, no, the man must
not look to speed better than the master. Mat. 10.24.
Says the master himself: The desciple is not above his master, nor the
servant above his Lord. It is enough for the disciple to be as his master, and
the servant as his Lord. Now for himself thus said the master of himself
(having spoken much out of the scriptures to his disciples of his passion and
resurrection. Luke 24.26
) Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory?
For all others said a servant of his; 2. Tim. 3.12
All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution. How much
more some other light affliction, such as is sorrow, sickness and pain? all
which and many more, are nothing comparable to persecution, persecution is far
more grievous than the pain which I feel, or the sickness which I abide.
Having therefore a desire to live godly in Christ Jesus, shall I not bear
quietly, and suffer patiently the pains of this my sickness and disease? The
Apostle says that, Act. 14.22.
We must through many tribulations enter into the kingdom of God. This my
sickness is but one. A weak soldier is he that cannot bear one blow. A
weak christian were I if I would be daunted with one cross: though it be
grievous as no chasting for the present seems to be joyous, but grievous, yet
is it neither tedious, nor discommodious: not tedious, for it is but momentany.
Psalm. 30.5.
As David says: Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes in the
morning. Heb. 12.11.
Not discommodious, for it brings the quiet fruit of righteousness unto them
which are thereby exercised. Yea says Paul; Our light affliction which is but
for a moment, 2. Cor. 4.17
causes unto us a far more excellent and an eternal weight of glory. And
what should I either grudge or grieve at that which neither comes for my hurt
when it comes, neither yet will tarry long after it is come? A welcome guest is
he that comes but for a night, and yet much enriches his host ere the morning.
Such a guest should sickness be, for so it deals with the host to whom it
comes. As Heli therefore said, when he heard he should be punished. 1. Sam.
3.18
It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good; So say I now I am punished;
It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. I am not too good to be
smitten of him. Where my betters have not escaped his hands, there is no reason
that I should wish I might. I daily say, if daily I pray as daily and duly I
should, thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Now in heaven it is done
willingly, readily and faithfully. If therefore I will any thing do as I say,
I must willingly, readily, and faithfully bear this burden which the Lord
has imposed upon me. To comfort and encourage me in the bearing thereof, I now
have Christ my captain being in glory, to look upon me, and behold me: for as
the Apostle says. Heb. 4.15.
We have not an high Priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, but was in all things tempted in like sort. And therefore I need
not either fear or faint under my burden. For why he which redeemed me seeing
mine affliction and misery, will no doubt both comfort me in measure sufficient,
and release me at time convenient. Exodus 2.25.
In the second of Exodus it is said, God looked upon the children of Israel,
and God had respect unto them. And in the third of Exodus the Lord says: I
have surely seen the trouble of my people, which are in Egypt, and have heard
their cry, because of their taskemasters: for I know their sorrows. Therefore
I am come down to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians, and to bring
them out of that land, into a good land, and a large, into a land that flows
with milk and honey, even into the place of the Cananites, and the Hittites,
and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Hiuites, and the Tebusites. And
therefore he says unto Moses: Come now and I will send thee unto Pharaoh, that
thou may bring my people the children of Israel out of Egypt. After the
manner that he dealt with them, will he also in mercy deal with me. For he is
ever one and the same: Gal. 3.20. Malac. 3.6. Job. 13.15.
God he is, and is not changed. As ob therefore said in his affliction, so say
in this my visitation: Lo though he slay me, yet will I trust in him, and I
will reprove my ways in his sight. He shall be my salvation also: for the
hypocrite shall not come before him it is not this pain that shall part him
and me: it is not this sickness that shall separate us: it is not this disease
that shall daunt or dismay me. Nay to say at once; Romans 8.38.
Neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor things present,
nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able
to separate me from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Thus now
you see by what means he that is sick may munite his soul against the pains
of his sickness.


Q. I do so: I cannot deny it. But what if his sickness be mortal?


R. Though it be, yet there these will be effectual. For they are of force not
only against the pains of some one sickness, but also against the pains of
every sickness; yea the mortal and deadly sickness.


Q. I but to the pains of sickness there may come an immoderate fear of
death, which will not very soon be vanquished, because, Death is the last
enemy that shall be destroyed. 1. Cor. 15.26.



R. Though there so do (as it is very like there will: for death is the most
tetrible of all things to wit in this life) yet may the soul be armed as well
against that, as against the other.


Q. It may so, and it is good to have it so. But how shall he that is sick
(and that mortally) bring it to be so?


R. By means.


Q. What means?


R. These two: practices, and meditations.


Q. By practices how?


R. Four ways. First, by considering himself. Secondly, by considering his
life. Thirdly, by regarding more the benefits of God that are to be enjoyed
after death, than death it self. Fourthly, by looking upon death in the glass
of the Gospel, and not in the glass of ye law. For she is not comfortable to
look upon in the first, how terrible soever she shows her self in the last.
And terrible she is in the last, though comfortable she be in the first.


Q. But will the consideration of each of these serve to arm the soul of him
that is sick against the immoderate fear of death?


R. I think no less; I teach no less; I know not how to persuade you less.


Q. Show me the reason of each, and I shall the better believe you.


R. Will you not believe else?


Q. I did not yet say so. I speak comparatively not simply.


R. That comparatively then you may believe me, if simply you will not, I will
endeavor to do as much as you desire.


Q. So do, and I will believe you simply and comparatively.


R. To the purpose intended then may the consideration of the first of the
four well serve: for consider he himself that is sick, and he shall find
that his body is but a prison to his soul, and his soul a prisoner in his
body. And why should not this arm him against all immoderate fear of death?
for what should he fear the breaking of his prison, and the freeing of his
prisoner? David desirous of life eternal, and the sight of his master cried
out, Oh how long shall I live in this prison? Psalm. 142.7.
And Paul reuoluing with himself the miseries that infested him in this
prison, cried out, Romans 7.24.
Oh wretch that I am who shall deliver me from this body of sin? David and
Paul's practice should be the sickemans president. His body to him is no better
then Paul's and David's body was to them. His body therefore is but a body of
sin, a prison of the soul, a burden to the mind and spirit. As a man of
God has said, no bocardo, no dungeon, no sink, no puddle, no pit is in any
respect so evil a prison for the body, as the body is of the soul. For it is
such a cage as stinketh in the sight of God; a body of sin is this cage of
the soul. And therefore he that is sick should fear no more to go out of
it, than out of a prison. To fear the delivery of the soul from prison is
mere folly. It is to wish a stinking lodging, and a filthy cage to dwell in,
and ever to carry it about which is extreme misery. It is to wish continual
banishment from the joyful realm of heaven, his natural country, which is
extreme madness. What man would be so foolish, wretched, careless and mad, as to
wish any such matter? none wise, sober, and in his right wits. The sick
therefore unless he will be counted foolish, wretched, careless and mad, must
never fear immoderately the opening of his prison, and the loosening of his
prisoner. Now if the consideration of this first practice does thus well serve
to the fencing of the soul against al immoderate fear of death, what shall
we think any of the rest that follow to be of much less value. Truly no.
For going from the consideration of himself to the consideration of his life,
shall he there find any less force than before? Iam. 4.14.
surely no? for what is his life? It is but a vapor that appears for a
little time, and then vanishes away, What is the certainty that he has
either of it or in it? it is a mere uncertainty. Sir. 18. 8.
For as Syrach says, No man has certain knowledge of his death. His life is
like the weathercocke which turns at every blast, the wave which mounteth at
every storm; the reed which boweth at every wind: but his death is like a
thief which comes at unawares. What is the peace he has all his days?
little or none. His life is but a warfare full of continual labor and sorrow.
And now what should he fear inordinarily, the vanishing of a vapor, the
turning of a weathercocke the breaking up of a warfare? the Saints in the
Apocalips say, Apoc. 22.20.
Come Lord Jesus, come, Shorten these latter days for thine elects sake, and
save us. Their saying should teach others what to say. For as Paul says: Heb.
13.1.
We have not here an abiding city, but we seek one to come, Merrily therefore
should he wish, and willingly cry, O father of heaven, Matt. 6.10. Apo. 22 20
thy kingdom come. Come Lord Jesus, come, And not inordinately or immoderately
fear the coming of that which certainly will come, and necessarily must come.
Seneca. enterpre.
For as Seneca says. It is but folly to fear that which connot be eschewed.
It may be (says he) thou will say: thou shall dye? and what matter is that
says he? upon this condition thou came into the world that thou might go
out. But thou shall dye? It is the law of nations that thou must restore again
what thou have received. Again; thou shall dye. (What then?) thy life is but a
pilgrimage. When thou have walked much and long, thou must return (once
again) thou shall dye neither the first, nor the last. All that are dead have
gone before thee; all that are living shall follow thee. But thou shall dye
young? It is the best thing that ca^ be to die, before thou wishest to die. While
life is pleasantest, death is profitablest. It is then best to dye, when it
delights most to live. But once more thou shall dye young? It may be fortune
takes thee from some evil: if none other, yet surely she takes thee from old
age. And what a good that is Augustine shows when he says. August. de
Catechizandis rudi.
When men wish unto themselves old age, what other thing wish they but a long
infirmity? Thus as you see does Seneca harten a man against death and the
fear of death. And thus may any wise sick man harten himself. For what is
death that he should immoderately fear it? August. super. Ioh.
Says Augustine: Death is the leaving of the body, and the laying down of a
grievous burden. Says Chrysostom. Death is a necessary gift of nature now
corrupted, Chrysostom. super. Matt. cap. 10.
which is not to be eschewed, but rather embraced. Says Secundus the
Philosopher to Adrian the emperor, asking him what death is. Death is the rich
men's fear, the poor men's desire. And says Chrysostom again. Chrysostom.
homil. 5. ad popul. Antioch. Brandm. page 567. Eccl. 9.12.
Death is a sleep somewhat longer than usual. For the like things happen to
those that dye, that do to those that sleep. He that sleeps, knows not when
he begines to sleep: he that dies, knows not when he begins to dye. Man
knows not his end. He that sleeps rests from all the care and labor he had
while he waked, he that dies rests from all the care and trouble he had while
he lived. Apoc. 14.13
He that sleeps, lives while he sleeps; Mat. 22.32.
he that dies, when he is dead. For the soul is immortal. And God is not the
God of the dead but of the living. Yet when Abraham and Isaac and Jacob were
dead, God said: I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, Exodus 3 6.
and the God of Jacob. He that sleeps, dreams either of things pleasant, or
things pestilent: he that dies and is dead, Luke 16.22.23.
enioyes either things joyful (as the joys of heaven) or things painful (as
the pains of hell) he that sleeps, Job. 19.25.
sleeps in hope to awake again: he that dies, dies in hope to rise again.
And therefore the Jews call the churchyard, the house of the living; because
they which there sleep, shall thence in the last days rise. He that sleeps
is stronger when he awakes than before: he that dies is better when he rises
again than ever he was before. He rises in incorruption, he rises in power. 1.
Cor. 15.42 43. Mat. 19.26. 1. Cor. 15.25.
He that sleeps may easily be waked: he that dies may easily be raised. The
trumpet shall blow, and the dead shall be raised up incorruptible. To come to
some point now, what should a man fear either the laying down of a burden,
or the taking up of a sleep? being weary he desires both the one and the
other. Being wearied with the cares and crosses of this life, what should he
then fear death? no man fears to be cast into a sleep, neither should a
sick man fear much to die. As Seneca says. Senec. in prouer. Epist.
It is a foolish thing to be delighted with sleep, and yet to abhor death,
when as a continual sleep is the imitation of death again; Through the fear
of death, we make unto our selves an unquiet life, and so great is the madness
of men, that some are driven to die by the fear of death. We are to be
strengthened least we too well love our life, and too much hate our death. And
we must be persuaded when reason thereto persuades to end our life, but not to
fear death. A valiant and courageous man ought not to fly, but to go out of
his life. For himself and of himself he says otherwhere. It repents me not
to have lived, because I have not so lived, Senec. lib. de senectyte.
that I should think my self borne in vain. And so depart I out of this
life, as if I departed out of an Inn, not as if I departed out of an house,
for nature has given us an Inn to stay in, but not an house to dwell in. Thus
by his example he showed what he himself did, and by his reason what others
after his example should do; if either his example be worth the following, or
his reason worthy the believing, for his reasons sake and after his example,
he that is sick (and therefore not far from death) should neither
immoderatly fear death, nor negligently expect death. How fearful soever
death is, if it be looked upon in the glass of the law; yet is it not so,
being looked on in the glass of the Gospel. In the one it has a sting, (and
that a sharp one,) in the other it wants a sting: and therefore it is no
wondrous fearful one. Says Gregory: What is this mortal life but away? and
consider my brethren, what a thing is it, in the way to be wearied, and to nill
that the way should be ended? He that travails, desires to be at his iourneies
end: what should he that lives be afraid to die? death is the end of his
^ourney. Every thing reioyces in the end. What should the sick man fear
death? death under the Gospel to him that believes, ^s, The passage to life,
not to destruction. For be which believes in Christ dies not, Ioh. 5.24.
death has no power over him; but he passes from death to life. The death of
those that believe has another Epitheton, than has the death of those that
believe not. Precious in the sight of the Lord (says David) is the death of
his Saints: Psalm. 116.15 Sap. 3.19. Bern. in quadam ep^^co.
but horrible (says Solomon) is the end of the wicked generation. Precious is
the death of the Saints: precious truly as the end of their labors, as the
finishing of their victory, as the gate of life and the entrance to perfect
security. And again in the same place says he. The death of the righteous is
good for the rest, (that follows it,) better for the newenes (of that rest)
best of all for the security that is in that rest, that both follows it and
is new. For as the same Bernard otherwhere says. Bern. ser. 25. paru. sermon.
Three things there are which makes the death of the Saints precious. 1. Rest
from labor. 2. Joy of the newenes of that rest. 3. Security of the eternity
of the same rest. But on the contrary part the death of the wicked is most
vile. It is evil truly in the loosing of the world, (for without grief they
cannot be severed from that which they love) it is worse in the seuering of the
flesh; (For their souls are pulled from their bodies by wicked spirits) it is
worst of all in the double suffering of the worms and the fire. (For the worm
ever stingeth, and the fire always burns, neither ever cease to torment.)
Much what to the like effect does Chrysostom write of the death of the one and
the other. Although they die at home, Chrysostom. hom. 66. in Genes. de morte
peccator.
both wife and children being present, familiars and acquaintance standing by,
if yet they want virtue, their death is but evil. So although he be in a
strange country, though he lies upon the pauement, and what say I though he be
in a strange country? although he falls into the hands of thieves; although
he be devoured of beasts, yet if he be endued with virtue, his death shall be
precious. As Anselmus writes: Anselm.
It hurts not those which are good, whether they be murdered, or taken away by
sudden death. For they never die sodeinly, which ever thought they were to
die. Whether therefore they be slain with the sword, or torn in pieces of
beasts, or burned with fire, or drowned by water, or hanged on a tree, or have
their legs broken, or die by some other misfortune; yet ever is the death of
his Saints precious in the sight of the Lord according as it is, At what time
soever the righteous dies, his righteousness shall not be taken from him. And
so death hurts not, but profits much. If therefore he that is sick, or any
other does believe, he needs not overmuch to fear death. For what should a
man fear that which does good, and not hurt? brings profit, and not
disprofite, is beneficial and commodious, not unprofitable and noxious?


Q. Nothing at all in my mind. But what? is death so?


R. Why else say I so?


Q. Because it pleases you to say so.


R. What? must I speak what pleases me.


Q. You should not.


R. Neither will I so near as I can, but that will I speak which may please
God and pleasure man.


Q. Because you say then, Death does good and not hurt, brings profit and not
disprofite, is commodious and not noxious, to whom is it commodious?


R. To whom not? It is commodious to him that suffers it, and it is commodious
to him that sees it suffered.


Q. But not to every one of those that suffer it, or see it suffered?


R. Neither did I yet say so. It is commodious to every one that suffers it
either in faith, or for faith, or both. It is commodious also to every one
that sees it suffered, so he makes right use of the seeing it suffered. For
the first these sayings of Scripture make some what. 2. Cor. 4.12. Tob. 3.6.
Ro^. 8.28. Sir. 41.2. Romans 8.38.
Death works in us. It ts better for ^ to dye, then to live, to them that
love God a things work together for the best. O Dear how acceptable is thy
Judgment unto the need full, and unto him whose strength fails, and that is
now in the last age, and is vexed with a^ things. Gregor. super. Mat. 10. in
testimo. illis.
For the other this of Gregory makes much. The Death of the righteous to the
good is an help, to the evil a testimony; that thence the wicked may perish
without excuse, whence the godly do take example, that they may live.


Q. What good brings Death to him that suffers it, as you have said?


R. The goods thereof they are unspeakable, for multitude they exceed number,
for greatness they pass understanding, for goodness they excel all that men
here, enjoy, or may enjoy.


Q. I would I might hear somewhat of the^: that so both I and others might be
benefited by them?


R. Since so you will, I say, so you shall. First Death killes his familiar
enemy, Gal. 5. 1. P^ 12.11. Romans 6.7.
to wit his body or flesh with all her lusts fighting against the soul.
For be that is dead is freed from sin. And what a benefit this is, that
saying of a learned writer shows which thus sounds. Seneca.
There is no pestilence more forceable to do an hurt, then a familiar enemy.
A familiar enemy betrayeth Christ into the hands of sinners. Secondly Death
opens a door to his poor prisoner out of a filthy prison in which he was
held bound and captive, that is, Death gives liberty to his Soul to depart
from the body, in which it was deteyned from the presence of God, as in a
prison. For many have thought the body of man to be as a prison to the Soul of
man. Pythagoras seeing one of his scholars very busy about trimming up of
his body, said, this man ceases not to make unto himself a more troublesome
prison. What a benefit this is, it may appear by David's prayer. Psalm. 142.7.
and our experience. David's prayer, Psalm. 142.1.
Bring my soul out of prison that I may praise thy name. Our experience is,
that prisoners hate little more then locks and boltes, because they must stay
them from going out. Thirdly Death delivers him from the carryage of a coffin
full of filthiness and uncleanness: that is, his body. Plato in Cratylo says
(...). i. Corpus, a body, Plato in Cratylo.
dicitur quasi (...), is said to be ac (...). i. Sepulchrum, A grave, and
Sepulchro quid faedius? and what more unclean then a grave? Mat. 23.27.
Whited tombs, says Christ, appear beautiful outward, but are within full
of dead men's bones, and of all filthiness, such like are the fine and fair
bodies of men. A corruptible body (says Solomon) is heavy unto the soul,
Sap. 9.1^.
and the earthly mansion keeps down the mind that is full of cares. And
what a benefit this is, it may appear not only by Paul's speech in one
place, but also by his great outcry in another. For thus he says in one place:
Whiles we are at home in the body we are absent from the Lord, 2. Cor. 5.6.
And thus he cries out in another: O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver
me from this body of death? And a miserable thing it is to be absent from the
Lord, Romans 7.4.
and to be troubled with the body of Death. When Paul says, the Ephesians
were without God in the world, he reckened up one of the evils the Ephesians
were infected with, Ephe. 2.12.
ere ever the bright light of the glorious Gospel of Christ Jesus did shine
unto them and upon them, but when he said, If God be with us who can be against
us? he spoke of one of the greatest blessings that is, Romans 8.31.
writing therefore to the Philippians he not only desires to be with
Christ, but also says that so to be is best of all. I am greatly in doubt on
both sides, desiring to be loosed and to be with Christ, Phil. 1.23.
which is best of all. This therefore was David's complaint: As the Heart brayeth
for the rivers of waters, Psalm. 42.1.
so pants my Soul after thee o God, my Soul thirsts for God, even for the
living God; Psalm. 42.2.
when shall I come and appear before the presence of God? And this otherwhere
the saying of the Psalmist: It is good for me to draw near unto God. 73.28.
What should be others thereupon, I leave it to others to discern. My meaning
is to proceed to another commodity that death brings with it to whom it comes,
and that is this; It puts an end to the painful Pilgrimage he was going on in
this world. For what is this mortal life, but a way, Basil. hom. 1. in psalm. 1.
and that for the have that every thing generate makes to the end? What a
commodity this is, may many ways appear, but especially by that of Solomon:
Eccl. 7.3.
The day of Death is better then the day that one is borne. And that of Syrach,
Death is better then a bitter life. If it were requisite, Sir. 30. 17.
that either of these were better proved, proof might soon be produced For
the first there is one that says. For two causes the day of death is better
to the servants of God then the day of birth: Perald. tom. 1. page 134.
One is because Death is the egresse from misery, whereas the birth is the
ingresse to misery, says a wise man, though Death be not good, yet is it the
end of all evils, Seneca says, Death is the remedy of all evils. The second
is, because Death is the gate of glory to the servants of God. It is the
beginning of a blessed life. For the other, there is another that says. Sir.
40. 25. 41. 2.
It is better to dye then to beg. O death how acceptable is thy Judgment
unto the needful, and unto him whose strength fails: and that is now in
the last age, and is vexed with all things, and to him that despayreth, and
has lost patience, To like purpose said old Tobit in the anguish of his
Soul. Tob. 3.6.
It is better for me to dye then to live, because I have heard false reproaches,
and am very sorrowful. For the maine point we drive at, there is one that
says. Philip. 1.2. Cor. 5, he which dies is freed from the miseries of the
world he goes to the Lord from whom he went on pilgrimage, so long as he abode
in the body. Also in Death he leaves sin, labor, affliction, the slime of
the earth, the matter of continual conflict against the spirit of God. And
that body made of the dust of the ground which he leaves in Death he shall
receive again in the day of the restoring of all things, in far better case
then ever it was in this world. For then it shall be made like the glorious
body of Christ. Whether therefore you respect the Soul of him that dies, or
you regard the body, yet ever is that sure which I say, that death is
commodious to him that dies, If you respect the Soul, It is freed from the
bands of the body, to be with Christ, It is translated to immortality, It is
conducted to the heavenly country, from which it was a stranger: If you
regard the body, it is freed from all misery; It is committed to a most safe
and sweet sleep, it is prepared to the glory of the resurrection, the flesh
rests in hope: whatsoever you respect or regard, yet this at length you must
come to; Raban. lib. 9. in eccl. cap. 2.
The judgment of present death is good to those that worship Christ, because
by it they pass to eternal life, Sanctus Idiota.
By a good death a man chaunges his fear into security, his labor into
tranquillity, his want into sacietie, his sorrow into iocunditie: by a good
death he escapes all danger of loosing the grace of God, his estate comes to
be better then ever it was before. While he lived, Lazarus was contemned, Luke
26.21.
neither Master nor Man would regard him, more compassion was had of him by
dogs, then by men. The dogs came and licked his sores, but no man gave him
the crummes which fell from the rich man's table, but when he was dead, Lazarus
was esteemed, the Angels came and carried him into Abraham's bosom, of Christ
himself Myconius says. While Christ lived, Myconi. in euang. Mar expos.
he might see nothing but humility, and many things horrible and dreadful,
but being dead see how honorable his burial was great and good men bury him,
there is a magnificent preparation, a new Sepulcher in the gardein in which yet
never man lay. As it fared with these, so often fares it with others, by these
then may others see what commodities draws toward them when death comes upon
them, some I have showed, mo at pleasure may be conceived, so good, so
pleasant, so profitable there are, as Bassus an old man once said. Ser. 30.
episto.
If there be any discommoditie in death, it is the fault of those that die (and
not the fault of death it self. In his book of the contempt of death says
Seneca, Seneca. lib. de contem. mortis
for the pain that is in death. It is light, if I can bear it, It is but
short, if I cannot endure it, for the commodities that are therein, they are
many. I shall leave of all possibility then to be sick any more, I shall leave
of all possibility to be bound any more, I shall leave of all possibility, to
dye any more. Sickness shall have no more to do with me, bondage shall have no
more to do with me, Death shall have no more to do with me, the power of the
one, the other, and all of them shall be taken from them, what in this point
Seneca thought was to betide him, is surely to betyde others. As Seneca
therefore contemned death because of the commodities of Death, so may they for
the same cause stand in less fear of Death then otherwise, for therefore is
it said, that there are many commodities in Death, that those which are to dye,
should be well armed against the immoderate fear of Death. For it is but
folly to fear that which will come, and upon all come, and upon many very
profitably come, when it does come. Many makes a virtue of necessity, and
most wonderouslie love that which brings commodity, says Seneca again.
Seneca. lib. de senectu.
In death there is no greater solace against Death then mortality it self. I
see not therefore how any should over foolishlie fear Death, it bringing
commodities as it does, not only to them that suffer it, but also to those that
see it by others suffered.


Q. No more do I; neither should I; if there were as much proved, as was
erewhile propounded?


R. Why do you make an if? what is there wanting?


Q. The latter part of your saying.


R. What is that?


Q. Do not you know?


R. Whether I do, or do not, I would know of you?


Q. And that I can tell you?


R. Do it then.


Q. So I mean, but I do but quicken your wit a little with this, being by
other things fully resolved of your will.


R. I can but commend your wit for so doing. But I would hear what is wanting
to be proved of that which was propounded?


Q. That you shall: that death brings commodity to those that see it suffered,
is the thing which I speak of.


R. And that's the thing you need not much speak of, or at the least, not so as
you have spoken. For that thing is not now unproven. Remember you not, that
out of that ancient and learned doctor, Gregory, I told you, that The death
of the righteous was an help to the good (th^^ saw it) and a testimony to the
evil?


Q. Yes indeed do I.


R. Be not so hasty then hereafter to accuse before you have just cause. For
that saying of Gregory is proof sufficient for that in controversy.


Q. It is so, I can it not deny: but I would have had more.


R. Why? more than enough is too much: and the proverb is, enough is as good as
a feast. Though more should be said, yet would it all come to this issue. For
ever the death of the righteous is either an help to the good, or a testimony
to the bad, or both to either.


Q. But how the one to the one, and the other to the other?


R. The one to the one by making them to remember their own ends, to wish the
like ends, and to prepare against their ends. The other to the other by making
them more obstinate in their sins, more perverse in their actions, more loose
and licentious in their lives and conuersations. For when a good man sees
another die, he then bethinks himself that he also must die, he wishes that
such a death he may die ( Let me die the death of the righteous, Number. 23.17
and let my last end be like his. He prepares what he may to come to such an
end. But when an evil man sees a good man die, he then is either raised from
his sin to righteousness, or hardened in his sin against all godliness.
Raised it may be he is, if he see him die a good death. i. A death in his
estimation good: but hardened, if he see him die an hard death. i. A violent
death an unnatural or a troublesome death. For he thereupon presently reasons:
this man's life was not so good, as he himself thought it, and some other
judged it. For then should he not have had so hard an end. For such as the
life is, such the death is. And as Augustine says: He cannot die ill, Ang. de
doctrina christian.
which lived well, and hardly he dies well which lives ill. For mine own part
therefore, what course I have taken, that will I hold; what ways I have
walked, them will I walk; what things I have done, them will I still do. They
that have done as I do, have died a better death than he this, that would in
no wise do as I have done.


Q. But is this his reasoning good and laudable?


R. How think you?


Q. I ask you.


R. And I you.


Q. I think it not good.


R. No more do I.


Q. But why do neither of us both think it so?


R. Because there is no reason either of us both should think it so. For a
good man may have an hard end. In outward show the death of our Savior
Christ was but an hard death: he died the death of the cross, and we know what
was said in the law, Deuteronomy. 21.23 Gal. 3, 13.
Cursed is every one that hangs on a tree: Yet I hope we may not say that
therefore Christ died a bad death.


Q. God forbid we should. For by his death we are delivered from death, and I
hope that was no bad death to him which was so good a death for us?


R. In worse sort we are not to judge of the death of any good man. For he
cannot die badly, Aug. lac. sup. citat. Aug. de ciuit-dei. lib.
how hardly soever he dies, that has lived godlily: For as the same father
says. That is not to be thought an evil death before which there went a good
life. For there is nothing makes an ill death, but that which follows death.


Q. Leaving the wicked then in and to their wickedness, let us return. For I
see that that which is of it self good, they will make bad.


R. Tit. 1.15.
That is right so. For unto the pure are all things pure, but unto them that are
defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure, but even their minds and consciences
are defiled. But because you speak of returning, whither would you we should
return or to what?


Q. Either to that we were in hand withal, or to that which is to follow.


R. Unless you will, we have done with that, we were in hand withal. For I
have showed you how death was commodious both to him that suffered it, and also
to him that saw it suffered.


Q. You have so, and no little comfort have I gotten thereby. For thereby I
have learned against the days of necessity how to fence my soul against the
inordinate fear of death.


R. Right use in so doing have you made thereof. For thereto and for, have I
said thereof what I have said.


Q. I know so much, and therefore I acknowledge it. But as I remember, you
said, that by meditations as well as by practices, he that is sick, and that
mortally, may arm himself against all excessive and immoderate fear of
death.


R. I did so; and in so doing I did not amiss. For by the one as by the other
is that to be done, which I said was thereby to be done.


Q. As you have showed then how it might be done by the one; so I would you
would show how it may be done by the other.


R. In this point I will what you will. As then by practices four ways the
sick man might munite his soul against the immoderate fear of death; so may
he by meditations also four ways do the same.


Q. But how?


R. First by meditating, that his death as well as the death of any other man,
and the death of every man, is not only foreseen, but also foreappointed of
God. Secondly, by thinking that death following after and joined with a
reformed life has a promise of blessedness adjoined unto it. Thirdly, by
thinking that he which dies, believing in Christ dies not forth of Christ,
but in Christ, having both his body and soul really coupled to Christ,
according to the tenor of the covenant of grace. Fourthly, by considering that
God has promised his special, blessed, and comfortable presence unto his
servants in all their needs and necessities.


Q. But touching these matters there may be a double doubt. One touching the
truth of them, another touching the effect of them?


R. I deny not but there may be; but I avouch that there need not be. For the
truth in them is as I have pronounced of them, and the effect of them, is like
the truth to be found in them.


Q. Is it true then that the death of every man is not only forescene, but
also foreappointed of God?


R. Why else say I so? use I my tongue to lie, and my mouth to deceive? you
need never make question thereof, if either you consider the saying of Job,
touching this point, or the history of Christ his death.


Q. Why? what says Job touching this point.


R. That's to be seen in the seventh of his book, where he makes this
question. Is there not an appointed time to man upon earth? Job. 7.1.
and are not his days as the days of an hireling, and in the 14. where he
gives this answer. 14,5.
The days of man are determined and the number of his months are with thee O
God.


Q. And what is the history of Christ his Death?


R. That part which I speak off, that which is thus recorded in the Acts of
the Apostles: Act. 4.27.28.
Doubtless against thine holy Son Jesus, whom thou had anointed, both
Herod and Pontius Pilate with the Gentiles and the people of Israel gathered
themselves together, to do whatsoever thine hand and thy Counsel had
determined before to be done.


Q. What gather you thence?


R. That which the Text does give, to wit, that in the Death of Christ there
came nothing to pass, but that which the foreknowledge and eternal Counsel of
God had appointed.


Q. But what is that to the death of another man, or to the death of all men?


R. Even as much as I would desire, and more then so much as you did require.
For what did I desire, or you require, but to know what God did in every man's
Death? whether he determined of the time, or not? and whether he fore-knew what
he had determined? And now whether of these is it, which is not here manifested
and explained? the first or the last? surely, surely, neither of both. Not
the first, because he determined the time of Christ's death, and what agreed to
the head, agrees with the parts, but Christ is the head, and those of the
Church are his members. If therefore the Death of Christ (the head to the whole
body) were foreseen (as foreseen it was) the Death also of every member
of his mystical body is also fore seen, and ordained also by the special
decree and appointment of God. Neither yet the second, because he determined
not only the time, but also the place and manner, and end of Christ's death,
together with other circumstances thereto appertaining and belonging, and he
determines nothing which he did not fore-knowe, for his foreknowledge is
conjoined with his decree. If therefore he so dealt with Christ, it cannot be,
but that so also he deals with others: for as the Apostle says, Those which
he knew before, Romans 8.29.
he also predestined to be made like to the Image of his Son. Thus now you
see that the Death of Christ is as much to the Death of all men, as either I
desired, or you required.


Q. But you said it was more?


R. If so I did say, It is not otherwise then now I do say, for the more
comprehends the less.


Q. But yet the more is never the more proved.


R. Why say you so? seeing I even now said, that in the death of Christ, there
was not only time when, place where, and manner how; but also persons by whom
foreseen and preappointed by God, and that in his own everlasting Counsel
and decree; does not that prove what you lately said was unproven?


Q. Yes: if that were proved.


R. Never (if) at the matter: the saying of the Apostle Peter in the fourth of
that Acts (lately rehearsed) in the verses 27. and 28. does sufficiently
prove that: for there it is said. Herod and Pontius Pilate, and the Gentiles,
Act. 4.27.28
and the people of Israel gathered themselves together against Christ Jesus to
do whatsoever the hand and Counsel of God had determined to be done. Now it
is well known by the history of the Gospel, written by the Evangelists,
Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, what was done. Nothing therefore of that which
was done unto him, at his death, in his death, or concerning his death, was
either unknown and vnforescene, or vnappointed and vndecreed by God himself.


Q. Admit that may we not therefore make a doubt touching the death of other
men?


R. No surely, we ought not.


Q. And why?


R. For the resemblance that is betwixt Christ and his members.


Q. What then? affirm you that the death of every man is not only
foreseen, but also fore-appointed of God, so as Death can neither come sooner
nor later in respect of God but just at the time appointed by him?


R. Yea that I do, and more too.


Q. More too, what is that?


R. That the very circumstances of death; as the time when; the place where;
the manner how; together with the beginning of the sickness, the continuance in
the same, with every fit; and the end thereof with every pange, are all
particularly set down in the Counsel of God.


Q. This more is much, and more by much then before you spoke of.


R. Whatsoever it is, It is no more then I may as truly, as boldly speak.
For our Savior Christ says, Mat. 10.30.
The very hairs of our heads are numbered, and a Sparow lights not upon the
ground without the will and providence of our heavenly Father. And if God has
care of hairs and Sparowes, he is not careless of those things which betyde his
Servants, either in Death, at Death, or about Death. For things are greater
the^ the numbering of hairs, and the lighting of Sparowes. Psalm. 139.15
For this cause David says in the Psalms: My bones are not hid from thee,
though I was made in a secret place, and fashioned beneath in the earth; thine
eyes did see me when I was without form, for in thy book were all my members
written, which in continuance were fashioned, when as there was none of them
before. For the same cause may every one in sickness say; this is thy doing o
Lord: here is no more then thou imposest upon me, thy pleasure it is, that
thus and thus I should be tormented and afflicted.


Q. But does this necessarily follow of the former?


R. What else? for why should not a man be patient in his sickness, when he
knows the Lord to be the cause of his sickness? For what man may resist his
will? Or why should a man immoderatelie fear Death, when he knows God to be
the worker of his Death? what should he fear that which is both foreseen ere
it comes, and fore-appointed when it comes? I held my tongue and said nothing,
Psalm. 39.10.
(says David) because thou Lord did it. Lo the Lords doing was the cause
of his patient abiding, the Lords doing also in each man's Death, should be
the cause of each man's patient suffering and expecting of Death. Psalm. 135.6.
Mark. 7.37.
For as he does every where whatsoever pleases him, so does he well any
where whatsoever he does.


Q. That which you say, should be as you say; but it will not be.


R. That is the iniquity of man, and not the infirmity of this truth. What it
should be, it will be, if it be well thought upon. For what should man fear
what the Lord will have to be? No man can resist his will, and every man
prays that his will may be done. Matthew. 6.10
Now when no man can resist his will, and every man prays for the
accomplishment of his will; what should any man immoderatelie fear, what he
cannot possibly avoid? and what he daily prays may betyde? It is folly,
it is vanity, it is iniquity so to do. When young Samuel had told old Elie
all that the Lord had threatened, and was purposed to bring upon his house, for
the wickedness of the same, this was old Elies saying to young Samuel: It is the
Lord, 1. Sam. 3.18
let him do what seems him good. When faultles death has seized upon
fearful man, this should be his saying; It is the Lord, let him do what
seems him good, his will it is I should dye, his will I cannot resist, his
will be done. August. sup. Psalm. 35.
It is the Justice of God that some time thou be well, and sometime thou
be sick. If when thou art well, the will of God be sweet, and when thou
art sick the will of God be bitter, thou walk not with a right heart.
Wherefore? because thou will not direct thy will after Gods will, but wilt bend
Gods will to thy will, that is right, but thou crookest it, thy will is to be
corrected by that, but that is not to be buckled to thine, and thou shall have
an upright heart. Without the conforming of man's will to Gods will, man's will
is but a perverse will.


Q. That's sure, but what may move him to reform that which is perverse, and to
conform it to that from which it is auerse.


R. The first and last meditations I have yet spoken of.


Q. I pray God that all you are to speak off, may effect what you and I do
affect.


R. So pray I also, there is no fault in them if they do not, they are all as
fruitful as faithful, so they be faithful that are to use them.


Q. Manifest both in all, as you have done in one.


R. So will I in time.


Q Out of time you cannot do it.


R. That's so, because nothing is done which is not done in time: but yet there
is a difference of time, there is a due time, and an undue time.


Q. And this is now a due time for the second to succeed the first, and each
one to follow another.


R. You say well, if you think your self satisfied for the first.


Q. I did amiss else to move you to the second: for I am unwilling to remain
unsatisfied in any thing, whereof I may be satisfied by you. Being therefore
satisfied touching the first, what say you to the truth of the second? has it
a promise of blessing annexed unto it.


R. Has it? If I have said it, you need not to make any doubt of it. I would
not say what I cannot justify, neither often use I to do it, but to put you
out of all doubt, touching that whereof you seem to be in doubt, consider
what is written in the Revelation of the Evangelist John, and then I think
not, but soon you will cause to doubt.


Q. Why what is it that is there writtten?


R. Apoc. 14.13
That, Blessed are they which dye in the Lord, for they rest from their labors,
and their works follow them.


Q. And does it thereupon follow that Death joined with, and following after a
reformed life has the promise of blessedness annexed unto it?


R. What else? for first, there is none die in the Lord but they which have
lived in the Lord for living sometime in the Lord, must go before dying any
time in the Lord: for as Augustine says: He hardly dies well, which always
lived ill. Secondly, they which so die, are said to be blessed: blessed are they
which die in the Lord. Thirdly, that blessing then begins, when as this life
ends. For it is said; therefore they are blessed which die in the Lord,
because they rest from their labors, and their works follow them. In which
words there is both an expressing of the time wherein they are blessed, and
also of the cause wherefore they are blessed. The time is the time of their
death: for it is said, blessed are they which die in the Lord. The cause is
their resting from their labor. For blessed are they which die in the Lord,
for they rest from their labors, etc. In both the Evangelist speaks in the
present tense, having an eye in the last to the preterperfect. For first he
says, they are blessed: he says not that either they were blessed in the time
past, or they shall be blessed in the time to come: but they are blessed in the
time present, as though they were in bliss, even in their death. Secondly, he
says they do rest, he says not, that they have rested, or that they shall
rest, but that they do rest, as though their death were a rest, and not a
distress. Thirdly, he says from their labors: as though death present were a
rest from labors past.


Q. Though the Evangelist says so; yet it follows not but that they which die
in the Lord, both were blessed, and did rest before their death, and shall be
blessed, and rest better after their death?


R. Neither did I yet say, that any such thing will thereupon follow. For the
most of those that at their death are blessed, in their life also were in some
sort blessed: and all those that are blessed in their death, shall for ever
after be blessed after death. Eternal life is here in this life begun, and
that sometime long before death, and sometime in death; but it is never
finished or perfected till the life to come, and after death. There is
perfection, here is but incoation; there life is perfected, here it is but
incepted. He which here has it not, at any time there enioyes it not. On the
contrary part, he which here is entered into it, shall there fully be
possessed of it. To conclude therefore, they which are blessed in their death,
were also blessed in their life, and shall be blessed after death with life
lasting ever, and enduring world without end.


Q. This being as you say, no marvel though the meditation of that promise be
a shield of succor against deaths terror. For of my self I can here
collect, that too much death is not to be feared, having so sweet a promise
of rest thereto annexed.


R. In so doing you do what every christian ought to do. For what should he
over much fear death that has herein a promise made to him of life? what
should he over much fear that which frees him from labor, and brings him to
rest? who would not leave an house of clay, for a building given of God, that
is an house not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens? life, rest and a
building given of God, are three things which mitigates in any the immoderat
dread of death. For the love of these death should rather be loved, than
loathed, wished than shunned; craved than feared


Q. You say well if every death had the promise of these things made unto it?


R. Never if at the matter, for there is no good death which has them not all
promised unto it.


Q. There is much difference between a good death, and any death.


R. I deny not that. But I spoke not of any death, but only of a good death.
Neither could I: for that place of scripture which I produced for proof of
what I propounded, says not, that all are blessed which die; but that they
only are blessed which die in the Lord.


Q. That a man might come to that, what should he do?


R. Live well so near as he can. For as the proverb is. Such as the life is,
such will the death be. And as Augustine says as you heard ere while. He
cannot die ill, which has lived well, and hardly does he die well, which has
lived ill.


Q. August. de doctrina chr^stiana.
That should not seem to be very necessary. First, because there are but few
that regards it. For how ever every man desires to die well yet not many desire
to live well. Balaam himself, though he much esteemed not to live the life of
the righteous, yet he greatly desired to die the death of the righteous: Number.
23.10
Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his.
Secondly, because it is said (as you have before alleged) that they are
blessed which dye in the Lord. Apoc. 14.13



R. It follows not upon either of your reasons, that it is unnecessary. For
first, that which fewest follow, is most necessary: The preaching of the word
of God fewest regard; yet is the attending thereto most necessary. When Martha
being offended with her sister Marie, for that she would not help her to
serve when she gave entertainment to Christ, but sat still at Jesus his
feet, attending to what he speak, complained to Jesus, that her sister left
her alone to serve; Jesus himself was so far from reproouing of Marie for
this her fact, as he defended her and reproved Martha, Luke 10.41.
saying. Martha, Martha, thou carest, and art troubled about many things. But
one thing is needful. Marie has chosen the good part which shall not be
taken from her. Thereby showing that the hearing of the word preached was
necessary, and more necessary than the corporal entertaining of him.
Secondly, that which is by John the Evangelist said, is not so to be
understood, as men need not care to live well, because there by him it is
said, that they are blessed which die in the Lord. For except while they live,
they live to the Lord, when they die, they cannot die in the Lord. Living to
the Lord is a mean to come to die in the Lord. As Seneca says; Death is
honest, Sen. 57. ep.
by that which is honest.


Q. What say you then to the thief that suffered when Christ was crucified,
Luke 23.33.
and with him? did not he die in the Lord?


R. Yes: else would not the Lord have said unto him. Luke 23.43.
This day thou shall be with me in Paradise.


Q. Yet you know even then when he was crucified, he was a thief, an evil
doer, Mat. 27.38. Luke 23.32. Mat. 27.44. Mark. 1^.32
a reuiler of the son of God.


R. All this I know too, because the scripture reuealeth so much: but what
infer you thereof?


Q. That he that dies in the Lord, does not always live in the Lord?


R. That's not true; in the Lord he does live always for in him (the Apostle
says) we live, we move, Act. 17.18.
we have our being* But not to the Lord always. For the same Apostle says,
Other where, 2. Cor. 5.15
Christ died for all, that they which live, should not henceforth live unto
themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again. As though
always living in him they did not always live to him.


Q. You now speak of another life than I do.


R. Not a whit. For you speak either of a natural life, or a spiritual life,
or both. And so do I.


Q. My meaning was to speak but of one.


R. My meaning was then to answer you perceived me not.


Q. You did not so, though you mean so?


R. I did as much as I meant, though you perceived me not.


Q. In deed there might be a fault.


R. And verily there was the fault. For what soever you think, he that does
once die in the Lord did always live in the Lord, though not always to the
Lord.


Q. If I were deceived those two words (In and to) deceived me.


R. Not the words but the misposing of them, it was that deceived you.


Q. When and where did I mispose them?


R. Where and when you inferred that whether he that dies in the Lord, does not
always live in the Lord.


Q. Why? is not that inference good?


R. No for the last in, you should have put to.


Q. Why it is true? is it not?


R. Yes, but it is not due. It fittes another time and place better than this
and now.


Q. Make it then as you would have it?


R. As you should have made it.


Q. So then: how is that?


R. Thus; he that dies in the Lord, does not always live to the Lord.


Q. If I had said so, the matter had not been great for the thief that died in
the Lord, did not always live to the Lord.


R. If you had said so, my labor had been lesser, and your gain greater.


Q. Take it so. What loose I thereby?


R. That which you labor to have proved thereby.


Q. What was that?


R. Think you I have forgotten?


Q. I know not.


R. You shall see that I have not.


Q. What was it then?


R. It was this: that it is not always necessary, that a good life should go
before a good death.


Q. And does not that thereupon well follow?


R. The contrary thereto I have all this while followed.


Q. What soever you have followed, does not that follow?


R. How often shall I tell you no?


Q You never told me so much before.


R. I insinuated so much if I told you it not.


Q. There is difference between an insinuation, and a negation?


R. In time more than in truth.


Q. But to the matter again. You confess that the thief we speak of, died
in the Lord, do you not?


R. I do so. I neither do nor will deny it, before I have confessed it, and
still I stand to it.


Q. You acknowledge also that at the time of his crucifying with our savior,
he was a wicked man, a thief and an evil doer.


R. I do so, and must so, because the scripture says so.


Q. How then say you that necessarily a good life must go before a good death?


R. Matt. 24.44
Even as well as the scripture says in one place, that same also the thieves
which were crucified with him, cast in his teeth, that is, He saved others,
himself he cannot save. If he be the king of Israel let him now come down
from the cross, and we will b^leeue him: Luke 23.3^
he trusted in God, let him deliver him now if he will have him. For he said I
am the son of God And in another: one of the evil doers, which were hanged
railed on him, saying. If thou be the Christ, save thy self and us. But the
other answered and rebuked him saying fear thou not God, seeing thou art in
the same condemnation? We are in deed righteously here: for we receive things
worthy of that we have done: but this man has done nothing amiss.


Q. But why say you so?


R. Because as if ye distinguish times these two places which seem to repugne
one another, are soon reconciled: so these two things, that which I defend,
and that which you oppugn are quickly accorded.


Q. What times speak you of?


R. The time wherein both the thieves railed on Christ, of which Matthew the
Evangelist speaks, and the time wherein one of the same thieves reproved the
other for reuiling and railing on the son of God: of which Luke the
Evangelist reports.


Q. What difference between these times?


R. Much. The one was a good time, the other was a bad time. That was a good
time wherein the one thief reproved the other: but that was a bad time
wherein they both reviled and rayled on the son of God.


Q. It seems all was at one time. For it was all at their and Christ's death.


R. One general time if you will, but not one particular. Mat 27.45.
For there was three hours distance between Christ his crucifying and his
dying. Lu. 23.44.
At the sixth hour he was crucified, at the ninth he died. And in three hours
space many things happened.


Q. But what happened in these three hours?


R. The railing of both the thieves on Christ Jesus, and the repenting of one
of them. In the beginning of the three hoth might rail, as Matthew seems to
speak before the ending, of the three the one did repent, as Luke assuredly
does record.


Q. Be it so: what infer you thereupon?


R. That which before I defended, and you denied.


Q. Why that?


R. Because he which you say, died in the Lord, did sometime also ere he died
live to the Lord.


Q. How does that appear?


R. As Well as any thing may appear. For the same scripture which speaks of
his dying in the Lord, speaks also of his living to the Lord.


Q. Why what says the scripture thereof?


R. More than that which you have heard, yet somewhat you have heard.


Q. Have I heard any thing that makes for this purpose.


R. I: that I hope you have.


Q. What was that?


R. That* when one of the evil doers which were hanged, rayled on Christ Jesus,
saying, If thou be the Christ save thy self and us. Luke 23.39.
The other answered, and rebuked him, saying, fear thou not God, seeing thou
art in the same condemnation? we are indeed righteously here; for we receive
things worthy of that we have done: but this man has done nothing amiss.


Q. And what is there more which I have not heard, but may hear?


R. That which follows, what you have heard. And he (the same that before
reproved his fellow) said unto Jesus, Lord, Luke 23.42.
remember me when thou come into thy kingdom.


Q. And what? do these things prove that the same thief which once died in
the Lord, did some time ere he died live to the Lord?


R. What more manifest? for what is it to live to the Lord, but to live
according to the will of the Lord? and he that thus lived ere he died, as you
have heard, how did he not live according to the will of the Lord? in three
things does the will of the Lord consist. 1. In this, that a man turns from
his wicked ways, to him. For as by his prophet Ezekiel he says. Ezekiel. 18.23
Is it my will that the wicked should die, says the Lord God, or rather that
he may return from his ways and live? As I live says the Lord God; I will
not or I desire not the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his
way, and live. 2. In this that a man exercises himself in living godlily. For
by his blessed Apostle he says. 1. Pet. 2.15.
So is the will of God, that by well doing ye may put to silence the ignorance
of foolish men. 3. In this that a man continues in well doing to his lives end.
For says the beloved Son of God: Ioh. 6.39.
This is the fathers will that has sent me, that of all which he has given
me, I should loose nothing. Now perseverance in doing good is that which makes
that a man is not lost, because it is said: Mat. 10.22.
He that endures to the end, he shall be saved. Says Hierome: It is not the
point of virtue to have begun, but to have continued and perfected what was
begun. And says Remigius: Reward is given not to those that begin, but to
those that persevere. For as Isidore says: Then does our conversation please
God, when we finish the good which we begin by holding out to the end. In
which of these three did not he we speak of, according to the will of the
Lord? in the first, the second, or the third in neither. Not in the first, for
there he turned from his wicked ways; he had been a thief, now he was none;
he had been an evil doer, now he was none; he had been a reuiler of the son
of God; now he was none. Not in the second; for there after that once he was
converted, he exercised himself in doing of good. He sorowed for his sins,
he confessed them, he prayed for pardon of them, he suffered quietly some
punishment due to them he reproved his fellow thief for continuing in them,
he justified Christ the Messiah from the guiltines either of them or the like
unto them. the text which records the history of him proves as much as I say.
One of the evil doers which were hanged, railed on Christ Jesus, saying. Luke
23.39.
If thou be the Christ save thy self and us. But the other answered and
rebuked him saying, fear thou not God, seeing thou art in the same
condemnation? There is a show of his own conversion, and his fellows
corruption. We are indeed righteously here; There is his confession, with a
continuatio^ of his fellows corruption. For we receive things worthy of that
we have done: There is his patient suffering of punishment, with a reason of
his fellows corruption. But this man has done nothing amiss. There is his
justifying of Christ. And he said unto Jesus, Lord, There is his acknowledgment
of Christ's power; Remember me when thou come into thy kingdom: There is his
prayer for his sins remission and his souls salvation. Neither yet in the
third, for there he perseuered as long as life lasted. After once he put his
hand to the plough, he never looked back. In what he sometime ere his death
lived, in that he once at the end of his life died. In faith, and hope, and
love, he lived, for the time after his conversion that he lived, and in faith
hope and love he died, when the time wa, this life ended. In as much then, as
in his life from his conversion to his death he lived according to the will of
the Lord, it is thereby certain, that ere he once died in the Lord, he
sometime lived to the Lord. And so at length that is manifested, which long I
have labored to manifest.


Q. In deed the certainty of the theefes living sometime to the Lord, once
dying to the Lord, is thereby manifested, but the necessity of every ones
living so, that feign would die so, is never the more proved.


R. In that you are deceived. For the action of one man that is good, is the
instruction of every one that would be good. Whatsoever good the thief did, he
thought duty for him to do, and other than duty, the like no man can think
because he that taught him to do what he did, teaches no man but what is
duty.


Q. Why? who taught him to do what he did?


R. No other schoolmaster than the spirit of God.


Q. How know you that?


R. By the word of God.


Q. Why. It says not that the spirit did teach him?


R. But it implies it, and that's as good, Hicron. in Ep. ad Gal. ca. 1.
for as Jerome says. The Gospel is not in the words of the scripture but in
the sense.


Q. But whether does the word imply, what you say it implies.


R. Where it says, the thief said unto Jesus, Lord, Luke 23.42
remember me when thou come into thy kingdom.


Q. Why say you so?


R. Because the Apostle Paul teaches me to say so.


Q. Where?


R. In the first of his Epistles to the Corinthians the twelfth Chapter and the
third verse.


Q. What says he there?


R. That, No man can say, 1. Cor. 12.3.
that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost.


Q. And do you by this prove that the spirit of God taught the thief to do
what he did?


R. What else? For. 1. in the fore place you see, he called Jesus Lord. Luke
23.42
And he said unto Jesus, Lord, etc. 2. in the eight to the Romans besides many
other places the holy Ghost is called the spirit of God. Romans 8.9. Romans 8.9.
Now ye are not in the flesh but in the spirit, because the spirit of God. (i
the holy Ghost) dwells in you, and Romans 8.14. As many as are led by the
Spirit of God, Ephesians. 4 30
they are the Sons of God. And Ephesians the fourth grieve not the holy
spirit of God, by whom ye are sealed unto the day of redemption.


Q. Well then I yield: and seeing it is necessary for him that would once dye
well sometime to live well; I would that all which desire to dye well, would
regard much to live well.


R. You do well to wish it. It is a thing to be wished, though it will never be
performed, for as Seneca says. Seneca. Epist. 78
As it fares with a play, so it fares with life. It skilles not how long it be
ere it be don, but how well it is done while it is in doing.


Q Seneca. Epist. 22.
But as the same Seneca says. No man considers how well he lives, but how
long he lives.


R. This their misdemeanour is more to be pittyed the^ praised, for as
Augustine says, No man will either have or suffer a long supper evil, August.
in sermon.
and what should any wish a long life and evil? If it be a great thing that
we live, it is a great good to live well. Id. de doct. Chir.
It is better to live well, then to understand soon. For he which lives well,
deserves to understand more, he which lives ill, shall loose even that which he
understands. Seneca therefore says. Seneca in Epist.
A wise man does ever think what kind of life his life is, and not how great
or how long his life is. Idem. in Epist. 78.
For it is not good to live, but to live well, It is no great thing to live: all
thy servants and cattle do live, Socrat. insuis ex hortation.
He lives not in whose mind there is nothing, but that he may live: eat and
drink that thou may live well, Thou may not live, that thou may only
eat and drink.


Q. What counsel therefore do ye give?


R. The same that ere while I did, viz. that he which desires once to die
well, has ever a mind to live well.


Q. But it is not enough to have a mind to live well, unless he also labor
to live well.


R. That's so: but unless he minds well to live well, Mat. 12.34.
he will never labor well to live well. For as out of the abundance of the
heart mouth speaks: so of the abundance of the mind, the man himself
works: the heart makes the tongue to speak, and the mind causes the hand
to work.


Q. All this is true, I cannot deny it.


R. Why did you then contend so much about it?


Q. Because I was desirous every way to be resolved.


R. Are you so now?


Q. Yea, for this matter.


R. What? have you other, that you put in this?


Q. I hope you are not ignorant of that, for as yet you have spoken but of two
of the four meditations, which you said long since were much available
against the immoderate fear of Death.


R. In deed I have yet spoken of no more.


Q. That you may speak as well of the rest that follow, as you have of those that
are gone before, leaving that where abouts we have so long contended, we will
proceed to the first of those which are to succeed.


R. And what will you with that?


Q. No other then with the former.


R. There needs not all that, for I know no doubt touching either the truth
or the effect thereof.


Q. What to you is needeles, for me is needful, for I yet know no more
touching this point now coming into hand, that that which you long since
taught me to know.


R. If you know that, you know all which for our intended purpose you are to
know, for the truth and the effect of it are the things which for our purpose
are needful to be known.


Q. And those are the things I am yet in doubt of.


R. Without cause if you be. For the truth thereof it is this: he that dies
believing in Christ, dies not out of Christ, but in Christ. For he which
believes in Christ, is in Christ, and he that is in Christ, by believing in
Christ, has both his body and soul really coupled to Christ, according to
the tenor of the covenant of Grace, so that though after Death body and soul
be severed one from another, yet neither of them are severed and disioyned from
Christ. For the conjunction which is once begun in this life remains for
ever in the life to come, and he that is thus conjoined to Christ, what needs
he doubt any thing touching the effect of the same conjunction? what need he
immoderately or inordinately fear Death. Death cannot hurt him: Death is but a
passage to life unto him. Ioh. 5.24.
He which believes in him that sent me, says Christ, has everlasting life,
and shall not come into condemnation, but has passed from Death unto life, and
says Paul, Romans 8.1.
there is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus.


Q. I but you know, when a man dies, that his soul goes from his body, and
that his body being left of his soul rottes in the earth?


R. What then? yet is he never the more to fear Death for that, for his
conjunction with Christ still holds, though the soul goes from the body, and
the body rots in the earth, yet are they both still in Christ, both in the
covenant, both in the favor of God, and that as much as they were before death.


Q. But they are both severed one from another, so as neither soul with body,
nor body with Soul, has any communion or fellowshippe?


R. What then? that separation for a time notwithstanding they shall again at
length be reunited and joined together; and then shall they have full communion
one with another world without end.


Q. I know they shall so in the resurrection at the last day.


R. Why then object you as you do? that knowledge is to strengthen you, and any
that knows it against the fear of death, with that David comfort himself
saying. Psalm. 16.9.
Mine heart is glad and my tongue rejoices: my flesh also does rest in hope;
for thou will not leave my Soul in grave: neither will thou suffer thine holy
one to see corruption, With that Paul comfort himself and others: himself
when he said. Philip. 1.22
In death and life Christ is to me advantage; Others when he proved unto them
the resurrection of the dead, with that also should you comfort your self and
others. What use both David and Paul made of it, should others also make. For
why? the thing of it self is one unto all. And all that believe shall have
much alike benefits thereby; but I mind not now to speak of them: neither
need I, for they pertain to another life, and I now glaunce at them, but as
they yield comfort in this life.


Q. That comfort you speak of should move you more fully to display them,
for those things which follow after death, may in this life yield comfort
against Death.


R. You heard me even now profess so much; and I like it well you will so
soon thereupon confess so much.


Q. I must confess the truth, for therefore I learn.


R. I am glad thereof, for therefore I teach you it.


Q. If I should not make that use of it, both you should teach it in vain, and
I learn it in vain, but that, that may not betide, I will mark both what you
do teach, and what I may learn.


R. In so doing you shall do well.


Q. I persuade my self so, and therefore I will do as I say, so near as I
may, but now seeing you have no mind to speak of some things after this life,
I would you would speak of something in this life.


R. So have I already.


Q. I deny not that in demanding this: but I now speak of a more special
thing then those which are past.


R. It is very like so: but what is that, that I may soon satisfy you?


Q. The last of your 4. meditations which you long since said were very
sufficient to comfort the Soul of man against the immoderate fear of Death.


R. If that be it, we shall do well enough, but what would you that I should
say touching it?


Q. First, whether that the Lord has promised his presence to his servants as
you said or not? Secondly, whether so much will thereupon follow as you
inferred or no?


R. It seems you doubt at every turn, but it is no matter to show you that I
speak no more then I will justify, I will show you both the one and the
other.


Q. I thank you for that, not because I doubt of what you say, but because I
would know your ground for that you say.


R. For the first therefore thus says the Lord by his Prophet David: Psalm.
91.15.
I will be with him in trouble, Isai. 43.3.
and by his Prophet Esaie: When thou passest through the waters I will be with
thee, and through the floods: that they do not ouerflow thee, When thou walk
through the very fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame
kindle upon thee, and thus by his Son and our Savior Christ Jesus. Ioh.
14.18. Mat. 28.20
I will not leave you comfortless, I will be with you unto the end of the
world. And by these is it not manifest, that the Lord has promised his
presence to his Servants in time of need and necessity.


Q. Yes, it is so: I neither can nor will deny it, but the Lord himself is
invisible, is he not?


R. Yes for as the Scripture says, No man has seen God at any time: to Moses
he himself said. Thou can not see my face, Exo. 33.20. 1. Tim. 1.17 Col.
1.15. Iud. 13.22.
for there shall no man see me, and live: of him Manach said unto his wife. We
shall surely dye because we have seen God. When they saw as the text says,
but an Angel of God.


Q. By what means therefore does he manifest his presence, that so we may
perceive a performance of his promise?


R. By means many. In number three, First by moderating and lessening the
pains and torments of sickness and death, as the very words of his promise by
Esaie his Prophet do plainly import. For he says, Isai. 43.3.
When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee, that the floods
do not ouerflow thee, and when thou walk through the fire, thou shall not
be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee, So that if the floods do
not ouerflow a man when he is in the waters, nor the flame kindle upon him when
he is in the fire, he may well think the Lord is there present, restraining
both the waters from swelling, and the fire from burning. For naturally either
of them would do the kind, if he did not restrain the^, so in the pains of
sickness, and pangs of death, if a man finds his sorrows nothing so grievous
as the afflictions of his life, he may well think the Lord present, for the
pains of the one, and the pangs of the other are painful enough of
themselves, and overmuch yrkesome to many. Yet this that I now say, many have
true indeed found, of many such there is mention made in the Acts and Monuments
of the Church, they which have the book may look into it, assuredly they
shall find what I hear say: neither shall they loose their time when they
have so done, or repent them of their labor in so doing. For my part I must
now proceed from this means of the Lords, manifesting his presence (though he
be invisible, and not to be seen visibly) to the next. Secondly therefore the
Lord does manifest his presence in the pains of sickness and pangs of death,
by giving in inward and unspeakable comfort of his spirit unto them that are
afflicted with the one, and distressed with the other, for to many then does he
give a greater portion of his spirit, the^ at many other times bypast and
foregone. In one place of scripture the Apostle Paul speaking of himself and
his afflictions says thus: As the suffering of Christ abounded in us, so our
consolation abounds through Christ. 2. Cor. 15.
And in another place speaking of his own and his fellows behavior in their
tribulations he says thus: We rejoice in tribulations, knowing that
tribulation brings forth patience, etc. Romans 5.3.
Now there must be some thing that must work this joy and comfort. For as
the same Apostle says: Heb. 12.11.
No chastising for the present time seems to be joyous, but grievous. And
what must that be, but the spirit of God? for a fruit of the spirit, Gal. 5.22.
as the same Apostle says, is joy, yea joy in tribulation and affliction, as
seems by the fruits of the spirit thereto annexed: for after joy follows
peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, and meekenes: all which are
virtues more to be practiced in tribulation, than any other time. When the
Apostle therefore will express the cause of all this joy and rejoicing in
tribulation he says, Romans 5.5.
Because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost, which
is given unto us. Thereby showing, that the holy Ghost (which is God) is cause
of all this joy. And therefore not absent from him or them, in whom this joy
is. For as he says, 2. Cor. 3.17
Where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty: So may I say, where the
spirit of the Lord is, there is joy. And where the spirit of the Lord is, there
the Lord himself is: For the Lord is the spirit. 2. Cor. 3.17.
So that by this joy vz. inward joy in grief, and unspeakable rejoicing in
tribulation, a man may gather that the Lord does then visit him as it were in
his own person and minister unto him refreshing for his soul: hence is it,
that the Church says in the Canticles. Cant. 2.5.6.
She being sick of love: his left hand is under mine head, and his right hand
does embrace me. And the Prophet David in his Psalms of him yt judges wisely
of the poor: Psalm. 41.1.
Blessed is he that judges wisely of the poor: the Lord shall deliver him in
the time of trouble; the Lord will keep him and preserve him alive. The Lord
will strengthen him upon the bed of sorrow, thou have turned all his bed in his
sickness. What thence should follow, shall hereafter follow: for now the third
means thereby the Lord does show himself present in sickness and death is to
follow. And that is the ministry of good Angels. For then does the Lord send
them to his servants, as nources and keepers, to hold and bear them in their
arms. For as the Apostle says: Heb. 1.14.
Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for their sakes,
which shall be heirs of salvation? And as the Psalmist says: Psalm. 34.7.
The Angel of the Lord pitcheth round about them that fear him; and
delivers them. And again; he (that is the Lord) Shall give his Angels
charge over thee to keep thee in all thy ways. Psalm. 91.11.
They shall boar thee in their hands, that thou hurt not thy foot against a
stone. So much sundry histories of scripture do manifest, if of it self it
were not manifest. When Hagar Abraham's bondwoman said touching her son
Ismael, I will not see the death of the child, Genesis 21.16.
The Angel of God called unto her from heaven, and said, What ayleth thee
Hagar? Fear not, for God has heard the voice of the child where he is.
Arise, take up the child, for I will make of him a great people. 1. King. 19.4
When Elijah was under the Juniper tree, and desired that he might die, saying,
It is enough: oh Lord take my soul; for I am no better than my fathers, the
Angel of the Lord came and touched him saying, up and eat for thou have a
great journey. When Christ himself was tempted, Mat. 4.11.
The Angels came and ministered unto him. When he was to be crucified, he said
unto Peter, laboring to shend him from his foes, Think thou that I cannot
now pray unto my father, and he will give me more than twelve legions of
Angels? Thus ever in trouble they are ready to help, succor and relieve, and
that by the special decree and appointment of the almighty. As Bernard says,
Bern. ser. 4. sup. illud acc^sserunt ang. etc.
They are present that they may protect. They are present that they may profit.
At death also they are ready to receive and carry the souls of Gods servants
into heaven. This appears plain by the history of Lazarus: for the scripture
says, When he died, Luke 16.22.
he was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bobosome. Thus in their sickness to
their death, in their death and after their departure, till they being Angels
in heaven do attend upon those which are Saints on earth. And by this their
attendance how does not the Lord show himself present? for without his
commandment none of them all does any thing. They all watch what he speaks,
they all go whither he sends, and they all do what he commands. As the
Psalmist says: Psalm. 104.4.
He makes the spirits his messengers, and a flaming fire his ministers.
Again, if the Lord be present (as I have both said and showed) how, will it
not follow, as I inferred, that inordinately and immoderately death is not to
be feared? for what should he fear that has the Lord with him, and of his
side? Psalm. 118.6.
The Lord is on my side (says David) and therefore I will not fear what man
does unto me. The Lord is with me, therefore I will not fear what man can do
unto me. The Lord is with me among them that help me, therefore shall I see my
desire upon mine enemies. Yea (says he) though I should walk through the
valley of the shadow of death, Psalm. 23 4.
I will fear no evil, for thou art with me: thy rod and thy staff they
comfort me. And again, Though I walk in the midst of trouble, yet will thou receive me; thou will stretch forth thine hand upon the wrath of mine
enemies, and thy right hand shall save me. What was David's comfort either in
death, or in any other distress, ought also to be any others comfort in the
like case and condition. And therefore Paul was confident, and upon his
confidence said: Romans 8.31.
If God be on our side, who can be against us? Who spared not his own son,
but gave him for us all to death, how shall he not with him give us all things
also? who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? it is God that
justifies, who shall condemn? it is Christ which is dead, yea or rather,
which is risen again, who is also at the right hand of God, and makes request
also for us. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation
or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? As it
is written, Psalm. 44.22.
For thy sake are we killed all the day long: we are counted as sheep
appointed to the slaughter. Nevertheless in all these things we are more then
conquerors, through him that loved us. Neither is it any thing to be marueiled
at, that Paul upon the consideration of the Lords presence was thus bold and
confident. For we find by experience, that he that is in a foul way in a
dark night fears little, either the approaching of thieves or the meeting of
beasts, the one cruel, the other savage, if he has company with him so
comfortable is company. If a man in this plight fears little, what should he
that is sick, and in danger of death, fear much? he has better company then
the company of any man. The Lord himself is his companion: he is his keeper
and his guide: so also does he watch over him as nothing may hurt or annoy him:
And blessed is he whose help is the Lord Jehovah. Psalm. 144.15 146.5.
Again, he has ye Angels of God to guard him: they watch over him, that he
dash not his foot against a stone, he that has such company, so good, so
great, so mighty and magnificent, needs not fear that which comes with
worse, less, and more weak company then he has. When the servant of Elisha
was afraid for the ^ost that compassed the City with horses and chariots,
wherein they were, Elisha said fear not, 2. King. 6.15
for they that be with us, are more then they that be with them etc. True that
was, for behold the mountain was full of horses and chariots of fire round
about Elisha. Tob. 5.19.
Again, when Tobit saw his wife weeping for the want of her son Tobias, the
staff of their hand to minister unto them, he said: Be not careful my
sister, he shall return in safety, and thine eye shall see him. For the good
does keep him company, and his journey shall be prosperous, and he shall
return safe. Thus by the company of Angels they comforted the one his wife,
the other his man. And so may they themselves that are sick, as it is
therefore said after Tobits speech to his wife, then she made an end of
weeping: so I would it might be said after mine to them that are sick, then
they made an end offearing.


Q. Of fearing? nay, you would have them fear I trow. Pro. 28.14.
Blessed is the man that fears alwaie says Solomon.


R. Yea I would have them to fear God alwaie. But I would not have them to
fear death more than they need. And that is the fearing I would have them
make an end of: other fearing I spoke not of.


Q. Yet you would not have them make a final end of fearing that, would you?


R. Yes of fearing it immoderately. For I deny not but a man is to fear it.
But immoderatly I would not have any to fear it.


Q. I would then you would show how you would have him to fear it, and how you
would not?


R. The one as I take it I have showed already, the other I mind to show
hereafter.


Q. As it pleases you, so let it be. That he is not immoderately to fear it,
and how he may keep himself from immoderate fearing of it, you have in deed
already showed. And in so doing you have spoken sufficiently of the duty that
lies upon the sick man touching his soul, the chief and principal part of
himself.


R. As Pilate said of the superscription, Ioh. 19 12.
he set upon Jesus his head. What I have written, that I have written. So say I
of that which I have said, what I have said, that I have said. But howsoever
he said, it must be taken as is. Like it is, it is neither said as it might
be said, nor as I would it had been said. It is as it could be, and therewith I
wish you to be contented.


Q. I am so, and I thank you that I may be so. Whatsoever it may be to the
others, it is pleasing to me, and that I hope is sufficient for you. For I was
the cause of all that has been said, was I not?


R. Yes, or else it had not been said.


Q. Let me also be the cause of that which is to be said.


R. So be on Gods name.


Q. Now then having spoken of that which the sick man must do concerning his
soul, let us proceed to that which concerns his body. For next after his
soul he is to care for his body, is he not?


R. He is so: and if you remember I have already said so.


Q. Yes I remember it, and that makes me speak of it: but touching that, what
it is, he must care for, either as yet I have not heard, or else I have
already forgotten.


R. If you have not heard it, now you shall hear it, and if you have forgotten
it, I will put you again in mind of it, whether you have heard it, or
forgotten it, that it is (that you may hear it and remember it,) that till God
does wholly deprive it of life, it cannot be preserved in health and life.


Q. The thing is good: but why must he take such care of it, as you say?


R. Because it is a good thing, as you say.


Q. But my saying so, is not your only reason of prescribing so?


R. That is very like in deed: yet is that one good reason, for every one is
to care for that which is good, the young man that came unto Christ, Mat. 19.
said unto him, Master, Mat. 19.16.
what good thing shall I do, that I may have eternal life? as if without doing
good he should not come to life, To do good (says the Apostle) forget not,
Heb. 13.16. Gal. 6.10.
for with a such a sacrifice God is pleased, and in another place says he,
While we have time, let us do good, and in his Epistle to Gaius says John the
Evangelist, Beloved, Ioh. 3. Ep. ver. 11.
follow not that which is evil, but that which is good, and says David, Psalm.
34.13. 1. Pet. 3.10.11.
If any man long after life, and to see good days, let him eschew evil, and
do good, and says Peter to Cornelius of Jesus, Jesus went about doing good,
Act. 10.38. Ioh. 13.15.
and says Jesus himself to his disciples, I have given you an example, that
ye should do as I have done.


Q. I grant you without further proof all this that you do say, for this is
not that I would have you to say.


R. What is it then? would you not have me prove that it is the sick man's
part to care to preserve life and health in his body, so long as God will give
the one, and grant means for the other?


Q. Yes.


R. And have I not done that in saying as I said?


Q. Yes in some sort: but not in such ample sort as I would. I would have and
hear some more reasons then that propounded, why he that is sick should see
his body preserved in health and life, till such time as God wholly depriues it
of life.


R. What you will, you shall, that therefore I said the sick man should do,
because it is a good thing so to do, I now say the sick man is to do. First,
because, he was not the giver of life to himself, but God: for as the Apostle
says, Romans 14.7.
None of us lives to himself, neither does any dye to himself, for whether
we live, we live unto the Lord; or whether we dye, we dye unto the Lord;
whether we live or dye therefore, we are the Lords, and so not those that have
power over themselves, to do with themselves, what soever is pleasing to
themselves, but those that should do with themselves, what God has appointed
them to do, now he has appointed those to whom he has given life, to preserve
it so long as you may. For he has given his gifts to be kept till he calls for
them, and to be referred to his glory so long as they are enjoyed. In as much
therefore as the sick man has his life of God, as any other man has his, he
is to be as careful of preserving his life, as any other man is. Secondly, he
is so to ^e, because life being once given (how light acco^nt soever some make
thereof using unlawful m^^nes and indirect, to deprive them selves of it) it
is (...) most precious jewel, and that such an one, as ^one can give but God
alone. Our common saying of it is, life is sweet, and that our saying is a
commendable saying by the judgment of the Scripture. For touching life, first
Solomon says, Eccl. 9.4.
It is better to be a living dog, then a dead Lion: for according to the
Philosopher, It is better to be, then not to be. Pro. 13.8.
Secondly the same Solomon says: A man will give his riches for the ransom of
his life. Yea thirdly, Satan himself says, Job. 2.4.
Skin for skin, and all that ever a man has will he give for his life. If a
man therefore will be accounted but a man, he is to esteem of his life. A man
will regard what belongs to a man. A Father in Terence said, A man I am, and
nothing that pertaines to a man, do I think strange unto me, what must he then
do that will be accounted a good man, a just man, a holy man, a righteous man?
must he contemn and despise his life the good gift and singular grace of God?
surely no. A righteous man says Solomon, Regards the life of his beast, Pro.
12 10.
and therefore I would think much more the life of himself, he is but a mean
man that esteems not better of himself, then his beast? he is better in
nature; he should be much better by nurture. A prudent man (says Solomon) sees
^e plague, and hides himself, which is as much as if he should have said, A
pruden^ man sees the means to cut off his life and he seeks the means to
preserve i^ (...) well, thirdly does he so, because life is give him to a good
end, to wit, yt he might have time to use al good means for the atteining of
everlasting life. For God would have no man to perish, 2. Pet. 3.9. 1. Tim. 2.4.
but all men to come to repentance, Yea God would that all me^ should be saved,
and come to the knowledge of the truth, and for this purpose does he give life.
Greg. in moral.
For this present life is the way, by which we go to our country. First
heaven, for this cause special care must be bad of the preservation of life,
for if the way be stopped up by which a man should go to any place, how shall
he ever come to that place to which he is bounding, and to which he is bound
to go? were it not for ships, men could never pass the Seas: were it not
for ways, men could never go to towns: were it not for life, men could never
come to heaven. Much therefore are they to be blamed which spend their life in
pleasures and delights, according to the inordinate affections of their own
hearts, and not according to the wholesome prescriptions of Gods law, for life
is not given so to be spent: but life is given, to the end that men might have
liberty to get out of the kingdom of darkness, into the kingdom of grace,
and from the slavish bondage of sin, into the glorious liberty of the Sons
of God. For this cause Paul says Christ died for all, 2 Cor. 5.15
that they which live, should not from henceforth live unto themselves, but
unto him, which died for them, and rose again. Where living unto him which
died for them, is nothing else, but living to the end aforesaid, for without
living in Christianity, whose end is the attainement of salvation, there is no
living to Christ, which is the chief part of sanctification, and should live,
as Peter says, 1. Pet. 4.2.
As Much time as remains in the flesh, not after the lusts of men, but after
the will of God, whose will as the Apostle Paul says, is sanctification: 1.
These. 43.
This is the will of God even your sanctification: your sanctification, not
your prophanatio^. But to proceed: in the fourth place, the sick man as well as
any man, must take care of that which is laid upon him, because of others to
whom and for whom he is to do good, as much as he can, and as long as he can,
but soon shall he cease to do this, if either negligentlie he regardes his
life, or violently he depriues himself of life. Eccl. 9.10.
For there is neither work, nor invention, nor knowledge nor wisdom in the
grave, whether he goes.


Q. Partly for Gods cause then, and partly for his own, and partly for
others, either near and dear unto him or daily standing in need of him, you
would have him that is si^ke, to regard the recovering of his health and the
preserving of his life.


R. It is just so, and you have heard my reasons.


Q. But in sickness what means should a man use for the preservation of life,
and the recovering of health?


R. Good and wholesome Physic.


Q. Why? that is a thing contemned of some as needles, despised of many as
fruitles, and adjudged of most to be superfluous?


R. That makes not but it must be used and esteemed by the well disposed sick,
as an ordinance and blessing of God ordained and appointed for the preservation
of life and recuperation of health: for why? the wiseman says: The Lord has
created medicines of the earth, Sir. 38. 4.
and he that is wise will not abhor them. With such does he heal men, and
takes away their pains Exodus the 15. Exo. 15.25.
and 25. verse, the water was made sweet with wood, that men might know the
virtue thereof, by the applying of a lump of dry figs at the Prophets
appointment to his byle, Esa. 38.21 2. Kin. 20.5.
Hezekiah the King was healed, so as the third day, he went up to the temple,
and house of the Lord according to the saying of Isaiah the prophet.


Q. But that his cure was miraculous. For it is miraculous that a man should be
made whole in two or three days space?


R. It is so in regard of time, but not in regard of means. For the cluster
of figs was a natural and ordinary medicine or plaster serving to soften
and ripen tumors of swellings in the flesh. Gal. lib. 2. de art. curatiua. c.
1.
And though that had been, yet would not therefore the use of physic come to
be despised and contemned. For when the Samaritane bound up the wounds of him
that lay wounded between Jerusalem and Hierico, Luke 10.34.
he powered in wine and oil into his wounds, which was a kind of physic, and
was therefore commended. And therefore physic ought not to be condemned. For
that surely is not to be condemned, for which a man in scripture is highly
commended. For it is a good thing that works commendation. Romans 13.3.
Will thou be without fear of the power says the Apostle? do well then: so
shall thou have praise of the same. But the Samaritane as I say, was therefore
commended. For says the Lawier, he was indeed neighbor unto him that lay
wounded, Luke 10.37.
and half dead by the way side. And therefore physic should not in such
sort as it is, be contemned. For this the Samaritanes dealing with the wounded
man, was a right practice of physic. Valles. de sacra philos. cap. 88.
For the wine which he powered, served to cleanse the wound, and to ease the
pain within: and the oil which he used, served to supple the flesh, and
assuage the pain without.


Q. It seems then by your speech, you greatly mislike of them, which in
sickness utterly refuse and wholly despise all use of physic?


R. I do so, and not unworthily. For how can I like of those that contemn the
ordinance of the almighty, to the end that men might recover their health
being sick, the Lord has put that nature and strength into herbs, and
spices, and roots, which they have, and given unto some men the knowledge of
the secrets, and properties thereof, with which they abound. How now can men
despise the use of these things, but that they therewith also despise the
further enioyall of their health, which by these things is to be repaired,
being by some of their things decayed? and this to do, what other thing is it,
than to be guilty of their own bloods in the presence of the Lord Jehovah the
mighty Lord of hosts? for to neglect the means to health, what other thing is
it but to deprive themselves of life? and what is it to deprive themselves of
life, but to be guilty of their own bloods? to say in a word, therefore what
now touching this point I think good to say, I say; whosoever in sickness
despises physic, despises the lawful means which God offers of
recovery, and so becomes guilty of his own blood in the presence of the
Lord.


Q. An hard saying.


R. But a true saying.


Q. It makes well for the commendation of physic, and the advancement of
physicians.


R. Yet no more than is requisite. For both of many are less regarded than they
should.


Q. Both physic and physicians are much beholding unto you, you plead their
cause well.


R. I plead it no otherwise than I might, neither are they ever the more
beholding to me for this. I do no more than in conscience I am bound to do.
If they are beholding to any, (as the truth is they are) they are beholding to
the Lord himself; he it is that has commanded the one to be used, and the
other to be honored. The first, Syrach. 18. 18. Sir. 18. 11.
Use physic ere ever thou be sick. The, second, Syrach. 38 1. Honor the
physician with that honor that is due unto him, because of necessity.


Q. But is there any reason of either?


R. Who art thou that ask a reason of Gods doing? art thou void of reason,
to ask whether the author of reason, does use reason in his doings? his will
is reason enough. For he knows whereof we stand in need: and of the first
our own need is one good reason. For Christ himself says, The whole have no
need of the physician, Mat. 9.13.
but the sick have. Another is the Lords ordeyning of the physic. For as
Syrach says, The Lord has created medicines of the earth, Sir. 38. 4.
and he that is wise will not abhor them. A third is the multiplicitie of
cures that have been done by it. Exodus 15.25
Was not the water made sweet with wood, that men might know the virtue
thereof? was not Hezekiah his bile healed with a cluster of figs, that men
might know the operation of them? with such things does the Lord heal men,
and take away their pains. The variety of tables wherein were written the
cures that were done by it, which was found by hypocrites in the temple of
Diana at Ephesus, can give witness to this I say. So can also the particular
relation of sundry others, who through physic have been freed from those
miseries, with which some long time before they had bin perplexed: but my
purpose it is not to prosecute these things. A fourth reason of that I say, is
man's necessity; for man cannot well be without physic: for now his head
aches, now his heart grieves, now his liver heates, now his stomach cooles, now
his spleen swelles, now his reins grindes, now his sight fails him, now his
hearing goes from him, etc. But for all these and many more physic helps him
with remedy. And therefore not without reason has the Lord commanded physic
to be used. To proceed, where he had such reason to command physic to be
used, we cannot think he wanted reason to command the physician to be
honored. For, for the first is the last; so that wheresoever the first is to
be used, the second is to be regarded. But you say why and wherefore? and I
answer. First, Sir. 38. 1. 12.
Because the Lord has created him. Syrach 38. ver. 1. and ver. 12. And says
Paul. 1. Tim. 4.4. Sir. 38.12.
Every creature of God is good, and nothing ought to be refused. Secondly,
because man himself has need of him. And much is that to be esteemed, which
much is needed. Thirdly, because the hour may come, wherein their enterprises
shall have good success. And that that may do good at any time, is to be
despised at no time. Fourthly, because in the sight of great men he is had in
admiration, and that which great men esteem, mean men should not despise. The
proverb is, and with it the truth, like prince like people. Such as the master
of the house is, such soon will those of the household be. But princes and
great men greatly honor the physician. Ptolemeus son to Antiochus the first,
gave unto Aristrato, cousin to the great Philosopher Aristotle, a thousand
talents of silver, and a cup of gold, in such wise that he wan honor
throughout all Asia, and riches for his house, and all for curing Antiochus his
father of a certain disease of the lights. The Romans did erect unto Antony
Musa, by birth a Grecian, and by profession a physician, a picture of Porphyrie
in the field of Mars, and also gave him privilege of citizen of Rome, and all
because he cured their Emperor Augustus of a sciatica that he had in his
thigh. To speak of mo is needeles, when to these experience herself gives
further witness. The conclusion is, no mean man ought to despise the physician.
The mean man's health ought to be as dear to him, as the great man's is. It
cost God as much to give him life, as it did to give life to the mightiest
monarch in the world. And as careful ought he to be of preserving life in
himself, as the great man is of maintaining life in himself: life either is
or ought to be alike sweet to all.


Q. So it may be it is, though physic be not used of all?


R. How appears it to be so, when the means to preserve it are neglected so?


Q. It may be they often are omitted, not because they are ever neglected, but
because they cannot well be procured.


R. So there be no fault in those that should procure the means I have done I
speak not against those yt have not ye time to use the means but against those
that want will to use them.


Q. They may have will to use them, and yet want them.


R. I grant that, and in wanting them their fault is so much the less, by how
much their will is good to have them.


Q. So it had need to be: you would otherwise hardly censure of a number. For
more there be that use not the means, than there are that use the^.


R. The more, the worse. It were better there were fewer.


Q. Whether it would be better or no, I say not: but I am sure it cannot
easily be helped.


R. Not because it cannot, but because it will not. The fault that is, is more
in the men that should use the means to health, than in the means that should
be used.


Q. Yet there may be fault in them?


R. Little or none simply. All that is, is respectively.


Q. Why none simply?


R. Because there is almost no country which yields not those things which
make for the preservation of health in those that are of that country.


Q. Why any respectively?


R. Because either the ministers may err in their ministering, or the reciuers
fail in their receiving. The first may miss either of their mixture, if their
physic be compounded, or of their time if it be simple. The second may have
either an indisposite body, or a very unfitting place.


Q Well now, since so you clear physic of crime, and you charge her receivers
with blame, answer me one thing.


R. What Is that? I for I must hear ere I answer.


Q. May a man use the counsel and physic that is given and prescribed by any
physician?


R. No not so: for every one that professes physic, is not good in physic.
And that counsel and physic is to be used which is given by physicians,
which are known for learning to be skillful, for experience practiced, for
religion and conscience sound and sincere, for otherwise the life and health
may come to be decayed and empaired, which should be restored and repaired. The
witles and unskillful do kill more than they cure.


Q. Whether then may a man use the prescripts of coniurers and charmers?


R. Surely no. He may not seek their counsel, much less take their receipts.
Al charms and spells of what words soever they consist, al characters and
figures, either in paper, wood or way, all anulets and ligatures which serve
to hang about the neck, or other part of the body, are naught except they be
grounded upon some good natural reason, for neither by creation at the first,
nor by any ordinance in Gods word since, have they any power to cure a
corporal and bodily disease. Words can but signify, and figures can no more
but represent, when they have done these things they have done, more good of
themselves they cannot do.


Q. Yet these means are more commonly used of the common people, then good
Physic?


R. The use thereof is never the more commendable therefore, for not what they
do is to be regarded, but what they should do: they are but fools in doing
what they do, and such in their so doing they show themselves, were they any
thing wise, with Balaam they would go no further then the word of the Lord:
with the Israelites, they would not do every man what seems good in his
own eyes, but it is no matter, they speed thereafter.


Q. That may be well, for many of them by their so doing speed well, they are
eased of their pains, they are healed of their sores, they are rid of their
maladies, they are cured of their diseases.


R. If they speed well being so eased, cured, and healed, it is well, they
speed well in show, but not in truth; they speed well for the present, but not
for the time to come. As the proverb is, the Devil is a knave, he can and
will do them some good that seek unto him for the present time, that he may do
them the more hurt in the time to come.


Q. Think you then, that they which are thus eased, helped, cured and healed
of their pains, griefs, sores, and diseases do not speed well?


R. I cannot tell, it may be so far forth as by these means they are (as
you say) eased, helped, cured, and healed of their pains, griefs, etc. they
speed well, but as far forth as they sin in seeking ease and help by these
means disallowed by the Lord himself, it may be they shall not speed well.


Q. I would you would lay aside, may be, and speak resolutely.


R. It may be that would not please you.


Q. That's but a small fault, you have said ere now, that you should not seek
to please men.


R. Neither will I where seeking to please them, I shall be sure to displease
God.


Q. Then speak as I wish you.


R. And I will so, because you wish me so. It were better for them to dye of
their sicknesses, then to seek recovery by such wicked means.


Q. This indeed is resolutely spoken.


R. So you bad me speak.


Q. I did so, but why say you so?


R. Because the Lord himself says by the mouth of Moses his servant; Leuit.
20.6.
If any turn after such as work with spirits; and after Southsaiers, to go a
whoaring after them: then will I set my face against that person, and will cut
him off from among his people.


Q. How does it hence appear? it were better for them to dye of their
sicknesses, then to seek help by such means? for here is nothing threatened
but death. For I will not cut him off from among his people, is no more but I
will kill him, that he shall no more live among his people.


R. Though there be no more threatened but death as you say, yet still is that
true which I say, and thence also it does appear to be true, for the death
there threatened is worse then the death which from their sicknesses would have
dimaned: the one i. the first could have been but natural (for it is natural
for a man to die upon his bed) the other. i. the second would have been both
violent and sudden. For it is a violent and sudden death, to be taken away
when a man is very likely to live, and whilst he makes none account to die.
And I think a violent and sudden death, is worse then a natural. In a
natural death, life has attained his full periode. In a violent and sudden,
life is cut off ere ever she comes to her periode. Again, for the natural,
often we wish and well we may. It is the end of all our labors, it is the gate
of life, it is the house appointed to all that live, it takes away all evils,
and delivers the just man's soul from them. As one says, In generality, it
takes away three things, for the which the righteous wish to go out of this
life, to wit, The fear of transgression, the grief of affliction, the heat
of emulation, so long as they live, they are sure to sin, to sorrow, to
lament, says Bernard. By how much the longer we live, Bernard Hierom.
by so much the more we are molested, and do sin, says Hierome. Infinite
are the perils amongst which we walk, what should it delight us to remain
among the snares of the devils, the swords of men, the unlawful motions of the
flesh? and therefore Paul said, Romans 7.24. Tobit 3.6.
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? Tobit
said, It is better for me to die then to live, because I have heard false
reproaches, and am very sorrowful. 1. Match. 2.7
Mattathias said, Woe is me, wherefore was I borne to see this destruction of
my people, and the destruction of the holy City, and thus to sit still? 1.
Kin. 19.4
Elijah said, It is enough O Lord take my soul, for I am no better then my
Fathers, and Jeremy said, Ier. 20.14.
Cursed be the day wherein I was borne: and let not the day wherein my Mother
bare me be blessed, with many other words which you may read in the xx. of
his Prophecy. Again, as death takes away all evils, so it brings and gives
many goods, Bernard.
as Barnard says: Death will come, but it will be but a sleep to the elect of
God, a gate of life, a beginning of refreshing, a ladder to ascend up into
heaven by. Hence says one upon that saying of Syrach, O death how acceptable
is thy judgment unto the needful etc. Unto the Saints, truly the judgment
of death is good, because it is no other thing to them, but a going out of
prison, an end of banishment, a finishing of labors, an arriving at an Haven,
an end of a pilgrimage, a laying down of a grievous burden, a delivery out of
a ruinous house, a return to their country, an entry into life. And in
consideration hereof Paul said, Philip. 1.2^
I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ, for Christ is to me both in
life and death advantage. What Paul wished, others may wish; for death is the
same to them, it was to him; advantage to him, advantage to them; advantage to
all that die in him, by death they pass from labor to rest, from shame to
honor, from poverty to plenty, from a cottage to a kingdom, from death to
life. And thus now you see, both that we may pray, and also well pray for
natural death, but so much you neither can nor may see for a violent and a
sudden death. Against that we many times pray, from plague, pestilence, and
famine, from battle and murder, and sudden death good Lord deliver us, and
of right we ought, for we are never so ready, as that it is good for us to be
taken suddenly, and we know it will go but hardly with us, if we be taken in
our sins. Others being taken suddenly makes us afraid, and therefore the
fear of being taken our selves suddenly, should more make us to fear, and
upon fear to say: From sudden death good Lord deliver us: the forethought of
death comes sometimes ill enough, and therefore the sudden cannot come always
well enough. But now I remember my self, I have said enough of this, to
manifest what I was to manifest. Now therefore if you please, I will back
again as fast as I may.


Q. And whither will you back?


R. To that from which we are somewhat fallen.


Q. What is that?


R. The bad dealing and ill speeding of those that use the prescripts of
Coniurers and Charmers.


Q. Why? you have been about the one and the other of these all this while?


R. I have so; but otherwise then I would if you had not been.


Q. What would you have done, if I had not been.


R. Have made quicker speed about their evil speeding.


Q. Me think you have been quick enough: and if it be as you say, they are
sure to speed ill enough.


R. You if still, as if you doubted: If you will not believe either me for
Moses, or Moses for himself, or both for God; look upon Ahaziah king of
Israel, and tell me if you find not as much proved by his history, as before
was avouched upon divine verity.


Q. Why? what is his history?


R. That being sick through a fall through the lattesse window in his upper
chamber, 2. King. 1.2.
which was in Samaria, he sent messengers to Baalzebub the God of Ekron to
know whether he should recover of that his disease, yea or no? but while this
was in doing, the Angel of the Lord said to Elijah the Thisbite, arise, and go
up to meet the messengers of the king of Samaria, and say unto them: Is it not
because there is no God in Israel, that ye go to enquire of Baalzebub the God
of Ekron? wherefore thus says the Lord; thou shall not come down from the bed
on which thou art gone up, but shall dye the death.


Q. And is there hereby as much proved, as was before by you propounded?


R. What else?


Q. I see but three things in it. 1. Ahaziah his sin, 2. the reproof of his
sin, 3. A commination against him for his sin.


R. Yet therein may you see, what I would have you see. See viz. First that
they do sin grievously, which leaving the ordinary means the Lord has set
to have health by, do seek unto extraordinary: Secondly that they which do
so wickedly, shall therefore speed ill fauouredly. The first in the two first
you see: for there as Ahaziah sinned, so he was therefore reproved, The second
in the last, you say you see, for there is showed how Ahaziah should speed, for
his wicked deed.


Q. I, but yet it is not showed how he did speed?


R. It may thence easily be collected, for the word that comes out of the
mouth of God shall not return unto him void, Esa. 55.12.
but it shall accomplish that which he will, and it shall prosper in the thing
whereto he sent it.


Q. But did this so?


R. Yea verily, for thus in the 17. verse of the 1. Chapter of the second
book of Kings it is said: 2. Kin. 1.17.
So he died according to the word of the Lord which Elijah had spoken.


Q. I, but yet it appears not that it had been better for Ahaziah to have died
of his sickness, then to have askte counsel of Baalzebub the God of Ekron
touching his disease?


R. No death: what hinders? First he dies for his sending, and it may be he
should not then have died if he had not sent. Wherefore and therefore are
words that imply much, and in this history they are both used, 2. King. 1.
verse 4.16. Secondly ere he dies he loses an hundred men and two captains,
through his sending, which he should not have lost if he had not sent, and do
not these things approve what a longtime you have driven me to prove?


Q. Yes for him, but not for others.


R. Yes, yes for others and him too, they which are alike in offense shall not
be unlike in punishment, what Aheziah once gatte by using unlawful means for
health, that often get others by doing the like good never get any. The author
of mischief, by whom all Charmers and Coniurers do work, never does good;
though for the present I deny not, but it may seem good, and other good then
that which he does, they get not. Every servant lives at his Masters expenses,
and therefore his servants must fare no otherwise then he will allow them.


Q. You are an eger man against Coniurers and Charmers since you cannot abide
that they should be sought to in sickness for health, answer me to this: May
the help and counsel of allothers but these, be both asked and used?


R. Yea, if they be as before I said, for knowledge skillful for practice
fortunate, for conscience upright and religious.


Q. Your (If) argues not that every others help beside Coniurers and Charmers
is either to be craved or practiced.


R. It is very like so, if they be not qualified as before is specified.


Q. Why require you so much in a Physician?


R. Because with less he is no good Physician: and I would have none so
foolish as to put himself into the hands of the unskillful, unfortunate and
ungodly: it is ill committing of a man's self to him that is skillful, if he
be both unfortunate and ungodly, but it is worse to him that is neither
cunning, luckie, nor godly, though he be zealous to do good, a man may have
little good by him, if he has neither knowledge to direct him, nor success to
follow him, and therefore surely he may look for less where all are wanting,
often times a man fares the worse for another man's ungodliness, how much more shall
he fare amiss when all three evils meet in one?


Q. I but that is seldom when?


R. Too often if it be but once, for bad is the first, that is ignorance, it is
the mother of all errors, but worse is the second, that is infortunacie, the
infortunacie of one is unfortunate to another: but worst of all is the third,
that is impiety, for one man's impiety hinders another man's prosperity.


Q. I confess none of them all is good.


R. And dare you affirm that one is not worse then another?


Q. I neither dare, nor do: yet that which is in the comparatiue or
superlatiue, must also be in the positive.


R. That's true, because neither comparatiue not superlatiue can be without the
positive, but why stand you upon those things?


Q. Because you have driven me to them?


R. If I wist that, I would draw you from the^, for it is not for us now to
stand upon the^.


Q. Yet we may well speak of them?


R. I withstand not that.


Q. Neither do I withstand you in the qualities of your Physician, but yet I
would crave a reason of that his condition?


R. I have given one already, will not that content you?


Q. That's a very general one.


R. Is it ever the worse for that?


Q. I say not so, but still me think it is for somewhat, that you wish a
Physician whom a man in sickness should seek to, to be so conditioned, as
before you have mentioned?


R. It is so, and that somewhat I have told you, for I would have him good that
is to be sought to, because I would have the sick seek to none but him that is
good.


Q. Your will is good, but who is so good?


R. He that practices well.


Q. What is he?


R. He that practices religiously in regard of himself, and commodiously in
regard of his patient.


Q. Do not all practice alike?


R. No, diverse practice diuerselie, some work only by the inspection of the
urine; some again hand over head; some other by Astrologicall rules.


Q. And do you find fault with every of these?


R. Yea that do I, and not without cause, for the first may be deceived, the
second sooner kill then cure, the third effect less good then they otherwise
might.


Q. Why? is it not good to judge by the urine?


R. Forest. de vrin. iudicijs lib. 3. Lang. lib. 2 Epist. 4.
Yes: but it is not ever safe to minister according to the urine, for as the
learned in that faculty avouch, that kind of dealing tends rather to kill, then
to cure, and sundry men are indeed killed thereby.


Q. Why is that?


R. Because judgment by the urine is very deceiptful, for the water of him
that is sick of a pestilent fever, even unto death, looks for substance and
color as the water of a whole man, and so does the water of him that is sick
of a quartane, or of any other intermitting fever; specially if they have used
good diet from the beginning, so also does the water of him that has the
plurisie, or the inflammation of the lungs, or the squinancy often times when he
is near death.


Q. May one and the same urine then foresignifie both life and death, and may
be a sign of diverse and different diseases?


R. Yea that it may, for a thin crude and pale urine, in them that be in
health, does betoken want of digestion; but in them that are sick of a sharp
or burning ague, it betokens the frenzy, and is a certain sign of death at
hand to ensue.


Q. I muse then why most Physicians work by the inspection of the urine.


R. You need never long muse thereat, the reason is soon found, they are sent
unto by many and that often by simple souls, women and servants, such as can
give them no further instruction, then they themselves extorte from them, by
questioning with them upon inspection of the urine, they are sent for but by
few, so that their abse^ce from their patients, is a cause why they work as
they may upon their patients, no doubt but many would work otherwise then they
do, did they see and know the conditions of their patients.


Q. It seems then there is fault as well in them that should use them, as in
themselves.


R. You may be sure of that, for many are so niggish, as they had as live
spoil themselves, as spend their money. If they might be cured for God have
mercy, they would oftener then they do, seek for remedy, but because they
cannot have health without wealth, they will rather hazard their health, then
empaire their wealth.


Q. I fear me they often therefore speed accordingly.


R. You need never fear it, for assuredly you may almost any where find it.


Q. Are not the Physicians themselves in this respect somewhat to be blamed
think you?


R. I know not; and I think not; so they neither know of their sickness, ne yet
be called to help them in their sicknesses.


Q. But many make experiments of their new devised medicines upon the bodies of
their patients, and that makes a number stay of seeking their aid, do they not
well in so doing?


R. Surely no, though they shun the aid of such as they know do so, yet they
might seek the help of those they either know or hope do not so, for as those
Physicians are to be blamed which do as you say: so they that utterly
therefore renounce the use of Physic, are not to be excused, for as there
are more maids then maulkin; so there are more Physicians, then such as make
experiments of their new devised medicines upon the discrased bodies of their
diseased patients, and to them they may resort; their aid and assistance they
may crave, their prescripts they may follow.


Q. I but there are but a few of these?


R. Though there be not, yet those few they may seek to.


Q. The labor may be much, and the charge great to seek unto them.


R. Yet should the health to be had by using them, be more regarded then either
labor or charge in seeking them. For what will not a wise man do for health?
Sir. 30. 15.
Health and strength (says the wise man) is above all gold, and a whole body
above infinite treasure, There is noriches above a sound body, Better is the
poor being whole and strong, then a rich man that is afflicted in his body.


Q. As true as all this is that ye have said, yet a number had rather fall into
their hands which will temper with them, if they use the advice of any, then
seek to such as you speak of that will temper for them.


R. The more unwise they, if they will not be advised, let them do as they
will for me, I pray God bless me out of their hands, and so all those that
make account either of life or health: for more hardy are such practitioners,
than harmeles. For often through such their practice the health of their
patients is decayed, if sometime their lives be not shortened. And hereupon it
is, that prouerbially it is said, He lives miserably, that lives medicinably.
The wise and discrete physician will neither so practice, nor make himself a
proverb.


Q. Why? what will he do?


R. That which every good physician should do, vz. perpend the causes, crises,
symptoms and effects of the disease, and then work accordingly. And that so
as both the nature of his patient may be preserved, and his decayed health
restored.


Q. But these things considered will he ever minister physic, or use
phlebotomie without the direction of judicial astrology?


R Yea that he will, or else he should not be such as he would be taken to be,
nor as I would wish him to be.


Q. Why? can you or do you esteem amiss of those, which minister no physic
at any time, neither yet use phlebotomy without the direction of judicial
astrology?


R. I neither can nor do well esteem of them: for if they follow this course
continually, they must needs kill many a man. By astrology a man must not be
let blood till the Moon be out of Leo, the house of the sun: but by
physic, a man full bodied, taken with a pleurisy, the Moon being in Leo
must presently be let blood, or else it will go hard with him: for if he stay
till the Moon be removed out of Leo, he may by all likelyhoode die, either by
inflammation of the blood, or by consumption of the lungs. For in the time the
Moon makes her abode in Leo, the aposteme increases so much by the gathering
together of the humors, as it can neither be dissolved nor ripened. Through
the defect of either of which it comes to pass, that either the blood is
inflamed, or the lungs consumed: of which two whether soever betides, the life
will soon be shortened. But to leave this, and learn more, by astrology
again, a man must not be let blood, the Moon being in malignant aspects with
any of the unfortunate planets: but by physic, Lang. lib. 1. epist. 35.
Ganiuetius called Amicus medicorum.
a man being sick of the squinancie, or of the fever called Synachus (the
Moon being as is said) dies, if he be not let blood, ere ever the Moon be
freed from the foresaid malignant aspects. By the consideration of these things
be you your self judge, whether I may esteem well of those or no, which will
minister no purgations, nor let any blood, otherwise than they are counseled
by astrologicall directions.


Q. If I be judge, I must judge no otherwise than you your self have already
judged. Your judgment me think is so good, as other I can give none. For this
I have seen, by that which you have said, that they which in ministering of
physic, and striking of a vein, do stay wholly upon judicial astrology, do
often neglect to do, what in conscience they should earnestly labor to do.


R. In seeing that; you have seen what well you might see, and what every one
in duty is bound to see. For where a man must not stand upon astrology, he
must not stay upon the directions of astrology. The directions of astrology,
are like unto astrology. The one unsure, the other uncertain. Neither of both
such as any man is to build upon. But this is enough of this at this time.


Q. Enough also if you will let it be for the physicians the sick man is to
seek unto.


R. As you will, let that be. For I now go as you draw me.


Q. I will draw you then from the conditions of the physicians, whose aid and
counsel the sick man is to crave, unto the office of the physicians, which
they are to practice when their patients have their presence.


R. And what would you touching that?


Q. What is that?


R. It is neither one nor simple.


Q. Be they fewer many acquainte me with them.


R. And I will. First, in defect of such as are to put the sick in mind of
their sins, they are to advertise the^ that are their patients to humble
themselves truly under the mighty hand of God, and fervently to pray unto him
in the name of Christ, for the free and full pardon of all their sins. This
is as it were a preparatiue to the physic they shall give. This if they do
ere ever they minister any physic, it will cause their work to have the
better success. For oftentimes the impenitencie of the sick is an hindrance
to the physicians. It causes that the physic by them given will not work,
either as in reason it should, or by hope they expect it would. Secondly, after
they have ministered any physic, they are to pray unto almighty God, that he
in mercy would vouchsafe to give thereto happy and prosperous success, for
as the Prophet says, Except the Lord does build the house, Psalm. 127.1.
they labor in vain that build it, except the Lord keeps the city, the
keeper watches in vain: So here may I say, except the Lord does bless the
Physic the physicians do give it in vain. If they any thing doubt whether
this duty does ly upon themor no, they may consult with Jesus the son of
Syrach touching it, and he will teach it then out of doubt. These are his
words; They also shall pray unto the Lord, that he would prosper that, which
is given for ease, and their physic for the prolonging of life. And I think
they give as much, as I either ask or seek. Whether they do or no, I will not
spend either more time, or further labor in proouing of it. For they will
readily grant it without gain saying if they be as they should be. For why?
it is the part of the Godly man at every turn to pray; and one thing that he
is to pray for, is that God would bless him in his labors, and give success
to that he takes in hand. Dan. 6.10. Psalm. 109.164. Romans 1.9.10.2. 1. These.
5.17.
Daniel says that he prayed thrice a day. David says, that he prayed seven
times a day. Paul says, that he prayed without ceasing. And Luke says, that
Cornelius prayed continually. And Paul wills the Thessalonians; and in them
others to pray continually. And he that prayed himself without ceasing, and
taught others to do the like, prayed also that by some means one time or
other he might have a prosperous journey by the will of God, Romans 1.9.
thereby teaching what others in the like cases are to do. But I will not
stand upon this. It is apparent enough of it self, that as they are to pray
ere they give, that they may give, so they are to do when they have given,
that good may be done by that which is given: that so they may acknowledge the
blessing by giving to be Gods, as well as they do the power to give. To
proceed: Thirdly, if either before or after their giving they see any certain
and manifest signs of death in the sick, they are to certify their patients
thereof, and to tell them plainly in what peril they are. For this, as it
will bereave the sick of all confidence in earthly things (as those things
which are vain and transitory:) so will it make them to put all their
affiance in the mere mercy of God, as the safe and sure anchor of their
souls. For as once the Apostle said of himself and his like, 2. Cor. 1.9.
we received the sentence of death in our selves, because we should not trust
in our selves, but in God which raises the dead. So then they may say of
themselves, we receive the sentence of death in our selves, because we should
not trust in our selves, but in God which raises up the dead; and therefore is
able if he will, to raise us up again, and set us up upon our feet. For
easier it is to restore us to health ere we die, than to raise us to life when
we are dead.


Q. There is no doubt of the effect of that which you say, but of the office,
that in so saying you lay upon physicians. For physicians make it a question
whether this that you say, does belong unto them yea or nay?


R. It is more than they need, if they so do. For when Hezekiah was sick, the
Prophet spoke plainly unto him, and said: Isai. 39.^.
Set thine house in order, for thou must die. And of him they may learn it.


Q. How so when as Isaiah was no physician, but a Prophet?


R. His being a prophet hinders not, but they may learn of him as much as I
say. For I think not but without offense I may speak it, here Isaiah played
the part of a physician, as well as of a Prophet. For as at his first coming to
Hezekiah being sick, he said; Set thine house in order, for thou must die. So
his departure again from him or at least his last leaving of him, he said,
Take a lump of dry figs, and lay it upon the bile, Isai. 38.21.
and he shall recover. If he played only the part of a prophet in the first, I
see not but he played only the part of a physician in this last. But if any man
will say, he might play both the Prophet and a physician in this last; because
he might be as well a physician and a Prophet, as Samuel was a Prince and a
Priest. I see not but I may also say he played both in the first, because he
might as well say, as a physician, set thy house in order, for thou must die, as
a Prophet. For as it is not the Prophets part alone to move men to make their
wills; but others may do it as well as they; so is it not the physicians part
alone, to tell men they shall die, but others may do it as well as they. Yet,
as the Prophets are especially to move men to make their wills, because they
best know how they should be made; so the physicians are especially to tell
their patients they shall die; because they best know the most certain, and
infallible signs of death. Others may see some, but they can see more. And as
they can see most, so they can Judge best. And as they can Judge best, so they
can tell soonest. And as they can tell soonest, so they may tell first.


Q. Tell let them then, because you will to tell have them. But if they see no
certain signs of death, what will you that they shall then do?


R. As the Prophet before named, did. Apply physic according to the nature of
their patient, and the quality of his disease. And that being done, as the
wise man counsels them to do. Pray unto the Lord, Sir. 38. 14.
that he would prosper that, which is given for ease, and their physic for
the prolonging of life.


Q. And after what sort shall the sick take it?


R. After that sort that every sick man is to take it as the ordinary means
that the Lord has ordained for the recovery of health empaired and decayed.


Q. But how in more particularitie is that to be taken?


R. First, with preparation to it. Secondly, with sanctification of it.
Thirdly, with consideration of the use and end thereof.


Q. And why with the one, and the other of these?


R. With the first, because he that is to take physic, must not only prepare
his body, as Physicians do prescribe, but his soul also, as Divines do
appoint, and that he must prepare, by humbling himself under the hand of God
in his sickness for his sins, and craving par^on of them, and for them. For
first in consideration that he has provoked the Lord to anger against him by
his sins, he must submit himself unto his hand, acknowledging that he
suffers no more then he has deserved, nor all that neither. Secondly in regard
that he is no way able to satisfy the wrath of God against him conceived for
his sins, Iam. 5.13.
he must in all humility, and most earnestly crave pardon of him for his
sins, and both these must he do ere ever any medicine enter into his body.
Sir. 3^. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
This I am sure was the rule of Syrach to his son, My son fail not in thy
sickness, but pray unto the Lord and he will make thee whole, leave off from
sin and order thine hands aright, and cleanse thine heart from all wickedness,
Offer sweet incense, and fine flower for a remembrance, make the offering fat,
for thou art not the first given. Then give place to the Physician, for the
Lord has created him, let him not go from thee, for thou have need of him. The
hour may come that their enterprise may have good success. For they also
shall pray unto the Lord, that he would prosper that, which is given for ease,
and their Physic for the prolonging of life. For the neglect of this rule,
Asa the king is much blamed in scripture, 2. Chro. 16.1^.
for he sought not to the Lord in his sickness, but to the physicians, and put
his trust in the^. And for the contempt thereof amongst us, much woe by some is
sustained. For thence it often comes, that those diseases prove incurable which
are of themselves curable, and they that are molested with them, suddenly die
of them, who otherwise in man's judgment might have lived long without them.
Ere ever therefore any physic be taken by the sick, it is good that as the
Lord does humble him by sickness, so he does humble himself unto God for all
his sins, and crave pardon of them: so shall both his physic be blessed
unto him, and he himself blessed in the use of it. But till he be reconciled
unto God, by his humbling of himself, and craving pardon of him, twenty to
one his physic will never do him good. For as unto the pure all things are
pure, so unto them that are defiled, Tit. 1.15.
and unbelieving nothing is pure, but even their minds and consciences are
defiled. But to leave this first, with which he that is sick, is to take
physic, I will come to the second, with which he is to take use of physic,
as with the first. Touching which I say that with it he is to take physic,
because that when he has prepared himself, and is about to take physic, he
must sanctify the physic which he takes, by the word of God and by prayer,
as he does any of his other either meats or drinks. That by the first. i. the
word, he may have warrant that the prescribed medicines which he is to take be
lawful and good, and by the. 2. that is prayer, he may have Gods blessing upon
the same to ye recovering of his health if it be Gods good will and pleasure.
For as without the warrant of the word nothing is lawful, so without the use of
prayer nothing is sanctified. For as the word must come before a thing be
lawful; so prayer must come before a thing be prosperous: hence is it yt the
Apostle wills us to pray continually, and many have used prayer before they
have done any thing, that that which they were to do might be sanctified
while they were in doing it, Act. 20.36.38. 1. King. 18.38.
and blessed when they had done it. As Paul prayed before he iourneyed, Eliah
prayed before he sacrificed. Tobias prayed before he bedded, the Israelites
prayed before they bickred, etc: and all to teach us, that we must pray before
we journey, before we sacrifice, before we bed, before we fight, before we
do any thing, because without Gods aid and assistance we can do nothing:
Ioh. 15.5.
and therefore not take physic to our good; (though the physic that we take
be never so good.) But to pass from this, and to come to the third, which was
consideration, I say with that, he that takes physic is to take it, because a
man must rest no more upon physic, than he may, nor trust any more to it than
he ought. Physic has a certain end, though man's appetite has no end, and
that end must he well mind, that minds to take physic as he ought. Further
than the end he must not go, now the right and proper end of physic is,
the continuing and lengthening of life to his natural period, which is the
extreme point of life, beyond which by no possible means it can longer be
preserved, having been thereby oftimes before helped and continued: for then is
nature wholly spent. When therefore he takes physic, even whilst he is taking
of it, he must not think, that any ways by it he can prevent either old age
or death, for that is impossible, and impossible cannot be changed by physic.
God himself that is incurable has set it down, that all men must once die
and be changed, because all men have often sinned. And therefore to escape
death by any means no man must ever either hope or expect.


Q. It is but in vain if any does. For it is appointed to all men once to die,
so assuredly every man must once die. Happy is he that comes not twice to die.
It is good once to die as you have showed, but it is ill twice to die, as I
suspect.


R. Never suspect it, but believe it. God is not as man, Numb. 23.19.
that he shouldly. Yet he has said: Blessed and holy is he that has part in
the first resurrection: Apoc. 20.6.
for on such the second death has no power but they shall be the priests of
God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years. And therefore
cursed must they needs be, on whom the second death has power. For to have
part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone is the second death.
Apoc. 21.8.
And the fearful and unbelieving, and the abominable and murderers, and
whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and al liers shall have their part
in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death
and whosouer was not found written in the book of life was cast into the lake
of fire. And death and hell were cast into the lake of fire: this is the second
death.


Q. I pray God bless us from that. For as the death is ill so the company
therein is also ill.


R. It is for the evil: and therefore it cannot be good.


Q. So it seems. Since it is for the evil, let the evil take it, and keep
it, and hold it, if they will. I am weary of talking of it, there is so small
comfort in it.


R. It was your self that gave the occasion, otherwise I had not spoken of it.
But since we have said thus much of it, know thus much more touching it. First
though there be no comfort in it, to the wicked that shall have part in it,
because there is no peace to the wicked: Isay. 48.22.
yet there is comfort by it to the godly, because they know the wicked shallbe
plagued in it, and all things work together unto the best for them. Secondly,
Romans 8.28.
that the wicked shall to it whether they will or no. For in Matthew the seventh,
they reason to and for the contrary, Lord, Lord, Matthew. 7.22
have we not by thy name prophesied, and by thy name cast out devils? and by
thy name done many great works? But there Christ says, then will I profess
to them, I never k ew you depart from me, ye that work iniquity. Now seeing
you are weary of talking about this, talk of what you will.


Q The liberty you give me is more than I wish and greater than now I can use.
You have tied me to a course, and I will not run much out of course. Now
therefore when the sick has taken his prescribed physic, after your
described sort, has he done touching himself, or is there any thing else he
is to regard, in regard of his body?


R. I think not, but I may say, he has done. For whatsoever else is to be
done is most what comprehended in the things already named, or else will be
mentioned hereafter, where other things are pursued.


Q. As we have seen, then what he is to do concerning God and himself; so if
you please, let us see what he is to do concerning his neighbor. For as I
bear away, he was the third person, you say the sick person was to think
of.


R. You say true: and what pleased you shall not displease me: for it aunswers
the course before propounded, and hitherto followed. The first thing the sick
man is to do concerning his neighbor, is to seek reconciliation with him:
for if he must do nothing out of charity, he must not die out of charity:
for the greatest work that man has to do in this world is to die. But the
Apostle affirms, that nothing must be done out of charity: 1. Cor. 16.14
for he says. Let all your things be done in love: and therefore die a man
must not out of charity. For one of his things it is to die, and as even now
you heard, one of his greatest. Moreover, if in the old testament, a man was
to do what I say, when he was to offer but a beast in sacrifice unto God, much
more is he to do it at Death, when he is to offer himself, his soul and
body, a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor unto God. For that which was an
hinderance to the acceptance of a beast to be offered in sacrifice, will much
more be an hindrance to the acceptance of a man to be offered in sacrifice:
for the sacrifice of a man is greater than the sacrifice of a beast: but then
he was to do it. For then it was said: If thou bring thy gift to the altar,
Matthew. 5.23.
and there remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee, leave there
thine offering, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother, and then
come and offer thy gift: for without reconciliation of his sacrifice, there was
no acceptance. When you shall stretch out your hands, Esa. 1.15.
I will hide mine eyes from you, says the Lord, and though ye make many
prayers, I will not hear: for your hands are full of blood. Now therefore also
he is to do it; for now it is said: When ye shall stand and pray, forgive,
Mark. 11.25.
if ye have any thing against any man, that your father also which is in
heaven may forgive you your trespasses. For if you will not forgive, your
father which is in heaven, will not pardon you your trespasses. And no
marvel, for without peace between man and man, there is no peace between
man and God. Without love all is nothing. Says Paul: Though I speak with the
tongues of men and Angels, 1. Cor. 13.1.
and have not love, I am as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymball. And though
I have the gift of prophecy, and knew all secrets, and all knowledge, yea if I
have all faith, so that I could remove mountains and had not love, I were
nothing. And though I feed the poor with all my goods, and though I give my
body that I be burned, and have not love, it profits me nothing. And says
John. If any man say, I love God, 1. Ioh. 4.20.
and hate his brother he is a lier: for how can he that loves not his brother,
whom he has seen, love God whom he has not seen?


Q. I make no question of the duty; but of the sense. For every man
understands you not. To seek reconciliation is as far from their
understanding, as their practizing.


R. That may be: yet I hope you are not so senceles, but you know the sense
thereof.


Q. Though I be not, yet I would have you so speak as not I alone, but that
all others may understand you.


R. I speak not in such parables but they may. But I will speak plainly, and
as plainly as may be, that the plainest of all may plainly understand me. To
seek reconciliation, is freely to forgive all men that have offended, and
earnestly to desire all men to forgive that are offended, so that when I do
say; it is the sick man's part to seek reconciliation with his neighbor, it
is as much as if I should say; he is freely to forgive all men that have
offended him, as he himself would be forgiven of God, whom he himself has
many ways offended; and also earnestly to desire all men whom he any ways
has offended, to forgive him, as willingly as he does forgive others. The
first part of this reconciliation is enjoined Marc. 11.25. And the second, Mat.
5.23. what is said in either you have already heard, and it is needeles here
again to repeat. I think now that I have spoken thus plainly, you do not
any longer stand in doubt.


Q. Not of the duty as I have said.


R. Not yet of the sense as you did say.


Q. Of neither, but of the accomplishment of the duty according to your sense.


R. That is more then you need, if as I have said, the sick does proceed.


Q. How is that?


R. That is, if he does simply forgive, and sincerely desire to be forgiven.


Q. What if a man cannot come to the speech of them to whom he should forgive,
nor of them of whom he would be forgiven, or if he do, what if they will
neither forgive, nor be forgiven?


R. Nothing but well, the will of the sick God will here accept for the deed,
and if a man will, he may forgive whom he will, though he speaks not with them:
to forgive a man, does not necessarily require, that a man must talk with him,
to whom he will forgive. When Paul was absent from the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 2.10
he said unto them, to whom ye forgive any thing, I forgive also: no more
does it ever to be forgiven, for as a man may forgive being absent, so may he
be forgiven though he be not present.


Q. But how shall they know that he would be forgiven?


R. There are more ways then words, to acquaint them with that, either he may
write his mind, if so much he can, or otherwise by word of mouth he may impart
his mind, by some faithful and trusty messenger, or else he may use some other
honest signs. When Iaakob was desirous to be reconciled to his brother Esau,
Genesis 32.16.
He sent a present unto him, two hundredth she goats, and twenty he goats,
two hundredth ewes, and twenty Rams: thirty milch camels with their colts,
forty kine, and ten bullocks, twenty she Asses, and ten foales, for he
thought I will appease his wrath with the present that goes before me, and
afterward I will see his face: it may be that he will accept me. And so it came
to pass, for when Esau saw him, he ran to meet him, and embraced him, and
fell on his neck, and kissed him. As Iaakob did, so may he.


Q. I but it may be he shall not speed sowel, as Iaakob did.


R. Let him refer the success to God, yet let him know that Solomon says.
Pro. 21.14.
A gift in secret pacifieth anger, and a gift in the bosom great wrath,. To
the truth hereof many subscribe: says Ovid: Ovid lib. 3. d^ Art a^and.
Believe me gifts do please both Gods and men,
With gifts Jove himself is pleased now and then.
What shall the wise do? the fool in gifts does joy:
By gift received, the fool remits all annoy.


Philip king of Macedon said, no Tower was ever so well fenced, but soon it
might be expugned, if once an Ass laden with gold might come unto it. And
Verres in Tully says, Cic. in Ver.
That there is no thing so holy, but that it may be profaned by money; nor any
thing so strong, but that it may be subdued by money, Yea says another, Money
can do all things, all things obey money. Plutarc. in vita Aemilij.
Plutarch in the life of Paulus Aemilius says, That ancient historians
report, that not Philip, but his gold subdued Greece: Nomb. 22.
and in the two and twenty of Numbers we read, that for gifts Balaam would
have cursed, where and whom God had blessed: for gifts by Judas, Mat. 26.15.16.
Christ the son of God was betrayed: for gifts, the Soldiers that kept the
Sepulcher were persuaded to say, his disciples came by night and stoale him
away while we slept: of the effect therefore he needs not much to doubt.


Q. No not if they have a mind to forgive him, but what if upon no entreaty,
neither words nor writings, nor gifts, they will be induced to give him?


R. Nothing but good to him, that he is not forgiven, the fault is not in him,
that has used all means to obtain it, but in them that by no means will be
persuaded to grant it. If the case were otherwise, in what case were he yt now
is here a dying, and yet has his enemy beyond the seas, by whom he would be
pardoned? surely in bad, not good, he could not say with Simeon, Luke 2.29.
Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace, but with Iaakob to his
friends, Genesis 42.38.
as Iaakob said to his sons, Now shall ye bring my gray head with sorrow
unto the grave, but his hap is not so hard, to be in such a course case: in
matters above his reach and beyond his compass it is enough to will well. In
this and the like cases, a will and desire to be forgiven, August. super Psalm.
57. Id. super Psalm. 134.
is forgiveness it self. Whatsoever thou willest and can not, that God
accounts as done, because God seeks the heart: sees the heart within; is
witness, judge, approuer, helper and crowner. It suffices that thou offrest thy
will, when thou can, confess with thy mouth, unto salvation: but when thou
can not with thy mouth, believe (with thine heart) unto righteousness, thou
praisest with thy heart, thou blessest with thy heart, upon the altar of thy
conscience thou latest holy sacrifice with thy heart, and answer is made
thee, peace upon earth, to men goodwill, For as Gregory says. Greg. hom. ^.
super euan.
Nothing is offered unto God richer then a good will. And to make an end, the
Apostle Paul says: in one of his Epistles to the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 8.12
If there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has
and not according to that a man has not. So that if a man has a desire in
sickness to be forgiven at their hands whom he has offended, though he cannot
be forgiven of them, either because they are absent and ignorant, whether he
desires forgiveness or not, or present and obstinate, altogether unwilling to
forgive though never so insta^tlie he requires ir, it hinders not but he may
die well enough, and have hope to abide the judgment of God, good enough Other
men's iniquity cannot work him such an injury, neither may their obstinacy
deprive him of mercy. We read not in the eightenth of Matthew his gospel of
any evil that besides him, Mat. 18.29.
that was desirous to be forgiven of his fellow servant and could not, more
then his being cast into prison, till he should pay the debt (except these were
evils that his fellows had compassion of him, became suitors for him, and gate
their master to right their wrong done unto him:) But there we read of much
woe and wrecke that befell him, that would no ways be entreated to pardon
him. First his fellow servants complained of him to his and their master.
Secondly upon complaint to him made, his master grew wroth against him, and
revenged severely the wrong done to his fellow by him, and in this his anger.
1. He received him. 2. He vpbraided him with the good turn he had done him. 3.
he laid a double punishment upon him. 1. He recalled the gift that not long
before he had given him. 2. to perpetual prison he adjudged him, that you may
see I deal plainly, Mat. 18.23, 24. etc.
the story there is this. A certain king would take account of his servants.
And when he had begun to reckon, one was brought unto him, which ought him
ten thousand tale^ts. And because he had nothing to pay, his master commanded
him to be sold, and his wife, and his children, and all that he had, and the
debt to be paid. The servant therefore fell down and besought him saying,
master appease thine anger toward me, and I will pay thee all. Then that
servants master had compassion, and loosed him, and forgave him the debt. But
when the servant was departed, he found one of his fellows, which ought him an
hundredth pence, and he laid hands on him, and took him by the throat, saying,
pay me that thou owe. Then his fellow fell down at his feet, and besought
him saying, appease thine anger toward me, and I will pay thee all. Yet he
would not, but went and cast him into prison, till he should pay the debt. And
when his other fellows saw what was done, they were very sorry, and came and
declared unto their master, all that was done. Then his master called him, and
said unto him. O evil servant, I forgave thee all that debt because thou
praiedst me. Ought not thou also to have had pity on thy fellow even as I
had pity on thee? So his master was wroth, and delivered him to the Iaylers,
till he should pay all that was due unto him. The application is this; So
likewise shall mine heavenly father do unto you, except you forgive from your
hearts each one to his brother their trespasses, the collection out of both
this; that the estate of him that will not forgive his brother when he is
desired, is harder then his, which is desirous to be forgiven, and cannot, the
one has God with him, and for him. And if God be with (says Paul) who can he
against? Romans 8.31.
The other has God against him, and neither with him, nor for him, and what
can he do against God? what is man to God?


Q. I dislike neither of your relation, nor application, the greatest doubt I
make, is of your collection, for therein you say the estate of him that will
not forgive being requested, is harder then his that would be forgiven and
cannot, and thereby it seems his estate that would be forgiven and cannot, is
not so good as hitherto you have borne me in hand it is.


R. And why is it not so?


Q. Because the others being harder; his must needs be hard; else there were
no comparison.


R. Though I should grant you that, yet would you not get what you seek. It
follows not, because his estate is hard in the judgment of men, that
therefore it is hard also in the judgment of God. Esa. 55.8.
For his thoughts are not men's thoughts, neither are their ways his ways. As
the heavens are higher then the earth, so are his ways higher then their
ways, and his thoughts above their thoughts. I confess in deed it is an hard
thing that a man should seek at the hands of men, what in this case he cannot
obtain, when as the promise of God is already past for the obtaining of the
same at his hands, the example of the most high should much move, when he is
merciful, man should not be merciles. For it is said, be ye merciful,
because your heavenly father is merciful. Luke 6.36.
But often times so it falls out, that mercy is sooner found at the hands of
God our almighty creator, then at the hands of man, a mortal and miserable
creature. Yet these not finding favor at the hands of man when it is sought,
makes not that he that seeks and finds not, should be ever the less
therefore in the favor of God, for the favor of God goes not after the
favor of men; neither does it any thing at all depend thereon. Did it so, woe
were it to all those that are nothing in the favor of men, because they
neither do nor can, as some would favor the dealings of men: but woe it is not
to all such, for Christ to their comfort says. Ioh. 15.19.
If ye were of the world, the world would love his own: but because ye are not
of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world
hates you, the conclusion therefore is as before.


Q. And so let it be, since so you will have it.


R. Not any thing the more for that, for nothing must be as I will, my will is
no rule for right: but so let it be, because reason and truth both wills it so
to be.


Q. I have done then, Sir. 4. 28. 25
the truth I am to strive for, not to stand against.


R. That's true: but you are loath to yield till you must needs.


Q. That is not because I dislike the truth, but because I would find out the
truth.


R. But you know the proverb, by too much contending for the truth, there is
sometime a loss of the truth.


Q. I hope we have not yet contended so much about it, as that there should
be dreaded a loss of it?


R. Mary no, I would be loath any such thing should be, but what have you
found out of the truth?


Q. Yea; through your finding it for me.


R. Why then stand you still, without hastening forward?


Q. Because I would not hasten too fast.


R. What fear you?


Q. Not the loss of my way, but the forgetting of my work.


R. What Is your work?


Q. To enquire of you, whereof I am ignorant my self.


R. I were cunning if I knew that, it is well for me if I knew whereof I my
self am ignorant, though I know not whereof you be ignorant. The first is very
difficulte, the second is wholly impossible. 1. Cor. 2.11.
For what man knows the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in
him?


Q. You take me at the worst, my meaning is otherwise then so.


R. Explain it then, and then shall I know the better what to say.


Q. It is then, to learn that of you, which I yet know not.


R. In deed this is a plain speech, how ever it attributes more to me then I
dare arrogate for my self, for my knowledge is so great, as I may say as
Socrates said: this one thing I know, that I know nothing, but what soever I
do know, I know it by Gods grace wholly, and not by mine own industry, and
yet I do not know what it is you would learn of me.


Q. That you may soon know, through that which you already know, that which I
would feign know of you is this, viz. What secondly the sick man is to do
concerning his neigbour, for the first argues secondly, as secondly argues
first.


R. If that be it, I will teach you it, yet here his duty varies, as his
condition varies, one thing lies upon him as he is a public person, and
another thing as he is a private man.


Q. What if he be a public person? what must he then do?


R. What is fitting him according to his place, for every public person has
not one place, some have an higher place then others, and some have a lower.


Q. What if he be a ruler and governor of others?


R. Then must he take order, that the charges committed unto him by God, be
best in good estate after his Death.


Q. Whether he be ecclesiastical or civil?


R. What else, as both have the rule of others; so both must take care for
others. If he be ecclesiastical, he must cast as much as he can for the
continuance of the good estate of the Church, over which he is placed. It is
little for a man to care only for himself and his own time, and to regard
nothing the time that is to ensue. By the history of the Gospel it is
evident, what care the chief shepherd and Bishop of our souls, had of this
matter, for both before his death, and at his death, and after his death he was
mindful and zealous of this business, before his death he chose certain to
succeed him in the ministry of the word; at his death as he commended John to
Mary, Ioh. 19.26.
so he commended Mary to John, to her he said, woman behold thy son, to him
he said, man, Mat. 28.19.
behold thy mother. After his death he gave his Disciples commission to teach
all nations, baptising them in the name of the Father, and the Son, and the
holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever he had commanded
them. In the second Epistle of Peter the Apostle, it is easy to be seen how
careful he was to persist in his masters steps, in regarding what he
regarded, for there this was his saying: 2. Pet. 1.15.
I will endeavor always, that ye also may be able to have remembrance of these
things after my departure, from both there may well be collected, what I have
wished to be considered, this I am sure is the saying of Christ himself. Ioh.
13.15.
I have given you an example, that ye should do as I have done, and that which
was spoken by Paul himself, may well be taken as spoken by Peter, 1. Cor. 11.1.
Be you the followers of men, even as I am of Christ, but I mind not further to
dilate this point as now, I mean to proceed, if he be a magistrare, he must
provide before he dies, as much as he can, for the godly and peaceable estate
of the Town, City, and common wealth, whereof and in, he is magistrate, ruler
and governor. So did Moses; so did Iehoshua; so did David; and so should he,
for what fitted them being magistrates, fittes him also being a magistrate.


Q. What if he be a private man, and yet has some government of others, as
wise children, and servants? what must he then do?


R. If he be an householder and master of a family, he must endeavor himself
what he may, to set his family in order before he die, for thus said the
Prophet Isaiah to Hezekiah the king being sick: Isai. 38.1.
Set thine house in order; that is, make thy testament, that so thou may
prevent the braules and iarres that otherwise may arise among thine heirs;
tell thy household-folkes what thou will have done when thou art dead, or as
Jonathan has it, commend thine house to some good, honest, godly and
religious man; for why thou must die, and not live, and what was here spoken by
the Prophet to Hezekiah the king, we must think spoken by God to every man.
For as one Apostle says, 2. Pet. 1.20.
no prophecy in scripture is of any private motion or interpretation. For the
Prophecy in old time came not by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke
as they were moved by the holy Ghost. And another says, whatsoever things are
written aforetime, Romans 15.4.
they are written for our learning, that we thorough patience and comfort of
the scriptures might have hope. And again, 2. Tim. 3.1^
the whole scripture being given by inspiration of God is profitable to teach,
to improve, to correct and to instruct in righteousness, that the man of God may
be absolute, being made perfect unto all good works, and therefore also this
part and piece thereof.


Q. I deny not what you say, yet if you will give me leave to speak, you
shall hear what I will say.


R. Take leave, and say on.


Q. You have all this while spoken of troublesome matters, for how shall either
the magistrate provide peace for the common wealth after his death, or the
minister the word for his people, or the householder love for his heirs; when
it neither is in the magistrates hands to appoint a new, nor in the ministers
power to place another, nor in the householders compass, to make heirs?


R. How troublesome soever they be as you say, yet must they all be cared for
as I say, neither shall it be so difficulte as you imagine to do what I say,
if each of them will do as I say.


Q. What say you then each of them is to do?


R. If the magistrate will have peace among his people as well after his death,
as in his life; in his life he is to procure the maintenance of true religion
and virtue; and to establish the due execution of Justice; and to seek by all
means the outward peace of his people and common wealth, this if he does,
there is no doubt, but he shall provide peace for his people for sometime after
his death. Some I am sure there are mentioned in scripture, who by taking this
course while they lived, procured peace to their people, when they were dead.
When Moses was an hundredth and twenty years old, and was no more able to go
in and out before the people of Israel, he called them before him, and
signified that the time of his departure was at hand, and therefore took order
for their welfare after his death. First of all he placed Iehoshua over them
in his steed to be their guide to the land of promise. Secondly he gave
special charge to all his people, to be valiant and courageous against their
enemies, and to obey the commandments of God, how they speed here through the
book of Joshua better manifests then I can mention. Yet in a generality thus
much can I say, that here through they sped wondrous well, their enemies they
vanquished, the land of promise they obtained, and much peace and plenty they
therein enjoyed, Josh. 23.
the like course to Moses took Joshua when he was a dying; and the like effect
thereto that like taken course took among the people, for in the book of
Joshua it is said, that all Israel served the Lord all the days of Joshua and
all the days of the Elders that ouer-liued Joshua, 1. Kin. 2.1.31
what should I speak of king David, who when he was to go the way of all
earth, lying sick upon his death bed, placed his own son Solomon upon his
throne; and thereby provided happily for his common wealth and subjects? by
these it may be gathered what might be said of others, but for magistrates these
presidents are enough. To come to the minister now: if he will have the word
to sound in his Church no less after his death then it did in his life, in his
life he is diligently to preach it to his people, and christianly to walk
according to the same, and at his death he is to propound to his and his
Churches patron, a man for gifts sufficiently qualified, and for manners of
many well commended, and of his people much esteemed, this if he does, there is
little doubt, but that, that after his death will be obtained, which at his
dying was greatly wished for, he and his people ioining together, they shall
either in deed with this patron prevail, or very hardly miss; and if it
happen that both miss what they would, they may there-through notwithstanding
speed better then otherwise they speed, for he is extremely stiff that will
not bow at the ardent requests of many, when that which is requested, tendes
specially to the good and comfort of many. But to pass over this, and post to
the next. If the householder will have love to hold, and quiet to continue
amongst his heirs after he is dead; whilst he lives, and before he dies, he is
to dispose of the goods, be they many or few which God of his goodness has
here vouchsafed him. This if he does, it is not to be feared, but that will
fall out which I have said: for when every one knows his part and portion, how
shall they not accord and agree? the ignorance of his portion causes each man
to strive for a portion, that thinks he has right to a portion. This made one
come to Christ, saying, Luke 12.13.
Master bid my brother divide the inheritance with me. And this makes much
braule amongst many now. But if order in the house be established, there is no
such ado. Every man knows what he must hold him to, and therefore they all
are at quiet. Grieve they may, that one is not as good as another: but strive
they cannot one with another. A bar is set that no breach may be made.


Q. What bar?


R. Order.


Q. And if that be set, will there be no breach made?


R. No, not if that be kept. Nazianzene de moderat. in disput^^^nibus ^eruande.
For that (as Nazianzene says) is the mother and preserver of all things.


Q. But for the procuring of that vz. good order in his family, what must the
man (of whom and for whom we all this while speak) do?


R. 1. He must dispose of his lands and goods, that he then in ye time of his
sickness has in his hands. 2. he must admonish and charge those of the family,
wife, children and servants to learn, believe and obey the true religion of
God: that is, the doctrine of salvation, set down in the writings of the
Prophets and Apostles.


Q. You make it (it seems) a matter of duty for a man in time of his
sickness, to make his will, if it be then unmade and not a matter of
indifferency?


R. I do so; and in so doing, I hope I do no more than I may do, neither yet
any thing less than that which every man ought to do, for that which God by
Isaiah the prophet spoke unto Hezekiah the king being sick, I take as spoken
to every man being sick as well well as to Hezekiah. For what is spoken in the
scripture to one man, is spoken for the instruction of another man. And that I
may the more boldly think it to be so taken, the admonition of the wise man to
his son in the book of Jesus the son of Syrach does persuade me. For thus
there and by him it is said: Sir. 33. 22.
At the time when thou shall end thy days, and finish thy life, distribute
thine inheritance. But whether it be or no, the matter is not much. For I have
at hand the practice of many ancient and worthy men, which do prove that it
ought to be such. Genesis 25. Abraham before his death makes his will and gives
legacies. Genesis 25.5.
Abraham gave all his goods to Izaak, but unto the sons of the concubines
which Abraham had, Abraham gave gifts. Genesis 27. so does Izaak. ver. 28. and. 29
and ver. 39.40. and Genesis 49. So does Jacob. Genesis 49.3.
And so does Christ our Savior upon the cross, to his father he gives his
soul, Luke 23.46.52.
(father into thine hands I commend my spirit) to Joseph of Aramathea, he gives
his body; John 19.27.21.15. Luke 23.43.34.
to John he gives his mother, to Peter he gives his church, to the repentant
thief he gives paradise; to the soldiers he gives his garments. And of these
I gather what I have said, and in my judgment nothing amiss, both because
their actions are to us good instructions, and also because the action it self
is aunswerable to Christian conversation. For first, by Christianity, a man is
in his life so to dispose of those goods which God has lent him, as that his
disposition of them may make much to the glory of God after his death.
Secondly, a man is so to dispose of his goods in his life time, as there may be
none occasion of strife and contention between any of those he leaves behind
him after his death. Thirdly, a man in sickness is so to dispose of his goods,
as his goods may nothing disquiet him in his sickness, nor any thing distract
him from providing for his latter end. Now by making of a will in sickness (if
then it be vmade) a man may so dispose of his goods, as thereby he may geatly
glorify the name of God, which gave them; thoroughly break off strife and
dissension between them, which shall have them, and singularly quiet himself
that is to depart from them. And therefore I judge it convenient for a man to
make a will; and not indifferent to make or not to make. For first in all
things a man must seek the glory of God. For the Apostle says; 1. Cor. 10 32
Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God.
Secondly, above all things a man must put on love, 1. Pet. 4.8. 1. Cor. 1.3.6
for as Peter says, Love covers a multitude of sins. And says Paul, Love
rejoices not in iniquity. And our Savior himself says, Mat. 18.7.
We be to the man by whom the offense comes. It were better for him that a
millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of
the sea. Romans 16.18
They which cause division and offenses, are such as serve not the Lord Jesus
Christ, but their own bellies, says Paul. And therefore again otherwhere he
says: 1. Cor. 10.32
Give none offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the Grecians, nor to the
Church of God. 1. Pet. 3.4.
Thirdly, A meek and quiet spirit before God is a thing much set by. As Peter
the Apostle in the first of his Epistles anoucheth. But to draw home and drive
to a point, the one and the other, and every of these are this way gotten. For
a man making his will well and wisely, does thereby provoke others to glorify
God for giving him will and wisdom so to dispose of the things of this life,
and to imitate him in the like. Also he does thereby cut off much hatred and
contention, which otherwise might or would arise. For the making of a will is
the staying of many suits in laws. By it many a question is decided, some
doubts are resolved, all hatred is prevented (except more fault be in those
that remain alive, than in him that is departed and gone.) Moreover he does
thereby procure himself the more quiet in mind, the greater liberty to
attend upon God and his pleasure; the best opportunity that may be to frame
himself to another world. Still and still therefore I commend the making of
will before a man dies; but ever and ever I condemn the leaving of all at six
and seven, when he dies. For thereupon comes much strife and debate, great
questions and braulings at the law, immortal hatred and disdain, and that
among those which in former times lived in great peace, and good love. Oftimes
also all these prove so extreme, as every man besides that has any spark of
wit, or love to peace, says: It is great pity, that such a man died without a
will; that the least things as he did; that he did not set all things at a
stay. You will not believe what ado here is thereupon in the country. No
peace among his children, no love between his friends, no quiet to any of his
neighbors, etc.


Q. But one thing hear you ere you go further, do you condemn this leaving
off all at six and seven as you said, in all cases?


R. Yea surely; unless others are imagined, than are already by some pretended.


Q. Why? what do some pretend for their not making of a will?


R. First, the hiding of their substance. Secondly the concealment of their
decayed estate. Thirdly, the hastening of their own deaths. Fourthly, the
quieting of their kinsefolkes minds.


Q. And are none of these sufficient stoppes to stay a man from making of a
will?


R. Truly no.


Q. It may be your simple word will not be taken of every one for a sure
warrant.


R. I can then show reason of my assertion.


Q. So do then, and the better they may credit you.


R. That I will to, whether any will credit me the more therefore yea or no.
The first thing then pretended, is no sufficient stop to stay a man, from
making of a will, because it argues small thankefulnes to God for his
blessings. For what should a man be ashamed of the good gifts of God given unto
him? It is his part rather to manifest them, that so God may be the more
glorified for giving them, than to conceal them. 1. Cor. 4.7.
For what has he which he has not received? and if he has not what he
received not, why does he conceal them, as if he received them not? It is
the receivers duty, to acknowledge the giuers bounty. No more is the second,
because it argues too much pride. And what should dust and ashes be then proud,
when he is to return to dust and ashes. It is his duty rather to acknowledge
the dealing of the Lord with him, that others may take heed by him, how they
abuse the good gifts of GOD bestowed on them, than to conceal it. As it is God
that makes rich, so it is God that makes poor (for he sets up one, and
pulls down another:) and what should vain man desire to appear better than
God himself will have him to be? he yt will obtain mercy must not conceal
his own misery. Neither yet is the third, because it argues too great love of
life, and too much fear of death. And what should a man too much love that
which once he must lay down, or too greatly fear that which one day he must
undergo? It is his duty rather to submit himself under the mighty hand a God
according to his prayer, thy kingdom come, thy will be done, etc, than
otherwise. The days of man are numbered: his time appointed which he cannot
ouer-passe: though therefore he makes a thousand wills (if it were possible
for one man to make so many) yet shall he die never the sooner: God prolongs
not the days of a man for the want of a will. For they die as well, which never
makes any, as they which make many: neither does he shorten them because he
has made any: for some have made many, and yet live at this d y. But to let
this pass: of as little force is the fourth as the first, or as any that yet
have followed. And the reason is, because it argues too fond a liking of
kinsefolkes, above the duty that is owing unto God. And what should a man so
foolishly love his kindred, as for love of them he will omit the performance of
the duty, which he owes unto God? It is his part rather to do that which
may please God, than that which may please his friends. Gal. 1.10.
Says Paul, If I should yet please men, I were not the servant of Christ. And
says Christ himself; Mar. 10.37.
He that loves father or mother more than me, is not worthy of me, and he
that loves son or daughter more then me, is not worthy of me. How they
will be worthy of Christ; that are so foolishly affected to their kindred, as
for affection to them, they will not do what God has enjoined them, they had
best to look; least for neglect thereof they in the end speed otherwise than
they will like. While they are a looking to that, I will look to that they
say. And me think without further looking I may well say, that their pretense
of not making a will is merely false. For the making of a will is the quieting
of their kinsfolks minds, for when their kinsfolks see and know that there
is a will made, their minds are quieted, and all strife, that might for want
thereof after rise between them, is wholly staid and precided. So that still it
is good for the sick; for the procuring of order in his house after his death,
to take care for the making of a will in his life, and not to stay himself
therefro for any of these vain pretenses named, they all being already
sufficiently proved insufficient.


Q. Seeing you stand so stiffely for the making of a will, making it rather a
matter of necessity than indifference what rules touching the making of his
will would you wish the sick to observe?


R. These, which the lawiers say, testatours should observe.


Q. What are those?


R. Ask the lawiers.


Q I am not with them, nor amongst them, except you be one.


R. Why? you know I am none.


Q. It may be notwithstanding you have heard what they say.


R. In some sort I may not that deny.


Q. What then have you heard?


R. First, that he which is to make a will, must look to him self whether he
be testable or not; that is such, an one as may make a will. Secondly, that he
must look to the things which he will demise: whether they be such as he may
demise, yea or no. Thirdly to the form of the will that he will make, whether
it is sufficient in law yea or no? for every man (say they) is not to make a
will; neither is every thing to be demised by will; neither yet is every
form of a will good.


Q. Where shall a man find these points decided amongst them? viz. who may
make a will and who not? What goods he may demise, and what not? after what
form he must make it, and after what form he may not?


R. In one Swinburne, that has written a book of Wills and Testaments.


Q. Is it extant?


R. Yea that it is, and common either in every Stationers open shop, or in
each Ciuilians private study.


Q. As time and occasion does serve, I will see what you say in him is to be
seen. In the mean season what rules according to divinity would you wish a
testatour when he is to make his testament to think upon? and how many?


R. But four for number.


Q. And what for nature?


R. These; first, that he makes his testament answerable to the law of nature,
the written word of God, and the good and wholesome positive laws of that
kingdom or country, whereof he himself is a member. Secondly, that he makes
in his will no bequeath to any of any evil gotten goods. Thirdly, that his well
gotten goods he principally bestow on his children, and them that be of his
kindred. Fourthly, that his will is in no force so long as he lives; but that he
has power in himself to alter and change it at his pleasure.


Q. What reason have you for either of these?


R. Reason enough and sufficient.


Q. Show it then? and begin with the first.


R. So I mind: for the order I my self propound, I will my self observe.


Q. What reason then a man should make his will aunswerable to the law of
nature, the law of God, and the law of man?


R. Good, and this: those laws must be the rule of his will. For this is a
maxim in law: whatsoever will is made contrary to law, is void in law. So
that if he will have it accord with the rule, he must have it accord with these
laws.


Q. Is it not enough, if it accords with one, though it accords not with every
one?


R. No. For that which accords not with every one, hardly accordes with any
one. The one ioynes so nearely to the other, as hardly you can disioyne any one
from the other. The law of God written, M. Moss. The arra^g^^ment o^ usury.
ser. 4. p. 110.
agrees with the law of nature. (For there is no difference between the law of
nature and the written word but this, that the latter is as it were a
termination and specification of the former: and the one was written in tables
of stone, but the other is engraven in the hearts of men) and the law of man
should close so close to both, as that should not be taken for law, which has
not the ground from Gods and natures law. For the^ only is man's law good, when
it has Gods and natures law for grounds. And then ever is man's law evil, when
it accords neither with the law of God, nor with the law of nature. If a
testament therefore accords with natures law, there is no doubt but it accords
with Gods law, and if it accords with Gods law, there should be no question
whether it accords with man's law, because man's law should accord with Gods law
without any question. And if it accords with man's law (if man's law be as it
should) it also accords with Gods and natures law.


Q. Be it so then. Let it accord with one and all, and all because of one.
What is your reason you will not have him that makes it, to bequeath any evil
gotten goods to any in it?


R. Because he is to restore them, not to bequeath them. Of what restitution is
to be made, of that a gift cannot be made: a gift should be of that which
rightly might be reserved, and not of that which justly ought to be restored:
of his own and well gotten should a man give; and not of another man's and ill
gotten Says Ambrose: Ambros. lib. ^. de of^^ic.
That liberality or bounty (says Ambrose) is not allowed if that which one
gives, he extorts from another, and gets unrighteously. And says Augustine:
Give alms of your just labors: Augustinus de verbis. Domini.
for he cannot corrupt Christ the judge that he may not hear you with the
poor from whom you take. Do not so much as will to give alms of briberie
and usury. As Syrach says: Sir. 34. 18.
He that gives an offering of unrighteous goods, offers a mocking sacrifice.


Q. Why but Christ himself says, Luke 16.9.
Make you friends with the riches of iniquity, that when ye shall want, they
may receive you into everlasting habitations?


R. But that I hope is not as much, as give by your wills unto any those things
which you have unjustly and unrighteously gotten?


Q. Why may it not be so? so they that give shall make them friends with the
riches of iniquity?


R. But those friends cannot receive them into everlasting habitations. Neither
can that place of scripture be so expounded as is by you imagined. For make you
friends with the riches of iniquity, Aret. in Luke 16.9.
is no more but this, Since ye are only appointed of God stewards over your
riches, be ye liberal bestowers of them upon the poor.


Q. Such may they be, that give by their wills ill gotten goods.


R. I say not but such they may be, but sure I am, that such they are not. For
they which are rightly liberal, are liberal of their own. But these, if they
be any ways liberal, they are liberal of other men's. That which is unjustly
gotten, is theirs from whom it is gotten, and not theirs by whom it is gotten.
So that they giving of that which is unjustly gotten from other men, cannot be
counted liberal for giving to whom they would give.


Q. Why? you say that make you friends with the riches of iniquity is as much,
as be ye liberal bestowers of your riches upon the poor?


R. Yet do I not therefore say that any man by his will may give unto any that
which he has unjustly gotten from many? for I tell you still there is great
difference between his goods and other men's goods. And give if a man will, he
must see that that be his own which he will give.


Q. The text we stand upon, enforces not so much: for the words are, make you
friends with the riches of iniquity.


R. I know both the words, and what you may infer upon the words. Yet I do
not know what you would feign infer upon them. For the words carry no such
sense as this, give to any by your will that which you have unjustly gotten,
neither yet any like this: give to others that which is others, and not yours.


Q. How then do they give, make you friends with the riches of iniquity?


R. As before I have showed.


Q. But are not they the riches of iniquity that are gotten by iniquity?


R. Yes: but they are not therefore only called the riches of iniquity,
because they are gotten by iniquity: but also because to many they are the
cause and occasion of iniquity: and also (as Augustine says) because the
world which lies in iniquity, judges these things to be riches which in
deed are not.


Q. And may not a man make him friends with the riches of iniquity; whether
they be therefore called the riches of iniquity, because they are gotten by
iniquity, or because they are to many the cause and occasion of iniquity.


R. Yes that he may, if so he will, and thereto he applies his endeavor.


Q. Why say you then, am ^n may not in his will bequeath them to whom he will?


R. Because you ever speak not of one kind of riches of iniquity. But one
while you speak of the riches of iniquity, which are gotten by iniquity;
another while you speak of the riches of iniquity, which are therefore so
called, because unto many they minister the matter of iniquity.


Q. Of which soever I speak, may not a man give of either?


R. Yes he may. But neither when he will, nor where he will, nor to whom he
will nor what he will, not as he will; neither yet as much as he will.


Q. If ye ty him to all these while he gives, he shall not give much when he
gives?


R. As much as reason and religion allows him in the last kind of riches of
iniquity; so he ever has an eye to the thing that he gives; the time when he
gives; the place where he gives; the person to whom he gives; and the manner
how he gives.


Q. And what? may he give nothing of the first.


R. I yet said not so, but when it comes, that of them he may give, he must
neither give what himself will, nor to whom himself will, nor as himself
will.


Q. What Is the reason I pray you, that you mince this matter thus?


R. You need not ask me again; for I have told you it long since.


Q. I have forgotten it then?


R. That's much, having remembered it so often; but once more I will put you in
mind of it, that ever hereafter you may remember it: my reason is this;
because I would have him first make restitution of all that he has unjustly
gotten.


Q. When? when his will is in making?


R. Yea even then, if he has not made it before.


Q. Why then?


R. Because that ancient Father Augustine says. Augustine,
The sin is not pardoned (that in ill getting is committed,) unless the thing
ill gotten be restored.


Q. As the saying is, that is but one Doctors opinion?


R. That will not serve to shift it off, for it agrees just with the chief
Doctors religion: for when good Zacheus upon that it pleased Christ to look
upon him, and to dine with him, cried: Behold Lord, Luke 19.8.
the half of my goods I give to the poor, and if I have done any wrong to any
man, I restore him fourefolde, then and thereupon Christ again said unto him:
This day is salvation come unto this house. As though till such time as either
restitution were in deed made, or a resolute purpose conceived to have it
made, Salvation had been a stranger to him, and his house too.


Q. Yet one would think there were some difference between these two
doctors, for the one speaks of remission of sins, the other of the
salvation of souls.


R. There is never the more difference in their doctrines for that, whatsoever
there was in their persons, for the salvation of souls with Christ speaks
of, consists in the remission of sins, which Augustine speaks of. Luke 1.
says Zachary of his son John: Thou babe shall be called the Prophet of the
most high: Luke 1.76.
for thou shall go before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways, and to
give knowledge of salvation unto his people, by the remission of their sins.
Psalm. 32.1.
And Plal. 32.1. says David; Blessed is he whose wickedness is forgiven, and
whose sin is covered. Now if salvation be known by the remission of sins,
as Zachary says, blessedness not denied him, whose sins are forgiven as
David says, I hope I may well say, that the souls salvation consists in the
sins remission, and so no difference between Christ the chief doctor, and
Augustine an inferior doctor.


Q. And what then?


R. That good it is for him that is sick and about to make his will, even then
to make restitution of that he has ill gotten, if before that and then he has
not done it.


Q. How fetch you that about?


R. As I should and ought by reason of the saying of the one doctor and the
other, neither dissenting in doctrine one from another, for I would not have
the sick to miss his sins remission for lack of restitution, as it is
perilous to miss the former, so it is ieopardous to lack the latter, for the
former will not be, except the latter also be, if so the latter at all maybe.


Q. No marvel then, though you be earnest for restitution?


R. You would say so, if you knew all.


Q. Why? is there more yet to be known? this I think is enough.


R. Whatsoever you think, it is true that I say.


Q. But what is it you say?


R. That the gift that is made of goods ill gotten, will never benefit them to
whom it is made, for the evil committed in getting will creep also upon those
that shall after have the same in keeping, and being gotten on, it will cleave
so fast to, as neither the receivers shall prosper with their gifts received,
nor the things received with the receivers. For one way Paul the Apostle says:
Romans 1.31.
Not only they which do evil, but also they which consent thereto, are
worthy of death, and therefore well that which I speak off, for worldly
adversity is less then death. And an other way experience teaches us; that
goods ill gotten by the parents, makes no long stay with the children: often in
the next generation they pass away; it is a wonder if to the third they make
their stay. Hence it is that one says, incontinent upon the death of the
infamous Roman Princes, Caligula and Nero the Senate provided, that all their
riches and household stuff should be burned and buried in wells, least that
in their tyrannical goods there might be hidden some evil fortune, by the
covetousness whereof Rome might be lost, and the common wealth imprisoned.
Hence also should it be, that men in their sickness, and at the making of
their wills, should rather restore what they have unjustly gotten, then
bequeath any part thereof to any: for who that wise is, would give that, which
being given, will neither benefit him to whom it is given, nor any thing
profit him, to whom it is given?


Q. For my part I think none, he that would give, should see ere he gives,
whether that he would give, would be for the benefit of him to whom he would
give, that's but a slender benefit which tends to the hurt of him to who^ it is
given.


R. I am of that mind too, and therefore I would have no man so foolish as to
give by his will any thing that he has gotten ill.


Q. What if he has nothing but what is so gotten?


R. Then let him give nothing, for of his own he should give, and not of
other men's.


Q. What shall he then do?


R. Restore all, and the fruits thereof, the charges diducted above the
getting, and keeping of the fruits, and his own necessary diet.


Q. To whom.


R. To them from whom he has unjustly taken, and unlawfully gotten.


Q. What if he knows them not? or they be dead? or they be he knows not
where?


R. Then let him restore to their executors and assigns, or to the next of
their kin. Numb. 5 6.



Q. What if he knows none of them?


R. Yet let him not keep them, but restore them to God, that is in way of
recompense and civil satisfaction, let him bestow them on the Church or common
wealth. Number. 5.8.



Q. In so doing it may be, he shall leave but a little behind, to bestow upon
his wife and children.


R. It matters not greatly though he does not. It is better for him to leave
them nothing, then to leave them any thing evil gotten through the one he may
be in good way toward the kingdom of heaven, but by means of the other he
shall be in the right way that leads to hell. And as Christ says, It is
better to enter into life, Mat. 18.8.
halte or maimed, then having two hands or two feet, to be cast into
everlasting fire. So I think it is better for him to be in good way to the
kingdom of heaven, by restoring all, and leaving himself nothing, then to be
in the ready way to hell, by reserving all, and restoring nothing For what
shall it profit a man, though he should win the whole world if he loose his
own soul? or what shall a man give for recompense of his soul? for the Son
of man shall come in the glory of his Father with his Angels, and then shall
he give to every man according to his deeds.


Q. I deny not but that it is better for him so to do; but what is it for his
wife and children?


R. It is never the worse for them, the better he does, the better they shall
do.


Q. Other where peradventure; not here, as I conjecture.


R. Then you conjecture amiss, it is better for them to have a little left
them well gotten, then a great deal ill gotten, by the one they shall have Gods
blessing to attend upon them, and go with them: for as he is himself
righteousness, so he goes with righteousness, and with little prospers well
the righteous: but by ye other they shall have the Lords curse to lie upon them,
and oppress them, yea utterly wast and consume them: for as he is himself
equity, so he stands against iniquity, and in every thing plagueth the
ungodly, if you doubt of that I say, you may think of these places of
Scripture: Prou. 15.16
Better is a little with the fear of the Lord, then great treasure and trouble
therewith. Psalm. 37.16.
A small thing to the just man is better then great riches to the wicked and
mighty. Prou. 10.2.
The treasures of wickedness profit nothing: but righteousness delivers from
death. The Lord will not famish the soul of the righteous, but he casts away
the substance of the wicked. Blessings are upon the head of the righteous: but
iniquity shall cover the mouth of the wicked. Prou. 13.25
And again, The righteous eats to the contentation of his mind: but the
belly of the wicked shall want, and then tell me if I say amiss.


Q. Not for the comfort of them for whom you speak.


R. Nor yet of them against whom you think I speak.


Q. I say you speak not against any.


R. Neither do I if you judge uprightly.


Q. So would I judge, if at all I should judge, but I hope you will not abridge
me of the liberty, which you have granted me?


R. Not a whit, if you abuse it not.


Q. You will give me leave then to question with you?


R. I have given you that already: neither do I yet recall my gift. Question
therefore and spare not, but be answered, when you are answered.


Q. Question then I will because so I may, and answered I desire to be, because
as yet answered I am not.


R. Answered you shall be, if answered you may be, propound your question.


Q. 1. What if he has bestowed more upon the things he has ill gotten, then
the things are worth? must he then restore?


R. Either restore or recompense he must for the things themselves: though
deduct he may the expenses he has been at for the bettring of the things so
gotten.


Q. 2. What if the things be either worse than they were, or else utterly lost,
wasted and consumed?


R. Whethersoeuer they be he must make recompense for them according to the
value they were of, when they were first taken, and for the profit that might
in the interim have come of them, if of themselves they were fructiferous.


Q. 3. What if they were stolen before he took them?


R. That will not free him, either from restoring them, or satisfying for them.


Q. What will you have him restore them to him that stole them?


R. No, that were to nourish him in his knauerie: and that no man must so nigh
as he can: for so it is written, Leuiticus the nineteenth: Leuit. 19.17
Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart, but thou shall plainly rebuke
thy neighbor, and suffer him not to sin. And so 1. Tim. 5. Them that sin,
rebuke openly, 1. Tim. 5.20
that the rest also may fear.


Q. To whom then?


R. Either to the owner thereof, if he be known; or to him from whom the
former thief took them, if he had any good interest in them, as if he either
borrowed them to take some use of them, or they were pawned to him, for some
other thing lent by him.


Q. By this doing he should bring himself into great obloquie, should he not?


R. Not a whit. It is no obloquie to be spoken of for doing good. Infamy
gotten by doing good, is great glory. Matthew. 5.11 12.
Blessed are ye (says Christ) when men revile you and persecute you, and say
all manner of evil against you for my sake falsely. Rejoice and be glad, for
great is your reward in heaven: for so persecuted they the Prophets which were
before you. And says the Apostle Peter, 1. et 4.14. P
If ye be rayled upon for the name of Christ, blessed are ye, for the spirit of
glory and of God rests upon you: which on their part is evil spoken of, but
on your part is glorified. But let none of you suffer as a murderer, or as a
thief, or an evil doer, or as a busiebodie in other men's matters. But if any
man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed: but let him glorify God in
this behalf. It is great obloquie to depart this life without restoring what
is ill gotten, or recompencing for that which is so gotten; they which so dye
shall leave an evil name behind them, every good man will speak evil of
them: and that is obloquie, when good men speak evil: for they know both what
they speak, and wherefore they speak, but evil men know neither what they
speak, nor well wherefore they speak: for when men do best, they speak
worst, and therefore that is no obloquie what they speak. Yet they are those
that most, and most what speak of him that restores ere he dies, what he
unjustly gate while he lived. And what should he recke or regard the
speeches of those that are evil? Their speech may be vehement for a time, but
it is never permanent any time. When they have said enough, they will hold
their peace.


Q. I, but by that means they will discredit his children, if he has any:
for the fathers infamy is the childrens ignominy?


R. Not a whit the more for their speeches, if the children follow their father
in his goodness, not in his wickedness. But if it be so infamous a thing, to do
what is good, as you would feign bear the world in hand it is, there is soon
a help at hand, a remedy to prevent such a mischief, a way to avoid all
obloquie.


Q. What is that I pray you? I would feign know it.


R. Soon may you, if already you do not. For what he will not do by
himself, he may do by another. For that any man may do by another, which he
may do by himself. And he which does by another, it is as much as if he did
it by himself. For John the fourth, it is said: Now when the Lord knew, Ioh.
4.1, 2.
how the Pharisees had heard that Jesus made, and baptized more Disciples then
John (yet Jesus himself baptized not, but his Disciples.) Where you may see
plainly, that that was accounted done by Christ himself, which was not
indeed done by him, but by his Disciples at his appointment.


Q. What I may see, I do see; neither do I gainesay what I see: but all this
while I see not, who that other is, by whom he that is to restore may restore?


R. Of your self you may soon see that, because I speak in a generality,
and not in a specialitie.


Q. May he restore then by any one?


R. Any secret and faithful one, that will restore for him, and yet conceal
his name, and not disclose him.


Q. What if he does deceive him?


R. No hurt to him if he does, for his will in that case is taken for the fact:
and the burden lies upon him that is put in trust to restore for him if he
does it not. But here you misdoubt more than you need: he that is faithful
will not deceive him, if he should, how were he faithful? He is faithful
which keeps his promise, and does not deceive any to whom he promises: he
that is secret will not disclose him if he should, how were he secret? He is
secret, which keeps in secret what was committed unto him to be kept secret.


Q. What if he neither promised the one nor the other? Neither secrecy nor
fidelity?


R. Yet Cato says, It is the part of a good man, even to keep that faith
which he never promised, and well so he said, because every man will imagine,
that so much was at his hands requested, yea, and so much also by him promised,
ere ever such a business was unto him committed. For who can think that any man
will commit so weighty a matter as this is to any one, ere ever he be assured
of his secrecy to conceal him, and his fidelity to restore for him? And what
other ordinary way is there to be assured of either; but the giving of his
word; the plighting of his troth, and the making of a promise? Whether
therefore he be requested to be both secret and faithful, yea or no; yet if
such a matter be committed unto him, it stands him in hand to be both: though
no words be used in the committing of such a matter unto him, so much is
requested of him, and so much also is to be performed by him. So much he would
expect from another, if so much he should commit to another: so much he is to
perform for another, if so much be referred to him by another: Mat. 7.12. Luke
6.31.
Whatsoever he would that others should do for him, that he himself should
do for others. It was the precept of Tobit to his son: Do that to no man,
Tobit. 4.15.
which thou hate. And it is the precept of Christ to his seruanrs; As ye
would that men should do to you, so do ye to them: Luke 6.31.
likewise by the one and the other, and both; he should be directed in this.


Q. You speak well to animate him to whom such a thing is committed, to see
that the same thing by him be performed: but what is this to encourage him to
restore, which has gotten into his hands what he ought to restore?


R. As much as need to be: for first he is not to distrust: 1. Cor. 13.7.
Love hops all things, and believes all things. Though there be but a few
faithful; yet it may be his good hap to find one of them. No doubt but he
which gave him a mind to restore with, will also give him a man to restore by.
God leaves not his. After he has once moved their minds to will well, he
ministers the means whereby to work well. For he is he that works both the
will and the deed, Phil. 2.13.
even of his good pleasure. And Paul the Apostle, Phil. 1.6.
to the Philippians says: I am persuaded of this same thing, that he that has
begun this good work in you, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ.
Secondly, though he be deceived, yet there is thereby no hurt redounding to
him: the hurt that is, is to him that was put in trust, and yet did deceive. He
disburthened himself in referring the matter to another: and that one whom he
thought would not deceive him: and those two things, hope to find a man that
will restore in his steed; and assurance to miss the inconvenience of not
restoring, by referring the matter to another, are good inducements to make any
willing to restore, which has in his possession what he ought to restore.


Q. They may be so. But what? Is it enough for him to be willing to restore, if
he does not restore?


R. No. For if he be able, he must not only be willing to restore, but also as
far forth as he may, he must restore. Where there is power to do the thing
which ought to be done, it is not enough to will the doing of it; but he must
also endeavor to do it. Romans 2.6.13
For God will reward every man according to his deeds: and the doers of the
law shall be justified. Hence is it, yt often the scripture exhorts men to
doing, as well as to willing, and more to doing than to willing, as Psalm. 34.14.
Eschew evil, and do good: Psalm. 27.3. Trust in the Lord, and do good: Esa.
1.16. Cease to do evil. 17. Learn to do well. Eccle. 9.10. All that thine hand
shall find to do, do it withal thy power. Iam. 1.22. Be ye doers of the word,
and not hearers only, deceiving your selves. And the better to induce men
thereto, does use many and forceable arguments; as one from the commendation
thereof: another from the commodity thereof, a third from the peril that
otherwise may ensue. The first, Pro. 21.3. To do justice and judgment, is
more acceptable to the Lord then sacrifice. The second, Romans 2.13. The doers of
the law shall be justified: Iam. 1.25. A doer of the work shall be blessed in
his deeds. The third, Mat. 7.21. Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that does the will of my father
which is in heaven. And again, Matt. 7.26. Whosoever hears these my words,
and does the^ not, shall be likened unto a foolish man, which has builded his
house upon the sand: and the rain fell, and the floods came, and the winds
blew and beat upon that house, and it fell, and the fall thereof was great.
But whither go I? I am far enough, if not too far.


Q. Not any thing too far. I must yet hale you further.


R. Not much in the point we were in hand withal.


Q. How far I know not; but a little farther there is no remedy.


R. Well then, use your skill.


Q. If a man that has gotten somewhat ill, you say be able to restore, he is
bound to restore.


R. True, if the thing be to be restored, otherwise he is to recompense for it.


Q. That is as good as to restore, is it not?


R. Yes, if the thing be not to be restored; or the party to whom it should be
restored, will accept of it, for satisfaction for a thing, is a kind of
restoring the thing.


Q. But what if he that has gotten much ill, be neither able to restore all,
nor recompense anything?


R. I can say nothing till I know whether he be willing to restore, if he were
able, or willing.


Q. Willing, not willing?


R. Then his will will there go for fact, so he does sincerely acknowledge his
faults, unfeignedly bewail them, heartily sorrow for them, instantly crave
pardon of them, utterly forsake them, resolutely determine, though he lives
never again to commit the like unto them; and constantly purpose if God bless
him with life, and bring him to better state, according to his power to
recompense for them. For as the Apostle says. 2. Cor. 8.12.
If there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man
has, and not according to that a man has not. And how pleasing to God a
willing mind in this case is, will soon appear out of the example of Zacheus.
Luke 19. For he had no sooner said, Luke 19.8, 9
Beholld Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor: and if I have taken
from any man by forged cauillation, I restore him fourefould. But Jesus again
said unto him, this day is salvation come unto this house, forasmuch as he is
also become the son of Abraham. And yet there is there no mention made of
any, to whom he made either actual restitution, or equivalent satisfaction.
Though no doubt but there was cause enough why he should have done both. For
first he was a publica^. And publicanes had long hands lose fists, and limde
fingers. They took tribute of the Jews for the Romans, and therefore they
were hated of them as dogs. As some say they were called Publicans, Publicans
as Public dogs; because they were hated as common dogs. Secondly, he was
chief receiver of the tribute. And the chief receiver was no little deceiuer.
It askte both cunning and craft to come to be chief. Thirdly, he was rich. And
the Poet says, A rich man is either an ungodly man himself, or heir to one
that was ungodly. Fourthly, he promised to restore fourefould. And what should
he do that, unless he had robbed some, and deceived more? for in theft and wrong
there was required a restoring of fourefould; as is easy to be seen in the
history of David. 2. Sam. 12.6. Whereupon Nathans telling him, 2. Sa. 12.1.2.
There were two men in one city, the one rich, and the other poor, the rich,
one that had exceeding many sheep and oxen, 2. Sam. 12.2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
the poor, one that had none at all, save one little sheep which he had
bought and nourished up, etc. And that the rich man having a stranger come unto
him, refused to take of his own sheep and his own oxen, to dress for the
stranger that was come unto him, but took the poor man's sheep, and dressed
it for the man that was come unto him: you may see the king grew exceeding
wroth, and that with the rich man that had done the poor so much wrong, and
thereupon again said unto Nathan, as the Lord lives, the man that has done
this thing, shall surely die. And more than that, he shall restore the lamb
fourefold, because he did this thing and had no pity thereof. And the ground
of this you may find in the 22. of Exodus: where God himself says, Exodus
22.1.
If a man steal an ox or a sheep, and kill it or sell it, he shall restore
five oxen for the ox, and four sheep for the sheep.


Q. I but, what infer you upon all this?


R. That there was cause enough why Zacheus should have made actual
restitution or satisfaction for the wrongs he had done, though we read not
that he did.


Q. And what of that?


R. That to have a will to restore is good, where there is not power to restore.


Q. By what means make you that good?


R. By Christ his liking of a good will to restore in Zacheus, who had ability
sufficient to restore. For. 1. he was rich being chief receiver of the
tribute. 2. half of his goods he gave to the poor, and that being done he
left enough behind to restore fourefold with.


Q. But what you would have hence to follow, does not well follow. For what
Christ liked in Zacheus, he may dislike in another.


R. Not so by your leave. For Christ is no acceptour of persons. Act. 10.40.
In every nation he that fears him, and does as Zacheus did, is accepted with
him as Zacheus was.


Q. I, he that does as Zacheus did. But that a poor man cannot do. He neither
has whereof to give, nor wherewith to restore.


R. What then? yet he may have as willing a mind to restore as Zacheus had.


Q. I deny not that; but I doubt of the acceptance of his will.


R. You may as well doubt of the suns being in heaven or your own living on
earth. What reason is there, that God should not accept as well of him that
would restore and cannot, because he is not able, as of him that could and did
not though he were able (for ought we read?) if a good will thereto was good
in him that was rich and able to have restored, though he did not; it cannot
but be also good in him that is poor and unable to restore, no doubt but he
that came to save the poor as well as the rich, will accept of a good will in
the poor as well as in the rich. In his life time he made so great reckoning of
the poor, as he not only came of the poor, but also conuersed with the
poor, preached to the poor, made choice of the poor, spoke much in the
behalf of the poor, gave gifts to the poor, yea and did many things for the
poor. And now being dead, risen again, and ascended into heaven, shall we
think him less mindful of the poor, or less merciful to the poor? no,
no. As his power is thereby increased, so his mercy is therefore nothing
abated. Now his eyes are upon the poor, his ears are open to the cry of the
poor, his heart considers the deep sighing of the poor: much he regards
the company of the poor, and well be provides for the congregation of the
poor. Says the Apostle James, Iam. 2.5.
God has chosen the poor of this world, that they should be rich in faith,
and heirs of the kingdom, which he promised to them that love him. Having
chosen them, may we think, he will not accept a good will in them, they
wanting power to work what they will? surely no. First, Paul says: Romans 11.2.
God has not cast away his people which he knew before. Secondly, again the
same Paul says. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? Thirdly,
Christ himself says, They shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them
out of my hand. Ioh. 10.28.
No doubt then, but if they will well, where they can work but little, God
will accept of them according to their will. It was but a little that the poor
widow cast into the treasury, Mark. 12.42
She threw in two mites which make a quadrin (which was about half a farding)
yet Christ himself said that she cast in more, then all they which cast in
besides her. Yet they cast in much. The people (says mark) cast money into
the treasury, and many rich men cast in much. And by that we may gather, that
Christ esteems our gifts by our affections and ready wills.


Q. I, our gifts, but not our debtes.


R. Yes debtes, as well as gifts. For gifts, if you look well about you, are
none other but debts. First, God commaundes the giving of gifts as well as the
paying of debts. And as I take it, it is a debt to obey the commandment of
God: in respect therefore of his commandment, the giving of gifts, is a debte
as well as the paying of debts. Secondly, the cause of gifts is none other than
a debt: and as I guess, the effect is not unlike the cause in respect of the
cause of gifts, gifts are debts: For love is the cause of gifts. For therefore
men give, because they love: and to them commonly they do most give, whom
affectionatly they do best love. And that love is a debt the Apostle proves
plainly, when he says, Romans 13.8.
Owe nothing to any man, but to love one another. Gifts themselves therefore
are none other than debts: for as the logicians say, Such as the cause is, such
also the effect is.


Q. I grant that gifts may be debts in regard of God, that commands the^, but I
doubt whether they be so in regard of men, that are to receive them.


R. And I think there needs no great doubt be made of that neither, for they
that are bound to give, are bound to give to some body: for he that commands
men to give; shows men also to whom they shall give. Give (says Syrach) unto
such as fear God, Sir. 12. 4, 5.
and receive not a sinner. Do well unto him that is lowly but give not to the
ungodly: hold back thy bread, and give it not unto him least he overcome thee
thereby: else thou shall receive twice so much evil for all the good that thou
do unto him. Give unto the good, and receive not the sinner. And give (says
Tobit to his son Tobias) of thy bread to the hungry, Tobit. 4.16 17.
and of thy garments to them that are naked, and of all thine abundance give
alms, be liberal to the first, even to their death, but give nothing to the
wicked. And says Paul, Give to all men their duty, Romans 13.7.
tribute to whom ye owe tribute: custom to whom custom: fear to whom fear:
honor to whom ye owe hnour. And says Christ, Give to him that asks, Matt.
5.42.22.21.
and from him that would borow of thee, turn not away. Give to Caesar the
things which are Cesars, and give unto God, those things which are Gods. Romans
6.13.
And again says Paul: Give not your members as weapons of unrighteousness,
unto sin: but give your selves unto God, as they that are alive from the
dead, and give your members as weapons of righteousness unto God. As therefore
you grant them debts in regard of him that commands them to be given, so I
also take them in regard of those to whom they are commanded to be given.


Q. In a generality so you may (if any way you may) but not in a speciality.
For he that shows to whom we shall give, does not say to this man ye shall
give.


R. Look back to the places forenamed, and there you shall find what you say
fully answered. For they show both to whom we are to give, and to whom we
are not to give. If therefore our gifts be debts in respect of us that are to
give them, because God has commanded us to give, they are so also in respect
of those that are to receive them, because God also has showed us to whom we
are to give them.


Q. It is requisite then that they be such in deed, as those to whom God has
commanded us to give?


R. That is right so. Otherwise they are but usurpers, and we ill disposers.
They usurpers be cause they take that which they have no right to receive, and
we ill disposers, because we give to those, to whom we are not bound to give.


Q. But ere we go further, for fear of going to far whereto tends all this
our talk about gifts and debts?


R. To the proouing of Gods well accepting of a good will to restore, in him
that has no ability to restore.


Q. In deed that's the thing which was the last in question.


R. And therefore the thing which was last proved.


Q. But how by that which was last spoken?


R. Thorough that which was there first granted.


Q. What was that?


R. That in our gifts a good will was good and acceptable before God, as
appeared in the poor widows gift which was very little, and yet preferred by
Christ himself, before many great


Q. But why by this now said, was that aforesaid proved?


R. Because that aforesaid did accord with that now said. For our gifts are
but debts.


Q. Well then to shut up this point, because I both see, that this which you
say is very comfortable to a number of distressed souls, that have a mind to
restore what in times past they unjustly gat, though they want might, where
with to accomplish it; and also because I know not what may betide my self,
being but a frail man if God leave me to my self, I acknowledge what you have
said, to be as you have said. And because so it has been by you confirmed, as
it has, I auow that so hereafter it shall be affirmed by me as it ought.


R. It is kindly done of you that yet you will yield at length. Though I am
therefore more beholding to present necessity, and dread of future misery,
than your own kind courtesy: for I think not but you stood as long as you
were able to stand.


Q. Whether I was able to have stood longer or not, it matters not. Resolution
of that whereof I doubted, and confirmation in that whereof I hoped, made me
stand so long as I did. I have often heard speech of restitution, but I could
never before hear so much as I would.


R. And have you now heard as much as you would?


Q No, not yet.


R. What is there you would more hear?


Q. First, If a man be able to restore, what order you would wish him to
observe in restoring? Secondly, If he be unable to restore all, and they unable
to forbear the want of that which he has unjustly gotten, what course, He
that would restore all and cannot, You would wish him to take, that would
restore all and cannot?


R. Touching these two points, what I my self think without prejudice to any
other, you shall soon and shortly hear. And first concerning the first I say,
if he be able to restore and willing with his ability to do it, he needs not
observe any order in his restoring. He may begin where he will, and end with
whom he list. Yet this much he ever bear in mind, that therein he makes as
much have as he can, least that delaying too long, he be driven not only to
restore the things taken, but also to recompense for the damage by the taking,
and the detriment through this deteyning, and that according to the quantity
of the things and their damages. If they be certain, then according to their
certainty must he restore. If they be uncertain as in injuries often it
falls out, then according to the judgment of some honest, wise and discret
man he must restore, having always an eye to the several circumstances of the
thing; the time; the place and the person. Now concerning the second I say.
First, he must consider the things which he has taken, and should restore,
whether they be certain or uncertain? the persons from whom he has taken,
whether they be in better case than himself, or as mean, and worse. If the
things he has taken, be some certain, and some uncertain, he must restore
the certain before the uncertain; (except the uncertain be such as it is
certain they were never any man's certain: for such may well be given to the
poor) among the things which are certain, those things which do yet remain
in their kind, are first to be restored, after they are restored recompense,
is to be made for them which are perished. For the things which are uncertain,
whether they were any man's certainly, yea or no, they may be restored
according to the advice and counsel of some honest and discret man, or else
for his own benefit, as one of Christ's little ones reserved, so there were no
danger of further theft afterward to ensue feared dreaded or suspected. If the
persons whom he has taken unjustly and wrongfully be in far better case than
himself he himself the^ being in great necessity; it is sufficient that he
has a good will to restore, though actually he does not then restore: but if
the persons from whom he has unjustly gotten, and unlawfully kept, be in as
mean case as himself, and worse to, then ought he to restore what he has to
restore, or else to recompense as far forth as he may. Pro. 28.3.
For as Solomon says: A poor man if he oppress the poor, is like a raging
rain, that leaves no food. And thus now you have heard what you were
desirous to hear.


Q. I but yet I am not satisfied. The difference in person you speak of,
drives me to make a little further question.


R. What Is that trow?


Q. Nay it is those. For touching either person the better and the worse I have
somewhat to say.


R. Say on.


Q. First you say, if the person from whom he has unlawfully taken and
unjustly gotten, be in far better case than himself, ^t suffices that he
has a good will to restore, though he does not indeed restore. And there I
demand, whether he is not bound to restore, if then he recouers and after
comes to estate better after? Secondly, you say, if the person from whom he
has unjustly either taken or gotten, be in as mean an estate as himself, or
worse, he then being in no great good case, it is his part and duty either to
restore the thing it self if it be, or to recompense for it, if it be not.
And here I demand, whether a man ought not more to love his own life than
his neighbors?


R. To the first of these demands, I answer that if he recouers his health,
and after comes to greater wealth he is to restore, if not the thing he had
unjustly got, yet the equivalent to the thing, if so be that any time he
had occupied the thing ere ever he came to necessity. And my reason hereof
is, because such occupying of another man's goods was unlawful. But if he
never occupied it before he came to that his extreme necessity, I said
sufficient for before. To the second I answer yes, so he seeks not unjustly
to mainteyne it. But the mainteyning of his life by taking from another poorer
than himself is unlawful, because so he killes another to mainteyne
himself. He killes another by subtracting from him, what is necessary for
him. For as Syrach says: The bread of the neeedefull is the life of the poor:
Sir. 34. 22. 23.
he that defraudeth him thereof is a murderer. He that takes away his
neighbors living slaieth him. And to kill another is unlawful. For it is
said: Exodus 20.13
Thou shall not kill. So is it also to mainteyne himself by taking from
another. For it is written: In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread,
till thou return to the earth: Genesis 3.19.
that is by thine own labor and other honest and lawful means shall thou
get what may serve for the preservation of thy life, but by unlawful and
indirect means thou shall not get any thing. Psalm. 1^8.2.
When thou eatest the labors of thine hands (says the Psalmist) thou shall be
blessed and it shall be well with thee. Ergo when thou eatest the labors of
other men's hands, thou shall be cursed and it shall be ill with thee. With this
accords more. The bread of deceit is sweet in a man, Prou. 20.17
but afterward his mouth shall be filled with gravel. The gathering of
treasures by a deceitful tongue is vanity tossed to and fro of them that
seek death. Prou. 21 6.
The robbery of the wicked shall destroy them: for they have refused to
execute judgment. Again, he that increases his riches by usury and
interest, Prou. 28.8.
gathers them for him that will be merciful to the poor. But these are
enough. And I think, enough is said touching either of your demaundes. Is
there not?


Q. Yes enough, but nothing at all too much.


R. Enough is sufficient. And what should we do with more? too much of any
thing is good for nothing.


Q. In deed so says the proverb. But howsoever this enough here is
sufficient, yet have I neither enough nor sufficient.


R. Why want you now?


Q. That which I have not had yet.


R. It is better to want that, than that which you have. But what is it you yet
have not, and want, and feign would have, that you might not want?


Q. The reason of the third rule you say the sick man was to look unto, when
he came to the making of his will?


R. And rhat may you soon have. For without reason it is not.


Q. The last I know; and therefore the first I crave.


R. The last for the first then you shall have. The reason thereof is the law
and commandment of almighty God: and is not that a good reason think you?


Q. Yet: who dare say the contrary? but that the will may be sufficient in law,
what is the law of God touching a will?


R. That the Testatour by his will does make those his heirs, which are to be
his heirs?


Q. Who are they?


R. His son if he has one. His daughter if he has none, his brethren, if
he has neither son nor daughter; his fathers brethren if he himself has
none. If none of them be living, the next of his kin whosoever.


Q. How prove you that?


R. By the 27. of the book of Numbers, where Gods commandment to the
Israelites was, That when any man dyed, his son should be heir; Numb. 27.8,
9, etc.
and for want of a son, his daughter; and for want of a daughter, his
brethren; and for want of his own brethren, his fathers brethren; and for want
of them, the next of his kin whosoever. For there these are Gods own words:
If a man dye and have no son, then ye shall turn his inheritance unto his
daughter. And if he have no daughter ye shall give his inheritance to his
brethren. And if he have no brethren, ye shall give his inheritance unto his
fathers brethren: and if his father have no brethren, ye shall give his
inheritance unto his next kinseman of his family, and he shall possesset it.


Q. So are these also: this shall be unto the children of Israel a law of
judgment, as the Lord has commanded Moses. If therefore you have no better
proof than that, you may peradventure miss of your purpose.


R. Not any thing the more for that For. 1. there are more Israel, than those
which are of Israel. Gal. 6.16.
God has his Israel. Galath. 6 16.2. It follows not because this was a law
of judgment for Moses and Eleazar and the Princes, etc. to judge by, to whom
inheritance did appertain, if any died intestate; that therefore it was not a
law of direction to those that did make testaments, whom they should appoint
heirs by their testaments. I would think rather that every man might
privately by his testament appoint after this direction, who should be his
heir, because publicly by judgment Moses and the rest were to determine
after this direction, who was to be heir. What was to stand for a public
lawe^, might well serve for a private direction: from a public law, each
private man is to take instruction. Moreover, this which I say, seems to agree
just with the law of nature, for when Zelophead was dead, and his daughters (as
it may be coniectured) defeated of the inheritance that did by right appertain
unto them, they came and stood before Moses, and before Eleazar the Priest,
and before the Princes, and all the assembly, at the door of the Tabernacle of
the congregation, saying: Our father dyed in the wilderness, and he was not
among the assembly of them that were assembled against the Lord, in the
company of Korah, but he died in his sin, and had no sons. Wherefore
should the name of our father be taken away from among his family, because he
has no son? Give us a possession among the brethren of our father. As though
they should have said, there is neither right nor reason in this, that we
should not be heirs to our father, since he committed no such offense, which
should cause us to be disinherited. You that are in office to hear causes, and
right wrongs, look to it, we are as nigh as our fathers brethren: if we may
not have the whole, give us a possession among them, and for so much as Moses
knew not directly what to say to the cause in question, he brought it before
the Lord, who denied it, as before I have showed, and thereby argued what
hitherto I have auerred.


Q. What? that the son should be the fathers heir?


R. What else? the words there imports no less, the sense does fully and wholly
implie so much.


Q. Have you any other proof than that?


R. Is not that enough.


Q. I cannot deny but the words are plain, and the sense pregnant. Yet the
instance is but particular.


R. You confess as much as I wish, and though the instance as you say, were
but particular, yet Gods own inference there is general. Number. 27.8.
If a man die and have no son, then ye shall turn his inheritance unto his
daughter: and where God himself speaks, what need we any further witness? As
God is greater than our heart, 1. Ioh. 3.20.
and knows all things: so is he worthier than any witness, and judges all
causes. Yet since needs you will have more: as you have heard God himself
speak in, and for the cause under the law, so may you also hear him speaking
in the same before and after: before, Genesis 15. after, Romans 8.17. 1. Tim. 5.8
Genesis 15. Genesis 15.3.
Though God said to Abraham, I am thy buckler and thine exceeding great reward:
Yet Abraham again said unto him; behold, to me thou have given no seed:
wherefore, lo, a servant of my house shall be mine heir. This was Abraham's
resolution, till God showed him his determination, he thought the right of
inheritance, he having no issue, did appertain to the chief in his house, but
God determining to show him both who should be his heir, and any man's right
heir, said unto him touching Eliezer of Damascus, the steward of Abraham's
house. This man shall not he thine heir, but one that shall come out of thine
own bowels, he shall be thine heir. i. the son which shall come out of
thine own loins, he shall be thine heir. Romans 8.17.
Romans 8. If ye be sons (says God by the mouth of Paul) then are ye also
heirs; which words importe, that none should be heirs but sons; if there be
sons, for they are not: then ye may be heirs; but then are ye also heirs,
as if sons ought to be heirs, if they be: to conclude therefore, Paul says,
1. Tim. 5.8.
He that provides not for his own, and namely for them of his householde, is
worse than an infidel: as though this by nature were instilled into very
infidels, that in their lives, and at their deaths, they would provide for
their own, and them of their householdes, ere ever they provided for any
other, besides their own, and their households. And therefore should not be
estranged from christians. If nature works so much in infidels, grace should
not work less in christians. Grace is better than nature: and therefore the
operation should not be worse.


Q. It seems you count it an exceeding fault for a man, by will to alienate
his goods or lands, wholly and finally from his children and offspring, if he
has any?


R. Neither do I in this case any thing without reason: for when God by his
law has appointed who shall be heirs, what shall man at his pleasure
appoint new heirs, as if his wisdom were better than Gods? I am sure there
is no reason for it, neither will the very law of nature permit or approve
it. There is one that says, Plato de Repub. li. 2. Aristot. pol. lib. 5. c. 8.
Dorbel. 4.145. qu. 2. de Testam.
A testament made against the equity of the law of nature, the law of God, or
the law positive is to be broken: and whether a will that does appoint other to
be heirs, than God in his law does appoint, be a will against the equity of
the one law or the other, I leave to other men to judge?


Q. Then may you soon be gone, for some say, the father may appoint another,
if the son has promerited it?


R. Diverse men, diverse minds: I know some say so, and I deny not but the case
may sometime be such, as the father may so deal. Reuben was the eldest son
of Israel, 1. Chro. 5.1.
but he had defiled his fathers bed, therefore his birthright was given unto
the sons of Joseph, the son of Israel, so that the genealogy is not
reckened after his birth right. When Iaakob called all his sons together, to
tell them what should come to them in the last days, thus he said to Reuben
his eldest son, Thou art my might, and the beginning of my strength, Genesis
49.3.4.
the excellency of dignity, the excellency of power: thou wast light as
water: thou shall not be excellent, because thou wentest up to thy fathers bed:
then did thou defile my bed, thy dignity is gone. But ordinarily it falls
not so out, though often Parents take occasion to deal hardly with their
children. And I speak not now of extraordinary chances, but of ordinary
events: and therefore your then you may be soon gone, comes not in so happily
as you would.


R. Neither care I whether it does or no. I am not conceited, my desire is but
to be resolved, with or for that I think you will not be offended.


R. Often and often that has been manifested, but to the matter again
controuerted. Though the son in the fathers judgment, has promerited wholly
to be disinherited, yet so much against the son, the father in his sickness
upon his death bed should not be incensed, as therefore of his fatherly
benediction, he should utterly be deprived. The Father should rather remember
the love he bears to his son, and the obedience he owes to his God, than
thus seek to revenge the misdemeanour of his son against him, the fault that
is in his son, at that time he should forgive and forget. The time of death
is no time for revenge: as he would then be forgiven, so should he willingly
forgive, because of his own trespass against his father, God almighty, he
would be loath to be disinherited of his kingdom; so because of his sons
trespass against him, he should be unwilling to disposses him of that which
otherwise (if his trespass had been away) should have descended unto him.
What though the son forgets he is a son, yet must not therefore the father
forget that he is a father. The history of David and Absalom teaches no such
matter. For though Absalom was as ungracious a son to David, as a son
almost might be, yet was not therefore David as unkind a father, as a father
could be. When Absalom followed him over Iordane, with a purpose to disposses
him of his kingdom. 2. Sam. 18.5
David yet said unto Ioab and Abishai, and Ittai; Entreat the young man gently
for my sake. And when Ahimanz and Cushi brought him tidings; the first question
he asked them was this, is the young man Absalom safe? To which when Cushi
answered, the enemies of my Lord the king, and all that rise against thee to
do thee hurt, be as that young man is: David the king was moved, and went up
to the chamber over the gate and wept, and as he went, he thus said: O my son
Absalom, my son, my son Absalom: would God I had dyed for thee o Absalom,
my son, my son. By this history Parents may learn, not to be too unkind
to their children, how ever their children be unkind to them, especially at
their farewell to them and to the world: for alas, what pleasure may it do
them when they are gone; so to have dealt with them ere they did go? What a
perpetual blot to their names in so doing, shall they leave behind them? What
an evil example shall they give to other? What a torment shall they fix in
the heart and conscience of their distressed children? For these and other
considerations, I could wish that Parents would not be merciles to their
children when they come to dye, how ever they seemed mindles of them while they
did live. It is hard to dye with an hard mind toward them. A father pittieth
his child; a father provides for his child. What fathers are they that
neither pity them having done amiss, nor provide for them being in distress?
If at no other time they ca^ use either, yet at their dying time they should
use both pity, that they may be reconciled together; provision, that their
offspring may flourish when they are gone both, that many may thence take
instruction, and some thereby reap consolation: though their children were
graceles while they themselves lived with them, yet this heaping of coals upon
their heads, may make them gracious when they are gone from them. It may kindle
a fire of grace in their hearts. And after they may seriously repent, what
foolishlie in times past they did commit. In Esau the want of it wrought evil.
The days of mourning for my father will come, Genesis 27.41.
and then I will slay my brother. In others the use of it may work good. My
father dealt more kindly with me than I deserved, much more good therefore
will I do, than is by any expected. No man shall vpbraide me by my gracelesnes
in time past, but each man shall commend me for my goodness in the time
present: what I have bin, shall be forgotten of every man but my self, and
what I am, shall be remembered by others more than my self. As I have more than
ever I expected, so will I do better than ever I promised. If thus it works in
any, is it not better than if it had been otherwise?


Q. Yes no doubt. But such things as this is, chances but seldom.


R. Yet parents may hope that it will happen often.


Q. They may hope, and be deceived.


R. So they may also, and be assured. For as Solomon says, What is it that
has been? Eccles. 1.9.
that that shall be. And what is it that has been done? that which shall be
done? The proverb also is, Hope well, and have well.


Q. That parents then in this case may have well, I wish that they may hope
well,


R. And I, upon their hope well, that they may do well.


Q. In hoping well, they shall do well: shall they not?


R. Yes, for it is a good thing to hope well, but it may be they will not do
sufficiently well.


Q. Why?


R. Because upon former displeasure, they may dispose of their goods after an
uneven measure.


Q. Why is it not lawful for them to do with their own as they themselves
list?


R. I trow no. Neither do I yet think that you are of that mind though you
be a father. Goods are given to be used, as God will have them used, and not as
those to whom they are given, do list to use them.


Q. It may be Gods will, that they shall use them as they list.


R. I, but it is not. Neither is it like that ever it will. Iam. 1.17.
For God is no chngeling. With him there is no variablenes, neither shadow of
turning.


Q. What is his will?


R. That all shall have some; and some never a whit. And no marvel: for what
is not one child, a child as well as another? and again, is not one child as
dear as another? and lastly, is not one child to live to the world as well as
another?


Q. Yes if he be a child, and to live. But what then? must not or may not a
man therefore give more to one than another?


R. I say not; but that he may, and must. But he neither may nor must that
after his own liking.


Q. Why not?


R. Because God himself has otherwise appointed.


Q. What or how has he appointed?


R. That not any one upon the fathers own liking shall have more than the
rest, but that the eldest according to his appointment shall have most of all.


Q. What reason for that? it may be the eldest may be the worst and the most
unfit?


R. Though he be, yet must he not be thought so, because God himself has
not thought him so. And the reason of his not thinking so, no man must ask.
His will and determination is reason enough for his action or constitution. It
is sufficient for us to know that he will have it so, though we never enquire
why he will have it so. Yet if any be so scrupulous, or so curious, as he
likes not of Gods constitution without a reason, reason is soon at hand to be
found. For God the fountain of reason does nothing without reason. Now there
may be three reasons given of the Lords appointing the eldest to have most of
all, and more than any, the first is his eldership, which God himself has
ratified as a reason why he should have more than all or any of the rest. For
thus says the Lord in Deuteronomie: If a man have two wives, one loved and
another hated, Deu. 21.15, 16, 17.
and they have borne him children, both the loved and also the hated, if the
first borne be the son of the hated, then when the time comes that he
appoints his sons to be heirs of that which he has he may not make the
son of the beloved first borne, before the son of the hated which is the
first borne. But he shall acknowledge the son of the hated for the first
borne, and give him double portion of that he has. For he is the first of his
strength, and to him belongs the right of the first borne. The second is the
preservation of the stock, which in his person is to be mainteyned. For in the
elder brother from the father to the son the stock is always continued.
Among the Jews the father being dead, the eldest son was to all the rest as
father, and therefore he was honored of all the rest as father. In Noah's
house Sem was the eldest, and more is said of him being eldest than of the
rest. Blessed be the Lord God of Sem, and let Canaan be his servant. Genesis
9.26.27.
God persuade Iaphet that he may dwell in the tents of Shem, and let Canaan be
his servant in Jacobs house Reuben was the eldest, Genesis 37.22.
and more was his counsel regarded being eldest than others. When all the
residue of the brethren were agreed against Joseph that he should be slain,
his only disagreeing was cause sufficient why Joseph was not slain. Amongst
our selves, the prerogatives of the eldest are more and greater than any of all
the rest. I need not to speak of them, he that is any thing acquainted with
the laws of this land, is not ignorant of them. He that is the eldest in any
family, will soon labor to know them. I will proceed: the third reason is
the having of some always in readiness to do service for the common wealth. In
the time of peace to help to govern it; in the time of war, to help to
defend it. For of all the brethren if he were unfit, who should be more fit?
for years it is sure he exceedes them all, for experience it is thought, he
excelles them all: as he has most years, so he should have most experience.
For by most years comes most experience. For these reasons the eldest should
have portions of his fathers goods and lands, both bigger for quantity, and
better for quality, than any of all his other brethren.


Q. Some times I deny not what you say. But that always it should be so, I do
not greatly well like of: for at the time of the fathers death the eldest may
be able to shift for himself, as well as some of the rest, but the youngest
may be very unable. And therefore I would think greater care should be had
of them, than of others. Besides that, it may be the youngest shall be
brought up to some chargeable kind of life, as a scholars life, a courtiers
life, a merchants life etc. and therefore some reason as great care should be
had of them as of some others.


R. Whatsoever you pretend for ground of your dislike, yet this must you ever
know and hold, that man's invention must give place to Gods constitution. And
though I have all this while labored for the preferment of the Eldest (as
reason is I should) yet he being provided for, I never stood, neither now do
I stand against the well providing for of the youngest. If the eldest be once
regarded as he ought, let the others after him be considered, as they may. Yet
for that point thus much I say, whatsoever is done, let it rather be done upon
reason than affection. Many I know are foolishly affected: and therefore some
of their children are carelessly regarded: some have a great deal given them,
and some again have never a whit. Let every one in his place be considered,
and all my words thereof shall be ended.


Q. It is very like so: for if I had not caused thus many, fewer I imagine by
many would have been used.


R. Of that you may be well assured. For your questions and objections these
many have procured.


Q. I suspected so; and therefore I say so. But pardon me if I have run out
of rule touching this rule, and I will keep my self better in rule, about
your last rule.


R. The more you do so, the better it will be for you, no hurt ever by keeping
of rule. But the last rule is so short, as well you cannot run from it.


Q. Neither mind I, though I might. But yet I would gladly know the reason
thereof?


R. Whereof? of your wanting possibility to run aside?


Q. No: that is easy. But of the rule it self, which is somewhat harder.


R. That I gave you with the rule, and have it again, you may in the rule.


Q. What is it then?


R. The Testatours liberty to alter and change his will at his pleasure
according to law during his life.


Q. But why is that the reason?


R. Because the Apostle himself in the Epistle to the Hebrews says: Heb.
9.17.
The testament is confirmed when men are dead: for it is yet of no force, so
long as he that made it is alive. If this saying of the Apostle now be reason
sufficient, your question is answered, and my duty is discharged, if not, you
must seek to the Ciuilians for more.


Q. Where the first is sufficient, the second is superfluous. I am so well
satisfied with the first, as I mind not now to seek any thing of the last. If
so it please you therefore, we will now pass to the second thing you said the
sick man was to do, that would in his sickness seek to establish good order
in his house after his death.


R. Indeed order requires so much, and the Apostle wills, All things to be
done ^^ order. With what you are therefore conte^^^ I shall not be discontented.
But concerning that, what will you that I say?


Q. I cannot prescribe you any thing?


R. But you may propounde me something.


Q. The duty it self you have already prescribed, but how or whence gather
you, that a man in his sickness laboring to procure good order in his family
after his death, should admonish all those of his family, wife, children, and
servants before his death, to learn, believe and obey the true religion of God
all their days?


R. I gather it three ways: first, by the general commandment of God:
secondly, by the practice of diverse godly men mentioned in scripture: thirdly,
by the special commendation, God himself gives to one therefore above the
rest. For first, God gives this general precept, Heb. 1.13.
Heb. 3.13. Exhort one another daily, while it is called to day, least any of
you be hardened through the deceitfulnes of sin. And I know little
difference between exhortation and admonition, unless you say, admonition goes
before exhortation, and exhortation follows after admonition. Secondly, I
find many good men in the book of God to have done thus. In the book of
Deuteronomie, Deu. 31.32.33.
I find Moses to have admonished all Israel, Joshua their captain, Leui
their Priest, and the audience of all their congregation, to cleave unto the
Lord their God, and to serve him after his death. It is so much to repeat
some, as I refer you thither to read all. The reading of all there, is better
by much than the repeating of some here. In the book of Iehoshua, I find
Iehoshuah to have done the like: For to all Israel, their Elders, Iehosh. 23.1,
2, 3. etc.
their heads and their Judges, and their officers, he said, I am old and
stricken in age: also, ye have seen all that the Lord your God has done unto
all these nations before you, how the Lord your God himself has fought for
you. And the Lord your God shall expel them, and cast them out of your sight,
and ye shall posses their land, as the Lord your God has said unto you: be
therefore of a valiant courage, to observe and do all that is written in the
book of the law of Moses, that ye turn not there from to the right hand, nor
to the left; neither company with those nations: that is, with them that are
left with you, neither make mention of the name of their gods, nor cause to
swear by them, neither serve them, nor bow unto them, but stick fast unto
the Lord your God, as ye have done unto this day, etc. Josh. 23. and 24. by the
whole. In the first book of Kings I find, 1. Kin. 2.1.2
David to have charged his son Solomon to the like effect, saying: I go the
way of all earth, be strong therefore and show thy self a man, and take heed
to the charge of the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, to keep his statutes
and his commandments, and his judgments, and his testimonies, as it is
written in the law of Moses, that thou may prosper in all that thou do,
and in every thing whereto thou turnest thee, that the Lord may confirm his
word which he spoke unto me, saying: If thy sons take heed to their way,
that they walk before me in truth, with all their hearts, and with all their
souls, thou shall not (said he) want one of thy posterity upon the throne of
Israel. In the book of Tobit also I find, That old Tobit no sooner remembered
that he had wished for death, Tobit. 4.2.
but he said; wherefore do I not call for my son Tobias, that I may
admonish him before I dye: (as though when a man were a dying, it were his
duty to admonish his sons, and those of his family to do those things
which are pleasing unto him, which gave them life, and may at his pleasure take
it again from them:) And therefore when he had called him he said: My son,
after that I am dead, bury me, and despise not thy mother, but honor her all
the days of thy life, and do that which shall please her, and anger her not.
Remember my son, how many dangers she sustained when thou wast in her womb,
and when she dies, bury her by me in the same grave. My son, set our Lord
God always before thine eyes, and let not thy will be set to sin, or to
transgress the commandment of God. Do vprightlie all thy life long, and
follow not the ways of unrighteousness: for if thou deal truly, thy doings
shall prosperously succeed to thee, and to all them that live justly, and so
forth as follows in that place. Now by all this which I have found, this is
the conclusion which I make, to wit, that what good thing soever men know,
touching God and godliness, they are not to keep it to themselves, but to teach
it their children and families, not only in their life time, but also at their
death, that so God may be glorified of them, both while they live, and also
when they dye. And the third thing that induces me thereto, over and above the
precept of God, and the practice of good men, (of which I have now spoken) is
the special commendation God himself gives to Abraham, the father of the
faithful, for the doing of the same: for when he was to discover unto him the
destruction of Sodom and Gomorhe, he made this the reason of his so doing.
Genesis 18.19,
I know Abraham that he will command his sons and his householde after him,
that they keep the way of the Lord, to do righteousness and judgment. And
what a singular commendation this is, he that has but half an eye may see?
It is a very good thing to be well spoken of by men. Senec. de Reme. fort.
The good opinion of men is safer than money. An honest report is a second
patrimony. Id. in Prou.
Yea says Solomon, A good name is to be chosen above great riches, and loving
favor is above silver, Prou. 22.1. Eccl. 7.3.
and above gold. A good name is better than a good ointment. But it is a
better thing to be well spoken of by God himself: as he better knows what
is in man, so he better judges what is done by man: as he also is greater
than man, so is his commendation better than man's. Man's is hardly got, and
easily lost, Gods once got, is ever hardly lost: as he knows what he
speaks, ere he speaks; so he speaks surely when he speaks. As Balaam said
to Balak. God is not as man, Number. 22.19
that he should lie, neither as the son of man that he should repent: has he
said, and shall he not do it? And has he spoken, and shall he not accomplish
it? (As Peter says) The word of the Lord endures for ever. As Christ himself
says, 1. Pet. 1.25.
(which was and is God, Mat. 24, 35.
) Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away. As
therefore he that is sick is desirous to have the praise of God before the
praise of men, (because of all praise it is the best,) so is he to be careful
of that which God himself commaundes to all, and commends in Abraham, he
commands it, that it may be obeyed, he commends it, that it may be
regarded, he commands it and commends it, that in the time of sickness, and
before the hour of death, it may not be neglected.


Q. But what is the reason that he that is sick, should in his sickness be
careful of that you speak of? It may be in his health he has often before
done it?


R. That hinders not, but that then also he must do it. It is a duty that
lies upon a man, not only in the time of health, but in the time of sickness
also: though therefore in his health he has never so often admonisht all those
of his family to fear God and keep his commandments, yet then in his
sickness he is not to cease to admonish them still: often had Moses and Joshua
admonisht the Israelites to serve the Lord, and walk in his ways, ere ever
the time of their departure drew nigh, yet did they not therefore cease to do
it, even then, when the time came that they were to depart. No more should he
that is sick, and at the point to dye: you ask here what is the reason he
should then do it, but you might better ask what are the reasons thereof: for
they are many, more than one. One is, because it is the last and best work he
can then do and the Apostle says, Desire you the best gifts: And again, 1.
Cor. 12.3. Gal. 6.9. 2. These. 3.13
Be not weary of, and in well doing: for in due season ye shall reap, if ye
faint not. Another is, because it is every man's part to seek the propagation
of Gods glory, as well when he is dying, as while he is living. For therefore
the Lord created him. Esa. 43.7. I created him for my glory. Esa. 41.7.
And again, verse 21. This people have I formed for my self, they shall show
forth my praise. Romans 14.8.
The Apostle also says, Whether we live or dye, we are the Lords: and
therefore while we live, we should live unto the Lord, and when we dye, we
should dye unto the Lord. And because living we should live unto the Lord, and
dying dye to the Lord, both living and dying, we should admonish others to live
and dye unto the Lord. Living, because the Apostle one where says, Exhort one
another, and edify one another, even as ye do: 1. These. 5.11 14.
and verse there the 14. Admonish them that are unruly dying; because the same
Apostle other where says: 1. Cor. 10.31
Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever you do, do all to the glory of
God, and therefore this: for this makes much to the glory of God. Steuens
vehement exhortation to the Jews before his death, made some turn unto God
after his death. Says Augustine in one of his books de ciuitate Dei.
Augustinus de ciuitate Dri.
If Steven had not prayed, the Church had not had Paul the Doctor of the
Gentiles. Through the many good words which Christ used, as he went to be
crucified, some were either converted or confirmed: the thief was converted,
the Centurion was confirmed, by both, God was glorified: the thief said, Luke
23.42.43. etc.
Lord remember me when thou come into thy kingdom, and he received this
answer. To day shall thou be with me in Paradise. The Centurion when he saw
what was done, he glorified God, saying: Of a surety this man was just. And
all the people that came together to that sight, beholding the things which
were done, smote their breasts and returned. But I will return to that, from
which I was not yet turned. And a third reason thereof is, because then a man
speaks with the best affection. Seldom when a man is well affected, if in his
mortal sickness he be ill affected: for as Solomon says, Pro. 29.15.
The rod and correction give wisdom. And therefore David said: Before I was
afflicted I went astray, Psalm. 119.67
but now (that I am afflicted, I keep thy word. By the good admonitions which
Moses, and Joshua, and David, and Tobit, and others, of whom I have spoken)
gave unto their sons subjects and servants, a little before their deaths, the
truth of this I say, does very easily appear: and by other things which
shall hereafter be said, the same may further appear. If either of these be
not enough, there may be some further thought had of the Patriarchs dying, the
Prophets dying: Christ himself dying, the chief crucified with dying, Steven
the Martyr dying, for there will be seen the ardent affection they spoke
withal, when they were dying, and so that explayned which I was explayning.
But a fourth reason is at hand, and therefore I must from this. And that fourth
for which a man dying, should admonish those of his family to cleave unto the
Lord, is because the admonition which is then delivered, is ever best
remembered. How soon soever other in other time past given, is gone and
forgotten, that in that time given, is seldom when wholly forgotten. No words
are ever so well thought of, as a man's last words: with them, he which will not
be moved, with any will hardly be moved. A tree never gives so big a stroke, as
when it falls: and a man never speaks with such efficacy, as when he dies:
as then the Swan sings most sweetly, so as then a man speaks most
pathetically. All parts are then in great force, because they have but a while
to be in force. And thus your demand is answered, though your mind be not
satisfied.


Q. For this the last is satisfied, as well as the first is answered: but yet I
have wherewith your wit may be exercised, as well as I have, whereby my mind
is perplexed.


R. And what is that?


Q. What manner of admonitions a man on his deathbed should give either to wife,
children, or servants or others?


R. That is a thing that needs never much to trouble you. It suffices that he
give such generally to al, and particularly to some, as before you have heard
by Moses and Joshua, given in generality to all, and by David and Tobit given
in particularitie to their sons, Solomon and Tobias.


Q. But I would hear of such in particular, as may particularly fit either
wife or children, or servants?


R. And such you may hear of, such there are already composed and extant: such
also you may by yourselfe read in a book, which commonly is in most men's
hands, and worthily is called the Sick man's salve.


Q. If it be not troublesome to you, I had as lieue hear them of you, as read
them in him. As they come from you, I shall well remember them: as I find them
in him, I shall be careless of them. More I regard what I hear, than what I
read; especially if the book be by me, wherein I may at any time read: but
the truth is, the book you speak of is out of my hands, as out of some
others. If therefore I may entreat you to recite them, I will endeavor what I
may in memory to record them.


R. That may be, but I had rather you should there read them, than I here
recite them. It is labor far away for any there to read them, than for me
here to recite them: as they are there, they are long, and it may be as they
should be here, to some they would be wearisome.


Q. Whatsoever they may be to others, they shall be nothing displeasing to me.
And for their length, you may abridge them if you please.


R. The coherence of one thing with another, may be that, as any abridgement
will be inconvenient.


Q. As you may and will then, so let me have them.


R. Is there no remedy, but have them you will?


Q. Not any, if have them I may?


R. Much what then as it is there, thus may the sick man say to his wife. Oh
sweet wife, you see in what case I lie here, sick, weak, and the prisoner of
God, looking every hour for my departure out of this world. And this
visitation of God, is unto me welcome, and I thank the Lord with all my heart
for it. I doubt not but when I am once gone hence, I shall be in a far better
case than ever I was: therefore I pray thee good wife be not heavy, neither
take thought for me, but rather pray that the will of God may be done in me:
and be as well contented, that I should at the calling of God go from thee, as
ever thou wast that at his appointment I should come to thee. I have run my
race; I have passed those years which the Lord appointed that I should live in
this world. And now is the time of my departure come. And I give over this my
life willingly, and with a free heart, therefore take no thought for me: and
doubt thou not sweet wise, but if thou go forth, to live in the fear of
God, and to please him, God in the time of thy widow-hoode will be an husband
unto thee, he will be thy patron and defender, he will be thy mighty shield
and strong buckler, he will provide for thee, and foresee, that thou and thine
shall want nothing that is good. For he has promised in his holy word, Psalm.
146. and 20. Esa. 10.^ Ier. 5.12. Zach. 8.
that he will take charge of the widows, and defend their cause: he has also
charged the Magistrates and rulers, to look unto widows, and to deliver them
from oppression. I doubt not therefore, but the Lord will abundantly provide
for thee and thine, so that thou and they have always his fear before your
face. In all things therefore good wife, have it before thine eyes, that so it
may go well with thee. And if after my departure (O wife) thou have a mind to
marry again, marry in the wisdom of the Lord our God: for I know no man
can live chaste, except God give the gift. Only have this care, that he with
whom thou do determine to marry, be such a man as fears God, loves his
word, is well reported of by his neighbors, deals righteously with all men,
embraces virtue, despises vice, etc. Follow not the manner of certain old
doting widows, which for bodily lust in their old crooked age, couple
themselves with yonkers, which might right well have bin their children, and
unto whom they might also have given suck, for such marriages are not blessed
of God, because the one marries for bodily lust, the other for worldly
covetousness. Choose thee therefore such an husband as will love thee, and not
thy goods only, as is equal to thee in condition, state, and age: as also
will tender thy children, and see them brought up in the fear of God: that
this may be, pray always unto God, that he will bless thee, and prosper thee
in all things. Moreover (oh my sweet and loving wife) look well to the
bringing up of thine and my children: bring them up in instruction and
information of the Lord; weed out of their minds all kinds of vice and
wickedness, that their bodies may be made the temples of the holy Ghost: have
an eye unto thy servants, give them their covenants, and suffer them not to be
idle. So govern thy house, that there be found in it no vice, but virtue; no
wickedness, but godliness; no sin, but honesty and christian behavior. Be
thou also an example of godly life unto thy children and servants; so may
thou be sure to have obedient children, and faithful servants: yea, so also
shall thou be well reported of thy neighbors, and beloved both of God and all
good men. And thus good wife adieu. This is there the sick man's exhortation to
his wife: and this or the like may the sick man we speak of, use to his wife.


Q. This I assure you is a good one: the ground of any it does comprehend; but
what manner of one may he use to his children?


R. This which hereafter follows, or some other much like it in effect. Oh my
children, God bless you, and send you many, yea, and those joyful and quiet
days upon earth. Ye see in what case I am, sore sick, and very weak, abiding
the good pleasure of God. The end of this my life is come, and I am glad of it,
and most heartily thank the Lord my God for it: let it not dismay you (my most
dear children) that I shall now be taken away from you: for albeit that I
being your natural father, shall no more serve you, nor provide for you as
hitherto I have done: yet doubt ye not, but if ye go forth as ye have begun,
to fear God and to serve him, he will not leave you comfortles, but in my
stead he will be a father unto you, and provide better for you, than ever I was
able to do: therefore if ye will have God a merciful and gentle Father unto
you, behave you your selves as dutiful and obedient children toward him,
fear him, love him, honor him, serve him, pray unto him, call upon his
blessed name, be thankful unto him for his benefits, and in all things,
seek to please his godly majesty. Give your minds to the reading of the holy
Scriptures, and whatsoever you read therein, practice in your lives and
conversation: be not only hearers of the word, but doers also, for he that is
not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, shall be blessed in his
deed. Iam. 1.25.
Moreover, avoid idleness, and too much childish pastimes, let no time of your
life pass away without fruit: eschew all evil company, and have nothing to
do with them that be ungodly, though their words be sweet for a time, their
end is sudden destruction. Oh my children many thousands are cast away, for
that they have not the fear of God before their eyes, neither will be ruled by
good counsel. Therefore desire always the fellowship of them that be good and
virtuous, have all your trust and confidence in the Lord your God, take nothing
in hand before you have craved his help by fervent prayer, and after that
thing done, give God most hearty thanks therefore, acknowledging him the
only giver of all good things. The sabbath day and such other fruitful days,
spend them holilie and godlily, give your selves to prayer, to hearing of
Sermons, and to reading of the word of God. See that ye defile not the name of
the Lord your God, with vain and unlawful oaths: reverence your elders,
honor your mother, be obedient unto her, pray for her, do for her whatsoever
lies in your power, that God may bless you, and give you long and joyful
life upon the earth. Be no evil speakers of any man, but be courteous and
gentle unto every man. Let no lightness appear in you, neither in gesture nor
countenance; be true and faithful, cast away all pride, and embrace humility,
avoid superfluous eating and drinking, use temperance in all your doings* be
not moved to anger against any man, but be patient and ready to forgive all
men: be merciful to the poor, help all men to the uttermost of your powers:
study to do good unto all, and hurt none: love all men, even your very
enemies, be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with goodness: these few
lessons if ye observe, ye shall do well. As a most merciful father God will
bless you, continue his favor toward you, multiply his graces upon you, and
wonderously prosper you upon the face of the earth. But these if ye neglect and
despise, the Lord will be angry with you, set his face against you, neither
will he ever leave till he have utterly overthrown you. Take heed therefore o
my good children to the commandments of our God; apply your hearts always to
observe them, that so it may always go well with you, and the gracious favor
of God ever be continued toward you. Thus desiring the Lord to be with you,
to bless and preserve you, to his gracious protection I commend you. Thus in
general (friend mine) you see what manner of admonition the sick man (we
talk of) may give to the whole company of his children, if God has blessed
him, with many.


Q. I do so, and I thank you for it. But may I not in like sort see what in
particular he may say to his eldest son, the first fruit peradventure of his
body, and assuredly the heir of all his lands?


R. Yes that you may.

So then let me. For more have many, than either one alone or none at all.


R. Thus then may he say unto him, of all the sons that God has given me,
thou art my first borne; for thee I thank him, for in thee lies the hope of my
posterity. Look therefore that thou seruest God all the days of thy life,
that thou may be the father of many children through the blessing of God. If
thou do resemble me as in countenance and lineaments of body, so likewise in
manners and conditions of life, it shall not repent me to have begot such a
son, neither shall it forethinke thee to have had such a father. Take heed
therefore that thou do not degenerate and grow out of kind. Follow me in
all things as thou have seen me follow Christ. After I am dead bury me, and
despise not thy mother, but honor her all the days of thy life, pray for her
and do for her whatsoever lies in thy power, Tobit. 4.
remember that God has appointed thee to be the staff of her old age,
neither forget thou what and how great pains she had suffered for thee. Prou. 1.
Beware of riotous company, and have always the fear of God before thine
eyes. Eccle. 6.
Keep company with such as have understanding, and lean unto their wisdom
and counsel: be sober minded and eschew the lusts of youth, 2. Tim. 2.
but follow righteousness, faith, love and peace with them that call on the Lord
with a pure faith. When thou shall come to the possession of such worldly
substance as I have appointed for thee through the goodness of almighty God,
look that thou do use and not abuse thy goods. Spend in measure, and as
present necessity shall require. Beware of superfluous expenses. Pro. 23.21.
Avoid banqueting and delicious fare. For whosoever loves delicately to fare,
shall come to poverty. Remember it has cast away many thousands. Think that
well spent, that is spent in thine own house. Extraordinary banquetings look
yt thou flee, remembering that that which is gotten in a long time, is consumed
in a short space. Tob. 4.
Give alms of thy goods, and turn never thy face from the poor, so shall it
come to pass that the face of the Lord shall not be turned away from thee. Be
merciful after thy power: If thou have much give plenteously, if thou have
little, do thy diligence gladly to give of that little: for so gatherest thou
thy self a good reward against the day of necessity. For mercy delivers
from death, and suffers not to come into darkness. Alms is a good gift before
the most high to all them that use it. Beware of all whoredom my son, and
bring a chaste body unto the honorable state of marriage. When the ripenes of
thine age does require thee to marry, take heed whom thou chusest to be thy
yoke fellow. Follow not the corrupt manners of the wicked worldlings, which in
choosing their wives, have their principal respects, unto the worthiness of the
stock, unto the wealthines of the friends, unto riches, beauty and such other
worldly vanities. Consider thou rather the godliness than the worthiness of the
maids parents, the honest and virtuous bringing up of her, her chaste and
sober behavior, her christian and godly manners, her modesty, gravity,
sobriety, and womanlines her faith obedience, humility, silence, quietness,
honesty, housewifelines, and such other fruits of Gods spirit. Let her be no
Papist nor Anabaptist, nor Epicure, but one of the household of faith and such
an one as fears the Lord God unfeignedly. With such an one couple thy self
in the fear of God, and know her to be the gift of God, as Solomon says:
House and riches are the inheritance of the fathers, Pro. 19.14.
but a prudent wife comes of the Lord. Therefore when thou art once joined
with her in the holy order of Matrimony, seek after no strange flesh: beware
of whoredom. Entangle thy self with no other woman's love; but be glad with
the wife of thy youth. Let her breasts satisfy thee at al times, and delight
in her love continually. If God send thee children, thank him for them, and
study to bring them up in the fear, nurture and doctrine of the Lord, that
they may learn to know God even from their very cradles. Order thy household
godlilie and honestly, cherish thy servants, and give them their covenants,
remembering that thou also have a master in heaven. Love thy neighbors, and
dwell quietly among them. Lend unto them gladly whatsoever they need, if thou
have it. Oppress not thy tenants, raise not thy rents, take no unconscionable
incomes or fines. Be contented with the old accustomed reasonable paiments.
bring up no new customs; maintain the lawful liberties of the town wherein
thou dwell: be no unprofitable member of the common wealth: defame no man,
but speak well of all men, hurt no man, but to the uttermost of thy power, be
beneficial to all men. Let not pride have rule either in thy mind, or in thy
word. For in pride is destruction, and much trouble, and in fiercenes is
scarcity and great poverty.: for fiercenes is the mother of fame. Let not the
wages of any man that has wrought for thee, tarry with thee, but give it him
out of hand. Look that thou do never unto any man, Matt. 7.12. Tob. 4.15.
that thing, that thou would not another man should do unto thee. Give of
thy bread to the hungry, and of thy garments to them that are naked. Ask
counsel always of the wise, and despise not any counsel that is profitable.
Bless thy Lord God always, and desire of him that thy ways may be made
straight, and that all thy purposes and counsels may prosper. My son do
these things, and God shall bless and prosper all thy doings. And thus my
son, the God of peace be with thee. This is the admonition the sick man may
give to his eldest son, having many, or but one or more than one.


Q. But what manner of one is that which he may give unto his daughters: for
all that fitteth his sons, will not fit them?


R. That shall you hear also, if you will but give me leave to breath a little.


Q. It were hard if I should not do that for you, you having already done so
much for me.


R. Yet many are so careful of having them selves; as they care little for the
spoiling of others.


Q. Their love is small. God keep me from such a mind. I would not any thing
with the hurt of any, much less with the hurt of you, which long have sought
my good, and now are doing it.


R. Your words are good. But I Will stay them. I will now answer your demand.
That therefore our sick man may speak that which shall fit his daughters,
as well as he has spoken that which may fit his sons, he may thus say unto
them. (Oh my sweet daughters) I pray God bless you, and make you joyful
mothers of many children. Serve God, obey your mother, be diligent to please
her. Give care to her wholesome admonitions and follow them. Do nothing
without her counsel and advise. When your age shall require you to marry,
follow the counsel of your mother, and other of your faithful friends, which
wish you to do well in choosing of your husbands. Take heed ye be not
corrupted with the gifts of naughty packes, nor deceived with the flattring
tongues of wicked and unthrifty persons. For many in these days seek not the
woman, but the woman's substance. Couple your selves with such as fear God,
love his word, and be of honest report. And when ye be once married, reverence
your husbands, know them to be your heads and governors appointed of God, obey
them, and submit your selves unto them. Suffer not your love to depart from
your husbands, neither know any man besides them, but keep the bed undefiled,
that your marriage may be honorable in the sight of God, and of his holy
congregation. And if GOD does bless you with children, look that you bring
them up to the glory of God in his fear and doctrine. Engraffe in their young
breasts, even from their tender age virtue, godliness and good manners. Look
well unto your household, and be examples to your maids of godliness and
honesty. Be no gadders abroad, nor haunters of tauernes, but keep your
houses continually, except some earnest and lawful business provoke you to go
forth. Be no bablers, nor vain talkers, but for the most part use silence. For
silence in a woman is an ornament unto her. Apparel your selves in comely
array, with shamefastnes and discreet behavior, 1. Pet. 3.4.
not with broydred hair, either gold or pearls or costly garments, but as it
becomes women that profess godliness through good works. Let the hid man
which is in the heart be without all corruption with a meek and quiet spirit,
which is before God a thing much set by. For after this manner in time past did
the holy women which trusted in God, tire themselves, and were subject to their
husbands, as Sara obeyed Abraham, and called him sir, whose daughters year,
whiles ye do well, not being afraid of any terror. These few lessons if you
observe, doubt you not my (dear daughters) but God will well prosper you, and
give you a joyful and quiet life upon earth. In steed of me he will be your
father, and will defend you better than ever I could or should, pray to him
therefore for his blessing, and vex not your selves much for my departure. I
am to go before you, and you are to follow after me. God send us all a good
going. And thus Gods blessing be with you my daughters. This is the admonition
the sick man may make unto his daughters if he has any or many.


Q. What if he has but one?


R. Then as here he seem'de to speak plurally as having many, so there he may
speak singularly, because he has but one.


Q. If then he chaunges the person, he need not use any other admonition?


R. True: except he himself will, or he knows some cause why he should
change his style.


Q. But what manner of admonition may he give unto his servants, for they are a
part of his family as well as others, and those you said he was to admonish
also?


R. This or the like: syrs (you my servants) ye see in me what shall be the
end of you and all flesh else; even a departure from this vile and transitory
world. For we are but strangers and pilgrims on the earth, as all our fathers
were. We have here no continuing city, but we seek one to come. The
ordinance of God is, that all men shall once dye. There lives no man that
shall not die. A man in his time is but grass, and flourishes as as flower of
the field. Our life is even as a vapor that appears for a little time, and
then vanishes away. On this condition came we into the world, that we should
again go out. We have been sure of death ever since we had life. These things
do ye now see practiced in me. The time of my departure out of this world is
at hand. I thought it good therefore to send also for you, and to take my leave
of you, till we meet again in the kingdom of God. I thank you for the good
service that ye have done me; I have not forgotten your serviceable hearts and
good will toward me, but I have given to every one of you such a portion of
money, as shall declare some part of my thankful and well willing heart toward
you. Now this remains to be craved at your hands, that as ye have hitherto
faithfully, truly, and honestly served me in my life time, even so after my
departure (so long as ye tarry here) ye will show the like faithfulness, truth
and honesty toward your mistress. Consider, that so long as I lived, I was a
stay unto her, and unto the things that concerned her; but now her chief hope
next unto God consists in you. Therefore I pray you look well unto the
things that appertain unto her: see that nothing go to wrecke, waste and
decay. Provide that through your diligence her things may rather increase than
decrease. Ye know I hope the duty of a good servant, notwithstanding at this
my departure from you, I will put you in remembrance of it, that when I am
gone, ye may yet remember my admonitions, and so the more speedily answer unto
your vocation. Ephesians 6. Col. 3. 1. Tim. 6. Tit. 2. 1. Pet. 2.
The duty of a good servant is to serve his master and mistress willingly,
and with a free courage, even for conscience sake, not with the eye, but with
the heart, to obey them, to honor them, gently to answer them, not to pick
or steal away their goods, but to be faithful unto them in all things. See
rherefore that ye on this manner behave your selves toward your mistress
avoid all stubbornness, churlishnes, cursed speakings, telling of tales,
lying, picking, wast, idleness, negligence and sluggishnes, eschew all evil and
riotous company. Fly drunkenness and whoredom. Abstain from vain oaths and
foolish pastimes. So behave your selves in all your life and conversation, that
the name of God and his doctrine be not ill spoken of. Let the light of your
godly behavior so shine before men, that ye may do worship to the glorious
Gospel of our Savior Christ in all things. And in this serving your mistress
with a glad, ready and faithful will, think your selves to serve the Lord
your God, and to do that thing which is pleasing in his fight, and that he
also will see your pains recompensed, Col. 4.
as the holy Apostle faith, Ye servants be obedient unto them that are your
bodily masters in all things, not with the eye service as men pleasers, but in
singlenes of heart fearing God. And whatsoever you do, do it heartily, as
though ye did it to the Lord, and not unto men, knowing that of the Lord ye
shall receive the reward of inheritance, for ye serve the Lord Christ. But he
that sins shall receive according to his sin. For there is no respect of
persons with God. If ye serve your mistress truly and faithfully, hereafter,
when ye your selves shall be householders God shall likewise send you true and
faithful servants. But if ye serve her falsely and ungodly, then shall ye of
your servants be likewise served hereafter. For with what measure that ye mete
with all, shall other mete to you again, Mat. 7.2.
says our Savior Christ. Live therefore according to your vocation in the
fear of God, and ye shall prosper right well. God shall bless you, and never
leave you succourses. As the holy man Tobit says, be not afraid, truth it is
we lead here a poor life: but great good shall we have if we fear God, and
depart from all sin, and do well. Well the blessing of God be with you. Tob.
4.
For I must ere it be long away from you. Farewell. Thus I think I have showed
you, as much as hitherto you have desired of me.


Q. You have so, and I heartily thank you therefore. For thereby I learn how
to instruct and admonish them that are with me, and under me: but I have not
yet done. For how ever death be the last end of this life yet it is not the
least thing to be regarded in this life, (as before you have signified.) My
request now therefore is to know how the sick man in the agony of death is to
behave himself: for no doubt he must as well care to order himself aright in
death, as to prepare himself aright to death.


R. I will satisfy you in your petition, because you please me in your reason.
For to a good death there is as well required a good disposition in death, as a
right preparation to death. In the very agony of death therefore, the first
thing the sick man is to have care of, is, that as he has lived in faith* so
he may also die in faith. For such as he dies, such shall he be judged. And
such as the last day of this life does leave him, such shall the last day of
the world find him. Eccles. 11.3
As Solomon says, In the place that the tree falls, there it shall be. The
second, that as he has spent the former part of his life, so he may also
spend the latter: for obedience is better than sacrifice, and without obedience
his death cannot be acceptable to God, because he seems to go unto God of
fear and constraint, as a slave to a master; and not of love and good will,
as a child to his father. The third, that as in the beginning he received his
soul of God, so now in the end he renders it again to God. For as he was the
first giver, so he is the best keeper.


Q. I hope you will here deigne me the same liberty, that hitherto you have,
that so it shall be as lawful for me to question with you about these things,
as before it has been about others?


R. I should else do little for you. For whom at all times I would do as much
gladly, as I might fitly.


Q. By how much the more you are at all times ready to do for me, by so much
the more I am always bound to think my self beholding to you. All this is
courtesy in you: no desert in me.


R. Let such words pass, least time ouerpasse, leaving what you could say, go
to what you would say.


Q. I will then. Touching the first thing therefore you spoke of, what is it to
die in faith?


R. It is with all thy heart wholly to rely a man's self upon Gods special love
and favor and mercy in Christ, according as it is revealed in the volume of
the book of God.


Q. But why is the sick man in the agony of death to look to this?


R. Because that is the most special time of all his time, for him to put his
faith in practice.


Q. Why that?


R. Because then, all things in and of the world do fail and forsake him. His
friends, his riches, his pleasures, his outward senses, yea and his temporal
life too, do then all at once, leave and forsake him. What help soever in
times past they yielded him, yet then they fail him, and yield him no help
at all.


Q. And what can faith then do for him that so much you wish him to establish
it in him?


R. It can make him go wholly out of himself, and to despair of comfort and
salvation, in respect of any earthly thing, and cause him with all the power
and strength of his heart to rest on the pure mercy of almighty God.


Q. Has it ever effected so much in any?


R. Yea that it has in many.


Q. Where have you an instance thereof?


R. In the first book of Samuel, the thirtieth Chapter, and the sixth verse.


Q. Why what is there said?


R. 1. Sam. 30.6
That David comforted himself in the Lord his God.


Q. What does that make to the purpose you speak of?


R. As much as may be. For the time when David did this, was then; when the
people intending to stone him, there was nothing before his eyes to be seen
but present Death.


Q. And what made him then to do it?


R. The application of the merciful promise of God to his miserable and
distressed soul. For thus he says unto God, and of his promise in one place,
Psalm. 119.49 50.
Remember thy promise made to thy servant, wherein thou have caused me to
trust, it is my comfort in trouble: for thy promise has quickened me. And thus
of himself in another place, and the comfort he found in his trouble: My
soul she failed and my heart also, Psalm. 73.26.
but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever.


Q. But does it hereupon follow, that it will effect as much in some other?


R. What else? for wherefore else is this written of David, but for our
instruction? what agrees to and with the general, will not I hope disagree to
and with the particular. But for the general Paul says. Whatsoever things are
written aforetime, are written for our learning, Romans 15.4.
That we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might have hope. And
therefore for this particular, you may soon know what I might say. For written
you see it is: and therefore for our learning written it is.


Q. But it may be we may learn some other thing thence than this?


R. Though that may be, yet it follows not therefore, that this is not thence
to be learned. I stand not against other things, but for this.


Q. What reason have you therefore?


R. More then that which is showed, I have the efficacy of faith. For if faith
be; faith works. (Says James the Apostle) Faith without works, Iam. 2.26.
August. in sermon. 22.
is dead, and says Augustine that learned Clerk, Faith is called Faith, of
that which is done, two syllables do sound, when faith is named, the first is
of that which is done, the second is of God. I ask thee therefore whether thou
do believe, thou say I believe. Do what thou say, and it is faith,
and says our Savior Christ, Mar. 16.17.
These tokens shall follow them that believe, In my name they shall cast out
devils, and shall speak with new tongues, and shall take away Serpents, And if
they shall drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them, they shall lay
their hands on the sick, and they shall recover.


Q. But faith may then work some other thing, then that which you speak of?


R. But this is then the proper work of faith, and that then is the due time
for that work. Nom. 21.9.
As the Israelites a dying looked upon the brazen Serpent, which was erected by
the appointment of God, that so they might be healed from the stinging of
fiery Serpents: so others a dying must with the eye of a true and lively faith
look upon Christ exalted and crucified on the Cross, that so they may be
saved from their sins, and the wrath of God due unto them for the same. For
the brazen Serpent was a figure of Christ, Ioh. 3.14.
and Christ, as Paul says, is to the godly both in life and death advantage.
Philip. 1.21
In either whosoever believes in him shall not perish, but have eternal life.
Ioh. 3.15.
For God so loved the world, that he has given his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life, for
God sent not his Son into the world, that he should condemn the world, but
that the world through him might be saved.


Q. Is it not enough that in times past the sick man has believed, though in
the agony of death he does not believe?


R. No marry, First by the Evangelist the Lord says: Be thou faithful unto
the death, Apoc. 2.10
and I will give thee the Crown of life. Secondly by his Son he says: Mat.
10.22.
He that endures to the end he shall be saved, by neither he says, be
faithful a while, and it is well, but be faithful to the death, and endure to
the end: arguing by both, that it is not enough to begin well, and then give
over: but that having begun, they must never be weary, but continue to the
end. In vain is good done, Greg 1. moral.
if it be left before the life be ended, because he runs in vain, which gives
over before he comes at the mark. There is no joy of a ship that perishes in
ye haven; neither yet of a man that believes not in death. Blessed are they
(says the Spirit) which dye in the Lord, Apoc. 14.13
they therefore which would be blessed after their death, must labor to die in
the Lord at their death now they die in the Lord, which are ingraffed in Christ
by faith, and rest and stay only on him, and rejoice to be with him, they
therefore which will die in the Lord, must till their death continue in faith
for the Lord, faithes time, is this lives time, so that faith does want of her
time, if she has not all of this life's time, when this life is once past, the
time of faith is ouerpast, faith exceedes not this life, neither should she
fail during this life. As in the agony of death, the devil is most busy to
bring unto death, so the^ should faith most strive to help unto life, for thus
and well it is written: The just man shall live by his faith. Abac. 2.4.
1. the just in this life, shall live after this life, by his faith in God and
his Christ had and held during the term of this life, for except he believes
in this life, during the time of this life, he shall not live with God after
this life: by this you may easily tell whether it be enough, yea, or no, to
have believed in God and his Christ before death: though he does not believe at
all in death.


Q. I may so: but yet I cannot tell how any shall show that then he does
believe?


R. Neither need you to seek that, it is enough for you to know how he that
does believe shall show that he does believe.


Q. To come to that knowing, asks great cunning, for every one that says
he does believe, does not show indeed that he does believe.


R. But every one that does indeed believe, may show that he does believe.


Q. I deny not that, if he be in health, but I ask how he that is sick, and
in the agony of death, shall then show that he does believe?


R. And that I answer he may diverse ways do, first by praying unto God:
secondly by speaking well either of him, or of his religion.


Q. Why? but may a man pray when he is a dying?


R. I think not but often times he may, so I am sure Iaakob the Patriarch did,
so Christ our Savior did; so also Steven the Protomartir did, Genesis 47.31.
when death had seized upon the body of Iaakob, he raised up himself, and
turning his face toward the beds head, he leaned on the top of his staff by
reason of his feeblenes, and then he prayed unto God, and this his prayer is
counted a fruit of his faith, Heb. 11.22. When Christ was in his agony in the
garden he prayed, Heb. 11.22. Mat. 26.39.27.48. Luke 23.34.46. Mat. 26.37.
and upon the cross again he prayed, thrice upon the one, and thrice within
the other. In the garden once he said. o my Father if it be possible let this
cup pass from me: nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will. Another time
he said, O my Father if this cup cannot pass away from me, but that I must
drink it, thy will be done. Again he prayed the third time saying the same
words. Upon the cross, the first time he said, Mat. 27.46
Eli, Eli, Lamasabachtani* that is, my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
the second time he said: Luke 23.34
Father forgive them, for they know not what they do, the third time he said,
Father into thine hands, I commend my Spirit. When Steven was a stoning he
called upon the Lord, and that twice: once for himself, and once for his
enemies, for himself he said, Act. 7.69.
Lord Jesus receive my spirit, for his enemies he said, Lord lay not this
sin to their charge. And this his calling upon the Lord there is attributed
to his being full of the holy Ghost, by all this I gather that the sick man
believing, when he is dying, may also pray when he is dying. It is well known
what the good thief upon the cross did even when death was seizing upon him,
and life leaving him; and by that as by the former it may be collected, what
by a sick man dying may be practiced, for his crucifying death might be as
hard a death as some sick man's death, if not harder, the thief then prayed,
Lord remember me when thou come into thy kingdom, and so also the sick man
may nay, ought as much as ever he ought, for says God, call upon me in the
time of tribulation and anguish, and that's a time of both: and says James,
Iam. 5.13.
Is any man sick, let him pray. And then I think a man is sick if ever he be
sick, no sickness or affliction to the agony of death.


Q. Alas, Alas, when sense fails, and tongue falters, and death nippes, how
would you have a man to pray?


R. With heart, if not with tongue, in affection, if not in action, for prayer
stands not in the enuntiation of words, but in the affection of hearts, when
Moses spoke never a word unto God, God said unto Moses, Wherefore cryest thou
unto me? Exodus 14.15
When death therefore assailes me, and all senses external fails, so as the
sick be utterly unable to pray with tongue, yet if through the instigation of
others he be willing thereto, that his will to prayer is as good as if he did
pray: for as David says, Psalm. 10.17 145.19.
God hears the desires of the poor, and he will fulfill the desires of them
that fear him: he also will hear their cry, and will save them. And this he
speaks, as if the sighs, sobs, and groans of a repentant and believing heart,
were prayers before God, as well as the supplicatory words of a loud and
mournful crying tongue, but to stay further speech of this, though I might
make much more, you see many speak and understand well to their last gasp,
and they (I think) may use their tongues in prayer as well as their hearts.


Q. There are but a few that do so, and seldom when it is that any do so.


R. Yes undoubtedly, they are many that do so, and such times fall out often,
and neither is greatly to be marueiled at, for why? As good words either of
God and godliness, or to God and his goodness are sighs of a true and timely
faith: so often does God enable many to the last point of their lives, both to
speak, and to use many good words to his glory, their own comfort, and others
great good. If you will look either into the Scriptures, or into other
histories, you shall find there many good men to have spoken to the last, and
to have used merueilous good words at the last. In the nine and fourtieth of
Genesis the last words of Ia^kob were prophecies of blessings and curses upon
his children, the duration of government in Israel, and ardent prayer for his
own good. Amongst all and other things by him there said, these are neither
least nor last: Genesis 49.10.
The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, and the Lawgiver from between his
feet, till Shilo come. And again, O Lord I have waited for thy salvation. In
the two and three and thirteth of Deuteronomie; Deu, 32.35.
the last words of Moses, were his most excellent song, containing the
benefits of God toward his people; and their ingratitude toward him; and
Moses his blessing wherewith he blessed the children of Israel before his
death, the words are better for you there to read, then form here to repeat;
referring you thither therefore there to read them; here for this time I
willingly omit them. In the second of Samuel and the three and twentieth
Chapter, the last words of David were, The spirit of the Lord spoke by me, 2.
Sam. 23.1
and his word was in my tongue, the God of Israel spoke unto me, the strength
of Israel said, Bear rule over me etc. In the four and twentieth of the
second book of Chronicles, the last words of Zacharias the son of Iehoiada,
2. Chro. 24.22.
when he was stoned, were these, The Lord look upon it, and require it, the
last words of our Savior Christ when he was dying upon the cross, as they
were many and admirable, so they were full of spiritual grace and comfortable.
Mat. 27.46
First speaking to his Father he said, 1. Eli, Eli, Luke 23.34. Luke 23.43.
lamasabachtani. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me. 2. Father forgive
them, they know not what they do. 2. to the thief he said, Ioh. 19.26.27. etc.
Verily I say unto thee, to day shall thou be with me in Paradise. 3. to his
mother he said, Woman, behold thy Son, and to John, Behold thy mother. 4.
Earnestly desiring our salvation he said, I thirst, 5. Having made perfect
satisfaction unto God for man's offense he said, Luke 23.48
It is finished. Lastly when body and soul were parting he said again unto
God; Father into thine hands I commend my spirit, Act. 7.56.59.60.
the last words of Steven were these, 1. Behold I see the heavens open, and the
Son of man standing at the right hand of God. 2. Lord Jesus receive my spirit.
3. Lord lay not this sin to their charge. In other writers you may see the
last words of others, and those very good, all spoken at the last cast of life.
Eusebius. lib. 4 cap. 15.
At the last and as the last, thus spoke Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna; Thou art
a true God without lying, therefore in all things I praise thee, and bless
thee, and glorify thee, by the eternal God and high Priest Jesus Christ thine
only son, by whom and with whom, to thee and the holy spirit, be all glory
now and for ever. And thus Ignatius Bishop of Antioch: Id. lib. 3. c. 30.
I care not what kind of death I die. I am the bread of the Lord, and must be
ground with the teeth of Lions, that I may be clean bread for Christ who is
the bread of life for me. And thus Ambrose Bishop of Millaine: Paulinus in vita
eius.
I have not so lead my life among you, as if I were ashamed to live. Neither
do I fear death because we have a good Lord. Possidonius in vita Augustini
And thus Augustine Bishop of Hippo. 1. He is no great man that thinks it no
great matter, that trees and stones fall and mortal men die. 2. Just art thou
o Lord and righteous is thy judgment. Fox preface to Luthers Comment. upon
the Psalms of degrees.
And thus Luther comparable to the chiefest (as Master Fox once said,) My
heavenly father God and father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and God of all
comfort, I give thee thanks, that thou have revealed unto me thy son Jesus
Christ, whom I have believed, whom I have professed, whom I have loved,
whom I have praised, whom the Bishop of Rome, and the whole company of the
wicked persecuteth and reuileth. I pray thee my Lord Jesus Christ, receive my
poor soul, my heavenly Father though I be taken from this life, and this
body of mine is to be laid down, yet I know certainly that I shall remain
with thee for ever, neither shall any be able to pull me out of thy hands. And
thus Bishop Hooper, O Lord Jesus son of David have mercy on me, and receive
my soul. And thus Annas Burgius; Forsake me not O Lord, least I forsake thee.
And thus Melancthon: if it be the will of God I am willing to die, and I
beseech him that he will grant me a joyful departure, and to the like effect
many others. But to speak of them al were too much, the examples of those good
men that at the last end of their lives have expressed their notable faith in
God, and his Christ, are infinite, and therefore too many as well for me to
recite, as for you to remember. As these (which I have mentioned) may suffice
to show what many have done, so may they well serve to signify what all should
do, for good words by the good are ever to be spoken, so long as a word by
them can be spoken.


Q What if through the extremity of their pains, and the idleness of their
brains, such words cannot or will not be spoken? shall we think them to be
ever the more faithles and ungodly?


R. Truly no: God forbid we should, many good men are silent long before
their death; many again, through the extremity of their disease speak hardly
and badly at their death, though therefore their words neither be as they
should be, nor as we would wish them to be, yet must we neither judge of them
by their words, nor condemn them for their words, not judge, least we our
selves come to be judged, for with what measure we mete unto others, with the
like will others mete unto us, as therefore we would not be judged of others
for any infirmity in our selves, so must we not judge others for any
infirmity espied in them, judgment is Gods, and to him we must leave it, as
Paul says, We must judge nothing before the time, 1. Cor. 4.5.
until the Lord come, who will lighten things hid in darkness, and make the
counsels of the hearts manifest, that every man may have the praise of God. Not
condemn; least therefore we chance to be condemned, evil words at the time
of death may proceed of other causes, then want either of faith or religion,
the disease may cause much, and in every disease men are not ever alike
affected, the more violent the disease is whereof a man dies, the more
unseemly are his gestures when he dies, of violent sicknesses, the companions
are often fransies, and other unseemly motions. As therefore it is folly to
attribute that to one thing, which is to be attributed to another, so it is to
condemn a man for words which come not from him, but from the disease that
does possess him.


Q. When we see any then at the point of death, using worse words than they
should, or we would, what will you that we do?


R. Other things than either judge or condemn.


Q. That's like in deed, because you dislike them, but what are those other
things you speak of.


R. First, persuade him as you may and can to use better, for it is written,
Leuit. 19.17
Thou shall plainly rebuke thy neighbor, and suffer him not to sin.
Secondly, pray for him as you ought, that the spirit of God may put better
words in his mouth. For no man can say, 1. Cor. 12.3. Luke 11.13.
Jesus is the Lord, but by the Spirit, and this spirit is obtained by prayer.
Thirdly, look upon your own present love toward him, and for that, practice
the two former last named, but abstain from the two other before mentioned: for
as the Apostle says, Love thinks not evil, 1. Cor. 13.5.
but love beleueeth all things, hops all things, endures all things: and
therefore it thinks not that he is altogether faithles, that uses a word
fruitles, but believes that he is, and hops that he may be the child of God
a few bad words notwithstanding. Romans 7.20.
For sure it is not he that speaks them, but the sin that dwells in him.
Fourthly and lastly, look upon the sickmans life bypast and gone, and if that
has been as it ought to be, never fear evil, nor yet suspect amiss. For as
that ancient and learned father Augustine says: August. de ciuitat. dei lib.
1.
That is not to be thought an evil death, before which there has gone a good
life, for there is nothing which makes an evil death, but that which follows
death. Now because that's unknown to us, Id. lib. 5. de baptismo ca. 27.
because that many that seem to be without, are within, and many that seem
to be within, are without, we must learn to hope the best, and leave to judge
the worst.


Q. God grant that so we may, for prone enough we are of our selves to judge
amiss.


R. That makes not, but that we must restrain our selves.


Q. Neither do I say otherwise, for that cause I wished as I did.


R. And nothing amiss, for our nature as it is, is to be corrected, and not to
be followed, and that which even now you used, is a mean to have that I speak
of, practiced.


Q. Therefore I used it, but to let this point go, and to meddle no further
with censuring, whether men die in faith or out of faith, may it please you to
say some thing of the next, which is their dying in obedience.


R. I have said somewhat thereof already.


Q. That's little to that I would have you say.


R. Why? what would you have me to say?


Q. What it is to die in obedience?


R. That is soon said.


Q. The sooner, the better.


R. To die in obedience is to be willing, ready and desirous to go out of
this world, whenever it shall please God to call, and that without murmuring
or repenting.


Q. No marvel though you say a man in his sickness is to take care for it. It
is not easy, how shall a sick man compass it?


R. By practicing the former, For to him that believes, all things are
possible, Mark. 9.23.
and therefore this easy, not impossible.


Q. Possible peradventure supernaturally, but not portable voluntarily.


R. Yes no doubt: for that faith which makes all things possible beyond
nature, makes all things portable against will.


Q. That may be, and I verily think is, but that a man should be willing,
ready and desirous to go out of this world without murmuring, grudging or
repining, whenever, wheresoever, and howsoever it shall please God to call
him, is very hard, rare and difficulte.


R. Not a whit, If a man has faith, Ioh. 5.4.
but as a grain of mustard seed: for this is the victory that overcomes the
world, as John says, Even your faith. What therefore should a believing man be
unwilling to undergo, what necessarily he must undergo?


Q. No he should not; that I grant: but what may persuade him that he shall
not? this I ask.


R. And that I answer, the very last thing I spoke of, for voluntarily that
is to be suffered, which necessarily must be suffered.


Q. What then?


R. Therefore death voluntarily is to be suffered.


Q. Wherefore that?


R. Because death necessarily is to be suffered, Heb. 9.26.
for as the Apostle says: It is appointed of God, that all men shall once die.


Q. But how shall any of them be persuaded willingly to die?


R. I have already told you, by this very necessity of once dying.


Q. All men know they shall once die, yet no man almost is ever the willinger
to die?


R. The greater is their sin, and the more is their shame, by how much the
more certainly they know they shall die, by so much the more willingly they
should die, this knowledge should work that willingness.


Q. I deny not but it should; I see not that it does.


R. Somewhere you may see it, though every where you cannot see it, knowledge
is not ever fruitles, they that know this well, frame themselves to die
willingly, for to die willingly, is a fruit of knowing they shall die once.


Q. But they have more then, then this knowledge to make them willing: for
that's not the only tree whereon this fruit does grow.


R. Neither did I yet say so: there are many things which may move men in
sickness to be desirous of death ere it comes, and makes them willing to die,
when it comes.


Q. I would I might be acquainted with some of them, if you will not, or
cannot recite all; yet I beseech you reckon up some, (if not the most, yet the
best of them,) that so whenever death does come, I may the better know how to
bid her welcome?


R. To pleasure you therewith, I pass not for any pain thereabout. First it
is Gods will, pleasure and ordinance that all shall die, for God created us,
that we should once die: no man therefore is to repugne and strive against the
good pleasure of God. Romans 9.19.
For who ever resisted his will? the sick man's and every man's daily prayer
is, Thy will be done in earth, Mar. 6.10.
as it is in heaven. Why therefore should he be unwilling to have that thing
chance unto him, for which he daily prays? That were but a drawing near
unto God with his lips, and a dishonouring of him with his heart. And what
were that but an assuring of his soul, that in time he shall be despised and
abhorred of God? for thus the Lord himself says, 1. Sam. 2.30
Them that honor me, I will honor; and they that despise me shall be despised.
But to proceed: it is natural to die, for who ever lived, that has not died?
who does now or shall hereafter live, that shall not also taste of death? why
then should he that is sick desire to degenerate and grow out of kind? One man
is willing to be rich, because an other is rich, to have wife and children,
because another has so, to go trimly apparelled, because another does so etc.
Why should he not also be willing to die, because another does so? In this
there is greater necessity, then in the others possibility, for every man
cannot be rich, every man cannot be brave and trim, every man cannot have wife
and children etc. but certain it is, that every man must die, his auncesters
the most holy and perfect have died; why should he disdain to follow their
steps? Is he better then Abraham, Isaac and Iaakob, and the rest of the
Patriarchs, that he should not die? Is he wiser then David and Solomon, and
other of the kings, that he should here upon earth for ever live? Is he
holier then Aaron, and Eleazer, and other of the priests, that he should escape
Death? is he cunninger than Nathan, and Esaie, and Jeremy, and other of the
Prophets, that he should not yield to nature? when as all these Kings, Priests,
Prophets, and Patriarchs are dead, why should he grieve and grudge to die? as
by them he is to learn, that once he must dye; so by their example he is to
gather, that never either wisdom, or holiness, or cunning can save him from
death. If death had been only cast upon him, the burden thereof might have
been thought somewhat the more unrighteous and intolerable. But for so much as
all the forenamed have already tasted of death, and all other hereafter
shall, there is no reason but he also should both willingly and patiently submit
himself thereto, for he is here no other, than they were and all are. A
stranger and soiourner as all his fathers were, an aliaunt and Pilgrim as all
his brethren are. Here he has no continuing city, but he is to seek one
which is to come. Whiles he is here at home in the body, he is absent from the
Lord. The days of his Pilgrimage are both few and evil. Nature has given him
but an Inn to rest in, not a place to dwell in, and what should a stranger be
unwilling to depart hence, and go home? that is neither the part nor property
of a stranger. A stranger as he delights to hear from his country when he is
thence, so he desires to go thither, that he may for ever abide there. There is
his father, there is his mother, there are his brethren, there are his
kinsefolkes and acquaintance. And with the^ he is desirous to be. As ye Eagles
are, where the carcass is; so his affection is, where these are, why then
should he or any sick (who is no other than a stranger) be unwilling to die,
and lay down his life? his father, his mother, his brethren, his kindred are
all hence, and in heaven. Matthew. 6.9. Gal. 4.26.
Our Father (says he) which art in heaven. Jerusalem which is about, is free,
and is the mother of us all says Paul. Act. 3.21.
Jesus Christ (says Peter) the heavens shall contain, until the time that
all things be restored. And says Solomon, Sap. 3.1.
the souls of the righteous are in the hands of God, and no torment shall
touch them. And who would not be willing to be with them? Luke 15.18. Ruth.
1.16.
I will go to my Father; quoth the prodigal. Entreat me not to leave thee,
nor to depart from thee, quoth Ruth, whithersoeuer thou go, I will go: and
where thou dwell I will dwell: Philip. 1.23
I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ; quoth Paul. And again, in
another place to Barnabas he said: Act. 15.36.
let us return and visit our brethren in every city, and see how they do.
Much more may he say thus, if he be wise, stay here he cannot; he is mortal.
He may not; he is miserable, he shall not. Upon that condition he came in that
once he should go out. It is appointed of God that all men shall once die. It
is appointed, and therefore it cannot be altered. Heb. 9.26.
It is appointed of God, and therefore it will not be changed. He is God, and
is not changed; his counsel shall stand and his will will be performed. It is
appointed of God that all men shall once die; and therefore it will not be
remedied, but once he must die. What is appointed all men, must needs be
appointed him. As where all are expressed, none are exempted, so in all he must
needs be comprehended. I hope he will not expect to have that granted him
which was denied Christ himself. By how much the more he is inferior to him
in other things, by so much the less is he like to be superior to him in
this. As he was man, he died, because he is man, he must neither grieve nor
grudge to die. The servant is not greater than his Lord; Ioh. 13.16. Ioh.
15.20. Matt. 10.24 Ioh. 13.13.
the disciple is not above his master. Neither must he be above Christ, or
greater than Christ, Christ is his master, Christ is his Lord. As Christ
therefore dyed willingly for him, so should he for Christ. He has left him an
example, 1. Pet. 2.21.
that he should follow his steps. It is more for his profit so to do than he
is aware. Who would be an enemy to his own good? he cannot cease to sin,
except he die, why should he be unwilling to escape so great an evil? he shall
never come to the true life, where felicity both joyful and eternal is except
he die; why should he neglect to attain so great a good? he shall never have
the fruition of Gods majesty, and the blessed company of heavenly spirits
except he die; why should he not pray daily to be delivered from this present
evil world, upon condition he might once come to enjoy the most glorious
presence of the almighty: The very heathens which knew not God aright, but only
dreamed of the immortality of the soul, as those that look'te for a better
life after this, (though they knew not what that life was or might be) both
wished death ere it came, and died valiantly and joyfully when it came; and
shall he being a Christian, one which knows both God and his word, and has
the promise of joy, hope and comfort after this life, both abhor death ere it
comes, and refuse to undergo it when it comes? oh fie for shame that it should
be so. If an Ethnicke said thus: Cic. lib. 1. quest. Tuscul.
Oh immortal God, how is that pleasant and joyful journey to be wished for,
which being once done and past, there remains no sorrow, no care, no
pensiuenes? o that goodly and pleasant day when it shall be my hap to leave
this filthy and troublesome world: and come to their companies that inhabit the
heavens. Id. de senectute.
If God would suffer me, that I being of this age might become an infant and
sucking child again, I would utterly refuse it, neither would I by any means
call the race that I have run, back again, that I might again be young.
For what pleasure and commodity has this life? yea rather what displeasure,
incommodity, pain, travel and trouble has it not? but let it be granted,
that it has pleasures: certes yet has it either saciety or measure. And
nature in this world has given us a place to tarry in for a while, but not to
dwell and continue in for ever. What should a Christian say? to him should
death be much better, and less bitter than to an heathen? Of him therefore
should death be better accepted than of any heathen. But it is a world to see
the world, the heathen writers in their monuments call death a changing for a
better life, a quiet sleep, are-mouing from mortality to immortality, from
trouble to quietness; from the shadow of a life unto a very perfect and
vncounterfet life, from sorrow to joy, from evil to good, and haven of rest, a
solace of the mind; and end of all evil and wickedness, and a beginning of
all true joy, felicity and pleasure, and therefore they were unwilling to
live. The Christian professors acknowledge all this, and more too, and yet
they are unwilling to die. What must follow hereupon, but that they must
therefore be their judges. It is said, that one once having read a little book
of Platoes touching the immortality of the soul did therefore make a way
himself, being thereto incensed by too great a love to eternity and a better
life. How much more should he that has read the whole book of God touching
the happy estate of soul and body after death, be willing well to welcome
death when God does impose and lay the same upon him? 1. In Gods book of life
there are better reasons found to persuade by thereto, than in Platoes book of
the immoratlitie of the souls there are any to enforce the making away of a
man's own life. 2. God has more authority over. the soul of man to
recommaund it again to himself at his pleasure; than man has over his life,
to deceive himself of it when he will. God is the first giver, and therefore
should be the first receiver. Man is the sole recaller, and therefore should be
the safe keeper. But not longer than the first doner is content he should enjoy
such a gift. All good men have ever desired to depart with it, when God was
purposed to recall it. And what should not he that is sick do the like?
either his sickness has made him good, or it ought to have made him good. For
sickness is ever sent for good, and Gods great mercy it is, that he warnes
with sickness ere ever he strikes with death. If it has made him good, why
is he unwilling to lay down his life, when God does call for his life? if it
has found him good, why would he longer detain it life than he may? If it be
to make him good, why does he hinder the working of it? be he good, or has he
a mind to be good, it is not his part to be unwilling to die. So far from
being unwilling to die, have sundry of the godliest wights (that ever were in
the world) been, as earnestly they have longed, wished, desired and prayed for
death. That Princely Prophet David cries out and says. Woe is me and sorry am
I for it, Psalm. 120.5.
that I must yet longer abide in this world like as the heart desires the water
broookes, Psalm. 42.1
so longs my soul after God. My soul is a thirst for God, yea even for the
living God, when shall I come to appear before the presence of God? Psalm. 84 1
And again: O how amiable are thy dwellings thou Lord of hosts? my soul has
a desire and longing to enter into the courts of the Lord, my heart and my
flesh rejoice in the living God. Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, they
shall always be praising thee. One day in thy courts is better than a thousand,
I had rather be a door keeper in the house of my God than to dwell in the
tents of ungodliness. In another Psalm he prays after this manner; Psalm.
142.7^.
Deliver my soul out of prison, that it may come and praise thy name. That
good old man Tobit, Tobit. 3.6.
made thus his prayer unto God and said: O Lord deal with me according to thy
will, and (...) command my spirit to be received in peace. For more expedient
were it for me to die than to live. How desirous of death the holy Apostle Paul
was, these his words do manifest, Christ is to me life, Philip. 1.21 23.
and death is to me advantage. And therefore again he says: I desire to be
loosed and to be with Christ. What should I speak of that ancient and godly
father Simeon, whose history is known, and laid down in the second of Luke?
how did he desire to die as soon as he had seen Christ in the flesh, and know
him to be the Savior of the world? Was not this thereupon his present saying?
Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace according to thy word. Luke
2.29, 30, 31, 32.
For mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou have prepared before the
face of all people, a light to the Gentiles, and thy glory of the people
Israel. Such affection as was in these good and godly men, David, Tobit,
Simeon, and Paul, should also be in those that are sick, and by their
sickness are admonished to look for death, they should desire rather to die,
than to live, to be dissolved, than to be restored, to be delivered, than to
be detained. For if they mark well, what is their life but a vapor that
vanishes, a flower that fades, a wind that passes, a smoke that flies, a
lamp that burns. And what should they be desirous to have a wind to hold,
a flower to stand, a smoke to stay, a vapor to continue longer then either
they may, or God will suffer and permit? He numbers their days, he measures
their months, he records their years; when they are all come to their sum,
number and measure, why should they be unwilling either to end them, or to end
with them? will they nill they, end they shall, and end them God will. And
better I think it would be with them, if God might end them with their good
will, then it will be, if he ends them with their evil will. Apoc. 14.13
For blessed are they which die in the Lord: but it is in doubt what they are,
which die unwillingly, for they hardly die in the Lord, because they die not
in obedience to the Lord.


Q. I but I pray you, do not censure them so hardly, you know not what death
can do, death is fearful, and the fear thereof may affright the best.


R. But not so I hope, as that it shall make the^ utterly unwilling to die, for
though death of it self be fearful, yet is not every way fearful, nor to
every one fearful: though in it self it be the entrance into eternal misery,
because of sin from whence it came, and whose wages it is, as Paul says;
Romans 6.23.
yet in Christ it is the gate to eternal life, abounding with all felicity:
for when Christ took away sin, he took away also death issuing from sin
which drew with it eternal condemnation, and when he gave unto us
righteousness, he gave unto us also immortality and celestial felicity the
companion of righteousness, so far is it therefore from the godly to fear
death, which terrifies others, as often they wish death, and soon they desire
to leave this life, for they know they are here but strangers, and not
citizens, and therefore they are ever seeking a City to come, to them
therefore death is pleasant and amiable, for then cease all their miseries and
troubles, yea then begins all their joys and pleasures, as appears by this
saying of John the Evangelist. Apoc. 14.13
Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, for from henceforth the spirit
says, that they shall be at rest from their labors. But to the unfaithful and
unbelieving death is fearful, for then begins their sorrows and miseries,
their plagues and torments, as is to be seen in the history of the rich man,
Luke 16. When the wise man therefore speaks of this very point in question,
this is his saying: Sir. 41. 1.
Oh death how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man that lives at rest in
his possessions? unto the man that has nothing to vex him, and that has
prosperity in all things: yea unto him that yet is able to receive meat, or
that yet sets his mind on belly cheer. Sy. 41.2.
O death how acceptable is thy judgment unto the needful, and unto him, whose
strength fails, and that is now in his last age, and is vexed with all
things, and to him that despaireth, and has lost patience, and this thereupon
is his exhortation: Fear not thou the judgment of death: remember them that
have been before thee, and that come after: this is the ordinance of the Lord
over all flesh. And why would thou be against the pleasure of the most high,
whether it be ten, or a hundredth, or a thousand years, there is no defense for
life against the grave.


Q. But like you this his exhortation, and that which he says touching the
matter in question?


R. What else? I know no reason why I should dislike either, he speaks truth,
and according to truth, and should I dislike his speaking of truth?


Q. No, but yet you may examine the truth?


R. What? where there is no doubt? but I doubt whether I may examine the truth,
further then for the finding out of the truth for the truth is to be believed,
not examined.


Q. Put in, if it be once manifested.


R. Whether that be in or no, the truth must be believed, Heb. 11.1.
For faith (as the Apostle says) is the ground of things which are hoped for,
and the evidence of things which are not seen. And Gregory says, Grc. ho 26.
super eua^g. Amb, de Trinitate.
That faith is worth little, which has proof from human reason. Take
arguments away (says Ambrose) where faith is sought. In her own schools let
logic now hold her peace. Fishers are believed, not Logicians. August. super
Ioh.
What is faith, but to believe which thou do not see? whence and how, the
Trinity is comprehended, o man thou do well enquire: how it is believed,
thou do not well ask, yea therefore it is well believed, because soon it
is not comprehended, for if it were soon comprehended, it were not needful
that it should be believed, because it should be seen. But to leave this, and
to return to what we were in hand withal. What is it that you dislike in the
wise man's saying, you make so much ado about it?


Q. I dislike not any thing though I doubt of something.


R. What is that you doubt of? of a man's fear^ng death?


Q. I need not doubt of that, that's a thing a man cannot avoid.


R Yet that's a thing a man should refrain.


Q. Why? would you not have a man to be afraid of death?


R. No, not a good man; not a faithful and believing man, for what should he
fear death that has his faith fixed on Christ's death? Death is swallowed up
into victory through Christ's death, death has neither power nor dominion over
him that believes.


Q. But that all men do not, for all men have not faith?


R. But I speak to him, and of him that has faith.


Q. And would you not have him that has faith, to fear death?


R. Not so, as he should, therefore be utterly unwilling to dye: for it is
appointed by God, that all men shall once dye, and I would not have him that
has faith, to withstand the ordinance of God: for his it is to obey, not to
resist.


Q. How then would you have him to fear it?


R. First, as it is the destruction of human nature in him, i. as it makes
him cease to be a living man: for so Christ feared it when he sweat water and
blood in the garden, and hereupon said: My soul is heavy unto death: Mat.
26.38.
Secondly, as it is an hurt to the church or common wealth, for often by death
the church and commonwealth are deprived of those which either were then
indeed, or might have been in time, a great help, stay, and comfort to either.


Q. Otherwise than thus would you not have him to fear it?


R. No.


Q. And why?


R. For many causes. First, because it is unto him an abolishing of sin. For
he that is dead, Romans 6.7.
is freed from sin, he then cease to offend God any more as he has done.
Secondly, because it is a bettring of his bodies condition, for whereas before
it was sensible, and so perplexed with many miseries; it is by death made
insensible, and therefore freed from all calamities: whereas before in life, it
was both an active and passive instrument for sin, it is then after death
neither of both. Thirdly, because it is the way for his soul to come to rest,
life and glory. For they that die in the Lord, rest from their labors, enjoy
life, and remain in glory. Rest from their labors, Apoc. 14.13. Enjoy life,
Mat. 22.32. remain in glory. Romans 2.7.10. Dan. 12.3. And they that come to
these things must die ere they come at them. As one says, There is no other
way to come to heaven by, but death.


Q. And what conclude you thereupon?


R. That which I should, viz. that he which has faith in Christ, should not
so fear death, as therefore he should be unwilling to leave this life. Cyprian
in sermon. de mortalitate
For as Cyprian says, It is his part to fear death, which has no will to go
to Christ: It is his to have no will to go to Christ, which believes not he
shall begin to reign with Christ. God (says he) has promised to thee
departing out of this world immortality, and eternity, and do thou doubt?
this is not to have known God at al; this is with the sin of incredulity to
offend Christ the master of all believers; this is being set in the Church,
not to have faith in the house of faith. Let him be afraid to die, who not
being borne anew by water and the spirit, is mancipated to the fire of hell,
let him be afraid to die, which is not marked with the cross and passion of
Christ: let him be afraid to die, which from this death must pass to the
second death: let him be afraid to die, whom the eternal flame shall torment
with everlasting pain so soon as he departes this world: let him be afraid
to die, upon whom this by his long stay here is bestowed, that during his
abode here, his punishment is deferred: but let him never be afraid to die,
that knows himself to be here a Pilgrim and stranger, that believes the
resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting, that loves the Lord with
all his heart. As the forenamed writer says. What stranger is he that hastens
not to return into his country? We make account that Paradise is our
country, now we have begun to have the Patriarchs our Parents; Why do we not
make have and run, that we may both see our country, and salute our
parents. A great number of our dear friends does there expect us, a mighty
train and troop of parents, brethren and children, now sure of their own
immortality, and yet careful for our safety does wish us: to come unto their
sight and company, what joy is it in common both to them and to us? What
pleasure there without fear of dying, and with certainty of living? How great
and perpetual felicity? Again, who would be afraid to dye, that believes
the resurrection of the dead? For as one says, The most sure trust of
christians is the promised resurrection of the dead from above And no marvel
when Christ himself says, This is the will of him that sent me, Ioh. 6.40.
that every man which sees the Son, and believes in him, should have
everlasting life; and I will raise him up at the last day. And again, I am the
resurrection and the life, he that believes in me, although he were dead, yet
shall he live and whosoever lives, and believes in me, shall never dye.
Lastly, who would be afraid to dye, that loves God sincerely? For it is the
property of him that loves, to adioyne himself to the thing he loves, and to
wish that he might enjoy it, and to grieve at that which does hinder his
enjoying of it. It is a token therefore, that he loves not God as he should
that is, either afraid or unwilling to dye: for other way to come to God, to
heaven, to immortality, than by death, there is none; he that dies not,
comes to neither, And who if he might would not come to all? Except the
wheat corn fall into the ground and dye, it bideth alone: so except a man fall
into the earth and dye, he bideth alone: Eccl. 4.10.
and woe (says Solomon) to him that is alone, but if the wheat corn die, it
brings forth much fruit, so if a faithful man dye, he attaineth to much
fruit? He comes as I said to God, to heaven, to immortality. And who would
not if he might, come to all these? None surely that is wise, that is godly,
that is faithful and believing: for to come to God, is to come to the
fountain of living waters, which who so comes to, shall never more thirst;
to come to heaven, is to come to the haven of everlasting happiness, which who
so comes to, shall never more faint; to come to immortality is to come to
eternal life, which who so comes to, shall never more dye: none therefore
that is wise, that is godly, that is faithful, that is believing, should be
afraid and unwilling to dye, for dye any when he will, that is so qualified,
and death shall not hurt him, death shall have no power over him, death shall be
game and not loss unto him.


Q. I but whenever he shall dye, death will be painful unto him?


R. And what then? Let him be never the more unwilling to die for that: for
why, the Apostle says, Act. 14.20.
By many tribulations we must enter into the kingdom of God (By many) and
therefore he must be willing to have the pains of death some: we must enter
into the kingdom of God, and therefore never be unwilling to die for the
pains of death, for as the same Apostle says. Romans 8.18.
All the afflictions of this life, are not worthy of the glory which shall be
showed unto us, and therefore the few afflictions in death are unworthy
thereof. The pains that are suffered are but temporal, but the joys which are
to be enjoyed are eternal, and who will not be content to suffer a short pain
for a long pleasure? He is not worthy of any sweet, which came away with no
sour, the labourer works, ere he receives his wages, the Soldier fightes,
ere he winnes the victory; the gamester runs, ere he enioyes the price; 2.
Tim. 2.11
And the christian must die with Christ, ere ever he shall live with Christ,
yea he must suffer with Christ, ere ever he shall reign with Christ. As he
that will have the meare, must crack the shell, so he that will have the life
after death, must abide the death that goes before life. As for the pains
thereof they are neither greatly to be dreaded, nor impatiently to be suffered:
not to be dreaded because they cannot hurt. Romans 8.28.
For to them that love God, (as they do which believe in God) all things work
together for the best, not unwillingly to be suffered, because they bring much
good. For these light afflictions, which are but for a moment, 2. Cor. 4.17
cause unto him that suffers them a far most excellent, and an eternal
weight of glory, while he looks not on the things which are seen, but on the
things which are not seen, for the things which are seen are temporal but the
things which are not seen are eternal. Who now that is wise will not
willingly suffer the one, that he may enjoy the other? there is no comparison
between glass and gold; and very unwise is he, that will not do away the
first for the last, if he may: even so there is here no comparison between
the pains of death which are to be suffered, and the joys of heaven, which
are to be expected. So that altogether foolish is he which will not willingly
abide the one, that happily he may attain the other, the pains that
ordinarily are suffered in death natural, are nothing to the pains that are
suffered in death violent and unnatural; yet diverse godly men have suffered
them willingly, that they might after in heaven live happily. Why then should
not he that is godly, suffer willingly the pains of death natural, that so
he may come to the fruition of joy celestial, for my part I see small reason to
the contrary.


Q. What then?


R. Let him then that is unwilling to die naturally, because death is
painful, consider of the great and intolerable pains, which they have
suffered, which died violently and unnaturally, and see if that will not
animate him to die willingly, and incite him to bear the pains of death
courageously.


Q. Shall he find those that have died violently to have suffered so great
pains?


R. What else?


Q. Where shall he find that?


R. Both in the Scriptures and otherwhere.


Q. What shall he find in the Scriptures touching this matter?


R. That the prophet Isaiah for the hope of everlasting life, suffered his body
to be cut asunder with a wooden saw, that Jeremiah was stoned to death; that
Amos after diverse other grievous torments was thrust into the temples of the
head with a great nail of iron, and so shortly after died; Mat. 14
that John Baptist was cast into prison and beheaded, that James the brother of
John was slain with the sword; Act. 12.
that Steven was stoned unto death, and last of all that Christ our Savior was
crucified, Mat. 27.
and nailed to the cross, on which he died.


Q. And what otherwhere?


R. That some good men were devoured of wild beasts; Acts and Monum.
some burnt with fire unto ashes; some broiled unto death upon hot coals;
some slain with the sword; some hanged upon gibbets; some pierced to death
with arrows; some beaten to death with stones; some boiled; some rent in
pieces with hot burning iron hooks; some racked; some drowned; some cruelly
murdered in prison, some torn in su^der by horses; some dismembered by trees;
some one ways made away, and some another: many an one very badly, very
beastly, and very cruelly.


Q When this is found, what shall he thereupon find?


R. That willingly he is to die, though in much pain he does die.


Q. Why that?


R. Because willingly they suffered a violent and unnatural death.


Q. That yet appears not?


R. In the forenamed places it may and does soon appear, for many when they
were offered life, refused and accepted death.


Q. Not because they were willing then to die, but because they could not as
they would longer live.


R. As much and more for the first cause, as for and then the last.


Q. Though that be granted, yet is not the other proved.


R. What other?


Q. That willingly he is to die that dies naturally, because willingly they
died, that died violently.


R. What more or better proved? What better instruction may thence be taken?
what better collection may thence be drawn? If they so suffered, that
otherwhere they might be crowned. Why should not others in like sort suffer,
that otherwhere they may be blessed?


Q. I deny not but they should; yet I say not that therefore they should.


R. And in so saying you say not as you ought; if any death be to be suffered
willingly, a natural death is much more, a natural death is sometime better,
if not most what then some other, often times there are therein fewer pains,
then in some other, and what should a man be unwilling to die for a few
pains? No Soldier is unwilling to fight for a few blows; no fields-man
unwilling to plow for a few blastes; no trauailer unwilling to go on his
journey for a few showers; neither should any christian be unwilling to die
for a few pains, either they are not so many for number, or so mighty for
measure as they might be, or as they have deserved they should be, and what
should he suffer then unwillingly, when as they are neither many nor mighty? 2.
Tim. 2.5.
No man is crowned, says Paul, except he strive lawfully: Neither say I, is
any man blessed except he suffers patiently, what therefore should he be
unwilling to die, that knows of necessity he must die, and would gladly be
blessed when he does die? though he dies never so painefully when he does die;
yet let him die willingly, that he may die blessedly, as Paul said of his
preaching, If I do it willingly, I have a reward, 1. Cor. 9.17
so say I of his dying, if he does it willingly, he has a reward. Apoc. 14.13
Wis. 3.1.
Blessed are they which die in the Lord. The souls of the righteous are in the
hands of God, and no torment shall touch them. Though they suffer pain before
men, yet is their hopeful of immortality. They are punished but in few things,
yet in many things shall they be well rewarded. In the time of their vision
they shall shine, and run through as the sparks among the stubble, they
shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord
shall reign for ever. And when so great a reward as this now mentioned, is not
only propounded, but promised, what should he die unwillingly, that must die
necessarily? the hope of reward should move much, the Apostle Paul was willing
to suffer all kind of pains and torments for the glory of God, and therefore
he said, the holy ghost does testify in every City, saying. Act. 20.23.
That bonds and troubles do abide me: but I care not for them, neither is my
life dear unto me, so that I may finish my course with joy. So should he that
is about to die, be willing to suffer all the pains of death, and therefore
say; Though once it be appointed me to dye and I cannot shift it, yet I care
not for it, neither is my life dear unto me, so that I may lay it down with
joy: for as Paul said of himself, I am ready not only to be bound, but also
to dye at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus: so may he say of himself:
I am ready not only to suffer with Christ, if so it be his will, but also to
dye for him, wheresoever and whenever it shall please him to call me. This if
he would say, as it would be wondrous profitable to him, so would it be
merueilous comfortable to others: he should receive a reward for it, and they
take occasion by it, to glorify God their father in heaven, forgiving such
gifts here on earth unto men.


Q. And this it may be he would say, were it not for the fear of death, with
which he is possessed, the pains of death, with which he is astonished and some
other things, with which he is molested.


R. These things should not hinder him, as I have showed.


Q. Yet they do, as often it is experienced.


R. That is the fault of men that are to die, not of the things: for these are
no causes to make men unwilling to dye, that know of necessity they must dye.


Q. Yet they are taken for causes, as well as other things?


R. I know they are; but that makes not that they are causes, men's accepting
them as causes, is no proving of them to be causes.


Q. Neither do I say they are?


R. Why do you then so often propound them as causes?


Q. Because I would have you thoroughly disprove them to be causes.


R. In so doing you do little amiss, but have I not already sufficiently
disproued them to be causes?


Q. Yes so many of them as are named.


R. Why? are there more yet unnamed?


Q. Why else said I as I said?


R. What may they be.


Q. The taking of him away from his gorgeous and pleasant houses, his sweet
and delicate pastures, his other commodious and comfortable creatures; the
spoiling him of all his honor and pomp the seuering of him from all his
friends and acquaintance, his wife, his children, his kins-folkes, neighbors
and other his familiars, the disappointing him of al his good purposes, the
providing for his wife and children, the disposing of his goods, the repenting
him of his sins, the preparing of his Tomb and other things necessary for
his solemn and seemly funeral.


R. Are these think you such things as should make a man unwilling to die?


Q. Whether they should or no I know not, but what they do I am not altogether
ignorant.


R. I hope you make your self more ignorant then you need, I take you not to
be so simple as you would seem to be, where the effect is to be condemned,
the duty cannot be commended.


Q. You then are of the mind they should not do what they do, whatsoever
they do?


R. Not in making him unwilling to die, such effect they should none of them
take.


Q. What not the first.


R. No nor yet the last.


Q. Why? would it not grieve a man think you to be taken from his fair houses
which he has builded, his seeled parlours which he has used, his pleasant
Orchards which he has planted, other commodious things which he has much
delighted?


R. Yes: but not that way, this way to be taken should be no grief at all,
given they were once, one day this way to be taken again, and what should the
fear of being once taken away from these things make him that is but a steward
over them, unwilling to die? his love to these things should not be so great,
but that he should willingly leave them, always he cannot stay with them, a
parting there must be from them, and rather he should be thankful unto God,
for the long use he has had of them, then unwilling to die, because of the
love he bears to them. It may be if he had lived longer they should have bin
taken from him; and what a grief would that have bin? of the twain, it is
better for him to be taken from them, then the^ to be taken from him, by the
first he is sure he has use of them during life; and so escapes the miseries
many others are subject unto which want them: by the last he should have been
sure to have been filled with grief conceived upon the loss and lack of
them: by the first he is in possibility to dispose of them to Gods glory and
others good: by the last he should have been at a certainty, that he should no
ways have bestowed them, for man cannot dispose of that he has not. What
therefore by death should he be unwilling to leave them? It is better to leave
them by death, then to loose them by misfortune in life, in taking him from
them when he can no longer stay with them, death does him no hurt, but good.
First, Genesis 47. Ps. 39. 1. Pet. 2. Heb. 13.
it takes but him away, that cannot stay, the best in this world is but a
pilgrim and stranger, he has here no dwelling City, but he looks for an
other that is to come, and what should he be unwilling to go, that must of
necessity go? It is better be times then too late, he shall the sooner come
to his ways end, he shall have the longer time of rest when he comes, there he
shall all the way go in the less peril and the more safety etc. Secondly,
it takes him but from those things which will one day leave him, though it were
granted him many days to stay with them, for though his houses were never so
strong and stately, yet are they but earthly and transitory, as in time they
were made of clay, so in time they will turn to clay, how soon, and in what
manner, neither he, nor any man else can tell. And what should he be unwilling
to be taken from those things which one day will he, nill he, will be taken
from him? It is better to leave them, then to be left of them. The contempt of
them makes a man rich, not his love to them. Thirdly, it helps him to more and
better, then it takes him from, it takes him from earthly; it helps him to
heavenly; it takes him from corruptible, it helps him to incorruptible; it
takes him from temporal, it helps him to eternal, it takes him from somewhat
that man made, it helps him to yt which none but God made: and what should he
be unwilling to change for the better? It is ever good changing for the best
and for the best he is here sure (so he believes) for to change after this his
earthly house of this tabernacle be destroyed he shall have a building given
of God, 2. Cor. 5.1.
an house not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens. Where as here he
had but a cottage, then he shall have a building: where as here he had but a
cottage either by his fathers gift, or his own purchase, then he shall have a
building given of God, another manner of giver then ever his father was, he
gives abundantly, Iam. 1.^^.
and casts no man in the teeth, whereas here he had but a cottage made with
hands, then he shall have a building given of God, an house not made with
hands, whereas here he had but a cottage made with hands and temporal, and
corruptible. For whatsoever is made in time, does fade with time, then he shall
have a building given of God, an house not made with hands but eternal, and
that in the heavens, and durable, for it ever endures that is eternal, which
of all these should move him to dislike? a fair building is better then a
foul cottage, as there is therein more room, so there is thereby more
delight, a building given of God, is better then a cottage bestowed by parents,
or procured by purchase, as there is odds in the giuers, so there is in their
gifts, the gifts of God are like himself as Paul says without repentance,
Romans 11.29
An house not made with hands, is better then an house made with hands, the
first cannot be pulled down with hands the last may. An house eternal in the
heavens, is better then any temporal on the earth, the one will vanish and
consume with the earth, the other shall stand and abide with the heavens, the
place of the one far better then the place of the other. Apoc. 21.18. etc.
Pure gold like unto clear glass; the foundations of the wall thereof
garnished with all manner of precious stones, the gates of fine pearl, and the
streets pure gold, the people of the one much difference from the people of
the other, all clothed with garments which will never change color, nor alter
condition. Clothed of God with white garments which shall never wax old, but
always abide glorious and incorruptible, and all fed with Manna which is hid
and of the tree of life which in the midst, of the paradise of God, all stored
with gold better then any of Ophir, and all filled with pleasure for evermore,
to such an house who should be unwilling to go? or why should any be unwilling
to go, to change a cottage for a palace every man could be content: to go
from his house that he has here, to his house he shall have other where, no
good man should be discontent: for situation it shall be better, for provision
it shall be better, for pleasure and delight it shall be better so situated as
there shall be no need either of the Sun or the Moon to lighten it, for the
Lamb of God is the light of it, so provided for as they that inhabit it, shall
neither care for meat nor cloth, for Manna is the meat that is used in it,
and Sanctity the cloth, so adorned as no pleasure is wanting, for there is
whatsoever may be desired to be; and good whatsoever is or shall be, for the
treasures in Gregory says. Earthly substance compared to eternal felicity,
Greg. in ho.
is rather a weight then an help. For the pleasures of it Augustine says. We
shall there be vacant, August. lib. 22. de ciuit. dei.
and shall see, we shall see, and shall love, we shall love, and shall rejoice
to be what shall be in the end without end, for both the same Augustine says:
Far sooner may we say what is not there, August. de symb. lib. 3.
then what is there: there is there no death; there is there no mourning, there
is there no wearines; there is there no sickness; there is there no hunger, no
thirst; no heat; no cold, no corruption, no need, no sorrow, no sadness, but
as Barnard says, Bern. in quod. sermon.
there is there that joy, to which al other joy being compared is but sadness,
all pleasure but pain, all sweet but sour, all comely, but filthy, all that
may delight but grievous, there is: Aug. de tilit: agendae peniten.
always the greatest felicity, happy liberty, happy blessedness, there shall be
fulfilled that which the Lord says in the gospel, men shall be like unto the
Angels, Mat. 22.30.13.43. 1. Cor. 2.9.
and also that, the just shall shine as the Sun: to conclude, there the things
which eye has not seen (because they are no color) neither ear has hard
(because they are no sound) neither came into man's heart (because man's heart
must go unto them) are, which God has prepared for the^ that love him. Why
then for a house or land, an orchard, a garden, a chamber, a parlour, or any
such like should a man be unwilling to die? so good he neither has nor may
have, as other where he may and shall have, so he lives as he should, and dies
as he ought. And what man will not change lead for silver, brass for gold,
earthly and transitory houses, for celestial and heavenly buildings? know you
there is any? think you there should be one?


Q. I neither know any, nor yet think there should be one.


R. Neither should you know any that should be unwilling to die, because of
his fine houses or fair buildings. First there are four things which may make
the houses themselves blame worthy; or if not them, yet either their builders
or inhabiters. 1. The matter of them, if they be made of things unjustly
gotten, Ier. 22.13.
for says Jeremy. Woe unto him that builds his house by unrighteousness, and
his chambers without equity. 2. The form, if they be too great, too costly,
too full of pleasure and delight, for again says Jeremy. Woe unto him that
says, I will build me a wide house, and large chambers, (and here is the
greatness condemned,) so he will make himself large windows (and here is the
pleasure thereof and delight therein disproued) and seeling with Cedar (and here
is the costlines disalowed) and paint them with vermilion. 3. The variety, if
they be too many, more by many that are meet and necessary, for says Esaie:
Woe unto them that join house unto house, Esa. 5.8.
and lay field to field till there be no place that ye may be placed by your
selves in the midst of the earth: and immediately after, this is in mine
ears says the Lord of hosts: surely many houses shall be desolate, even
great and fair, without inhabitants. 4. the evil intent, if they be made more
to show vanity, than to serve necessity: for as Seneca says, an house is a
muniment and defense against those things which are hurtful to the body: this
whether an hedge or a wall does uphold it, it little skils. Know ye this, men
are as well covered with gale as with gold. Contemn ye the rest, which
superfluous labor makes as an ornament: remember ye that there is nothing
merueilous but the soul, to which being great, there is nothing great. 2.
There are five or six things which may or should draw the founders of them,
and dwellers in them, from so much love unto them, as should make thee
unwilling to depart from them. 2. The curse that is denounced against those
that love them, Esa. 5.8. and Iere. 22.13. 2. The hatred yt God bears against
the houses that are so loved, Amos 6.8. The Lord God has sworn by himself,
says the Lord God of hosts, I abhor the excellency of Jacob, and hate his
palaces: 3. The examples of sundry good ones whose steps we should follow, who
neither much loved them, nor any thing esteemed them. In his birth our Savior
Christ for his house had but an Inn, Luke 2.7. and at his death a tomb,
Matthew. 27.60. all his life he had not where to rest his head, Matthew. 8.20. For
Abraham the father of the faithful; Romans 4.11.
the Apostle says, Heb. 11.9. By faith he abode in the land of promise, as in
a strange country, as one that dwelt in the tents with Isaac and Jacob, heirs
with him of the same promise: for he looked for a city, having a foundation,
whose builder and maker is God. For others he says, Heb. 11.37, 38. They
wandered up and down in sheep skins, and in goats skins, being destitute,
afflicted, and tormented: whom the world was not worthy of: they wandered in
wildernesses and mountains, and dens, and caves of the earth, (great, fair,
costly, and sumptuous buildings, strong, stout, and stately habitations, huge,
high, and honorable houses) for some one other amongst many. It is reported of
him, that he had his house in the manner of his sepulcher. And when the Emperor
that then was asked him, why he fitted his house to his body, he answered him,
this is sufficient for a man that must dye, and thereto he added: It is better
leapt into heaven out of a cottage than out of a palace. 4. The injury that
is offered others in the making of them. For there often the builders lay,
which at will they should have given to the poor, and therefore Paul of whom
Hierome writes, would not lay out his money upon such stones as should perish
with the world but upon living stones which are tumbled upon the ground, and of
which the city of the great king is builded. 5. The accusation that the stones
often in such houses make unto God against those that there laid them, and
being laid, too to much loved and esteemed them: for as the Prophet Habakuk
says, Hab. 2.11. The stone shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of
the timber shall answer it. 12. Woe unto him that builds a town with blood,
and erecteth a city by iniquity. 6. The folly that is showed in building of
fine houses, and committed in loving them when they are builded. For first men's
lives are shorter now than ever they were, and yet now they must have brauer
houses than ever they had, and what wise man thinks not that a folly:
Secondly, men's souls are as precious now as ever they were, yet now they will
have better houses for their bodies than for them, and what religious man
knows not that a folly? The care for the soul, should not be less than the
care for the body: he that says for the body, Care not for the body, says
for the soul; Keep thy soul diligently, Matthew. 6.25 Deuteronomy. 4.9.
and he that will be worshipped in Spirit, because he is a spirit, will be
glorified with the body, because the spirit remains in the body, as the
Apostle therefore says in one place: 1. Cor. 6.13
The body is not for fornication, but for the Lord, and the Lord for the
body: So again he says in another, Therefore glorify God in your body and
in your spirit: for they are Gods. And between both: Know ye not that your
bodies are the members of Christ? Shall I then take the members of Christ, and
make them the members of an harlot? God forbid: and again, Know ye not that
your body is the temple of the holy Ghost, which is in you, whom ye have of
God? And ye are not your own. Thirdly, the Apostle says: Col. 3.2.
Set your affections on things which are above, and not on things which are on
the earth, yet now they have such love to their houses, as for their houses
they are loath to go to God, loath to yield to nature, unwilling to go the
way of all earth, and what good man deemes not this a folly? Howsoever men love
their houses here, yet for love of them they should not be careless of the
houses, they should seek otherwhere. 2. Cor. 5.2.
We sigh (says the Apostle) desiring to be clothed with our house, which is
from heaven, and they sigh, because they must forgo their house which they
have on earth; and yet the Apostle by his speech shows what house their love
should be most to, their house from heaven; their house eternal in the
heavens. How much soever they love their houses, yet will not their houses here
continue, neither shall they ever get any thing by the love they bear them.
Fourthly, their houses shall and will decay: the temple of Jerusalem was a fine
house, a finer house I guess, than the finest they have, yet as fine as it
was, Matt. 24.2.
Jesus said of it when his Disciples showed him the building of it, there shall
not be left a stone upon a stone, which shall not be cast down. If that might
not stand which was built at Gods appointment, and for his service, they may
well think theirs shall not, which are built at their own assignement, and
for their own pleasure and delight: theirs have no such privileges as that
had. What the Lord spoke against the houses of Iaakob, Amos 3. they may well
think spoken against theirs. Amos. 3.1^
Surely in the day that I shall visit the transgressions of Israel upon him, I
will also visit the altars of Bethel, and the horn of the altar shall be
broken off, and fall to the ground. And I will smite the winter house with the
summer house and the houses of iuorie shall perish, and the great houses shall
be consumed says the Lord. And thereupon conclude, that what betided them,
will also in time betide theirs: for among the signs which shall go before
the day of judgment. Hierome recites this as one, that all buildings shall
fall and therefore theirs too, because else al shall not, for none is exempted
where all are expressed. Secondly, though they should or could stand, yet they
should get nothing by their love toward them. For our Savior Christ says,
Whosoeeuer shall forsake houses or lands for my name sake, Matt. 19.29
he shall receive an hundredth fold more, and shall inherit everlasting life.
And thence it may be collected, that whosoever shall make more account of
houses, or lands, than of the name of Christ, he shall here loose of that he
has, and in the end miss of eternal life too: And then what shall they
get? By this Judge you now which have heard me all this while, whether it is
good that a man that must die, should be unwilling to die because of his fine
house, from which Death when she comes does take him?


Q. If you make me Judge, I must judge as you have persuaded me to judge, vz.
that it is not good. For as you say, by his being unwilling, he looses more
than ever he can get, because he looses his houses on earth, and his house from
heaven: and by his being willing he gets more than he can lose, because he
gets an house eternal in the heavens: for the leaving of an house temporal on
earth, and that I think the better.


R. In so thinking you think well: for as David says, Psalm. ^4.10.
A day in Gods courts is better than a thousand other where: and immediately,
I had rather be a doorekeeper in the house of my God, than to dwell in the
tabernacles of wickedness, such as are many brave houses in the world. And
before, Blessed are they that dwell in thine house: they will ever praise thee.
And after again, The Lord God is the Sun and shield unto us: the Lord will
give grace and glory, and no good thing will he withhold from them that walk
uprightly.


Q. But what would you have me to think of the rest that makes some unwilling
to die as well as this?


R. No otherwise then of this, unless they be other both greater and better than
any you have yet named.


Q. Why, would it not grieve a man think you, to be spoiled of all his honor
and glory he has had in this world, in the space of an hour or less?


R. Not a whit, so long as he is to go to better and greater.


Q. But that he is unsure of.


R. No more than he was of holding that he had, nor so much neither, if he be
righteous, just and holy: for the honor of such is far greater after this
life than ever it was or could have been in this life. Then,.1. Mat. 13.43.
When the wicked are condemned and punished, the just shall shine as the Sun
in the kingdom of their father. And they that be wise shall shine as the
brightness of the firmament: Dan. 12.3.
and they that turn many to righteousness shall shine as the stars for ever
and ever. Wisd. 3.7 8.
In the time of their vision they shall shine, and run through as the sparks
among the stubble, thy shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the
people. As the Psalmist says, Such honor have all his Saints; or, this honor
shall be to all his Saints. If this honor be not better than all the honor the
most honorable in this world has, You may see the honor of the Saints after
this life specified in more particular manner, and thereafter after judge.
First, they shall be the friends of the great king. Ioh. 15.15. Henceforth
call I you not servants, but I have called you friends. Secondly, they shall
be of the house and family of the almighty God, Ephesians. 2.10. Now ye are no
more strangers and farreiners, but citizens with the Saints of the household of
God. Thirdly, they shall be of the counsel of God, 1. Cor. 6.17. He that is
joined unto the Lord, is one spirit. Fourthly, they shall be admitted to the
table of God, Luke 22.29. I appoint unto you a kingdom, as my Father has
appointed unto me, that ye may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and
sit on seats and judge the twelve tribes of Israel. 1. Cor. 6.3.2
Do ye not know, says Paul, that the Saints shall judge the world? know ye
not that we shall judge the Angels? Fifthly, they shall be manifested to be the
sons of God, Ioh. 3.2. Now are we the sons of God, but yet it does not
appear what we shall be: and we know that when he shall appear, we shall be
like him: for we shall see him as he is. 6. They shall be heirs of the
heavenly inheritance, Romans 8.17. If we be children, we are also heirs, even
the heirs of God, and heirs annexed with Christ. 7. They shall be all kings,
to every one of them shall be given a kingdom, Luke 12.32. Fear not little
flock, for it is your fathers pleasure to give you a kingdom: and to the
righteous it shall be said: Mat. 25.34.
Come ye blessed of my father, inherit ye the kingdom prepared for you from
the foundations of the world. A kingdom that fades not, but a kingdom that
endures; a kingdom that continues and abides for ever, for they that come
into this kingdom shall reign for evermore; they shall neither soon nor
suddenly be put therefro, as many other kings are from their kingdom: but
they shall reign for evermore, Apoc. 22.5. Is not the last and least part of
all this honor greater and better than all the best and chiefest honor of,
and in all this world?


Q. Yes: there is none that may or can deny it: but yet you see the inheritance
is the childrens, and the kingdom is theirs that are blessed of the father;
and it may be he is neither a friend, nor a child, nor blessed?


R. He must hope well if he will have well, he must not condemn himself
before God does condemn him, a friend he is, if he does whatsoever Christ
commands him. Ioh. 15.14. 1. Ioh. 3.10.
A child he is if he loves the brethren. In this (that is in love) are the
children of God known, and the children of the devil: for Augustine
expounding that place says, August super eundem locum. 1. Ioh. 3.10.
Only love discerns between the children of God, and the children of the
devil. All men sign themselves with the sign of the cross, all men answer
Amen: all men sing Alleluiah; all men are baptized, go to church, etc. yet are
not the children of God discerned from the children of the devil, but by love:
they which have love are borne of God; they which have not love, are not of
God: and if not of God, then of the devil, for there is no mean between God
and the devil. Christ himself also says: By this shall all men know that ye
are my Disciples, Ioh. 13.35.
if ye have love one to another. Lastly, blessed he is if his sins be
forgiven him. For Blessed is he (says David) whose wickedness is forgiven, and
whose sin is covered. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not
iniquity, Psalm. 32.1.2.
and in whose spirit there is no guile.


Q. It may be these (ifs) will make him more and more unwilling to dye, than
otherwise, for it may be, and most likely it is, he neither does what he
ought, nor love as he ought, neither is he assured of the forgiveness of his
sins as he would.


R. What then? Yet let him be never the more dismayed for all these may bees.
If he be assured of the forgiveness of his sins, as he should, though not as
he would, it is enough, though he neither does all that he ought, nor love any
as he ought: for both these latter, are salued by that former.


Q. But without those latter, he cannot be assured of that former?


R. That is very true. Yet must it not be looked for, that either he can do
what he is commanded to do, as he is commanded to do it, or love whom he
is commanded to love, as he is enjoined to love him.


Q. Neither did I yet urge that: for as I take it, where action cannot be, it
is good if affection be.


R. So in deed says the proverb; In things above our reach, it is enough to
will well. To the like effect also says the scripture: If there be first a
willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, 2 Cor. 8.18.
and not according to that he has not. Not unlike either says Hierome: Hie.
om. ad Demetr.
With God to whom all things are known before they be done a perfect will of
doing, is taken for the doing of the deed it self. August. super. Psalm. 51.
And to shut up all says Augustine: Whatsoever thou will be, and eanst not,
that God accounts as done: and this may be a great comfort against that which
ere while you objected. vz. that so much the more a man that is dying should be
unwilling to dye, because of the honor he is to loose, by how much the more
he is unable to do what he is commanded, and to love whom he is enjoined, both
which are means to the honor he is to seek: for if his good affection be
taken for right due action, he need not be unwilling to dye in regard of his
honor present, because through that he is assured of better honor yet to
come.


Q. If that were as you say, it were both somewhat, and somewhat worth.


R. It being so lately put out of doubt, you need not thereof make any doubt.
Let him live in fear, and dye in faith, and there is no fear but he shall
come to honor enough. You heard ere while of the honor of the saints; Psalm.
149.9.
such honor says David, have all his saints: such honor therefore shall he
have, being one of his saints.


Q. But it may be he shall want of the pleasure he had here?


R. That is most true: but he shall meet with better otherwhere, and joy in
them and of them, more than in and of any, here he ever might, or once could:
for all pleasure here is mingled with pain, all joy here is mixed with sadness,
all delight here is intermedled with grief, but the joy, pleasure, and
delight, he shall go to, shall be full, safe, and pure, full, without defect;
safe without peril; pure without mixture: such as can never be wasted, never
lost, never corrupted. It is infinite, and so it cannot be diminished: August.
in soliloq.
says Augustine, There the joy never decreaseth. It is every where, and every
whence, and so it cannot be lost. Anselm.
There shall be joy (says Anselmus) within and without; joy above and beneath,
about and above, and every where full joy. It is simple and pure, and so it
cannot be corrupted, Apoc. 21.4. God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes,
that shall be there whither he is hoping and bounding to go: and there shall
be no more death, neither sorrow, neither crying, neither shall there be any
more pain: for the first things are passed, God shall wipe all tears from
their eyes, the tears of compunction says Bernard, because there there shall
be no sin: the tears of compassion, because there there shall be no misery:
the tears of devotion, because there there shall not be vado and venio ad vos,
I go away, and come again unto you. Lastly, it shall be eternal, and so it
shall never be ended, Esa. 35.10. The redeemed of the Lord, shall return and
come to Zion with praise, and everlasting joy shall be upon their heads: they
shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and mourning shall flee away: and
what should it grieve him to forgo those joys and pleasures that here he
has had, to go to those that there he shall have? Or why should he be more
unwilling to go hence, in regard of those he has had, than he is willing to
depart, in respect of those he is to have? If you compare the one with the
other, the first with the last, the least with the greatest, the best with the
worst, you shall find as much ods between the one and the other, as between
a little drop of water, and the great sea, the light of a small candle, and the
bright sun, a slender pebble, and the whole earth. As Barnard says, Bernard.
in quodam Sermon.
In truth that is the true and only joy which is conceived, not of the
creature, but of the creator? which when thou shall possess, no man shall take
it from thee, to which all joy otherwhence compared is but grief, all pleasure
but pain; all sweet, but sour; all fair, but filthy, last of all, all that
may delight, but dolorous; for the goodness of God does infinitely exceed all
created goodness. The delight therefore which shall be in the immediate
perception of that goodness, shall infinitely be better then all perception of
any created goodness, surely if it were possible for one man to see the joys of
that goodness, he would straight ways despise all the joys of this life, this
appears plain in blessed Paul, who after he had been rapt up into the third
heaven, presently said. Philip 3.8.
I have counted all things loss, and do judge them to be dung, that I might
win Christ. For as Augustine says: Augustinus lib. 4. de lib. arbitr.
so great is the beauty of righteousness, so great the pleasure of the eternal
light, that if it were lawful for a man to stay there but a day, he would for
this alone contemn all the years of this life, though they were both
innumerable, and full of pleasure and abundance of temporal goods: for neither
with a small nor a false affection is it said. One day in thy courts, is better
than a thousand other where. What joy soever a man has, or can have in this
life, it is nothing to the joy that there is to be found. Here he may have joy
from himself, from his friends, from his goods, but this joy is but short,
impure and obnoxious. It is short, Job. 20.5. Job. 20.5.
The rejoicing of the wicked is short, and the joy of hypocrites is but a
moment. The joy of the world (says Augustine) comes from abroad, Aug. confess.
and easily it is hindered, and soon it is discontinued. It is impure, Pro.
14.13. Pro. 14.13.
Even in laughing the hearer is sorrowful, and the end of that mirth is
heaviness: Boethius.
The carnal man (says Boethius) has one grief of the delaie of the delights
which he desires, another of the defect which he finds when he uses them.
For wheresoever the flesh seeks refreshing; there it finds defect
distressing. Every little too much joy, has following it double anoy. To wit,
the remorse of conscience, and the oppression of nature. It is obnoxious, Pro.
14.13. The end of that mirth is heaviness, Pro. 14.13.
in the use whereof the heart is sorrowful. Job. 28.13. Wisdom is not found in
the land of those that live pleasantly: And Luke 6.25. Woe be to you that now
laugh: for ye shall wayle and weep. But there you shall have joy from God,
joy from himself, joy from the saints, joy from the place he is in, joy
from that he has attained, and joy from that he has escaped: as Anselmus
says, Joy from within him, and joy from without him, joy from above him,
and joy from beneath him, joy from every place round about him: and this joy
as I have said, shall be full without defect, simple without mixture,
continual without ceasing, as pleasing, as profitable, and yet profitable
without hurting, and pleasing without annoying: evermore delighting, evermore
rejoicing, evermore provoking, more and more to rejoice at it, and delight in
it. As much as this joy is better than any other joy, so much the more willing
should any be to hasten to it, that once and ever he might enjoy it; and
nevertheless, unwilling to dye, any that is to dye, because without dying
here, he cannot come to it otherwhere.


Q. True is what you say, in regard of duty: for as every man is desirous of
the best, so he should hasten to the best. But there is somewhat which hinders
the effect of that you say in him that is a dying, as well as in him that is
yet living?


R. What I pray you is that?


Q. The departing from those his friends here, whose company he often
frequented, and in whose society he much ioyed and delighted.


R. Alas, that is a thing that should little or nothing molest or trouble him,
for there is such a diversity of friends here in this world, as a man can
never say he has a friend, as Barnard says. All friends, and all enemies, in
the history of our Savior Christ, a man may see a plain president of worldly
friends; even now he must be a king, his friends would have it so: even by
and by, he must be no body; his friends would have it so. Ioh. 6.15.
They which so dearly loved him, that they would make him a king, shortly
after for no occasion fell away from him and followed him no more. In the one
and twentieth of Matthew, they which received him joyfully, when he came riding
into Jerusalem, crying and saying. Ioh. 19.15.12.18.30.
Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord; not many days after,
entreated him despitefully, crying, away with him; away with him; crucify him.
If thou deliver him thou art not Caesar's friend, if he were not an evil doer
we would not have delivered him unto thee. If thus the friends of this world
used Christ a man that went about doing good, and healed all that were
diseased; a man that did all things well, and nothing amiss, how will they use
those that are of Christ? Mat. 10.25.
If they have called the master of the house Beelzebub, how much more then of
his household, the disciple is not above his master, nor the servant above his
Lord. It is but folly therefore for a man to be unwilling to leave this world,
because in leaving it he must leave his friends also, what though he has not
found falsehood in fellowship before time, in all his time, yet let him not
think but that he both may and shall in time to come, if he lives. For the
world is ever like it self, Ioh. 15.19.
it loves his own: it hates those that are not of it, and when the wiseman
speaks of the friends which in this world are to be found, he thus says,
and not otherwise: Some man is a friend for his own occasion, Sir. 6. 8.
and will not abide in the day of trouble. And there is some friend that
turns to enimitie and takes part against thee, and in contention he will
declare thy shame, and again some friend is but a companion at the table, Sir.
32. 1.
and in the day of thine affliction he continues not: and again, there is
some friend which is only a friend in name: but there are but a few earnest
and hearty friends, which will stand by a man, when the world is most against
him. Moreover let him look to the friends of whom he makes so great account,
and from whom he is so unwilling to depart, and I fear not but he shall find
them more casting for his goods, how to get them, then caring for his health,
how to procure it. If so the case stands with him and his friends (as twenty
to one, but it does) what grief should it be to him to depart this life
because of such friends?


Q. Surely little, if all were such: but it may be that he has better, for
there are some good, and it is hard if amongst many, he has not some such,
now if he has any such, I warrant you it will grieve him to depart with them,
and from them for of such Syrach says. Sir. 6. 84.
A faithful friend is a strong defense, and he that finds such an one,
finds a treasure. A faithful friend ought not to be changed for any thing,
and the weight of gold and silver is not to be compared to the goodness of his
faith. A faithful friend is the medicine of life and immortality, and they
that fear the Lord shall find him.


R. I know that to be true which Syrach says, but I like not of that which
thereupon you would infer, for though a man had such friends as Syrach
speaks of, and you imagine your sick man to have, yet should not a man
therefore be unwilling to leave this world, and yield to nature: but I fear
me you presume more of your sick-mans friends, then you need to do, for where
shall a man find a faithful friend? Cic. lib. de Amicit.
A true friend, says Tully, will never be found, for he that is a true friend,
which is as it were another the same. As Theophrastus once said to one that
told him, Seneca in proverb. Philosoph.
that yonder man is such a man's friend. Why then is he poor, he being rich?
he is not a friend which participates not infortune with his friend, so I
think it may be said to you telling me your sick-man has so many friends,
and amongst the many some very good, Why then he being sick, are not they
also sick? they are not friends, which in fortune participate not with their
friends, Thomas (which is called Didymus) was a better friend to Lazarus then
any of these you speak of, for he had no sooner heard his master say: Our
friend Lazarus is dead; but he presently said unto his fellow disciples, let
us also go that we may die with him, Ioh. 11.16.
as though it were the part of friends, to be ever like affected to their
friends: but which of these you speak of, hearing tell their friend is sick,
will say to his fellow friends; let us also go, that we may be sick with him?
I doubt me never a one; yet you know well that it is the precept of the
Apostle: Romans 12.15.
Rejoice with them that rejoice, and weep with them that weep: be of like
affection one toward another. My conclusion therefore is as before, that when
as there will no such friends be found (as will be sick when their friend is
sick, or die when their friend does die, there should none that is sick be
unwilling, to die because of his friends. First, he has known the good his
friends can do him. Secondly, he is not ignorant what he himself can do for
them. Thirdly, he shall leave them to one that may and can, and peradventure
will do more for them then ever he was purposed, though many years more he
should have lived. Fourthly, he is uncertain whether his friend would continue
if he should live. Many change soon, and some do what they mind to do very
suddenly, when they have done, what they can for him, and he what he could for
them, what should he stay upon them? It may be the longer his stay is with
them, the worser it would be for him. Friends often cause men to do amiss,
and sometime men sustein more the^ ever they should, had it not bin for their
friends, sometime they come to poverty by their friends, sometime they receive
punishment for their friends, sometime they reap shame through their friends.
Still therefore I dehort every one, and will diswade any from being unwilling to
die because of his friends.


Q. And though you so do, yet still will many an one be unwilling to depart
from his friends, except he could be persuaded that either he should go to
better presently, or else that he should see them again afterward.


R. If that will help to make him willing; I will never stand with him for
either, let him look that he be one of the number of the faithful ones, and
I will prove both that he shall go to better then those he leaves presently,
and that he shall after again see whom he leaves apparently.


Q. Do these; and doubt not that.


R. Departing then from his friends here, in the faith and fear of God, doubt
you not but he shall go to better other where. For first he shall go to God
the Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost, which were here and will be
there, better friends then ever he found any, here the father created him, the
Son redeemed him, the holy ghost sanctified him; which of all his friends
here did half so much for him? there the whole Trinity in unity will
glorify him, which of all his friends may compare with him? whereas other
friends do often vary and change, these will evermore remain and abide;
whereas others are mutable and inconstant, these are, were, and will be always
immutable and constant, whereas others are as they were) mortal, and must die,
these will ever endure immortal, and shall never die; whereas others if they
remained still together, could but pleasure him in small things: these can and
will pleasure him in great. 1. Cor. 2.9.
For such things as eye has not seen, nor ear has heard, nor man's heart
ever conceived, has God prepared for them that love him. Secondly, he shall
go to the goodly company of heaven, the glorious Angels and blessed Spirits,
whom he shall find much better friends, then ever in this world he found any:
for whereas his friends here did now and then forsake him, they will ever abide
with him; whereas his friends here did now and then break from him, they will
ever keep company, and hold friendship with him, whereas his friends here were
ever fickle, and must be sought to, to be preserved; they will be ever
faithful, and never seek occasion to be rejected, by this I think the first
point is manifest, for the next now I say thus much. After his departure hence
(so he then and his friends afterward, depart in the faith of Christ) he
shall see those his friends again from whom he departes here, and that in
far better sort and case, then ever here he either did or could see them,
for he saw them corruptible, but there he shall see them incorruptible; here
he saw them mortal, here he saw them miserable and inglorious, but there he
shall see them all blessed and glorious. And is not this think you enough?


Q. Enough? no there are too many thereto that doubts, hereof and of the former
too.


R. There is never the less truth in either for that, for there are some that
doubt whether there be any truth at all, and therefore avouch a general
uncertainty in all.


Q. But their folly is easily perceived, being by many sundry ways
manifested.


R. So is also theirs that doubt of the truth of either of these things which I
have said, for as truly as the Lord lives, they are both true.


Q. In your conceit like enough.


R. Nay in the judgment of the best I assure you.


Q. The longer you say so, the greater doubt you make, for it is hard to judge
who are best.


R. Not a whit in regard of these points, for the Apostle says: the spirits of
the Prophets are subject to the Prophets, 1. Co. 14.32
and the Prophets judgment (as the word Prophets is there understood) is as I
have said, for what I have herein said, I have said it after the judgment of
the Prophets.


Q. Yea after it may be in regard of time, more then truth.


R. No more the one then the other, for in regard of truth as well as time, I
speak according to the judgment of the Prophets, for touching the going of
those that depart hence in the Lord, unto better friends then any here they can
find, or are to be found, the judgment of the Prophets is as I have said, for
thus speak the Prophets, the souls of the righteous are in the hands of God,
Wis. 5.1.
and no torment shall touch them. Dust return to the earth as it was, Eccl.
12.7. Ioh. 17.24.
and the spirit return to God that gave it. Father, I will that they which
thou have given me, be with me, even where I am, that they may behold my glory
which thou have given me. Now, where he our head expected to be after his
departure out of this world, may easily be gathered by this his prayer which
he made to God his father at his way going. Father into thine hands I commend
my spirit, Luke 23.46.
for why should he commend his spirit into his hands except he knew it were
then to go into his hands? and thereupon also it may soon and readily be
collected, where the souls of the righteous after their departure are and
shall be, for where the head is, there the members must be. If the head
therefore be with God, and so has been ever since his departure out of this
world, the members shall also be after their departure, and so shall continue
for ever.


Q. Yea in time peradventure, but not presently.


R. Yes presently without any peradventure, for as Christ said to the thief
upon the cross. This day shall thou be with me in Paradise, so Paul said to
the Philippians: Luke 23.43. Phillip. 1.21 22.
Christ is to me both in life and death advantage, desiring to be dissolved and
to be with Christ.


Q. It is true that Christ said as you say to the thief, and that Paul so said
unto the Philippians, but what you would, will not thereupon presently follow:
for Christ said to the thief, this day shall thou be with me in paradise, to
wit, in hope but not in deed, for henceforth thou shall hope to come thither,
and Paul said to the Philippians, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ, according to his petition, but not according to Christ's execution, for
it follows not, because Paul desired to be with Christ, that therefore
presently after his dissolution he was with Christ.


R. All follows that I would have to follow, for all that yet you say, for
these toyish distinctions have nothing in them, because they have not in
scripture any thing for them. Where is it there said, the thief according to
hope should be in paradise? also, where is it there said, that Christ did not
execute Paul's petition, when once he came to his final dissolution? hope has
respect to the time that is peradventure long yet to come; Christ speaks to
the thief, as it were in the time present: to day thou shall be with me in
paradise, as heri, yesterday is an aduerbe of the time past, and cras, to
morrow, an aduerbe of time to come, so hodie, to day, as I guess is an aduerbe
of the time present, as I take it therefore your distinguishing inter spem and
rem, is but tri^^ing circa spem and rem, and so nihil omnino ad rem, that is
nothing at all to the matter for this day th^^ shall be with me in Paradise,
is as much as this, as soon as life is gone out of thy body, whatsoever
becomes of thy body, thy soul shall go with me into the kingdom of
heaven, that so where I thy master am, thou my servant may be. And
whatsoever you say touching Paul's desiring to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ, yet I am sure Paul himself says the contrary, for Paul says, that
when the time of his departing came, there was no distance of time, between
his dissolution and his acceptance. In his second epistle to Timothy his
son in the faith, when he was near his end, this was his saying, I have
fought the good fight, 2. Tim. 4.7.8.
and have finished my course, I have kept the faith; from henceforth is laid up
for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous judge shall
give me at that day, and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his
appearing.


Q. If this be as you say and seem to prove, what shall become of purgatory?


R. Even what will, or else what should, for what should become of that which
is not?


Q. Is not? say not so, for so saying you may have more tongues on your top
then you are aware of.


R. As Pilate said touching the superscription set upon Christ's head, Ioh.
19.22.
What I have written, that I have written; so say I touching purgatory, what I
have spoken, that I have spoken: Otherwise then I have said, will not be said,
how many tongues soever I may have on my top for saying so, yet still and
ever I must say so, for out of this life there is no purgatory; and in this
life the true and only purgatory, by which, and in which our sins must be
cleansed, is the sweet precious and ever virtuous blood of Christ, 1. Ioh. 1.7.
For the blood of Jesus Christ, as John says, cleanses us from all sin.


Q. What then? do you think that presently after the separation of soul
from body by death, that the souls of all men go either to heaven or to
hell?


R. I do more then think it, for I constantly believe it.


Q. What ground have you for it?


R. As much as need to be for any matter of faith.


Q. What? Scriptures?


R. Yea, and Fathers also.


Q. Feign would I see that.


R. Soon may you see it, if well you listen to it. The petition of old Tobit
does prove so much, Tob. 3.6.
for this it was, Command O Lord that I may be dissolved out of this
distress, and go into the everlasting place, and what may this everlasting
place be but the kingdom of heaven? It can no ways be understood of
purgatory, for purgatory is not an everlasting place: as Fisher sometime
Bishop of Rochester says in his book against Luther. Among the old Doctors
and Fathers of the Church, there was either no talk at all, or very little of
purgatory: Tobit 1.3.
besides Tobit was a right good man as his history does declare, and therefore
not to go into purgatory, for by the new devised doctrine of the purgatory
proctours, no such persons are to come there They themselves exempte martirs
out of purgatory, Aret. prob. part. 1. loc. de purgat. Luc. 16.22.
the history of Lazarus and Dives does prove so much, for this it is. It was
so that the beggar died, and was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom. The
rich man also died and was buried, and being in hell in torments he lift up his
eyes, and saw Abraham a far off, and Lazarus in his bosom, and what may the
inference hereupon be, but that which I say? this here upon I am sure is the
saying of Iustine: Justin. q. 60 to Orthod.
this is a plain and a manifest doctrine of Lazarus and Dives, by which is
taught that after the departing of the soul from the body, men cannot by any
means or provisions, or by any policies bring profit or commodity to them,
the sayings of Christ, John the third, and John the fifth do prove so much, for
these they are. Ioh. 3.18.
He that believes in him (that is Gods own beloved son whom he sent into
the world, not to condemn the world, but to save it) shall not be condemned:
but he that believes not is condemned already, because he believes not in
the name of the only begotten son of God. And again, he that believes in
the Son has everlasting life; and he that obeys not the Son, shall not
see life, but the wrath of God abides on him: and again, Verily, verily, I
say unto you, he that hears my words, and believes in him that sent me has
everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but has passed from
death to life. And what is hereupon to be gathered, but that the souls of the
righteous at their departure from their bodies go unto God in heaven, and not
unto fire or water in purgatory, for they go unto that which they had ante
seperationem, before their separation, and not unto that which they never had
in expectation, and what had they before their separation but life? Ioh. 5.24.
He that believes in him that sent me has everlasting life, neither may have,
nor shall have, but has, and where is that life but with God? Colos. 3.3.
With thee is the well of life, says the Psalmist, and your life is hid with
Christ in God says the Apostle, Whither then must they go, when they go, but
unto God, who was and is their life, and with whom their life is? Whether also
I see not? in this heir life when and while they here lived, they never so
much as once dreamed of going into purgatory after death, but of going into
heaven some of them both write and speak. We kn^w, says Paul, 2. Co. 5.1.
that if our earthly house of this ^abernacle be destroyed, we have a building
given of God, that is an house, not made with hands, but ^ternall in the
heavens. For therefore we sigh, des^^ing to be clothed with our house which is
from heaven. Nevertheless we are bold, and love rather to remove out of the
body, and to dwell wi^h the Lord. And again; Philip. 1.21 22.23.
Christ is to me both in life and death advantage, and whether to live in ^he
flesh were profitable for me, and what I do I know not, for I am greatly in
doubt on both sides, desiring to be loosed and to be with Christ which is best
of all. News quoth Oecolampadius to his friends, who came unto him a little
before his death, I shall be shortly with Christ my Lord. I pray thee my Lord
Jesus Christ (says Luther) receive my poor soul: my heavenly father; though
I be taken from this life, and this body of mine is to be laid down, yet I
know certainly, that I shall remain with thee for ever, neither shall any be
able to pull me out of thy hand. Return o my soul unto thy rest quoth Babylas
martyr of Antioche. When his head was to be chopped off, because the Lord has
blessed thee: because thou have delivered my soul from death, Ps. 116.7.8.
mine eyes from tear, and my feet from falling, I shall walk before Iehouab
in the land of the living. Furthermore in a generality, these are ye sayings of
the ancient Fathers touching this point. August. lib. 13. ca. 8. de ciuitat.
dei
The souls of the godly being separated from their bodes, are in rest, and the
souls of the ungodly ^oe suffer punishment, until the bodies of those do rise
again unto life everlasting, and the bodies of those unto eternal death, which
is also called the second death, so says Augustine. I is most certain that
the souls of the right^ous being loosed from the flesh, Greg. lib. 4. Dialog.
c. 25
are received into heavenly seats, and that the very truth it self
testifies, saying, where the corpse is there the Eagles will resort. So says
Gregory. Of these sayings I gather, what all this while I went about to
gather: to wit, that presently upon the departure of any out of this life,
their souls go straight ways, either unto God in heaven, or else unto satan
in hell. For as Augustine says, August. in his sermon. of Time the 232. sermon.
There are but two places, and as for any third place, there is none at all: he
that reigns not with Christ, shall perish with the devil, without any
doubt. Again, there be two habitations or dwelling places; August. de verb.
apost. sermon. 18.
the one in the fire everlasting: and the other in the kingdom that never
shall have end, the first place the Catholic faith by Gods authority,
believes to be the kingdom of heaven: August. lib. ^. hypog.
the second place, the same Catholic faith believes to be hell, where all
runnagates, and whosoever is without the faith of Christ, shall taste
everlasting punishment: as for any third place, we utterly know none, neither
shall we find in the holy scriptures, that there is any such. Now for mine own
part, since there it will not be found, it shall not any other where be sought.
For as Theodoret says, Theodoret. lib. 1. cap. 7.
The Evangelists and Apostles writings, and the sayings of the old Prophets
do clearly instruct us what judgment we ought to have of the meaning and
will of God.


Q. What then? What though also you will take no further pains to seek a
third place, does it therefore follow, that therefore there is none? Augustine
I can tell you, upon whom you so much stand, is very doubtful in the case, for
sometimes he denies, as you say; sometime he affirms, as others pretend, and
sometimes again he doubts, as himself declares: he denies in the places by
you named; he affirms, De genesis contra Manich. lib. 2. c. 20. de vera and
falsa poenit. c. 18. and lib. 21. de ciuit. Dei c. 23. etc. 26. Non redarguo
(says he) quia forsan verum est. I reprove it not, because it may peradventure
be true, that some after this life suffer temporal punishment. He doubts in
his Enchiridion cap. 69. Item de fide and operibus cap. 16. in quaestione 1.
Dulcitij. Tale aliquid post hanc vitam fieri incredibile non est, and vtrum ita
sit quaeri potest. It is not incredible that after this life, some such thing
may be, and whither it be so or no, it may be demanded.


R. Whatsoever Augustine is, I much pass not, for I stand not so much upon
him, but that I can follow him or reject him. Neither herein do I him any
injury at all. For this is his own saying: August. in proem. lib. 3. de
Trinit.
Be not bound unto my writings, as unto the canonical scriptures. But when
thou shall find in the scriptures, that which thou did not believe;
believe it without any doubting or delay: but when thou find that in my
writings, which thou did not know certainly before, except thou shall
certainly understand it, do not stiffelie affirm it. August. epist. 198. ad
Fortunatum.
And again: We receive not the disputations or writings of any men, be they
never so catholic or praiseworthie, as we receive the canonical scriptures:
but that saving the reverence due unto them, we may well reprove or refuse some
things in their writings, if it happen we find they have otherwise thought,
than the truth may bear them. Such am I in the writings of others, and such
would I wish others to be in mine. But here in this matter, of which we now
entreat, I stand more upon his negation than either his affirmation or his
dubitation. First, because he therein accords with the holy canonical
scriptures, which I some while mentioned ere ever I him named. Secondly,
because he oftener denies it according to the scripture, than he either
affirms it, or doubts of it, altogether against the scriptures: for besides
the places named, in which he denies it (which for weight, if not for number,
are able to counteruaile all those in which he either affirms it, or doubts
of it) he denies it also in his first book against the Pelagians, where he
thus says. August lib. 5. cont. Pelag.
A third place we know none, neither do we find in the holy scriptures that
there is any such: out of the forge of thine own conceit (O Pelagian) feign
thou such an one to be. And in his Enchiridion, where he thus says: August.
Enchirid. cap. 67.
They which teach that some men are punished in a long continuing fire, but not
eternal, are deceived through a certain humane benevolence: for the holy
scripture being consulted with, answers another thing. And also in his
questions of eitheir testament, where he thus says: In the world to come,
there is only remuneration, August. in quaest. vtriusque Testament.
and condemnation, but here (in this world) sins are either loosed or bound.
But why stand I thus long upon him, upon whom if I stood nothing at all, the
truth of that I say, would be never a whit the more impaired or weakened? It
is because I was thereto urged and moved: and not because my matter had been
naught, unless by him it had been confirmed: for the ground thereof is good. And
therefore as tha^ house will stand which is built upon a ro^ke; so will this
doctrine which is grounded upon the truth.


Q. So let it then; for I see by that which ^ said against purgatory, that
there is little ground for purgatory.


R. Never little it, as if there were any, but rather none it, because there is
none at all: for except it be in Philosophers and Poets, Purgatory has no
ground. And what should we do with the authority of Philosophers and Poets,
against the express testimony of scriptures and Fathers? Alphonsus. lib. 8.
de haeres. de Indulgent. Polydor. Virg. de Invent. lib 8. cap. 7. August. lib.
2. ad Gaudent.
Until this day of the Grecians, or of the East Church, Purgatory was never
believed, says Alphonsus: and of Purgatory among the ancient fathers, there
is either no mention at all, or very seldom: yea, even until this day the
Grecians believe it not, says Polydore Virgill. And though they did, yet were
that nothing to us. For we must not always imitate or allow, whatsoever
allowed persons have done: but lay the judgment of scriptures to it, to see
whether they allow the doing of it. Exodus 23.2.
For thus they run. Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil, neither
agree in a controversy to decline after many, and overthrow the truth. Iere.
23.16.
And again: Hear not the words of the Prophets that prophecy unto you, and
teach you vanity: they speak the vision of their own heart, and not out of
the mouth of the Lord. And again; 1. Ioh. 4.1.
Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they be of God: for
many false Prophets are gone out into the world. And to the same the ancient
writers accord: says Ignatius, Whosoever speaks any thing more than is
written, Ignatius in his epistle to Hieron.
although he be worthy credit, although he fast, although he keep his
virginity, although he do miracles; although he prophecy, yet let him seem
to thee a wolf in the flock of sheep, says Hierome: After the Apostles of
Christ, Hieron. super. Psalm. 86.
notwithstanding some man be holy, notwithstanding he be eloquent, yet he
wants authority: and says Picus Mirandula: We ought to believe a simple
plain husbandman, or a child, Picus Mira^dula in the quest. Whether the Pope
be above the Council. Deuteronomy. 12.32.
or an old woman, rather than the Pope and a thousand Bishops, if the Pope and
the Bishops speak against the Gospel, and the others with the Gospel. If the
scriptures allow not what we would have allowed, we must not allow it. Deuteronomy.
12.32. Says the Lord, Whatsoever I command you, take heed you do it: thou
shall put nothing thereto, nor take ought therefrom. If any man shall add unto
these things, Revel. 22.18, 19.
God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this book, and if any
man shall diminish of the words of the book of this prophecy, God shall take
away his part out of the book of life, and out of the holy city, and from
those things which are written in this book.


Q. An hard sentence, a heavy burden. I see well by this, that we must
believe neither Pope, nor Papist in their purgatory cause.


R. You may be right well assured of that, for therein they speak not with the
Gospel. But they add to the Gospel, and diminish from the Gospel, yea and
speak against the Gospel. The Gospel says, Christ the Lamb of God, has
taken away the sins of the world: But they say, Purgatory must do somewhat
thereto. The Gospel says, The guilt of sin being remitted, the punishment
thereof cannot be retained. They say, The guilt of sin being remitted, some
part of the punishment thereof, and fire in purgatory must be sustained. The
Gospel says, God does not punish one sin twice. They say, The sin that
God does in part punish here, he does afterward more fully punish in
purgatory. The Gospel says, All the punishments that God does levy upon
sinners after this life, is in hell. They say, Some punishment that God does
lay upon sinners after this life, is in Purgatory. The Gospel says, After
this life, there is no punishment of sin temporal any where. They say, Yes
in Purgatory. Thus in this point are they and the Gospel contrary.


Q. Yet by hearing and reading of others, I have found that much they pretend
the Gospel.


R. That is not unlike: yet are you not therefore ever the more to credit them
in what they say. For thus says Saint Cyrill. In council. Calcedon. act. 1.
Athanas. cont. Arrianos orat. 1.
All heretics out of the heavenly inspired scriptures gather occasion of
their error. And thus Athanasius: Heretics use the words of the scripture for
a bayte.


Q. I but they do not so?


R. The better for them, if it be not found so, but I fear me as Tertullian
said of one heretic, Tertullian. de Baptismo.
He assaulteth the faith by the same words of God that breeds faith: so we
may well say of them: They assault the faith by those things which engender
faith. For as the devil fought against Christ with the scripture: so they
often fight against the truth with the scripture. If time would permit, and
opportunity did serve, I could show you what I say by those places of the
scripture which they pretend: for what therein and out they pretend for
purgatory, makes wholly and fully against purgatory. But I cannot here and
now stand to manifest what I say.


Q. If you will not confute what others do say for it, why have you said so
much against it?


R. To prove that they which depart hence in the faith of Christ, do go to
better friends and company, than here then they forgo, or ever before they
enjoyed.


Q. And might you not have done that, though you had never said so much against
Purgatory?


R. No indeed: for ever there would have been some doubt whether they should
not have gone thither.


Q. What and though they had been persuaded of that, yet should they not
therefore have doubted ever the more of this. For as the Purgatory patrons
avouch, there comes no bad persons into purgatory: as Origin a fautor of this
error says: Origin. in Psalm. 36. homil. 3.
As I suppose, all we must needs come into that fire, yea, although it be
Paul or Peter.


R. But they would have been somewhat the less willing to have dyed, and so
would any one that is to dye: for thither they must all have gone to pain, and
no man is willing to go to pain, though he goes to never so good company,
but all talk of company in purgatory, is but lies and vanity: for as there
is no purgatory, so there is therein no company. Locus and Locatum, i. the
place, and that which is therein placed, are relatiues. If therefore there be
not any such place as purgatory. (as in truth there is not) there cannot be
any such thing (as better friends than any in this world are to be found)
placed in Purgatory: but you know it is manifest, that there is no such
place: and therefore it must be denied, that there is any such company: for if
the place be not, the company cannot be: the nature of relatiues is such,
that if the one of them be, the other must also be.


Q. But this ere you go, shall or will any be ever the more willing to dye,
because after his death, he shall not go into Purgatory?


R. Whatsoever any one is, every one should: for dying in Christ's fear and
christian faith, every one shall be sure to escape all punishment, which is
painful, and attain to peace and pleasure which is joyful.


Q. And shall he that does so, come to ever the better friends for that?


R. What else? Heb. 12.22.23, 24.
For he shall come unto the mount Sion, and to the city of the living God, the
celestial Jerusalem, and to the company of innumerable Angels, and to the
congregation of the first borne which are written in heaven, and unto God the
judge of all, and to the spirits of just and perfect men, and to Jesus the
mediator of the new Testament, and to the blood of sprinkling, which speaks
better things than that of Abell. And are not these better friends than any
here are, or are to be found?


Q. Yes verily I think that, for here are none that either may or can do, as
these always may, and some times do. Neither are there here any that in times
past have done, at these have done. But have you ever read or heard, that this
has taken the effect you speak of in any?


R. Yea, in many: for such effect it took in one, whom Tully speaks of, in
the first book of his Tusculane questions: such effect it took in Socrates,
of whom Erasmus writes in the third of his Apothegmes; and such effect it
took in Cercidas Ciuis Megalopolita ex Arcadia, of whom Aelianus reports in
his thirteenth book de varia historia.


Q. Why, what say these great writers of those of whom they write?


R. Of his man, Tully records, that he should say, Cic. lib. 1. Tuscul. q.
Oh that goodly and pleasant day, when it shall be my chance to leave this
filthy and trouble some world, and come to their company that inhabit the
heavens. Of Socrates, Erasmus reports, Erasmus. lib. 3. Apo.
that when Crito upon great affection toward him, persuaded him to keep
himself alive, in regard of his little children, and his friends that did
hang upon him, if he would not in regard of himself, he thus answered Crito.
For my children, God which gave me them will take care for them: for my
friends, departing hence from them, I shall either find others like unto you,
or somewhat better than you, neither shall I long want your company, since
shortly you also are to go thither, whither I my self now go. Of Cercidas
Aelianus writes, that being fallen into a most dangerous sickness. Aelianus de
varia hist. lib. 13.
One asked him whether he would die willingly yea or no, unto whom (as Elianus
says) he gave this answer: why not? For after death I shall see the best
learned men in all kind of sciences, of the Philosophers, Pythagoras: of the
historiogragraphers Heratious: of the Poets, Homer; of the Muses, Olympus;
which through their monuments of learning have gotten themselves an immortal
name. And thus now you have what these great writers say of these, of whom they
have written.


Q. By how much the sooner I have it, by so much your kindenes toward me is
the greater. But would you have the consideration of those his friends to whom
he is to go, take as great effect in him that is sick and ready to depart
this world, as in these you have named?


R. What other thing should I? for these things are written for his instruction
as well as others, and christians every way, should be as forward in christian
conversation, as heathens (such as these) were ever any way.


Q. That is true: but it is a question among christians, whether they being
once departed this life, shall ever again s^e and know after this life, those
whom they saw and knew, and were acquainted with all in this life? and
therefore often they are less willing to die, than in duty they should, and in
affection they would.


R. In so being they are the more unwise: for the matter you now speak of,
there needs not to be any matter of question.


Q. Is it a matter think you so manifest?


R. Yes verily.


Q. By what means appears it so?


R. 1. By reason out of the Scriptures. 2. by testimony out of ancient
writers.


Q. Manifest the one and the other of these, and I will soon have done.


R. So I will, if you will.


Q. I ask it, and therefore I will it.


R. I promised it, and therefore I will perform it. Genesis 2.23.
Out of Genesis then the thing we speak of does thus appear. Adam before he
sinned being in the state of innocence, knew Euah so soon as God brought her
unto him, and called her by her name, for as soon as she was come unto him he
said: this now is bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh: she shall be called
woman, because she was taken out of man. And therefore the departed out of this
life shall know one another after this life. For why? their knowledge in heaven
shall not be infetiour to Adams knowledge in paradise. But their estate shall
be much more blessed and perfect. For Adam in his best estate had possibility
to fall, but they in theirs shall have neither power nor will. Out of the.84.
Psalm it does thus appear, Psalm. 84.
they which are singing men in this world but for a season continuing together,
know one another; and therefore the departed hence in the faith of Christ,
shall also in the life to come, Apoc. 4.8, 9, 10.11. Apoc. 5.11, 12. Apoc.
1.15. Matthew. 17.3.
know one another, for they shall ever praise the Lord. Out of the Gospel
according to Saint Matthew.1. the.17. chapter it does thus appear: when Christ
was transfigured in mount Thabor, his Disciples Peter, James, and John, did not
only know Christ, but also Moses and Elias which talked there with Christ,
whom notwithstanding they had never seen nor known in the flesh. And
therefore the departed hence being once come to behold the glorious majesty
of God, shall not only know Christ their Savior, and such as with whom here
in this world they were acquainted, but also all the elect and chosen people of
God which have been since the world began; for being gone hence, they are gone
(as before has bin said) To the mount Zion, Heb* 12.22, 23, 24.
and to the city of the living God, the celestial Jerusalem, and to an
innumerable sight of Angels, and to the congregation of the first borne which
are written in heaven, and to God the judge of all, and to the spirits of just
and perfect men, and to Jesus the mediator of the new Testament, etc. And
being there, their knowledge cannot be less than was the knowledge of Peter,
James and John, on mount Thabor, but greater; for now Christ is both ascended
and glorified, but then he was but for a time transfigured, and the fashion of
his countenance changed: 2. Luke 9.29.
the 19. chapter it does thus appear. They which are to judge one another,
must know one another: for they cannot judge whom they know not, but after
this life the departed hence shall judge one another, for when Peter in the
person of his fellow Disciples as himself, Mat. 19.28.
said unto Jesus, Behold, we have forsaken all, and have followed thee: what
shall we have? Jesus said unto them, verily I say unto you, that when the
son of man shall sit in the throne of his majesty, ye which followed me in
the regeneration, shall sit also upon twelve thrones, and judge the twelve
Tribes of Israel. The departed hence therefore after their departure shall one
know another, not only those their friends, whom before they knew in the
flesh, but also those the saints and servants of God, whom in this life they
never knew, ne yet at any time ever were acquainted with. 3. The 22 chapter it
does thus appear: they which shall be like the glorious Angels of heaven
shall know one another, as the Angels do: Mat. 22.30.
But the saints departed shall be like the glorious Angels of heaven: therefore
the Saints departed shall know one another. For what reason should they belike
to the Angels in other things, and unlike to them in this? Out of the Gospel
according to Saint Luke, Luke 16.
it does thus appear: if there be mutual knowledge after this life, between
the good and evil, there is much more so between the good themselves, for
they are all Citizens in one city, fellow heirs of one kingdom, members of
one body, fellow servants in one householde serving one Lord and God, and they
we all know well, know one another: but there is mutual knowledge after this
life, between the good and evil. For after death, Luke 16. The rich glutton
being in hell, Luke 16.23.
did know both Abraham and Lazarus being in joy: and Abraham again (though he
were long before the rich man) did know that miserable and unmerciful rich man
(though he were much after Abraham) for as the rich man seeing Abraham a far
of, and Lazarus in his bosom, cried, saying, Father Abraham have mercy on me,
and send Lazarus that he may dippe the tippe of his finger in water, and cool
my tongue, for I am tormented in this flame: so Abraham hearing the rich man
crying, answered and said: Son remember that thou in thy life time receiuedst
thy pleasure, and likewise Lazarus pains; now therefore he is comforted, and
thou art tormented. Therefore there is mutual knowledge much more after this
life, between the good themselves: for nearer together, and much more
conversant one with another, are the good themselves, than are the good and
evil: the good are in heaven, the evil are in hell. Heaven and hell are much
distant one from another: the one is above, the other is beneath. Between both
there is a great gulf set, so that they which would go from heaven to hell,
cannot; neither can they which are in hell go from thence to heaven. If
therefore they which are in hell, do both see and know them that are in
heaven, and they which are in heaven, know them also which are in hell; much
more do they which are in heaven, know those that are with them in heaven.
For it is easier to know them that are of the same house and family with
them, with whom they are daily conversant, than those which are of another,
and with whom they seldom or never meet. Conuersing one with another, is a
ready way to the knowing one of another. But to proceed, out of Paul's
epistles to the Romans, it does thus appear: the members of one and the same
body know one another: for the head knows the hand, and the hand the head;
the eye knows the foot, and the foot the eye, the ear knows the tongue,
and the tongue knows others, and the heart knows all. But all the godly
departed, are members of one and the same body: for says the Apostle, We
being many, Romans 12.5.
are one body in Christ, and every one one another members. As the members
therefore in the body know one another; so also do the godly departed know
one another, if they know one another while here they live together, where
they see God but with the eyes of faith, why should they not in heaven much
more know one another, where they shall see God face to face? shall their
knowledge be less there, then here? In the first of his Epistles to the
Corinthians Paul the Apostle seems to say the contrary. For there he says.
Here we know in part, 2. Cor. 13.9 10.12.
and we prophecy in part, but when that which is perfect is come, then that
which is in part shall be abolished. Now we see through a glass darkely, but
then we shall see face to face, now I know in part, but then shall I know, even
as I am known, and upon this saying of the Apostle. What may a man better
infer then this, knowing one another while they are here, they shall not be
ignorant one of another when they are gone hence? for mine own part I neither
see how this can be infringed, nor how a better thing may be inferred, but to
each forward: thus again I say, where the knowledge of the greater and the
better cannot be denied, there I would think the knowledge of the less must
needs be granted, but there the knowledge of the greater, and the better
cannot be denied. 1. Ion. 3.2.
For there we shall know and see Christ as he is, Heb. 1.3.
which is the wisdom, image, and brightness of the heavenly father, There
therefore the knowledge of the godly among themselves must needs be granted,
for what shall they know their head which is Christ, and shall they not know
themselves which are members of that head? In that I take it there is small
likely-hoode and less reason, of my mind I am sure are others no mean
persons for account in the Church of God. Amongst others the principal I will
now stand upon is that ancient and learned father Gregory, who in his
dialogues has this saying. Greg. lib. dialog. 1.33
There is a certain thing in Gods elect and chosen people, which is to be
marueiled at, for they being in heaven, do not only know them whom they knew
in this world, but they know also the good people whom they never saw, even as
perfectly as though they had before both seen and known them, for when they in
that everlasting inheritance shall see the ancient Fathers, they shall not be
unknown to them in sight, whom they always knew in work: for when they all
with a like cleanness do behold God, what is it that they should not there
know, where they know him that knows all things? The next out of whom I will
allege any thing is Brandmiller a Minister and citizen of Basil, Brandmil.
conc. funer. Conc. 10.
who in one of his funeral Sermons has this memorable saying: It is certain
that in the life eternal we shall know those, with whom in this life we have
been conversant, our parents, our children, our kindred and acquaintance, yea
and also all the Patriarchs and Prophets; Adam, Abraham, Moses, David, Esaie,
John the Baptist, Zachary, Elizabeth, Marie the mother of our Lord Christ,
Peter, Paul and others as the Apostles in mount Thabor both saw and knew Moses
and Elias, when they there talked with Christ, though they themselves still
were but in their mortal and corruptible bodies, For in the life everlasting
we shall not be stocks wanting all sense and understanding as some affirm,
which say that after this life we shall not one mutuallie know another. If we
shall know God (which we must because it is said Ioh. 17.3. this is life
eternal to know thee to be the only very God, and whom thou have sent Jesus
Christ) much more shall we know men. As also blessed Gregory reasons in the
fourth book of his dialogues where he says: Because there all in a common
cleannes do behold God, there is not any thing there whereof they should be
ignorant, where they know him that knows all things. Did not the rich man of
whom mention is made Luke 16. know Lazarus (after his death) whom before he
had known in his life time, and also Abraham whom never he had seen before?
did not the disciples also according to their old manner know Christ after his
resurrection. Furthermore, if there shall be love in the life to come, there
shall also be knowledge, for knowledge causes love, and love comes of
knowledge (there is no love or desire of a thing unknown) but there shall be
love most perfect in the life to come. 1. Cor. 13.8. love never falls away,
ergo there shall also be knowledge, besides all this in the holy Scripture the
place and estate of the blessed is called heavenly Jerusalem, and the City of
the living God, but what City should that be, if therein the citizens should
not mutually one know another, by the testimony of these two (as I take it)
and the reasons out of Scripture before propounded, there is now at length as
much proved, as was by me sometime since promised. If further manifestation
thereof be required, more is yet at hand to be adjoined, many of the better
sort among the heathens were so well beaten to the belief thereof, as they not
only thereupon heartily desired death ere it came, but also took it joyfully
and patiently when it came, they desired it, that so they might go the sooner
unto the blessed company of immortal Gods: they quietly and joyfully
suffered it, that so much the more certainly they might see and know, not
only the gods, but also all those noble, good and virtuous persons that ever
lived in this world, as well such as they never knew, as also those whom in
this world they did most perfectly know. As Tullie therefore relates the
matter, this was the saying of Cato the elder. I have a great desire to see
your fathers, Cic. lib. de Seen.
whom I honored and loved: but I wish not only to talk with them whom I have
known in this world, but with them also of whom I have heard and read, yea,
and I my self written, If I were once again going thitherward, J would never
have mind to return hither again, and again this was his saying; Oh that
noble and pleasant day, when it shall be my chance to come unto that heavenly
company, and blessed fellowship, and depart from this troublous and stinking
world, for then shall I go not only unto those men of whom I spoke unto you
before, but also unto my Cato, which was as worthy a man as ever lived, and as
noble. Moreover as the same author reports; these were the sayings of
Socrates when he went to his death: It is a most blessed and goodly thing for
them to come together which have lived justly and faithfully. Cic. lib. ^.
Tuscul. q.
O what a great pleasure think it you to be, friendly to talk with Orpheus,
Museus, Homerus, Hesiodus and such like? verily I would die full often, if it
were possible to get those things I speak of. And as ere while you heard this
was the saying of Cercidas when one asked him whether he would die willingly,
Elianus de varia hist. lib. 13.
being fallen into a most dangerous and desperate disease; Why should I not?
for after my death I shall see the best learned in all kind of sciences; among
the Philosophers, Pythagoras: among the Historians Herateus; among the Poets,
Homer; among the Muses, Olympus; which through their monumentes of learning
have gotten themselves an immortal name. If thus these heathens were persuaded
of this matter, as they took a truth without any question, that they which in
this world lived godly, justly, righteouslie and soberlie should go into a
joyful place of rest, where having the blessed company of the immortal gods,
they should see one another, know one another, talk and rejoice one with
another; what should christians be which have not only the grounds that
heathens had, but better and greater far away then ever heathe^s either had or
could have? should not they think you to be more credulous, confident, and
believing then ever heathens were?


Q. Yes surely, for as it was a check to the Scribes and Pharisees, that the
Publicans and harlots did go into the kingdom of heaven before them, so it is
to christians, that heathens herein should be more believing then they: but
what if christians grounds fail them, more then heathens conceits?


R. Oh fie on such a question, damnable is such an assertion, are heathens
conceits comparable with christians grounds? What gross absurdities should
you fall into, if you should avouch any such thing? first you should accuse the
Scriptures of untruth. Secondly you should prefer heathenish grounds before
christian principles. Thirdly, you should injury the heathens in accounting
that their conceit, which is gods truth.


Q. God forbid that I should fall into any of these, the last is naught, the
second worse, the first of all, I did but ask the question, I will not avouch
any such assertion.


R. But why ask you such a question?


Q. Because of that I have heard objected against that which all this while by
you has bin proved and confirmed.


R. What is that I pray you?


Q. That which is thus written in the ninth of Ecclesiastes, commonly called
the book of the Preacher. The living know that they shall die, Eccl. 9.5.
but the dead know nothing at all: neither have they any more reward, for their
remembrance is forgotten: and again; there is neither work nor inue^tion, nor
knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither thou go.


R. Alas, alas, by either of those sayings the doctrine before delivered is
nothing at all crossed or disproued. For first, the dead know nothing at al as
they are dead, yet it follows not therefore, but that they know something as
they live. Secondly, in the grave (where the body must lie when it is dead)
there is no knowledge, yet it thereupon follows not, that in heaven (where the
soul does live) there is no knowledge. Moreover the dead know nothing at all,
as they are dead, so long as they are dead: but shall they therefore know
nothing when they shall live again? they know nothing in the body, so long as
the body is in the grave, and shall they therefore know nothing in the body,
when the body is raised up out of the grave? they know nothing in the body
between the day of their death, and the day of doom; and shall they therefore
know nothing at all after the general resurrection? or do they therefore now in
the soul know nothing between the day of their dissolution, and the general
day of restoration? there is a non sequitur in all these: so is there also in
that which should be concluded out of the places objected, for they speak of
the dead, as they are dead; they speak of the the dead while they are dead;
they speak neither of the dead as they do live, nor as they shall live. And
the doctrine before delivered speaks wholly of the dead as they shall live in
soul, in the time present; and as they shall live in body and soul in the
time to come. Again, they speak of knowledge earthly, for it follows in
the next verse; And they have no more portion for ever, Eccl. 9.6.
in all that is done under the Sun. But this doctrine now lately delivered,
speaks of knowledge heavenly, for it speaks of knowledge from the day of
death to the day of judgment, and from thenceforth to all eternity.


Q. Still then you hold what you held?


R. What should I else do, this that you have said cannot withhold me, a man
must stand to the truth til he die, yea and though it be for the truth that he
does die, and other then a truth I know not this to be that I have said, for
they that depart hence in the Lord shall after their departure know those their
friends that were gone before them, and those also that shall follow after them.


Q. But this one thing further touching that point, how shall they know them?


R. Even as the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 13.12.
As they are known, now I know in part, but then shall I know even as I am
known.


Q. Shall the Father know the Son, and the Son the Father, the husband the
wife, and the wife the husband etc.


R. Yea no doubt, though I think not that either the father shall know the
son, or the son the father, as here the father knew the son, and the
son the father. For all earthly and polluted knowledge shall be abolished
and done away, and I am moved to be of this mind: partly by the saying of
Christ, Mat. 22.28,
Matthew the two and twentieth, where being demanded, whose wife of the seven
in the resurrection, that woman that had had seven husbands, should be; he
gave this answer: In the resurrection they neither marry wives, neither are
wives bestowed in marriage, but are as the Angels of God in heaven, and partly
by the saying of another, a learned and godly writer, who in the tenth of his
sermons says thus. In heaven where there shall be no more place of misery,
Brandmil. sermon. 10. conc. funer.
or time of mercy, and so no affection of mercy (as Barnard says in the 11.
of his Epistles) we shall be no more so affected, as here upon earth we are. For
our will shall be one and the same with Gods will, whom he will have to be with
him in his heavenly kingdom, him shall we also willingly have with us; but
whom the Lord will not have to be with him him shall we have no mind to be
with us, whatsoever a one he shall be yea as the Psalmist says: Psalm. 58.10.
Ausbertus lib. 6. in 14. cap. Apoca.
The righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance, for as Ausbertus
says. The torment of the wicked shall make for the increase of the praise of
the elect.


Q. Why but shall not the father know the son to have been his son, and
the son the father to have been his father?


R. To that as I dare not say definitiuely yea: so do I not say, resolutely,
no. What manner of knowledge there shall be in particular between one and
another, my knowledge here does not serve me to describe. Yet thus much I dare
say (because God by his word has emboldened me so much to say) that Peter in
the transfiguration of Christ his master, knew Moses and Elias, to be Moses and
Elias. And that he and other of the Disciples knew Christ after his
resurrection to be Christ. That the unmerciful rich man knew Lazarus to be
Lazarus after his death, and Abraham to be Abraham though he had never seen him
in the flesh. For Peter upon the sight of Moses and Elias said unto his master
Jesus: Mat. 17.4.
Master it is good for us to be here. If thou will let us make here three
tabernacles, one for thee, Ioh. 21.5. etc.
and one for Moses, and one for Elias. And John the Disciple whom Jesus loved
(after that Jesus appearing unto them as they were a fishing, said unto them,
Cast out the net on the right side of the Ship, and ye shall find, said unto
Peter, it is the Lord, and after that Jesus said unto them, come and dine. But
as the text says, none of the Disciples durst ask him who art thou, seeing
they knew that he was the Lord. Luke 16.23, 24.
And the rich man being in hell in torments lift up his eyes, and saw Abraham a
far off, and Lazarus in his bosom. Then he cried and said, father Abraham
have mercy on me, and send Lazarus that he may dippe the rippe of his finger
in water, and cool my tongue, for I am tormented in this flame. What may
further be gathered of these things I leave to the wise to judge, and to the
learned to gather. Here is seeing one of another, knowing one of another, and
talking one with another; but what manner of knowing one of another, here
after shall be in more particular manner, neither my will, nor my skill do now
serve more particularly to describe. This that I have said may very well serve
for the purpose for which I have said it. All that are wise, are wary, how
they speak of things above their reach, and beyond their conceit.


Q. And so are you?


R. If I be not, I should be, (though I be nothing so wise as I would be.) For
as Solomon says. Pro. 25.27.
It is not good to each much honey, neither yet is is glory to search their
own glory. The counsel of sage Syrach also is this: Seek not out the things
that are too hard for thee neither search the things rashly which are too
mighty for thee. Sir. 3. 22, 23 24, 25.
But what God has commanded thee, think upon that with reverence and be not
curious in many of his works: for it is not needful for thee to see with
thine eyes the things that are secure. Be not curious in superfluous things for
many things are showed unto thee above the capacity of men. The meddling with
such has beguiled many, and an evil opinion has deceived their judgment.


Q. Speak you this to your self, or to me?


R. To both if you will; because it fittes us both but to my self especially,
because I seek for my self wholly.


Q. You spoke for the sick ere while.


R. So had I done still, if you had not stayed me.


Q. I am sorry I stayed you.


R. There is no cause you should be so. I can turn to him at your pleasure.


Q. So I must request you. For yet I have not done though that which you have
said, touching the knowing of his friends departed, and to depart, after he
himself is departed, might make him wondrous willing to depart this woeful and
miserable life: yet are there other things which keeps him from so being as
not long since I declared unto you.


R. What so ever other things things they be yet are they thereto of as small
validity as those things which have gone before.


Q. I know you will say so, how ever they prove not so.


R. I cannot say otherwise though I would unless I would betray what we all
ought to defend vz. the truth.


Q. Why in earnest, do not you think it would yrke a man to be disappointed
of all his good purposes?


R. Not a whit, so long as he is disappointed by God; who does dispose of all
things better than ever he could purpose or imagine. And he that has so many
good purposes in his head and his heart, why does he not dispatch them out of
the way, ere ever death come? It is no time then to bethink himself of them.
Death will not tarry either his or their leisure: any wise man will think it
were good looking to them before hand. Solomon says, All that thine hand shall
find to do, Eccle. 9.10.
do it with all thy power. 1. out of hand, without delay, ere ever death come.
What reason, is there that God should tarry upon any man's purposes? or why
should man purpose any thing upon hope? when his thoughts are vain, his
purposes cannot be very good. For out of his thoughts comes his purposes. First
he thinks, then he purposes. If he hopes that God will deferte his death
because of his purposes, he will surely be deceived. The purposes of man cannot
disappoint the purpose of God. If they might, men would be full of good
purposes, that they might live long. But so God has ordained, that many are
taken away in the midst of their good purposes, to teach the rest to be as
quick in finishing, as in purposing. And not to defer the dispatch of their
purposes, in hope that therefore God will defer the prefixed time of their
death.


Q. These are both good lessons. But they are not hereby taught to be ever the
more willing to dye?


R. What are they then? when they see many disappointed of their purposes, why
should they be unwilling because of their purposes? God disposes not according
to their purposes; and daily they pray that his purpose may take effect and not
theirs. Either they pray foolishly, or they should die willingly. More ought
they to regard Gods purpose, which cannot be altered, than their own, which
upon many occasions may soon be changed. But since you say, some are unwilling
therefore to die, because they are thereby disappointed of their good purposes.
I pray you lets hear some of the good purposes that makes them unwilling?


Q. You have heard them already.


R. But good things can never be heard too often. And therefore we may hear
them again. More good is gotten at the second or third hearing, than the
first. 1. Sam. 3.
Samuel knew more at the fourth hearing, than he did at the first. So also may
we, the first as the following stroke strikes not so deep, the first as the
fourth drop pierces not so far: the first as the second hearing leaves not
such an impression behind.


Q. All this is true. As therefore hear them you may so hear them you shall.
These they are, the promising for wife and children: the disposing of goods;
the repenting of sins; the preparing of Tomb and other necessaries for a
solemn and seemly Funeral.


R. Alack, alack: that the missing of these things should make any man
unwilling to die, here is nothing of any such weight. 1. his wife is
unprovided for. What then? must he therefore be unwilling to die? 1. he might
have provided for her aforetime he had time enough, if he had had a mind
thereto. 2. is he sure she should have been provided for if he had lived. Many
the longer they live, the more they spend: and the less they have in the end
to leave behind them. Many again, loose more in an hour than they get in a
year. What he might or should do is altogether unknown, and to him very
uncertain. 3. his wife may be better provided for than he is aware of. 1. God
himself has promised to be an husband to the widow. And as I think he both
can and will then better provide for her than ever he either would or could. I
am sure he has provided well for many after their husbands death, that never
were well provided for in their lives, you your self can produce examples
enough, I need not propound any yet that by them you may think of others, you
may call to mind, Ruth the Moabitesse the wife of Mahton, the widow of
Zarephath, Ruth. 4.10. 1. King. 17. 2. King. 4.1.
and one of the wives of the sons of the Prophets. 2. his wife may marry
again to another after his death that will be as careful for her as ever he
was in his life. The second marriages are not ever the most second. Many speed
better at the last, than at the first. The Roman princes and captains have
married widows; and the most holy king, David, took two widows to wife,
which both had been the wives of his inferiors. The one was Bathsheba the
daughter of Eliam, wife to Vriah the Hittite, 2. Sam. 11.3
the other Abigail the wife of Nabal the carmelite. What may betide his he
knows not. It may be a better than himself may join with her. What then for
her cause should he be unwilling to die? let him leave the providing for her,
either to him that shall next enjoy her, if she marries again, or to God
himself, if she keeps her self a widow the one or the other, or both of
these will so sufficiently provide for her, as he needs not any thing to beat
his head about her. But. 2. (and secondly to) his children are unprovided for
what then? shall he therefore grieve and grudge to die? did never any man leave
his children unprovided for but he? or shall they never be provided for,
because they are not provided for, because they are not provided for by him? or
is he sure they shall be provided for, if he does what in him lies to provide
for them? many have left their children unprovided for, because they had not
any thing to give them; and yet they have done well enough. Many again have
left them much because they had enough, and yet they in short time have come to
nothing: it is neither the fathers providing for them, nor the fathers, nor
providing that does anything, but the blessing of God that does all in all. If
he blesses, though the father does nothing, the children shall do well enough,
his blessing will make them rich. If he curses though the father gives much,
the children will come to nothing. His cursing will make them poor what may,
shall, or will betide them he is utterly ignorant. It may be a better stepfather
may step up in his place, than he ever would or could have been a natural
father. I my self have known some that have come to more by their steed
father, than ever they could by their own father what then for their cause
should he be unwilling to die? let him leave the providing for them, either to
him that shall be their stepfather, if ever God move the mind of their mother
to marry again, or else to him that has promised to be a stedfather to the
posterity of those yt love him. The one or the other, or both of these will so
sufficiently provide for the^, as he needs not any thing to trouble his mind
about them. If they be good, God himself will take better care and charge of
them, then ever he himself did, for he will never leave them, nor let them be
fatherles, he will nourish them, and teach them from their youth up; until
their old age, death and grave, he will not forsake them. So will he provide
for them, as well they may say and sing with David: my Father and my mother
forsook me, but the Lord has taken me up. If they be evil, what should he
so much care for them as he should be unwilling to depart the world by reason
of them? rather let him leave them to the world, to be corrected by the
world, then provide for them in the world, that ye may have wherewith to
follow the fashions of the world, by caring for them he does but foster the
wickedness that is in them, and what should he care to cherish that which will
grow too fast of it self? we weed the thistles out of our corn, we cut the
nettles out of our gardens, we rend the Iuie from our Oaks: 1. Sam. 2.23
4.17.18.19
So should we weed, cut and rend wickedness from our children. Old Eli cherisht
wickedness in his children, but it spoilde both him and his children, they were
both slain; and he fell from his seat backward and brake his neck. What
others must expect by his example, they may learn, for mine own part I must
proceed further, and therefore I must pass hence, I can not stay here.


Q. But whither will ye?


R. But whither you would, to that which follows as another stay from dying
willingly.


Q. Good enough then: go to, while you speak I will hear.


R. Thirdly, his goods are undisposed, what of that? must he therefore be
unwilling to die? First, why were they not disposed in the time of his health?
I hope he might better have bethought himself how they were to be bestowed
then, than now: the time of death for such a purpose is not the most
commendable time, though it be the most common time, especially if a man has
much to dispose, and many to care for. Secondly, why does he not in as much
speed as he may dispose of them? If he will, he may make a quick dispatch, the
law of the Land does teach him what he shall give to his eldest son if he
has many, or any more then one, the law of the land does tell him what he
shall bestow upon his wife, if he has one, and shortened is his care if he
has none. Reason and religion can both instruct him what he shall give unto
others, either children, or friends, or needy neighbors. Why does he delay?
does he think he shall die ever the sooner for the dispatching of his business
out of the way? he is then in an error, and in a vile error, death tarieth
not the disposing of his goods, many would never make will upon that condition
if he will not dispose of them while he may, when he would, he shall have nay.


Q. I marry, that is that which troubles him?


R. The fault is his own: why should that trouble him? either he might have
done it before his sickness, or in the beginning of his sickness.


Q. He might so: but in his health he thought not of sickness, and in the
beginning of his sickness he hoped for health.


R. In neither he did them, as he should and ought.


Q That cannot now be helped, the time past is irreuocable.


R. Neither must he therefore be ever the more unwilling to die, though he
has not disposed of his goods, there are that will dispose of them, never let
him fear that his goods shall lack owners: Whilst he lives they are wished,
desired and expected: when he is dead, they will be enjoyed and possessed.


Q. That is that which grieves him, for by this means they go not to whom he
would?


R. But they shall go to whom God will, and that ought to content him, for he
is the Lord of them, and as he gave them to him ere he had them, so he will
derive them to others when he shall leave them, better it may be, nay
assuredly, he will dispose of them, then ever he would or could, he tries the
heart, and searches the reins, he knows what is in man, better then man,
he can tell for whom they are fit, and for whom unfit. For whom they are most
fit, on them he will bestow them, this is more then any man can do, for he is
blind, and cannot see; he is affectionate, and cannot judge, who is the
fittest to have this or that, much or little, something or nothing, what then
for his goods should any man be unwilling to die? let him leave them to the
disposing of him that disposed them to him, and let him never doubt but they
shall be disposed well enough, there is no disposer like him, none comparable to
him, none that can do as he does. In this regard he needs never be unwilling
to leave either them or the world.


Q. No more it may be he would, these things you have said being once and well
considered; If so his sins were pardoned and remitted, but he has not so
much as repented him of them, and that does much affright him.


R. The fault is his own, and no body is to be blamed for it but himself,
why did he delay so long? who does hinder him now? what means he to drive off
further? does he think to live the longer for that as to die the better?


Q. What his thoughts are I know not, but loath he is to die for it, I am sure.


R. How loath soever he is, die he must, and he had best to look to it in
time, if he dies in his sins, he shall rise again with his sins, and in the
end he shall be condemned for his sins, he might better carry any thing with
him then his sins: that burden will bow him down to hell.


Q. The fear of that makes him loath to dye.


R. Why does it not also cause him soon to repent? of the twain this it
should soonest effect, therefore in deed it is laid upon him; let him not
neglect his time, whatsoever is ill deferred, is worse omitted, except he
repents; he perishes, and what will he perish?


Q. He would not?


R. Why then repents he not?


Q. He fears it will not be accepted?


R. Why does he not more fear to be condemned? If once he shows his
unfeigned repentance, never let him fear Gods gracious acceptance. Act. 17.40.
Ion. 6.37. Ezekiel. 18.21.22. Chrisost in lib. de reparat. lap.
He that calls every man thereto, reiects no man therefore. At what time soever
a sinner does repent him of all his sins from the bottom of his heart, he
will put them out of his remembrance, says the Prophet. God never despises
repentance, if it be offered unto him simply and sincerely, although a man
comes to the height of evils, yet if he will return thence to the way of
virtue, he takes him willingly and embraces him lovingly. For repentance is
not weighed by the length of time, but by the sincerity of the affection. The
thief which hung upon the cross needed not the prolixitie of time, that
therein he might merit entrance into paradise, but so much time sufficed him,
as would serve him to utter one speech (Lord remember me when thou come into
thy kingdom) so that in one moment of time being absolved from the sins of
his whole life, he was thought meet to go before the Apostles into paradise.
If thus the Lord dealt with him, let him not think he will deal otherwise
with him, this example is recorded for his instruction, and for the consolation
of all that in true says and with unfeigned repentance turn unto the Lord.


Q. And therefore not for his, for his hope is small, because his sins are
great, and his repentance is not good, because it comes not in time.


R. If his hope be small so it be somewhat at all, let him say with David: let
me not be disappointed of my hope. If his repentance be not good, let him
pray with the people in the lamentations of Jeremy: Lam. 5.21.
Turn thou us unto thee o Lord, and we shall be turned: renew our days as of
old. Whatsoever they either be, so they both at all be, let him not think but
that which is written for the instruction of any, and the consolation of all
that repent, is also written for his, one amongst any, or all he is: What
though his sins be great; yet the mercies of God are greater, says an
ancient writer, Gods mercy is greater then man's iniquity, and if it were not
so; how could any sin be pardoned, any trespass remitted, any offense forgiven
and covered? Lam. 3.22.
His mercy it is (says Jeremy) that we are not consumed, as if his mercy
were not, our sins would work our destruction, the wages of sin says
Paul, is death, Romans 6.23.
but eternal life is the gift (and mercy) of God through Christ. Bern. in
quod. sermon.
As Barnard therefore says in a certain sermon of his, so may it well be
said to him that is so hardly conceited of his own sins and Gods mercies.
Let not your conscience hinder you, because where sins have abounded, there
grace has been wanting to superabound, the truth of this is to be seen in
diverse mentioned in Scripture, who have bin accepted to mercy, the greatness
of their sins notwithstanding. Examples for this purpose, are David, Solomon,
Manasses, the prodigal Son, Marie Magdalen, the Thief upon the cross, the
blessed Apostles, Peter and Paul, these all found grace to have more abounded
where sin much abounded, for these all were received into favor, how ever
their sins many for number, and mighty for measure, deserved nothing but
eternal wrath and displeasure, some of them confessed their sins to be as
many as the hairs on their heads, more then the sands, too heavy for them to
bear, yet as great and as many as they were, they were all pardoned, forgiven
and remitted. Why then should any doubt or despair of mercy, because his
sins are great? as his sins are great, so let his repentance be good, and
let him not fear. Esa. 1.18.
Though his sins were as crimsin, they shall be made white as snow: though
they were red like skarlet, they shall be as wool. Aug. in lib. ^e ^lito^e
^g^^d. pen^.
Let no man despair (says Augustine) the wickedness which he committed did not
so much cause Judas the traitor utterly to perish as his despair of mercy,
to the same effect says Ambrose: Let no man distrust, let no man being guilty
of his old sins, Amb. super Lu^. lib. 2.
despair of the divine rewards, the Lord knows how to change his sentence,
if thou know how to change thine offense.


Q. I if he changes it in time: but he this has delaied till death: and now he
fears it comes too late?


R. If it comes in life, and comes then in truth when it comes, it comes not
too late, as one says, It is never too late if ever it be true, for the Lord
himself testifies that at what time soever a sinner does repent him of his
sins, he will put them all out of his remembrance, and what is he that dares
distrust him? whom will he believe, that will not believe him? it is an hard
thing not to believe a man when he speaks the truth: but it is an harder not
to believe God when he swears to the truth. Now says the Lord as I live,
Ezekiel. 33.11
I desire not the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way
and live. Tertullia. in hunc loc.
He inuiteth by reward, he promises salvation, he desires to be believed,
swearing. O blessed they for whose cause God does swear: O most wretched we,
if we do not believe the Lord swearing. He that believes not God (says John)
1. Ioh. 5.10
has made him a liar. If he will not make God a liar which is the truth it
self, and has sworn by himself that that is true which is spoken by
himself, let him believe God that his repentance will not come too late, if it
comes at all; that he might not doubt God has confirmed as much by deed, as he
has affirmed by word, he pardons the thief repenting at the last gasp,
when he was upon the cross ready to yield up the ghost he did but say; Luc.
23.42.43.
Lord remember me when thou come into thy kingdom; and immediately again
Jesus said unto him, verily I say unto thee, to day shall thou be with me in
paradise, as Chrysostom says: he needed not so much as one day to repent
himself: Chrysostom. homil. 27. upon Genesis. Cyprian in his first treatise
against Demetrian.
what speak I of one day? no he needed not one hour: so great is the mercy
of God toward us. What Cyprian therefore writes to another, let him take as
spoken to himself: Although thou do at thy very departing out of this
world, and going down of this temporal life, pray unto God, for the sins,
who is the true and only God, calling upon him with a faithful confession, and
acknowledging both of thine offenses, and of his truth: thus confessing and
believing, thou have free pardon and forgiveness given and granted unto thee,
of the mere goodness and mercy of God. And in the very death, even as soon
as thou have given up the ghost, thou passest unto immortality. For as the
same Cyprian again other where writes: Cyprian in his sermon of the Lords
Supper.
In that very moment of time, even when the soul is ready to depart away
from the body, and is even at the lips of the party to yield up the Spirit,
the goodness of our most merciful God refuses not repentance, and whatsoever
is truly done, is never too late done, August. ser. 59. de verbis domini.
and as Augustine says: Whenever any man turns himself unto God, all
things utterly are forgiven him, let no man be doubtful, least any thing
happily be not forgiven: As Isidore says, Isid. de summo bono lib. 2.
Let no man despair of pardon although he turns not to repentance, till the
end of his life. For God judges every man according to his end, and not
according to his life bypast, and again, In the life of man the end is to be
sought, Ibidem.
because God respects not what kind of ones before we lived, but what kind of
ones we were about the end of our life. So then it repents him at length of his
sins, that has lived long in his sins, let him not think his repentance comes
too late. For it is better to repent late then never. Late, works good as you
have heard: never brings death as you may read, Luke 13.5 Except ye repent, ye
shall perish. Neither let him be ever the more unwilling to die because his
repentance comes late. For well he dies, that dies repenting, and what should
he be unwilling to die, that shall die well when he does die? to that a man
should never be unwilling which either he knows he can, or he is sure he
shall do well, either ignorance to do a thing, or assurance, that he shall
not do it well, is that which makes a man unwilling to do it at all. Insomuch
therefore as he knows he must die, because he is mortal, and that he may
die well, if he repents; let him never be unwilling to die, that is willing to
repent, but let him repent earnestly, because he repents late, that he may die
blessedlie, because he repents at all. Apoc. 14.13
For blessed are they which die in the Lord, and die in the Lord do they, which
by repentance turn unto the Lord.


Q. Your counsel is good: commend it he must; obey it he would, but as yet
he thinks not himself fitted thereto.


R. VVat lackes he yet?


Q. The trimming of his tomb, the making of his grave, the getting of things
necessary for the celebrating of his funeral.


R. And is he for these things unwilling to dye? The further he goes, the
simpler he is, did he know or consider what it is to be with Christ in heaven,
he would never be desirous for a grave to stay from him here on earth. If he
never has any at all, it is little to him. The loss of a sepulture is
nothing. He is covered with heaven, which is not covered with earth: He that
is sure to be covered with that, what need he care whether he be covered with
the other? There shall no other thing betide him, if he be so served, than
has betided many other, both better and greater than he. And what should that
trouble him, when he has many in the same misery to accompany him? The
proverb is, The misery of many sweetens the misery of any. If he looks well
about him, he shall find many in this predicament. Pompey the great, wanted
his grave: Cyrus the king of Persia, lay unburied: Christ himself was laid in
Joseph's tomb. It were too much to speak of those whom the waters drowned,
beasts devoured, fire consumed, the earth swallowed up, serpents destroyed,
dogs spoiled, and the sword made away. These all, and many more wanted that
which he is so desirous to have: and yet I hope a number of them were never
the worse for that: neither I warrant him shall any be that lives in the fear
of God, and dies in his faith: it is not a stately tomb or a costly sepulture
that betters any: as good have wanted both these, as have enjoyed either. More
are there also, that shall come short of both, than that shall attain either.
One or two peradventure in a town shall come to one, the other, or both of
them: shall all the rest therefore be unwilling to dye? God forbid, such
impiety be far from the hearts of the godly: all that are wise know that the
burial of the dead was, or denied more for the solace of the living, than the
succor of the dead: so much also the very form of the tombs that are made
does give. They are very fair and plain on the out sides, and have much cost
bestowed on them, they are gilded with gold beset with pearl, vernisht with
oil, adorned with arms, etc. but they are very rough and ugly on the inside
having nothing at all done to them, nor any thing unless it be a small board
between them, and the corpse they cover and enclose: and who would for the
want of that which should work a little eye pleasure to others, stay himself
from the undergoing of that which should bring eternal joy to himself? What
account soever some makes of a gay tomb, and a gallant sepulcher, yet there
have been, and are others as wise, that neither have, nor do make very much
thereof. When Demonastes was a dying, his friends asked him how he would be
buried; and this answer he gave them: Let this thing never trouble you, The
st^nke shall bury me: Erasmus ^. 8. Apoph.
and they saying, It were an unworthy deed, that such a man's body as his,
should be torn in pieces of dogs: he again said, Aret. de sepult.
What hurt is that to me so long as I shall do good to some other. To like
purpose said Theodorus Cyrenensis to Lysimachus the king, threatening him the
cross, and other extremities: Little cares Theodorus whether, he rottes upon
the ground, or above in the air. Furthermore, S^^b. sermon. 160.
the same day that Socrates was to drink poison, he was asked of some that
wished him well, how he would be buried? and then he answered, That way that
shall be most easy for you. The same time also, Apollodorus offered him a
cloak of great price, that he might dye having that about him: Erasmus. li.
3. Apoph.
but he refusing that gift, said: Why should not mine own cloak which served
me while I lived, serve me also when I am dead? Thereby condemning the pride of
a number, who with great care and cost provide aforehand, that being dead, they
may be buried most honorably, as if all the world lay in a brave burial.


Q. That I may interrupt you a little. Would you have a man careless of his
burial?


R. No, I think you heard me not yet say so?


Q. No, but you speak as if you would so.


R. You mistake me then: but you must know there is a difference between
caring in a mean, and caring too much: caring so, as he would have it
seemly, but not sumptuous, if he might persuade himself he shall be never
the worse if he wants it, nor much the better if he have it, and caring so as
he is unwilling to dye, except he have it so sumptuous as he would and does
wish: because he thinks he shall never dye well, nor speed well, because he
wants it. The first caring I allow: the good men of God from time to time have
regarded it. God himself among his temporal blessings has inserted it: much
good also to posterity is done by it: the second I condemn; good men have
abhorred it, God himself does not esteem it, little good, but much hurt
proceeds from it. He that makes that a reason of his being unwilling to dye,
has in him but small reason, and less religion: neither reason nor religion
would have a man unwilling to dye, because he cannot be buried sumptuously:
as there comes no hurt to the good, by the want of a sepulture, so there comes
no good to the evil, by the having of a glorious sepulture. The first is
manifest, Romans 14.17
Because the kingdom of GOD is not meat nor drink, a noble, or ignoble, or
no sepulture; but righteousness and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. The second
is apparent, because Every one shall receive according to his works, Romans 2.6.
and not according to his sepulture. Both are evident by one saying of
Augustine: Neither does a denied burial hurt any thing the faithful bodies,
neither does a granted profit any thing the unfaithful. Luke. 16. There are
two that dye, the one rich, the other poor, the one evil, the other good, the
one unrighteous, the other righteous, the one unfaithful, the other faithful
and believing. The last and least of these twain in the eyes of the world
dies, Luke 16.23, 24.
and no mention is made at all of his burial, but immediately after it is
said, that he died. It is also said, and was carried by the^ Angels into
Abraham's bosom, as if because he was denied burial in earth, he was
granted burial in heaven, and so it should seem by that which follows:
Send Lazarus, that he may dippe the tippe of his finger in water, and cool my
tongue. The first and fairest in outward show dies to, and immediately after,
it is said that he dyed, it is added, that he was also buried, as if he were
buried sumptuously, but after that, this to either is added, And being in hell
in torments, etc. As if his glorious burial did benefit him nothing at all:
and so must it needs be by arguments from the contrary: for if the good be
never the worse for want of a sepulture, the evil are never the better for
having a brave and glorious sepulture. Again, if a bad sepulture hurts not the
good estate of the good, a good helps not the bad estate of the bad. But the
place forenamed does manifest both these, vz. That the good are never the worse
for the want of a sepulture, nor the evil ever the better for the having of a
glorious and sumptuous sepulture. And Augustine has a good saying in his
questions upon Genesis to the same purpose. Augustine. in questi. super. Genesis
This ought to be the comfort of the faithful, that wheresoever their bodies
be buried, or through their enemies rage they be left unburied, or for their
lust being torn in pieces they are consumed, that therefore they shall not be
ever the less whole, or ever the less glorious in their resurrection. Whether
therefore a man be good or evil, there is no reason he should be unwilling to
dye, because as yet he has not made such preparation for his burial as he
would.


Q. Yet you confess there is reason he should somewhat regard it?


R. What then? Yet it thereupon follows not, that therefore he should have no
will to dye, he should have thought upon both his death and his burial ere
then. Joseph of Arimathea in his health, and in his garden where often he
solaced himself, both thought of his death and his burial. There he provided
his tomb, though another enjoyed it before him, there he made provision for
his death, though he lived longer than those that were more likely to live than
he. So should he, this instruction should he have taken of Joseph.


Q. I but you hear he did not.


R. He was so much the more negligent. For so much as he did it not then
himself, he must leave the care of his burial now to others.


Q. That grieves him.


R. And why? though he had before taken never so much care therefore, yet he
must have done so in the end. No man can see himself buried, he can but show
where and when and how he would be interred. And all this I hope he may then do
in few words if he please.


Q. I but he is then unprovided of those things which makes for the adorning
thereof?


R. When he is gone he need not take any care for that. Though he had made
all the provision he could yet he is not sure he should have enjoyed it. They
whom he left behind, would have bin in choice whether he should have had it or
no, as good therefore now for him to leave the care thereof to them, as then to
refer the disposition of all unto them.


Q. I would not think it to be so; because then they would so have disposed of
things as he had directed them, and now they will order them as best pleases
them.


R. No doubt they will now, as they would then, now as then, and then as now,
they must have had a care of comelines. It may be now they will not be at so
much needeles charge; they will spare of that which he would have spent. And I
think in so doing they shall not do much amiss that he be honestly and
seemly buried according to his estate and calling, it is sufficient.


Q. Executors often come short of that?


R. Often also they go to far. They spend more than need, or is meet.


Q. They seldom trespass that way.


R. The seldomer, the better. In this case they should see they do not
trespass any way.


Q. If each man would what he should, all things would be well quickly.


R. He also you speak of would die willingly, he would never trouble his head
about that he must learn to others whether he will or no.


Q. I would he would so; I wish he might, so sure I am you have pretily
persuaded him to do so.


R. I wot what I would; I know not what I have.


Q. Removed you have those things that might make him unwilling, or that he
himself pretended why he was unwilling.


R. If I have done that, I have done but what I was moved unto by you.


Q. If you were thereto moved by me, I would I might move you to one thing
more?


R. What Is that?


Q. What you would further counsel any unwilling to die, to do, that he might
become willing thereto?


R. Having yielded to more, I will never stand with you for this. Sir. 7. 35.
Iam. 1.27.
In his health, I would advise him often to visit the sick, sometime to go to
funeralles, now and then to enter into the house of mourning. For as Solomon
says, Eccle. 7.4.
It is better to go to the house of mourning, tha^ to the house of feasting.
The first is the house of knowledge, the last, the house of forgetfulness, the
house of knowledge, first of our selves, for there we shall know our selves to
be but men. Secondly of our God. For there we shall learn that we are in his
hands, as the clay is in the hands of the potter. By the.1. we shall be
admonished of the calamities of this life, into which we all fell through
sin; and also of repentance, through which the flesh being mortified, in
spirit we shall live unto God. By the 2. we shall be taught to submit our
selves under the mighty hand of God, and to content our selves with that lot
the Lord in his wisdom does lay upon us. Romans 9.20.
Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus?
The house of feasting as I said is the house of forgetfulness. 1. of our selves:
for as Hierome says: Nothing does so much decay the understanding as eating
and drinking. And what sooner brings a man into forgetfulness of himself than
the overthrow of the understanding? 2. of our God. For as Osee says: They were
filled, Hose. 13.6.
and their heart was exalted: therefore have they forgotten me. Exhd. 32.6. 1.
Cor. 10.7
Of the Israelites it is said, They sat down to eat and drink, and rose up
to play: as if playing were the fruit of feasting, rather than praying. And
the reason why Job sent and sanctified his Sons when the days of their
banketting were gone about, Job. 1.5.
and rose up early in the morning, and offered burnt offerings according to the
number of them all is rendered to be this. For Job thought, it may be that my
sons have sinned, and blasphemed God in their hearts. As if it were not
possible almost to feast with dainty fare, and fast from wicked fact. But I
will back again to the advice you have required me to give any one that is
unwilling to die. And touching that, as before in his health I advised him to
go to the house of mourning; so now both in sickness and in health I would
wish him to make the memory of death familiar unto him. Eccle. 7.4.
For as Solomon says, The house of mourning is the end of all men, So he
says: the living shall lay it to his heart i. the living shall remember that
he himself most also die. The want of this makes many die unwillingly; for
hardly men yield to that they are not acquainted with: but the daily use of it
makes any ever willing. Use makes perfectnes. As a man takes better the death
of his friend which lay long sick, than of him which died sodeinly: so does he
take his own death more willingly, that has been often thought of, than that
with which he is sodeinly overtaken. So much gives the answer of Musonius:
Maximus sermon. 36.
for he being once asked, who might best shut up his last day answered, He
which always thought his last day to be present unto him. So much also proves
the action of Gorgias. For he being asked whether he would die willingly,
answered: I die willingly, for willingly I go out of my body as out of a
rotten house. Furthermore both in his sickness after his health, and in his
health before his sickness, I would wish him to crucify his old man and
acquainte himself with forsaking the world, and the things both of and in the
world, in few words, I would wish him to learn to die, while he is like to
live. For as a dry tree is sooner burnt then a green, so is he more willingly
dissolved, that is in spirit mortified then he which yet with the love of the
world is entangled: Chrysostom. Tom. 5. page 502.
He which contemns riches (says Chrysostom) and pleasures and vain glory,
for whose sake he does desire to live; cannot but suffer patiently his going
out of this life. For as Seneca says: He has contemned to die, Seneca in
Traged. 3. Chrysostom. ad populum. Antio.
which does not covet I told you a day ago (says Chrysostom to the people of
Antioche) that we fear death, not because it is terrible, but because neither
the love of the heavenly kingdom does inflame us, nor the fear of hell
trouble us, nor a good conscience remain in us: will you that of this
importune anxietie I relate unto you the fourth cause, not less true than the
former? we live not in that asperitie which is fitting Christians, but this
soft, loose, and easy life we love, so that it is very likely we are
delighted with these present things. But if we would pass over this life in
fastings and watchings, and a thin diet, cutting off our desires, restraining
our absurd pleasures, suffering the troubles of virtue, according to Paul,
chasticing our body, 1. Cor. ^.27. Romans 13.14
and bringing it into subjection taking no thought for the flesh to fulfill the
lust of it, quickly would we desire the things which are to come, making have
to be delivered from our present labors etc. For this mortifying of the deeds
of the flesh by the operation of the spirit, is a ready way to make us willing
to die, and unwilling to live. But the cockring of the flesh, and the giving
our selves to delight, is that which makes us altogether unwilling to leave
this present world, and wholly desirous ever to remain and abide in the same.
For this we find by proof, that no man is more unwilling to die, than he that
desires to follow the delights of the world, and to fulfill the lusts of the
flesh. If therefore any man would be willing to die, he sees what is one point
of his duty, by one part of the advice I give him. More he may see, by farther
advise to be given him. But my meaning is not to burden him with precepts:
all that I will further say, is this, that I would persuade him to recall into
his mind some of those good lessons which all his life long, either he
himself has read, or else heard, either read or preached by others. For the
time of sickness is the time wherein a man is to make use of all the good things
he has learned al his life long. And he yt has not furnished himself with
some thing for that purpose, has not so well provided for himself as he ought.
Neither shall he be so able to stand in the evil day as otherwise he might.
For it is written, is a good weapon to fight with against our adversary, which
then will fight hardly against us. With it Christ himself repeld Satan in his
conflict, Matthew fourth and with it Paul wills us to withstand him; Ephesians
the sixth: Matthew. 4.4. Ephesians. 6.17.
Take says he the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God. Happy is he
which can every way so furnish himself therewith, as able he may stand in the
evil day, and that so, as the wicked one may have no advantage against him.
But woe unto him, that being unfurnished therewith, is not able to withstand any
assaults of the wicked, him he will conquer, subdue, and lead captive to the
kingdom of darkness, there to be tormented for ever; him he will trouble,
molest, and afflict, him he will plague, punish, and torment, him he will so
hardly entreat so cruelly handle, so severely opresse, as curse ever he shall
the day, wherein he was borne, the year in which he lived, and the very
moment of time, in which he came thither. But further to increase his misery,
all his yelling and cursing shall be in vain.


Q. God then enarme us that we may be able to stand; that standing we may
overcome, and ouercomming we may be crowned, and being crowned, we may
rejoice, and reioicing, praise and honor, and glory, Apoc. 5.13.
and power be unto him that sits upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for
evermore.


R. Amen. And whenever God calls, he himself give us grace to answer him
patiently, to go to him quietly, to leave this world willingly, that so dying
we may die as well obediently as faithfully, to his great glory and our
eternal felicity.


Q. Amen also to this say I, for this at his hands are we ever to ask, that so
once we may speed, for of him it must be, or else it will never be. James
1.17. But I will cease further to trouble you in this point. I see by your
petition, you are at a conclusion. But yet I will not wholly cease as I
remember sometime since said, that even when the very pangs of death were upon
him, the religious and well minded sick man was to have care of three things,
that he might die in the Lord and be blessed: the first was, that he might die
in faith; the second, that he might die in obedience, the third, that he might
render again unto God his soul which once he had of him, and hitherto has
enjoyed by him. Of this third thing what I pray you might or may your reason
be?


R. As then it was, so now it is diverse, one is, because God was the first
giver of it, and it is reason when a man is a dying (if he has not done it
before) that he restore every thing to the proper owner. Now the proper owner of
the soul is God, for as he was the first Creator thereof, so was he the sole
bestower. Eccl. 12.7. Genesis 2.7. Another is, because so Christ our savior
did, for when he was dying upon the cross for us, this amongst others was his
saying. Luke 23.
Father into thine hands I commend my spirit. And it is reason that the servant
in this case should do as his master did. For every action of him the master,
is the instruction of other his servants, he also has said. First learn of
me: Mat. 11.27. Ioh. 13.15.
secondly I have given you an example, that ye should do as I have done. More
over the first Martyr that ever was after Christ's death did thus. Blessed
Stephen while his adversaries the Jews threw stones at him to kill him, called
upon God and said: Lord Jesus receive my spirit. Act. 7.59.
By this example shoud other learn: for this is written for others learning,
if David did it when he was but in some danger of death, much more should
others do it, when they are past all hope of life. For more is to be done
upon a certainty then a ieopardie. But David being in some ieopardie did it,
for thus he said. Psalm. 31.5.
O Lord into thine hands I commend my spirit. Others therefore being out of hope
of life (as all those are that are mortally sick) should not be slack,
remiss and negligent in doing it: a third reason is, because so the soul
shall be well kept. And it is reason that which a man has some care of, should
be committed to his custody which will keep it well. For things committed to
ill keepers are soon lost, now the Lord is the best keeper that is. Out of his
hands he is so powerful as no man can pluck it. John. 10.28. And in his hands
he is so merciful as nothing may hurt it. Wisdom. 3.1. And therefore reason
that as it was of him in the beginning received, so now again in the ending it
should to him be commended, as nothing has better right unto it, so nothing
will have greater care of it. The right that is had in it, and the care that
will be had of it, should work this disposition of it.


Q. What if it be not then done?


R. It can never after be done. After death there is no doing of any such thing.


Q. If it be not done at all, will not God take his own where he finds it?


R. Yes it is like that he will take it. But it is uncertain whether he will
take it into his own hands, to preserve and keep it, or give it in to the
Devils hands, to plague and punish it. It may be for his negligence in not
doing it, the Lord will so take it, as nothing but vengeance shall light upon
it. It is good ever to prevent the worst. The Devil lies always in wait to
devour, but never is he so greedy as them. For then he knows, that what he
gets, he for ever gets, as then he for ever looses, what then he looses.


Q. Think you there is no good man, but does it?


R. God forbid I should so say: so might I soon condemn the righteous and
justify the wicked doer. For God knows many a good man dies sodeinly, and
has no time to bethink himself of any thing.


Q. That a man may both do it and do it well what must he of necessity do?


R. First he must resolve himself of the power that God has to preserve his
soul, if he commends it unto him. Secondly, of the will that he has to take
it unto his custody being commended into him. He that is not resolved as well of
the one as of the other of these, he cannot surrender his soul into the hands
of God, as into the hands of a faithful creator.


Q. It is an easy matter to be resolved of the first. vz. Of the power of God,
because God is omnipotent, and nothing can resist his power. Romans 11.34
But how shall he be resolved of the second that is of the will of God? for as
the Apostle says. Who has known the mind of the Lord? or who was his
counselor? Wisd. 9.13.
And as the Wise man says. What man is he that can know the counsel of God?
or who can think what the will of God is?


R. Though no man of himself can think, know, or be resolved of the will of
God, Iere. 10.14.
because by his own knowledge every man is a beast before God; yet by the
spirit of God the righteous may, yea shall know it, because as David says, The
secret of the Lord is reueiled to them that fear him; Psalm. 25.14. Esa.
54.13. I^re. 31.3. Ioh. 6.45.
and as it is witten in the Prophets; they shall be all taught of God.


Q. But how shall the righteous know by the spirit of God, that God will
receive his soul and keep it?


R. By the witness it gives to his own spirit, for the spirit of God
certifieth his spirit, that he is redeemed, justified and sanctified by
Christ, and that in the end he shall be glorified. And he that is thus certified
and assured, may boldly commend his soul into the hands of God as into the
hands of the faithful creator, and that in assurance that it shall be for ever
preserved and kept For why? Romans 11.29 Romans 8.30.
the gifts and calling of God are without repentance, and look whom he
calls, him he justifies, and whom he justifies, him he glorifieth, This
assurance made David commend his soul into the hands of God; for a reason why
he did commend it unto him, was the redemption which he had wrought for him.
For as in these words, Psalm. 31.5.
Into thy hands I commend my spirit, is his action; so in these, for thou have
redeemed me O Lord God of truth, is his reason: and this assurance also may
make any good man to commend his soul into the hands of his almighty
creator, and most merciful redeemer, neither needs he doubt, but that it
shall be accepted being so commended, for what soul soever God has loved to
redeem, that soul he will still love to preserve.


Q. I think well that; but how shall he know that the testimony that is given
to his spirit is the testimony of Gods spirit.


R. By other fruits of the same spirit, for the spirit of God is no where
without fruit, says the Apostle, Where the spirit of the Lord is, there is
liberty, and says Christ, 2. Cor. 3.17
when he is come. i. the spirit, Ioh. 16.8.
he will then reprove the world of sin, and of righteousness and of judgment
etc. Ioh. 16.8.9.10.11.13.


Q. But what may those fruits of the spirit be, by which he shall know the
testimony that is given to his spirit, to be the testimony of Gods spirit?


R. His living and dying in faith and obedience, for these are fruits of the
spirit of God. Gal. 5.22. and he that lives and dies in these, is not without
the spirit of God, for where his fruits are, there he himself also is.


Q. Why join you these two together, his living and dying in faith and
obedience?


R. Because it is hard to have him die in them that has lived without them.
Petrarc. Optate been mori, quod ipsu^^ nisi been vixeritis, frustra est.
I know but one example in all the Bible, of a man that died in faith, which
lived without faith, and that is the example of the thief upon the cross: who
is one that no man might despair, and one alone and no more, least any man
should presume.


Q. What is the reason that he which lives not in faith and obedience, should
hardly die, either in the one, or in the other, and very rarely in both?


R. The bitterness of the panges of death, for to him that has not lived in
both, they are so hard, uneasy and intolerable, as oftener they drive him
clean from them, then draw him any thing to them, neither is this any thing at
all to be marueiled at, for if other light afflictions do sometime shake the
faith of the servants of God endued with great measure of grace; it is not to
be thought, but the pangs of death will keep him wholly from faith and
obedience, which in his life time was never acquainted with either, but the
force of the one is to be seen in that good man Job; who once in his
affliction said: though the Lord kill me, yet will I trust in him, but
afterward in his trouble (his faith being ouercast as with a cloud) he said,
that God was his enemy, and that he had set him as a mark to shoot at, the
fury therefore of the other is to be found I fear me in some other, some such
matter I am sure was to be found in that evil man when he died, who never
cared to live either in says or obedience while he lived, but wholly despised
the one, and utterly neglected the other.


Q. That a man then might die in faith, you would wish him to live in faith?


R. You may guess twice, and not guess so right again: for if that he that in
his life was accustomed to live well, does sometime in show die ill, how shall
he certainly die well, that ever in his life was addicted to live ill? the
proverb is, Such as the life was, such the death is: and oftentimes it is
found true: neither is it any wonder though it be so: for an evil custom is
not often left upon the sudden. Can the black Moore change his skin, says
Jeremiah, or the Leopard his spots? Iere. 13.23.
then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do evil.


Q. It is more ieopardous I see to delay to live well, than many judge it to
be?


R. You may be right sure of that, for he which is not willing to live well to
day, will be more unwilling to morrow. It is an hard thing to resist custom:
for custom in time becoms another nature. And the saying is, Do what you can,
nature will some ways have the course: what is bred in the bone will hardly be
forgone.


Q. That a man then may be in the better possibility to die well, it is good
betimes to begin to live well.


R. That is most certain: Oh, Lam. 3.27.
says Jeremiah, it is good for a man to bear the yoke in his youth.

What liquor sweet or sower a vessel first does take,
The smell thereof will aye remain, or hardly it forsake.
Prou. 22.6.
Teach a child, says Solomon, in the trade of his way, and when he is old he
shall not depart from it.


Q. What may persuade this you speak of?


R. That which I do speak: and what is there else almost that may not? The
word of God does every where and way persuade it: the entrance of every man
into the Church of God does persuade it; the petition he makes in the Church
does persuade it; the confession he makes before the Church, does persuade it;
experience in many things does persuade it; every thing but folly, vanity, and
iniquity does persuade it. If you will have precept, Eccle. 11 6.
the word goes thus: In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening let not
thine hand rest. Eccle. 12.1. Sir. 18. 20.
Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth. Whilst thou may yet sin
show thy conversion. Matthew. 6.33.
First seek the kingdom of heaven. If you will have promise, the word goes
thus: Pro 8.17. Pro. 8.18, 19 20.
They which seek me early, shall find me. Riches and honor are with me, even
durable riches and righteousness. My fruit is better than gold, yea than fine
gold and my revenues better than silver. I cause to walk in the way of
righteousness, and in the mids of the paths of judgment. That I may cause
them that love me to inherit substance, I will fill their treasures. Seek ye
first the kingdom of God, Matt. 6.33.
and his righteousness, and all these things (.i meat, drink and cloth, after
which the Gentiles seek) shall be ministered unto you. If you will have menace
and threatening, the word goes thus: Make no tarying to turn unto the Lord,
Sir. 5. 7.
and put not off from day to day for suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord break
forth, and in thy security thou shall be destroyed, and thou shall perish in
the time of vengeance. Thus every way the word goes to persuade a speedy
conversion unto God, that man may escape confusion with the devil. For profit
thereby it says: This is the acceptable time, 2. Cor. 6.2.
this is the day of salvation, to day hear his voice. For peril through the
neglect thereof, it says: exhort one another daily, while it is called to
day, lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulnes of sin. For example
of those that have been diligent in the practice thereof it says: that Samuel
began to serve God in his minority; that Timothy knew the Scriptures of a
child; that John grew in spirit as he grew in years; that the lady to whom
John wrote, 2 Ioh. 4.
had children that walked in the truth of all these things, and more in the
word, there is nothing which does not persuade to a speedy turning unto the
Lord, both in faith and obedience, the commandment is holy, and that should
move; the measure is sharp and that should move; the menace is sharp, and
that should move; the profit by obeying is good, and that should move; the
danger in neglecting is great, and that should move; the example of doing is
pleasant, and that should move; happy is he, whom either any, or all of these
do move. If these do not thoroughly move, the rest that follow may somewhat
help thereto; they should, and these would feign move. So soon as a man is
borne, or not long after, he is baptized in the name of God the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost; and wherefore is that, but to show, that when he
cannot run to Christ, he should creep unto him, and serve him as he can in
youth and age? So soon as he begins to pray, he says; Hallowed be thy name,
thy kingdom come, thy will be done; before ever he says: Give us this day our
daily bread: and wherefore is that, but to show, that so soon as he can pray,
he is to seek the will of God, which he must do; before the food which he
must eat, the words which he lives by, before the sins and pleasures which
he perishes by? It is written, that when Christ heard a young man answer, that
he had kept the commandments from his youth, he began to love him: and
wherefore is that, but to show how Christ loves timely beginnings to obey and
serve him? There is not one confession for old men, and another for young men,
as though it were a work of necessity for old men to believe, and a work of
supererogation for young men; but one for all, as though it were as convenient
for young men to believe as well as old. The old man says not, I did believe
in God; neither does the young man say, I will believe in God: but both say, I
do believe in God. And wherefore is this, but to teach that a man must believe
in God, as well when he is young, as when he is old? He which in Scripture is
called I am; loves I am; and cares neither for I was; nor I will be. As he
is ever present, so he delights in that which is present. As man's time
therefore is only the present time, so should he both believe and obey in the
present time. As it was a fault in Felix to say unto Paul, I will hear thee
when I have a convenient time: so it is in him that would be Felix, to say
unto God, I will believe in thee; I will obey thee, when I have a convenient
time. As when Christ asked Peter this question, love thou me? He looked
that Peter should answer him, Yea Lord I love thee: so when he asks any
this question, Beleeuest thou in me? He looks that he should answer him,
Yea Lord, I do believe in thee. He likes not, I will believe in thee. There
is some certainty, in I do believe in thee; but there is great doubt, in I
will believe in thee. He that does not believe, is uncertain whether ever he
shall believe. It is not in his own power to believe when he list to believe:
neither if it were, is he sure that God will then like of his believing, which
would not other when believe, when it was meet he should have believed.


Q. Why but it is an old saying; Repentance can never be too late?


R. I, but it is a true saying, Repentance can never be to soon. The first
lesson that John taught was, Matt. 3.2.10
Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. The first lesson that the
Disciples taught was, Matthew. 4.10
Repent too, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. And the first lesson that
Christ taught was, Repent also, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. And all
this was for no other cause, but to teach all, that repentance should be the
first work any man should do. And now if this be so; then neither faith nor
obedience must be the last that must be looked after. For repentance is not
full, till faith and obedience comes; the first to assure of pardon for the
sins past, the second, to prevent through grace, all sins that otherwise
would come. As a man therefore in the beginning of his age, is to repent, that
he may attain to the kingdom of heaven, so is he also to believe and obey,
timely crookes the tree that true cramhooke will be, and timely turns the man
that true Christian will prove. The tree which buddeth not in spring is dead
all the year, the man which believes not in youth, is most what unbelieving
in age. If children be deformed in youth, there is small likely good they will
be well favored in age. So if men's minds be planted in sin while they are
young, seldom any goodness buds thereout when they are old. As other grafts,
so virtue must have a time to grow. The seed thereof is sown in youth, but
the fruit comes up in age. As the best killing of a Serpent is in the egg,
so the best mastring of sin is in the youth. If it be not then overcome, it
will hardly be overcome. It is hard making of an old dog to stoop. If he be
not taught while he is a whelpe, he will be unskillful, so if man be not
reformed while he is young, he will be wicked when he is old. What man in
youth does most put in ure, that til death to keep he shall be sure. As the
arrow is directed at the first, so it flies all the way, over or under or
beside, but it never finds the mark unless it be leuelled right in the hand.
So as the life of man is begun, so it is most what continued, either wide,
short or gone of, and from that it should be. The beginning is half of the
whole. Of a good beginning seldom comes a bad end. If therefore a man will be
in hope of a good death, it is good for him betimes to set upon a good life.
A good life is a good means to a good death; and the sooner that that is
begun, the better this in the end will be. Ye wish (says Petrarch) to die
well, but that your wishing is in vain except ye have lived well, as if
without living well there were no dying well.


Q. But what if a good life be not begun betimes?


R. There is so much the more pains to be taken about it toward the end. He
that sets not on his journey till noone, must go faster than he that began
in the morning. So he that begins not a good life betimes must live so much
the more straightly when he does begin it. It is said, the Devil is very
busy, because his time is short: an old man therefore in goodness is to be much
more busy because his time is shorter, as the Israelites therefore gathered
twice so much Manna the day before the Saboth as they gathered any day before
yt, because they might not gather upon the Sabbath: so the gray headed which
looks every day for the last Saboth, must pray twice as much, hear twice as
much, do twice as much to prepare the sacrifice of his body and soul, as ever
he did in any time of his life before, because the night is at hand in which he
can neither hear, nor pray, nor work any more. For there is neither work,
Eccle. 9.10.
nor invention, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither he goes.
Sermon. Disc. Ser. 115. de Tempore.
A certain Merchant passing through a wood found there an Heremit of a
hundredth years old, of whom he demanded what he there did? to whom the
Hermit answered, I learn to die. Upon him again the Merchant thus replied,
what need you do that seeing you are old? for without that shortly you must
die, to him again the Hermit thus answered: that is the thing I fear,
because I know I must die, and yet I know not to die. What is it therefore
quoth the Merchant to know to die? marry quoth the Hermit, to leave sin and
do righteousness, according to the saying of the Psalmist, Eschew evil and do
good. Among other things in this history worth the nothing, this is not the
worst that by how much the shorter the time was, the Hermit had to live, by so
much the greater his care was to live well. What was this old man's practice,
should also be other old men's as well as his. What fitted him because he was
old, does also well fit them, because they are old. His time was short and
therefore he was desirous to know to die. Their time is short, and therefore
they should be desirous to do the like. Surely they must away: whether it be
to night before to morrow, or to morrow after, to night they do not know.
Better it is to prepare in time than to say I would I had. Had I wist comes to
late. As it was a great commendation for Mnason to be called an old disciple:
so it is a great discredit for them to be counted old dissemblers. It is ill
for young men to be vicious, but it is worse for old men not to be virtuous.
It is too bad for men to follow sin when sin forsakes them. Nothing does so
much blemish old men as sin. For old Noah to be drunk; for old Lot to be
sleepie; for old Sampson to loose his strength; for old Eli to cocker his
children; it is a great disgrace. If old men regard ought a good name after
their death which is better than great riches in their life, I wish them, I
will them, I advise them to be sober, discreet, holy, righteous, and religious
in their age. Pro. 16.31.
Age is a crown of glory when it is found in the way of righteousness. Sir. 25.
4, 5. 6.
Oh how pleasant a thing it is when gray headed men minister judgment, and
when the elders can give good counsel, oh how comely a thing is wisdom unto
aged men, and understanding and prudence to men of honor. The crown of old
men is to have much experience, and the fear of God is their glory. But if
then they neglect the ways of God, and the works of his commandments, the
Lord have mercy upon them, without his great mercy, their estate is evil;
their condition is all too bad. Sir. 25. 2.
Three sorts of men (says the Lord) my soul hates, and I utterly abhor the
life of them: a poor man that is proud; a rich man that is a lier, and an old
man that doteth. If therefore hated and abhorred of God they will not be, let
them speedily reformed be. If death (which is at their gate) take them
unawares, the thredde of their hope is cut off, and perish they must in their
sins. For after death there is no place, Ignat. in epist. 6. August. ad Petr.
diac. cap. 3. August. epist. 80. ad Hesychium.
nor time to confess them. In the life to come, they shall have repentance for
them, but in the sight of God they shall not find remission of them. In what
state their own last day shall find them, in the same state the last day of
the world shall find them: for such as every man in the same day shall die,
even such in that day shall he be judged. As Solomon says, If the tree fall
toward the South, Eccle. 11.3
or toward the North, in the place that the tree falls there it shall be. As
the apostle Paul therefore says unto all: While we have time, Gal. 6.12.
let us do good unto all men: so say I unto them while they have time, let
them do good unto themselves: and to do that let them not linger with Lot
till the angel pluck them, but haste with Noah, while the flood does warn
them, least when they would enter, with the foolish virgins, they have answer,
I know you not, Mat. 25.12 41.34.
in steed of (with the disciples) from the beginning I have loved you: and when
they come to judgment, they receive with the wicked, Go ye cursed, in steed
of Come ye blessed, sounded to the blessed. Sharp is the word Go ye: sweet
is the word Come ye: as they like of the sweet Come ye better than of the
sharp Go ye: so let them like better of the means to the sweet Come ye,
than of the ways to the bitter Go ye.


Q. As your counsel is good, so they had best follow it.


R. You say true: as it is commodious to follow it so it is perilous to forsake
it perilous in the time present, because it bereaueth the^ of the honor due
unto them: for who will honor an old man that is vicious? I reprove an old
man (says Cleanthes) that has graye hairs, Laert. lib. 7. c 2.
but has not a grave heart: and perilous in the time to come, because it
dispossesseth them of the kingdom of heaven: for God has said: Apoc. 21, 27
Stob. ser. 113.
No unclean thing shall enter therein. And Metrodorus said: An old man is not
blessed except he has the number of good works absolute. And to one that
asked Diogenes what thing was most miserable in this life, he answered: Laert.
lib. 6
An old poor man: and that may be an old man void of good works, as well as
an old man destitute of great riches: for poorer is he that is destitute of
goodness, than he that is destitute of goods. And unlike it is that he would
co^demn that in another, which he so highly commended in himself: for great was
the amity that was between him and poverty, great also the commendation he
gave to poverty: when one objected to him his poverty, he said: Stob. ser. 95.
Oh unhappy man that thou art, what say thou? I have not seen any man
exercise tyranny for poverty, Idem ser. 93
but all men for wealth and riches: poverty is a virtue which is learned of it
self and an help to philosophy: for to what philosophy does persuade by
words, to that poverty compells by deeds. But what do I prosecute this thus
far? It is no great matter which way it be taken. It makes little for the
honor of old men that are vicious; neither does it derogate any thing from
the renoune of those that are virtuous. By that which I have said, may easily
be coniectured, what I would have said. It is every way perilous for old men
to persist in their sins, and to persevere in their wickedness. Themselves they
over burden, others they too much corrupt, all they hurt. In as much as I
cannot effect with tongue, what I affect in mind, I beseech God to give them
all grace so to live while they are old, as well they may die, when they do
die.


Q. Amen to that say I. For it is as miserable to die, to die, as it is
pleasurable to die, to live. And I would as gladly die to live, as live to be
old.


R. Yea, I think and rather too. Of the twain the first is the best.


Q. But of the other twain, the last is the best.


R. I say not that, because I know not whether there be any goodness at all in
ye first. But this I say (because I know it) that of those two, neither the one
can be attained, nor the other annoyed without living well while they live, and
dying well when they die. For the scripture says; Apoc. 14.13
Blessed are they which die in the Lord. It says not blessed are they which
die out of the Lord, neither yet, blessed are they which die against the Lord.
For neither the one nor the other of those can be blessed. Nor the first, Romans
8.1.
because the Apostle says, There is no condemnation to them which are in
Christ Jesus. For thereby he insinuates that there is nothing but condemnation
to them which are out of Christ Jesus. Nor the second, because the Lord says,
1. Sam. 2.30
Them that honor me, I will honor, and they that despise me shall be
despised. For thereby it may be gathered, that they which are against the Lord
both in their life and death, shall not be with the Lord after their death. For
how should they then be despised? they are not despised, that are received of
the Lord to be with Christ for ever. Greater honor cannot be done unto them.
For when Paul desired the best of all, he desired to be with Christ, which (as
he says) is best of all. Philip. 1.23. desiring to be dissolved, and to be
with Christ which is best of all.


Q. Whatsoever you say; by that which you do say, this I find must be said,
that a good life must go before, that a good death may follow after, and both
concur together, that perpetual bliss may ensue either.


R. In finding this you have found the truth. For as the second is not often
without the first: so the third is very seldom without the two former. But
that there has enough been said of this before, there might here now more be
said. But referring you to that, I will rest here with this. For when all is
sought that may be sought, this will once at length be found, that a good life
till death, and a good death after a good life, are the best means to an
happy life, after life and death.


Q. That we may all find the last, God give us grace to seek the first. For
as it is his grace that we live at all, so it must be of his grace if we live
well.


R. True is that you say. For as Paul says, By grace we are saved; and
without grace we could not but be damned. Then is a man overcome by his
sins, while he labors to live righteously of his own strength, without the
hope of the grace of God that delivers him. Moreover as the fore named
Apostle said of himself, 1. Cor. 15.10.
By the grace of God J am that I am: so must we say of our selves, by the grace
of God we are that we are, whatsoever in goodness we are, for as that learned
man Hierome says, Our righteousness does not consist of our merits, Hieron.
lib. 1. aduers. Pelag.
but of the grace and mercy of God: that therefore I may once come to a
conclusion, I here say Amen to your petition


Q. So much the iuster is my petition, by how much the better (Amen) fittes
your conclusion: but I see it fittes well; and I wonder nothing you sought to
conclude. For lo we are at the pitch of our parting, and I never thought
thereof. Lord how soon and sodeinly is this day gone? I had thought we had
been much farther from our parting place then now I see we either were, or
are. But seeing there is no remedy, I thank you heartily for your company,
most heartily also I thank you for the good documents both touching my life, and
concerning my death, you have in your conference with me vouchsafed to deliver
unto me. God make me willing to regard them and able to requite you. I esteem
them because they are healthy, and I must and will remember you, because you
have dealte courteously.


R. Your kindenes is great, yea greater by much than I either ever deserved, or
now desired: neither my company, nor my conference have merited, what either
willingly you say you gave, or dutifully you say you owe. The first
necessarily you were to have because thus far one way did well serve us both.
Except one of us should have gone about, we could not have gone asunder. The
last handsomely you could not be denied, because as friendly as earnestly it
was desired, of some thing also we were to be talking, whilst together by the
way we were to be walking.


Q. But you might have chosen that notwithstanding, whether you would have
talked of this matter yea or no?


R. Not oportunely, though lawfully. For every time fittes us to talk of
death, because we know not how soon we must yield thereto; whether to
night before to morrow, or now before anon?


Q. In deed we are at an uncertainty, either when or where we are to expect
it, but the remembrance thereof to some is yrkesome?


R. That makes not that conference there: aboutes, to others should be
loathsome, some seek it, many wish it, all must undergo it, though some
cannot abide to hear of it, yet there is no reason but some should think of
it.


Q. God forbid that any should be otherwise minded. If we think of other
petite businesses (as we do) (for what go we about which we think not of
before we go about it?) much more should we think of it. It is the last and
greatest business we have to do, and in their last actions men commonly labor
to excel themselves. Shall or should they then in this seek to shame them
selves? they should not, whatsoever some will, wise men will not, whatsoever
others do: whatsoever others do or will do, God make us wisely to think of
it, well to provide for it, that strongly to arm our selves against over much
fear of it, orderly we may come to it, patiently we may bear it, happily we
may pass through it, and christianly as well as courageously we may ouergoe
it.


R. Amen: for the well minding of it ere it comes, is the right managing of it
when it comes, he that never thinks of it, can hardly abide to undergo it,
and will scarcely labor well to pass through it, that makes many so unwilling
to hear of it, and so impatient to bear it as they are; namely, their seldom
minding it, and their never thinking of it.


Q. I am just of your mind for that: so am I also for all else that hitherto
you have spoken concerning it. I could say more, but I will not, the time that
tarieth no man, and the way, which being unknown troubles every man, do both
call me a way. Once again therefore good master Regulus, I heartily thank you,
and humbly take my leave of you.


R. If there be no remedy, but needs we must break company, the Lord be with
you.


Q. And with you also.


R. Amen: I beseech him for without him; neither of us both can do any thing:
the holy Angel of God go with us, to the places whither we are going, and
conduct us to the place which we are ever desiring, and protect us in the
places wherein we shall be abiding.


Q. Amen, Amen: for so shall now our journey be prosperous, and in the end our
arrival to rest most joyous, but again fare you well, 2. Cor. 13.13
for I must yield to time being subject to time.


R. Farewell sweet friend Quirinus: and the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and the love of God the father, and the most comfortable fellowship of the holy
Ghost, be with us and remain with us this day and always: Amen, Amen.


FINIS.

