THE GREAT ASSIZE, OR, DAY OF IVBILEE.

Delivered in four Sermons, upon the 20. chapter of the Revel. ver.
12.13.14.15.

Whereunto are annexed two Sermons upon the 1. chapter of the Canticles, verse
6.7

The second Impression, corrected and amended by the Author SAMVEL SMITH,
Minister of the word of God at Prittlewell in Essex.

Math. 12.36. I say unto you, That of every idle word that men shall speak,
they shall give an account thereof at the day of Judgment.

LONDON, Printed by NICHOLAS OAKS, 1617.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL AND Virtuous Gentlewoman, Mistress JANE ELIOT of
Newland Hall, SAMVEL SMITH, wishes the increase of all true comfort in this
life, and eternal happiness in the next.
RIGHT Worshipful, the Apostle Paul has told us, That In the last days shall
come perilous times, For men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous,
boasters, proud, cursed speakers, Disobedient to parents, unthankful,
unholy, without Natural affection, Truce Breakers, false accusers,
intemperate, fierce, no Lovers at all of them which are good, traitors, heady,
high-minded, Lovers of pleasures, more then lovers of God, having a show of
godliness, but yet deny the power thereof: And they are the words of our
Savior himself: that as it was in the days of Noah, So shall the coming of
the Son of man be. And again, when the Son of man comes, shall he find
Faith upon earth? When were these perilous times Saint Peter speaks of, if
not now? When was there the like security? When gave men themselves over to
their own hearts lust more then now? By the which then we see that we are
they, Upon whom the ends of the world are come: and that we must all shortly
be called to account for these things: The Nineuites fast and repent, the
Publicans do fear and quake, when Jonas cries to the one, and John to the
other of judgment to come. Ahab is humbled, and Felix trembles, when from
Elias and Paul they hear of death and Judgment: yet alas, where is the man
among us, that thinks of these things? Do not men cry, Peace, peace, till
destruction come upon them, as the Travel upon a woman with child: She
thinks not of the pain until it come, and they think not of this day of
reckoning till it come. This is the security of our Age: so that we may now
look for an end to be put unto these sinful days: for what are they but
the forerunners of that last and dreadful day? The Lord make us wise betimes,
that we may think of that Great Assise, and the account that we are then to
make. I have here endeavored in a weak measure to unfold the Doctrine of the
day of Judgment, the which J here present unto your Worship, in regard of the
demonstration of my unfeigned thankefulnes for your extraordinary kindness
bestowed upon me: As also in regard of the great affection, and good devotion
you bear to the Truth: Accept therefore I pray you, what is here offered unto
you, and take in good part my endeavor therein: so I humbly take my leave,
Resting

Your Worships in all Christian duty to be commanded, SAMVEL SMITH.

To the Christian Reader, Grace and Peace from JESUS CHRIST the Prince of Peace.
CHristian Reader, I present here unto thy view, the third public fruit of
my Ministry, wherein I have endeavored, that those especially of mine own
Hearers, might a second time take notice of my Exercises, that in public I
delivered unto them. The night comes when no man can work: therefore it
stands us all in hand, both Minister and People, to esteem of Time as the most
precious thing in the world; and the rather, because we know not how soon we
shall be called to an account of our Works. Many have had many times many good
purposes of heart to cleave unto the Lord, that have been prevented by Death,
for want of timely Repentance. It shall then be our wisdom, To agree with our
Adversary while we are in the way with him; for if we be but once arrested
by Death, we shall be sure to pay the utmost farthing. Use this as a help unto
thee, to better thee in the performance of that duty which concerns thee so
nearly, That thou must one day give an account of thy Works. If thou reap any
benefit by it, give the praise unto God, from whom every good and perfect gift
proceeds; and help me in thy prayers, which I shall take as a full recompense
of all my Labors, and be encoraged to spend some hours more in the like
duties for thy good. In the mean time I remain

Thine in the common Savior, SAMVEL SMITH.

THE GREAT ASSIZE. The first Sermon.
REVEL. 20.11.12. etc. 11 And I saw a great white Throne, and him that sat on
it, from whose Face fled away both the Earth and the Heaven, and their place
was no more found.

12 And I saw the dead both small and great stand before God: and the Books
were opened: and another book was opened, which is the book of Life: and the
dead were judged of those things which were written in the books, according
to their deeds.

13 And the Sea gave up her dead which were in her: and Death and Hell
delivered up the dead that were in them; and they were judged every man
according to his deeds.

14 And death and hell were cast into the lake of fire: this is the second
death.

15 And whosoever was not found written in the book of life, was cast into the
lake of fire.


HAVING spoken (not long since) of the Coming of CHRIST into his Garden, Cant.
5.1.
or into his Church, and of his kind and princely offers unto us, suing for
entertainment at our hands, being his first coming unto us here in this vale
of Tears: I thought it very necessary to speak something of his second
coming; that those that will not be moved with the former, might be terrified
with the latter.

To which purpose I have made choice of this place of Scripture, in which this
matter (as you see) is at large described, with many necessary circumstances,
needful to be known and learned of every one of us all. For here the second
coming of Christ is revealed to Saint John in a vision from Heaven, even in
that manner, in which Christ will come at the last day: For these five Verses
contain in them nothing else, but a lively and heavenly description of the
second coming of Christ to Judgment, with all the circumstances belonging to
the same.

The parts of the Text.
For first, if you would know with what Majesty, Power, Integrity,

John says here, he Saw the dead both great and small, stand before the
Judge: all that ever are, that have been, or shall be unto the end of the
World, must appear before the Throne of CHRIST JESUS.

Thirdly, if you desire to be the Books shall be opened, that God will Judge
every man by his own conscience; for that shall give evidence, either with or
against thee, either to excuse or accuse thee.

Fourthly, and lastly, if you Blessed; But Death and Hell, and Satan, and all
ungodly sinners shall be cast into a Lake of Fire and Brimstone for evermore,
which is the second death.

Now having seen the meaning of the Text; let us come to speak of the
several points, one by one in order.

I saw a great white Throne, etc.
THis Verse contains in it a notable Description of the Judge himself. And
whereas S. John says, he saw a great white Throne; that is, Christ Jesus
revealed it unto him in a Vision; the manner of his second coming to
judgment; and withal, commands him to write it in a book, for the comfort
and instruction of the Church of God for evermore.

Here then we may note the great care and love of JESUS CHRIST, toward his
poor Church and people, that he would not have them ignorant of his second
coming to Judgment: But he does make it known to his Disciple John, and bids
him record it in the book of God for our instruction, that so no man might be
ignorant of it: but rather might prepare himself by true repentance, to meet
the Lord Jesus Christ in the Clouds.

Now concerning the Vision, Saint John saw a Great white Throne: he saw a
throne set, and this Throne is described by two properties: First a Great
Throne; 1 Great Throne.
secondy, a white Throne. The first shows the wonderful Might, Majesty, and
Power, of the Judge. The second shows the Purity, Integrity, and
Uprightness of the great Judge of the whole world.

Mat. 25.31
And as it was showed unto John in a Vision, so our Savior Christ himself
speaks of it, when he shows, that as earthly Kings, when they will make
show of their Regal Power, and Dignity, of their Majesty; they ascend into
the Thrones of their Kingdom: even so Christ Jesus, when he comes to
Judgment, he will come with all glory, all his holy Angels shall attend on
his Sacred person: And then he will ascend into this Great white Throne of his
Glory, to pronounce that final sentence both on the Sheep and on the Goats.

And surely it makes much for the comfort of Gods poor children, that though
here they be in want, in misery, and poverty, yet they shall be made partakers
of this glory of their head Christ Jesus. Secondly, it serves to astonish all
hard-hearted sinners, which contemn Christ and his poor members: Christ will
at last manifest his power in their just condemnation.

Seeing the person of the the presence of an earthly Prince, how careful and
circumspectly would we behave our selves, to do nothing unbeseeming the
presence of so great a person. This is the great care men have, when they come
into the presence of an earthly judge, to put off their hats, and to show al
tokens of reverence: And yet it is a wonder, to see how irreverently men and
women come into the ptesence of the Everliving and most high God, unto the
presence of the great Judge of Heaven and Earth, the King of Kings, and Lord of
lords. When we come to pray, or to sing Psalms unto God, how irreverently do
some sit with their hattes on? would any man do it in the presence of an
earthly judge, or a mortal presence? Surely it is an vnreuerent behavior, to
sit covered, either when we speak unto God by Prayer, or when GOD speaks
unto us in his word.

Again, when men come to hear the word of this great Judge, the glorious
Gospel of Jesus Christ: when they read it privately in their houses: It is
wonderful to see what little reverence they show in the glorious presence of
this great Judge. Would any earthly Prince take it in good part, if thou
should stand in his presence, and he talk with thee for thy good, and thou
should even at that time turn thy back upon him, and fall to wiping of thy
shoes, or some baser business? Though men dare not do this in the presence of
an earthly prince: yet when Jesus Christ shall speak unto them in his Word and
Gospel, they will more regard the vain and foolish talk of any Boy or Girl
that shall prattle in their ears, then the heavenly voice of this great Judge
CHRIST JESUS. Which shows very plainly, that they care not for CHRIST, and
that they make but small account of his Word and glorious Gospel. Oh therefore
let us consider when we come, either to speak to God by our prayers, or to
hear Christ speak unto us in his Word; that we come to appear in a glorious
presence; that so we may come in fear and reverence, as becomes the presence
of so great a majesty.

heed we never do wrong any of his poor members; for Christ he takes it
as done unto himself, and he will never put it up at our hands. Let us
therefore embrace the counsel of the Prophet David, in the second Psalm and
twelfth verse, Kiss the Son lest he be angry, etc. let us regard his word,
embrace his Gospel, love his people, obey his truth, kiss the golden Scepter
of this great and mighty Judge of the world, lest in his anger he break us in
pieces with his rod of iron.

Secondly, 2 White Throne.
this Throne of CHRIST JESUS is called a White Throne. Now this white Throne,
it betokens purity, beauty, sincerity, and integrity: And therefore it
shows that CHRIST JESUS the Judge of the whole world, will judge all causes,
and all persons, uprightly, sincerely, and purely: no cruelty, no injustice,
nor wrong will he do to any creature, but will proceed most sincerely in all
uprightness. Indeed, judgment in this world many times swarueth greatly:
sometimes the Judge is not able to search into the depth of the Cause:
sometimes for fear he dares not do justice: sometimes for favor he is
withheld: sometimes bribes blind his eyes, and pervert the right sentence.
But it shall not be so with this Judge of the whole world. His sentence is a
righteous sentence, he will judge according to truth: he is able to find out
any cause, and will examine it to the bottom: he fears no man's person, he
will not be moved with favor to conceal the truth. And as for rewards, he
contemnes them all; therefore no doubt he will proceed according to justice.

This serves for the comfort word, and to walk accordingly, they be disgraced
and despised of the world. Well, let us learn here to possess our souls with
patience: for there will come a day of reckoning, when as our righteous cause
will be heard, and we shall have justice, and all the contemners of Christ
Jesus, and persecutors of his poor members, shall feel the smart of it.

Esaias 55.6.
to seek the Lord while he may be found, and to call upon him while he is
near. Now while we live, Jesus Christ comes unto us by his Ministers, as a
Savior to save our Souls, in mercy to bring us to Repentance. But after this
life he will no more come as a Savior, or a Mediator, but as a mighty Judge
full of Majesty, full of Might, Power, and Glory. And therefore look how men
die, so shall the Judge find them. If thou die in thy sins, and do not
repent, and seek for pardon at the hand of the Judge, whilst thou live
here; There is no hope of mercy after death. For how death leaves thee, so
shall judgment find thee. Cain died many thousand years ago; and Judas in
their sins: so shall the last day find them. For after death, there is no
mercy; but justice and judgment.

And one fitting thereon.
NOw who this is, which sat upon this Great White Throne, The Person of the
Judge described. Reu. 14.14.
you may see in the Revelation of Saint John, the foureteenth chapter, and the
foureteenth verse, I saw a White Cloud, and one sitting on it like the Son
of man, having on his head a golden Crown, and in his hand a sharp Sickle. So
that we see that it is the Son of man, even CHRIST JESUS GOD and man, that
shall be the judge: And so does Saint Matthew call him: Mat. 25.31
When the Son of man comes in his glory, and all his holy Angels with
him, then shall he sit upon the Throne of his glory. And again, he titles
him by the name of a King; Verse 24.
Then shall the King say to them on his right hand, etc. This is taught by the
Apostle, We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ..1 Cor. 5.10


True it is that our Savior Christ is King, Priest, and Prophet; a true
Prophet, in whom was contained all the secrets and whole counsel of God: A
true high Priest, whose Sacrifice alone was able to put away the sins of the
whole world. But when he comes in the Throne of his Majesty, to judge the
quick and the dead, he shall not come as Priest or Prophet; for these Offices
of Christ are finished. For his Prophetical Office, he has sufficiently
revealed the whole counsel of God his Father to his Church and People: First
by his holy Prophets; then by himself; after, by his Apostles and Minsters.
And therefore seeing that his Prophetical Office is finished, he calls not
himself a Prophet, but a King. Again, CHRIST JESUS our Priest, having once
for all offered up that Propiciatory Sacrifice, for the sins of all the
Elect; now this Office of a Priest is likewise finished, and this Sacrifice
must be no more iterated and repeated. But now he comes as a King, in all
Majesty and Glory. For though his Prophetical and Priestlie Office be
accomplished: yet his Princely Office is not finished. But now CHRIST JESUS the
Judge of quick and dead, shall begin to manifest himself to be a King to
all Nations, to men and Angels: Now shall he show himself to be King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, full of all Divine and Heavenly power and glory; For
that now at the name of CHRIST every knee shall bow. When our Savior JESUS
CHRIST lived on earth, he came in misery, very base and lowly; every child
durst look him in the face. Then every base fellow, every sinful wretch, durst
mock him and spit in his face. Herod and Pontius Pilate, and the rabble of the
Jews, durst then use him at their pleasure. But now, He shall come as a King,
full of majesty and glory, guarded and attended upon with many thousands of
heavenly Soldiers, even all his holy Angels; and then he will make Herod
and Pontius Pilate, yea the greatest Kings and Monarchs to stoop. Nay then,
all his enemies shall tremble and quake, Zach. chap. 12 ver. 10. and not dare
to open their mouths against him. Oh then! what a terror may this be to all
wicked and ungodly sinners, that live in sin, to see him come in that
wonderful Majesty, to be their Judge, whom they have contemned, whose
members they have persecuted, and whose word and glorious Gospel they have not
regarded, but trodden under foot: for he shall come with a sharp two-edged
Sword to cut them in pieces, and a consuming fire to burn up all ungodly
sinners.

And as he is a King to the wicked, so is he a King to the godly. He alone
has the Scepter of David, to the endless comfort of those that be the
children of his Kingdom. For who is it that curbs Leuiathan, snaffles the
Devil, brideleth his force and malice? Surely this our King. Who is it that
cuts the throat of sin in his members, and takes away the strength of
sin? Surely this King of Kings. Who breaks the brass bars of Death, and
pulls out the sting of Death? Our sins, that they sting not our souls to
the eternal death. None can do that but this our King CHRIST JESUS. Who opens
the gate of heaven? who puts his spirit into the hearts of his children, making
them to cry Abba, Father? to lift up their souls, and with joy to long after
this Kingdom of Heaven? Surely, it is none other in Heaven or earth, but this
our gracious King: who being the only immortal and wise GOD, having the Key
of Heaven and of the bottomless Pit; he alone can kill and make alive, he
alone can lift up to Heaven, and send to Hell: he alone, and none but he, can
save and destroy. O what a comfort is this unto all the poor Members of
CHRIST IESNS? For what greater joy and comfort can there be to any poor
soul then this, to know; that he that is their Judge, is their Savior, a
sweet Redeemer, a merciful Judge unto them? he will never condemn his own
members: Nay, he will crown them with his own Self, and with his own
Glory.

of us in his blessed word: Malac. 1.6
If I he a Father, where is mine honor? If I be a Lord, where is my fear,
says the Lord. So will Christ say; If I be a King, where is that loyalty,
service, and obedience, that is due unto me? Now Christ Jesus is a Spiritual
King; and therefore he will be served in Spirit and Truth. O then let us all,
with a godly purpose of heart, yield, and resign our selves, bodies and souls
to honor this King, and to perform unto him true and spiritual obedience for
evermore. Alas, it is not external and outward service, which he expects: he
is not like an earthly king; but he regards the heart and the soul, that is a
special thing in his service. And if we shall thus perform this spiritual
service and obedience; then we shall show our selves to be his loyal and
dutiful Subjects, and then will he acknowledge us for his Servants: But if we
deny to him this service of the heart, and give it to any other, he will then
cast us off for evermore.

Severity of the Judge described.
Thus much of the Majesty of the Judge, and of his sincerity and uprightness
in judgment. Now in the description of the Judge, it is further added; that
from the face of this Judge, both The Heaven and the Earth flee away: And this
does show the wonderful severity of this great Judge of Heaven and Earth. We
know that men fly those things that they fear and dread: So here the Heaven
and Earth do fear the glorious presence of JESUS CHRIST the great judge of the
whole world, and seek to hide themselves, that they may not appear before
him. This flying of the Earth and the Heavens, and hiding themselves that they
dare not appear in the presence of CHRIST: this shows the wonderful majesty,
and the great severity and terror of CHRIST JESUS the Judge: from whence we
observe a threefold instruction.

The Heavens and the Earth Ans. They never sinned indeed, but yet the sin of
man is of that force, that it has infected both the earth we tread on, and
the heavens over our heads, many thousand miles above us. Oh then, see how
monstrous a thing sin is in the sight of Almighty God: what a vile thing,
that the contagion and infection thereof should hurt and infect the whole
Heavens, and make them that they dare not abide the glorious presence of God
their Creator. O, should we not abhor sin as the vilest thing in the world?
We are afraid of the plague, because it infecteth and kills men's bodies:
But the plague of Sin is a thousand times, and more, to be abhorred and
fled from; seeing it poisons and infects both body and soul; and is so
contagious, that the creature is afraid to behold the face of the Son of God.

Seeing both Heaven and Peter says: 2. Pet. 3.10.11. All these goodly houses,
all thy gold and silver, and costly apparel shall be burnt with fire: this may
teach us moderation and sobriety, in the use of Gods creatures. What folly is
it, to spend all that a man has to build a stately house; and yet in the end,
it must be consumed with fire, and become nothing else but fevvell for the fire?

That seeing the heavens and sense, nor feeling, nor never sinned: if these
shall fly before the Son of GOD, as being not able to endure his presence:
Alas, what shall wicked and hard-hearted sinners do? what shall become of the
vile wretches of the world, which live and delight in sin? where shall the
ungodly and sinner appear? what will become of all ignorant souls? what will
become of the Blasphemer and Adulterer? If the Heavens and the Earth, these
great and glorious creatures which sin not, shall not be able to stand in his
presence; Then, what I say, will become of all profane and ungodly sinners?
Alas, they shall be even at their wits end, not knovving in the world which
way to turn them, nor where to fly for succor? where shall they seek for
refuge, when as the Judge himself is their enemy? who dares plead for them?
dare any Saint or Angel? No, no: no Saint or Angel dares open their mouth to
speak one word in their behalf; neither can any creature deliver them from
the dreadful vengeance of this terrible Judge.

Verse 12. And I saw the dead both great and small.
THvs have you seen the person of the Judge described by his wonderful
majesty and power, The persons that shall appear before this Judge described.
wherevvith he will come to judgment; and also by the great severitie and
terror that shall astonish both the heaven and the earth, and make them to fly
from before his presence.

Now in this Verse, and that which follovveth, is declared who be they that
shall appear before this great Judge. Namely, I saw the dead, both great and
small, etc.

Secondly, the evidences that shall be brought in, and what witnesses shall
be produced, either to excuse, or accuse, in these words; And the Books were
opened.

And I saw the dead, both great and small, etc. Before we come to speak of the
words, here may a question arise: Namely, How this can be true that Saint
John says, He saw the dead, both great and small? For we believe that Christ
Jesus shall judge both quick and dead; not only the dead, but the living: and
Paul says, 1. Cor. 15.
We shall not all die, but we shall be changed: they that be living at his
coming. Then how does this place agree with them, seeing S. John says here,
He saw the dead? Here is none spoken of, but the dead, no mention of the
living.

I answer. Saint John says, He saw the dead: Not that he saw not the living
too. For he saw (no doubt) both quick and dead stand before God. But he
speaks here, only of those, of whom there might be some doubt. For if the
dead, and they which have been rotten so many thousand years, shall appear,
and stand before God: How can we think that any of the living shall be
wanting? if that they which have been dead for six thousand years, and are
turned to ashes, shall be brought to judgment: then (no doubt) they which be
found living when Christ shall come to judgment: So then, it is evident, that
though Saint John speak here only of the dead, because there might be most
doubt of them: yet he said, in a vision all men, both quick and dead, stand
before almighty God at the Bar of JESUS CHRIST.

Doct. Comfort to the godly that they shall rise again
I saw the dead. Hence may we raise a double Doctrine: First, a notable
comfort for the souls of Gods children; namely, that the dead bodies of Gods
children do not perish; they are not cast away, and lost, when they die, but
they shall rise again. They shall be purified and made a glorious body; and
they shall stand in the presence of the Lord Jesus Christ, and shall see his
glory. And therefore let us not think, that when death comes and separateth
the soul from the body, that then the body does perish, and is cast away: No,
no: it shall rise again: it is but laid in the Grave, as in a sure Chest; and
there it is at ease, and lies asleep, as in a bed of dowlne: But when
CHRIST JESUS shall come to judgment, it shall rise again. For we must know
that every true believer is made a member of CHRIST. And not only our souls
are united to Christ, but even our dead bodies, when they be laid in the Grave;
they still remain the dear members of his mystical Body, and therefore
shall not perish, but rise again to glory. And for our further confirmation
in this point of Resurrection, Resurrection proved.
let us see how it is confirmed to us by the testimony of the holy Scriptures:
as that of Daniel; Dan. 12.13
They that sleep in the dust shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some
to everlasting shame. And the Lord God by the Prophet Hoseas, does make unto
his Church this gracious promise, Hosea 13.14. I will redeem thee from the
power of the grave, I will deliver thee from death: O death, I will be thy
death; O grave, I will be thy destruction. This is cleared by the testimony of
Jesus Christ himself. Ioh. 5.28.
The hour shall come, in the which all that are in the grave, shall hear his
voice, and they shall come forth; And they that have done good shall go into
the resurrection of Life; and they that have done evil unto the resurrection
of condemnation. This is taught by the Apostles of Christ Jesus, in diverse
places of their Epistles. As, Behold, I show you a Mystery: 1. Cor. 15.52.
we shall not all sleep; but we shall be changed, and that in the twinckeling
of an eye, at the last Trumpe. And this is that which all of us confess to
believe, as one of the most principal Articles of our faith; The resurrection
of the dead: Phil. 3.21.
So that we see it is clear, that the godly and the wicked shall both arise.
But the ends of their resurrection are different, the one shall rise to life
eternal, the other to perpetual shame, and eternal destruction: So that
howsoever, it shall be a joyful day to the godly, that have the sting of Death
taken away from them through Christ his death, yet the wicked shall have no
benefit by it; and therefore unto them it cannot properly be called a
Resurrection, no more then the taking of a malefactor out of prison to be
executed, can be called a Delivery. But it shall be with the godly and the
wicked, at that day, as it was with Pharaohs servants, Genesis chapter 40. both
of them were taken out of prison, but the one of them to be restored to his
Office, to minister before the King, but the other to be executed, and put to a
cruel death: Even so shall it be with the godly and the wicked at the last
day: Both shall arise out of their graves as out of a prison; but the one to be
ever with the Lord; ministering praises unto him for evermore: the other to be
banished from his presence, and sent into everlasting condemnation. For unto
them alone is the resurrection a benefit, where remission of sins goes
before, as we are taught in the Creed.

This must needs be a great comfort to GODS Children, Job chap. 19. I know
that my Redeemer lives, and that I shall see him with these eyes: This same
body shall arise, this very body for substance, though purged and cleansed
from sin, yet the same for substance shall rise again: and these my eyes
which have been careful to seek Christ Jesus, to seek his glory, to read
his blessed Word, to relieve the poor members of CHRIST; that these my eyes
shall see my blessed Redeemer, to my endless joy: And these mine ears which
have been careful to hear thy holy word to save my soul: they shall hear
his sweet and blessed voice, saying unto me; Come ye blessed of my Father. For
the bodies of GODS children shall not perish, but shall rise to glory, and be
made like unto the glorious Body of Jesus Christ. Oh how this should move all
men and women, 1. Cor. 15
to use their bodies well, to the honor of Christ Jesus; seeing he will not
let them perish, but will crown them and glorify them for ever.

Secondly, this must needs be a fearful terror unto all profane and filthy
sinners, who bestowed their bodies wholly in the service of sin and Satan:
They shall look on him whom they have pierced, and shall lament, Zachar.
12.10. For even their dead bodies shall rise too; but how? to judgment, to
torment, and to burn for ever in the lake of fire and brimstone. Thou have set
open thy wanton and adulterous eyes, to behold vanity; thou have delighted to
hear vanity, more then goodness, thou have used thy tongue to lying, deceit,
swearing, etc. and have run to vain sportes, and pastimes on the Lords day,
to the dishonor of CHRIST JESUS, to serve the Devil, and thine own flesh. Oh
know, that thy body shall one day rise again to judgment, to torment, to be
cast into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone.

Consider the rich Glutton, Luke 16.
he should be a warning to all ungodly sinners. He gave his body to all
kind of uncleanness, pride, drunkenness, etc. He gave his tongue to lying,
swearing, and cursed speaking; and now is his body tormented, and would give
even a whole world, if he were Lord over it, for one drop of water, to cool
his flaming tongue. O let him be a warning to all sinners; and teach us to use
our bodies well; to look to our eyes, to our ears, and to set a VVatch before
our mouths, for fear lest we dishonor GOD by them, and bring endless woe
unto our selves. Well then, you see, that as it is an exceeding great joy to
Gods Saints, that they shall rise again; so is it a terror unto the wicked,
that they shall Rise again to Judgment, 1. Sam. 2. It were well with the
wicked man, with the Drunkard, etc. if their bodies might never rise; if they
might rotte and perish in corruption, and that their soul might be even as the
soul of a beast, a vapor utterly to be extinguished. But now there is more
behind, they shall one day come to judgment: And therefore Saint John tells
us in this place, that he saw the dead both great and small, stand before GOD.
Even our dead bodies must rise, either to honor, or dishonor; either to joy,
or to pain; to salvation, or damnation: And therefore, let us bethink our
selves of this betimes.

Both great and small:] Great and Small, who?
These words may admit a double exposition: for it may seem this; that by
Great and Small is meant those that be great men grown; or else small children:
young and old, all must appear. For, we see that many die even little
children, young Infants of a span long; some again die men of years. Well,
both great and small must appear: none shall be so young, or so little, but
that they must stand before GOD; and none so great, or so strong, but they must
appear likewise. Secondly, by great and small may be understood all sorts and
degrees of men, and women; great men, and great women; poor men, and poor
women; All sorts and conditions, must come to judgment; as well the prince, as
the subject, as well the rich, as the poorest Beggar: as though Saint John
should have said; I saw all men that ever have been, or shall be to the end of
the world; none shall be wanting: the rich and poor, young and old, high and
low, married and unmarried, bond and free, all must stand before God. Oh, what
a wonderful assembly will this be, to see so many millions of thousands: It is
a great sight to see an Army of men of a thousand; But here shall be a
thousand thousands: Even all men, women, and children, that ever have been, or
shall be, to the worlds end: None shall be wanting, the rich, and poor; young,
and old; high, and low; bond, and free; all must stand before God: and
therefore it is well called the day of the Lord, when all the offspring of Adam
shall stand before God.

Seeing S. John saw the dead both great and small, Uses diverse, 1.
stand before God, that is, al sorts of men and women, high and low, rich and
poor, bond and free, all must appear, and hold up their Hand at the Bar of
this great Judge: Surely, this ought to move all men, both great and small,
rich and poor, to make conscience of their lives, to repent of all their evil
ways, to turn to GOD by true repentance; for you see here no excuse can serve
the turn, no avoiding of this appearance; all must appear: the very Devils
themselves, 2. Cor. 5. Esaias 30.
and all the damned spirits must come to judgment. Tophet is prepared for the
King, the Judge, the Gentleman, the rich man, if they be wicked, their riches
shall not be excused, nor the poorest shall not be forgotten. Surely, and if we
have any care at all, what shall become of our poor souls at this day? It
ought to persuade al men, both poor and rich, both Minister and People, to
repent, to turn to Almighty God to lead new lives; that then we may rejoice
with joy and comfort. This did make Paul to labor to keep a good conscience,
Acts 24.16
before God and all men: and why? Because there would come a day when all must
arise to judgment, and give a straight account of all their thoughts, words,
and works. And the same reason should move us likeiwse to keep a clear
conscience. And what is the cause that men live in sin, and defile their
bodies, with many thousand filthy sins? Surely, because they think not of this
day when they must stand before God. If they could but think of this day, that
they must all come to a reckoning: O, it would stay and bridle their carnal
hearts from many foul and filthy sins, which now they commit with
greediness, 2. Cor. 5.11. Acts 17.3.

This will be a blessed day to all the children of God to hear the Judge say
unto them, Come ye blessed. O happy day, O blessed voice.

But to the ungodly sinners that live in sin, to the Drunkard, Blasphemer,
etc. this will be a terrible and fearful day, to hear the woeful voice of
the Judge, Go ye cursed into etc. Oh doleful voice, Oh heavy news, O
fearful Sentence, O woe, and ten thousand woes to all ungodly sinners: woe
then to the blasphemer: woe to the drunkard, etc. woe unto all ungodly and
wretched sinners: for there is no escaping of this Sentence. All must appear,
all must stand before God, all must come to their answer. None shall be so
great to escape, or so small to be forgotten. And then woe to them that shall
rise to this fearful and woeful Sentence, and heavy news of condemnation.
Oh, it had been good for such men, if they had never been borne, or had been
brought forth as loathsome Toads or Serpents; for then begins their eternal
misery and condemnation. O then, again, and again, let us bethink our
selves, that we must come to judgment; we must be called to a reckoning: we
cannot escape the Sentence of Judgment by any means whatsoever.

Again, where Saint John says, He saw the dead: Here Job was; some maimed
in body, as the poor man was. John 5.
Well, when our bodies shall now arise, they shall not be weak, or lame, or
maimed; but a perfect body, sound and a glorious body. All pain shall have an
end, all woe shall cease: But as for the ungodly, Psalm. 1.6.
it is not so with them: But they shall arise, that both body and soul may
go to hell together. Stand before God. I saw the dead, etc. Here we see
again, that our accounts must begin before God himself: we must stand
naked in his sight; and who then can think to hide his sins from him? He
knows the heart, and tries the reins; and his eyes are like a flame of
fire. Revel. 2.
O how this should move every man and woman, often to bethink himself of
this time, when he shall come to his account, even before the eternal God,
who cannot be deceived, nor bribed. If a malefactor come before the Judge, that
is guilty of treason or murder; how he quakes to think of the terror, and
severity of the Judge! he is afraid, and trembles, to appear in his
presence. How much more should we tremble and quake? And how should
hard-hearted sinners be at their wits end, to think they must come to stand
before God? to appear at the bar of the everliving, and most mighty Iehoua,
who can cast both body and soul into hell fire? O what secure and careless
wretches are we, that are nothing moved with these things, to repent and to
turn to God, to leave our foul and filthy sins! And if a poor prisoner
condemned should laugh and be merry, would not all men think him to be a
madman? And shall not we be worse then madde-men, if we never come to think
of these things? If a poor traveler that has but one penny in his purse,
shall come to an Inn, call for all manner of dainties, and never think of the
shot; would* not all men think him mad, and out of his wits? What
madness then is in every one of us all, if in this our pilgrimage, or travail
on earth, we spend our days in pleasure; bathe our selves in sport and
pastimes, carking and caring for the things of this world; and never to
bethink our selves, as to say, Alas, what do I now? I eat, I drink, I card,
I dice, I take my pleasure, and bathe my self in delight: but woe is me I must
com to judgment, I must give my reckoning l I must stand before GOD one day,
and there give an account. O that we had hearts to think of this? both young
and old, rich and poor, Minister and people, that we must stand bellie-naked
before God, that we must give an account of all our sins, to his Majesty:
It would bridle us, and keep us from many presumptuous sins which now we
commit.

The end of the first Sermon.
The great Assize. THE SECOND SERMON.
REVEL. 20.12. etc. 12 And I saw the dead both small and great stand before
God: and the Books were opened: and another book was opened, which is the book
of life: and the dead were judged of those things which were written in the
books, according to their works.


We have heard already the person of the Judge described unto us, with what
unspeakable majesty and glory he shall come, to the great comfort of the
godly: and also with what wonderful terror he will come, to the great terror
of the wicked. Secondly, we have here, who shall be cited to appear: Both
great and small: 1. These. 1.8
al must appear. Now follows in the third place, the most special and
principal matter of all; namely, after what manner all men shall be judged, in
these words: And the books were-opened, etc. We see that earthly Judges are
brought unto the Bench with great attendance. They being set, the prisoners are
brought forth, and are called over, one by one; and their matters are heard,
and witnesses produced: and so according to their faults they receive
judgment. Even so, at this great day of the Lord, Christ Jesus shall come with
a thousand of Angels; and before him shall stand all men and women, Both great
and small: And then shall the Books be brought forth. Indeed we see, when an
earthly judge sits on the Bench, it holds a long time to try causes; such
witnesses, and such evidences must be produced. But it shall not be so at the
last day: for when all men shall stand at the bar of Christ's judgment, they
shall then be judged according to the written Records, even according to the
Books: for they shall then be opened.

Books, wha^ is meant by them.
Now if you would know what these Books be, it is easy to know: for they be
even the particular conscience of every man and woman: thy conscience is the
book that shall be opened; and that shall be as good as ten thousand
witnesses, either to excuse, or accuse thee before God. For there shall need
no other witness, no other evidence against us at the last, but our own
conscience. For as God has his Book of infinite Knowledge, whereby he knows
the sins of all men and women as certainly as if they were written in a
book; and though men forget them, yet the Lord remembers them: So he has
given unto every man and woman a book, their own conscience; wherein are
written all our thoughts, words, and deeds, so as none shall escape. And the
Books are two, the Book of the Law, and the Book of Conscience: the one
showing a man what he should do, the other what he has done. Against the
book of the Law, none shall be able to except. For the commandments of the
Lord are pure and righteous altogether. Psalm. 19.9.
And as for the book of Conscience, who can deny it, or except against it?
seeing the Lord will now judge a man, not by another man's Conscience, but by
his own, the which he has always had in his own keeping, even in his own
bosom.

Now, seeing here what is meant by these books, namely every man's particular
Conscience: let us come to search what be the things written in this book;
and first, what use we are to make unto our selves from this: Every man's book
shall be opened, etc. First, in these books are written every thought of our
heart: In the Books of our cons^ince is written, Our (...).
none so secret, or so close, but it is here recorded. Secondly, every speech
and word of our mouth. Thirdly, every deed that men do. Thou have sealed up all
our sins in a bag, says Job; to show the exact kind of keeping of them
against that day of account. Surely, if there be any thing in a man to be
maruailed at, I must needs confess that this is a wonderful work of God,
that he has given to every man and woman a Conscience, which is like unto a
book; in which is recorded all our thoughts, words and works. A wicked man, an
unchaste woman, how many thousand vile and filthy thoughts have they in their
minds night and day? their hearts burn in lust and in uncleanness: now they
pass away to them, they regard them not, they make little or no account of
them. But (alas) they are all written in this Book of thy conscience: thy
conscience marks them, thy conscience writes them down. And if thou repent
not of them, and leave them, O woe to thy soul, when these Books come to be
opened and read over. For then thy conscience will accuse and lay to thy
charge, every one of them in order. Thou have set my misdeeds before me, and my
secret sins in the sight of thy countenance, says David. Again, in the heart
of man, what anger, what envy, what malice lurk therein? and they pass it
over, and think it no matter. Well, know (beloved) that unless you repent of
the very thoughts of the hearts, even these things will be found written in the
books at the day of Judgment; and what a lamentable thing will that be?

2. Our thoughts.
Secondly, as conscience is privy to all our thoughts, and will accuse us of
them at the day of Judgment: so all our speeches are noted therein. What a
number of wicked speeches pass out of the mouth of wicked and vain men and
women? what horrible and blasphemous oaths? what cursed speaking, lying, and
slaundering? Now a wicked person, that thus abuses his tongue so many thousand
times in a day, he cannot for his life remember them. Well, know that every
sinful word thou speak, is written in this book, there it is recorded:
and when this Book of thy conscience shall be opened, it will discover all thy
sins, not only thy filthy thoughts, but every wicked word. Our Savior tells
us, Mat. 12.36
that we must give an account of every wicked word at the day of judgment. For
though men labor to forget them, yet they are written in their consciences,
and one day shall come to judgment: O how this should awaken us all, and cause
us to look unto our lives, to make a covenant with our eyes, as Job did; and
to set a watch before our mouths, as David did; and to lay aside our vain
oaths, and idle mirth, which (as Solomon says) cannot want iniquity; seeing
one day they must all of them come to judgment.

3 Our works.
Thirdly, if we come unto the lives of men and women, why (alas) they be
nothing almost but a continual practice of sin, as the sins of men's lives
they be innumerable, even as the Sands on the Sea shore. Now though men's lives
abound with so many thousand sins, yet we see man perceiues not, nor knows
not one quarter of his sins. It may be he knows some; but (alas) they
forget the greatest part of them. But yet they be all written in this book of
thy Conscience: and they shall all come to Judgment. When these Books shall
be read, then all thy sins shall be made manifest, though never so secret:
for thy Conscience does mark them all, and pen them down against this day of
account.

Now seeing what is meant by this book, our Conscience: and likewise what be
written in them, even all our thoughts, words and works: let us come to see
what use we are to make of this Doctrine first. Hence first of all we may
observe the endless love and mercy of our God toward us; foretelling every

Paul complains of this: Romans 7.
and Peter bids Simon Magus to repent and pray, Acts 8.
if perhaps the thoughts of his heart might be pardoned. I doubt not but the
children of God are careful over their very thoughts. For a wicked carnal man
may abstain from some grievous sins; But it is a note of the true child of
GOD, to repent of his evil thoughts, and to be careful over them.

Thirdly, seeing every man's hell to torment them.

The mean to get a good conscience.
And therefore it should be our chiefest care, our chiefest study, and our
chiefest desire, all our life time, to keep a good conscience. Now if you
ask, how is it possible to get a good conscience? I answer, for the getting
and keeping of faith and a good conscience; we must know that it is done by the
use of the word of God. Ioh. 17.
Sanctify them by thy Truth, Thy word is the Truth. All graces of Gods
spirit, are wrought by his word. But that we may get a good conscience, we must

First, repent of all our sins: we must know by the Law of God, what is
sin, and what is not.

Secondly, we must know the heavy curse of GOD even for sin, that the reward
of sin is death eternal both of Body and Soul. For men do by nature
bless themselves in their sins; and though we hear of Gods Judgments
against sin, yet whose heart is touched and troubled? Thus men run on still
in sin, and fear nothing. They mean well they say, but yet live ill, and
think all is well.

Thirdly, til we see what sin is, and then see the curse of God due to sin,
we shall never seriously try our consciences, and see how our sins have wounded
them, that so we may repent us of sin.

Fourthly, we must be grieved for our sins; we must acknowledge and confess
them, begging for pardon of them; and to hunger, and thirst after Christ Jesus:
For there is nothing that can purify the conscience, and quiet the heart, but
only the blood of Jesus Christ applied to our souls by Faith, with persuasion
of the forgiveness of them.

Mark here then (beloved) when a man is thus humbled for his sins, and
beggeth the pardon of them earnestly, with sighs and groans; then will the
Lord send down into his soul, his blessed Spirit; to assure us of gods mercy,
of the pardon of our sins, that our wounds in conscience are healed, and this
is done by the means of Faith, Acts 15.9
which purifies the conscience.

Hereby we may perceive, For, Hebr. 11.
whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. Again, though men see their sins, and
oftentimes their conscience checks them for sins, yet how few do bewail their
sins? for I am persuaded that there is not so wicked a sinner, but sometimes
his conscience checkes him. Indeed men see not the danger, and feel not the
wounds of conscience, because now their Books be clasped, they be shut up,
their seared Consciences be now asleep: But the day will come that their
Books must be opened, and their secrets declared; and then conscience will
accuse them, condemn, and torment them.

Again, when a man or woman has gotten a good conscience, so as being truly
humbled for their sins, and begging pardon, they find some assurance of GODS
love in Christ, and that now their consciences do not accuse them; even then
must men take no less pains to keep and preserve a good conscience, to do
nothing to wound thy Conscience. A man's Conscience is a very tender thing. The
means to keep our conscience pure.
It is like the apple of the eye; if it be pricked but with a pin, it will not
only blemish the eye, but endanger the sight: So conscience, it is a tender
thing, if ye prick it by sin, it will blemish thy conscience, wound it, and
even make havoc of thy soul. And therefore says Solomon, Counter-gard thy
heart, and watch over thy soul, Proverbs 4.14. that thou do nothing that may
wound thy conscience.

Now, that we may keep these books of account, (our consciences) pure and good,
we must do two things. First, avoid all things that may any way hurt a good
conscience. Secondly, use all good means and helps to cherish a good
conscience. In truth all sin hinders a good conscience. Sin is that which
wounds the Soul, and makes havoc of a good conscience: that is the very
cut-throate of men's souls. And therefore, if you would keep a good
conscience, take heed of sin, which wounds a good conscience, and makes it
unable to stand before God at the last day.

But there be two especial lets and impediments of a good Conscience: First,
ignorance of the Law, and the word of God. For when a man knows not what is
sin, and what not; how can he take heed lest he wound his Soul? And
therefore we see, let a man come into his House at Midnight, he can see
nothing amiss, and out of order; but let a man come in at Noone, then he can
epsy the least disorder: even so poor, blind, ignorant souls, not knowing
the Law of God, cannot see any wounds in conscience, nor nothing amiss in
them. But let them come to the word of God, and look in this Glass, then they
shall find themselves much out of order; to have wounded souls, and defiled
consciences.

The other impediment of a good conscience is worldly lust; namely, the love
and exceeding desire of riches, honors, pleasures, etc. And he that suffers
these desires to have place in his heart, he cannot possible keep a good
conscience. Secondly, the means to preserve and to keep a good conscience be
three.

First, to do all things that may save and cherish true saving faith, whereby
our souls be assured of the love of GOD in Christ Jesus for the pardon of our
sins. For Faith is the root, and the foundation of a good conscience; and
without faith there can be no good conscience. Romans 10.
Now to preserve Faith, we must often hear and read the word of God, repent
of our sins, acknowledge and confess them, and be humbled for them, and walk
in the duties of faith and repentance: And in so doing, we shall find more
and more the comfort of a good conscience. And therefore we must take heed we
do nothing to break off the feeling of Gods love, or to wound our conscience.

Secondly, we must endeavor in all things to obey Gods will, and bear a
constant purpose, not to sin in any thing. For, a purpose to live in sin, and
conscience, cannot stand together: so that where there is a purpose to live in
sin, there is neither faith, nor a good conscience.

Thirdly, we must walk with God, as Henoch did, so to order our lives, as
always in the presence of GOD; and this will make us keep a good Conscience:
and the want of this makes men bold to sin, because they consider not that
GOD sees them, and that they have a conscience within them.

And another Book was opened, which is the Book of Life.
THus when Christ has examined the Books of men's Consciences, to view what is
therein written, that Judgment may be avvarded thereafter. Now he shows
that he will open a second Book, even the Book of Life, What is meant by the
book of Life.
And of this book of Life, we shall see often mention in the word of God, both
in the old and new Testament; as that of Moses: Exodus 32.31.32.
Oh this people have grievously sinned! Therefore now if thou pardon their
sin, thy mercy shall appear: But if thou will not, I pray thee raze me out
of the Book which thou have written. Psalm. 69.28
Again, Let them be put out of the Book of Life, neither let them be written
with the righteous. Revel. 3.5.
Again, He that overcomes shall be clothed in white array, and I will not put
out his name out of the Book of Life. And the Holie-Ghost speaking of the
glory of the heavenly Jerusalem says; Reu. 21.27
There shall enter into it no unclean thing, neither whatsoever works
abomination or lies: Phil. 4.3.
But they which are written in the Lambs Book of Life.

Now if you would know what is here meant by the Book of Life, it is the Book
in the which all the names of Gods Elect, which in his eternal purpose he has
chosen, be written, as it were, with Letters of Gold; and it is nothing else
but GODS eternal council, purpose, and decree, wherein he has elected and
chosen a certain company of mankind, to bestow eternal life upon them: for
we must not think that God has any need of a Book; but only for our
understanding he speaks thus: Even as a Captain records the names of his
Soldiers, to call them one by one; and as in Cities the names of the chief
men be recorded: So God has as it were, enrolled the names of all his Saints,
and engraven them in the book of Life, with letters of gold for ever, so as
not one of them shall perish. Thus seeing what is meant by the Book of Life,
let us see what we may learn hence.

Revel. 3.5.
If thy name be written in the Book of Life, thou shall never perish. Christ
will not blot out thy name out of the Book of life, but acknowledge thy name
to be in his Book at the latter day, to thine endless joy and comfort. Whom
GOD loves once, Romans 11.
he loves to the end. But woeful and wretched are those which are not written
in this book: for all these shall be shut out of heaven, whose names are not in
the Book of the living; but in the black Bill, Reu. 21.27
the Book of death.

But here we must take heed of the carnal reasoning of wicked men and women.
Many there be who reason thus: If I be the child of God, and written in the
Book of Life, let me live as my lust, I am sure to be saved. Others say, If I
be a reprobate, and not written in the Book of Life, why I am sure I shall be
damned, although I live never so well. Poor souls, they know not what they
say: they speak flat contrary. For if God have elected any man or woman to
eternal life, he has ordained that they should walk in the way to eternal
life. And it is impossible that they should run on in sin, and live and dye
therein. And therefore if men thus reason, they do even cast away their own
souls. But let all men know, that as GOD has ordained some men to eternal
life, Romans 8.30.
and written their names in heaven; so he has appointed the^ the means to
walk in, to bring them thereunto.

Book of Life. This Christ himself will teach us in that speech of his unto
his Disciples, which rejoiced so; because the Devils were subdued under them,
and cast out by them: Nay rather (says our Savior) Rejoice that your names are
written in the Book of Life: But (alas) what do most men and women rejoice
in? To be the son of a rich man, a gentleman, or nobleman; to have gold and
silver, lands and livings: This makes men to bear themselves aloft. But who is
he that rejoices in this? That he is the son of God, that his name is written
in the Book of Life? Well, thus having observed from the word of God, what is
meant by this Book of Life; namely, the eternal decree of Gods election;
here-hence comes two weighty points to be considered of us: First, whether
it be possible for the child of God to know whether his name be written in the
Book of Life, or no. Secondly, if it be possible, then by what means we may
attain to this knowledge, to be assured that our names be in Heaven: that we
are in the number of those that shall be saved. And these are two most
necessary and fruitful points to be known of all Christians.

Whether it be possible for the child of God to know whether his name be
written in this book of Life.
Concerning the first point, whether it be possible for the child of God to
know whether his name be written in the book of Life, or not. The Church of
Rome holds, That no man can certainly know whether he be the child of God,
or no. Nay, they condemn this as a foul fault, and bold presumption, for any
man to be certainly persuaded of this, That he is the child of God, elected in
Christ Jesus; and that his name is written in the Book of Life. They say, we
are to hope well, etc. But (alas) shall we venture the salvation of our souls
upon an uncertain hope? No, we must go further, and labor to be assured, and
certainly persuaded of this, That our Names are written in the book of Life:
and that a true Christian, man or woman, may assuredly be persuaded, and
certainly know, that he is the child of God, it is out of question, if we
will believe the holy ghost. Else why should S. Peter will us to give all
diligence to make our Election sure? 2 Pet. 1.10 Job 19. Romans 8.16. Luke 10.
And why did our Savior bid his Disciples Rejoice that their Names were
written in the book of Life, if they could not know it? Again, every Article
of our Christian faith does confirm the truth of this Doctrine; where we are
taught to believe the Catholic Church; and that we are of the number of Gods
people. We believe the pardon of our sins, and that we shall have life
everlasting.

Now then you see how little we are beholden to the Church of Rome, who hold,
that we may not be certainly persuaded of our salvation; but must only hope
well. Did not Job know it? Did not Paul know it? Job 19. Romans 8.38
Then let no man doubt of this, but the children of God may, and do know it,
that they shall be saved. And therefore let us believe this doctrine, and embrace
it: And withal, let us abhor the doctrine of the Church of Rome, which is
contrary to the Gospel of Jesus Christ. For what comfort can any Christian
have, till he know that he is the child of God? How should we dare to call
upon God? How can we be at peace in our Souls? With what comfort can we
perform obedience unto GOD, except we find this blessed persuasion, that our
names are in this book; and that we be the Elect and chosen of God?

Secondly, now the next question is, How any man or woman may come to this
certain knowledge, whether his name be written in this Book, whether he be
the child of God, or not? And this you see is a matter of no small moment, but
a most weighty matter, and concerns our souls very narrowly; and therefore
let us be careful to listen unto it, that we be able to prove our selves,
whether we be in the faith, or not, whether we be the sons of God, or nor;
and so whether we shall be saved, or not. O, it is matter of endless comfort
to Gods children, when they know this, that they be the children of God; and
that eternal Life belongs unto them, it will stir them up to obey GOD with
joy and cheerfulness, in all his Commandments.

By what means we may come unto this knowledge.
Now there be two ways to know it; One is by ascending into heaven, into the
privy council of God. But this is a dangerous way, and not to be attempted of
any man, because Secret things belong to God: Exodus 29.
but things revealed to us, and our children: And his ways are past finding
out. And therefore this way no man must dare to assay.

Besides this, there is yet an other way to know whether our names be written
in the Book of life; and that is by descending into our selves; and by
certain marks and testimonies in our own hearts, to prove that we are in
the number of Gods Elect. For as Solomon says, Pro. 27.19
As water shows face to face: Even so the heart shows man to man. Even as a
glass shows what a man's face is: so will a man's heart and conscience show
what man is in the sight of God. Then, if you would now know whether your names
be written in the Book of Life; that is, whether you be the elect of God, and
heirs of eternal Life; you must now enter into your own souls, 2 Cor. 13
prove your selves, and you shall certainly know whether you shall be saved or
damned. For if thou find in thee the true marks and notes of Gods children,
thou need not fear but that thy name is in this Book, and thou shall
certainly be saved. But as for wicked and profane men and women, that make no
conscience of sin, they shall in spite of their teeth, upon this examination,
sing the doleful tune, I am a damned sinner, I know not what will become of my
poor soul at the day of Judgment: And therefore that we might in some
measure try our selves, and judge whether we be in this book, and so shall be
saved; let us search out of the holy word of God, some certain marks of Gods
children. The first mark whereby we may know whether we be elect or not, is
the inward testimony and witness of Gods spirit, Romans 8.15
Ye have not received the spirit of bondage to fear again; but ye have, etc.
Whereby Saint Paul tells us, that wicked and ungodly sinners, which have not
the spirit of God to guide them, but live in sin; they have only the spirit
of Bondage, they have no true peace in their souls: but they that be the
children of God, have the Spirit of Adoption, who seals unto our hearts the
assurance of our adoption, and election, and does make it known unto us, that
we are the Sons of God: For his Spirit does witness to our spirits, that we
are the Sons of God, Romans 8.16.

And, that no man might deceive himself, and think he has the testimony of
GODS Spirit, when he has it not: Saint Paul gives us two most excellent
notes, to know whether we have the testimony of GODS Spirit, yea, or not. It
makes us cry, Abba, Father. Where the Spirit of God does witness to any man's
soul that he is the child of God; It will make him cry to God, and even fill
heaven and earth, with crying and tears, with sobbes and sighs for the pardon
of his sins. And he which has not this in him, that he cannot cry unto GOD
for pardon of his sins; this man can not truly assure himself that he is
the Child of God. And though men say, they hope to be saved, yet (alas) they
seldom or never pray unto God for the pardon of their sins.

Secondly, if we find the testimony of GODS Spirit, that we are the children
of God; It will make us, not only, to be earnest with God for pardon of our
sins, but it will make us cry, Abba, Father, that is, it will make us bear
the tender affection of a duetifull child, so as we shall be afraid to offend
so loving a Father. And therefore all those which delight in sin, and are not
afraid to offend GOD: Surely, they can find no assurance, that they be the
children of God. And therefore, if you desire to be assured that the names be
in this Book; labor to find this testimony of Gods Spirit, to witness unto
your Souls, that you belong unto God, and labor to be earnest in prayer unto
God, for that is a special work of Gods Spirit. 1. Cor. 2.12
The second means whereby we may know, whether our names be written in the
Book of Life; is by the word of GOD. For, the word of God tells us, whosoever
believes in Christ Jesus, shall be saved. But the child of God hearing this
promise opened and applied, by the Ministry of Gods word, is able to say, I
believe; and am able to apply this promise to my self: For no man has faith,
but he knows that he has it, and therefore can say, seeing I believe with
all my heart, surely I know I shall be saved.

Thirdly, besides the blessed testimony of Gods Spirit, which cannot deceive,
and the witness of the word of GOD; we may know our election by the fruits, and
effects thereof. As we say a man is alive, so long as we see him breathe; and
can judge of the Tree by the fruits: Even so, by the effects of Election, we
may know whether our names be in the Book of Life, or not. Now the fruits of
Election be set down by the Holie-Ghost, that al men might be able to examine
and try themselves, and know whether they be ordained to Life, or not: Whom
GOD predestined, Romans 8.30
them also he Called, and whom he Called, them also he Justified, and whom he
Justified, them also he Glorified.

Where we may behold the marks of our Election. For all that be elected to
Life Eternal, and be written in this Book; they are first called; secondly
justified; and thirdly, sanctified. So then, if you would know whether you be
elected to life, look to these three effects of Election. Art thou Called? art
thou Justified? art thou sanctified? Then sure thou art Elected: But if thou
have not these three, then can thou not assure thy self of thy salvation.

So then, the first fruit of our Election is our effectual Calling, when as
God does, by the Preaching of the Gospel, call us out of the world; from our
old sins, to be of the number of his people, to live as his children.
Again, when a man comes to the preaching of the Word, to see his sins, and
Gods anger for them; dislikes them, is grieved for them, bewailes them, and
begs the pardon for them, and begins to become a new man; to believe in
Christ Jesus, to seek after Gods Kingdom: He which finds this effectual
calling in him, he may assure his Soul, that he is Predestined to Eternal
Life. But we must take heed that we deceive not our selves with an outward
calling, for our Savior says; Mat. 22.
Many are called, but few are chosen. Many do hear the word of God with the
ear: but we must labor to find the Spirit of God to preach unto our Souls;
to apply the Word to our conscience, to believe it, and to obey it. And
therefore, they which live in their old sins, as blind, ignorant, and
profane, as ever before; (alas) how can they think to be saved? seeing God
chooses none, or saues not any, but whom he calls effectually by the Gospel, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13.
and seuers from the rest of the world.

Secondly, the fruit of Election is Justification: For whom he predestined,
them he called: So then here is an other token and mark, to know whether we
be Elected, namely, or Justified. Now, this is an especial grace of God, to
justify a poor sinner that must be saved. And whosoever is not justified,
cannot be saved. Justification has two parts. First, the pardon of sin:
secondly, the imputation of Christ's righteousness; For that, before a man can
be justified, he must repent him of his sins, know them, hate them, and
beg the pardon of them; and then Christ Jesus will assure us of the pardon of
them. And therefore, if we would know whether we be justified, or not, we must
look whether we have truly repented, yea and have been truly humbled for
our sins, and got the pardon of them all. Secondly, that we may be truly
justified, we must have a true faith in Christ Jesus; to lay hold upon him, to
be persuaded and assured in our souls, that Christ died for me, shed his Blood
for me, obeyed the Law for me, and will cover all my sins in his
Righteousness. So then, mark the conclusion; where there is repentance, there
is Remission of sins; where there is remission of sins, there is
justification; and where there is justification, there is salvation. And on the
contrary parts; where there is no repentance, there is no remission of sins;
where there is no remission of sins, there is no justification; and where
there is no justification, there is no salvation. O then what shall become of
those that live in sin, delight in sin, and never (as yet) could shed one tear
for their manifold and grievous sins? They can not find themselves to be
justified; they can have no pardon of their sins, so long as they live in
sin. And therefore if you would know whether you shall be saved, or not:
labor first of all to repent, and to lay hold on Christ by Faith, that so he
may cover your sins in his Blood.

Thirdly, fruit of Election is sanctified. And this is a special mark of
Gods child, 2 The. 2.13
to be regenerate, to be sanctified. Now Sanctification stands in two parts:
first, they must dye unto sin: secondly, they must rise to righteousness.
And would you know then assuredly, whether your names are written in the Book
of Life? Look unto your souls. If you find that you are sanctified, if you
hate your old sins, and filthy ways; if you love Virtues, and delight in
all holy duties; then it is a certain token that ye belong unto God. Romans 8.1.
For there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ. But if you do savor
the things of the flesh; lying in the old sins, Drunkenness, etc. why then
certainly, you have no assurance of salvation, that you can be saved: But you
must needs sing this doleful Song, I know not what shall become of my poor
Soul, whether I shall be saved or damned. Nay, if thou live in sin, thou
may justly fear that thou art a firebrand of hell: For, He that is borne of
God, sins not: 1. Ioh. 5.18. And, Let every one that calls on the name of
the Lord, depart from iniquity, 2. Tim. 2. Thus to die to sin, and to live to
righteousness, is a sure token that we belong to God. Thus you see, how a man
may come to know, whether he be elected, and ordained to Life, or not. Now let
us see what use arises hence.

Seeing God has his Book names of all those that shall be saved, and none of
them shall perish: hence comes endless comfort to all Gods children: If thou
find that thou art the child of God, and thy name is written in Heaven,
nothing can hurt thee, though thou be poor, sick, full of sores, in prison,
hated, contemned; yet nothing can hurt thee. Nay, all the gates of Hell can not
prevail against thee: no damnation can come unto thee. For if God do justify,
who can condemn? for at the day of Judgment, Christ Jesus will take his Book
of Life, and call us, saying; Come ye blessed: So as we shall not come to a
terrible Judgment, but to a loving Savior.

Secondly, seeing that it is so excellent a thing to have our names written in
this Book; to be the Elect child of God; we should labor for this above all
things in the world; for without this, we can have no sound comfort, either in
life or death. And therefore our Savior bids us in the tenth of Luke, not to
boast our selves of Learning, of Wisdom, of Riches: whereas these are but
vain things; but to rejoice that our names be written in heaven.

Thirdly, seeing God has a Book of Life, and has written down the very
names of every man and woman, that shall be saved; and has withal showed us
the way that leads unto Life; and unless we walk in this way, we can not come
unto it: It is our wisdom to walk in the way that leads to Life, in the
practice of Godliness. We are Vessels of Honor, and therefore must live
soberly, justly, and godly, in this present world. Not to serve sin, and
Satan any longer: But as the redeemed of the Lord, to walk from strength to
strength, from virtue to virtue, from one degree of Perfection to an other:
till at length we appear before the Lord, and there to reap the happy
revvard; even the full fruition of all happiness, and that for evermore.

The end of the second Sermon.
The great Assize. THE THIRD SERMON.
REV. 20.12.13. And the dead were judged of those things which were written in
the Books, according to their works.

13 And the Sea gave up her dead which were in her: and Death and Hell
delivered up the dead which were in them, and they were judged every man
according to their works.


COncerning the Book of Life, we have heard already what is meant by it;
namely, the Council and Decree of GODS Election, whereby he has chosen
certain men and women from out of the lump of Mankind, upon whom he will
bestow Eternal Life.

Secondly, we have learned that a man may; nay every Christian man and woman
ought to be assured, that his name is written in it.

Thirdly, we did set down some means out of the word of God, Romans 8.16
whereby a true Christian may be assured he is elected; namely,

1. Cor. 2
First, the testimony of Gods Spirit, which cannot lie.

Secondly, by the fruits and effects of Election; as Vocation, Justification,
Sanctification, love of the Brethren, 1 Ioh. 3.14.
and obedience unto all the Commandments of God. And therefore it stands us
all in hand to labor for this assurance of Election, else we cannot be saved,
Luke 10.20. and without it, we can have no true joy unto our souls. Surely,
men's carelessness in this point is great: Nay, their care to make their Lands
and Leases sure, will be a means to condemn them for their want of care in
this point.

Now Saint John proceeds in the Description of this last Judgment, After
what manner all men shall be judged
even as it was declared unto him by the Lord Jesus Christ himself in a
Vision; and shows after what manner we shall be all judged, Even according to
those things written in the Book, according unto our works. You have heard
before, that he saw all, both great and small, stand before God; none shall
be wanting, or absent themselves. Now it might be wondered how this great
multitude shall be judged; how every man's Book should be read, and every
man's cause should be tried. For we see what a long time it holds our Judges
here to try a few persons; such calling for Evidences, such proving of
witnesses, such preferring of Inditements. But Saint John says, It shall not
be so here, for all must proceed according to the written Records: And
according to these things which be written in the Book: So as when Christ
Jesus the great Judge, shall once sit upon the Throne of his Glory, attended
by his holy Angels; then shall the Books of every man's conscience be
opened, and then they shall afresh call to mind all their sins.

In these words we are to observe three special points. Parts of the Text.


First, who they are that must come to this Judgment; namely, the dead, even
they which have lien many thousand years rotten in the grave.

Secondly, the means whereby they must be tried; even by those things which be
written and recorded in their Books.

Thirdly, the Touchstone of this trial; namely, the written word of God. And
first of the persons.

It is not to be doubted but that Saint John means that all must come to
Judgment, Both great and small must stand before God. But why does he say
here, And the dead shall be judged? It is to be observed that he names so
expressly the dead, even those which have lain rotting so many thousand years,
must come to Judgment; they must be called to account; yea, their old sins
must be now brought to light. For this is the wicked thoughts of many carnal
men, that when a man is dead, he is well; then all his sins die with him,
he is forgotten, and his sins are not spoken of. But Saint John says here,
that even the dead must come to judgment; even their old sins must come to
light, and they must answer for them. It is nigh six thousand years since
Caine slew his brother, yet this sin of his is not forgotten; though Caine be
dead so long since, yet his sins are not dead. No, no, Caine one day shall come
to account for his sin. Judas, he did for vile lucre sell his Master many
hundreds of years ago; he is dead and gone: but at this day he shall be
called to account. So in our days, many men think, when they die, their sins
shall never be brought to light. The Usurer, he gets his goods by wicked
and ungodly means, he grows in wealth; when he dies, he thinks he shall
never hear of this sin again: So the Drunkard, Swearer, Profaner of the
Lords Sabbath, etc. they are persuaded, that death will end all their misery.
Ah (poor souls) it were well with them indeed, if death might end their
woeful misery: But alas, alas, death is even as a wide Gate, to let them have
some passage to endless woe, and misery. For when they be dead and buried,
their sins do not die with them, their misery is not then ended: O no, then
begins their endless misery and torment: Oh it were good they might have no
more being after death. It had been good for such men, they had never been
borne; or being borne, that they had been made rather a Toade, or a Serpent;
for in death they have an end. But it is not so with a filthy and and ungodly
sinner. For when he is dead and buried, even then begins his greatest woe
and misery: for even the sinner that is dead a many thousand years, must for
all this come to judgment. And therefore thou that live in sin, in
adultery, etc. remember, that although thou die, yet thy sins do not die
with thee: No, no, both thou and they must one day come to judgment: thy old
sins, and those which thou have committed in secret, they must come now to
light.

Seeing that the dead must come to Judgment, John says here, that the dead
were judged, even those whom we forgot, and whose sins we would think
would never be called to account, even they must come to a reckoning.

In the next place, Saint John tells us, how all men shall be tried, and
according to what, Sentence shall be avvarded; Namely, according to those
things Written in their Books. Here is the Evidence, here is no witness to
be produced; for a man's conscience shall be even as good as a thousand
witnesses. Now, what is here meant by the books you have heard already;
namely, the particular Conscience of every man and woman. Thy conscience is
the Book; that is, the Evidence: No other witness shall be produced, but
even thy own conscience. Again, the things which be written in these Books,
I told you they be all our thoughts, words, and works; not only our gross
sins, as murder, etc. but in our Books be recorded even our idle and vain
words, every vile and filthy thought; and by these Sentence must proceed; and
according to these must Judgment be awarded.

Now then, those which have good thoughts, yea and holy things written in
their Books, they be blessed and happy; for they shall not be ashamed: nay,
they shall be glad to have their Books laid open, that their repentance, their
faith, love, zeal and patience, etc. might be known, and come to light. But
woe then to all filthy sinners, adulterers, etc. For the reward of these
sins, is death, the wrath and curse of God for ever.



Acts 24.
This was the care of the blessed Apostle saint Paul Acts 24 in regard of this,
that we must all come unto judgment, and our consciences must be laid open,
and we judged according to the things therein recorded; it made this holy
servant of God to take all possible pains to keep a clear conscience before
GOD and man. O that we could immitate this blessed Apostle, that seeing we
must all come unto judgment, seeing our Books, even our consciences must be
opened and disclosed, and we receive sentence of salvation or damnation,
according to the things written in our Books; yea that we could labor and
endeavor, that no filthy sin might blot our Books, but that we could keep
them clear and fair, in the sight of GOD: It ought to persuade us all, above
all things in the world, to look unto this, to keep our Books fair. For if
our consciences do accuse us, GOD is greater then our conscience, and does
know all things.

Secondly, seeing sentence must pass according unto the things written in our
Books, and these be not only the gross sins of the world themselves, but
even the vile and unclean thoughts of our hearts; even these must come to
Judgment: then let us all be careful to avoid, not only the outward actions
themselves, but even these unclean thoghts of ours: for even they must come
unto Judgment. Alas, men think, thought is free, that they shall never be
arraigned for their vile and ungodly thoughts. But S. Paul says, Romans 2.1.
Thoughts shall either excuse, or accuse us. And whosoever does truly repent,
they do repent even of their vile and ungodly thoughts: for if we had no other
sins written in the Books of our conscience, but even our sinful thoughts;
even they were enough to condemn us both body and soul for evermore.

Neither may we content our selves, to think we are in good case, if we can
say, I am no Drunkard, no Fornicator, etc. No, look to thy Book, that there
be not so much as an idle word written there: For even they must come to
Judgment, as our Savior says, I say unto you, That for every idle word men
shall give an account at the day of Judgment.

And that we might know in particular what is written in our Books, Saint John
says, That we shall be judged according to our works. So it is, 2. Cor.
5.10. We must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every
man may receive the things which are done in his body, Revel. 2.8. Mat. 25.41
Reu. 14.13
according to that he has done, whether it be good or evil. We shall be judged,
and receive reward according to our works. If thy works be good, then life,
glory, and salvation; But if thy works be evil, then death, destruction, and
damnation. Good works, although they cannot merit, yet they will show that
faith that lay in the heart. So when an evil man dies, his evil works go
with him, his galled conscience will not leave him, neither in life nor death.

of God, by his works: yet we must know that judgment shall proceed at the
last day according unto men's works. If thy works have been good, holy, just,
and pure: then thou shall receive life, happiness, glory, salvation. But if
thy works be found to be wicked, unjust, and ungodly: then nothing else but
death, hell, and damnation belongs unto thee for them.

Well, what should this reach? according to our works shall our reward be. And
though our works can merit nothing at the hands of the Judge; yet he being a
most bountiful and merciful Savior, he will crown his own works in us,
and reward them in his mercy, though we merit nothing. Do thou relieve a
poor member of JESUS CHRIST? Do thou give a cup of cold water to a
Prophet, or a Minister of the word of GOD? CHRIST does promise thee of his
truth, he will not let thee loose thy reward. True it is, a cup of cold
water is a mean gift, and far from merit; yet Christ says, Verily, of my
truth, thou shall not loose thy reward. Math. 10.


O how should this persuade all of us to labor to abound in all holy duties?
to be liberal, and bountiful unto the poor members of Christ Jesus? seeing
our good works, though they cannot merit, yet they shall be rewarded, they
shall not be forgotten in the day of Judgment: they be sweet and blessed
companions; when al our frinds can do us no good, they will bring endless
peace and comfort to our Souls.

Again, it ought to terrify us all from sin, from evil works, and ungodly
ways, from swearing, drunkenness, uncleanness, and every evil way. For if we
be full of these, and these be found written in our Books, O then woe unto
us, when these Books shall come to be opened: for then nothing but death, hell
and damnation belongs unto us.

Here we see, that of all we have and enjoy in this world: what shall go
with us when we die? what shall accompany thee in the grave? Nay, at the
terrible day of Judgment, our consciences, our works, and our books, nothing
else shall go with us. When thou die, thou shall not take any thing in the
world with thee, but thy works, which be engraven in the book of thy
conscience: Death will bar all the rest: Thou can not take thy Gold and
Silver with thee, nor thy lands, or livings, corn, nor cattle: All these must
stay behind thee at what time thou die; only thy Conscience, thy Book, thy
Works must go with thee. If they be good, Oh blessed art thou that ever thou
wast borne: If they be wicked, filthy and unclean: Oh woe, and ten thousand
woes, I say, to thy soul for evermore.

O then, think of these things: But all their desire is for the World. Oh
poor blind Souls, poor Souls, they know not, or they will not know, that
they must leave al these behind them; they must depart from them all. Thou
can not take one piece of gold or silver with thee; but all must be left
behind: Only thy conscience, only thy books, only thy works, must
accompany thee. O then what madness is this, to seek, and hunt, after such
things as cannot help us, nor stand us in no stead in the day of Judgment?
Nay, if they be got, or kept with a badde conscience, they will be a very
terror unto thee at the last. O then, let us look to our selves; let us not
set our hearts too much upon these things, which cannot profit us, in this
hot fiery day of trial. Why should we be so foolish to set our hearts upon
that cannot help us; nay, which we must leave behind us. And for faith, that
which might be our comfort, both in life and death, and in the dreadful day
of Judgment; I mean a good Conscience, which, as it is a blessed and a sweet
companion in life and death; so it will be a blessed comfort to our poor
Souls at the day of Judgment.

O then I beseech you again, and again, seeing that nothing shall go with
you unto judgment, but only your works; let us lay aside our immoderate care
for the world, yea and the things of this world; for these must stay behind us,
and cannot help us in the day of Judgment. Let us labor for better things,
for durable treasures, for a good conscience, to abound in good works, in
knowledge, faith, and repentance: Let us take heed we be not found naked of
these. O what a woeful case are they in, that have nothing in the world to go
with them to judgment, but an evil heart, a galled conscience, full of all
uncleanness; their state is most woeful and miserable; it had been good for
them that they had never been borne.

Here may a question be moved, How this saying of Saint John, can stand with
that of our Savior, John 3.18. He that believes, shall not come into
judgment, but he that believes not, is condemned already. Now then, if the
faithful children of God shall not come into judgment, and the wicked
unbelievers be condemned already; How says he, that all shall be judged at the
day of Judgment?

I answer, it is true, that the faithful children of God shall not come into
Judgment, that is, of condemnation: Romans 8.1.
For there is no condemnation, etc. But God will pronounce that blessed
sentence, Come ye blessed, etc. As for the wicked, it is true, they be
condemned already: first, in the Decree and Council of God, being Reprobates
and Cast-awayes: secondly, in the word of GOD: thirdly, in their own
conscience, they be condemned already. But the full manifestation of this
Sentence shall not be until the day of Judgment. And so we are to understand
that saying of Solomon, Eccles. 3. God shall judge the just and unjust: The
just, to salvation; the unjust, to condemnation. Now the third point that I
propounded, is the touchstone of this Trial, whereby all men's thoughts,
words, and works shall be tried. To this S. Paul answers; At the day of
Judgment God shall judge the secrets of all men's hearts by my Gospel, Romans
1.16. Our thoughts, our words and our works, must be tried by the word of God;
and that thought, word, or work, which is not according to the written Word
of GOD, is an evil thought, a vile word, and a wicked work.

them, to be acquainted with them, that we might know what is sin, and not
sin; good and bad, that so we may leave the one, and do the other. Oh what
a woeful case are all they in, which are ignorant in the word of God: blind
men and women without knowledge; they know not what is good or evil. And
therefore says the Apostle Paul 2 Thessalonians. 1. That the Lord Jesus will come in
a flame of fire, to render vengeance to them which know him not, and obey not
the Gospel of Jesus Christ. And therefore, as you do love your souls, love
this word of God; labor to know it, embrace it: If thou be ignorant of it, and
yield not obedience unto it, it shall stand against thee at the day of
Judgment, and thou must be tried by it. Therefore let us all labor to be
instructed in it, to read it, to remember it, and to lead our lives by it:
For whatsoever is done contrary to it, is sin; it must come to judgment,
and the Word will condemn it.

13 And the sea gave up her dead which were in her: and death and hell
delivered up the dead which were in them, and they were judged every man
according to their works.
YOU heard in the twelfth Verse, immediately going before, how Saint John saw
the dead, both great and small, stand before GOD; that is, all men and women,
that ever lived, or shall live, unto the end of the world. Now here might a
question arise, How this can be; How is it possible that all men should come
to Judgment? There have been many thousands which have been drowned in the
Sea, and the fishes have devoured them; some have been slain in the field,
and the fowls have eaten their flesh, and many have been burnt, and consumed
to ashes. Then it is a very high point, a matter beyond all reason, that all
the dead should rise again. Men that have been drowned, fishes have eaten
them; and men again perhaps have eaten the fishes; and they that have been
burnt to ashes, their ashes have been scattered, who knows whither? How then
is it possible for them to arise again? Indeed the profane Atheists and filthy
epicures, are not ashamed ^o say, that there shall be no resurrection, but when
a man dies there is an end of all his joy, and of all his misery. But, that
the dead shall rise again, is an Article of our Faith, We believe the
resurrection of the dead: And so we know it is a special point of Gods glory,
in mercy to reward his poor children; and in punishing in judgment, the
wicked and ungodly. But, as Solomon says, In this Life all things happen
alike, to the just and unjust: Nay, oftentimes, Dives is full, and at ease,
when Lazarus is empty, and in misery. How then should God be just, if he
should suffer his poor children, that love and fear his Name, here to live
in misery, and never to reward them? Or again, how should God be just, if he
should suffer the wicked and ungodly, here to live at ease, if there were not
a time when they should taste of vengeance? Therefore they must come to
Judgment, they must rise again, the godly to be made partakers of life, and
joy; and the wicked, of shame and confusion: Job says in his nineteenth
chapter, That though the worms did eat his flesh, yet he should behold God
with his eyes: And Saint Paul does prove this with many reasons: 1 Cor. 15. If
the dead rise not again, then is not Christ risen: And if Christ be not risen,
then is our Preaching vain, etc. And why should we think it impossible for
God to raise our bodies out of the dust? We see a poor ignorant man is able
of Ashes, to make a very beautiful Glass. How much more then is the
Everliving, and almighty God, able to raise our bodies out of the dust? But
you will say, are men's bodies eaten of fishes, men eat them again? How is it
possible to save the bodies of men, thus consumed to dust, and mingled with the
bodies of fishes and of beasts? I answer, that though it be impossible to men,
yet it is not impossible to God: For he that created all our bodies of nothing,
can make them again of something; namely, of their own matter; and to sever
their bodies from all other matters: As we see that a Goldsmiths can sever one
matter from another.

So then this place does prove and confirm that Article of our faith, that we
believe the Resurrection of the dead. For howsoever a man dies, by Sea, or by
Land, in his bed, or in the field; Saint John says here, the Sea shall give
up all that have been drowned; death and hell, that is, the Grave shall
deliver the dead in them; so as all must come to Judgment, of what death
soever they die.

O then see (beloved) how the devil bewitcheth many a poor ignorant soul.
Achitophel; some with the guilt of sin, and of conscience, as Judas; and some
being crossed with wife and children, cut their throats, or otherwise make an
end of themselves. Now, they foolishly think, by this means, to end their
grief: Alas, alas, they do by this means, even hasten their own destruction:
And do, as if a man should (to avoid a little smoke) cast himself headlong
into a flaming fire: So they, to avoid this little grief of their body, plunge
body and soul into eternal torments. For, what ease is it for a man to kill
himself, or cast away himself, seeing they must come to Judgment? though
they kill themselves, or drown themselves, Why the water and the Grave must
one day deliver up their dead. And therefore, hence let us learn to arm our
selves, if Satan shall tempt us to such horrible facts, to cast away our
selves, etc. Let us answer him, We may not cast away that which Christ has
bought with his own blood. Nay, let us answer him, That we shall not thereby
end our misery, but increase it.

Now if you demand of me, by what means the dead shall then arise at the last
day? I answer, It is by the mighty power of the voice of CHRIST: The hour
shall come (says CHRIST) in the which, all that are in the Graves shall hear
the voice of the Son of God, and come forth, John 5.28. And to show the
wonderful power of the voice of Christ, it is compared to the sound of a
Trumpet, the lowdest, and the shrillest of all Instruments: And the Lord Jesus
himself shall descend, and come with a shout, 1 The. 4.16
and with the voice of the Archangell, and with the Trumpet of God, and then
the dead in Christ shall arise first. Such shall be the power and force of
this voice of the Lord JESUS, as that it shall be heard over all the whole world:
Nay, though men have lain many a thousand years rotten in the Grave, yet they
shall hear it and come forth to judgment. Nay, the very devils and damned
spirits, in spite of their teeth, shall be constrained to appear at his Voice;
No Prince, no Monarch, no King, no Angel shall be able to absent themselves;
but they must all be enforced to obey the Voice of the Son of GOD, and come
to Judgment.

and we cannot but come forth of our Graves unto Judgment: Oh let us now obey
his Voice in the Ministry of the Gospel, now embrace the Gospel, and the
voice of his Ministers. If we will not now leave sin, hear CHRIST JESUS
speaking unto us in his Word, and embrace his Gospel; then let us well know
that we shall one day hear another Voice, when we shall be compelled to come
before him to be condemned.

Thus you may see, that all the dead must arise and come to Judgment, and you
see how, and by what means, our bodies shall be raised; namely, by the mighty
and the wonderful power of the voice of the Lord Jesus. Let us now come to the
Uses.

First, seeing of what death soever men shall die; either by fire or water, or
howsoever, they must one day come to judgment: Let us then beware of that
ungodly thought, and devilish persuasion that runs in most men's minds:
namely, that think, that when they die, there is an end of all their misery:
And though they have been grievous and horrible sinners, yet if they can
escape till death, all is well. And thus they think, that they and their
sins shall be buried together. No, no (poor souls) they do much deceive
themselves: Howsoever thou die, thou shall come to judgment: And death is so
far from ending thy misery, that it is a broad gate to let thee in into it.
Luke 16.
For so soon as the Glutton died, he was presently in hell in torment: And
therefore let us take heed how we wish, as foolish men do in their sickness,
or age, or misery; O I would I were dead, then I should be out of my pain. O
no, no, if thou be not the child of God, and a repentant sinner; it had been
better for thee never to have been borne, or to be a Toade, or Serpent. And
thou shall find, that death is so far from easing thy pain, that it shall
bring thee ten thousand times more pain and torment, even in hell fire for
ever: Therefore let us not think that death shall end the miseries of wicked
men.

Secondly, seeing all men must rise to judgment, and by what means soever
they die they must be called to account; this is a wonderful comfort to Gods
poor children. Who abides more trouble and grief then they? Who be more
hated, reviled, crossed, and wronged, then they? So as their life here, for the
most part, is nothing else but a life of misery. But their comfort is here in
this, that they shall rise again, and then the case shall be altered; then
our misery shall be turned into felicity, joy, and happiness. Have thou
been poor here? then thou shall be rich, and possess a Kingdom. Have thou
been hungry and thirsty here? then thou shall taste of the Tree of Life. Have
thou been poor and naked here? Then thou shall be clothed with the
precious Robes of Christ's righteousness: and in steed of the rags of Infamy,
and Reproach, which we must put on here, we shall be crowned with a Crown
of immortal Glory, etc. Again, unto the wicked and the ungodly, it is not
so with them, but they, having taken their pleasure here, and received their
portion in this present world, shall arise now to Judgment, to hear the
Sentence of Condemnation denounced against them; and Mohammed Bouaziziow to be
cast into the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone for ever, John 5.29.
which is the second death.

Thirdly, seeing Saint John says, that we shall all come to judgment; these
bodies of ours, though they be drowned, though they be burnt to ashes, or
howsoever they be consumed, yet they shall rise again, either to Life
eternal, or death eternal: Should not this make us all (Beloved) to look
unto our selves, to take heed we do not use our bodies to the dishonor of
God. Would thou have thy body to be partaker of Life, Felicity, Glory,
and Salvation in heaven? Then use thy body now to the glory of God upon
earth, to hear his word, to sanctify Gods Sabbath, etc.

But if thou use thy body to sin, to swearing, to drunkenness, whooredome,
etc. then know, that thy body shall rise again to judgment to be tormented
for ever. Do not look upon the rich Glutton, Luke 16.
he had abused his body to swearing, drunkenness, etc. and what became of
it, was he not fearfully tormented in Hell at last? And he which had given
his tongue to swearing, etc. Now he cries, his tongue, his tongue. O that all
sinful wretches could but think of this one example of GODS judgments! that
if they abuse their bodies as this man did, that they shall then taste of the
same Judgment. Would thou have thy body glorified? then glorify God in thy
body. Do thou think that thy soul shall be saved, and thy body glorified,
if thou use the members thereof to sin, to uncleanness? etc. O no: let us not
deceive our own souls, it can not be. For, says the Apostle, Romans 6.2.
How can we that are dead to sin, yet live therein?

Fourthly, seeing the Holie-Ghost says, that of what death soever we do die,
we shall all rise again; and Gods children they shall rise to life, and to
glory. This must teach us all this Doctrine; namely, not to weep and mourn
immoderatly for our friends deceased. True it is, that CHRIST JESUS wept for
Lazarus; John 11.
and the Disciples made great lamentation for Stephen. Acts 7.
And so we have great cause to mourn and weep, when as some special member
of the Church of God is taken away; we may not be as stocks or stones, or
senseless creatures, without affection. It must needs grieve the heart of a
husband to part with his loving, godly, and religious wife. But here is a
mean for this mourning to moderate our weeping, that we weep not and mourn
not overmuch, for they shall rise again. I would not have you ignorant
brethren, concerning those that be asleep, that you should mourn at they
that have no hope, 1 Thessalonians. 4.13 Where the Holy Ghost tells us, that the dead
in Christ do not die properly; but lay them down to take a sweet sleep,
after their long and tedious labors, and troubls in this world; and afterward
they must rise again to life, to happiness, to liberty, to glory, and
salvation. And wherefore then should we mourn so excessiuely, and weep, and
lament at the death of our friends, seeing they do not perish, they are not
cast away? O no, their souls are presently in joy, and their bodies are buried
in the grave, as in a bed of dowlne, to take a sweet sleep till the day of
Judgment, and then they shall rise to glory.

And they were judged every man according to their works.
Mark, I pray you, how the holy Ghost repeates this point, again and again
he beats upon it, he can never have done with it. He said before, The Books
are opened, and the dead were judged according to those things written in the
books. And now again he says, They were judged every man according to his
works. What should be the cause why the Holy Ghost so often repeats this
point, and beats so upon it again and again? I answer, The cause is in us,
because we are hardly brought to believe this point, hardly persuaded of so
necessary a matter: for hardly one man of a thousand believes this; That he
shall be judged according to his works: Oh it is a hard matter to persuade men
and women of this, That they must give an account of their works, and be
judged by their works. Tell the wicked sinner of his ungodly ways, of his
profanenes, contempt of Gods word, etc. And what do they say? Do they quake
and tremble? Does their heart and souls even erne in them? O no, no: they
flatter themselves with this conceit, God is merciful: And thus they make the
mercy of God a packe-horse for all their abominations. And thus it is in the
vile heart of man, to think he shall never come to account for his sins, that
he shall never be called to a reckoning for them, and receive his reward
according to his works.

Here then we may perceive there be but two sorts of men and women; there is
the repentant sinner, and the impenitent sinner: and both of them must come to
judgment. The repentant sinner is he or she that mourns for their sins,
bewaileth them, hates them, and leaves them; and does hunger and thirst after
good things.

Now the impenitent sinner, is he or she that lives in sin, and will not in
any wise be brought to leave sin: They never with tears beg the pardon of
them at the hands of God, but wallow in all uncleanness, heaping sin upon
sin, and one ungodly way upon another: whereas all the sins of GODS
children, who do repent, be quit and pardoned in Christ Jesus, he has nailed
them to his Cross, and has washed them away in his own Blood, and they shall
never come to light. But their faith, their religion, their good deeds; as
their feeding and clothing of CHRIST JESUS in his poor members, Matthew. 25.
and according to these they shall receive their reward, life, happiness, and
eternal salvation* and as their good deeds be many, and great, so shall their
honor, praise, and glory be greater in heaven.

And therefore we should labor to abound in good works, in faith, knowledge,
repentance, love, zeal, etc. seeing our reward shall be according to our
works. But as for the unrepentant sinner that lives in sin, delights in
sin, as they do; not repent, nor have no faith, nor good works: even so as
their works shall be, so shall their punishment be. Ah what a woeful harvest
has many a poor soul now to reap at this day, that all his life time has
sold himself unto sin, that never had any care nor conscience to live a
godly life? They shall weep, they shall howl and lament, when they shall see
their reward shall be according to their works.

O how should this doctirene move us all, as we have any care to our poor
souls, to look to our selves, to watch over our ways, to hate sin, as the
very bane of our souls; and to avoid every evil work, because even by our
works shall we be judged. O then as you love your selves, and as you desire
life and salvation, abound in good works, and as you fear the wrath and
endless vengeance of God, and as you fear the torments of hell, take heed of
sin, of every evil thought, of every evil word, and of every evil work:
for by them we shall be judged at the last. And if our works be evil, let us
assure our selves this will be the sentence of the Judge, Depart from me ye
cursed, etc. But if you have care to live here a godly life, to abound in good
works: O then see what a cheerful and comfortable voice ye shall hear, Come
ye blessed of my father, etc. For judgment shall proceed according* to our
works. O that God would touch our hearts, that we could but truly learn and
believe this one lesson, That our sentence shall be as our works be, and
judgment shall be awarded according to our works: O it would bridle us from
many thousand sins and impieties. How should any man dare to sin, to
swear, to lie, to steal, etc. when as he knows that his reward shall be
according unto his works? and it would inflame our souls to labor to abound
in good works, in knowledge, faith, repentance, humiliation, care, and
conscience, because, if we abound in these, our sentence shall be happy,
blessed, and comfortable; and our glory and reward shall be great in the
Kingdom of heaven.

The end of the third Sermon.
The great Assize. THE FOVRTH SERMON.
REV. 20.14.15. 4 And death and hell were cast into the lake of fire: this is
the second death.

5 And whosoever was not found written in the book of life, was cast into the
lake of fire.


IN the handling of this weighty point of Religion; the second comning of
CHRIST to Judgment: we have learned from he mouth of God; First, what manner
of person the Judge shall be; namely, that he shall come like a mighty Prince,
with great Power, Majesty, and Glory, to the great comfort of all his poor
members; and to the great terror and dread of all his enemies.

Secondly, we have seen who shall be judged; Both great and small.

Thirdly, the manner how judgment shall proceed; namely, by the written
Records of men's consciences.

And now in the last place, we are to come to the execution of judgment upon
the wicked reprobates, and ungodly, in these two last verses: for when
judgment is pronounced according to their works, when CHRIST JESUS shall say
unto them, Depart from me, etc. then immediately the execution of this sen^ence
shall follow; for so says Saint John here, And death and ^ell were cast into
the lake of fire, that is the second death.

First, here we are to seek the ^rue meaning of the Text, because there is
never a word that ^s plain, but may move a quetion: For,

First, what is Death that he should be cast into Hell? Is Death any
creature? Is Death ^ubiect to pain and torment? Surely no. Death is no body,
^t has no sense nor feeling; Death is no creature, but only ^he deprivation
of life. Again, that a strange speech is this, that death should be cast into
^ell; how can this be?

Secondly, what is meant by ^he lake of Fire: Is hell a water, ^r fire, like
our fire?

And lastly, we are to consider what is meant by the second death, into which
al reprobates must be cast.

First, here by death and hell is meant, not death it self, or hell it self:
but the heirs of death and hell, that is, all the Reprobates that shall be
cast into hell fire, and there die for evermore. Thus then you see what is
here meant by death and hell; namely, the heirs of death, and firebrarnds of
hell: All reprobates, all impenitent sinners that live and die in their sins,
all those shall be cast into the lake of fire.

Seeing the Holy Ghost gives these Titles and Names, to all wicked and ungodly
sinners, even death and hell. Surely this shows the wonderful misery* and
the cursed estate of those that live and die in their sins without
repentance. Alas, it is so woeful and damnable, that they be even called death
and hell it self.

Oh then let all sinners that live and delight in sin, the Drunkards, etc.
could lay this to heart: That howsoever they see not their misery, nor the
woeful estate wherein they live, but bless themselves in their sinful
ways; yet they are no better, then the heirs of vengeance, and wrath of God;
nay indeed, very death and hell it self.

True it is, that many wicked men do, as the people did in Esaias his time; Esaias
28.11
though they lived in horrible sins; yet they made a league with death, and
were at an agreement with the Grave; they had taken a Lease of death and hell,
to live in sin by License, without punishment. But the Lord tells them, he will
break their covenants, and disannull their agreements: and although they have
lived a long time in sin, yet in the end death will knock at their doors,
and he will lay hold upon them, and they must pay full dear for their long
Lease; even the loss of body and soul for ever.

And is not this the practice of most men and women? Do they not even make a
covenant with death? and do they not labor to be at agreement with hell? Men
live in swearing, lying, drunkenness, etc. and yet they think they shall never
die, they think they shall escape for all their sins. But (poor souls) let
them well know that death and hell will seize upon them. Nay, if they live and
die in their sins, without repentance; let them know, that they be not better
then death and hell it self, and they must be cast into the lake of fire.

True it is, you shall see many a notorious sinner, contemner of the Word, a
drunkard, etc. they think themselves to be jolly fellows, and who but they?
Alas, alas, their case is fearful: poor souls, they do not see they be the
sons of death, the heirs of vengeance, and the wrath of God, the firebrarnds
of hell; nay, even death and hell it self.

death and hell is the reward of sin.

And death and hell were cast into the lake of fire.] Would you know what shall
become of the profane wretches of the world? would you know what shall become
of the blasphemer? would you know what shall become of the adulterer, drunkard,
idolater, swearer? etc. S. John says here in plain terms, They shall be cast
into the lake of fire. Thus was the rich Glutton, Luke 16. for his gluttony,
drunkenness, want of pity, etc. cast into this woeful lake of fire. And thus
shall all impenitent sinners one day be cast into this woeful Lake of fire.

Now, if a Blasphemer, or an Adulterer, etc. should have but this punishment,
to hold his little Finger in the flame of a candle one hour, how could he
endure it? But if a man should be roasted on a Gridiron, or boiled in a
Cauldron of molten lead, what misery were this? whose heart would not quake,
and melt, to think on it? O these are nothing, in comparison of these most
extreme and endless torments in this lake of fire; when both body and soul,
shall both burn and boil, and as it were, fry in the scorching flames which
cannot be quenched. All men, almost, are afraid to commit Treason because
Traitors are so grievously punished: they are hanged, drawn, and quartered.
But, alas; men be not afraid to commit Treason against the King of Heaven,
though they must be cast into a lake of fire for evermore. Men are afraid to
offend the Prince for fear of death: And yet our Savior bids us, Not fear
them that can kill the body, and can do no more, but fear him that can cast
both body and soul into hell fire. And yet we see that men and women be more
afraid to offend man, then God that can cast both body and soul into hell
fire.

If we should see a little child fall into the fire, and hear it cry
pitifully, and the very Bowels should be burnt out: O how it would grieve us,
and make our very hearts bleed within us; How much more then should it grieve
us, to see, not a child, but even our own bodies and souls, cast away for
ever, by sin, into the lake of fire that cannot be quenched? If a man should
come amongst us and cry, fire, fire, thy house is all of a flaming fire, thy
Corn, thy Cattle, thy Wife, and Children, and all that thou have were
consumed with fire: Oh how would this astonish us, that would make the very
hair to stand upright on our heads, and tears to gush out of our eyes. Behold
then, and see, the Spirit of God cries out unto us, Fire: even the dreadful
fire of hell, gapeth ready to devour, not thy house, thy corn, or thy
cattle, but thy poor soul, and that for evermore. Oh how should this break
our hard and flintie hearts asunder, and make our souls to bleed? if we have
any spark of grace, any care of our souls, that they may not be tormented in
this Lake of Fire for ever.

I will leave the further handling of this point, until I come unto the next
verse; where the Holy Ghost says again, the better to make it sink into our
very hearts, That Whosoever is not found written in the Book of Life, shall
be cast into this lake of fire.

Now, the better to express what is meant by this Lake of Fire: Not a bodily
death, nor a material fire, like to ours; But the Holy Ghost means here,
even the second death; that is, not of the body only, Double death.
but of eternal death and damnation both of body and soul for evermore. This
is the second death, and by this we may see there is a double death: there is
the first death, and the second death. The first death is, the separation of
the soul from the body, and this is common to all; the children of GOD do die
this death, as well as the wicked; yet there is a difference: For death is no
curse to the children of God, because Christ's death has taken away the Sting
of death, that it can not hurt the children of God: No, it is as a door to let
our souls into the Kingdom of Heaven: But the second they never taste of: No
child of God needs to fear the second death; Romans 8.1.
For there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. Wherein the
second death consists.
Now, as the first death is only the separation of the soul from the body; so
the second death is a total, and final separation of both soul and body
from God for evermore. And this second death does stand principally in these
three points.

ungodly sinners that live and die in their sins, they shall be severed from
the glorious and blessed presence of GOD for ever: Which shall be punished with
everlasting perdition from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his
power, 2. These. 1.9. O what a woeful death is this, to be plucked and torn
from the blessed and comfortable presence of God: whereas our Savior CHRIST
says, Matthew. 5.^8. that our happiness, and all the joy of GODS children, shall
stand in the beholding of God, and being in his presence for evermore. Then
what misery and what woe will this be unto the wicked, to be cast out of the
glorious presence of God for ever, seeing that he alone is the fountain of
Life and of happiness?

cast into the lake of fire, and have all their abode with the devils, and all
the damned spirits in hell, where shall be no joy, nor comfort, nor ease, but
weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth. If a man should be cast into a
deep and darkesome dungeon, full of Toades and Serpents: what comfort I pray
could he have but to wish for death? This is the death that all the impenitent
sinners must die. They must be cast out of the sweet and comfortable presence
of the Lord CHRIST JESUS, and be thrown into a Lake of Fire and Brimstone,
there to be tormented for evermore. Mat. 25 41


Thirdly, the third thing Mat. 13.24
Now what a woeful torment is it, to be cast into a furnace of fire, and to
lie many thousand years therein? this is a torment that cannot be expressed.
Again, he says, that Their worm sh,ll not die, Esaias 66.24
and their fire shall not be quenched. Now how should a man do if he should
have a worm always crawling in his belly, gnawing always at his heart? This
is the estate of all wicked men and women: They shall always have a worm,
even grief and anguish of heart, ever gnawing at their hearts, and biting at
their consciences: And this worm shall never die, nor kill them, but ever
gnawing and wounding them. So then you see by this which has been spoken, what
this second death is, and also wherein it does consist.

Now all the Question will be, Who shall be cast into this Lake of Fire? Who
are they that shall die this second death, Who they be that shall partake of
the second death.
which is such a miserable and woeful death? For there is no man nor woman that
lives, I think, but they suppose that they shall escape this death: they hope
that they shall be saved and so escape this flaming fire: And therefore now you
shall see who they be, that shall be cast into it. Look, they are there marked
out unto us, Reu. 21.8. The fearful and unbelievers, and abominable, and
murderers, and whooremongers, and sorcerers, and liars, etc. shall have their
part in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second
death: So then the Holy Ghost tells us, that all impenitent sinners shall be
damned, 1 Cor. 6.10
shall be cast into this lake of fire, which is the second death.

Then what a strange thing is this? The Holy Ghost tells us who shall be
damned, and cast into the Lake of Fire; all impenitent sinners; the Blasphemer,
the Drunkard, etc. and yet no man (almost) will believe this. Well, the Spirit
of God cannot lie: He says, That all the wicked and ungodly sinners shall be
cast into the lake of Fire which is the second death: now tell never so wicked
a wretch of his sins, of his swearing, etc. And what will they say? Tush, GOD
is merciful, I hope I shall be saved: Is not this, I pray, to give the
Holy Ghost the lie? Tell the drunkard or the profaner of the Lords day, etc.
they shall be damned; do they believe this? Oh, no, no; For if they did
believe it, how durst they be so bold to live in sin? Well, howsoever these
vile wretches say, they hope to be saved as well as the best of them all; yet
know, this is the truth of God; the Holy Ghost tells us plainly, That all
unbelievers, and thieves, and murderers, etc. shall be cast into the Lake of
Fire and Brimstone, which is the second death.

But to you, whose hearts do tremble for fear of these things, whose souls
do melt for fear of this second death: now if you would know how to escape
this Lake of Fire, and how to avoid this second death, which is the eternal
damnation and torment both of body and soul; you shall see how the Spirit of
GOD does not only show you how to escape hell, but to come to heaven; not
only to avoid damnation in this Lake of fire, but to obtain salvation and
joy in the blessed and glorious presence of Almighty God for evermore. Now see
what the Holy Ghost does teach thee in the sixth Verse of this chapter, Blessed
and holy is he that has his part in the first Resurrection, for on such the
second death shall have no power: But they shall be the Priests of God and of
Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years, that is, for evermore.

So then, would you know what manner of men and women shall escape the second
death, and eternal damnation in this lake of hell fire? why the Holy Ghost
says, They, and none but they, that have their parts in the first
Resurrection. So then it is manifest, in these words, that there be two
resurrections, and also a double death. The Children of GOD, they have a double
resurrection, and one death. But all wicked and ungodly sinners, they have one
resurrection, and a double death. So then let us see what is meant by this
first resurrection; namely, our rising out of the grave of sin, to newness
of life. This is the first resurrection, Ephesians 2.1.
You that were dead in trespasses and sins, has he quickened. Romans 6.4.
And we are buried with Christ in Baptism, that like as he rose again to the
glory of the Father: even so we should walk in newness of life.

So then, would you know, whether you shall escape eternal fire in hell, even
this second death? then look unto your own souls. Are you dead to all your
old sins, and new sins? Are you quickened in the inner man? Do you hate sin as
well when it is committed by your self, as by others? Do you labor to
mortify and to keep under the works of the flesh, and walk in all holy
duties and obedience both unto God and men? Romans 8.1.
For there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ, which walk not after
the flesh, but after the Spirit.

Blessed and holy are they that have part in the first resurrection; where he
shows, that none shall be blessed, none shall have part in the first
resurrection, and be freed from the second death, but such as be sanctified to
live a godly life, that are partakers of the first resurrection. And therefore,
if you desire to be blessed, and to escape the second death, which is the
everlasting damnation both of body and soul, then labor here to live a
godly life. For these two, Justification and Sanctification, cannot be severed.

And this is a very great comfort to all the true members of Christ, to live in
newness of life.

But as for wicked and ungodly sinners that live in sin, delight in sin, that
have no part in the first resurrection: their case is woeful, they be subject
to the second, that is, eternal death and damnation: for if ye live after the
flesh, Romans 6.8.
ye shall die.

And therefore deceive not your selves, as many do, which think, if they come
to Church, hear the word, receive the Sacraments, all is well, they hope God
will be merciful to them, they hope they shall not be damned. Well, mark
what I say; thou may come to church duly, thou may hear the word of God as
long as thou live, thou may receive the Sacrament as often as thou will;
but if thou have not thy part in the first resurrection, that is, unless thou
live a godly life, unless thou mortify thy filthy sins, and ungodly
desires, unless thou become a new creature; surely, surely, thy estate is
lamentable, and thy part is in the lake of fire and brimstone, which is the
second death. And therefore let no man deceive himself, and sooth himself,
because he hears the Word, professes the Gospel, receives the Sacrament, that
therefore he is well enough. No, no: though thou hear never so much, if thou
live in sin, in swearing, drunkenness, etc. thy estate is as woeful as before,
because thou art not freed from the second death.

And mark this difference, The children of God have two resurrections, and one
death: they rise from sin in this life, to newness and holiness of life:
and they rise at the last day to eternal life in Heaven; and therefore truly
blessed. But alas, graceless and godless sinners, that have two deaths* and
but one resurrection; they die in sin here, they are dead in sin, and delight
in sin here: and so they die the first death of the body, and eternal
death, the second death of body and soul in hell. And as they never had part
in the first resurrection: so the second resurrection is only to judgment,
to death, and to damnation.

And therefore, if you would live when you be dead, you must die to sin whiles
you be alive. Only the penitent sinners shall live for ever in eternal life;
only those which die to sin, shall escape the second death: But the
impenitent sinner, that lives and delights in sin here, he shall die for his
sins eternally; nay, he shall never taste of the life to come. But as he
would not labor to have his part in the first resurrection; so he shall be
sure to have his portion in the second death: which is so fearful a thing,
that it might make even flintie hearts to break in pieces, to lie in fire
burning for ever, without any ease, or end. O let us look unto it, and live a
godly life, and labor to have part in the first resurrection; and then shall
the second death do us no harm; but we shall live for ever in heaven with
God.

15 And whosoever was not found written in the Book of life, was cast into the
lake of fire.
THE former verse did show to us, the execution of the last Judgment upon all
wicked and ungodly sinners; and of that we spoke the last time. Now in this
Verse we may observe the different estate of the children of God, and of the
wicked: for as there be but two sorts of men, Good and Bad, Elect and
Reprobate, Penitent and Impenitent, the children of GOD, and the limbs of
Satan: So there be but two places, Heaven and Hell, Joy and Pain, the Right
hand and the left: and the reward shall be according, either Blessed or Cursed;
for so Saint John says here, The Elect shall have eternal life: But they
that be Reprobates shall be cast into the lake of fire.

First, concerning the Elect, and those that be chosen in Jesus Christ, and
whose names be written in Heaven. As their lives do differ from the wicked and
ungodly; so their estate after this life is far different: for they shall be
blessed for ever. And if you do ask, what is this Blessedness that all the
Elect shall have? I answer with Paul, 1. Cor. 29.
The eye of man never saw it, nor it never entered into the heart of man to
conceive the hundredth part of this happiness: yet we may out of the word of God,
gather some taste of it, as it is described unto us in the word of God.

And first and foremost, this blessed state of the godly at the last day, stands
in this; That God shall be all in all unto us: what good thing soever the heart
of man can wish, 1. Cor. 15.28.
that will God be unto us. If thou desire wealth, why GOD will be it unto thee.
If honor, or pleasure, why Almighty God will be all in all unto us: nay, every
child of God shall have a kingdom, Matthew. 25.
come ye blessed, etc.

Reave. 21.
Secondly, in the Kingdom of Heaven, there shall be no wants: for we shall
be freed from all sin, and all wants in body and soul shall be supplied.
And though now we see God but in part, yet then we shall behold him face to
face, 1. Cor. 15.28.
to our eternal comfort; we shall evermore live in his blessed presence, John
17.3. Revel. 21. Psa. 17.15. Reu. 22.3.
and reign with him for ever.

Thirdly, all the Elect shall be like unto Christ Jesus: so says Paul, Phil.
3.2.1.
He shall change our vile bodies, and make them like his glorious body. Christ
was most holy, pure, incorruptible, and glorious: even so shall we be; we
shall be for ever freed from both sin, Satan, death, and hell.

Fourthly, in heaven we shall reap endless joy and happiness, Psalm. 16.11
and shall delight in praising of God for ever: so as we shall keep a
perpetual Sabbath, and rest in the service and worship of God for ever. And
this shall be done to all which fear GOD, and whose names be written in the
Book of Life.

O then, cursed be these men and women, which think, Matt. 3.14.
It is in vain to serve the LORD. O no: then men shall know, it is not in
vain to serve the Lord: Nay, God will put a difference between them that
serve him, and serve him not. And this should encourage all men to labor to
abound in all holy duties; seeing God will reward even the least work of
faith. If thou give but a cup of cold water in the name of Christ, verily thou
shall not loose thy reward. Though our works cannot merit, yet he will in
mercy, for Christ's sake, thus Crown the good works of his children.

And seeing a few shall be saved, o let us labor to be of the little Flock;
let us, above all things, seek this Kingdom of God: If thou win this, thou
art happy and blessed, though thou loose all the world besides. And if thou
loose it, thou art miserable and wretched, though thou win the whole world: O
then what mad men are we, if we do never seek for this, or dream of heaven
till we have one foot in hell: let us not then think to gain a kingdom so
easily; we cannot go to heaven on beds of dowlne, but we must strive to enter
therein. And as life is sweet, joy, riches, honor, and pleasures are sweet: so
to have them for ever, without fear of loosing, this is a blessed thing: for
so it is with them that be in possession of this Kingdom, they shall be out
of fear to loose it, but shall reign with Christ for evermore.

Thus (in some sort) you may conceive the blessed, and most happy estate of all
the elect and faithful children of Almighty God, which ought to move us to
repent and turn to God.

But, what shall become of the rest, the ungodly sinners, of them whose names
be not written in the Book of Life? Alas poor wretches, poor souls! it
grieves me to think of them, it would make a man's heart to melt, to think on
their most woeful misery: And I quake to speak, or to think what shall
become of their souls for ever. The Holy Ghost says here, They shall be cast
into the lake of fire. What shall become then of the swearer, drunkard? etc.
They shall be cast into the lake of fire: Matthew. 25.
for so says Christ, Go ye cursed, etc. This is their end, and this is their
portion for evermore. Ah poor wretch, Ah vile creature, ah miserable sinner:
it had been good for them, if they had never been borne, or been made rather
Toads, or Serpents, then Men. For besides that, that they shall be cast out of
the glorious and comfortable presence of God, and his holy Angels, they shall be
cast into this lake of fire for ever.

Concerning which Lake of fire, into which all impenitent and hard-hearted
sinners shall be cast for ever; I will set down three special points.

First, the perpetuity of it.

Secondly, the extreamitie of it.

And thirdly, that it is remediless.

All which considered; me thinks it should make the flinty hearts of sinners
to melt, and to break in pieces, for fear they do come into this place of
torment, into this lake of fire.

And seeing the spirit of God does repeat it again and again, that all
reprobate sinners shall be cast into the lake of fire; it is to show, that men
do little consider of that, they do not tremble at it. And therefore he
beats upon it, to teach us, it is a special point to be thought on, to
mollify our hard hearts.

And first, concerning this lake of fire: In that it is named here A lake of
fire, this notes to us, the extremity of the torment, that it is a place of
endless woe, unspeakable pain. The Scripture gives it sundry names, to set
forth the unspeakable torment thereof. Reu. 21.8.
All wicked and impenitent sinners shall be cast into the lake of fire. For of
all torments, none is so extreme as fire. And Christ says, There shall be
weeping, Luke 13.28
wayling, etc. And it shall be most hot, and yet most cold; strangeness of this
fire, etc. Again, Their worm shall never die, Mark chap. 9.44. That worm
which shall gnaw their consciences, even the torment of their consciences. O
what a woeful thing is this, for a man or woman, to have a worm continually to
gnaw their bowels within, never to let them alone, or to give them any rest?
Such shall the misery be of the wicked. Again, Tophet is prepared for the
King, he cannot escape, and it is deep and large, and the burning thereof is
fire and much wood, and the breath of the Lord as a river of brimstone shall
kindle it, Esaias 30.33. So as the wrath of the Lord shall be as bellows to blow
it, and as a river of brimstone to maintain it.

By this you may alittle conceive the extreamitie of this woeful Lake of hell
fire. But if I had the tongue of men or Angels, I could never express it to
the full. For as the joys of heaven be unspeakable, so the torments of hell
can not be expressed, at what time the total wrath of God shall seize upon
the reprobates, both body and soul, and shall feed upon them for evermore.
Now, to the end you may the better conceive the extreamitie of it, you must
know, that the torments of hell, they be universal even in all the parts of the
body, and faculties of the soul at once; the mind, the will, the conscience,
the affection, the head, the heart, etc. all at once shall be tormented. The
pains in this life, they are (for the most part) particular in some part of
the body: but in this fire, the sinner shall be tormented in all parts at once:
and yet we may see, that some pains there be, as is the stone, etc. which men
would not willingly have for a whole world. Alas, what a woeful thing will
this be, to be thus tormented, even in all and every member so extremely? Let
one example serve in this point. The rich Glutton cries out, Oh I am tormented
in this flame! Luke 16. The torment and heat was so great, that he would have
given even a whole world, if he had been Lord of it, for so much water as
would have stuck to ones finger, to have cooled his flaming tongue: Tongue,
tongue; Soul, soul: Thus you see, that this fire is most extreme and woeful,
and yet men will not believe it, they fear it not.

But let us think upon the most woeful and extreme pain of this Lake of
fire, and let us make that use which CHRIST teaches us: If thy right hand or
foot, that is, any thing never so sweet, never so profitable, never so dear
or near unto us; Let us cut them off and cast them from us; that is, let us
forgo, and forsake them all: For it is better to go poor to heaven, then
rich to hell: It is better to go naked to Heaven, then in costly apparel to
Hell. O let all carnal men, all ungodly sinners, that live in pleasures,
sports or pastimes; yea let them know they shall pay full dearly for these
things, even the loss of their souls in hell for evermore.

Secondly, as the pains of Hell be easelesse and most extreme, so they be
endless and perpetual, no end of them for evermore. So Abraham tells the rich
Glutton; You that be there cannot come hither, Luke 16. and so says S. John,
Revel. 21. It is a lake of fire and brimstone that burns for ever. So, Go ye
cursed into everlasting fire, Mat. 25.41. It can never be quenched, when as
damned sinners shall lie therein many thousand years, yea, as many as there be
Stars in Heaven, and yet never to have an end. If a man should but once
every thousand years, take one spoonful of water out of the Sea; how many
thousand thousand years would be expired before he should have emptied the
same?

O consider this, you that forget GOD; Consider this, you which contemn the
Word of GOD, profane the Lords Sabbath, that make no conscience at all of
drunkenness, etc. what a treasure of plagues the Lord has reserved for the
damned? Oh, let us think often of this, that these torments be both endless
and easelesse? Oh what mad men and women, what fools be we, if we will now
enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, and then to lie in torments for
ever? What shall it benefit or profit us to enjoy a little worldly pelf,
money, lands or livings here, to live in all pleasures and delights, some
sixty or eighty years, and then to be tormented in hell fire for evermore.
And yet do we see that such is the extreme folly, and madness of many men,
that they will have their penyworths here, though they pay never so dear for
it in the life which is to come.

Thirdly, these torments, as they be endless and easelesse, so they be
remediless. This we may behold in the Glutton in hell, who would have given a
world, if he had been owner of it, and yet for all that could he not have it;
it was then denied him. For there is no ease nor remedy: in hell no redemption
after death; no silver nor gold, no wit, nor policy, no appealing to
another Judge; but he must lie by it for evermore even in this close prison,
till he have paid the debt and uttermost farthing. For, if all the Saints and
Angels in the Kingdom of heaven should fall at the feet of Christ, to beg
but for one soul, it could do him no good, CHRIST would deny them al, they
must have the repulse.

O consider this: this is it that ought to make all men to quake, and all
hearts to tremble, that in hell is no ease, nor hope of redemption. This is
that which makes the devils and damned spirits to fear and to tremble, and yet
it cannot move flintie, and stonie-hearted sinners once to be afraid. O I
beseech you let us think of these things now in these days of mercy: now is
remedy to be had, now we may avoid this woeful misery, now we may escape
this fearful torment. If we will now repent, if we will now leave our sins
and beg pardon of almighty God for them, we may escape: but after death there
is no time of mercy but judgment and torment, but fire, and brimstone, and
the wrath of God for evermore. And therefore now let us repent, let us bewail
our sins, and live as the servants of God, and not as the slaves of sin and
Satan, any longer; and then the gates of hell shall not prevail against us.

Our Savior Christ tells us, Mat. 16.26
that the soul of a poor beggar is more worth then many thousand worlds: And
therefore the loss of a soul is greater then the loss of the whole world.

If a man should loose House, Land, Wife, Child, and all he has, yet it is
nothing in comparison of his soul: that is a loss of all losses, to be
severed from God, and from Christ, and to be in hell torments for ever. O then
let us know what our souls be worth; let us learn to prize them above the
whole world. But alas, men can not so esteem of them. Oh no: men will for one
penny, or an hours pleasure, hazard loss of soul and body for evermore. Ah
poor soul, thou did never yet know what thy soul is worth. Christ Jesus
says, it is more worth then all the world. Oh let us so esteem of it, and
value it, and account all riches, pleasures, or profits, as dung, so that our
souls, our poor souls may be saved in the day of our Lord.

The end of the fourth Sermon.
A FOLD FOR Christ's Sheep:

Delivered in two Sermons upon the first Chapter of the CANTICLES, verse. 6.7.

BY SAMVEL SMITH Minister of the Word of GOD, at Prittlewell in Essex.

ESAIAS 55.3. Hearken, and your soul shall live.

LONDON, Printed by NICHOLAS OAKS. 1617.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL AND Virtuous Gentlewoman, Mistress MARY BVTLER of
Tooby, SAMVEL SMITH wishes al Grace, Prosperity, and true comfort in this
life, and eternal happiness in the life to come.
THe Book of the holy Scripture (Right Worshipful) is as the Princely Prophet
David calls it, Ps. 119 125
A Lantern to our feet* and a Light to our Paths. The Elect of God are
therein enlightened, and taught of God, through the inward operation of Gods
Spirit: John 6.
the knowledge thereof has been dear and precious unto the Godly. Paul, that
sanctified Vessel of the Lord, did esteem all things else but Dung in
comparison of it. Phil. 3.8.
Moses regarded not the pleasures he might have enjoyed in king Pharaohs Court,
Heb. 11.24
in comparison of this: And David preferred the Office of a Dore-keeper in Gods
house, Psalm. 84.12
before the chiefest Palaces here below. This was that that Solomon the
wisest did aim at especially, 1. Reg. 3.5.9.
having his choice of many things offered him from God: and no marvel though
the children of God do prefer the choice of it before all other inward things
whatsoever, because our Savior will teach us, that the knowledge thereof will
bring a man to Life Eternal: John 17.3.
It will safely conduct a man to God his kingdom, and make him decline from
the by-waies of sin and error, which lead to destruction. Here is Milk for
Babes, and strong meat for men of riper years: so that none that are invited
to this Feast, but may find some refreshing. Yet notwithstanding, that this is
the excellency of the holy Scriptures, and that this has been the choice of
God his servants in all ages, to prefer the knowledge of it before all things,
and to conform their lives thereunto: The Papists, the malicious ennemies of
Gods truth, will notwithstanding show themselves to be of the Serpenticall
brood, Gene. 3.15
ever treading on the heel of God his church, even with their Templum Domini:
Jeremy 7.
Templum Domini: the Church, the Church, as if the church-Keyes hung ever at
their girdle. These their painted shows of piety and holiness, has caused
many to stagger in the way of godliness, who have not taken deep root in
christian profession. Let such, with a single eye, read over these two
sermons, where they shall find a Fold pitched for all Christ his Sheep: The
true church made known from the flocks of his Companions: which, howsoever
they come with, Jesus, Jesus, in their mouths, yet do deny the power of
godliness, seeking utterly to extinguish the light of Gods truth, that it may
not shine unto men. Indeed, a palpable darkness has yet ouerspread all the
Dominions of that Romish Pharaoh, more palpable then the darkness of Egypt,
but the Truth shall prevail, maugre the spite and malice of Antichrist, and
all that bloody Crew: And the Bright Beams of the gospel shall dispell those
foggie mists of Popery, and Jgnorance: when the pride of the Whore of Rome is
once at the height, and the measure of her iniquity is once full, according to
that of Saint John in the Revelation: She is fallen, she is fallen, even
Babylon that great City, etc. God put it into the hearts of all christian
princes, to rise up against her, By suppressing of Popery.
that their war with them may assure them of a peace with themselves, and
with their Lord God. For, how dangerous they be unto a christian commonwealth,
even their hellish Attempts do show. Neither is it an error in practice, as
many would bear men in hand, but it is an error in doctrine, teaching, yea and
maintaining it, that they may safely kill, and take away the life of a
christian Prince, that will not yield and subject himself unto the Pope of
Rome. Therefore traitors to Christian Princes in action or affection, and so
much the more dangerous to be sufferd.
And no marvel then, though they can not endure the manifestation of God his
Word, which is a Lantern unto our feet, and a Light unto our Paths,
directing us to heaven: For this Light, if the Pope did not smother it, even
little children in the Streets would long ere this have cried: Fie upon them,
fie upon them. It is my care, both in public and private (out of my small
reading) to discover, as much as in me lies, the mystery of Iniquity, and to
lend one blast to the sounding of that Horn, The word.
that shall at last shake down the walls of this Jericho. It is the old and
ancient Doctrine of Faith and Repentance that I here entreat of: As for the
plainness of the manner of delivery of it, I do trust you will acknowledge
that the power of the spirit is best seen in weakness: and that
plainelinesse do best answer a straight and even Level: the evidence of the
spirit is best seen in plainness.

J have presumed to prefixe your Worshippes Name unto this small Work: It
shall (by Gods good blessing) increase your love unto the truth and gospel of
Jesus Christ: A zealous professor whereof you have showed your self to be
these many years: and work in you a further detestation of Popery. As you
have begun well, so proceed, and let your works be more at last then at first:
Be still for God in all his ways, and God will be still for you in all your
ways: advance him still, and he will advance you. Thus I add this poor
Mite to the treasury of the Church, ascribing the Patronage to your self, the
use to the world, and the success of it to God. I pray God to keep you in his
holy fear, and favor, unto the end: and so remain

Your worships in the surest bond. SAMVEL SMITH.

A Table of the Doctrines contained in these two Sermons.
THE FIRST SERMON. CANT. 1. v. 6.7.
Doctrine 1. CHRIST JESUS must be loved with the strongest affection of Love.
p. 234 Doct. 2. True note of a Sheep of Christ, to hunger and thirst after the
word of God. p. 225 Doctr. 3. The church of God does acknowledge Christ to be
her chief shepherd. p. 267 Doctr. 4. The church of GOD sometimes is in the
very heat of persecution. p. 274 Doctr. 5. Christ leaves not his church in
the heat of persecution, but provides comfort for them. p. 285 Doct. 5. It is
altogether impossible for men to hold out in time of trial, that are not
assisted by God. p. 296
THE SECOND SERMON CANT. 1. v. 7.
Doctrine 6. CHRIST esteems of his church, as if they had no sin. p. 308
Doctr. 7. The church of GOD sometimes may be at such a straight, as not to
discern the truth. p. 317 Doctr. 8. A direction to know which is the true
church. p. 324
A Fold for Christ's SHEEP. THE FIRST SERMON.
CANT. 1.6.7. 6 Show thou me, O thou whom my soul loves, where thou feedest,
and where thou lie at noone: For why should I be as she that turns aside
to the Flocks of thy companions?

7 If thou know not, O thou the fairest among women, get thee forth by the
steps of the Flock, and feed thy Kiddes by the Tents of the Shepherds.


BEFORE I enter into the Text it self, which I have now read unto you, it shall
not be amiss for my better proceeding, and your understanding, to speak
something concerning the order of placing this Book, the Title of it, and the
subject matter therein contained.

Touching the order of placing this Book, wherein king Solomon labors to
build up the Spiritual Temple of the Soul: It is the same he observed in
building the material temple, 1. Reg 6.
where he framed three Courts; the utmost for the Common People, the second for
the Priests and Levites, and last of all, that Sanctum Sanctorum, the Holiest
of Holies, only for the High Priest to enter in at, and that but once a
year: even so in this Spiritual Temple of man's Soul he has likewise framed
three Courts: First, an utmost Court, which is his Book of Proverbs, where
all sorts and degrees of men whatsoever, are taught and instructed a civil
course of manners: Next to that, he has a second Court, which is his
Ecclesiastes, leading men on further in the ways of godliness and Christian
piety: And last of all, he has a Sanctum Sanctorum, which is his Canticles,
wherein not every one, but only those which delight in heavenly and Divine
Mysteries may behold the pure, free, perfect, eternal, and constant love of
Christ Jesus toward his Church, and every faithful Soul; as also the love
of his Church toward him, and what great and princely benefits she reapeth by
him.

Secondly, for the Title and subject matter of this most excellent Book, as
there is Sabbatum Sabbati, so this is a Song of Songs: because of all that
Solomon did endite, this is most Divine and most excellent. In the which he
does most lively and affectionately, by Allegorical, and Parabolicall
Speeches, cipher out and describe unto us the most holy and perfect love of
Christ Jesus, toward the Church his blessed Spouse. For CHRIST and his Church
are here brought in, in this worthy Book, as two Paramours, Psalm 45
who are in love the one with the other; as a time of wooing ever goes before
the solemnization of Matrimony, and which in due convenient time have a
purpose to marry, Math. 1.11
as Joseph and Mary were first espoused before they came together: So the same
order is observed in this Spiritual Union betwixt Christ and his Church: John
3.29. They must first be contracted, then after married. The Contract is, when
a man is regenerate and borne anew, Revel. 21 9. translated out of Nature into
Grace, depending only upon Christ for salvation: and finished and made up in
the day of Judgment, when all the Elect shall fully enjoy Christ. For so
witnesses the Holy ghost, where it is said, Let all be glad and rejoice, and
give glory to him, for the Marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife has
made herself ready, Reu. 19.7. So then this book contains in it the
wonderful love, and mutual affection betwixt Christ Jesus and his Spouse: the
true Church of GOD, and every true believer. Thus much may serve touching the
book it self, we will now come to the words of the Text.

Show thou me, O thou whom my soul loves, etc.
IN the beginning of this chapter, the Church begins to speak to Christ,
and being ravished in heart with his Love, desires most earnestly to be
embraced of him, that she might be joined unto him, and have fellowship with
him, preferring Christ Jesus with the blessings and benefits she reapeth by
him, before all other things in the world.

In the third Verse she confesses her untowardness, and her want of power to
embrace Christ, and therefore she desires him to draw her heart by his Word
and Spirit: whereby she shows her earnest desire to receive Jesus Christ.

Verse 4. She remoues an objection that might be made: for it might be said,
Alas, thou art black and deformed, how can thou then hope that he will take
any pleasure in thy beauty, seeing that he is the most pure, blessed and
glorious Son of God? To this she confesses, that though by Nature she be
black, full of blemishes and natural corruptions, by reason of her original
sin, and natural corruptions, as also her actual transgressions; yet
notwithstanding, being washed in Christ's Blood, clothed in his Righteousness,
and being decked and beautified with the Graces of his Spirit, Knowledge,
Faith, Repentance, Zeal, Patience, Love, Obedience, etc. she is fair and
comely.

Now in the sixth Verse, she puts up an earnest request unto Christ, that he
would in mercy show her where he feeds his Flock, and where he prouides
comfort for them in the time of trouble. For Christ being the great Shepherd,
his Church on earth seeks only after him, to be fed, resting assured, that
there is but one true shepherd, who feeds all his Sheep with wholesome
pasture.

In these two Verses we have two things to be considered of us,

Viz. 1 The Request and Petition the which the Church does make unto Christ.
Verse 6. The Tex^ divided
2 The most kind and loving answer of Christ Jesus unto his Church, directing
her, and comforting her according to her Petition, Verse 7.


In the first of these we are to consider two things. First, the Request; and
secondly, the reason of the Request.

In the Request, note, First, the person to whom she resorts; Oh thou whom etc.

Secondly, the Request it self, which is twofo^d. First, that Christ Jesus
would show her where he feeds his Flock with his holy Word and Sacraments; to
this end, that he would feed her, as he fed the Flocks of former times.
Secondly, where he prouides shelter and shadow, in the heat of persecution;
as the manner of those Shepherds was in those hot countries, to drive their
sheep to shade in the heat of the day.


And lastly, the Reason: For why should I be as she that turns aside after
the Flocks of thy companions? So that if CHRIST do it not, it will not be
for His honor, nor yet for her good.

The person unto whom the Church seeks for direction.
First, for the Person to whom she seeks for direction and comfort, it is
CHRIST JESUS the Savior and Redeemer of his church and people; whom she
describes thus, Oh thou whom my soul loves, etc. q. d. O Lord JESUS CHRIST
my Savior and Redeemer, whom I love with all mine heart; yea whom I love most
earnestly, above all the world: So, as if the question were asked what I love
best in all the world, I speak it from my heart; It is thou Lord alone.

Christ Jesus must be loved with the stFaida Hamdiongest affection of love.
Hence we learn with what affection every child of God, and true believer,
must love JESUS CHRIST; namely, with the greatest and strongest affection of
love they can. So as if it were asked, what, or whom do thou love most, thou
can truly say with the Church here, the Lord Jesus CHRIST, O thou whom my
soul loves! So did S. Peter, whose love was so great that he died for CHRIST:
So that he might very well say to Christ when he asked him this question,
Whether he did love him, or no? Yea Lord, John 21.15
thou know that I love thee. The like is to be seen in Marie, whose love
was so great to Christ, that in testimony thereof she washed his feet with
her tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head: So that CHRIST gives
this testimony of her to her everlasting praise, Luke 7.47
That she loved much. So does the Church and Spouse of CHRIST testify her
love to Christ, in diverse places of this most worthy book calling CHRIST JESUS
her Beloved, Cant. 2.10
My beloved spoke and said, etc. And again, Stay me with Flaggons, and
comfort me with Apples, for I am sick of love, Cant. 2.5. Yea it is a Precept
given by the Lord God himself, that he must have the chiefest love, and the
first room in our hearts: Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, Deuteronomy. 6.5. The Lord will not be
satisfied with the love of our eyes, to behold his works; the love of the
ear, to listen to his word; the love of the tongue, to talk of him; the love
of the feet, to go to his Sanctuary; but the Lord does require all these loves
together in one: So as a man may truly say with David the prophet, Psalm.
83.25. Whom have I in heaven but thee? And (...) desire nothing in earth in
comparison of thee. The Lord cannot abide that a man should have a heart, and a
heart; one for God, another for the Devil. We can not serve God and Mammon:
Mat. 6.24
we must not part our love to the world, the Flesh, or the Devil, but Christ
must have all. Now the reasons are diverse, to show with what an ardent
affection we must love CHRIST JESUS.

First, because he is our Husband, Esaias: Esaias 54.5.
He that made thee is thy Husband, whose name is the Lord of Hoasts. And
again, Reu. 19.7
Let us rejoice and give glory to him, for the Marriage of the Lamb is come,
and his wife has made her self ready. Now our Spiritual service and worship
of God is (as it were) a certain Marriage of our souls unto God. When we
take upon us the profession of Christ Jesus, as in Baptism; then we betroth
our selves to Christ, as to an husband, entering into covenant with CHRIST, To
keep us only to him unto our lives end. So then by this means, the Lord is
become our husband, and we his Spouse. Now then, as an honest man can not
endure that another man should have a portion in his wife; so will not Christ
endure that any other should have with him a portion in his church, For he is a
jealous God, Exodus 20. verse 5. So then the force of the reason stands thus.
Gods people which are married unto CHRIST, must love CHRIST alone, because we
are linked and married to him alone, as a wife to her husband, unto whom alone
she is bound. Therefore if we forsake the Lord, and break the promise we made
to him in Baptism, and betroth our selves unto others; then will he surely
cast us off, give us a Bill of Diuorcement, as shameless strumpets, and punish
us for our unfaithfulness.

Secondly, he loved us first John; We love him, John 4.19
because he loved us first: Yea, he loved us first, when we were his enemies,
and had made a voluntary separation between him and our souls, committing
Spiritual fornication with sin and Satan: yea, as the Apostle Paul
witnesses, Ephesians. 2.4.5.
Ye that were dead in trespasses and sins has he quickened. And lest we
should any whit doubt of his love, he has manifested it, Revel. 1.6.
in that He has washed us from our sins in his Blood: Oh then, greater Love
then this, can no man show. And therefore, seeing Christ has loved thy Soul
so dearly, as to suffer a cursed death, yea to shed his own heart Blood, to
save thy soul: Oh how ought thou to love Christ again? If a man were
taken by the Turks, and put to extreme slavery and bondage, where he should
remain for ever, unless a great sum of money were paid for his ransom, the
which he were never able to pay: how miserable were the estate of this man?
But if one should come, that out of his mere love unto him, pitying his
misery, that should pay his ransom, and set him free: who can express how
much this poor wretch were bound unto him? We are all taken prisoners, and
that not by the Turks, which only can but hold us in temporal bondage; but
by Satan the Prince of darkness, where we should have endured, not a
temporal, but a spiritual and eternal bondage and slavery, and that in hell
for evermore. And nothing but only the blood of the Son of God could be our
ransom: O, how should this work upon the affection of every Christian man and
woman, and even bind us to love Christ again. Now what might move Christ, but
only his love, to give himself to death for us? Surely, nothing that was in
us. Ephe. 2.4.5
But God who is rich in mercy, through his great love wherewith he loved us,
even when we were dead by sins, has quickened us together by Christ, by whose
grace ye are saved. And again. 1. Ioh 3.16
Hereby have we perceived love, that he laid down his life for us. Ephesians. 1.7.
By whom (says the Apostle) we have redemption through his blood, and
therefore the love that Christ Jesus has first she^ed unto us, must constrain
us to love Christ again.

My beloved is white and ruddy, Cant. 5.10
the chief of ten thousand. In the world we see it common, that some are
beloved, because they are fair and beautiful; some, because they are rich and
wealthy; some, because they are wise and prudent; and some, because they are
honorably descended. Now Christ Jesus has all of these. For what soever may
affect a man's heart, and any way procure love, the same is Christ Jesus fully
and absolute without any shadow of mutabilitie, or change: For wisdom, he is
the fountain: for truth, he is the author of truth: for mercy, he is the
storehouse of all mercy: for riches, he is the Lord of heaven and earth,
even the storehouse of durable riches: and for beauty, he is the most holy
and blessed son of God, full of grace and truth.

Oh how may this serve to reprove Gadarens, who preferred their hogs before
Christ: yea one mess of pottage with Esau: that can be content to sell Christ
for less then thirty pence: that love their filthy plesures, eating,
drinking, pride, vncleannenesse, etc. more then CHRIST and their own souls,
like the Bethlemites, let Christ lie in the stable amongst beasts; for they can
not afford him one corner in their hearts.

Again, it is the sin of thousands, that profess Christ to be their Husband
and Savior, that yet break their covenant, and serve the world and the flesh:
that pretend they love the Lord Jesus Christ, and yet betroth themselves to the
world, the flesh, and the devil, and serve them. Now how could any man be
content with this, That his wife should say she loves him, and yet sets her
heart upon another man? So, how can we think that God will take it at our
hands, if we will make show that we love Christ, and yet are ever dallying with
the world, Christ's enemy? Oh he is a jealous God, and will never endure it at
our hands.

And lastly, by the rule of this Doctrine of the Papists here no less to be
reproved; who so much rob God of his honor, calling upon Saints, and praying
unto them; nay, preferring the virgin Marie before Christ himself; giving
honor and adoration to Saints and Angels, making them Mediators and Saviors:
they shall find one day, that GOD will not put up this robbery at their hands;
but will show his jealous and terrible anger against them, as most sacrilegious
persons, and robbers.

It must stir up every Christian man to labor to find his heart ravished
with the love of Christ Jesus; so as he can say, out of the affection of his
heart, O thou whom my soul loves! so as if the question were demanded, what I
love best? I can truly say, Phil. 3.7.8.
I love Christ Jesus more then the whole world: yea, I account all things but
loss and dung to win Christ. And where men find this true affection and love
of Christ in them, it is a certain sign of their salvation; that God has
cast his love upon them, that so the love of God draws love to him again. As
the light of the Sun lights on the eye, and by it we see the Sun again. And
as by the picture in the Wax, we know the Seal: so by our love to God, we
know his love to us. O how should this cause every man and woman, and every
mothers child amongst us, to examine their love toward Christ, that so they
may gather some assurance unto their own souls, that Christ has cast his
love upon them. And to do this, ask me this question of thine own soul:
Do thou desire, Phil. 1.25.
with the Apostle Paul, to be loosed, and to be with Christ? Tell me, Note.
is it meat and drink unto thee to do the will of Christ? Is thy hand ever
ready (according to thy ability) to bestow any thing upon Christ, and for the
advancement of his glory? Do thou labor in the place wherein thou live,
to advance the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ? Can thou be content to
undergo shame, disgrace, trouble, persecution and bonds; yea, death it self
for Christ's sake? Does the remembrance of his coming to Judgment cheer up
thy heavy soul? And do thou cry with the spouse of Christ, Come Lord Jesus,
come quickly? These be marks and tokens whereby thou may discern whether
thou do love Christ Jesus, yea or no.

But because all men are ready to say that they love Christ, or else it were
pity they should live, and the like; when indeed the love of Christ is not in
them: Marks to discern our love to Christ.
I will yet proceed a little further, and observe a few notes and marks of
this pure and hearty love to Christ, which are most certain signs of grace.

1. By our love to his word.
First, if we love Christ, we will love his word, delight in it, and esteem
it above gold and precious stones. Psalm. 119.67.
Lord what love have I unto thy word (says David) all the day long is my study
in it. Yea, it is altogether impossible for a man to be religious, to fear
God, and to love him, that has no sound love, nor delight in the word of God:
so that by our love to his word, we may judge of our love to Christ: No love
nor delight in the word, surely no love nor delight in Christ: great love to
the word, great love to Christ. In the valewing of this pearl, David's practice
is notable, who made the Testimonies of God his heritage, Verse 111.
and the very joy of his heart, and esteemed them above gold, yea above fine
gold. And therefore seeing most men have no delight in the word, seldom or
never hear it (unless it be for fashion sake) read it, or meditate in it day
or night: it is a certain token that the love of Christ is not in them.

2. By our love to his Saints.
Secondly, if we love Christ Jesus with all our heart, we will love those whom
he loves, his blessed members, true Christians. 1. John 3.
Hereby (says Saint John) we know that we are translated from darkness into
light, because we love the brethren. David testifies of himself, Al my delight
is upon thy Saints. It is our duty to love all, but we must love the Saints
with a peculiar and special love, as heirs with Christ, and members of the
same body with us. Therefore seeing men generally hate the members of Christ,
contemn them, and despise them; does not this make it very apparent, that the
love of Christ is not in them? For the world loves her own; John 15.19
But because I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates you.

Thirdly, if we love Christ Jesus, 3. By our obedience
we must show it by our obedience to his word, and to his holy Laws: for so
says Christ, If ye love me, Ioh. 14 23.
keep my Commandments. Little obedience, little love; no obedience to Christ's
will, no love, hearty obedience, hearty love. And therefore seeing generally
men rebel against his word, and break his Commandments; though these men
should swear they love Christ, yet are they liars, and the love of Christ is
not in them. For, who can believe that a traitor can love his Prince?

Fourthly, if we love Christ Jesus, 4. By our suffering for Christ.
we cannot endure to hear him blasphemed, rayled on, reviled, his word
contemned, or his Sabaoths profaned, but it will grieve us at the very heart,
and we will (to the utmost of our power) defend his cause, as a loving child
the cause of his father; and a faithful servant, the credit of his master.
And withal, it will make us be content to endure some trial and persecution
for his sake: yea, loss of liberty, wealth, riches, yea life i^selfe, who
has so loved us, that he shed his blood for us. Thus much of the affection of
the Church toward Christ Jesus. Now we are to come to the petitions themselves.

Show thou me, O thou whom my soul loves, where thou feedest, etc.
THe Church here, as in many other places of the holy Scriptures, compares
Christ Jesus to a good and faithful shepherd, as the Prophet Esaias describes
him, Esaias 40.
He will gather together his Lambs. And again, Behold, Ezech. 34.
I will require my flock of the Shepherds, and I my self will feed my
sheep, and cause them to rest quietly. This is acknowledged of the Prophet
David: Psalm. 23.1.
The Lord is my shepherd, therefore I cannot want. Yea Christ does thus
entitle himself, saying; Ioh. 10.11.
I (...) the good shepherd, etc.

Now the Church of Christ does put up her request to this great Shepherd and
Doctor of his Church, that he would be pleased to tell her where he feeds
his sheep with the preaching of the Word, and the use Of the Sacraments, that
so she may join with them, there to be fed and comforted.

Quest. But, Church, or flock she enquires after?

Resp.
Ans. I answer: Howsoever the Church of God is but one in all the world, yet
it has diverse parts. As the Ocean sea, though but one, yet it is called by
diverse names, according to the place where it lies: Even so the Church of
Christ, though but one, yet it has diverse parts, as the Holy Ghost
distinguishes of it, Revel. 1.4.
writing to the seven Churches which are in Asia: Now of the whole Church of
Christ, some parts of it be at peace and rest, free from persecution, when
other parts may suffer persecutions, molestations, and be vexed by the Devil
and his instruments, whom he sets a work. Now in this place, the Church of God
in persecution and great affliction, desieth to know of Christ, Where he feeds
his sheep, that is, where the Church is at rest and peace, where the word is
purely preached, the Sacraments duly administered, and Discipline duly
performed, that she may join with them in the service of Almighty God.

From this request and earnest The true note of a sheep of Christ, to hunger
and thirst after the word of God.
to hunger and thirst after the word of GOD, to enquire where Christ feeds his
flock, where the word is truly and faithfully preached, and the Sacraments
truly administered. And this doubt our Savior him self observes to be the
eare-marke of his sheep; John 10.27
My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me: but the voice
of a stranger will they not hear. This affection was in godly David, O Lord,
how amiable are thy Tabernacles? how does my soul long after thy Altars? O
when shall I come and appear before the Lord in Sion? And this duty is imposed
upon every Christian, to have an earnest affection unto the word of God. As
when a man is hungry, the veins sucking moisture in the bottom of the
stomach, he feels a pain which makes him desire meat: even so our souls
void of grace, and nourishment unto eternal life, they should hunger and
thirst after Christ and his righteousness, John 6.26.
after his word, which is the Spiritual food of our souls. And till a man be
hungry, he longs not for meat, he desires not food: so, till we see our
wa^ts, we never seek to have our souls fed with the word of God. Now in that
so few desire the word of GOD, and so few esteem of it, it shows that very
few do feeele their want of food, very few can discern their misery, and
wretched estate; but most men run on in sin, bless themselves in their evil
ways, and never say, Alas, 1. Pet. 2.2.
what have I done? we must desire the sincere milk of the word, as the infant
the mothers breast; And as the Heart does the rivers of waters, Psa. 42. and as
the Church does here; Show me, O show me where thou feedest thy flock! We
should do as the earth does in time of drought; she opens her mouth, begging
and gaping until the Lord send a rain. The beggar never begges hard till he
see his own want, and then he will spare no time, labor, nor words: so till
we see our own wants, we will never seek for the spiritual food of our
souls. But they be blessed which hunger and thirst after Righteousness, Mat.
5.6. though we think we be happy when we feel no want; as it is a common thing
to say, I never doubted of my salvation, I would be loath my conscience should
trouble me, etc. But certainly it is the beginning of grace, to find our
selves to want grace. Those that do eat meat with a full stomach, it does
them least good: So they which are full, and feel not the want of the word, it
does them little good.

those good things that are treasured up in the Word to make us truly happy;
forasmuch as all good things which we have and do enjoy in this present life,
they are appendences to the Word; by which Word, and by Prayer, they are
sanctified to us. Now it is got and obtained no other way, but by thirsting
after it. As the blessed Virgin says in her Song, Luke 1. v. 53. He fills
the hungry with good things, and the rich he has sent empty away. Which may
serve to comfort the poor children of God, which show their thirsting desire,
by their great labor and travel, to hear the Word preached, though they
meet with mockings and scoffings for it, by such as are far from thirsting
after it of themselves.

Solomon: The person that is full despises the hony-combe; Prou. 27.7
but unto the hungry soul, every bitter thing is sweet. So that when we
shall see our spiritual poverty without the Word, that we should even faint
and starve, and pine away, it will then make us prise the excellency of that
benefit we enjoy, when we have the same truly and sincerely Preached and
Taught amongst us.

the Badge, and the Brand of the Sheep of Christ, the true Church and children
of God: this doctrine then makes a plain distinction betwixt the Sheep of
Christ, and the stinking goats of Satan. The Sheep of Christ long after their
Shepherd; desire to be instructed by him; hunger after the Word preached and
taught; wish for the Sabbath, enquire where Christ does feed his Sheep, in the
green pasture of his Word and Sacraments: but the goats of Satan loathe the
word, and the preaching of it, They tread down the pasture of the Sheep,
Ezech. 34. yea they are weary of it, they will not go to the door to hear,
Malac. 2.13. they can be content as well to want it, as to have it: so as
hereby we may judge our own estates, whether we be the true Sheep of Christ,
or the stinking goats of Satan; the children of God, or the limbs of the
devil. Do thou love the word of GOD more then thine appointed food? Tell
me, do thou desire to be taught in the Word? Inquire thou where Christ does
feed his Sheep with good Pasture? And do thou delight in the Word? John
10.27. These are the eare-marks of Christ's Sheep, and may minister comfort
unto thy soul, that thou art one of those that belong to his Fold. But if on
the contrary part thou loathe the word of God, and have no desire at all to
tread in GODS House, but spendest the Saboth irreligiously, vainly, and
profanely, at the Dice, at Cards, Bowls, or Tables: O deceive not thy own
soul. It is a sign thou art none of Christ's sheep, but one of the stinking
goats of Satan: and there will come a day of separation, when Christ Jesus the
great Shepherd will divide the Sheep from among the Goats, when he shall set
the sheep on the right hand, and the goats on the left, Mat. 25.33.

This Doctrine does serve to

First, Atheists, Three sorts of men reproved.
which bleare out the tongue at all Religion, and christian Piety, making a
mock of God, of his Word, 1 Atheists.
and of all holy Duties; That think it lost labor to be religious, and that
there is no good got by hearing Sermons, and leading of a godly life. Oh it
has ever been the cursed thoughts of man's heart to think so; as was used in
the time of the Prophet Malachie; It is lost labor to serve the Lord, and what
good comes there by serving of God? Ah poor souls, all this while they can
minister no comfort unto their own souls, that they are the sheep of CHRIST
but a ferefull expectation of Judgment. For in what a miserable and wretched
estate is that man, which knows not whether he be in the estate of Grace,
or not? A Sheep of Christ, or a Goat of Satan? with what cheer can he eat
one meals meat, or sleep one night, that wants this assurance? O then, let
such be warned betimes, that if they look to have any comfort in death, and
after death, that now they labor to be approved for the Sheep of Christ.

2 Papists.
Secondly, the Papists which bar the people from the preaching of the Word,
and keep them in miserable ignorance and blindness: And all others which
seek by all means possible to hinder CHRIST'S sheep from endeavoring to be
taught, which otherwise would enquire Where Christ feeds his Sheep: where
the Word is truly preached and taught, and the Sacraments duly administered.
These are like the Scribes and Pharisees, Who shut up the Kingdom of heaven;
that will not enter themselves, nor suffer them that would. Oh, what sacrilege
does that adulterous church of Rome commit, that take from the people, the key
of Knowledge, yea and nuzzle them in ignorance, teaching, that it is sufficient
to believe as the Church does believe. Romans 12.2 Phil. 1.10.
Whereas the Scriptures do require of all men the spirit of discerning, Ephesians.
5.15. Try the Spirits whether they be of God: that so they may allow of those
things that are good, and be without offense until the day of Christ:
otherwise, if they follow their false teachers, they are sure to perish, Mat.
15.14
For when the blind lead the blind, they both fall into the pit of
destruction.

3 Carnal Protestants
Thirdly, all carnal Protestants, and secure worldlings: who, although they do
enquire where they may buie a good bargain, or get a good purchase, and labor
for that; yet never inquire where Christ feeds his Sheep. Oh, it is a wonder to
see how men do covet plesures, profits and preferments: these they seek for
with might and maine. But for the Ministry of the Word, to have it truly
taught them, that their souls may be saved: this they esteem not, they look
not after it. Surely, by this they declare to the whole world, that they are
none of Christ's sheep: For if they were, They would hear his voice and follow
him, John 10.27

Seeing the true Church of The Church of God does acknowledge Jesus Christ for
her chief shepherd
we learn that it is the duty of the true Church of God, to acknowledge
Christ Jesus alone, for their great Pastor and Shepherd, the only Head and
chief Doctor of his Church, and therefore to be ruled by him, and his Word
alone, to be content to be led and guided by this great Pastor and Shepherd
of the Church, as in John 10.28 I am the True Shepherd, and do know my
Sheep, and am known of mine. This is acknowledged by Peter in the behalf of
all the Disciples, John 6.68
Master, to whom shall we go? Thou have the words of eternal life. And CHRIST
has promised to be present with his Church, Even to the end of the world. Ephesians.
2.22 Colos. 2.19 Matthew. 28.
And again he says, that Where two or three are gathered together in my
name, I will be in the midst amongst them. Now the duty of Christ this
great Shepherd, it stands in two things: First, to govern his Church,
prescribing unto them Laws, binding the consciences of all his Members: And
secondly, by his grace, to quicken, and to put a spiritual life into them: So
that they shall be able to say, That they live not, but CHRIST in them.

and considered, which serve likewise for the confirmation of this point of
Doctrine unto us, is because the work of salvation is wholly and only wrought
by him, and no part thereof is reserved to any creature; as the Apostle
witnesses, when he says, That amongst men there is no other name given under
heaven whereby we may be saved, but only by Jesus Christ: And the Author of
the Epistle to the Hebrews witnesses the same thing, when he says, that he
is able perfectly to save them that come unto God by him.

This condemns the Church Rome, as no true Church of God. First, because they
will not content themselves with Christ Jesus to be their great Pastor, and
general Shepherd; but they have set up the Pope his Vicar, and matched him,
yea preferred him before Jesus Christ. Nay, they will not be content with that
pasture which Christ allows for his Sheep; the green pastures of his holy
Word, and clear streams of his blessed Gospel; but they will feed on the
filthy Trash, and dirty Drugs of their own devising: the fond and foolish
devices, inventions, and traditions of men, of their Popes and Cardinals: So
as they declare to the world they are no sheep of CHRIST, In that they will not
hear his voice and follow him, John 10.17. nor be content with the food he
has prepared for them, but feed on the filthy and foul pudles of man's
traditions.

all the faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ, which stand in Christ's steed:
That they teach nothing but the truth of God; wholesome doctrine, not their
own devices and dreams: but that which they persuade themselves Christ would
speak, if he were present. So on the contrary part, you that are the hearers
must content your selves with the Pastures of Gods Word, the plain and the
pure Preaching of the word of God, and not to be carried away to listen after
strange Sheepheards, that teach erroneous doctrine that may corrupt; or the
devices of man, which may tickle the ear, and not work grace in the heart.
And such are the vile Doctrines of the Church of Rome, which will rather bane
and poison men's souls, then edify them; as their doctrine of Merits,
Invocation of Saints, praying for the Dead, and a thousand the like. The which,
because they have no footing in Gods word, are here condemned, as no wholesome
pasture for Gods sheep to feed upon.

Thus much for the Churches first request. The second follows.

And where thou causest them to lie down at Noone.
FOr the better understanding of these Words, we must know, how that it was
the manner of the Shepherds in those hot Countries, to drive their sheep to
the pasture in the morning; and after, when the Sun waxed hot, to drive them
to the water and at noone to carry them to some shadow, where they might rest
in the heat of the day, lest they should be annoyed with the scorching heat
and beams of the Sun.

So here the Church of God and the Spouse of Christ, compares Christ to a
faithful and true Shepherd, and intreates him to tell her where he does
cause his Flock, that is, his faithful people, to find shelter and comfort
in the heat of persecution, when the Sun is hottest at Noone day; that is,
in the greatest and hottest persecution of the Church of God, in the most
dangerous and troublesome trials and times of great extreamitie, which is here
meant by Noone day; when the Sun is most hot and scorching, according to
that of our Savior, speaking of one sort of evil hearers: And when the Sun
was up, Mat. 13.6. and v. 21.
they were parched, and for lack of rooting, withered away.

From whence we observe a twofold instruction. 1. That the Church of God
sometimes is in the very heat of persecution. 2. That Christ the good
Shepherd even then forsakes not his, bur at Noonday, even in the extremity
of the same, prouides a shadow and place of comfort, and refreshing, for those
that are his sheep.


Object. 3 The Church of God sometimes is in the very heat of persecution
First, we are taught here, that it is the will of GOD, that his Church
sometimes should be tried: And it is his will that sometimes his People should
undergo persecutions, according to the rule of the Apostle S. Paul, 2. Tim.
3.12
Whosoever will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution. This is
expressly taught by the Prophet David, Psalm. 34.19
Great are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of
all,

This was the condition of the Israelites in Egypt, who remained there a long
time in cruel bondage under Pharaoh, Exodus 1.12. And in Hesters time, how were
the poor people of God in the heat of persecution! Est. 2.23.
This was the State of the whole Church of the Hebrews, described thus, That
Some were racked and would not be delivered, Hebr. 11.35. etc
that they might receive a better resurrection: And others have been tried by
mockings, and scourgings; yea moreover by blood and imprisonment: They were
stoned, they were hewn asunder, they were burned, slain with the Sword,
wandered up and down in Sheep skins and in Goats skins, being
destitute, afflicted, and tormented, whom the world was not worthy of, etc.
This we might further consider in the examples of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Job,
Joseph, David, Jeremy, and the like, whose lives are a plentiful storehouse
to testify this truth, That the people of God do many times endure manifold
afflictions, and sundry trialls. And this have we had experience of in this
Land, in the days of Queen Marie, when the Sun shone hot, and that the fire
of persecution was great, to the wasting of the bodies of many a dear Child
of God: So that if we hope to live with Christ in the Church Triumphant, we
must first die with him in the Church Militant. For none shall reign with
Christ there, that have not first suffered with him here: Nor none shall have
their tears wiped from them in heaven, that have not first shed them on the
earth. Thus having seen the Doctrine, that it is the State and condition of
Gods church here upon earth, to undergo sometimes many and grievous
afflictions. Now let us see the Reasons, that so the Doctrine may leave the
greater impression in every one of our affections.

In regard of Gods enemies They shall excommunicate you, yea the time shall
come, that whosoever kills you, will think that he does GOD service: And
these things will they do, because they have not known the Father, nor yet
me: So that it is no marvel, though the enemies of gods Church do rage
against the faithful servants of God, being stirred up thereunto by the
instigation of Satan; seeing that they know not God, nor Jesus Christ, John
15.19
but have their eyes blinded by Satan the prince of this world.

Paul says, It is necessary that afflictions should come, that the elect may
be manifest who they be. As it is not possible to know the valor of the
Soldier if he lie always in the Camp, and never come into the Field* So is
it impossible to know the Courage, Patience, Obedience, Zeal, Love, etc. of
his children, till trial come. And therefore God would have Abraham tempted,
to make his faith known. So Jobs patience, David's piety, Paul's courage, etc.
The earth which is not tilled and broken up, will yield nothing but briers and
thorns: And Vines will wax wild if they be not pruned and cut. Even so the
unruly affections of our hearts, as so many noisome weeds, would quickly
overrun the whole man, if the Lord, by sanctified afflictions, should not
manure us. It is good therefore (said Jeremy) or a man to bear the yoke in his
Lam. 3.27.
youth. And in another place the same Prophet says, Ier. 48.11. Moab keeps
his sent, because he was not powered from vessel to vessel, but has been at
rest ever since his youth. There are besides these, diverse other reasons,
wherefore the Lord does thus exercise his dear children in this life, with
crosses and afflictions: as to humble them for sins past, and to prevent
sin in them for the time to come: Because, when we shall perceive, that the
only weapon whereby Satan wounds our Souls, is sin, it will make us
repent of sins that are past, and wary of sins for the time to come: And
also to humble the pride of our hearts; For knowledge puffs up; and in
whatsoever thing we go before our brethren, naturally we wax proud of the
same. Now the Lord by these afflictions, like a skillful Physician, lets out
the superfluous humors of pride and vainglory, when we shall see what we
are by nature.

Well, let us make some use of this Doctrine to our selves. Noone day, the Lord
will have a time of trial. It is the Lords usual dealing, after long time of
peace, to bring some trials, that the Elect and true Christian may be
discerned. Of all things in the world the Lord cannot endure that his glorious
Gospel should be contemned, and despised, as it is at this day amongst us: Oh
then, seeing that we must even look for a trial; Let us prepare and arm our
selves with all needful virtues, with patience, with humility, with courage,
zeal, etc. Alas! any thing will serve the turn now to be a Christian; a small
matter: But if in the time of trial we shrink, Luke 14.25
or else yield unto the enemy, then we shall show that we are but hypocrites
and cowards. Oh then, let us be good Soldiers now in the time of peace,
provide and sharpen our weapons against the time of war: Let us cast it what
it will cost us to be the Sheep of Christ, loss of Lands, livings, gold,
silver, liberty, country, yea life it self; yet to resolve by the help of
God, never to be ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, let persecution come never
so hot upon us.

Secondly, we learn hereby, Spirit, then we can loose in the flesh.

then the Master, it must be ours.

Secondly, we learn from Christ leaves not his Church, in the heat of
persecution, but prouides comfort for them.
that though it may be sometimes Noonday with the Church of God, hot and
bloody persecution, yet Christ has ever a shelter and shadow for his people;
He has a Lair for them, a place of shelter, shadow, and comfort; he is ever
present with his Church and people in the hottest times of persecutions and
afflictions, to comfort them, to refresh them, to ease them of their misery,
to deliver them. This the Lord expresses in the Prophet Esaias 54.7.8. For a
little time have I forsaken thee, but with great compassion will I gather thee:
for a moment in mine anger I hid my face from thee, for a little season, but
with everlasting mercy have I had compassion on thee. Psalm 2.
This does the Prophet David make manifest, that notwithstanding the rage and
malice of Gods enemies, He that dwells in heaven shall laugh them to scorn,
the Lord shall have them in derision. This comfort is excellently set forth by
the Prophet Esaias, when he says in cha. 43.1.2. But now thus says the Lord
that created thee, O Jacob, and he that formed thee, O Israel, fear not: for I
have redeemed thee: I have called thee by thy name, thou art mine: when thou
passest through the waters, I will be with thee, and through the floods, that
they do not ouerflow thee: when thou walk through the very fire, thou shall
not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee: For I am thy Lord God.
Thus provided he for his Church in the days of Hester, Ester 3.
when they could see no means to escape. What a mischief had Herod invented
against the Messiah; so secretly, Matt. 2.13
as that he disclosed the secret of his heart to none, but pretended to the
Wise men, that his intent was to worship Christ? yet the Lord did bring his
device to naught; and Joseph and Mary, with the child Jesus, was delivered.
Acts 12.16
Peter being cast into prison, should even the next day have been executed;
yet through the prayers of the Church, was delivered. This Doctrine is further
cleared by the examples of Joseph, Job, the Church in Egypt, Cen. 41.14 Exo.
12*41 Dan. 6.23. Dan. 3.
Daniel, the three children, Sidrach, Mishach: and Abed^^go, who for a time
endured shame and reproach of the cross: yet afterward the Lord returned unto
them when the time of refreshing came. So that howsoever Gods children may be
under the heat of persecution for a time, it shall be but for a time; he will
not leave them destitute of his help, and comfort for ever, but will, in the
end, deliver them.

The Reasons serving to confirm this Doctrine, are manifest. Father, to show
the care that he takes over his Church, as his children, to provide for them,
and to govern them. For what father will not save his child, if possible he
can, from fire, or water, or some other eminent danger? Romans 8.15 John 10 1.
Matt. 7.11.
Now then, if we that are evil, know how to help our children, how much more
shall our heavenly Father, that knows all things, give good things unto his
children? Again, Christ is called by the name of a Shepherd, as the Church
does confess in this place. Now, will the Shepherd see the sheep go astray,
and not bring them into the right way again? or suffer the wolf to devour
the sheep, and not rescue them? And what shall we think that Christ the true
Shepherd of his Church will be more careless of his Flock, whom he has
purchased unto himself with no less price then with his own heart Blood;
then an earthly man is of his Sheep? Seeing then that Christ Jesus is the King
of his Church, and the shepherd of his Sheep, we need not doubt but that he
will defend his Church, and save his sheep, so that none shall be able to destroy
them, or take them out of his hands.

Secondly, our weakness and natural corruptions are not hidden from the LORD:
He knows whereof we are made, he remembers that we are but dust. And
therefore says the Apostle, God is faithful, which will not suffer us to be
tempted above that we are able, but will even give the issue with the
temptation, that we shall be able to bear it. So then, whether we consider
the Office of Christ as a shepherd to keep his Church; or the mercy of
Christ, that is ever ready to cover the wants of his Servants, making their
afflictions to be but momentarie: in these two respects we may safely gather,
that the Lord will never forsake his children, nor leave them in their
dangers, but provide for them both shelter and comfort, when they shall find
the heat of afflictions to shine most hottest upon them.

The use serves to direct us to Doubtless Abraham is ignorant of us, and
Israel knows us not, Esa. 63.16. What then, shall we trust in our chariots or
in our horses? doubtless a horse is counted but a vain thing to save a man,
Psalm. 37.17. Surely, we cannot honor him more then when we depend on him, and
rest upon his mercy. Thus David behaved himself in all his extremities, flying
unto God as a sure refuge, Psa. 91.2.3
I will say to the Lord, O my hope, and my fortress, He is my God, in him will
I trust, He will deliver me from the snare of the Hunter, and from the
noisome pestilence: His ears are always open to the cries of his children,
he puts their tears into his bottle. So long therefore as we have a voice
to call upon GOD, or a heart to sigh and groan unto him, we have comfort and
assurance to be delivered, and that he will not leave us nor forsake us in
danger.

cares, sorrows, and troubles, yet in midst of them all, the child of God
may say with the Prophet; Why art thou cast down (O my soul) and why art thou
so disquieted within me? O wait on God, for I will yet give him thanks: He is
my present help and my God, Psalm. 42.5. O then let us be constant: let us
comfort our selves in Christ Jesus, let us not for fear or danger deny CHRIST
and his Gospel; for CHRIST will be a shelter unto us, to refresh us, and
deliver us.

This shows the most woeful heads, for they shall find no shelter, nor
comfort, nor no place of refuge: For Christ is a shelter only to them that
believe in him, and obey him. And therefore thou which art a wicked man, an
impenitent sinner, a profane person: Alas, what will thou do? and which way
will thou turn thee in the time of trouble and calamity, when the Sun
waxes hot in the heat of persecution and scorching trial? Whither then will thou run for shelter? Alas, thou shall then be as a mad beast, which in the
heat of the day runs up and down, and finds no covert. So shall all
wicked and impenitent sinners have no place of succor, but lie open to all
GODS judgments; be scorched, Ezec. 9.4
yea even consumed with the fire of Gods displeasure; when the righteous, those
which are in Christ Jesus shall find shelter.

Now follows the Reason which she uses to move the Lord Jesus Christ to
grant her request, The churches reason of her request.
taken from the great peril and danger she was like to fall into; Namely,
lest being left without his direction and comfort, she be constrained to Turn
aside to the Flocks of the companions: that is to say, to leave the true
church, and worship of God, and join with the false church, to commit
idolatry, called here, the Flocks of the companions: Not for that they are
either Christ his companions, or the companions of his church and people; but
because they account themselves so; yea, they think, and call themselves
CHRIST'S companions. And if this thing should come to pass through want of
Christ's assistance to direct her, and to comfort her in persecution; then it
shall not be for his honor, not her good. This is the sum and substance of
her Reason.

It is altogether impossible for men to hold out in time of trial, that are
not assisted by God.
ever to stand out in the brunt of persecution, unless they be taught of God,
and comforted by his Spirit. And hence it is that the Prophet David, a man
after Gods own Heart, and endued with a singular portion of GODS Spirit, does
earnestly beg and crave at Gods hand the enlightening of Gods Spirit, and
desires to be taught of him; Open mine eyes that I may see the wondrous things
of thy Law. Psalm. 119.8


And again, 27.34.73.
Teach me thy Statutes. And again, Make me to understand the way of thy
Precepts, etc. Yea, CHRIST tells the Jews which murmured against him, because
he said, that no man could come to him unless his Father drew him, that all
the Elect are taught of God, Ioh. 6.45. And this made Paul to pray for the
Ephesians, chapter 1.17. that God would give them the Spirit of Wisdom, and to
enlighten their minds, that they might know what is the hope of their calling,
and what the riches are of his glorious inheritance. A notable direction unto
all sorts of men, how to behave themselves when they shall come into the house
of God; namely, not to rest on any natural gift whatsoever it be, wisdom,
learning, wit, memory, etc. For the wisdom of the flesh is enmity with God;
Romans 8. 1. Cor. 1.21
But to go out of our selves, and to seek the Lord in humility, and denial of
them selves; and then the Lord will give us a discerning spirit, that we shall
not be deceived. If any man (says Christ) will do my Fathers will, he shall
know of the Doctrine, whether it be of GOD, John 7.17. And again, Christ
promises his Disciples, being now to leave them, and to go to his Father, that
the Spirit of Truth should lead them into all truth.



Christ direct us by his Spirit; for so says Solomon, Prou. 14.12. The ways
that seem right unto us, the issues thereof are the ways of death. It is a
part of our misery, that we are turned every one unto his own way. Esaias 53.6


Secondly, when we know it, Christ his sake, that unless the Lord do assist
us, we shall not be able to undergo the least temptation that shall be laid upon
us.

And lastly, the enemies of Sheeps clothing, to deceive us, that of our selves
we shall easily be drawn away to believe lies. In all these respects, we may
safely conclude the former Doctrine, that it is impossible for us to hold out
in the day of trial, unless we be assisted by the LORDS holy spirit.

to the flocks of the companions, to the church of Rome, to flat Idolatry.
For alas, they know not the truth; They are not taught of GOD; They be blind
and ignorant, and will easily believe and embrace any Religion.

us the Spirit of Discerning, 1. John 4.1
To try the Spirits, whether they be of God, that so we may discern the truth
from falshoode. Yea, we must so labor to be fast grounded in the Truth,
Matt. 7.26
that no wind, nor weather may remove us, That we be sure to lay a good
foundation, that we do dig deep into our own hearts, build on the Rock,
To hate Popery and all Idolatry, to loathe it as the Doctrine of Devils.
Though they say they be the true Church, and the companion of Christ, yet be
they the Synagogue of Satan: The maine points of their Religion being clean
contrary unto the word of God: as are their Doctrine of Merits, Invocation of
Saints, worshipping of Images, praying for the dead, Sacrifice of the Mass;
that so we may, for ever, stand out against that cursed and damnable doctrine
of the Church of Rome, Yea, let us entreat the Lord that he would never
suffer it to get head again in this Land: notwithstanding we have deserved as
great a judgment; but especially that he keep us that we never join with
them in that bloody Religion.

Church of Christ fear themselves, and their weakness, that they should be
drawn away, and seduced to embrace false religion: And therefore they doubting
the worst, and fearing the corruption that is in their own hearts, pray unto
Christ, that they may not be left unto themselves, but that they may find
strength from him to withstand them.

The end of the first Sermon.
A Fold for Christ's SHEEP. THE SECOND SERMON.
CANT. 1.7. 7 If thou know not, O thou fairest amongst women, get thee forth by
the steps of the Flock, and feed thy Kiddes by the Tents of the Shepherds.


WE have heard before of the earnest request of the Church unto Christ, That
he would in mercy show her where he feeds his Flock, and where he provides
comfort for them in time of trouble. Here is the most kind, loving, and
gracious answer of Christ Jesus unto the Request of his Church: Parts of the
Text.
in the which note three things.

1 His exceeding love and kindness, in that he calls her, the fairest among
women.

2 His gentle reproof of her, If thou know not, q.d. This is very strange,
that thou which art the true Church, should not know where Christ feeds his
sheep.

3 His direct Answer to her request; wherein he does answer her to the full:
If thou would know where I feed my sheep, that so thou may feed with
them, and find consolation unto thy Soul; then thou must go in the steps of
the Flock: That is, thou must embrace the Faith, Religion, the worship and
service of God, the which my ancient church from the beginning have embraced:
The Faith, Religion, the Worship and Service of GOD, which my ancient Servants,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob have done, and tread in their steps. Secondly, thou
must place thy Tent, where the shepherds have done, the Patriarchs, Prophets,
and Apostles of CHRIST, their doctrine taught before. This is the sum and
substance of Christ's answer unto his Church.

First, observe here, how Christ describes his true Church and Spouse: He
gives her a most kind and loving name, expressing his kind and singular love
unto her: O thou the fairest among women!

Quest.

Ans. The Church, Resp.
and every true Believer, are black and deformed in themselves, vile and
unclean, and they can see no beauty in themselves, but are blemished yea and
stained with sins original and actual: But as they be sanctified by his
Spirit, washed in his Blood, and clothed in his Righteousness, they be fair
and beautiful in the sight of Almighty God, because Christ has washed them
from all their sins in his Blood, and couerd them with the pure roabes of his
own Righteousness; decked and adorned them with the holy and heavenly graces of
his Spirit, knowledge, faith, repentance, zeal, patience, etc. According to
that speech that the Lord himself uses, Ezech. 16.
thou art fair through that beauty of mine, which I have put into thee.

Christ esteems of his church as if they had no sin
that esteems so highly of them, as if they had no spot of sin or
uncleanness: though they in themselves be black, deformed, and polluted;
yet all those who do truly repent, embrace Jesus Christ, and believe in him,
that are washed from their sins, sanctified by his Spirit, and obey his will;
all these are fair, yea most beutifull in his eyes. He will not look upon
their sins and blemishes, but wincke at them, so long as they endeavor and
desire to do his will. This is confessed by wicked Balaam, when he saw that no
policy or device could take any place against the Church of God: He sees no
iniquity in Jacob, he beholds no transgression in Israel, Nu. 23.21 Again,
how goodly are thy tents, O Jacob, and thy tabernacles O Israel, as the valleys
that are stretched out, etc. Number. 24.5. So that the nature and condition of the
true Church far exceeds all other societies of men whatsoever, and is
precious and dear unto Christ. Hereunto comes the titles and commendations
given unto the Church so often in this most excellent book of the Canticles;
Cant. 2.2.
She is as the Roe of the field, the Lilly of the Valley, the Fairest amongst
Women, an Orchard of Pomegranats, a Fountain of Gardens, and 4 13. and 5.9.
a well of springing waters, the Spouse and Sister of Christ, the Beauty of the
Earth, the Glory of the world, a Lilly among Thorns, etc. And again, Thou
art all fair my Love, and there is no spotte in thee. These, and the like
examples, whereof the Scripture is full, all serve to confirm the everlasting
truth of this Doctrine unto us: how dear and precious the Church is in
Christ's sight, that of al Societies and Assemblies of men in the world, none
are more excellent and worthy, none more amiable and lovely, none more
beutifull and precious then the Church of God, the Spouse of Christ.

is there any thing that does hinder his return, but only sin; for it is sin
that makes us execrable to the Lord, and does hinder all good things from us.
Psalm 38.4
For, as long as sin remaynes, it is as a weighty burden, to press down a
sinner into hell; and the wages and stipend of it is eternal death. Therefore,
Romans. 6
if sin be taken away and pardoned, as it is from all the Elect, what should
hinder their happiness? God has against them no matter of displeasure; and
the obedience of Christ Jesus being imputed unto them, heaven can not be
denied unto them, but they must needs be saved.

Secondly, Christ Jesus does alone salvation is to be found, and no where else.
When the Lord brought the great and general deluge over the face of the whole
earth, What place was there left more excellent then the Arc, in the which,
Noah and his Family were saved, and out of the which the whole world besides
perished? What was that Arc but a Type and Figure of Christ's Church, wherein
salvation is to be found, and out of the which there is no salvation to be
looked for? Seeing therefore that remission of sins is proper only to
Christ's Church, and that therein is salvation and eternal life to be found,
we may safely therefore conclude, that the estate of Christ's Church, and of
every member thereof, is most excellent and blessed.

The uses of this Doctrine is Note.
Do thou repent of thy sins, and art truly humbled for them? Do thou
embrace CHRIST JESUS for the pardon of them? Has God sanctified thy heart by
his Spirit, so as thou hate every wicked way, and do desire and endeavor
to obey God his will in all his Commandments? Well then, comfort thy self,
and cheer up thine own soul; Christ Jesus will cover all thy sins, they
shall never be laid to thy charge: but he will wrap thee in his own
righteousness, whereby thou shall appear fair and beautiful in his sight.
Indeed many a poor child of God, looking on their own infirmities, and
manifold corruptions, see themselves to be black indeed, deformed and stained
with sin; it grieueth them that they do hang down their heads, and go
drooping all their days, striving and also struggling with their rebellious
hearts and vile corruptions, and think that CHRIST JESUS cares not for them,
cannot love them, being so defiled with sin. But I say again, Be not
discouraged; for if thou do repent of them, believe in Christ, hate thy
sins, and prayest often unto God to give thee power to withstand them, using
all godly means to withstand them, Christ Jesus will cover them, and pass by
them all, as he did deal with David, Peter, etc. Oh then how carefully ought
all men daily endeavor themselves to be the members of this Society, that so
they may have a part in all these excellent prerogatives? and then howsoever
the world do esteem of them, counting them miserable, grinding at them with
their teeth, and nodding at them with their heads, and every way
contumeliously reproching them; yet are they dear and precious in the sight of
Christ, who has redeemed them with the ransom of his own blood.

Let us learn by Christ's example good thing in the child of Almighty God, to
commend it, and to embrace it: and if we see any blemish or infirmity, that we
wincke at it, and cover the same with the cloak of Love; and not as the manner
of wicked and ungodly men; who though they see many good gifts and graces in
GODS children, as knowledge, faith, patience, love, zeal, etc. pass by them
all; and if they shall epsy but one blemish, or infirmity, or weakness, by
and by they blaze it abroad with open mouth, note them with a black cole,
calling them Puritanes, Precisians, Hypocrites, and the like; reuiling them in
a most odious manner; like a Coorrector of a Book, pass by all that is well,
and if but one fault, find that out; like the horse-Flie, passing by many
flowers, and sweet herbs, lights upon some noisome sore: these are not like
unto CHRIST, but to their sire the Devil, who is the Accuser of the Brethren.
Thus much for the exceeding love and kindness of Christ Jesus toward his
church, in that he calls her by this kind appellation, The fairest amongst women.

Secondly, his gentle reproof of her, If thou know not: q. d. This seems
strange, 2 Christ's gentle reproof.
that thou should be ignorant where I do feed my sheep, where my truth and
gospel is truly preached, and soundly professed: But if thou know not, The
church of God sometimes may be at that straight as not to discern the truth.
I will direct

Hence we are taught, that the church of God, and true believers, may sometimes
be so blinded, and left to themselves, that they stand at a stagger, and do
hardly know which is true religion, Where Christ does feed his Flock, where
the word is faithfully preached, and soundly professed. For we are all of us
ready to err by nature. How apt are we in matters that do concern our
Souls, to be mistaken? partly, through our own blindness, ignorance, and
carelessness, in not searching of the Truth, and trying of the spirits: and
partly, by the subtle policy of the devil, who is Gods Ape, and so like him
in many things. as that it is hard to discern his slights and falsehoods.
Wicked men, false teachers, lying prophets, set such a face and show on their
errors, and bear them out with such a countenance, credit, and authority:
and the truth is so neglected, plain, and simple, trodden under foot; that it
is hard for a man, yea the true Church of God sometimes, to discern where
Christ feeds his Flock. 1. Reg. 18.12.
When as Elias was left alone, and Baals four hundred and fifty prophets, who
could almost then discern the worship of GOD from Idolatry, when all was
corrupted? So when Michaiah told the truth, and Ahab had four hundred false
Prophets, it was hatd to discern the truth of God from the lying of Satan. In
Christ's time, how did the Scribes and Pharisees confound Religion, dim and
dazell the truth; for the which, our Savior himself did often reprove them?
And in our times, how do the Papists labor to obscure Religion? how bold and
impudent are they, to defend Idolatry, their own traditions and constitutions.

strive against our carelessness; Let us prove the Doctrine by the touchstone
of the Word, if they be according to the law and the Prophets, else abhor
them. Acts 17.
Let us do as the men of Berea did, entreat the Lord to give us the Spirit of
Discerning, that we may try all things, and hold the truth. And if ever we
had need to pray for the Spirit of Discerning, now is the time: we see how
bold the Devil is, how diligent to deceive us; and the Papists they be
impudent and shameless, even to thrust upon us their cursed Idolatry, and
tell us it is the true worship of God; their abominable Mass, their Merits,
Purgatory, prayer for the dead, worshipping of Images, calling upon Saints,
unwritten Verities, their vile Traditions, and filthy abominations, their
Constitutions and vile Decrees; as if they were the written word of God. Now
unless we have knowledge, and be able by Gods Spirit to discern the spirits;
alas! we shall drink in poison, idolatry, and superstition. O then, let us
labor to know the Word of God, believe it, obey it, be reformed by it,
confess our ignorance, and with all humility pray unto God to open our eyes
to give us the spirit of discerning, to know true Religion from false; which if
we do, certainly the Lord will reveal his Truth unto us. And thus much shall
serve for Christ's gentle reproof of his Church.

3 Christ's answer unto his church
The third and last point, is the direct answer of Christ to the request of the
Church; she desired to know of Christ where he fed his flock, and comforted
them in the time of persecution, that so she might join with them; and be
defended by him from false worship, and the idolatrous Church. Here Christ
does answer her to the full: If thou know not, Oh thou fairest among women!
get thee forth by the steps of the Sheep, and feed thy Kids by the Tents of
the Shepherds. His counsel stands in two parts, to show her where he
feeds. q. d. Would thou know where I feed my Sheep, and where I cause
them to lie down at Noone, that thou might feed with them, and be in my
Fold, to be defended and protected by me? then I counsel thee: First, to
walk in the steps of the Sheep: that is, thou must walk in the steps of
the faithful servants of God, Abrabam, Isaac, and Jacob; thou must embrace
that faith, religion, and worship of GOD, which they believed and embraced;
that is meant by the steps of the sheep. Secondly, thou must feed thy Kids;
that is, thou must receive and embrace that Doctrine which the ancient
Shepherds, Pastors, Prophets, and Apostles have taught and delivered. And if
thou shall thus tread in the steps of the sheep, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob;
and embrace and obey the doctrines taught by the Prophets and Apostles, in the
old and new Testament, thou shall then know where I feed my sheep, that thou
may feed with them, and take me for thy true Shepherd.

A direction to know which is the true Church.
to know true Religion, and the true worship of God, from false religion, and
false worship. If men do desire to know where Christ feeds his sheep, and
where GOD is truly worshipped, where is true religion, we must then tread in
the steps of the Sheep. That is, we must worship God, as Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob did, as Moses and the Prophets did; tread in their steps, and follow
their godly examples; believe, repent, and walk with GOD, as they did, whom
(by the judgment of Faith) we may conclude of, that they were the Sheep of
Christ; for of them does Christ speak here, and not of a company of Popes,
Cardinals, Jesuits, and the like, of that rabble; of whom to think that they
should belong to this Fold, I know not whence I should fetch my charity.
Again, we must embrace and believe the doctrine taught by Moses, and the
Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, who were the true Shepherds and faithful
Pastors of the Church of GOD: To the Law, Esaias 8.20.
and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this Word, it is because
there is no light in them. Iere. 6.16.
And again, Thus says the Lord, stand in the ways, and behold, and ask for
the old way, which is the good way, and walk therein, and you shall find
peace and rest for your souls. So then, if we desire to know true Religion,
and the true worship and service of God, this is the way, which I here teach
and deliver from the Lord JESUS CHRIST, against the doctrine of all the
Shauelings of Rome; namely this, and none but this; To inquire of the faith,
Religion, and manner of the worshipping of God, performed by Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, Patriarchs and Prophets, Preached and published by Christ and his
Apostles; believe that, embrace that, and rest our souls on that.

This may serve to decide a great question, and long controversy, between us
and the Papists. They affirm that they are the true Church, and we are
Heretics; we believe and hold that we are the true church of God, and that
they be not, but Babylon, and the Synagogue of Satan. This then is the maine
Question, whether they, or we, be the true Church? Who shall judge? even
Christ Jesus himself in his own word: we rest upon him and fly unto him:
which if the Papists would do likewise, they would never have run into a
labyrinth of controversies as they have even at this day: For Christ would
quickly have put an end unto all. For he says, that they be the true Church,
which Tread in the steps of the Sheep, and feed by the Tents of the
Shepherds: That is, that people that believe and worship God, as Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob did; and also that old Religion which they believed and
embraced as the true Religion, for that was taught by the holy servants of God,
who were the faithful Shepherds, and Pastors sent of God to his Church. Now
let trial be made, whether the Papists or Protestants, the Church of Rome, or
the Church of England do thus.

For the Papists, although they call their Religion, the old Religion; yet
alas, it is newly devised, the gteatest parts of it, within these four or five
hundred years: It is such as was never known to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses,
or the Prophets; it was never known to Christ or his Apostles; they have lost
the Steps of the Sheep, and the Tents of the Shepherds: that Doctrine, manner
of Religion, the worship and service of God, which was used by the Patriarchs,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, taught by Moses, and the Prophets, Christ and his
Apostles; and they have got a new Religion of their own devising: They walk
not in the steps of the Flock, but in the steps of their proud Popes, covetous
Cardinals; filthy Friars, mangy Munkes: They have devised a thousand things in
the service and worship of God against his Word, and against the Doctrine of
the Prophets and Apostles. Where shall we ever find that Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, and the Prophets did ever pray to Angels, or Saints, worshipped Images,
prayed for the dead, looked to be saved by their own works, or merits? If
they can show me, any foul-mouthed Jesuit of them all, but any one example,
in the whole book of God, of any of all Gods children that have performed
them, I will then lay my hand upon my mouth. In the mean time give me leave, O
ye Papists, to tell you, that you are none of Christ's Church, you are none of
Christ's Sheep; for you have left the Steps of the sheep, and the Tents of
the shepherds, the Doctrine taught by the Prophets of God, Christ, and his
Apostls; and are no better then the whore of Babylon, the Synagogue of Satan.

But as for the Church of England, we do believe and embrace that old and
true Religion, that same Faith which Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob did use: we
hold that Doctrine taught by the ancient Prophets, and holy Apostles of
CHRIST JESUS, without either adding or detracting: And if we should dare to
devise a new kind of Faith, Religion, and worship of God, not used nor known
to the ancient Prophets, Patriarchs, and Apostles, as the Church of Rome does;
it were to leave the Steps of the Sheep, and to join with the Flocks of the
Companions, even to shake hands with Idolaters.

Reu. 18.4.
and as Christ says, Come out of her, join not with her in her false
Religion, and Idolatrous service of God, lest you partake of her plagues, but
let us hold fast still the true Religion of God: Tread in the steps of the
Sheep; Feed by the Tents of the Shepherds. Let us live and die in the true
Church of God, and for ever hold fast the true, ancient, and holy religion,
which we have received from the holy Patriarks Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses,
the Prophets, and the holy Apostles of Jesus Christ, and then we shall be safe
and sure; yea blessed and happy for evermore.

FINIS.

