A DISCOURSE OF THE PRESENT TROOBLES IN FRANCE, AND MISERIES OF THIS TIME,
COMPYLED BY PETER RONSARD GENTILMAN OF VANDOME, AND DEDICATED UNTO THE QVENE
MOTHER, TRANSLATED IN TO ENGLISH BY THOMAS IENEY GENTILMAN.

PRINTED AT ANDWERPE. M.D.LXVIII.

A PASSION.
When grymm despair, withdraw graspe of grieslye vvooes,
In plounged minds, do work the muses vvracke:
Then boylinge heads turmoyles, the hammars gooes,
And hevvmors dryues, as does the summers rack.
No kindlye course, his propper plyght reteanes.
Sommond vvythe cayres, so fayred it by me,
By soddayne dryft, as flormes by mystye raynes,
Do chooke the air, and bryghtnes of the skey.
In such a plyght, did all my senses stand,
The storm begann, withdraw in my restles brain,
And from my eyes, the streams were straight at hand,
That on my cheeks, sharp shovvres down did rain.
Each hevvmor did (as surges soyles them selves,
On muddye shoores) vvythe rughe reflex contend.
Each vein puffed up, as though with flotynge eveles:
Did ransicke often, what way to wrest or vvend.
My body chylld, as all amasd withdraw vvoo:
My trymblynge flesh, hott agevves did conspire:
My clustred lymes, on frossen heaps did grovve:
And straight resolud, as though attacht withdraw fire,
Where in my corse, a stubburne war begann.
My sobbes supt up, vvythe snatchyng breathe redovvnd,
And smookye sieghes from clovvdy breast forth came,
That estsouns forced, a shatterynge hollovve sound.
But what it was, that bredd me all this caire,
My silence shall, record his cureles dumpe
In careless mind, that yelds not to despair:
Nor brag of fickle fortunes vvorldly brunt.
In mase of vvo, and in this caise was i:
Tvvene hope to riese, and fear, to faid, or fall,
When first my friend, presented unto me
This mourning uerse, of plaintfull FRANCE his thrall:
And badd me wrest, my vvearye muse to sing,
Of clatterynge arms, and fyerye MAVORS moude:
Of hateful war, en forced by ENVYES stynge:
To baythe his hands, vvithein his country blood.
Not half ypast, the threats of vvynter sadd,
When SATVRNE had, styrd up the GAVLES to arms.
My mormynge muse, in sorrovve all ycladd,
Began then to vvryet, of these divided harms.
My shaykynge hand, my plaintfull pen begann,
To vvayle the FRENCH, and present stayte of man.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, MY VERY GOOD LORD AND MASTER SIR HENRY NORREIS
KNIGHT. L. AMBASSADOVR RESIDENT IN FRANCE.
The bale begone, is when deformed wars,
Whith civil stroke, embrewes his native swoorde.
For were it not, that rage of rancours root,
By growinge evils, had watched so black a time,
I weane envy, by such owtraginge spleen
Had not brought forth, this foul misshapen change
In maimed state, that RONSARD wayles in ryme,
And I reduce, whith not resemblinge pen,
To English grace (though in unskillful verse)
By friends enforst to publish now abroad:
Which I present (SIR) to yowr shrowdinge hand,
No Trophee, nor mass of mighty mine,
Nor golden sum, but as a miete of fame,
Where power fails t'vnlade affections force.
Your bounden servant THOMAS IENEY.

AD THOMAM IENEIVM EPIGRAMMA.
Gallica si laudem Ronsardi Musa meretur,
Dum deflet patriis patria fata sonis:
Et tua, digna suis Ieneie est laudibus, eius
Anglorum in numeros dum breue cogis opus:
Nam tibi materia est eadem, decurris eodem
Tramite, Pieriae doctus vterque lyrae.
Ille canit patriae moestus fera damna ruentis,
Tingit and Aoniis Gallica verba fauis:
Tuque sequens vates Musae vestigia Gallae,
Sollicitas doctis plectra Britanna modis.
Gratia quaeque illum comitatur blanda canentem,
Emicat, in versu nec minor illa tuo est.
Sic vatem vates vertens, quas ille meretur,
Efficis vt lauds sint quoque iure tuae.
D. ROGERIVS.

FAVVTES ESCAPED IN PRINTINGE.
The leaf B. iij. second side, last verse for echo es read eckoes. The leaf
follovvinge, first side, the 24. line, for, ou black Moorey, read thou black
Moors. At the end in the sonnet, in the end of the sixth verse, for fame,
read, tame.

A DISCOVRSE OF THESE PRESENT TROBLES, AND miseries of this tme.
SENSE that by divine might of God,
The world was first y framd,
Who lent us life, as nature hight,
Unspotted and vnsteande,
If then from age to age, increase
Of vice, had entered in
To humain hearts, and rowted nowght
But rage of cancred sin,
Then long to fore, should extreme wrath
Of malice and of might,
Surmonted al, and we have led
Our lives in sineful plight:
But sense we see, each sort of men
In Sondrie place and I Will,
Some walk as in a virtuous way,
And some do live but vile,
We owght, and must confess by force,
That this difformed vice,
Owght not to bost of victory,
But as by foul surprise
Pursewes that trade, that she enioyes
That day when man is cladd,
With virtues and vith vices robes
In habit good or bad.
Ne yet vertew it self, do owght
Augment her gladsome bands,
If she had but encreast eftsonnes,
Her fame with heauid up hands,
Had strecht unto the tipp of gloor,
And each thing shoold accourre,
By perfect means to golden hap,
Which present we abhor.
But as it semes to Royal states,
And to there pompeus train,
And manners eke, through tract of years,
We see it thus remain.
For sometime virtue bears a sale,
And sometime vice aboundes,
The One erectes him self, with force,
The other sinckes and drowndes:
Rebayted thus, rechast with might,
The painful mind applies,
Lest that, with in this sineful woorld,
Increase of vice arrise.
It pleased thus, the puissant god,
To enterchaunge our might,
And suffer man, within the lap,
Of good and bad to light.
As does the painful pilot often
Conduct his crased boat,
In bitter storm, and quiet calm,
Twene hap and happles loate.
(Thou Queen) that from thie sappie wits,
Does shake of ignorance,
And redes and hears attentively
Our Martial feats of France,
Thou know, and can fulwel decerne
Beholdinge our debate,
The difference of each time forpast,
And of our present state.
To write of kings, there manners eke
In blood sometime embrewde,
And some unspotted and vnsteande,
That lyud with fame pursewde.
My hand does shake, my feeble pen
Is not in perfect plight,
My Muses all do mase to see
The fruits of dire despite.
Ambition does with thirsty throat,
And wide deuouringe pawe,
Stir up a thousand strifes and moo
Withowt respect of law:
Some one are lame of wit an skill,
And some with reason flows,
And some of feeble heart again
There nedeful cause foreslowes.
As princes do profess and are
So subjects do incline,
For princes are a pattern pressed
Unto there peoples eyes.
It then behoues in tender age,
For to enstruct each king,
How with advice he may conduct,
And govern every thing:
Even from his cradels first he owght,
To have before his eyes,
The fear of God, his erlie scourge,
That through misorders rise.
And eke he owght so well provide,
And so ordain and way,
The true and perfect law, that none
Do err or run astraye,
By scisme or by pernicious sect,
By false or forgd devise,
That intricates nowght else but dowbtes,
By wicked man's surmise.
MADAME alas I wayle to see
The clowdy bitter storm,
That threatens France, such wrackes of woos,
By wynters wrath y torn.
The flaggy snowes, the dampishe mystes,
The furye of the skies,
The bowstiours winds do woorcke the seas
And fominge surges rise.
And now the stars, the guidinge twynnes,
Disdaynes there gladsome light,
Stand stifflye (MADAME) to the stern,
To guide the barcke out right.
In mawger of the heydeous wyndes,
And rough malicious storm,
Conduct to harbor man and mate
In shipwreck thus y torn.
Whole France with folded hands requires,
An thryse requires thy mean,
Our sillye state (a pray to such
As scorn our noble reign)
That thou will have that happy mean,
That may those evels redress,
And by thy right and might appease,
These mischeffes more and less.
The Royal pride of haughty seat,
The pomp of princely law,
That quiet held the mace of might,
And regal swoorde of awe,
In bosom of the heavenly light,
What may their sowles now say?
Yea what may they that shrouded are
In cowche and tomb of clay?
What may the Royal PHARAMOVND
And CLODIVS insigne?
What may proud CHARLES, king PIPIN eke,
And LEWIS of that time?
What may CLOWIS in Armer clad
And Martial MARTEL say?
That yerst whythe prudent pollecye,
Did reign and rule always.
That whithe there valiant Arms still sought
For to enlarge our state,
Ye first found means by conqueste great,
To gain this fertel seat.
Where in their stateley goulden reigns
Of warlike Gauls we read,
And how with Armed men were seen
The barren feildes over spread.
Not thus by Civell sawage wars
Our state to over turn,
But sought by rigor of the swourde,
Our lustye fame to form.
Imagen that you hear the skrikes,
That echo es to the skies
And so redoundes from heigh again
To yearthe with dowleful cries:
What may our foremer fathers say?
And lusty men at arms:
That in these conquestes perrilous,
Receyvd their mortal harms?
And died: to effraunchise France,
With long and yerkesome toils,
To see our selfs with Civell swourd,
Distroye our native Soyles.
They may repyne and yeke repent
Their lothesome blouddie broiles:
Their quarrels and their conquests thus
Subdewed with warlike toylis
For souche a people thus distroaght,
For souche divided strife,
That loosethe while they might inioye
A shore of happy leife,
A fructeful soil a fertel land,
That thou of BRUTUS source
Where fominge seas on lofty sides
Does beat with rage of force,
And drinckes upon Thamasis springes.
And also ou black Moorey,
That in the western waves do live,
And build on Libicks shores,
Fearinge the flames of Phaeton
Declininge on thy head:
And thou proud Prince of poumpus train,
That confines one our side,
And thou proud Goat to Armor pressed
That prowes strives to win,
Who feels the Northen could some time,
One roughe and riueled skin:
By Martial feats of glittering Arms
Ne yet by blouddye fight,
Could never daunt or tame by hand
The GAVLES of warlike might.
The Axe of hardnid stele y wrought,
And quyck of cvt y framd
Makes often the labor easier,
Unto the work man's hand.
And warlike France, if sharp of wit,
And prudent pollecie,
Ought now to quicken with there force
The dymnese of the eye:
And by their labor so reduce
Their wealth to gladsome stats
And to the hatchet heow we see
The taulest oaks abats.
Whose weal no raginge arms could daunt
Nor threat of foreign foo,
Them selfs whith bloudye CYVEL knyfe,
Now seeks to overthrow.
So was strong AJAX brought unto
His baleful blowdie end,
Whilst through his corse, his brutishe hand,
The savage knyfe did send:
And ROME that wondered long each state,
(A Monarke built of pride,)
Who from Appollos rvddy bed,
Unto the western side,
His EMPIRE whithe his largest skirtts,
And bounds ystretched far,
Reuoltinge once, by CYVEL sword,
Decayed by country war.
If these be hateful presidents,
By plainteful hasserds thral,
And we not warnd how to beware,
To read of others fall?
Ought not we to be wayle our wrongs,
That in a cloud of woe,
Our eyes whithe blyndnes so forecaste,
We can discern no fo?
That present now to plonge of wrack,
Does threaten yeke decay,
And we headlonge in myserye,
Can not eschew the way.
The foreign Prince whithe warlike swourd,
Whose wars are plain to us,
Do pity our absourdities,
And state tormented thus,
That blount of wit we feel not now,
How our Dysastre tournes,
And that we see, and will not see,
How wayward fortune spornes.
Of Long record of antique fame,
Many have here tofore,
By thretninge and by fearful signs,
Presaged less and more.
Namelye with in soche years and days,
That headdy frantic GAWLES,
Whithe CYVEL shocke and native swourd,
Should shake both town and walls:
And that of filthy mourders often,
Our trowbeled estate,
Should render us of al estates,
The most unfortunate.
While like to blowndred crows in mystes,
We headlonge run to Arms,
Not knowinge how to shunn or shifte,
The sequel of our harms.
An to declare our selfs more wise,
We never gave no trust,
To true precepts nor ruled, our lives,
But ever to our lust.
But obstinate and blind as were
The HEBRVES of foretyme,
That trusted not the Sacred words,
Of those which did divine.
The godds that having some respect,
Unto the stray ned sort,
Sent in our time soche wonders often,
That might our lyfes exhort:
VVhithe waterie eyes for to repent,
And wayle our wicked syn,
And to repair the breach wile we,
A better life be gin.
The Skies whithe showers did wayle our wrake,
Be fore our tourmoyles were,
The Commetts from the Esterne Side,
VVhithe threats did foul appear,
And SEINE whithe over flowinge waves,
Of far unwonted force,
Did denotate, and we might deem,
To PARIS some devorse.
The waters in their swelling wrath,
As though whithe fominge fume,
They would by mighty ouerflow,
The synful world consume:
That heaven and earth did as it wear,
Threaten our Royal Realm,
A day of bitter sharp revenge,
And Ruin of the same.
O thou that writest of warlike works,
VVhithe not dissemblinge pen,
Depaint at length our monstrous age,
To fear and warn all men:
Recompte unto our tender youth,
Our fatalle myserye,
That readinge they may yeke bewail,
Our state whithe watery eye,
That they may live and yeke beware,
Of their forefathers synn,
Lest they by headlonge error do,
Right to soche evels fall in.
VVythe what unshamefast face may thou,
O Vile tormented life,
Be hold the story of our time,
In this myshapen strife:
In Readinge that our Septer has,
And Kingly famus raze,
From first so many years to forne,
Endured whithe glad increase:
And now runues rashlye to rvine,
By rage of martial might,
Even as the strongest rock is forced,
From heighe to low to light.
The story wytethe how JOVE some time,
In rage whithe hewmaine raze,
That would by curious means invent,
His godhead to displace:
And sought to know his divine might,
VVhithe in his Sacred I Will,
Which no man might to enterprise,
That are profane and Vile,
One day by prick of youth the god,
From heigh seat would remove,
To find out dame Presumption,
To entertayne in love.
Where at the foot of heigh OLIMPE,
Sound sleepinge where she lay,
Refte from her tender lips a kiss,
And eftesones stale a way.
Where whithe the prophaine god conceaud,
Souche rancour in his mind,
That all his means was for revenge,
Upon the heumaine kind,
Where at the heavens was wroth to see,
The vile lasciuous god,
And so agreed that he should feel,
The scourge and smartinge rod,
Refte than of Sacred godhead quite,
By strange transformed mean,
From ryueled aged hyde became,
To tender skyn again,
From fleetinge youth to manlye state,
As he stepped forwards still,
Whythe out restraynt he wrought a mean,
That might succeed his will,
What fancye framed in frantic brain,
What youth unseemly meant,
What thing profane and vile might be,
That he not easelye hent,
Poufte up whithe peacokes pride as did,
His beastlye reign begin,
So did his mounstrous shape declare,
The form of ouglye syn,
From forth his fyrie eyes broust out,
A strange deformed flame,
And naught but fraud and fycle baytes,
Did harber in his brain,
In poisoned heart was nourisht nowghtt,
But lothesome love devised,
Under his habit raggd and rent,
AMBICION sat disguised,
Whithe twyned look yet delycate,
As is the SERENS face,
And yeke a dulced tongue enfefte,
Whithe proud and painted grace,
His wings were lightelye borne, his feet,
Weere nether flesh nor bone,
A shadow but, that non may here,
When he was fled and gone.
In Sacred scooles the subtell god,
Fond means to lodge and dwell,
Only to blunt and blind there wits,
VVhithe divine arts that mell,
And to that end to plunge in woe,
Their curious wytts that sought,
As arrogant the heavens to clyme,
To know eyche Divine thought.
This foul transformed JOVE that thus,
Becamme profane ad vile,
Has brought this monsterous exchange,
And vprores in this Isle,
Demaundinge now to nedie France,
From SAVOYE some Svpplie,
From SPAIN and from each Christian foo,
That nere confyning lie,
And also of the man of war,
That priest to sound of dromme,
Drinckes of the flowd of DANVBY,
VVhithe channel deep that run,
And of the sylver streams of RHEYNE,
VVhithe lusty sides hempt in,
Who does bestride the barbed horse,
His Martial fame to win.
In this deformed change the son,
The fathers fear white stood,
The brother yeke whithe stained hand,
Ybaiths in brothers blood:
Yea Nature clean degenerates,
In weak and femall kind,
And glowinge spite by pride conceales,
The rancor of the mind,
Extracte from house of Native line,
Bereaues the others life.
The servile man in masters blood,
VVhithe stroke of stained knyfe,
Imbrues his hands, (O bluddie b^le)
O Nature foul confused:
The man contract in bands we see,
In Nvptiall bed refused,
The fruct of foes, by fraud of friends,
He may pervse that lust,
How ferme is fraud, how frail is faith,
How tycklie now is trust,
How as from HYDRAIS head intrudes,
The plumes of pevishe pride,
And how whithe duble faced wrong,
Times truth is sloly tried.
The infant from his cradel crept,
Deuorst from parents awe,
Stands up and stifflye does dispute,
Of right and Sacred law.
And every thing do clean declyne,
Whithe out restraint of might,
Abandond are all CYVEL means,
Of polecye and right.
In this deformed change each craft,
By painful hands sustaynd,
Who rept his fruct by labor sweet,
Is now no more mayntaind.
The herdeman does (dismayed man,)
Refuse his simple charge,
The advocate has now no mean,
To wrest his law at large.
The steerman leaves his floting bark,
To drenche the seas a lone,
The trafique of the spendinge hand,
Is now reject and gone.
By this misshapen Monster eke,
The wise and ware devise,
Is by his malice clean transformed,
To lewd and fylthie vice.
The tender youth in learned scooles,
Traind up to expert years,
Corrups his frail and tender age,
VVhithe fond and foul desiers.
The vilest craft do yeke transform,
His pick axe and his spade,
His pitcheforke to a pike and yeke,
His hatchet to a blade.
And will no more whithe togge of ploughe,
Tear up the slatie soyles,
But in a sword begert pourshewes,
This frantycke Cyvel broils.
Mute is the mouth that would control,
That Error now subornes,
There blind and brutishe appetits,
No Justice now reformes.
To foul and vile lycencious vice,
Now liberty permitts,
Disorder and deformed will,
In open ivdgement sitts.
Now each man proles for pryvate gain,
And gredy lust to wrenges,
The massy gains of goulden sommes,
That soche disorder bringes.
In this black time the stars do war,
The heavens do frown at this,
To see this Chaos upon earth,
Where form and fascion is.
Upon this doleful stage scarce did,
The prologue once begone,
Before our woees vnladed weere,
By conductes of the eyes,
Sense that black time of lateful wars,
And hateful myserie,
We have not svpt up all aure sobbes,
Our eyes be scarcelye dry:
Attacht of new unhappy time,
From worse to worse we fall,
Each resteful place, Each quiet seat,
Of Cyttye, Town and wall,
Has whithe foul breach of promise heighe
In trial of there truth,
Revolted and to bluddye Arms,
These Cyvelle storms pourshewethe.
Forfyerie Mars has this decreed,
In wrath and raginge mood,
To power down these plages on France,
Bestaynd whithe Cyvell bludde:
I wrast whithe wretched cares and woes,
Of stormye winter threats,
We fleet in waves of warlike sourge,
And crased sides that beats.
As does the bark in stubberne blastes,
Of mast and main berefte,
Of marenner of man and mate,
And yeake of pylate leafte.
The painful hand of skillful mate,
Denies to to hold the helm,
In goulfe of playntefull myserye,
Our state do ouerwhelme:
Decayed wit how blunt art thou?
That could not see the time,
When as the fatale Sisters did,
Draw fourth their vital twyne,
And left the soche tryumphant years,
Of long and happy age,
As in thy bosom never might,
Crepe in soche beastely rage,
Of glowinge spite by cruel Arms,
To bathe the synful hands,
In bowels of thye native shore,
That gylteles thee whithe stands.
Unhappy GAWLES unhappy men,
And thrice unhappy race,
That thus distraught sekst to distroye,
Thy fertell native place.
Defamed sword of Regal awe,
Blushe at thy feeble right,
Divided thus, decayed art,
Of Law and public might.
Unhappy seat unhappy state,
That now vnsteadye stands,
From lofty throne in case to fall,
In to Ambicions hands.
Look to your proud estate you GAWLES,
You GAWLES of ancient name,
That never staynd whithe overthrow,
You might conserve your fame,
In quiet form, as yerst to fore,
Your fathers in their time,
Who long mayntaynd a quiet reign,
From all vnshamefaast crime:
From head long broils, from Cyvell wounds,
From such defamed war,
That in this age (unhappy time)
We see apparent are.
Of happy and of quiet Life,
We see the glase run out,
The wrackes appears from clowdye sky,
Now MADAME look a bout:
Make clear a bourde, in stormye seas
The master shows his skill,
Reform these frantic brains that thus,
Do run on headlonge will.
Restrain whithe stedy reigns these men,
That whithe unbridled head,
Haste to the stage of fyerie arms,
Their native blud to sheed.
Respect the hassarde of our state,
Respect our present Reign,
Appease this quarrel and debate,
That mangles thus our fame.
Redress our vile dismembered age,
Of most deformed life,
Seek how to reconcyle these wars,
Of vile and hateful strife.
Seek to avoyde this foul Eclips,
Of war and Cyuell broils,
Seek to be nvnme the sinful hands,
That in these mischifs moyles.
Seek how to clear the clowdye threats,
Of this deformed sons,
Seek to repare this curlish breatche,
In savage hearts bogon.
Reform whithe heedful care our state,
That thus transfigured are,
Respect o QVENE this sequel now,
Of this unwonted war.
Repair o QVENE whith tymely care,
Our wealth now ouerthrone,
Some good hand gripe the stable healme,
To shipwreck as we run.
Our plaintefull state in throws of woe,
In hassard of decay,
Calls help of none but thee (thou QVENE)
That bearethe now the swaye.
The tender years of pompous king,
And proud unstained seat,
That never yielded to no calm,
Nor pusshe of coursed fate,
Assiste now whith thy sage advice,
Assist whithe pollecye,
Assist our Realm lest worn to wrack,
VVhithe wringed hands we cry,
Unhappy reign unhappy life,
Unhappy eke the wight,
Unhappy eke a thousand times,
The rvle of female might.
Let not the earth be staynd whith blud,
In plonge of hateful harms,
Exclayme and whithe outraging skrikes,
Complame of Cyvell arms.
Whose hateful and displesant yoke,
Of presant plage we feel,
Disarminge us unhappy GAWLES,
Of all our wonted we will.
Of all our proud and pompous praise,
Of all our antique fame,
Our honor flets, the glory ebbes,
Of our Tryumphant name:
What long tofore in foremer age,
Our fathers fame has won,
Unhappy we unhappy GAWLES,
Unhappy have undone.
FINIS.
A sonnet to the translatour.
As Homers streaminge source, of springinge head does flow
In Grekishe cloustred camps, by Trojans reard to fame:
As Virgils matchinge style, does vveaue in smothed frame,
The peased pliant words, of vvightes that lie full lovv:
So RONSARDS blovvminge grafte (from them as you may know
By ruthful mourners mind) does words from parents fame,
VVaylinge with brokken seighes the fyerie kinghtes of name,
That brave with glitternige svvord in field to smite the blovv
Of dedlye massy fiste, (most deu to vvaylful France)
Sent from myld God, that does which splayed arms inhaunce,
The lasting painful scourge, to vvhippe the thanckles flockee.
If creed may credit give, to dysmalles judgments day,
I think the same has taught, IENEY to outforth bray,
An English pleasant phrase, not far from RONSARDS stock.
Ferd: Fyldinge.

ELEGIA DANIELIS ROGERII ALBIMONTII ANGLI, DE PERTVRBATA CHRISTIANI ORBIS
REPVBLICA, AD ILLVSTREM VIRVM, HENRICVM NORRICIVM, AVRATAE MILITIAE EQVITEM,
SERENISS. ET CHRISTIANISS. PRINCIPIS, D. ELIZABETHAE, ANGLIAE, etc. REGINAE, AD
KAROLVM NONVM GALLIAE REGEM, ORATOREM.

AD ILLVSTREM VIRVM HENRICVM NORRICIVM.
Tristia conueniunt si carmina tristibus horis,
Tempore nec luctus, si dare laeta decet:
Haec ea, NORRICI, quae tristia tristibus horis
Offero iudicio scripta legenda tuo,
Non ingrata tibi spero ventura legenti,
Defleo dum tristi tristia fata lyra.
Add quod est aequum cum flenti flere piumque,
Publicus and tangit pectora iuncta dolor.
Ipsa etiam in lacrumas dum lumina soluimus aegras,
Egeritur, gemitu fit quoque cura minor.
Hinc tibi, credo, tui IENEI Musa probatur,
Quod queritur patria publica damna cheli.
Quod si nostra etiam poterunt lugubria, puris
Auribus, indicio and complacuisse tuo,
Tempora quam praestant genialia tristibus horis,
Temporibus laetis tam meliora leges.
ELEGIA, Ad illustrem virum, Henricum Norricium, Auratae militiae Equitem,
Sereniss. and Christianiss. Principis, D. Elizabethae, Angliae, etc. Reginae,
ad Karolum nonum Galliae Regem, Oratorem.
MIssus es Orator Galli dum Regis ad aulam,
NORRICI, and patriae consulis vsque tuae,
Ecquid vt est omnis facies tristissima mundi
Cernis, and vt praeceps in sua damna ruat?
Cernis, and haud melius te regna ruentia quisquam
Prospicit, incertas cernis adesse vices.
Nam tibi non tantum clarorum stripe parentum
Contigit, and nasci nobiliore domo:
Sed quoque prudentes tribuerunt numina sensus,
Abdita queis aliis quaeque videre soles.
Add quod aerumnas praesens queis angitur orbis,
Ipse etiam lippus, tonsor and ipse videt.
At tua men's causas sensu praesagit acuto,
Et tibi praesenti^ constat origo mali.
Scilicet orb^ furens toto bacchatur Erinnys,
Insidias, belli semina prima, serens.
Nec fas, nec rata pacta sinit, verumque fidemque
Tollit, and est horum frausque dolusque loco.
Victa iacet pietas, terrasque exosa profanas,
Relligio, coelum regna priora, petit.
Ambitioque leuis magnorum pectora Regum,
Sollicitans, odij tetra venena ciet.
Hinc Bellona manus tortis armata flagellis,
Accensis animis cogit ad arma viros.
Hinc pauor, hinc luctus, hinc plurima mortis imago
Perturbant cunctis gaudia nostra locis.
Ergo nec Virgo, nec iam Saturnia regna
Longius in terris quas coluere, vigent.
Aurea Pax cessit niueos lacerata lacertos,
Et Charites terris eripuere fugam.
Deliciaeque hominum Musae fugere, nec illas
Qui foueat vasto vix viget orb locus.
Ipse fides fractasque lyras abiecit Apollo,
Nec iuuat auratam nunc tenuisse chelyn,
Quin pharetra promens sua tela, en strenuus arcum,
Lunat, vt hac sola se tueatur open.
Omnis amorfugit, lacera Concordia palla,
AEthereos petiit venerat vnde tholos.
Quam cuperem Mauors etiam ad sua regna redisset,
Esset vt a tantis libera terra malis.
Ille etenim dextra late sua fulmina vibrans,
Inficit humano triste cruore solum.
Nec pudor integritasque iuuant, furor omnia miscet,
Martis vbique metus, mortis vbique pauor.
Foelices quibus ante datum, meliora videre
Saecula, cum pietas cumque vigeret amor:
Cum Pax alma domos coleret, nec miles iniquus,
Turbaret patrios Mart furente deos.
Nunc nec grata dies, noctisque ingratior vmbra est,
Felleque vipereo quaelibet hora madet.
Ecquis enim locus est quem non perrupit Erinnys?
Quem non sacrilegi militis arma replent?
Personat armorum terras fragor horridus omnes,
Quaeque parit tellus, sanguine fota putes.
Omnia deuastat gens Mossyneca sub arcto,
Russica qua gelidos Duna pererrat agros,
Sarmata bella fremens Henetos inuadit: and Hunos
Innumero oppressos milite Turca premit.
Et sexennali miscentes praelia bello,
Cimber in exitium triste Gothusque ruunt.
Germanisque habitans passim discordia campis,
Nescio quos motus insidiasque timet.
Belga sub Hispanis queritur noua vincla catenis,
Excuteretque iugum si daret hora ducem:
Quin etiam Mauors discordibus implicat armis
Illa Calydoniae proxima regna plagae.
Quaeque fuit quondam rerum domina Itala tellus,
Quam variis dominis seruiat illa vides.
At diuisa ruit plus quam ciuilibus armis,
Gallia, and in proprias effera fertur opes.
Nec modus vllus adest, nullus pudor, omnia legum,
Iuraque naturae militis ira premit.
Ipse pater bellum natis indicit, and arma
Filius in patris colla verenda gerit.
Frater and in fratris distringit viscera ferrum,
Quis memoret siccis vel legate ista genis?
Illum Caucaseis prognatum cautibus, horrens
Fouit inhumanae and dura papilla lupae.
Interea fidei saeuissimus imminet hostis,
Et iaculo and saeuus fulmine Acinacio.
Quis furor est, externa vocant dum bella, manusque
Turcica Christiadum dum sitit vsque necem,
In proprios saeuire artus, and vulnere mortem
Alterno, diris accelerare modis?
Tam subito oblita es belli cladisque prioris
Gallia, vt hei rursus ciuica bella velis?
Aspice quas toto regno circunspicis arces,
Quod de civilly Mart querantur, habent.
Non cernis viduata suis tua rura colonis?
Oppida diuitiis and spoliata suis?
Sulphureis quassata globis quae moenia quondam
Hostiles poterant temnere salua minas?
Squallida praeteritos deplorant rura tumultus,
Et Druidum vestris ossibus albet ager.
Ah! melius purges infectos sanguine campos,
Quam noua funesto praelia Mart noues.
Facta prius, nondum coijt miseranda cicatrix,
Quid renoues igitur vulnera clade noua?
Quisquis es, es tanti primus qui turbinis author,
Te poenae vltrices fata and acerba manent.
Tristia qui populos cogens ad bella quietos,
In niueae pugnas relligionis opus.
Non ita vis quorum verus successor haberi,
Induerant populis arma ferenda suis.
Alma procurantes sanctae sed commoda Pacis,
Et been commissas hi tuebantur oues.
Iam video instantes, te sic cogente, ruinas,
Sanguine iam video rura madere pio.
Forsitan and densis circundata lilia spinis,
Tempus adest perdant protenus omne decus.
Nam quis rebus opem (NORRICI) praebeat, orbi
Tam desperato number quis adesse queat?
Consilijs nullus cum sit locus, irrita vatum
Cum vota, vndosum per mare ventus agat.
Quod nisi certa meam fallant praesagia mentem,
Iam ruimus subito, tu nisi CHRIST iuues.
Tu nisi CHRIST iuues, nostrae qui causa salutis,
His potes auxilio solus adesse malis.
Adsis, at oppressis Dux CHRIST salutifer adsis,
Afflictasque iuues maxim Pastor oues.
Pastor oues tueare tuas, quas perdere pastor
Qui ferus Ausonia regnat in vrbe, studet.
Respice nos, tutique tuae sub robore dextrae,
Da precor aduersas vincere posse manus:
Pax redeat, nostrosque lares tranquilla reuisat,
Et comites, pulsas orb, reducat ouans.
Cana fides redeat, redeant probitasque pudorque,
Astraea and solitis det pia iura locis.
At lites valiant, valiant at praelia, saeui
Exulet immani Martis at orb furor.
Quaeque tuam niuea defendit pace Sareptam,
Tuta sit auxillis ELIZABETHA tuis.
Audiit, and coelo spes in mea pectora venit,
Et melior spero qui venit annus erit.
AD GVLIELMVM NORRICIVM, Henrici Norricij fill. natu max. summae spei iuuenem,
Epigramma.
Stemmate nobilium quod sis Gulielme parentum
Ortus, and innumeros quod numeres atauos,
Clarus es, and populo charissimus inde Britanno,
Nobilis and titulum fulgidaque arma geris.
At potius purae virtutis captus amore,
Quod vitas vitij semina quaeque mali,
Quod pietate refers niueo and candore parentem,
Est tibi quod curae cum probitate fides,
Nobilis and vere clarus Gulielme probaris,
Hinc tua nobilitas suspicienda fuit.
D. ROGERIVS.

ANNO MDLXVIII.

CALEND. IANVAR.


