THE Choice of Change: Containing the Triplicitie of Divinity, Philosophy,
and Poetry, short for memory, Profitable for Knowledge, and necessary for
Manners: Whereby the learned may be confirmed, the ignorant instructed, and all
men generally recreated.

Newly set forth by S. R. Gent. and student in the University of Cambridge.

T^ia sunt omnia.

printer's device of Roger Ward

AT LONDON Printed by Roger Ward, dwelling near Holborne Conduite

An. Dom (...)

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR HENRY HERBERT, Knight of the most noble order of
the Garter, Lord of Cardiffe manor and S. Quintin, and Earl of Pembrocke,
the right worshipful Sir PHILIP SIDNEI knight, with the right worthy Gentleman
M. Robert Sidney Esquire, S. R. wishes increase of virtuous qualities in the
mind, of the gifts of the body, and goods of Fortune.
RIght Honorable and Worshipful, If I should follow the custom of ^uch as set
forth books to the view of the world, which pass under the protection of
noble personages (besides the dread of offending wise men) I should run into
one of these three errors, either to praise your H. and W. by adulation,
praise my self by ostentation, or praise my work by seeking to bring men into
admiration. I purpose none of all these The first I leave, least my words
should empaire your worthiness. The second, I refrain, because I find nothing in
my self which can deserve praise. The third I will avoid, for if my labor has
been so well employed, as it may please you right H. and W it is able enough to
praise it self. I therefore present these my three books of Divinity,
Philosophy, and Poetry (comprised together in one volume) unto you three
right H. and W. (who are linked and united together in an indissoluble band of
amity and fraternity) humbly requesting that you will countenance the^ with
favor, and patronage them by your authority, that thereby they may eschew the
reproaches of malicious tongues, and bleare the envious eyes of such as pry at
other men's faults in the water, which cause things seem bigger then they be,
but regard their own faults, as through small nets, which cause things to
seem less. In so doing, you shall give me cause to rejoice in my travel, and
occasion by thankfulness to acknowledge my bounden duty. Thus leaving your
Honor and Worships to the direction of the Almighty, I cease, referring my
self to your good opinions.

Your Honor and Worships to command, S. R.

TO THE READER.
1 HE that knows not that he ought to know, is a brute beast among men. 2 He
that knows no more then he has need of, is a man among brute beasts. 3 He
that knows all that may be known, is a God among men.
1 Read willingly. 2 Correct friendly. 3 Judge indifferently.
THE FIRST HVNDRETH OF THE Triplicitie of Divinity.
1 Three things do witness the word of God to be true, and of great
authority. THe history of the world comprehended in the holy scripture. Many
notable and strange revelations. The miracles of the Church, which do confirm
the word.
2 The preaching of the word of God is comprehended in three things. In
doctrine. In consolation. In precepts.
3 The holy Scripture is divided into three parts. Into histories. Into
precepts. Into prophesies Histories consist in those things which are done.
Precepts in those things which are commanded. Prophesies, in foreshewinge
things which either are already come to pass, or shall hereafter be fulfilled.

4 Three good things are set forth in the scripture, which the Philosophers
never attained unto. The true knowledge of god, and calling on of his name.
True comfort in adversity. The way to live well and worship God aright.
5 Three things are most certain in the word of God. Promises. Prophesies.
Threatenings.
6 There be three singular things proper to the Scripture. Hugo. Whatsoever is
taught, is truth without falsehood. Whatsoever is commanded, is goodness,
without malice. Whatsoever is promised, is happiness without misery.
7 The word of God was revealed for three causes. To be learned. To be
believed. To be practiced.
8 There are three understandings of y^ scriptures set down by Hugo in his
third book of the s^ule. Historical. Mystical. The first, containing
examples fit for the simple. The second, mysteries fit for the learned. By
miracles By Figures By words.
The third, manners, common for both.
Moral.
9 All Scripture given by inspiration as Paul says 2. Tim. 3. is profitable
to three. To teach. To improve and correct. To instruct in righteousness.
10 There be three kinds of meditations in contemplation. Hugo. In creatures.
In scriptures The first arises of admiration. The second of reading.
Admiration, brings Question: Question, searching out. Readinge mynistreth
matter to know y^ truth. circu^spectio^ brings operation. Operation is y^ end
of Meditation.
The third, of circumspection.
In manners.
11 Three ways God spoke unto our forefathers, as Luther is witness in his
exposition upon the xxxv. chap. of Genesis By dreams. By manifest visions. By
the voices of proph^
12 The holy scripture is divided into 3. parts. The law The prophets The
gospel.
13 S. Paul in his three epistles to the Romans, Galathians, and Ephesians,
teaches three things He shows that all men are sinners. He teaches that man
is justified by faith only, without the works of the law. He prescribes them
that are justified, to do good works by Gods law.
14 Three things make men suspect the Epistle of Jude not to be Canonical The
narration of the strife of Michaell the Archangell with the devil The
narration of the body of Moses The prophecy of Enoch.
15 There are three sayings found in S. Paul his Epistles which are borrowed
of Heathen Antiquaries. Of Meander, Evil words corrupt good manners, 1. Cor.
5. ver, 33, Of Aratus, Covetousness is the root of all evils 1. Tim. 6. ver.
10. Of Epimenides, Cretians are always liars, evil beasts, now bellies, Tit.
1. ver. 12
16 Three things chiefly to be observed in the old and new Testament.
Faith, that we, may believe those things to be true, which Moses, y^ Prophets,
Christ and his apostles have spoken by the inspiration of the holy ghost. Hope,
that with a steadfast belief we may assure our selves that we shall obtain
those things that are promised, Charity, that we neither do, nor say any
thing but y^ which is acceptable to God, and profitable to men.
17 For three causes the word of God is to be preached. That the hearers may
understand, because without preaching he cannot hear. That he which
understands may believe because without hearing, he cannot believe That he
which believes may do good because without faith he can not do good.
18 For three causes we ought to be attentive in hearing the word of God. For
the reverence due to God, whose word we come to hear. That we may avoid the
dangers of negligence. For the profit which is manifold.
19 There be three invisible virtues of God. Power. Wisdom. Gf y^ which al
things proceed. In the which all things censist. The Father is power. The
son is wisdom. Power creates Wisdom govern goodness preserve
The holy ghost is goodness,
By which al things are governed.
Goodness.

Romans 11. ver. 36. Because of him, in him, and by him are all things. To him be
praise for ever and ever Amen.

20 God is three manner of ways al in all. August. In heaven only he is all. In
earth only he is al. In heaven and earth he is all.
21 Three manner of ways god is every where. By his essence. By his presence.
By his power.
22 He that will know God as he ought: must think upon these 3. things. Luther.
What he has commanded. What he has promised. He yt meditateth these three
finds God.
What he has threatened.
23 For three causes are three things attributed to God. Eyes, because he sees
all things. Hands, because he makes all things. Feet, because he is every
where.
24 There is none like unto God for 3. things, Bernard. He is rich in mercy.
He freely respects yt humble.
Mighty in justice. Justly judges the wicked.
Bon^tifull in grace* Pitifully saves sinners.

25 We have received 3. sorts of things of God our Creator, whereof we ought
always to be mindful. Such as lead us unto the fear of God. Such as move us
to love God. Such as provoke us to yield thanks unto his majesty.
26 The knowledge of God is threefold. General, as of the Philosophers, Romans
1. (...) 2. Job. 36. Special, as of the Christians, 1. Cor. 13. Romans 10.
Singular, as of the^ that are blessed. 1. Cor. 13. Ioh. 3.
27 These things are to be known in disputing about God. Not always. Nor to
all. The first is referred to the time. The second to the person. The third to
the matter.
Nor all things.
28 Three notable benefits of God. Creation. Redemption. By the three persons
in Trinity. The Father. The son. The holy Ghost.

Sanctification.
29 There are 3 inward properties to be observed in discerning the persons of
the Trinity. To beget. To be borne The Father only begets. The Son only is
borne. The holy Ghost only proceeds from both.
To proceed.
30 Three outward properties of the persons in Trinity. The Father sendes,
and is not sent. The Son is sent to be made a sacrifice. The Holy Ghost is
sent to sanctify our minds.
31 Three bear witness in heaven. The Father. The Son And these three are
one. Union. Uniting. United.

The holy Ghost
32 There are three qualities in the Sun representing the qualities of the
Trinity. The infinite fountain of light. The brightness coming from that
light The heat proceeding and breathing from them both.
33 Three things in us which do represent the holy Trinity. Memory.
Understanding. Represents the Father. Represents the Son. Represents the holy
Ghost.
Will.
34 Three names being one thing in deed, are liketo the Trinity. Snow. Ice.
So God is three in person, and but one in Substance.
Water.
35 Gods judgments are known by 3 things. Corporal punishments. The sting of
the conscience. The torments of hell.
36 Three manner of ways we may sin in the worship of God. When for only
true God, there are worshipped many Gods: as the heathen did. When the true God
is worshipped, but not according to his will. When yt true God is worshipped
but not only, which is done of the^ that worwip other Gods beside the true God.
37 By three things the love of God appears toward men. That he has given
to man the use of heaven. earth, and all his creatures. Gene. 1 Eccle. 17. That
he has granted Angels to be ministers to men* Heb. 1. verse. 14. For that he
has offered himself for mankind, taking upon him the form of a servant. Phil.
2. verse. 17.
38 We may commit three things safely into Gods hands. Injury Loss. Because
he is a revenger of injuries. Because he is the restorer of loss. Because he
is our Physician and best comforter.
Grief.
39 The sweetness of this name Jesus, consists in three things, It is honey
to the mouth. Melody to the ear. Joy to the heart.
40 The son of God according to his office, is named in three several
languages. Messiah, in Hebrew. Christ, in Greek. And according to these three
names, he is called. A Priest. A Prophet. A King.

Anointed in English.
41 Three things to be considered in Christ our savior. He prays for us, as
he is our Priest. He prays in us, as he is our head. He is prayed unto of us,
as he is our God.
42 Christ was known to the world to be true Messiah by three things. The
opening of heaven. The appearing of the holy Ghost. By the voice of his
heavenly Father.
43 Christ is called a Priest, and his office consists in 3. things. In
teaching, Malaehie 2. So the Son brought forth the Gospel in the bosom of
his Father. In praying: as appears in Leuitcus And he prayed for us. John 17
Heb. 1. 7. In offering sacrifice Hebr. 5. He offered himself for our sins.
44 Christ is called a King for 3. causes. Because he put down all power, and
destroyed the works of the devil. Because by the virtue of the spirit, he
reigns in the minds of the faithful. Because he defends his Church against
the tyranny of the devil.
45 Christ the true teacher does instruct us 3. ways. because he is The way.
The truth They way not erring. In example
The truth not deceiving. In promise
The life not ceasing. In reward

The life.
46 There are three causes of ye incarnation of Christ. That he might bruise
the Serpents head. Gen, 3. That by his sacrifice he might appease. Gods wrath,
That he might justify the unjust by ye imputation of his obedience.
47 Three figures of Christ his crucifying, set down in the scripture. The
sacrifices lifted up on high. The offering up of Isaac. The brazen Serpent
lifted up in the will dernes. Number 21. John. 3.
48 Christ his death for us, and satisfaction for our sins, is three fold. A
work without example. Favor without desert. Charity above measure.
49 The passion of Christ is applied 3. ways. It is offered by the word, as by
the hand of God. It is received by faith, as by the hand of man. It is sealed
by the Sacraments and the use thereof set down as it were in a table.
50 There are 3. fruits of Christ his ascension. To send the holy Ghost. To be
a mediator to God the father. To preserve the Word, and the Church.
51 The son of god was changed three manner of ways. From his humility, to
his divinity in his transfiguration. From passion to immortality in his
resurrection From immortality to his fathers equality, in ascension.
52 Three things concur in the person of Christ. Bernard. The word. These
three are one, and this one is 3.
The flesh. Not by confusion of substance, but by vinitie of person.
The soul.
53 Christ loved us three manner of ways. Bernard. Sweetly. In that he took
our flesh upon him.
Wisely. In that he eschewed all fault.
Valiantly. In that he suffered death.

54 There are three marvelous conjunctions as Luther says, in the exposition
on yt xx. cap. Genesis The conjunction of the Father and Son in divinity. The
conjunction of divinity and humanity in Christ. The coniunctio^ of Christ with
his church.
55 Christ confounds yt world and all things therein 3. ways. He accounts
the chief wisdom thereof to be folishnes. He reckons their best works for
justice. He changes their best good into evil.
56 Christ has made us partakers of three necessary things. Of his Cross Of
his Gospel. He has redeemed us by his death on the cross. He has instructed
us by his gospel. He has confirmed and sanctified us by his spirit.
Of his spirit.
57 The whole world did marvel at three works of Christ. Chrysostom. That he rose
again after death. That he ascended into heaven in the flesh. That he
converted the whole world by his twelve apostles.
58 Christ had three witnesses. which did testify of him. John Baptist. Ioh.
1. ver. 15. His works Ioh. 5. ver. 36. His Father, Math, 3. ver. 17.
59 Christ does excel the Saints in three things. In dignity of person. In
worthynes of office. These do not exclude. his divinity.
In perfectnes of gifts.
60 The joy which ye angels did express at ye nativity of Christ is said to
be great for 3. causes, For the matter which is great, namely our
reconciliation with God. For the continuance and stedfastnes thereof, for it
continues constant for ever. Because it is spiritual, and pertaining unto all
those that have the gift of faith.
16 Christ did foreshew 3. kinds of war. Of outward enemies. Of seducers. Paul
says, fighting abroad, fear within, and dangers in false brethren
Of false brethren.
62 Christ did raise three persons from death, as some judge in 3. several
years. The first year the widows son, Mar. 7 ver. 14. 15. The second year
the daughter of Iairus Luke 8. ver. 54. 55. The third year Lazarus, Ioh. 11.
ver. 44.
63 Christ revealed three singular secrets unto three Apostles, John the
Evangelist, Peter, and James. His transfiguration on the hill Thabor, Luk 9.
ver. 28. The reuining of Iairus daughter. Luke 8. ver. 51. The treason which
Judas practiced against him, Ioh. 13. ver. 26.
64 Christ is to be considered of us in three times. Before his incarnation.
At the time of his incarnation. God, the word, the Image, the son of God
Jesus Christ, God and man, the son of Mary, ye son of god the son of man,
Emanuell. Al God, al man, the truth of his divine and humane nature remaining.
In his glorification, after his resurrection, and ascension.
63 Three things do teach us that the holy ghost is true God, with the
father and the son. Testimonies out of the scripture, as Acts 5. Ananias did
lie unto the holy ghost, not unto men but unto God. The work of creation, Job
33. the spirit of God made me, and the breath of the almighty received me.
That which is every where, sees, and kills al things with his presence,
knows and hearesh al things Psalm. 139. whether shall I go from thy spirit.
66 The Apostles received three gifts when the holy Ghost descended upon the
day of the feast of Pentecost. The gift Of interpreting the scriptures Of
knowledge of al languages Of a constant heart bold to set forth the truth.

67 The light of the holy Ghost does rule us in three things. In our counsels.
In our manners. In the actions of our whole life.
68 The holy Ghost does confirm three things in us. Faith. Hope. Love.
69 The holy Ghost does govern three things in every godly person. The mind,
The heart. It does lighten the mind with the light of thy holy word. It does
kindle the heart that it may conceive the motions of good works, and virtues
which please God. It does move the will to be willing to do whatsoever God
wills in his word.
The will.
70 Three especial heresies which do overthrow the doctrine of the holy ghost.
Of the Graecians, which will have the holy ghost to proceed from the Father
only, and not so likewise from the son. The Macedonians, which say the holy
spirit is a living crature. Of the Sabellians, which affirm the holy ghost
to be all one with the Father and Son, and not three persons.
71 We commit sin three manner of ways. In not rewarding good things with
good things. In requiting evil with evil. things. On the contrary these 3.
things are praiseworthy. To reward good things with good things. Not to
acquit evil with evil. To recompense evil things with good.

In recompensing the good with evil things.
72 The almighty created three vital spirits. Which is not covered with
flesh. Which is covered with flesh but dies not courced with f^esh. Of Angels.
Of men. Of brute beasts
Which is covered with flesh, and dies with the flesh.
73 We sin 3. manner of ways. Of infirmity. Of ignorance. Against the
Father, because he is the God of might. Against the Son, because he is the
perfection of wisdom. Against the holy ghost, because he is the giver of
grace.
Of malice.
74 We are put in mind of three things so often as we behold a rainebowe. Of
the anger of god when he destroyed the world with water, whereof the blew
color is a witness. Of the mercy of God, who will not use that punishment
again. Of the latter judgment, and burning the world with fire. The fiery
color of the rainbowe showing the same.
75 The creation of the world is an evident testimony of three excellent
things. Of the Wisdom. Omoipotencie. Goodness of God.

76 Three things show that the end of the world is at hand. Because the end
of the Roman Empire is at hand. Because there is a general defect and
apostacy from the Faith throughout the world. Because the Gospel has been
preached throughout the world.
77 Three sayings of Angels are used in the scriptures more th^n others.
Michaell, who is like God? Dan. 10: and 12 chap. Raphaell Gods Physician. Tob.
3. verse. 17 Gabriel, The strength of God. Dan. 8. and 9. chap. Luke. 1,
78 Three chief offices which Angels do execute toward us. They withdraw us
from sin. They defend us from enemies. They lead us into heaven.
79 The holy Ghost the comforter, gives us three things. The earnest of
salvation. That he may bear witness tothy spirit, that thou art the Son of
God.
The light of knowledge. That when thou have don al yt thou caust, thou
should think thy self to be an unprofitable servant.
The strength of life. That which is impossible for thee by nature, is made
easy to thee by grace.

80 Three things to be considered in the creation of ye cceature. Who made it
By what he made it. If we ask who made it? God. For there is no author more
excelthen God.
If by what he made it? He said, and it was done. No Art of more force then
ye word of God.
If therefore he made it? because he is good. No causebetter the^ that good
should be created of God that is good.

Wherefore he made it.
81 The whole world has been three times ruled by 3 laws. The law of
nature. The law of Moses, Six thousand years the world shall endure, and
the^ be burned, says Elias, 2000. before the law. 2000 under the law. 2000
under the Gospel. But for y^ elect sake these last days shall be shortened.

The law of the Gospel,
82 Faith as August says is of 3 things and times, Of things past. We believe
that Christ is dead which is past.
Of things present. We believe that Christ sits at the right hand of his
Father, which is present.
Of things to come We believe that he shall come to judgment which is to come

83 Belief is of three sorts. To believe that there is a God, is of
knowledge, To believe God, is to consent to his truth To believe in God, is to
have true confidence in his mercy.
84 There be 3 kinds of knowledge. To learn to know only for knowledge
sake. To learn to know, to that end to be known of others. The first
curiosity. The second, vain glory. The thride, perfect charity.
To learn to know, that thou may be edified.
85 Faith and hope differ in three things. In obiectes. Faith apprehe^deth a
present benefit: Hope looks for one to come.
In offices. Faith apprehends the promise made by Christ, which neither hope
nor other works can do.
In subjects. Faith is a knowledge in the mind and trust in the will: Hope is
in the will, and in the heart,

86 Faith exceed three things as Bernard says. The end of man's reason. The
use of nature. The bonds of experience.
87 Thee things without all doubt are to be hoped for of God. Pardon. Grace.
Pardon of our sins. Grace in regeneration. Glory after resurrection.
Glory.
88 Three things in which our whole hope consists. In the love of adoption.
In the truth of Christ his promises. In the power of his redemption.
89 The hope of the wicked may be compared to three things. To dust scatered
in the wind. To smoke flying in the air. To a guest departing the same day
that he came.
90 Charity is of three sorts. Toward God, Toward our selves, Toward our
neihbous,
91 Our neighbor, though he be evil, must be loved for 3. causes. For Gods
sake. For his own sake. If thou love God, thou will love his son also. If
thou love thy brother when he is in health, thou will love him also being
diseased. Thou shall love him, that thou may gain his love, which seeks
hurt to thee.
For thine own sake.
^2 Gold and charity are compared together three manner of ways. As gold
does excel all metals, so charity does excel all virtues. As gold is rare
and dear, so likewise is charity. As gold is more fair and durable then
other metals, so far charity endures.
93 The humble man efcheweth three vices. Singularity, whereby a man will be
accounted more holy. Arragancie whereby a man does set forth himself above
others. Presumption, whereby a man does account him self fit for greater
matters, then in deed he is fit for.
94 Patience does suffer any pain for three things. God and Godliness. Faith
and religion. Virtues and laws.
95 By three manner of means, the virtue of patience is exercised. Of God we
suffer punishments. Of the devil temptations. Wherein we must take here. That
we do not murmr against god for our afflictions. That the temptations of the
devil cause us not to consent to sin. That ye mischife of our neighbor
provoke us not to requite evil,

Of our Neighbors persecutions, loss, and reproach.
96 These 3. things are a great praise in the just, To hold his peace when
his servant reuileth him. If he forbear him that is sick, when he offers
injury. If he make no answer to a poor man, charging him with untruth.
97 Patience is a great virtue, for 3. things. If thou hurtest not him, of who^
thou wast first borne. If thy self being hurt, thou do forgive him. If thou
fear him whom thou could have hurt.
98 Three examples of patience in the scripture, Of Job James 5. you have heard
of the patience of Job, and seen his end. Of Christ the only pattern of
patience. 1. Cor. 1. 1, Pet. 2. Of Lazarus which bare patiently infamy,
diseases, and contempt Luke 16.
99 A good life consists in these three things. To eschew evil. To do good To
persevere in goodness to the end
100 Perseverance has affinity with these three. It is the sister of
patience. The daughter of constancy. In adversity In labor I prosperity
The friend of peace

THE SECOND HVNDRETH OF THE ^riplicitie of Divinity.
1 Three things are comprehended in the knowledge of God. TO know who God is,
namely, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost To believe in him. To direct
and govern our life according to his will.
2 Abraham received 3. Angels into his house, and they talked familiarly with
three persons of ye same house. With Abraham the master of the house. With Sara
his wife, With their maid Hagar.
3 Three things which the devil will not grant. That Christ is the son of
God. He cannot abide that Christ should be man. He will not confess that
Christ has done those things which in truth he has done.
4 Three things chiefly to be remembered. Gods benefits, that we may render
thanks. Our sins, that we may be sorry for them. Our death, that we may be
careful to live well.
5 Poor men are more easily converted unto God then rich men, for 3. causes.
Because pride is annexed with riches: and as Gregory notes: Pride of mind is
a hinderance unto truth. Because the heart of a rich man is full of ye cares of
this world, which choke ye word of God. Because rich me^ have temporal
comfortes, and therefore do little regard spiritual consolation.
6 Our old adversary the devil is bound with three things. When our mind
being tempted, does not consent to evil, and take delight therein. When we
can so rule our mind, that we hate not our neighbor when he speaks
reproachful words against us. When we can so govern our mind, that we
murmr not against God, when he punishes us for our deserts,
7 Three weapons where with we may repulse the devil. The word of God. Faith
in Christ Jesus. Fervent prayer.
8 Saint Jerome says that we ought only to boast of one thing: which is, that
we know God aright, not of those 3. things which worldlings do glory in.
Wisdom. Strength. Richesse.
9 To love God with all our heart with all our soul, with all our might,
consists in 3. things. Not to be led away with slattery. Not to be seduced
with deceites. Not to be overcome with injuries.
10 We must praise God with three instruments. Our mouth. Our heart. For it is
the instrument wherewith he will be glorified. Singing and giving thanks in
heart unto God. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good
works and glorify your father which is in heaven. Math. 5, ver. 16. and chap.
7. ver. 21. Romans 2. ver. 23.
Our works.
11 The fear of God works 3. things. It corrects our minds. It drives
away sins. It preserves innocence.
12 God is to be feared for 3. causes. Because the house of him that fears
not God, shall soon be overthrown. Eccles. 27. Because he that fears not God
shall dwell in places where shall be no regard of knowledge. Because that God is
able to cast both body and soul into hell fire. Math. 10. Luke 12.
13 Three causes which move us to fear God. Al calamities which happen unto
mankind: death, diseases. destructions of cities and nations, hunger, wars,
etc. Also dreadful punishments which afflict the wicked, showing that god is
angry with sinners. All the erhortations of the prophets unto repentance. The
law of God, and the horrible curses which are added unto ye law. The death of
the son of God.
14 About the time yt the world shall have end, men shall be evil inclined 3.
manner of ways. They shall be lovers of themselves, following pleasure and
riotousnes. They shall be greedy and covetous. They shall be high minded and
proud.
15 Three sorts of people are called to religion. One sort God calls by holy
inspirations. Another sort is chosen of men by good counsels, as Hippolito was
converted to the Faith, by the instructions of Saint Laurence. The third sort
is constrained to enter into religion by some necessity or misaduenture
happened unto them.
16 Humility is a virtue which does chiefly comprehend three things.
Humility acknowledges our own uncleanness and infirmity, and does fear God.
She does not desire matters above her vocation, but keeping her self within
her bounds, she rests hoping in Gods help. She does not despise others that
are Gods instruments, but acknowledges Gods gifts in them, knowing that all
labor is in vain unless he prosper it.
17 He that is humble and lowly as he ought, does reap triple commodity. He
has God dwelling with him. The humble man is honored of men, and they always
give him a good report, He alone has the fruit thereof, because humility is
the mother of shamefastnes, yt way of patience, which leads to wisdom, the
keeper of fear and faith.
18 The tokens of true humility consiste in 3. things. In behavior. In words.
He that is humble in mind and body, does show yt same by loking steadfastly upon
the ground, and in not laughing without great cause. He speaks few words and
soft, and holds his peace until he be asked. He does nothing but that which
is agreeable with good manners, and that without pride.
In deeds.
19 Patience does comprehend and signify three things. A steadfastness of the
mind, suffering any affliction or contumelious reproaches without murmuring or
repining. A revenge giving a deadly wound, and heaping coals of fire upon our
enemies heads. A close martering, not without rewards.
20 When we suffer any cross or affliction, we must be patient for 3.
causes. That we may follow the example of Christ. Because God has so
commanded. That we may gather the fruits of patience.
21 Christ commands in the 5. chap. of Math. that we should not resist eull:
and by 3. precepts does exhort us unto patience He comma^deth that whosoever
shall strike thee on the right cheek, to turn to him the other also. He
commands if any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, to let
him have thy cloak also. He commands that whosoever will compel thee to go a
mile, to go with him twain.
22 We must suffer 3. kinds of evil patiently. Necessary evils, such as can
neither be altered nor amended, nor hindered. Accidental evils, which have not
happened unto us by our own evil counsel. Such evils as we have deserved.
23 The reward of patience. 1. James. 1. Blessed is the man that endures
temptation: for when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life which the
Lord has promised to them yt love him. Prou. 19. A man's knowledge is perceived
by his patience. 1. Pet. 2. If when ye do well ye suffer wrong and take it
patiently: this is acceptable to God.
24 Three things direct us in the right path, and suffer us not to go astray.
Love which banisheth all wearines and causes all labor and travel to seem
easy. Hope of promise or reward. Faith which is grounded upon promises, and
believes in God.
25 Unless the spirit of God do establish and seal our minds, that they may
continue steadfast in faith, we shall be overcome by one of these three things.
Either by satan who is furnished with a thousand arts, sleightes, and
deceites, to entrap us Or by our own frowardnes and inconstancy, which is
easily seduced by evil examples. Or by persecution and affliction which cause
us despair and throw our selves headlong into hell.
26 Three chief rewards of per seuerance. A crown of life. Apoc. 3. A
plentiful reward in heaven. Life everlasting. Math. 24. He that end^reth to
the end shall be saved.
27 Three things wherewith we may comfort our selves being in tribulaiion. That
the son of God is our advocate. our mediator, and makes intercession for us.
Luke 2. Ioh. 17. That he will not suffer us to be tempted above our power. 1.
Cor. 10. ver. 13. That he hears our prayers, and will help us in time of
need.
28 Three properties that belong to Epicures. They neither fear nor reverence
God, and esteem all godliness as a mokery. They offer sacrifice unto their
guts, other God they know not. Neither grief nor fear can compel them to
be careful for the time present, or to come.
29 Three kinds of doubting repugnant to faith. To doubt of God. To doubt of
his providence. To doubt of the certainty of that doctrine which the Prophets
and Apostles delivered.
30 All idols had their original o^ three things. Of superstition. Of wicked
imitation. Of flattery.
31 Three efficient causes of Idolatry. The devil fretting with hellish heat,
and haggish hate, and provoking man's miserable nature to devise idols thereby
to have God in derision. The blindness of men's minds, and boldness to reject
the word which has been delivered by the Prophets and Apostles, and devising
strange opinions and worshipping of God after their own pleasure A persuasion
of wisdom, and a good intent, which not content with the word of God only
does imagine it can invent more excellent kinds of worship.
32 Three causes why Idolatry should be abolished. Because it is sin against
the first commandment, not to abolish images. Judges 2. Because not being
abolished. they trouble the church of God. 3 King. 18 Elias says I have not
troubled Israel etc. The are to be abolished for fear of punishment, because
God is angry with idolaters, and will punish them. Deuteron. 4 Hos. 2. and 7.
33 We must fight with three sorts of weapons against heretics. With prayers,
With learning To convert them. To convince them. To condemn them.
With laws.
34 Evil men do persecute the good, three manner of ways. By hatred of their
hearts. By injuries in deeds. God commands that we resist them wc three
contrary things. With love of heart when he says love your enemies. With giving
been fits when he says do good to them that hate you. with praying for the^
when he says pray for the^ which revile and persecute you.

By reuyling words.
55 Three things to be known and marked concerning superstition. That it does
spring of true godliness, and diverse ways does weary men's minds That it does
vaunt of the title of true religion, and does allure multitudes of people unto
it, and does govern them. It atributeth a certain virtue unto things without
Gods ordinance or natural reason.
36 Magical blessings or enchantings do differ from the blessings of the
Patriarchs three manner of ways. Magicians are not called of God to bless.
They abuse good words, and wrest them to another end then God has appointed.
They have no promise that their endeavor shall take effect.
37 The proud man's heart is destitute of three good things. It is hardened and
wants godliness. It is void of Contrition. It is dry, wanting the dew of
spiritual grace.
38 Three horrible things may be noted in a proud man. That he strives
against God. That he will make him self equal with God. By transgressing Gods
commandments. By desiring to be almighty as God is. In yt he will have his
own co^ma^dement observed, though it be contrary to gods commandment.
That he exalts himself That he exalts himself above God.
39 Three things being thought upon, should abate the pride of man. Our
birth, which is lamentable, because we are borne in sin. Our life, which is
nothing else but labor and grief, and subject to many inconveniences. Our
death which is terrible, especially, because we shall be consumed with worms.
40 Three parts of repentance. Contrition. Gonfession, In the heart. In the
mouth Because we be seen with the heart unto righteousness. Because we confess with
the mouth unto salvation, Romans 10. ver. 10. Because the offense is not
forgiven, before restitution be made.
In works.
Satisfaction.
41 Pride is an exalting of the mind which does raise it self above our
Creation. Vocation. Humane condition.
42 By the shameful falls of three it does appear that security has no place
to rest in. Neither in heaven. In paradise. In heaven lucifer sinned through
security, In paradise Ada^ sinned through security. In y^ world Judas being
one of Christ his disciples, sinned through security.
Nor in the world.
43 Three things in Christ worthy to be wo^dered at. The examples of his life.
His words of wisdom. Whereby he edified the envious. Whereby he instructed the
ignorant. Whereby he did convert the unbelievers.
The maruels of his glory.
44 Three benefices which we have received, ought to move us daily and hourly
to give thanks unto God. Our creation. Our redemption. Our justification.
45 Let us give thanks to God all the day lon^ ^^d especially to acknowledge
three benefits. Because he has sanctified us being unclean. Because we have
received those things of his majesty which we had not. Because he has given
unto us those things which we never deserved.
46 The thanksgiving of three sorts of men ought deservedly to he reprehended.
Of hipocrites which is fained. Of worldlings which is for custom sake. Of such
as are newly recovered of a sickness which is wont to be very short.
47 Preaching is used for three purposes. That God may be feared. That God may
be known, and his will fulfilled. That many may be made inheritors of eternal
life.
48 Three kinds of confession in the holy scriptures. Confession of praise.
Confession of truth. Confession of a fault.
49 Three, effects of confessing the truth. A confirming of the doctrine sent
from heaven. A strengthening of those which are weak in faith. Testimonies of
the judgment to come and eternal life,
50 Christ in the fifth ot Matthew commands us not to swear by 3. things. By
heaven, By earth. Because it is yt throne of God. Because it is his footstool.
Because man cannot make on white hair or one black.
By our head.
51 For 3. causes as Augustine says, it seems that we should not swear at
all, Least we should take a facility in swearing. Least our facility bring us
to a custom of swearing. Least by that custom we fall into that danger which
is provided for swearers.
52 For 3. causes we may lawfully swear* That God may be worshipped and
glorified, Esa 19. ver. 8. 1. King. 22, ver. 14. That truth may be maint^^ned.
That Iunocentes being (...)nuented by craft may be delivered from danger.
53 Three things to be observed in oaths. We must not use all manner of oaths.
We must not use them always. We must not use them for light occasions.
54 By 3. manner of ways men forswear them selves. Either when they deceive or
are deceived When they think that to be false which is true. Or when they
think that to be true which is false.
55 Three things are like oaths. Vows. Couenantes. Promises.
56 The 4. commandment of those ten which were delivered unto Moses was
appointed to be kept for three causes. To signify unto us the spiritual rest.
To maintain ecclesiastical government. That cattle and servants might cease
from their labor.
57 Three principal holidayes on which the Jews used to go up to Jerusalem.
On Easter day. On Whitsonday, otherwise caled the feast of Pentecost. On ye day
of the feast of tabernacles which was wont to be observed the 15 of Sept.
58 We ought to meet together on those days which by the church are
appointed holidayes for three causes. That me may hear the word of God. That
we may pray unto him. That we may confirm our faith with the Sacraments.
59 Three things which as Luther affirms will destroy christian religion.
Forgetfulness of benifits which we have received by the Gospel. Man's wisdom
which ^il bring al things in order, and with evil counsel make common
quietness. Security which reigns here and there, and in every place.
60 Three kind of hearers of the word of GOD are praise worthy. They which
listen attentively. They which lay it up in their heart. They which show forth
the fruits thereof in their life.
61 The knowledge of 3. things very necessary for a christian. To know God. To
know his will. To know himself.
62 Three most necessary things for a christian man. True repentance. Fervent
prayer. Patience.
63 The whole life of Christians as Melancthon teaches, ought to be directed
unto three purposes That God may be glorified. That the Church may be
beautified. That we our selves in the Church serving God, may look for
eternal rewards.
64 Three things in a Christian which must agree together, That his light may
shine before God and men. Faith. Doctrine, and Life.
65 S. Paul unto Titus chap. 2. says, that a Christian ought to live 3.
manner of ways. Soberly. Honestly Discreetly.
66 Three things God requires at our hands. Deuteronomy. 10. That we fear him. That
we love him. That we walk in his ways.
67 Paul in the epistle to ye Galathians does warn Chrstians to take heed of
three things. That they be not desirous of vainglory. That they provoke not
one another to anger. That they envy not one another.
68 Paul in the fifth to the Ephesians will not have three things named among
Christians. Fornication. Uncleanness. Covetousness.
69 Christians have 3. accusars before God. The diuill. The law. Their own
conscience guilty of a fault.
70 Paul in the 2. chap. to Titus, wills a minister to do 3. things with
authority. To Speak. Erhort. Reprove.

71 Three things are necessary for a christian at all times. Faith toward
God. Love toward our neighbor. Mortification of ye flesh toward our selves.
72 The Israelites being in adversity, and comforting and exhorting one
another unto faith and obedience used to speak thus as in a proverb. Be of
good courage. Trust in God. That God which provided the Ram for Abraham to
sacrifice, he also will send happi^ success to thy enterprises. Genesis 22. ver.
13.
Follow thy vocation.
73 Preachers and Ecclesiastical rulers should always meditate on 3. sayings
in the scripture, and not suffer them to slide out of their memories. We must
one day render an account of our stewardship, and of every idle word. Luk* 16.
When I shall say unto the wicked, thou shall surely die, and thou give not him
warning, nor sp^^kest to admonish the wicked of his wicked way, that he may
live the same wicked man shall die in his ini* quitie, but his blood will I
require at thyhand. Ezech. 3. verse. 18. An hard judgment shall they have y^
bear rule. Wisd. 6. ver. 5.
74 Three things by which appears, that it is very difficult to preach.
Because of all things it is most laborsome. Because of all things it is most
dangerous. Because of al things in the world it is most despised, and subject
to the judgments of most vile persons,
75 Three things necessary for a Preacher that he may have many hearers.
Learning. Eloquence. Holiness of life.
76 The preacher of the word of God ready to go up into the Pulpet, must
remember three things. That he has Christ for his judge. Angels beholders of
him. Simple hearers, whose minds are easilye wounded.
77 Three ornaments fit for a ministers house. An open gate. A godly
household. A good library.
78 Three sorts of evil ministers Which teach ill, and live wickedly. Which
teach well, and live euilly. Which teach ill, and seem toliue well.
79 One of these 3. things does surely happen unto Ministers which preach the
word of God in evil princes courts. Either for fear they deny their master
Christ, as Peter did. John. 18. Or they are handled as Christ was in Herodes
court, and made a mocking stock. Luke. 23. verse. 11. Or they are cast in
prison, tormented and slain, as was John Baptist, Matthew 14. verse 10.
80 Three horrible evils were ye cause of the rich man's co^dempnation of whom
there is mention made in the 16. of Luke. Security in that he didnot repent,
nor had no feeling of Gods wrath and iudegment, Riot and surfeiting, Having no
care of the salvation of his soul. Want of faith. In that he did not respect
Lazarus: for where true faith is, there cannot be cruelty toward the
afflicted.
81, The man is blessed that does these 3. things. Psalm 112. Pitieth the
poor. Lends to them that want. Governs his affairs by judgment.
82 Truth is stronger then three strong things. 1. Esdras. 3. Strong wine. A
woman. A strong king.
83 Heretics do represent the properties of 3. beasts. Bernard. They are
biting like dogs. Subtle like foxes. Proud like lions:
84 Histories and the old fathers do attribute three things unto heretics.
Great knowledge. A show of wonderfullull holiness. A disagreeing with other
Churches.
85 Three sorts of Angels. The son of God. Genesis 48. The preachers of the
word. Malach. 2 Spirits created by God. Mat. 18. 2 Pet. (...)
86 For 3. causes heretics do troble more the godly teachers, then the common
lay men. Godly teachers do more easily understand their deceites, and bark at
them as good dogs do in the entry of their masters house. Godly teachers
cannot defend themselves with external force, and many times the communaltie
which should defend them, does forsake them. The pretense of heretics is
always to diminish the glory of God and holy worship, whereof the
ministers are perfect and godly teachers.
87 Three things to be noted in the enemies of Christ and his Church. First,
they are unthankful, and after the manner of ye world, for a great good turn
they repay great ingratitude, Secondarily, they have zeal without knowledge,
they will seem and be accounted defenders of truth. Lastly, they are
manslears and do all things with execrable cruel^tie.
88 Three sorts of hypocrites works which compel Esaias in his fifth chapter
to cry, Woe unto them. Such as speak good of evil, and evil of good, Such as
stand in their own conceits. Such as draw wickedness unto themselves with the
cords of vanity.
89 Whatsoever we do is both good and just, if we be not deceived with three
things. Augustine. If forgetfulness confound not our memory. If error
obscure not our understanding. If iniquity deprave not our will.
90 Hypocrites, as Bernard witnesses are Judges. Witnsses. But, without
authority. But, by hearesay. But without truth.
Accusers.
91 Christ has 3 sorts of soldiers. Some he has placed in the kingdom of
the earth, and these are fighting soldiers. Ephesians. 6 Some are triumphant
soldiers, for these he has ordained the kingdom of heaven unto whom after
the victory, he will give a crown. 2. Tim. 4. Some are cowardes and fugitives,
and for these he has appointed the prison of hell. Esaias. 24
92 The godly are afflicted some time for 3. causes. That their faith may be
tried. That true repentance may increase in the^. That they may be stirred up
unto the desire of eternal life.
93 The thoughts of men not regenerate, are of 3. sorts 1. John. 2 verse. 16.
After the concupiscence of the slesh. After the lust of the eyes After the
pride of life.
94 Let a minister live so that he may be as a pattern of good life unto his
hearers, following the example of Paul. 1. Cor. 4. verse 16. 1. Cor. 11. verse
1. Phil. 3. verse 17.
95 The chief knowledge of a Christian consists in 3. things. To believe
invisible things. To hope for things promised. To love God, though he s^eme
to show himself to be our enemy by punishing us.
96 Three things to be observed in all things that we do. That we follow the
express word of God That, we crave Gods aid. That we look for such event as
shall please him to send.
97 Three gifts of God which proceed out of his own mouth Proverb. 2.
Wisdom. Knoweledge. Understanding.
98 Three kinds of knowledge requisite in a Christian. Wisdom to know what
belongs to God that we may desire heavenly things. Understanding for the
world that we may learn to despise it. Foreknowledge of our death, yt while we
live we may live to God.
99 For 3 causes it was necessary that Christ should rise again the third day.
That the prophecy might be fulfilled. Hos. 6. verse. 2. That his body should
not corrupt. Psalm. 16. verse 14. That the omnipotency of his Diutnitie might
be linked with his humanity.
100 Three arguments and testimonies against the Anabaptists to prove that
Christ was borne of the flesh of the Virgin Marie. Of the promises made unto
Abraham and our fore fathers. Genesis 22. verse 18. item 26. verse 3. And in thy
seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed^ All such promises should
be false, if Christ had not come out of the womb of the Virgin Marie. It is
necssarythat Christ should take flesh of the virgin Marie, seeing in many
places of the scripture he calls himself the son of man. It is manifest in
the first chapter of the epistle of S. Paul to the Romans. verse 3. the words
be these, Who was borne of the seed of David according to the flesh

THE FIRST HVNDRETH OF THE Triplicitie of Philosophy.
1 The whole course of man's life consists in these three. TO be borne
weeping. To live laughing. To die fighing.
2 He is worthyly called a wise man Which remembers things past. Which
marketh the course of things present. Which foreseeth things to come.
3 Three things obtain great friendship, Fair speech in presence. Good report
in absence. Faithfulness in friendship.
4 Three sorts of men differ in wishing. The ambitious. The base minded.
Wishes so much, that for it he is hated. Craueeh so little, that every man
ouercroweth him. Desires a mean with love.
The virtuous.
5 Three sorts of men accounted happy in this world. He that owes nothing. A
man single and not married. He that has new buried his ri^h parents*
6 Three sorts of men woeful to be scene. A rich man fallen into poverty. A
virtuous man dispraised. A wise man scorned of the ignorant.
7 Three things which every man does in respect of his enemies. He fears He
hates Whom he fears. Whom he hates, he bewares. Whom he bewares he seeks his
destruction.
He bewars
8 Plutarch does require these 3, things in a young man. Temperance in his
mind. Silence in his tongue. Bashfulnes in his countenance,
9 The art of government was Found out. Defended. By experience. By science. By
prudence.
Conserved.
10 Pride is noted in a man by 3. things. To show a certain statelines in
going. To disdain his companions and equals. To separate himself from the
company of others, with a vain kind of selfeloue.
11 Three causes why a man may be earnest in giving good counsel, because It
is an easy thing, Of little cost. And the best gift a man can give unto his
friend.
12 Three desires amongst friends To enjoy health. To possess honor. Not to
suffer necessity.
13 Three sovereign plasters for a heart which is grieved. Temperance. Time.
Forgetfulness.
14 Three things good for every man. To understand well. To speak better. To
do best of all.
15 Alphonsus king of Aragon, used to thank God most heartily especially for 3.
causes. For that he made him a man, and not a brute beast. For that he was a
christian. For that he was Prince and ruler over so many countries.
16 Plato at the point of death, yielded thanks unto nature, for 3. causes.
That he was borne a man, and not a beast. For that he was a Grecian borne, and
not a Barbarian. That it was his chance to live in the time of Socrates.
17 Aristotle yt philosopher approaching unto death, his scholars requested him
to vnter some sententious saying unto them in steed of a last will and test
ament, who sighing, said I came humbled into this world. Here I have lived
carefully. I depart troubled, being unskillful and ignorant.
18 As dogs be like wolves so three sorts of me^ are like friends. Parasites.
Flatterers. Fawn for the belly. Cosen for the coin e. Dissemble in religion.
Hypocrittes.
19 The covetous man does always ^ffende three persons. God. His neighbor.
From God, he withholdeth his right. He denies things necessary unto his
neighbor. Unthankful to God. Wicked to his neghbour. Cruel to him self.
He keeps that which is (...) needful from himself.
Him self
20 Evil counselors teach a young and unskillful prince, 3. things which after
ward hurt him and his subjects much To prefer Profit before honesty. Gain
before virtue. Tyranny before modesty.

21 A good counselor should be furnished with these 3. Experience of many
things. True love toward him unto whom he ministers counsel. Liberty to
speak freely.
22 Three things ought to be considered in a witness. The nature. The
condition. That a witness be a man and not a woman, for women are diverse and in
constant in their report. That he be free and not a bo^dslaue for he will
conceal a truth for fear of his masters displesure That he be innocent and
not infamous, for justice will not accompany a wicked man.
The life.
23 We ought to bear 3 sorts of affection toward him that is convicted of a
crime. Love. Hatred. Considering his nature, we ought to love him, because he
is a man. Considering his fault which he has committed we should hate him.
Considering yt pain which he must suffer for his fault we ought to pity him.
Pity.
24 No man ought to praise himself, nor desire to be praised for 3. causes. For
if he respect the time he has passed he shall find that he has done many
things for which he ought to be sorry. If he consider of the time to come, he
shall perceive many imminent dangers whereof he should be afraid. If he regard
y^ present time, he shall find many defects and much want in himself, which
minister occasion of bashfulnesse.
25 Upon 3 occasions men use to excuse themselves for not doing things which
they were enjoined to do. Either when they are weary and would rest. Or when
that which is appointed does seem to be hard and difficult. Or when it
seems to be unfruitful and unprofitable.
26 For three causes we ought to use few words. Because of many words,
proceed many faults. Because it is a sign of Foolishness to use many words.
Socrates the Philosopher holding his peace amongst company and being asked why
he did so, answered, Because I have been sorry sometimes for speaking, but never
for holding my peace. Solon the Philosopher being sile^t when other men talked,
one demanded of him whether he held his peace for want of words to speak, or
for that he was a fool? He answered. No fool ^an hold his peace. Xenocrates
the Philosopher said unto one y^ was a great babbler, If you hard your self
with my ears you would hold your peace.
Because many words are the causes of coffeehouse and displeasing.
27 Those which are angry make small account of 3 things which should be
highly esteemed. Old age which ought to be reverenced. Affinity of kindred.
Benefits which are past.
28 Those judges can not judge vprightlye, which either. Suffer themselves to
be corrupted with gifts. Are moved with ^uthoritie. Will requtie friendship, or
revenge enmity.
29 Our mind must be preserved from three things. Anger. Hatred. Fretteth.
Consumes. Puffs us up with pride
Glory.
30 A guilty conscience works 3. miracles. It makes the heaven and earth
though they were x. times greater then they be, to be narrower then a mouse
hole. It causes strong men to be so fearful that they are a^tonished at the
shaking of a leaf. It stirs up the little dog, which though it has slept
al his life time, yet at his death it barks, and is in the stead of a thousand
witnesses.
31 Three things make a man very sorrowful. That he must die, That he knows
not when. That after death he knows not where(...) shall be.
32 Three powers of the soul assigned unto three parts of the body. Reason
to the head. Anger and other perturbations to the heart. Lust and concupiscence
to the liver.
33 Three instruments of men's actions. Sense. Understanding. Appetite.
34 The country life is maistresse of three things. Frugalitie. Diligence.
Justice.
35 The whole life of man passes away with doing three unnecessary things. A
great part with doing evil. A greater doing nothing. The greatest with doing
things to small^ purpose.
36 Al men are busied about one of these 3 things. Honesty. Profit. Pleasure.
37 The Sun has 3. titles atttributed unto it. It is called The eye of the
world. The pleasure of the day. The beauty of heaven.

38 The Astronomers testify that there comes profit from the Sun 3. manner
of ways. By influence. By motion. By light.
39 The world is likened to the sca for 3 causes. Bec ause Swells Burns With
pride. With covetousness. With lust and riot.
Fometh.

40 We ought to rule our ^ong in speaking, 3. manner of ways. To speak but
little of the nobler sort. To speak well of all men. To speak nothing in
commendation of our selves.
41 He that will live in quiet, must frame himself to 3. things. To Hear.
See. And say nothing.

42 Democritus the Philosopher is thought to have thrust out his own eyes for
3. occasions. Because his sight did hinder his inward meditations. Because he
could not look on women without lusting after them. Because he could not
patiently abide to behold the flourishing estate of wicked men.
43 The Philosopher Aristotle believed but 3 things. That which he touched
with his hand. That which he saw with his eyes. That which he could co
mprehend in argument.
44 Hope is good for 3 causes. It is aremedy in adversity, wiping tears from
the eyes, for hope only does sustain the^ whom iniurous fortune does
oppress. It nourishes the life, promising better success to morrow, It
leaves not a man athis death, but exalts his heart to immortalltie.
45 Hope does comfort 3. sorts of men, of whom others are past hope. Him
whom the Physicians have given over, Him that is bound and cast into a deep
dongeon. Him that has suffered shipwreck being tossed with waves: hope
persuades to cast his arms abroad.
46 Hope is misliked of some men. Plato and Pindarus call it a dream of him
that waketh. Cato says, yt it makes great things small, and small things
nothing. Another says, that it is a grief and an unprofitable burden which
wants event.
47 Three things to be noted concerning the affection of love. To love them
which hate us, is a divine virtue. To love them that love us again, is a common
thing amonst men. But to hate them that love us, is worse the^ brute
beastlynesse.
48 Three things requisite in all good works. Knowledge how to do them. Power
able to do them. Will to be ready to do them.
49 Three guides to poverty, Gluttony. Sloth. Whoredom.
50 Three things worthy praise are attributed unto perseuera^ce Cicero says,
it is a steadfast and continual vpholder of that which is grounded upon reason.
It does search out the truth, and follow it always. It cannot be altered to
depart from the truth, neither by favor, allurements, nor gifts.
51 Three most dangerous things will not alter the mind of a just man (being
resolute in his purpose) from the state of stedfastnes. Horace. Not the rage of
citizens commanding that which is evil. Not the puffed and swollen countenance
of a terrible tyrant. Nor Jupiters thunderboltes, the gates of hell, no though
the world should be turned topsi-turuie.
52 Three abominable sayings of the Epicures. There is no pleasure after
death. A vengeance on him that cares for to morrow. Neither fear thou the
latter day, nor wish for it.
53 Three causes why men love ^^e another. One loves because he is loved. An
other because he is advanced to honor. The third, because he looks for some
benefit at his hands whom he loves.
54 Pride does study to conioine 3. things her with self. Power. Nobility.
Riches.
55 Three things which Phytagoras chiefly wished for himself. Beauty. Riches.
Health.
56 S. Jerome writing to Ruffinus says. That a friend. Is long sought for.
Scarcely to be found. And hard to be kept.

57 Phauorinus writing of ambitious persons says, that Some be scoffers. Which
ambitiously attempts high matters. Which have obtained things too good for
their degrees. Which are deceived by hope.
Some full of hate. Some be miserable.
88 Three things which cause a man keep his friends. If he give much. If he
ask little. If he take nothing.
59 Three things which we ought to take in good worth of our friend. A gift.
His good will. His counsel.
60 The mind which is covetous of money knows Neither how to abstain from
that which is forbidden. Nor how to rejoice in that which is granted. Neither
how to frame it self unto goodness.
61 Cicero says, that he is wont to be called a thriftie fellow. Which
neither, for fear does forsake his fortress, which is the part of a coward.
Neither for covetousness does not restore that which was closely committed
unto him, which is a point of injustice. Neither rashly has misbehaued
himself, which is stark foolishnes.
92 You may mark three things in slaunderers. They are vain in heart. They
have lies in their mouth. Their throtes are open sepulchers, breathing out
filthy and abominable speeches, which seem to infect the air, even like ye
stench of dead bodies
63 Such as are hearers of slanderers, as Philostratus witnesses are Lovers of
many words. Followers of. lightness and crudelitie. Envious hearers of just
matters.
64 Truth is likened unto these 3. things. The light. The smell. For the
light is pleasant unto him yt has a clear sight, but offensive to one that is
pore blind. The smell which is comfortable to man, will either drive away or
kill a serpent. Bread is sauory to a sound taste, but unsavory to him that
has a sore mouth.
The Taste.
65 Hatred is likened unto these 3. things. Fire. A Both. For as the fire does
consume that substance whereby it is norished, so hatred consumes the heart
wherein it has bin nusled. As the Moth does gnaw y^ garment whereof it is
bred, so hatred gnaweth the heart wherein it is conceived. As a be pricking
another does lose his sting and can neither make honey, nor live but a small
time after, so the heart pricking another with the sting of hatred does lose
many sweet virtues and kills it self.
A Be.
66 Three things to be learned of the^ that apply themselves to any Art. Let
him be apt to learn, neither let him persuade himself that he knows all
things after a little instruction. Let him be ready to believe, though he
understand not al things, because as Aristotle says: the learner must believe.
Let him be obedient and not contemn good admonitions, nor condemn wholesome
counsels.
67 Three things being in one man, make him very learned. Art makes him
certain. Use makes him ready. Imitation, makes him expert.
68 The drunken man comes in cont^mpt by his surfe^ting He is an abomination
before God and his angels. He is scoffed and scorned of men, and thought unfit
for honest exercises. He is confounded with the devil, and led in all manner of
mischief.
69 Drunken men by too much swilling, bring 3. evils upon them selves. To
stumble and tremble. Madness. That a^ length the^ die, either blasted or stricken
with a planet.
70 King Philip of Macedon received 3. lucky messages at one time. That he had
wnone the games at Olympus by the running of his chariots. That his Captain
Parmenio had overthrown the Dardanians. That his wife Olympia had borne him a
son which was called Alexander.
71 Three things to be required of a Judge, which are necessary to the
discharging of his office. Let him hear the accusation, and listen as well to
the poor man's complaint, as to the rich man's request. Let him sift the
accusation by examining witnesses, and allowing of lawful proofs. Let him
pronounce the sentence of Justice earnestly, without respect of favoring one,
or hating the other.
72 The Judge must have respect unto three things. The law. The guilty. The
authority of the law must be defended without cruelty. The former life of him
that is guilty, his disposition, and his nature must be considered. He must
have respect unto ye people, least he spare them that be guilty to the
hinderance and danger of the common wealth.
The people.
73 Three things as Aristotle says, make a judge ignorant of the truth. Love.
Hatred. Private gain.
74 Lycurgus and almost al ye other Lawreaders of the world, albeit in many
things they were different, yet they had full concord and agreement in these
three. To honor God. To owe compassion to the poor. To bear a reverence to
old men.
75 All men's actions, or all the deeds of men are threefold. Some things are
done to a godly and a honest end and purpose, and these are worthy praise.
Some are done upon urgent necessity, and these are not worthy of excuse. Some
are done to an evil intent, yet not of necessity, and these deserve punishment.
76 A wise man lamenteth and repe^teth that he has done these 3. things. Gone
by sea, when he might have gone by land. That he has revealed his secrets.
That he has let one day pass without doing some virtuous thing.
77 Marcus Sergius had the use of 3. hands. A right hand. When he lost his
right hand he received 23. wounds.
A left hand. He fought in 4. sundry battles with his left hand.
An iron hand in stead of his right hand. He fought with his iron hand at the
siege of Cremona and took 12. places in Gaul

78 Three great benefits we receive when we eat cheries. They cleanse our
stomach. The meat of them br^^^eth good blood. The kernels of them are good
against the disease of the stone.
79 The gentle mind is of three sorts. Mild to suffer. Ready. Willing to
help.
80 We must put 3. things out of our minds. Cares. Fear. The desire of other
men's wealth.
81 Gold as Basilius says, is The snare of souls. The hook of death. The
bait of sin.
82 The craftines of the Eagle is known by three things. She lays stones in
the nest which have the virtue to drive away serpents. She teaches her young
ones to fly. She builds her nest in a safe place.
83 Three excellent things in the flying of the Eagle. She flies very swift.
She fl^eth far higher then any other bird. She is never weary of flying.
84 Three things show yt there is great clemency in Lions. They will not hurt
them that lie groueling They will exercise their crueltye sooner against men,
then women. They will not hurt children unless it be when they be almost
famished for hunger.
85 There be 3. things in yt night which cause us to sle^pe. The darkness.
The cold. For men desirous to sleep, do seek the darkest places. For both
in winter men sleep more soundly, and such as are cold of complexion, will
sleep longer then others which are h^te. For according to Philosophy, moiste
vapors arising from the stomach, and ascending to the brain, do provoke
sleep.
The moisture.
86 There be 3. things very commendable in the Dolphin. The love it bears
unto man. The protection of her young ones. Arion was saved in the sea by a
Dolphin. If it chance any of her young ones to be taken by Fishermen, they will
not forsake them, but follow them so extremely, that they will suffer
themselves rather to be taken, then forsake them. For Plime reports, that she
is the swiftest of all fishes.
Her swiftnes.
87 We must seek to get money for (...) causes. For necessary expenses. To
keep eredit. To prevent grinous mishaps.
88 Three famous civil wars among the Romans. Between Sylla and Maurius.
Between Caesar and Pompey. Beteene Antonius and Augustus Octauus.
89 Three things necessary for the increase of corn. Good seed. Good
ground. Gods blessing.
90 Three monstrous things which be in many men. An envious heart. A covetous
mind. A proud look.
91 Three things very necessary in war to obtain victory. To deliberate and
consult wisely of al things. To keep close that counsel which is concluded
on, least by treason it be revealed to the enemies. To know assuredly by
espials the condition and state of the adversaries.
92 Charles the 5. said, that there is three things whic h maintain war.
Victuals. Money. Soldiers.
92 Three things nedeful for the^ that will overcome cruel enemis with a small
army. Munition. Money. Counsel.
94 He that will place his battle must fores^e three things. The sun. The
dust. The sun before the face takes away the sight. The dust fillteh the
eyes and hurts them. The wind in fight helps the weapons.
The wind.
95 Three things which deserve the praise of goodness. To overcome cruelty
with gentelnesse. To move them to be better affected that do us injury. To
suffer patie^^ly what ^^euer is d^^e unto us.
96 We may read in the chronicles of Flaunders, that king Edward of England
warring against Philip Valesius King of France, by his letters offered him 3.
conditions. To fight either Person to person. A hundred against an hundred.
King Philippe made answer, yt he would none of his offers, neither would
yield to any thing which he, demanded.
Army against army,
97 Tamburlanes of a shepherd being made king of Persia, when he went to lay
siege to any town, he would 3 sundry days pitche 3. tents of sundry colors,
signifying 3 things. The 1. day a white tent. The white signified, that he
would not hurt any that would yield unto him.
The second day a red tent. The red signified, that he would put every one
to the sword.
The 3 day a black and smokie tent. The black and smokie tent signified, that
whatsoever remained, should smell of fire and smoke.

98 That a man may sin the less, let him take heed of three things. Evil
occasions. Evil customs. Evil conuersations.
99 Three sorts of men which care not greatly for meat. Covetous men. Such as
be sorrowful in heart. They that love solitarines.
100 We must not be curious, nor careful in three things. Of good rule and
order in another man's house. Of the divine government of the almighty In the
counsels of noble men.

THE SECOND HVNDRETH OF THE Triplicitie of Philosophy.
1 Three things disclose men's impatience, and make the^ murmr. TO serve
without recompense. To ask and be denied. To give and have no thanks.
2 Three things which every man is loath to endure. Poverty in old age.
Infamy after honor. Banishment from his natural country.
3 A man is most grieved for 3. things. To see the death of his children. To
hear the loss of his goods. To see the prosperity of his enemies.
4 Three things undo a man. To defer and prolong his business. To meddle with
other men's matters. To reject the good counsel of his friends.
5 Three enemies to good counsel. Have. Anger. Covetousness.
6 Three things make a man willing to serve. Gain. Love. To see his service
acceptable.
7 Chilo the Grecian being asked what was hard, answered. To keep close
secret counsel, To keep a man from idleness. To suffer wrong.
8 He that yields himself to the world, ought to dispose himself to 3.
things which he cannot au^ide. To poverty, for ^ee shall never attain to the
riches that he desires. To suffer injury pain and trouble. To business,
without e^^^dition,
9 Three sorts of men ought not to be made pertakers of secret counsel. The
man that will be often angry for small occasions. The drunkard that in his fit
will report al he knows. He that is in subjection to a woman.
10 Pythagoras being demanded of king Leontius, what differen^e there was
between Philosophers and other men, answered, Man's life seems to be like a
congregation assembled to se a game to which me^ resort for sundry purposes.
Some by their ownactiuity to win the worship of y^ game. Some for Lucar sake
to buy or sell some what. Other some minding neither to gain not to profit,
come only to behold and see what is done. In like manner men which are come
unto this life as out of an other life (...) nature, occupye them selves with
diligence either To get praise. Profit. Or regarding neither apply their
minds to search and know the nature of things, of which sort are
Philosophers, that isto say, Lovers of wisdom.


11 Glory is fought for, 3. manner of ways. Either by doing some valiant act
which may be eternized in the register of fame. Or by writing somewhat which
the posterity may read and marvel at. Or erecting some famous building for a
monument.
12 Three sorts of men whose manners are worthy to be reprehended. They which
neither inuit their neighbors to banquets, nor being invited themselves will
come unto them. They which inuit others, and bestow ba^quets on them, but they
themselves despise other men's good cheer. They which being invited will come
unto banquets, but will inuit no man to any banquet of their cost.
13 Three things necessary to ye maintenance of our bodies. Sufficient meat to
appease the rage of hunger. Clothing to cover the body, and expel cold. Sleep
which does refresh ye wearied lim^ with labor.
14 The body co^eteth 3. things Good cheer. Sleep. Merry talk.
15 Three sorts of men have su^drie sorts of manners in giving and taking
counsel. One sort of men, which see what is to be done and do it, and these
be the best sort. Another sort are those, which though they see not into the
matter, yet they obey the^ which have more knowledge then them*selues and these
also are good. The third sort (which are altogether either unprofitable and
abominable) are of those men which are neither governed by their own
wisdom, nor will be ruled by the wisedo me of other men.
16 Three things which for the uncertainty of that which may ensue, a man
cannot safely give counsel to enterprise them. To take a wife. To travel by
sea. To follow warfare.
17 Three things to be noted in giving counsel. To give counsel to a fool,
it is charity. To give counsel to a wise man, is a sign of vaineglorie. To
give counsel in a froward time, is a token of wisdom.
18 For 3. causes as Auicene says, our dinners ought to be greater the^ our
suppers. Because in the day time our natural heat is helped by the heat of
the sun to concoct our meat. They which exercise themselves had need of
meat, that they may be able to labor. But in ye day time men exercise
themselves, therefore they had need of more meat. With exercise our nourishment
is easily digested. Therefore in the day time we need more meat the^ at night
19 Three reasons which Galen and Hipocrates allege to prove that it is
necessary for the health of our bodies to eat more meat at supper then at
dinner. Because the time is longer between supper and dinner, then between
dinner and supper, wherein seeing we may concoct^ more meat, we may also eat
more meat at supper. Because fleepe following after supper, does help concoct
ion. Hipocrates 1 Aphoris, 15. Rest and quietness helps concoction, and
digestion, whereas little moving or exercise is very hurtful after meat.
20 In histories we can read of 3. cities only which were besieged three
yares continually the other. The first Bizantium, in the time of Seuerus the
Emperor. The second Bethoron, in the time of Adrian the Emperor. The third
Sama^ia.
21 Three sorts of men which should not be hindered in their purposes. He
which will lawfully marry a wife. He which will help the needy. He which from
a wicked life is purposed to return to virtue.
22 Three things are required as necessary for a man and his wife. Love in
the heart. Concord outwardly, in dwelling together peaceably. Both an outward
and inward agreement to do goodworks.
23 Daily exercises of reasoning and disputing, are profitable for 3. things.
They sharpen the wit wonderfully. They do consume and strenthen our judgment
concerning profitable and necessary things. They breed quicknes in resolving
doubts and intricate questions.
24 There is a continual desire of riches in men, as says Democritus. He that
has nothing, is trobled with a desire to get wealth. He that has enough, is
molested with cares, in keeping that he has. He that has lost all he had, is
vexed with sorrow for his mishap.
25 Three sorts of men gather riches couetously for 3 causes. He that is given
to pleasure, loves riches that by the help of them he may continue in his
voluptious vain. He that is ambitious and desirous of vain glory, desires
treasurre, that by the aid thereof he may be advanced and accounted honorable.
A man fearing future poverty, scrapeth up wealth by hook or croake, h^rdeth
it, and keeketh it, doubting hunger, age. diseases, banishment, etc. and
reposing more trust and confidence therein. then in God.
26 Three things which seem to make a man happy. Sufficiency Tranquillity
Wanting nothing. Grieuing for nothing. Fearing nothing.
Security.
27 Three things proper unto beauty. It is frail, and fades in short time.
Many wicked vices of the mind, are covered with the vale of beauty. It has
brought commodity to few, but many unto destruction.
28 Our ancestors feigned a triple fortune, or 3. fortunes. One blind. She
was called blind, because she bestowed benefits upon evil and unthankful
persons.
An other mad and furious. Mad, because she easily snaicheth and takes away
that which she has given.
The third deaf. Deaf, because she will not hear ye complaints of ye poor.

29 Ignorance is of three sorts. Some is good when we are ignorant of evil.
Some is evil when we are ignorant of good. Some is indifferent which is
neither good nor evil.
30 We are ignorant of many things which we might know, and that for 3 causes.
Either for carelesnes of the knoweledge of them. Or for sloth to learn them.
This kind of ignorance has no excuse.
Or for shamefastnes to enquire after the^.
31 Ignorance also is of 3. sorts after another manner. On is affected, which
will not know that which it knows. Another gross, which for sloth and
negligence, will not learn and search forth. The third invincible, which
remains after all diligence.
32 Three things which are a joy to beholders. To see agreement amongst
brethren. Love amongst neighbors. A man and his wife keeping faith and
loyalty together.
33 Beauty has prerogative above deformity, three manner of ways. Beauty
sets forth honesty, as says Pacatus, for virtue in a comely body is
always more acceptable. We more willingly talk with those which are fair,
then those which are foul, as Aristotle witnesses. Beauty is of more force
to commend any body, then any letter of commendation.
34 Three things make men break their covenants. Ungodly desire of gain.
Heady anger. Lust which sets men's hartson fire.
35 Three evils for the most part accompany beauty. Fair people are
disdainful, and pride follows beauty, and beauty how little soever it is,
proud it is. There is great strife betwixt beauty and chastity. And that
which pleases many is kept with great danger. It is an oc casion of sin, or
a stirrer up of foolish love: for lightness has always been a suter to the
fairest.
36 Three excellent governors. God governs the world. The mind governs
the soul. Wisdom does rule and govern the felicetie of this life.
37 Lampedo is judged happy for ever (as Pliny writes) for 3 causes, for
that she was A kings daughter. A kings wife. A kings mother.
38 Al moral Philosophy is divided into 3. parts. Ethicall. Oeconomicall.
Which pertains to the government of a man's own self. Which belongs to ye
government of a man's house. Which concerns the government of the common
wealth.
Political.
39 Three things which whette the eye sight. To view fountains of water. To
Look upon green things. To behold a man's self in a looking glass.
40 Three commodities of letting blood. It cheareth the hearts of such as are
sad It appeaseth such as are angry. It keeps lovers from running mad.
41 Three sorts of people will tell truth always for the most part.
Children. Fools. Careless men.
42 Three chief parts in a man. The brain. The heart. Yields sense. Life.
Nourishment.
The liver.
43 Three things which can seldom or never be cured. Frenzy. Heresy.
Jealousy.
44 Three things necessary to obtain and maintain by authority. Wonderful
wisdom. Happy and prosperous success in the business of our vocation. The
good opinion and inclination of the peoples minds toward us.
45 Crafty and boulde counsels have three things pioper unto them. At the
first, in show they do delight. Afterward, being in execution, they appear
hard to be compassed. Lastly, in event they are found to be woeful and
lamentable.
46 We may fortell of y^ change of weather 3 manner of ways by the moon. The
moon appearing pale, it betokens we shall have rain. The Moon appearing
red, foresheweth we shall have winds. The moon e appearing white, presageth we
shall have fair weather.
47 Three things which are as necessary as as any phisike. A joyful heart.
Quiet rest. A moderate diet,
48 Three things necessary to be known in drinking. To drink but little and
often at dinner. Not to drink b^twene meals. To drink at the beginning of
supper but not after.
49 Three things overcome patience. Grief conquereth y^ stro^gest hearts Tibul
Unskillfulness then which as Seneca affirms nothing is more impatient
disdaining to hear any reason. Fear, lest y^ sufferance of on injury should
provoke men to offer us another injury*
50 Three necessary offices for a good wife to execute when her husband is
sick. Of a Cook. Of a Physician. Imitating y^ example of Saratomacha the wife
of K. Deiotarus.
Of a Chirurgian
51 Three causes why a man may weep for the death of his friend. In as much as
we re^oyce in his life, it is necessary we should weep at his death. Since two
hearts united in one honest affection have but one being and place of
residence, it is good reason that we bewail the death of our chosen friend,
even with the same nature and compassion that we would do our own. Least we be
evil spoken of Eccl. 38 verse. 17.
52 The glory of a man exalted unto honor, engenders 3. things. Strife anong
great men. Suspicion among his equals. Envy among the meaner sort.
53 Three things abate pride. Sickness. Poverty, Imprisonment and bondage.
54 Marcus Aurelius the Emperor was forewarned of great and grievous
punishments which should fall upon the city and citizens of Rome, by 3.
strange miracles which happened in y^ time of his Empire. As he was in the
temple of the virgins vestals, suddenly there entered in two hogs, and ran
about his feet, and there fell down dead. Another day as he came from his
high Capitol to have gone out at the gate Salarie, he saw two kites joining
together with their talents, and so fell down dead in his presence. Within a
short season after, as he came from hunting a wild beast, while he was gining
two greyhounds which he loved well water to drink, suddenly they fell down
dead at his feet also.
55 Three things do hasten our death. Sorrow. Solitarines. Desperation.
56 One demanded of Diogines what were best for a man do, to be in favor of
the gods, and belooued of the people. He answered. Reverence and honor much
the gods. Bring up his children in due correction. And be thankful to his
benefactors.
57 Three mothers bring forth three evil daughters. Truth the mother, hatred
the daughter. Riches the mother, ^nuy the daughter. Familiarity the mother,
contempt ye daughter.
58 A noble man being desirous to know of K. Alexander for what cause he would
be governor of the whole world. He made him this answer. All wars are raised
for one of these 3. causes, either. To have many gods. Many laws. Therefore
would I be conqueror of ye world, that I might command through out the world.
That they honor but one God. Observe but one law. Serve but one king.

Or many kings
59 Three tokens to know a wise man by. To endure. Not to exalte himself being
praised. If he know when to speak, and when to be silent.
60 Three principal plagues that Princes should take heed on. To call their
own follies and rashness Prudence. Their cruelty, justice. To fatten
themselves with the misery and calamity of the poor.
61 Three things which soon deceive a man. Fair speech. Great gifts. Little
knowledge.
62 Three sorts of men which are worthy to be accounted good Common
peacemakers. They that can forget injuries done unto them. They that will not
forget to requite good turns.
63 The Romans had a law named Falcidia, which was enacted for the reforming of
disobedient childrens manners, containing 3. things. For the first offense he
was pardoned, if there were any hope of amendment. For the second he was
punished. For the third he was punished.
64 Three sorts of men easilye get friends. Pitiful men. Courteous men.
Liberal rich men.
65 No man should think himself worthy the honor of three. Of a prince. Of a
priest. Of a Judge.
66 Men may lawfully fight in defense of three things. The Law. The prince.
The country.
67 Three things do allure us to epicurisme. The devil which promises
pleasures, and the goods of this world to them y^ worship him. Our own flesh
and frailty, which prefers sweet and pleasant things above al goodness.
Greedy gutlings, which by their example entice the ignarant unto the like
beastlines.
68 Patience overcomes any adverse calamity, 3. manner of ways. Not by
striving, but by suffering. Not by murmuring, but giving thanks. Not by
weeping, but by hoping.
69 Pride being in a man, causes him to be less esteemed, though he have
these 3 things. The favor of men. Wisdom. Beaetie.
70 We cannot yield worthy thanks unto three, as Aristotle affirms. The
gods. Our parents, Our masters.
71 Ambitious me^ are not with (...) these three vices They are very desirous
of vaineglorie They are very witty in cauilling at other men's words, and
reproving their deeds that thereby themselves may win the peoples hearts.
When they are become famous in the mouths of the common people, ^though
through the labor of others, yet they are so stout and high minded, that they
dare enterprise any thing.
72 Three things are dangerous for young men. Solitarines. Common company.
Because when a man is solitary, the devil is most ready to tempt him. Because
of evil talk which corrupts good manners. Because it is ye inue^ter of
naughtines
Idleness.
73 Humility is ye key of knowledge, whereof though there are many precepts,
yet these 3. chiefly to be observed. To contemn or despise no kind of learning
or knowledge. Not to be ashamed to learn. Having obtained knowledge not to
extol himself above any man.
74 For 3. causes men cry with a loud voice. When he is far off unto who^ they
would speak. When they talk with one that is deaf. When they are incensed
with anger.
75 Julius Caesar used to carry 3. things with him while he followed the wars.
His pen to write the whole course of the Romans success in their wars. His
books, to find himself occupied. His lance, to help to repulse his enemies.
76 The Bishop of Sarisbury did affirm that there is 3. ways to conclude
peace between the papists and protestants. That the protestants should yield
unto the papists, which they will never do, being governed by the word of God.
That the papists should yield unto the Protestants, which they will never
do, while might and multitude might prevail. Wherefore it remains, that the
stronger in fight, do utterly overthrow and disco^fit the weaker
77 Three evil qualities of evil customs. They take away from a man the sense
and feeling of his sins. They make men every day worse and worse They never
forsake a sinner before his death.
78 Pomponius affirms, that there are 3. sorts of bodies. One which has but
one shape. As a man: wood, a stone. Another which consists of many bodies,
agreeing or hanging together as a ship, a house. The third which is comprised
of many and sundry (as suppose of many bodies comprehended under one name:) as
the people, a congregation, an army, a legion.
79 Three things though they be very good, yet they please not every body.
Rain, though it will do very much good to to the earth toward increase.
Upright judgment. The labors of learned men.
80 Gluttony does harm unto men three manner of ways. It makes the body
deformed and misshapen. It breeds infirmities, and sometimes brings death. It
causes them to be insatiable like ravenous brute beasts.
81 Appius Claudius did assay 3. manner of ways to bereave Virginia of her
virginity. By prayer and request. By great gifts. By threatenings.
82 Augustine reports yt there are three kind of errors. The first kind,
when that which is false is thought to be true according to his meaning that
is the author of it. As if a man should think that Idols are true gods,
because they are called gods in the scripture. When that which is false is
taken for truth as if by reading Lucretius books, thou should think the
soul to consist of motes of the sun, which he both wroteand thought, and yet
it is an error. When something of another man's writing is believed to be true,
which the Author neither thought nor meant, as if a man should think the
Epicure to account virtue to be the chief felicity, because he praises
continency.
83 Three virtues most comme^dable in a woman. Sobriety. Silence. Chastity.
84 We salute 3. sorts of people when we meet them. Our betters. Of
necessity.
Our equals. Of our own will.
Our inferiors* Of mere virtue.

85 Three renoumed kings have 3. sundry titles. The king of England is
entitled defender of the church. The king of France is called y^ most
christian king. The king of Spain is termed the most catholic king.
86 They which sigh much are troubled with one of these three passions, Sorrow.
Love. Anger.
87 These three vi^es keep together for company. Gluttony. Drunkenness.
Lechery.
88 Three kind of people are ielous. Such as be of evil condition themselves,
for they muse as they use. Such as have fair wives, and great resort of men
unto their houses. Old men that marry young girls.
89 There are 3. points of wisdom. To believe little. To keep that which
thou have. To take no thought for that is lost.
90 There are three properties of the envious man. To level at high marks,
and to envy his superiors. To be blear eied and not to envy those which are
far off, or the dead. To be his own destruction, and his own executioner.
91 Three things which are overcome one of another. Death ouercomes man. Fame
florisheth after death. Time triumphs over fame
92 Death has three Sumners. Sickness. Adversity. Shows the weakness of ye
body. The instabilitie of fortune. Which ever has one foot to step into the
grave.
Age.
93 Labor is good for 3 things. It occupies the mind, and drives away
fantasies. It helps the body in concoction and diges^ion. It increases thy
substance, and augme^teth thy store.
94 There are three intolerable plagues. War brings famine and dearth of
all things. Famine, breeds pestilence and diseases. Pestilence, brings death
and desolation in countries.
95 All the laws of this world are reduced, and have their original from one
of these three. The law of nature. Ancient custom. The or dinances of men.
96 Man's nature is desirous of 3. things especially Of news, because old
things are stale and loathsome. Of liberty, because we desire to go abroad and
hate servitude. Of dignity because we desire to triumph over our enemies by
superiority.
97 As there are 3. kinds of stars so there are 3 sorts of friends. One sort
which appear unto the beholders like stars, yet are none: (and these
proceed of an exhalation being set on fire:) so some waiting upon our
prosperous fortune, seem to be our friends, and yet are not. An other sort
are wandering Stars, which also have their own proper motion: so some are
friends which by perverse will are changed, and become our enemies, yet he was
never true friend which did once desist from being friendly. Salust. The third
sort are Stars indeed, and fixed Sarres: so there are some constant and
unfeigned.
98 A man's anger or hatred is to be avoided 3. manner of ways. Either to be
assuaged and mitigated by words. Or suffered with silent patience. Or eschewed
by absence.
99 Caesar being in the wars of Persia, wrote a letter unto the Senate of
Rome, touching his happy success, which letter was contained in 3. words.
Veni. I came.
Vidi. I saw.
Vici. I overcame.

100 Brevity brings 3. commodities. It wins. It obteineth favor. It
gets profit.

THE FIRST HVNDRETH OF THE Triplicitie of Poetry
1 It is gain and pleasure for 3. sorts of men to lie. POets. Painters.
Astronomers.
2 Three things necessary in a flatterer. An impudent face. A steadfast coulor.
A changing voice.
3 Three things which our auucestors have abhorred. Meat twice sodden. A
reconciled friend. A woman with a beard.
4 Three things which will not be hidden. Straw in thy shoes. A spindle in a
sack. A whore in a chamber.
5 Three sorts of men we must take heed of. A ruddie Etalian. A white French
man. A black Almaine.
6 Three kinds of people which should not be believed. A woman when she
weeps. A merchant when he swears. A drunken clown when he prays.
7 Three signs of great poverty in a man. A nail in the pocket, Water in a
bottle. A straw hat in winter.
8 Three creatures do no good in 3. places. Knaves in a counsel chamber. Swine
in a bath. Dogs in a church.
9 The world consists in these 3. things and in nothing else. Proud misery.
Glorious vanity. Sweet bitterness.
10 Three horrible things are reported of the world. That is the region of
death. The shop of the devil. The prison of men.
11 Three sorts of benefits perish. Such as are bestowed upon old men. Such
as are given to children. They die before they have time to quite them. They
forget the^ before they be able to requite them. Dogs will as soon bark at him
y^ gives the^ meat as at strangers.
Such as are cast away upon other men's dogs.
12 Three things which if a man put trust in them, will deceive him. Old wives
tales. Charms. Dreams.
13 Three sorts of things whereof there is plenty, yet in many men's judgment
there ought to be scarfitie. Errors. Evil words. Beggars wives.
14 Three most filthy places. The court wherein a tyrant reigns. An Inn,
the host whereof is a thief. A house wherein the wife and daughters are
wantons, the goodma^ knowing thereof, and holding his peace.
15 Three things used by monks which provoke other men to laugh at their
follies. They are shaue^ and nocht on the head like fools. By their apparel
and going barefote, they s^eme to be beggars. They wear ropes about their
middles like thieves.
16 A certain monk being very devout, was accused of incontinency and breaking
his vow, he answered very demurely, that he had vowed 3. things: poverty,
obedience, and chastity, and yet not at all times, and in a^l places.
Poverty, being in a bath naked, and without his purse. Obedience, in the
fields when he was alone and without the company of his betters. Chastity,
when he was celebrating mass on the altar, not in his chamber. This devout
monk has many companions like himself.
17 trust not three things. Dogs teeth. Horses Feet. Women's protestations.
18 Antisthenes said that three things were absurd. To purge wheat from
cockle. To rid unprofitable soldiers out of the army. Not to expulse the
enutous out of the common wealth.
19 Bonifacius maintained his Popedom after the manner of 3. beasts. Entering
like a fox. Reigning like a lion. Dying like a dog.
20 Three things are very bitter. Gall. Grief. Death.
21 Three sorts of men which may lie by authority, without reprehension. Ole
men, seeing no young man can tell whether it be true or no which they speak.
Far travelers, because rather then we will adventure the like dangers
which they have passed, we believe that which they report. Noble men, because
none dare be so bold to control them, speak they the truth or not.
22 Three things which women can do all at once. Spinne. Weep. Prattle.
23 There is scarcity of 3. sorts of men in our age. Of priests, for if there
were not, one should not need to have 3. or 4 benefices. Of noble men, because
citizens do aspire to honor, and buy nobility. Of Jews, because christians
make an occupation of usury.
24 We can not know the authors of three mischeifes which happen oftentimes.
He that is drunk can not justly say, This cup of wine or that made me
drunk. He that walks among thorns, and is hurt, cannot declare which thorn
pricked him. A common whore being with child, knows not who is the father of
her infant
25 Three sorts of men are very slothful. They that sit long at dinner. They
that lie long in bed when they should rise to their labor. They that come to the
Church at the end of service.
26 George duke of Saxony, did once boast that he had at Lipsia 3. monastries,
wherein were such Friars as were wondered at of all the world. The first,
barefooted Friars, which never handled money, and yet did build sumtuous
houses. The second, of the order of S Paul, which had great store of corn,
and sold great store, and yet had no fields. The third, of the order of S,
Thomas, who were without wives, and yet had many children of their own.
27 Three things confound a whole multitude. The lawiers book. She
Physicians receiept, The zeal of ministers.
28 When an evil man dies, there is great strife. The deuell will have his
soul. His friends the treasure. The worms his flesh.
29 Three things which seldom can be seen. A broker which never made lie. A
Collier which never was black. Two hills near without a valley.
30 A crooked old man seeks by 3. things to increase his stre^gh. By taking
his ease in a warm and soft bed. By drinking good wine and beer. By
sitting near the fire, where he may ea^ a whote pie, roasted apples, and
pears, (...) such like,
31 Three things seldom brought to pass. That is An errant knave should prove
a good householder. A shameless woman should become a modest matrone. A dog
being used to eat durtie puddinges should afterward leave and loath them.
32 Three things whereof we may hope for no goodness. Of a tamed wolf. Of a
Jew baptized. Of a thief saved from the gallows.
33. Three things are uncertain and unconstant. The favor of princes. The
love of women. The shining of the sun in April.
34 Three things which are a disgrace to a rich man, yet no discredit to a
poor man. To wear a coat of course cloth. To have little money in his purse.
To have feathers sticking in his beard.
35 Three things be not silent where they be. Money in the purse. Wantonness
in heart. Grief in sickness.
36 Three sorts of men easilye become poor. Those which consume their wealth
in banque^ing and excess. Those which are slothful and idle, not caring which
end go forward. Those which are contentious, and by striving in law, enrich
the Lawier, and undo them selves.
37 Three things are intolerable. A Gentleman fallen into poverty. A rich
rusticall clown. A woman delighting in dainties and bravery
38 Three kinds of people will never be good. Young men without fear or
reverence. Maids without modesty and bashfulnes. Servants without truth and
honesty.
39 Three things which are little to be regarded. Women's noddings. Halting
dogs. Merchants oaths.
40 Three things which every man ought to take heed of. Least he be curious
when he reads over other men's letters. That he touch nothing in Smiths shops.
That he taste nothing in an Apothecaries house.
41 Women have three sorts of tears in their eyes. The first of Grief. The
second of deceipte. The third of impatience.
42 Three sorts of men which are not content with things present. Covetous
men, which always look for more gain. Curious persons which still studyfor
variety. Adulterers which always hunt after new whores.
43 A dog is to be praised for 3. things. For that he can cure and heal him
self with his tongue. He is a faithful friend unto his master. And he will
give warning when any come near the house.
44 There are 3. unhappy beasts according to the old proverb. A good woman. A
good mule. A good Goat.
46 A thriftie householder should especially take heed of 3. things. New wine.
Green wood. Hot bread.
47 He has nothing, neither can look any thing that is deprived of these
three things. Shame. Truth. Honesty.
48 Three things are gotten without money: Malady. Ignorance. (...)onor.
49 Three things necessary for an Inn keeper. That he be as merry as
Hector. That he be as pacient as Job. That he be ^s careful for his guestes as
Philemon.
50 We may read three things in comodies, of the craft and subteltie of
lovers. That they know what their meaning is, that crack their fingers, and
without noise can set the print of a key in wax. That they will come sneaking
into a house and tread softely on their toes like thieves, faining themselves
to have other business there, then in truth they have. That in the hearing of
many people, they can tell a fair tale for chastity, and dispraise lust
utterly.
51 We may perceive 3. great imperfections of lovers. They are blind, wanting
judgment, and suffering affection to lead the^ in a string. In a small time
they loose body, soul, wealth and all. They serve filthy whores, and like oxen
are constrained to draw the plough.
52 Three peculiar crosses which do afflict lovers. They live by another bodies
life. They speak in a strange language. They can see other men's harms, and
can not perceive their own.
53 Three things cannot agree with other three. Sleep with desire to learn.
Riches, with prodigality. Divine religion with human superstition.
54 Of 3. things we must beware. Too much wine. Strife. The princes anger.
55 Three things we must eschew and fly from. Sin. A serpent. An evil
woman.
56 Three things are not worth a fleece of wool. A Popes bull. A dead man's
skull. An old trull.
57 Three things as wholesome as medicines for the body. Running. Walking.
Reading with a loud voic^.
58 Beauty causes 3. things. Gazers. Lovers. Thieves.
59 Three sorts of men most merry, most free, most mad. Priests are most merry.
who at burials do sing when other folk weep. Physicians are most free, unto
whom it is lawful only to kill men, and though it be death to other men to
commit murder yet it gets them rewards. Grammarians are most mad, who
having neither skill in prose nor verse, yet when they look upon other men's
works, they will seem as though they could see very far in a millstone.
60 Three things will not endure long. Constrained love. Painting which women
lay on their faces Counterfect coin.
61 Women are not to be believed at three times. When they weep: for they have
taught their eyes how to gush out with tears at their pleasure. When they
feign themselves to be sick, we we should not give the^ credit til we saw they
were dead. When they say that they are not hungry, if they bring not their
trencher and eat, we must either believe that they have dined in the kitchen,
or else have set up a dainty morsel for themselves.
62 Three short times seem very long to some. The night seems long unto him,
whose best beloved has broken promise. The day seems long unto them that owe
a days work. The year seems tedious unto those children whose mother does
abridge their liberty.
63 A husband is forbidden three days of fasting. When the wife is gone to the
bath. When he has well beaten her, and she is angry When she is abroad at good
chears with her gossips.
64 You may know good wine by 3. things. The coulor. The smell. The taste.
65 A maker of clear spectacles did complain that his art was not so gainful
as it had been before times, and that for 3. causes, Because old monks and
priests could say their prayers without book. They were to dainty ware for
rude follows to meddle withal. Kings and Princes can see through their
fingers.
66 Three diseases which can not be helped. The gnawing of envy. The heat of
love. The sting of the conscience.
67 Three things which we must not hope to obtain after certain times.
Beauty after the age of twenty years. Strength after the age ot thirty
years. Riches after the age of three score years.
68 Three things make a man circumspect and careful. The love he bears to
his wife and children. Want of friends and money. The iniquity of times.
69 Princes have prerogative in 3. things. above other men. When they are
drunk, their familiars say they are merry. If they be black, they are said to
be brown^. When they be fools, they are called honest, simple and innocent.
70 Crates the Theban says, that there are three medicines for such as be in
love. Hunger, Hunger cures love, for love quaileth when good cheer fails.
Time. Time will either mitigate and assuage love, or end it,
A halter. If these two will not cure this malady, yet will a halter help
presently this infirmity.

71 Three sorts of men for the most part are great babblers. Barbers.
Bathkeepers. The reason is, because they hear mariners, soldiers, and other
extrauagant fellows, reciting many strange and sundry tales, that being as
it were infected with their talk, they become great bablers.
Vintners
72 Three sorts of eggs are accounted for good. White. Long. Eggs.
New.
73 Three sorts of men deceive us in show. Such as wear long knives, and yet
be no Cooks. Maids y^ have their hair hanging down, yet being no virgins.
Such as have shaven crowns, and be no priests.
74 We labor in vain with 3. sorts of men. By ministering a medicine to a dead
man. By admonishing an old man that is obstinate in his opinions. In washing
an Ethiopian.
75 We may take example by 3. sorts of men which hazard themselves in danger,
and often perish. The best swimmers are drowned. The best climbers do fall. The
best fensers are wounded.
76 Three sorts of people, from whom we must fly as from the devil. A wild
and unruly monk. A meal mouthed flatterer. A crafty old witch.
77 Three sorts of men which will trouble themselves when they may live
without care. The prince that will proclaim war when he may live in peace. He
that having a barren wife, will increase his well gotten goods with fraud and
usury. A man of 70. years of age, that will lead with him a springhall of
18. years old.
78 Three guests which are first at a banquet. Flies. Dogs. Flatterers.
79 We must not believe three things. The inconstant win^es. Our deceitful
dreams. That our prosperity will continue.
80 Three sorts of living creatures have very good eye sight. The Eagle. The
spotted beast. The curious person.
81 Hesiodus says, that he had need of three things that will expel
poverty. A house. A wife. An Ox to till the ground.
82 Three things to be noted in a pecocke. He is clothed like an Angel. He
walks like a thief. He cries like a devil.
83 All creatures do daily preach these 3. lessons unto man. Receive a good
turn. Give that unto others which is due to the^. Fly punishment.
84 Three things to be avoided, of which we should not hope well. An inconstant
mind. A rolling eye. Feet ready to run to do mischief.
85 Regiomontanus an excellent Astonomer, being asked on a time which were the
best signs for a man to know when he should take his journey, answered. A good
horse. Money in the purse. Good companions.
86 Three proud creatures. A knave sitting in a chair. A queen riding in a
chariot. A ramping louse in a scabbed head.
87 Three faults in maids which play with evil neighbors. They bewray our
secrets. They sell unto them the goods they have stolen from us. They are
gadding abroad in the night.
88 Three things being in the house, maids wish out of the house. An angry
maistresse. Smoke. A broken dish.
89 An ass does 3. filthy things not without commodity. Where he does file,
there he dongeth the ground. Where he does piss, he watars ye ground. Where he
tumbleth he breaks the clods.
Three things are sit for an ass. Fodder. Stripes. Burdens.
90 Three things are always good cheap. Earth. Worces. Lies.
91 Three sorts of men ought to be very vigilant. Pastors to their flocks.
Pilats to their ships. Portors to their gates.
92 Whoesoeuer will retain a Lawier, and lawfully seek his own right, must
be furnished with 3. pucket^. In the first pocket he must have his
declarations and certificats, wherewith he may show his right. In the second
pocket he must have his redd rudduckes ready, which he must give unto his
Laweir, who will not set pen to paper without them. In the third pocket he
must have patience: which must stand him in stead when his Laweirs do delay
him, and when sentence passes against him.
93 Lovers are slaves unto death for lusts sake, and do despise 3. things
which maintain life. They suffer hunger. They continue thirsty. They pass
the night in thoughts without sleep.
94 Every flower has these 3. things naturally. His blossom. His savor. His
sap.
95 A certain horsecourser sold a horse, and when he had received ready money,
the buierwould needs know of him what faults the horse had. The horsecourser
answered that he had three. That he would not clim trees. That he would not
swallow iron. Well, quoth the buier, then he will s^oyle no crows neastes. He
shall need no iron, for he shall have hay and prouender enough. In his
journey homeward he perceived y^ his horse would not go over wooden brides.
That he could not away with the iron bit. That he fell often, and yet
quicklye forgot his false, whereby he had trial of the horsecoursers honesty.
I will not commit my business unto him, but dispach it my self.
That he was to for getfull.
96 Three things very necessary in a fenser. A quick eye. A strong arm. A
stout heart.
97 Three things are very hard and difficult. To cause a woman take penance
patiently when she has deserved. To cause an old doting fool to reform his
manners. To teach on ass music.
98 An Epitaph worthy memory consisting of 3. parts. O man thou see what I
am. Thou know what I have been. Now think what thou shall be thy self.
99 A ploughman gave 3. lessons unto his son. Be holy in Lent. Be painful in
harvest. Be merry at Christmas.
100 Three things by no means tolerable. A long tongue in a fools head. A
loose life in a godly professor. A proud heart and a beggars purse.

THE SECOND HVNDRETH OF THE Triplicitie of Poetry.
1 It is not good to brag of three things. THat thou have good wine. A fair
wife. Plenty of money.
2 Three things agree not well. A little horse and a heavy man. He that is
thirsty with a little pot. An ancient man and a young wife.
3 A man may do three things without learning them. Laugh. Weep. Sleep.
4 A man must not make choice of 3 things in 3, places. Of a wife in
westminster. Of a servant in Paul's. least he choose a queen a knave or a jade.
Of a horse in Smith^^eld.
5 Three things make a man gasp. Las^nesse. An empty belly. Want of mirth.
6 A man must not be too hasty in lending three things. His sword. His wife.
His horse.
7 A vine brings forth three grapes. The first of pleasure. The second of
drunkenness. The third of sorrow.
8 Three should be always at home. The hen roost. The catte. The good wife.
9 Three are not without spot or blemish. A potter. The wh^^le of a cart. He
which frequenteth evil company.
10 Three manner of sages. The sage herb. The sage soole. Who so for wise
himself does accept. May match with sage, the sage wise accept.
The sage wise.
11 Women desire three things chiefly. To be gorgeously apparelled. To be
esteemed fair. To go whither they lust.
12 Three occasions that many times move debate. To talk with him that is
angry. To send him of an arrand that is weary. To wake a man out of his
sleep.
13 All the guestes present at a banquet, should have one of the properties
belonging to certain letters. Some of which sort are old men: should be like
vowels, which make a full sound by themselves, so old men among themselves,
should be the authors of talk and communication. Some of which sort are women:
should be like semiuocales, otherwise called half vowels, which h aue
liberty to speak, but not aloud like vowels, but softly not sou^ding their
words. Some of which sort are boys and virgins, should be mute like mutes
which yield no perfect sound without a vowell, nor they talk unless they be
spoken unto, by their betters.
14 Three things are said to be necessary for him that is a student in the
law. An iron head. A purse full of gold. A leaden tail.
15 There are 3. sorts of cunning beggars. Minstrels. Interlude players.
Iuglers.
16 A good horse should have 15. properties, that is to wit, 3. of a man, 3.
of a woman, 3. of a fox, 3. of a h^re, and 3. of an Ass. Of a man. Bold.
Proud. Hardy. Of a hare* A great eye. A dry head. Well running.


Of a woman. Fair brested. Fair of hair. Easy to leap upon. Of an Ass. A
big chine. A flat leg. A good hoof,


Of a fox. A fair tail. Short ears. A good trot.

17 These will never accord in one. Two wives in one house. Two cattes and one
mouse. Two dogs and one bone.
18 Three sorts of sauses. The sauce of meat is hunger. The sauce of love,
beauty. The sauce of frendshih, gentle words and courteous behavior.
19 Three occupations whereof there are many thieves. of Weauers. Millers.
Tailers
20 Three things are able too make a rich man poor. A proud wife. (...) wide
house. and a back door.
21 Three sorts of men dispose of all our goods. The goods of the mind. The
goods of the body. Inconstant divines. Unskillful Physicians. Covetous Lawiers.
The goods of fortune.
22 Three things necessary for a Scholar. A will. A wit. A book.
23 There was a kind of dancing used among ye Lacedaemonians, consisting of 3.
ages, and every age used to sing a several song. Children, they sang, We shall
be men and strong one day. Old men, they sang, We have been men and strong.
Men of middle age, they sang, We are men and strong: for that which children
hope for, and old men have lost, we enjoy and possess.
24 Three little creatures are always eating. Children. Chickins. Whelps.
25 Three places at London, wherein 3. notable vices reign. In the Royal
exchange. In Paul's Usury. Simonie. Briberie.
In Westminster hall.
26 Three sorts of living creatures, which who so loves not one of them,
seems not worthy to be called by the name of a man in a merry man's judgment.
Fair whelps. Fair horses. Fair women.
27 Three beasts are comely in their going. A lion. A grayhound. A goat.
28 Unto 3. sorts of men some things are a dishonor sometimes and sometimes
not. Few burials are no discredit to a Physician, but many are. Chastisements
are both honor and dishonor to a Prince. It is not infamous to a soldier to be
wounded in the face, but to be hurt in ye back.
29 Three several days in three sundry months, wherein it is not whole
some to be let blood, nor to eat goose flesh. The first day of may. The last
day of April. The last day of September.
30 Three intolerable creatures A servant when he reigns, A hateful woman
when she is married. A maid that is heir to her mistress.
31 It is no playing with three least jest turn to earnest. With fools. With
mightier men then our selves. With untamed beasts.
32 Three things are amiss in Princes courts. They which have but a bad
place, are caused to remove further from the fire. They which are most hungry,
have least meat set before them. They which sit lowest at the table, are
soonest called from their meat.
33 He is worthy to have the blessing of the gallows That buildes his house
all of fallowes. That pricketh a blind horse over y^ fallows That suffers his
wife to seek many hallowes.
34 Three small beasts are full of wisdom. The be The emef. The spider.
35 Three sorts of people in respect of use, in necessity may be accounted
good. Scholars, for they may serve in the priests places when they are dead.
Virgins, which may supply in place after men have buried their wives.
Merchants for they may play the vserers in stead of the Jews.
36 Socrates makes mention of 3. sorts of idle persons. The first sort are
such as spend their whole time in dicing. The second sort are of those which
consume their life in eating and drinking from morning till night. The third
sort are such as follow filthy whores, and walk in the woods.
37 Three things many a man beguiles. Essex miles. Kentish styles. Norfolk
wiles.
38 Three things whose ends are inglorious. Of March flowers. Of a wanton
maid. Of a priest that delights in war.
39 It is a shame for a man to take a fall 3. manner of ways, To fall in the
plain high way. To take a foil in woing a wife. To take a fall in the sight of
many from the horseback, which in riding on thou tokest a pri^e.
40 They which are troubled with the gout, have 3. things which they have not.
When they must eat, they have hands and on hands, because they have no vs^
of them. When they must walk, they have feet and no feet because they cannot
go. They have reason to seek after remedy, but want it, to endure such pain
as tends to the cure of their disease,
41 Three reasons alleged by 3. Roman matrones, why after the death of their
first husbands, they would not marry (...). The first was Marchia, who being
asked why she would not take another husband, answered, she found none that
would have her for her person, but mary her for her money. The second Valeria,
who being demanded why she did not mary again, answered, that she could not,
because her husband was not dead, but living: for so long as she lived, her
husband lived also together with her in her heart. The 3. Amnia, with whom when
her parents were instant to marry again (being young and rich) answered that
she could not having had a good husband, and therefore taking another, either
he should be good or evil, if he were good she should always be in fear to
loose him: if evil, always agreeued that it was her chance in choice to have
changed for the worse.
42 Three things in the beginning are easy, which afterward appear very
difficult to remedy. It is an easy matter to cast fire into any place, but
veie hard to quench it being kindled. It is an easy matter to move debate, but
hard to reconcile men being at varience. It is an easy matter to turn over
money by exchange, but a hard matter to come out of debt.
43 Three things are requisite at 3: times of the year. At Cristmas great
loaves. At Lent clean souls At Whitsontide new clothes.
44 Three things to be noted in a wedding ring. That it be of gold, for as
gold is the best metal, so the love between man and wife, is the dearest
love. That it be round, yt is without end, whereby is meant, that love should
not cease. That it be put on y^ 4, finger signif^ing hearty love, for the
physicians say that a vein in that finger comes from the heart.
45 Three causes why Priests have shrewder wives for the most part, then their
neighbors That seeing they are so ready to reprove other men's vices abroad^,
their wives might reprehend their faults at home. They that being exercised
with patience at home, may learn to suffer more easily common troubles
abroad. Preistes deserve to have shroud wives, for that they choose to marry
the fairest, which commonly are shrewe^
46 Three things of their own accord in asce^ding vanish away Smoke, the
higher it mounteth, the sooner it vanishes. Wicked men, the higher they
climb, the greater they fall. A song begun in a note to high, causes the
voice to fail or end in la, mi.
37 Three things are easily lost but never got again. A word spoken.
Virginity. Time
48 Three things very requisite in a Chirurgian. A hawks eye. A lions heart. A
ladies hand.
49 Three things change the nature and condition of man. Dignity. A wife. Wine
50 Three things make us wanton and shameless. Night. Love. Night has no
shame. Love has no reason. Wine has no seace.
Wine.
51 Three things makes a man weary of his house, and often of his life. Smoke*
Rain. A cursed wife.
52 Cut candle. Break cole. Was never good husband, nor good husbands friend.
Set stick on end.
53 Three most odious creaturs. A beggar proud. A rich man a liar. An old man
lecherous.
54 He that seeks these things may be deceived. Loialtie and truth in a
flatterer. A fine wit in a fat belly. Virtue in all evil company.
55 Three things very hard or not at all to be found. A hare without a muse. A
fenne without a sluse. A whore without a scuse.
56 Three things are very difficult. To carry water in a sieve. To root out a
vice which has been grafted of long time in a man's mind. To make women good
with stripes.
57 One repents no^ to have obeyed. 3. things. The truth. Good counsel. A
Cock crowing early in a morning.
58 Three creatures see clearly in the night. The Owl. The night raven. The
Weasell.
59 Three living things that excel man in the sense of smelling A vulture. A
hound. A sow.
60 There are 3. days, as says S. Bid, on which whoseoeuer is borne, his
flesh shall never rotte. The 12 of January. The 24* of March, The 28. of March.
61 Three things the elder they be, the more delight we take in them. Old
wine to drink. Old Books to read in. Old freindes to be conversant withal.
62 Three true tokens to know a fool by. To be angry too much without a
cause. To laugh without measure upon no occasion. To reprehend other men's
faults, and will not see his own.
63 There are 3. sorts of men generally. The first sort are of such as have
learning but want discretion and wisdom. For according to the proverb. The
greatest clerks be not the wisest men. Another sort are of those which have no
lerning, but by experience have obtained prudence and wisdom. The 3 sort are
of those which have neither learning nor discretion, and they are stark fools.
64 The invention of 3. things is wondefull. The invention of gunnes and
gunpouder. The making of glasses. The Printing of books.
65 Three things in a man which may be likened unto 3. things in a Smithes
shop. To wit a stith^e. The tongue, to a hammer Learning to a gad of steel.
66 Three doubtful questions, which none but Solomon could resolve. What was
most pleasant and sweet in man's life? He answered A quiet mind. What meat was
most fit for infants? He answered, No meat better agreeing with a childs
nature then his own mothers milk. What was the fittest place for achild to be
reposed in, and to take his rest? He answered the mothers bosom.
67 There are three causes why old men love their goods so well. Because they
think it a great matter to be reported to die rich. The memory of the actions
of their youth, and the infirmities of their present age, makes them so il
contented, y^ they are careless to provide for death which they see even
before their eyes, looking to live still to enjoy their goods, till death part
the in both asunder. Because they had rather leave the^ to their enemies being
dead, the^ in their life time be in danger to their friends for them.
68 Three sorts of men may be sorry though they say naught. He that spends
much and gets naught. He that owes much and has naught. He y^ looks in
his purse and finds naught.
69 Three causes why lovers discern not the fault^s of th^^r friends. Because
their aflection has ouermaistred their reason. Because they will not suffer
their fancies to be controle^ by other men's wills. Because (according to the
Philosophers) al great motions hinder those that be less: but love having
occupied the chief and most principal motions of the spirit, trobleth the
virtue and original of the senses, the same being the cause (with Plato why
lovers are made blind with the sight of their Ladies, and according to the
same the Poets have fained Cupid without eyes.
70 For 3. causes we suffer the loss of 3. things to our great
discontent^^ent. Of our wealth. Of our honor. Because being once lost, we
seldom recover it again. Because he that has lost his good name is ha^le
hanged. Because we may assure our selves that we shall never enjoy life
again after he we once dead.
Of our life.
71 There are 3. s^^ing horns to pluck on a (...) ^d^s ^a^. A beautiful face
in the wife. A ielous head in her husband. A wanton eye in a lover.
72 There are 3. very vigilant beasts. A goose. A cock. Thieves on a night had
stolen Jupiter had a goose not a keaked. The Germans use to carry their cocks
with them to the wars, to the end by their crowing, they may know how the day
passes away. For he will wind a thief and bewray him.
A dog.
73 Three things bite sore. An old dog. A hungry fly. An Usurer.
74 He were best to go where no man knows him. That swears till no man
trust him. That lies till no man believes him. That boroweth till no man will
lend him.
75 Three conditions of Abbey lubbers. To labor till they are a cold. To eat
till they sweat. To lie in bed till their bones ache.
76 There are 3. dangers of the world. To ride on a fierce horse. To sail on
the sea. To live under a tyrant.
77 Three sorts of men which are seldom seen, and hard to be found. A friend
in adversity, An old tyrant. A lawyer that will take no bribes.
78 Three things will not prove well without beating. A walnut tree. An ass. A
woman
79 Honors change manners in 3. sorts of men. Merchantes, because they forget
that ever they were apprentises. Priests, because they forget that ever they
were parish clerks. Magistrates, because they are unmindful that they were
private men.
83 Three trades of life which may travel without a passeport Pedlers.
Tinkers. Minstrels.
81 There are 3. unlucky beasts which do portend and foreshew of mischief
ensuing. A howling dog. A scritching owl. A croking raven.
82. Men's judgments differ much in these 3. things. Books. For one says,
this book is too long, another too short, the 3. of due length, and for fine
phrase and style, the like that book was not made a great while. It is al lies
said an other, y^ book is stark naught. For concerning the qualities of wine,
men are diversely affected. Ah, this is a hard wine quoth one, it is too sweet
in my opinion said another: nay, nay quoth the 3. man, it is sharp and
piercing me thinks. It is a cup of neat wine said the owner. I said another,
it has a good smacke of the caske, it will do a man as much good in his
shoes, as in his belly. For cheese has diverse tastes in several men's
mouths. He says it is too salt, he says it is fresh, he says it is too
hard, he says it is too new. It is too strong of y^ runnet says he It is
says another not strong enough for me. It is said one as good as can be:
Hereof no two of any ten can agree. So that, No book, no wine, no cheese, be
it good or bad: but praise and dispraise it has, and has had.
Wine. Cheese.
83 Three things of small continuance. A wonder. Vaineglorie. The remembrance
of a stranger.
84 There is great folly showed in these three things. In fishing before the
net. In vaunting before the victory. In reckoning without the host.
85 It is no deed of charity to give any thing unto three sorts of beggars.
Unto counterfect beggars, which say they are lame and diseased, when it is
neither so nor so. Unto couetons beggars, which having their bottell and dish
filled with drink, and their scrippe and wallet stuffed with victuals, yet
they will crave at the next door they come at. Unto proud beggars which will
take not kind of alms but money.
86 Three things are proud in 3. places. A cock on his dunghill. A dog at his
masters door. The good wife at home among her maids.
87 A man need not go a borowing to his neighbors that has these 3. A little
land well tilde. A little house well filled. A little w^^e well wild.
88 Three of the greatest beasts are afraid of 3. very small beasts. The lion of
the cock. The eagle of the beetle. The whale of the swordfish.
89 Three sorts of men are likened unto 3. kind of beasts. The flatterer with
the Cameleon, for as a Cameleon can turn himself into al colors save white,
so will a flatterer change himself into al hewes save honesty. The backbiter
unto the bas^liske: for as the bas^liske does kill a man a far of by sight, so a
slaunderer does kill a man a far of be hind his back with his tongue. The
envious man unto ^he Viper: for as y^ Viper does kill her dam by gnawing out her
guts, and afterward does sting and poison others, so envy does consume him in
who^ it is bred, and afterward hurts others.
90 A birchin broom consists of 3. things fit for correction. Twigges,
belonging to Scholemasters for the correction of small offenses. A staff,
belonging to masters for the punishing of greater faults. A with, belonging to
magistrates for the execution of traitors, ^elons, murderers, and such like.
91 Three things are very easy. An easy thing to find a staff to beat a
dog. An easy matter for him that is willing to invent an excuse. An easy
matter to give good counsel.
92 Three things are directed by destiny Wedding. Hanging. Thriuing.
93 Three still things are dangerous for the most part. A still fellow, for he
commonly is subtle and crafty. A still water which is deep, and therefore
dangerous. A still sow, for she will eat up all the draff.
94 Three things to be avoided by a wise man. Hope of things impossible.
Sorrow, for things unrecoverable. Fear, of things inevitable.
95 Three things can suffer no fellowship. Love, for a lover hates his
corriuall. Lordship, for honor is impatie^t of compeere. An Hermit, for he
seeks to abandon the company of men by seeking desert places.
96 The Papists did use to curse with 3. things. Bell. Book. Candle.
97 Three things are deerelye bought. Wit gotten by experience. Fame won by
death. That which is obtained by prayer and request for one man cannot entreat
another with out bashfulnes or blushing.
98 Three things are not to be regarded. The great vanities we see with our
eyes. The great wonders we hear with our ears Great sorrow when we conceive it
in our minds.
99 There are three very strong things. Gold, for there is no place invincible,
where in an ass laden with gold may not enter. Love, because it provoke us
to adventure our goods, life, renown and all. Labor, because it overcomes
all things.
100 God made 3. places for 3. purposes. Heaven, for the good. Hell, for the
wicked. Earth, for both.

Deo trino and vni sit laus, honor, and gloria. Amen.

