A NOTABLE discourse of the happiness of this our age, and of the ingratitude
of men to God for his benefits:

Written in Latin by that godly learned man John Riuius, and now newly
Englished for the comfort, and commodity of the unlearned, by W. W. Student.

John. 17. 3. This is life everlasting, that men know thee to be the only
very God, and whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ.

Horat. Interdum vulgus rectum videt: est vbi peccat.

Imprinted at London, for Tobie Cook, and Philippe Eede. 1578.

To the Right Honorable M. Doctor Wilson, one of the principal Secretaries to
the Queens most excellent Majesty and of her Highness most honorable privy
Counsel. W. W. wishes increase of all godliness in this present life, and in
the life to come eternal happiness in heaven.
THE wonderful variety, and diversity of opinions and judgments amongst the
Philosophers concerning man's summum bonum, or chiefest happiness in this life,
is not unknown to your Honor, and other learned men, how that some said it
did consist only in virtue, othersome in beauty, othersome in honor,
othersome in wealth, othersome (and that no small sum) in pleasure, and some
in a certain mixture, or medlie of all these. It were needless to reckon up
in this place all their idle fancies, and fond dreams about this one point.
Howbeit, I would certify the simpler sort of this thing, how that all of them
erred, and wandered in bywayes, how that every several sect and family of
Philosophers shot far wide of the mark. For, as S. Paul testifies: Romans 1.
21.
They became vain in their thoughts, and their foolish heart was full of
darkness. When they professed themselves to be wise, they beecame fools. We
Christians, that have been trained up in Christ's schole, have learned a better
profession of our Master, and Savior Jesus Christ. We know, and are taught so
to say, that God 1. Cor. 1. 20.
makes the wisdom of the world foolishness. We are instructed, and so we
steadfastly believe, that the only true felicity of this our life, and the
true happiness of this our age, stands in the publishing, and preaching of
Christ's Gospel, which is to the Jews a stumbling block, to the Graecians
foolishness, and to the Papists new learning: but in deed the power of God
to the salvation, and the wisdom of God to the instruction of as many as are
called both of the Jews, Graecians, and Papists. This glorious Gospel of our
God was first preached here on earth by our Redeemer, and Savior Christ
himself: then, after his ascension, it was carried into all parts of the
world by the Apostles, and their successors, with such success, that
Christ's spiritual kingdom was by the scepter of his word enlarged far and
wide. Which thing the deadly enemy of mankind Satan greatly envying, and
knowing that the flourishing state of Christ's kingdom would be the decaie,
and downfall of his, labored by all means possible, to bear down his
scepter, and scepter bearers by force and violence, which thing he after a
sort brought to pass, by raising up the ten bloody persecutions against the
Christians under the ten Tyrants, or Emperors of Rome. But the Devil, seeing
that this his former policy would not prevail, and seeing that the Christians
the more they were tormented for their faith, the more they grew, and
multiplied, devised to deal no more by violence, and bloodshed: but changing
himself into an Angel of light, sought means how in time of peace he might
withdraw men by little and little from the true Religion of Christ, to the
counterfeit and hypocritical religion of Antichrist. This crafty counsel,
and pestilent practice pleased the subtle Serpent well, which wrought this
effect, that it eclipsed, and diminished the fullness, and beautiful light of
Christ's kingdom, which was only maintained by the sword of the spirit, that
is to say, by the word of God. And because he might the more easily lead the
people out of the way of truth, his purpose was wholly hitherto bent, to
ouerwhelme the candle under the bushel, to darken the light of the Gospel,
which he brought accordingly to pass, by corrupting, and infecting the
Priesthood with the glorious pomp, The original of the Pope and popery.
and vanities of the world, with the wanton delights, and vain pleasures of
this present life. Then, even then, he set Antichrist of Rome in his royal
seat as his vicar, The Pope settled in Satan's seat, not in Saint Peter's
chair.
and lieftenant general, there to rule, and reign as God of this world in the
children of unbelief, bewitching them with strong delusions, that they should
believe lies, that all they might be damned, which believed not the truth, but
had pleasure in unrighteousness. This is that man of sin (by which is meant
not one particular 2. These. 2. 3. 4. 9. 10. Daniel. 7. 5.
man, but a succession of men, as by the bear in Daniel is not meant only one
King of the Persians, but a succession of Kings,) this I say is that man of
sin, and that adversary that exalts himself above all that is called God,
or that is worshipped: so that he does sit as God in the Temple of God, showing
himself that he is God. This is that wicked man, whose coming is by the
effectual working of Satan with all power, and signs, and lying woonders,
and in all deceiueablenesse of unrighteousness among them that perish,
because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved. By
this means Satan lulled (as it were) the world a sleep, for the space of
these seven hundred years last past. Now some man will marvel much how the
Pope should grow to such an unbridled authority, as he has gotten. Surely we
can assign no other cause but this: such was the will of God, and such was the
depth of his secret judgment for the contempt of his Gospel Was it not, I
pray you, revealed to S. John, that Apo. 17. 2. 4
the purple whore of Babylon should make all the Kings and Princes of the
earth, and the inhabitants thereof to drink of the golden cup of wine, full
of the abominations, and filthiness of her fornication? The very beginning,
and foundation of Antichrists kingdom was laid even in the Apostles time.
For S. Paul writ to the Thessalonians, that the mystery of iniquity 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7.
began then to work: but it was then hindered by the brightness, and purity
of doctrine received in the Primative Church. Afterward it grew up by
degrees, and specially by three steps. First, by the great Flow the Primasie
or Popedom of Rome grew up.
errors of the heretics in the East Church, which Chrysostom does call the
armies of Antichrist. Secondly, by the lamentable contention, and emulation
amongst the Christian Bishops in the Oriental parts. Thirdly, by the
superstitious devotion (for I will not call it liberal donation) of Princes,
and Emperors. For, after that the wicked parricide Phocas, Emperor of
Constantinople, Phocas, who had murdered Mauritius the Emperor was the first
Pope maker, for before that time the Pope was not taken for the universal head
of the Church, nor yet for Christ's vicar.
had given the Primasie, or name of universal Bishop unto Boniface the third,
the Popes authority, or rather tyranny increased excedingly. Then they sought
not only to be Lords within themselves, but also to be above all higher
powers: yea, above the Emperor himself. This kingdom of Antichrist from that
time forward grew mightily, specially under the Emperors of Constantinople:
and namely, under the Emperor Constantinus Pogonatus or Barbatus: and under
the Emperors of Germany Henry's, and Frederikes. Now in this time of
darkness it is much to be marvelled, unto what vile slavery, and thraldom.
Emperors and Princes were brought by the Bishop of Rome. Some of Emperors
brought by the Pope into shame full slavery.
them, being resolutely persuaded by the Romish Clergy, that the Pope was
Christ's vicar, and vicegerent: yea, half a God, refused no Popish subjection.
One waited at his gate barefoote, and barelegge: another was tied fast with
chains under the Popes table, there to pick up crumbes like a dog: another
suffered him to set his feet upon his neck: another held his stirrup, when
the Popes holiness vauted upon his horse: another was thrust into a
Monastery, and made a Monk. In such slavish subjection were Princes in those
days. Then in The true Church of Christ has not always been in a visible
government.
deed the Church of Rome, the whore of Babylon, was gloriously in open rule:
but the true Church of Christ was not in any visible government, no more than
it was in the time of Elias the Prophet. And this was, that the Scriptures
might be fulfilled and found true, which say, that there should be an
Apostasy, or defection 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. Mat. 24. 12. Apo. 13. 15.
from the faith, that is, a general reuolting from true Religion: that
iniquity should have the upper hand: that no man should have the liberty of
his life, but he that should take upon him the character, or mark of the beast.
O woeful, and lamentable times. O most miserable, and unhappy days. And yet
the Papists at The common cry of Papists at this day, which call us to their
holy whoorishe Church of Rome.
this day cry with open mouth most impudently, The Catholic church, The
Catholic Church, saying, that it has always been to be seen at Rome. They
tell us with shame enough, that the Pope can not err, that his faith is
Catholic, and pure without all blot, or blemish, and that if we believe iumpe
as he believes, we shall surely be saved. But we will never believe
Antichrist, nor run to Rome (albeit sometime a faithful city) to inquire
after our faith, and Religion. We wot well, that now it is, and has been a
great while, the sink of all sin and iniquity in the world, the very
seat, and habitation of Antichrist himself. We will not have that proud
Italian Priest to be our Doctor, and general Scholemaister, a man made of all
abominations, and whoredoms. We will not lay the foundation, or groundworke
of our faith upon the glorious name of any mortal man whatsoever. We see the
end of all Popery to be ignorance. We see they derogate, and detract all from
Christ and his Passion, and attribute their salvation to Masses, to men's
merits, to Saints prayers, to Pilgrimages, to vows of virginity, to their
own good works, and to a thousand other trifling toys. We see they prefer
men's traditions, and inventions before the truth of Gods word. We can show, if
need be, at what time, and by which Popes every parcel of Papistrie was
devised. He that will make a true Anatomy of it, and examine it from point to
point, shall find, that it tends wholly to gain, and no whit to godliness.
To be short, we know by the Scriptures of God, that their Religion which
forbids marriage and meats, is a doctrine of Devils. This was the misery,
and infelicitie of former 1. Tim. 4. 1.
ages, in which times notwithstanding God had his Church, though not always
subject to man's senses: in which ages God raised up evermore some good men,
which inueihed bitterly against the Popes intolerable In every age some
withstoode the Popes proceedings, though they had not such light of the truth
as we have now.
pride, and tyranny, as namely Hilarie Bishop of Vienna in France, Paulus
Cretensis, and Johannes Lampeon, both Bishops denied his supremasie, the
Church of Rauenna in Italy, would not acknowledge the Pope for her head. Nilus
Archbishop of Thessalonica writ a learned book against the Popes primasie.
Afterward in Italy, yea even in Rome Arnoldus Brixianus, an eloquent man,
oppugned stoutely the Popes primasie, and tyranny. Counsels, and Synods
condemned the Popes supremasie, after whom God raised up here in England a
valiant, and stout soldier John Wickleffe, and in Bohemia John Hus, and
Hierome of Prage, with many others, as histories record and witness.

But at the length, when it pleased the great goodness, The happiness of this
age generally.
and rich mercy of God, to take compassion on the world then drowned in
darkness, he renewed the heavenly light of his Gospel, by which Antichrist
of Rome should be revealed, and by little and little utterly destroyed. Then he
raised up mighty Capteines to make war against that spiritual Pharao, whom
he appointed like Moses, and Aaron, to safe conduct us out of the land of
Egypt, out of the house of bondage, out of the sorrowful servitude of Popery,
in comparison of which, that Aegyptiacall slavery was great liberty. To this
end and purpose he raised up in this most happy, and blessed age, sundry
learned Divines, as namely, Martin Luther, The best learned Divines of this our
age.
Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Calvin, Peter Martyr, Bucer, Bullenger, Gualter,
Theodore Beza, Chemnisius, Hemingius, Riuius, Zanchius, Daneus, Cranmer,
Ridley, Latimer, Hooper, Bradford, M. Jewel, M. Nowell, M. John Fox, with
infinite others both Englishmen, Scots, Frenchmen, Germans, Italians,
Spaniards, and Danes. Surely this the happy age, which Chrysostom fortold,
speaking of the last times: Ad nullam rem fugient, nisi ad Chrysostom. upon the 24.
of Matthaew.
Scripturas: alioqui incident in abhominationem desolationis. Then (says he)
will they flee unto nothing, but unto the Scriptures: otherwise they shall fall
into the abomination of desolation. To whom agrees S. Hierome, writing upon
the Prophet Nahum. And Gregory prophesies Hierom upon Nahum. Gregory upon
Job.
plainly of our time thus: Ecclesia post eosdem dies, quibus deprimitur, tamen
circa finem mundi grandi praedicationis virtute roborabitur: The Church (says
he) after those days, wherein she is depressed, and holden down, shall for all
that about the end of the world be strengthened with the great power of
preaching. Which thing is come now to pass in these days, as we may see, how
that the preaching of the Gospel has greatly prevailed against all the raging
persecution of the Papists: the Lords name be praised for it. As often as we
think upon this Gospel, we dare avouch, that these latter times are better
times, that this age is a golden age. For if Aristides the just was called
Graecorum foelicitas, that is, The happiness of the Graecians, we may more
worthily call Christ our felicity: and if the age, wherein he lived, was
called Aureaaetas, that is, A golden age, because justice flourished in it,
verelie we may more justly call this our age a golden age, because the glorious
Gospel of God shines now most clearly in the eyes, and sounds most
shrilly in the ears of all Israel. O that men would therefore praise the
Lord. O that men would acknowledge Psalm. 107. 15
before the Lord his loving kindness, and his wondrous works before the
sons of men. Thus we have seen the chiefest happiness of this our age, to
be the preaching of the Gospel of God amongst us. A part also of our
happiness at this day may consist in the Our age happy for that now all good
learning flourishes with the Gospel.
garnishing of good learning, which is come to a wonderful ripeness. I pray
God that for our unthankfulness it decaie not. And not only liberal arts,
and sciences excel now more, than ever they did, by reason of Printing (which
as wise men say is of all Gods external benefits one of the greatest) but
also Manual or Mechanical trades are come to such a perfection, as the like
was never heard, or read of before. But because there is no great doubt of
this, which our adversaries also do confess, I will stand no longer upon it.

In the happiness of this our age, the Lord in his manifold Of the happiness
of England specially.
mercy has made us Englishmen most happy of all other nations under the
Sun. For first, whereas before we sat in darkness, and in the shadow of
death, he has blessed us with the light of his holy Gospel, so that now we
are a people set at liberty, to the end we should ^. Pet. 2. 9.
show forth the virtues of him, that has called us out of darkness into
his marvelous light. Secondly, he has blessed us with a gracious, and a
religious Prince, a Phoenix amongst women kind, under whom we have had the
Gospel in great peace these twenty years: the Lord frame our obedience to
it in all holiness, and bless our Sovereign with a long, prosperous, and
zealous reign over us. Thirdly, the God of all peace has blessed us with a
strange, wonderful, and miraculous peace. For we sit here quietly, when as
all the world beside (almost) is in an uproar. Our Halcionij dies, our calm
and peaceable days do far surpass and excel the civil peace, either of
Solomon in Israel, or of Augustus in Rome. Fourthly, God has blessed us with
marvelous prosperity, and plenty of all things, such as our enemies envy at.

God grant that England may be thankful for all these spiritual, and
temporal blessings: and that Italy, Spain, France, Flanders, and other
nations, may in his mercy be partakers of his Gospel, and of our peace with
the fullness thereof, rather than in his justice so to punish us, as to make us
again companions of their spiritual darkness in the last place, and
greatest measure. This most happy state of ours, foreign nations do envy,
and specially Papists, who have banded them selves together in an holy league
(as they term it) to root out Gods Gospel from amongst us, and to bring in
again Mariana tempora. But, the Lord The Papists golden day shall never come
I trust to hinder our happiness.
be thanked, their Calendar does fowly fail them: their golden day (or
rather blood red day) in their Rubricke is not yet come: I beseech almighty
God, who is able to confound their devises, and wicked practices against his
Church, that it may never come.

Your Honor is not ignorant, how that there be some, whose wisest part in
them is their hoarie hairs, who so highly advance, and commend the former
ages, that like unthankful wretches, they utterly mislike, and discommend this
our age, wherein we live. In this consideration I thought good to oppose, and
set this book of Riuius against them, entreating of the happiness of this our
Age: which Argument, as I thought it would be most acceptable and grateful
to your Honor: so I now am bold to present it unto your favorable protection,
as a seal and sure testimony of my loving duty toward your Honor, not
doubting but that you will mightily maintain, and defend the happiness of
this our age, against all malicious Papists, carnal Gospellers, and wrangling
Sycophantes. This I trust you will do, being enabled (as you are) not only
with great learning, but also with great authority, which your Honor has
well deserved. The Lord give unto you, as he did unto Solomon, an
understanding heart to judge aright and to discern betwixt good and bad,
betwixt happiness and misery. The Lord keep and continue your Honor safe,
and sound, that you may be still a stay unto Religion, a godly wise
Counselor unto your Prince: finally, a favorable Patron, and friendly
Maecenas to all good learning, and learned men.

Your Honors to command, William Watkinson.

A brief Admonition to the godly Christian Reader.
ALbeit (good Christian Reader) this present discourse be a continuate style,
wherein one thing necessarily depends upon an other: and albeit it be not
divided, and distinguished into Chapters, as the common sort of books
published at this day are: notwithstanding I trust that those Marginall notes,
which I have set to the book, as certain Statuae Mercuriales, are able, as a
skillful guide, to direct thee unto all the particular points of this book,
as well as if it had been parted into Chapters. I have also added for thy
comfort, and commodity, the places, and sentences of Scripture, which the
Author had not quoted at all. This book will (I hope) be a good staff, and
stay to thy faith amongst these strifes, and contentions, about Religion in
these days. There is nothing in it but sound, and sincere doctrine, which we
profess: and a detection of the wandering ways of the Church of Rome. Be
always thankful to our good God for restoring to us his Gospel, which is,
and ought to be, the only joy of our days. If thou do find thy faith by
this excellent treatise any whit increased, and confirmed, the Author, and the
Translatour think them selves sufficiently recompensed, and rewarded. See that
thou courteously accept their zealous endeavors, and give all the glory to God
alone, whose name be blessed for ever, Amen.

I please all men in all things, not seeking mine own profit, 1. Cor. 10. 33.
but the profit of many, that they might be saved.

To the noble and famous man John Schlenitz, his dear friend, John Riuius
sends greeting.
THat which so often heretofore The rage and madness of the Papists is now
revealed, God be praised for it.
I have desired, and besought in prayer of our most gracious, and omnipotent
God to come to pass, to wit, that the Papists might at some time or other,
be so evidently manifested, and disclosed to the whole world, and to all
mortal men, of what nation soever, to this end, and purpose, that the
complaints of our men against them might not seem any whit undeserved on
their behalf: that now at the length I do both incredibly rejoice, that I
have by the singular benefit of God obtained, and also render unto the
immortal God as great thanks as I can for it. For, when as certain of the
Papists now of late days did painte out old superstitions with such
deceiptfull shadows (as it were) and counterfeite colors, that even
Papistrie is nothing else but painted hypocrisy and double dissimulation, with
which they have deceived the universal world.
the very wisest, much more the foolish, and unwary multitude, was by that
means brought into error, verily I feared to what issue the matter would grow
unto at length: yea, and I was greatly afraid, lest that they, which have a
good while ago been reclaimed from impious superstition, to the godly, and
sincere worship of God, and to the pure religion of Christ, being by little,
and little bewitched by the writings of our adversaries, would again (like
blind men) rush headlong, and fall backward into their former darkness of
ignorance, and errors. For certain men have now begone with no little care
and cunning, to set a fair glass upon old superstitions, and with comely
words to cloak and cover the faults, and vices of the Papists.

But now at this day, seeing that our adversaries do show Crafty conueyance
discovered and detected.
forth evidently and plainly, without dissimulation, what they go about,
what they look at, what they aim at, what they shoot at, and seeing that now
we may almost feel, and groape (as it were) with our hands the fond
counselles, and wicked practices of the ungodly Papists, I do see there is
no great danger, and I think that we need not to fear so much any more,
lest they can induce, and bring any man hereafter so easily into error,
unless he be stark blind, and out of his right wits. For who now does
not see, that the adversaries of sound and wholesome doctrine, do endeavor to
take quite away, to pluck out of all men's hearts, yea after a sort to bury
wholly, and altogether to ouerwhelme the very sacred, and holy religion of
Christ? For thus they teach Ad verbum, Word for word, I will put nothing
to of mine own. That faith (say they) by which a man does steadfastly Diuelishe
decrees of the Papists made in their Tridentine counsel.
believe, and assuredly trust to have his sins forgiven him for Christ's
sake, and to possess everlasting salvation, has no testimony, or witness at
all in the Scriptures, yea it is clean against it. What else? If any man shall
say, that the justifying faith is nothing else, but a steadfast trust in Gods
mercy, pardoning our sins for Christ's sake: or that, that only confidence
is the mean, whereby we shall be justified, let him be accursed, Item: If any
man shall say, that to the obteining Anathemata Papistica sine omni fundamento
doctrinae.
of salvation, it is necessary for every man to believe assuredly, and without
all doubting of his own infirmity, that his sins are forgiven him, let him
be accursed. What, is there any more of this stuff? Yea: If any man shall
say, that a man is absolved from his sins, and justified, for that he does
certainly believe, that he is absolved, or that no man is truly justified,
but he that does believe himself to be justified, and that our absolution,
and justification is fully perfected, and finished only by this faith, let him
be accursed, I tremble, and quake to rehearse such deuilish decrees of
ungodly men.

They will have faith to be only a simple credulity, and a What the papists
have ever taken faith to be.
bare knowledge of the history of Christ, and not also a steadfast trust, and
belief in Christ, as S. Paul in all his Epistles understands it. They would
have us continually to doubt of the good will of God toward us. They deny
that a man is justified only by trust, and belief in the mercy of God,
pardoning our sins for Christ's sake: that is, they deny that a man is
justified, Gratis, freely (as S. Paul says) even by the grace of Ephe. 2. 8. 9.
God, and that without works. They deny that faith is necessary for all men
to the obteining of pardon, and remission of their sins. They deny that
faith is always necessary to absolution from our sins: that is (to speak
more plainly) they deny that we ought necessarily to believe the Gospel.
For, I pray you, what other thing is absolution, but the voice Absolution, what
it is.
of the Gospel, sounding by the minister of the Church, by which voice that
remission of sins, promised to the penitent in the Gospel, is privately, and
particularly applied to every man's conscience. And seeing that our Savior
Christ, in the Gospel of S. Mark, flatly commands both, namely to repent,
Mark. 1. 15.
and to believe the Gospel, behold here the intolerable boldness, or
rather impudency of our adversaries. For they very willingly grant the one,
that we ought to repent: but verily they do so stoutly deny the other:
namely, that The Papists deny, that we ought to believe the Gospel.
we ought to believe the Gospel, that is, the preaching of forgiveness of
sins, that they accurse, and condemn every one that affirms this to be
true. Christ says: Credit Euangelio, that is, Believe the Gospel: but these
men say quite contrary: If any man (say they) shall affirm, that in absolution
of sins we must believe the Gospel, let him be accursed. Now what an
absurd thing also is this their Anathema? If any man shall say, that if grace
be lost through sin, faith also is always together lost with it: or that,
that faith, which does remain, is not a true faith, although it be not a
lively faith: or that he, which has faith without charity, is not a
Christian: let him be accursed.

Here, to be brief, they affirm that adulterers, manquellers, extortioners,
and such like, (whom S. Paul denies ever to be heirs of the kingdom of
God) persisting still in their Ephe. 5. 5.
sin and wickedness, may conceive some hope, and trust of their salvation,
and may promise unto them selves, that God for Christ's sake, will be
merciful* and favorable unto them: for that is it which we call, To believe.
If this their assertion What it is to believe.
be true, then surely the Apostle S. Paul is in an error. But if it be
impiety to grant that the Apostle erred, then they them selves do err, and
are deceived, and do manifestly teach a falsehood. In the mean while (such is
the miserable blindness of those men's minds,) they do not see, and perceive
how that they speak contraries. They do deny that Contrarieties in the
doctrine of the Papists.
there is any lively faith in heinous sinners, and wicked offenders, Ergo it
necessarily follows, that their faith is a dead faith, such an one as the
Devils also may have in them, according as S. James witnesses. How therefore
can that faith James 2. 19.
be found true, which is dead? Here I do believe they will coin, and bring
forth out of their own brain (as Jupiter brought forth Minerua out of his
head) a new definition of faith. But let us briefly have a view also of other
of their Devilish decrees. The Catholic Church (say they) does Traditions of
the Church of Rome.
retain, and receive whatsoever the chair of Peter has given out, does give
out, and shall give out concerning faith, and religion. Hereby you may easily
understand, how great the credit of the Church of Rome, and the authority of
the Apostolical seat is amongst them. Let us proceed on forward to the rest.
Ecclesiastical constitutions, (say they) concerning Ecclesiastical
constitutions.
fastes, feasts, and abstinence from meats, and many other things, do bind
a man in conscience to observe, and keep them, Etiam extra casum scandali, yea
without the case of offense to any. This is a hard saying. But what follows?
Christ (say they) does give, and grant many things Merits and intercessions
of Saints.
unto us here on earth, through the merits, and intercession of Saints, which
otherwise he would not bestow upon us: Wherefore they do very holily and
religiously, which with a devout piety, and godliness do visit those
places, which are dedicated to them, and which by this means seek for help
at their hands. Here you see that they do allow prayer to the dead, and
Pilgrimages, instituted for religion, and devotion sake. What say they else?
The use of images (say they) is VVoorshipping of images.
acceptable, and grateful to God, and we do well to fall down flat before
them, calling upon the Saints whom they represent. These verily are plain,
and evident enough, neither need they any larger explication. Let us therefore
go on forward to the rest. We must firmly, and steadfastly believe Purgatory.
(say they) that there is after this life a Purgatory for souls departed, in
which is paid the punishment, as yet due for sins. Notwithstanding they may
be succored, and helped by the sacrifice of the altar, by prayer, by fasting,
by alms deeds, and by other works of the living, as also by indulgencies,
that they may the sooner by that means be delivered, and set free from thence.

Now verily that appears plainly, which I said in the beginning, what the
adversaries, and enemies of the Gospel go about: namely to take quite away at
once all faith, all godliness, all holiness, all religion, yea the pure and
sincere The drift of popery.
service of God: finally, to bury and ouerwhelme Christ him self, the author
of man's salvation: also to thrust upon us their own vain dreams, the
foolish, fantastical, and doting devises of men: yea doctrines of Devils (as
the Apostle calls 1. Tim. 4. 1.
them) to the end that we should herafter direct all the actions of our life by
the rule, and squire of the Popes will, nothing at all regarding either what
God wills, and commands, or what he prohibiteth, and forbids us to do:
whom the Papists plain Epicures.
Papists (because they are flat Epicures) do neither wish to be merciful
unto them, nor fear him when he is displeased with them. But let us render
immortal thanks unto God, the eternal father of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, which has suffered the folly, and madness of the Papists to be so
manifested at this day, that no man now can doubt any more, what opinion, and
persuasion all of us ought to have of them. For they are indeed deceivers of
men's minds (as S. Paul says unto Titus) and men that turn away from the
Tit. 1. 10. 2. Tim. 3. 8.
truth: yea verily (as the same Apostle says unto Timothy) men that resist
the truth, as Iannes, and Iambres withstood Moses. But they shall prevail no
longer. For as the Iannes and Iambres Magicians.
madness of those Magicians was then evident to all: so the madness of the
Papists is now revealed to all men. For as they are indeed, so they are also
accounted of all men, seducers, Phil. 3. 18, 19
and deceivers, the enemies of the cross of Christ, Epicures, which have their
belly for their God, which mind earthly things, which bewitch men, that they
may not believe the truth. Wherefore, seeing that this madness of the
Papists is now manifested to all men, no man can doubt, but that no Christian
ought to have any society, and fellowshippe with A Christian ought to have no
society with a Papist.
such kind of persons. And if perhaps any man heretofore has doubted of it,
let him now verily cease to stand in doubt any more, knowing the impiety of
their doctrine, by which they labor to overthrow quite from the foundation our
Christian Common wealth. Fools they are, and mad men, which (with the Giants)
wage war with God him self, and hope to have The Papists make war upon
God Prou. 21. 30.
good success in the matter, seeing that it is most truly spoken of the wise
man, There is no counsel, nor wisdom against the Lord. But that I may come
now at the length unto that, for which I have spoken these things, of the
folly, and madness Our duty it is thus.
of the Papists: we ought woorthily all of us to give as great thanks to the
immortal God, as we can either conceive in mind, or utter in words, for
the renewing of Ecclesiastical doctrine, and for the disclosing of almost
innumerable errors, superstitions, and vices, commonly termed abuses. Now,
what kind of errors, and how great have been heretofore in the Church, if
any man be ignorant of them, he may with a little labor conjecture what they
are, even out of the books, which the enemies of the Gospel have written, out
of which we have brought forth these few for a show. They do not understand
at all what faith is, what the Gospel is, what absolution is: finally, what
Christ is. They teach that Certain errors of the Papists.
men ought only to believe whatsoever the chair of Rome has delivered out in
tradition, does deliver out, and shall deliver out.

They will have men to make choice of meats (contrary to the doctrine of the
Apostle,) yea without the case of offense, 1. Tim. 4. 4.
They do allow, and wonderfully commend to all men invocation upon dead
Saints, which thing comes very near to idolatry. They do approve
woorshipping of images, Pilgrimages Places of pilgrimages
to holy places, as to Rome, to Treuirs, to Compostella, and such like. They
do confidently affirm, and hold, that there is a Purgatory, from whence
indulgencies, and pardons may release, and deliver us. And who can rehearse the
whole rabble of those doctrines, which they teach, all which are full fraught
both with impiety, and superstition? Who hereafter will not marvel, and
wonder at the blindness of the Papists in this so happy an age, in which
after most gross, and mistie darkness of errors (wherein we went all
astray) there is restored by the great bountifulness of God a certain light
unto the world? Indeed all Gods benefits bestowed upon us, ought to excite
and stir us up to be thank full unto him: but yet that principal, and
singular benefit of God in instauring the doctrine of the Church (than which
there could no greater That singular benefit of God in instauring the doctrine
of the Church passes all other.
gift be given to men on earth) I say that only benefit is it, which of all
other we ought chiefly to marvel at, which we ought most to celebrate, and
for which, before all things, we ought to be thank full. And the greater the
blindness of the enemies of the Gospel is, so much the more verily do they
owe unto the immortal God, whose eyes of the mind God has opened in this age,
to acknowledge and behold the truth, and verity. But in this felicity, and
happiness of our age, great and incredible is the ingratitude of men to God at
The ingratitude of this age to God for their happiness.
this day, which I am constrained to confess not without great sorrow, and
grief. Of which argument, and matter I have within these few days last past
compiled a book, being happily moved, and stirred up thereunto by the
absurdity, and impiety of a certain writing, which the enemies of the
Gospel published abroad in Printe: which book of mine (most dear friend) I
thought good to consecrate, and dedicate unto you, though it be unpolished, and
written Extempore: and that for these two causes, both for to declare my good
will toward you, and also for your famous godliness toward God, and
singular care of Christian religion: which zeal, and fervent affection I do
again, and again pray from my heart unto God, that he would daily more, and
more augment, and increase in you. The son of God our Lord, and Redeemer
Jesus Christ, keep and preserve you with all yours, safe and sound. Fare ye
well. From Misena, upon S. Martines day. The year from the coming of the
word into flesh. 1547.

Of the Happiness of this our Age.
AS that most excellent, Virgil. George. lib. 2.
and famous Poet Virgil deemeth husbandmen, of all other men, to be thrice
happy, and fortunate, if they did know their good estate: so I do judge,
that all men which are every where living in this age, to be far most
happy and blessed, if at any time they would acknowledge those good
blessings, which God has sent them, and with thankful minds magnify and
praise him for so heavenly, and celestial a benefit. For, if thou do
endeavor to judge aright, and to weigh, and estimate the matter, as it is
worthy, thou The happiness of this our age how great it is, and in what
blessings it chiefly consists.
must needs confess, without all doubting, that within the compass of these
thousand years, or more last past, there never happened to any age so great a
blessing, as to this our age. For whether thou do respect, and regard the
knowledge of the tongues, the studies of humanity, and of all good arts, and
liberal sciences: or the instauration of holy religion, of Ecclesiastical
doctrine, of true and right Divinity: or whether thou considerest the
restitution of all things (as well public, as private) to their former estate,
or the bringing of them into a better form, or the amendment of abuses, and of
vicious, and corrupt customs, or finally the reformation both of manners, and
orders, thou shall find that all things are in better case now, than they were
in many ages before. And because the matter needs not to be doubted of at
all, concerning the skilfulnesse of the tongues, and the studies of good
learning, and Philosophy at this day: and because we know well enough, All
learning and good studies were laid to sleep in the former age.
and too well, that inueterate barbarousnesse, and rudeness, which before this
time ruled and reigned in all the world, I will not entreat any longer of
these matters. I mind to speak of the reparation of Ecclesiastical affairs:
and in this discourse I will bring forth those things, which may be good
testimonies, and proofs, that those words are most true, which I am not
affraied to affirm, of the felicity and happiness of this our age, against
many men's opinions, and judgments.

First therefore I will discover, and bring to light, what A division or
partition of this present work into three principal parts, and an appendix.
has been the state of former times, what superstitions, what faults, what
abuses have crept into the Church.

Secondly, I will declare what has been corrected, and amended in doctrine,
and what has been either changed, and turned to better in Ceremonies, or else
what has benequite taken away.

Lastly, I will do the best I can, to confute all those objections, which may,
and are commonly wont to be brought against us in this case: Whereunto I will
add a few words of the great ingratitude, and unthankfulness of men to
God for his benefits. After that I have declared these things, as the
meanness and simpleness of my wit will serve me, if (peradventure) there be
any that will read this my book, I will speedily dispatch him, and send him
away.

Therefore, I will now begin to declare unto you, as breefly as I can, in what
clouds of darkness we have dwelled heretofore, and I will comprehend the
summarie of them (for it were both an infinite, and an unnecessary labor to
prosecute every part) generally, as it were in certain Chapters and chief
heads.

Now first of all, in the former ages last past, they which would not only in
word, but also in deed, both be, and seem to be of the Christian name,
were wont to behave them selves thus, and were wont both thoroughly to
persuade them selves, and also to prove unto all other men, that they were good
Christians by this means. For I will speak only of those things which are
well enough known, and which no man can deny, but that they are done at this
day in the Popes dominions.

Wherefore they did believe, that there was one, eternal, How far the former
age believed aright.
infinite, and omnipotent God. Also, that the three persons of the Deity, or
Godhead, namely, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost were of the same
essence, and (that I may use the word, which the Synod, or Nicaene Council
does use) Homousios, that is to say, Consubstantiall, equal in power,
wisdom, and goodness. And thus far verily they did believe aright, and did
agree with the Christians of the right faith: but for all this, they had not
that opinion of Christ (of whom they were called Christians) which they ought
to have had. For, although they did believe, that Christ was conceived by the
holy Ghost (as the Christian Creed, commonly called Symbolum Apostolorum,
does teach) borne of the virgin Marie, crucified, dead, buried, the third day
roase again from the dead, ascended afterward into heaven, and that the same
Christ should come to judge the quick, and the dead: although (I say) they
did openly, without any doubting, profess all these things, notwithstanding,
they had no Wherein the former age did err.
sound understanding at all, or full persuasion of that point, which is chief
and principal, and upon which only our salvation hangs, and depends: to
wit, that only Jesus Christ is the author of man's salvation, The chiefest
point of our salvation.
and that no work, or merit of man, can claim any part, or parcel of this
praise, and glory: that forgiveness of sins, righteousness, and life
everlasting, does Who have their sins remitted and for what.
happen only to those, which put all their hope, and repose all their trust,
and affiance in Jesus Christ: and that that pardon of our sins, and
righteousness does chance unto us, neither for any other man, than for Jesus
Christ himself, as the only price paid for our sins: nor by any other
thing, than by faith in the same Christ. Moreover, that Jesus Christ is the
only man, which may reconcile us to God, as being the only Mediator betwixt
God, and man. Finally, that he only is our Advocate with our heavenly father,
the throne of grace, our Bishop, and high Priest, to make intercession daily
for us, the propitiation for the sins of the world: to be brief, our
righteousness, sanctification, 1. Cor. 1. 30.
and redemption. And that all men may confess that I do here speak the
truth, we will rehearse in order the errors, by which the purity, and
sincerity of this doctrine, concerning reposing confidence in Christ alone,
has been maruellously contaminated, and defiled.

First of all therefore it is plain, and evident that the A Catalogue of such
errors wherewith this doctrine, of trusting only in Christ, has been
corrupted. In what opinion the Mass has been heretofore said or soung.
Apaena and culpa.
daily sacrifice of the Mass was done to this intent and purpose, and in this
opinion: that both the quick, and the dead might obtain thereby pardon of all
their sins, and wickedness. For all men were thus persuaded, that by such a
work both the wrath of God was pacified, and also such men's sins were
released, as provided them to be said, or soung for them, that souls were
raunsomed, and redeemed out of Purgatory fire, and that faults, and crimes
committed, together with the punishments due for them, were wholly abolished.
So verily by that means that was attributed to man's The sacrifice of the Mass
does blasphemously derogate from the only sacrifice and satisfaction of
Christ.
work, which is due only to the son of God, who offered up himself a
sacrifice, and an oblation upon the altar of the Cross for the sins of the
world, whose body was betrayed, and delivered to death for us, whose blood was
shed for the remission of our sins: lastly, whose death it self was the
true sacrifice for the salvation of mankind. Furthermore, when as Christ had
alone satisfied for the sins of all men, these fellows showed us other
means, and ways, whereby we might satisfy God more fully, and amply: as,
amongst other things, Pilgrimages appointed for devotion sake, in Pilgrimages.
which very many consumed, and spent all the time of their life, whilst they
ran a gadding, and madding almost from the utmost ends of the earth,
sometime These wandering Pilgrims were as wise as waltames calfe, which went
nine miles to suck a Bull.
to Rome, or Jerusalem, sometime to Treuirs, or Compostella: whilst they go
to see, and visit Saint Michaels Cathedral Church and cave in Gargan, and
that most royal and magnificent Temple of Saint Lauretan: namely, all to this
end, to satisfy, and appease Gods wrath for their sins, and by this means to
obtain salvation. Hitherto also tend the Popes indulgencies, Indulgencies.
and pardons, either full and absolute for ever, or else but for a thousand
years, an hundred years, or forty years.

Hitherto tendes the fraternity, or fellowship of Friars, Fraternity of
Friars falsely thought to be the Communion of Saints.
which some men (forsooth) at this day call the Communion of Saints: and this
show of godliness they pretend to cloak that superstition withal, and they
labor to paint out a foolish and feigned thing wittily with such false
deceipts, and as it were to adorn and beautify it with some counterfeit
colors. Finally, hitherto tend those egregious suffrages, and succors of
Suffrages of Monks.
Monks, which certeinely were wont to be more esteemed then Christ's
propitiatory sacrifice for the sins of the world: yea, the greatest part of
men, rejecting in the mean while our Savior Christ, nothing doubted to
redeem, and purchase with a great sum of money the community of Monastical
works, as though the Monks works bought and sold for money.
salvation of their souls did consist only in these. For Monks commonly were
accustomed to power upon others the superfluity of good works, wherewith
they themselves abounded, and ouerflowed, if there were any that would lay
down ready money for them, and leaving always enough for the obteining of
their own salvation, they were wont to obtrude, and set to sale those their
works which were superfluous. That these things are thus truly reported of
them, those obligations, or quittances (which are extant at this day) made for
that matter are sufficient testimonies, and proofs. Thus are they made.
Concedimus (inquiunt) praesentium tenore, omnium Syngraphae super redemptionem
operum Monasticorum.
Missarum, diuinorum officiorum, orationu^, praedicationu^, studiorum,
ieiuniorum, abstinentiarum, vigiliarum, laborum, caeterorumque bonorum omnium,
quae per fratres, and sorores ordinis fiunt communionem, and participationem.
Et iterum. Statuimus vt iniungantur pro animabus vestris sacra Missarum
solennia, vigiliae, ac caetera suffragiorum praesidia: vt multiplici sacrarum
orationum, ac piorum suffragiorum adiuti praesidio: and hic diuinae gratiae
augmentum, and in futuro vitae aeternae praemium facilius, ac copiosius
mereamini adipisci. We do grant (say they) by the tenor of these presents
the Obligations about bying Monastical works.
communion, and participation of all Masses, of all divine duties, of all
prayers, preachings, studies, fastes, abstinencies, watchings, labors, and all
other good things, which are done by the Friars and Nonnes of this order. And
again: We ordeine that for your souls there be enjoined the holy rites, and
solemnities of Masses, vigils, and the other helps of suffrages: that you
being helped with the manifold aid of holy prayers, may deserve to obtain
both here in this life the increase of Gods grace and in the life to come more
easily, and plentifully the reward of eternal life. Hitherto we have
recorded, and related faithfully, and truly, the very words of the
Monastical obligation, and caution, least that there should be found some
froward fellow, which might gainesay us. Now the Monks commanded other men so
to lean and trust to these trifles (which Monks would have other men trust
to their works.
are of no value to the obteining of salvation) that amongst other things they
would cause men that lay at the point of death, to remember how many, and how
great good works they had done, by whose abundance and greatness, the
offenses which they in their life time had committed, might be overwhelmed: how
much merits they had, to which Heaven was due.

Now, as concerning the Popes pardons, many men hertofore ascribed so much unto
them, that they would How much heretofore men attributed to Popes pardons.
not stick to say, that by them a man might obtain forgiveness of sins,
and free releasement, from all villainy and wickedness: yea, although a man
had lien with our Lady, the virgin, Christ's mother, (an abominable So did
Friar Tecell preach at wittemberge.
thing to speak of,) and although he had slain, and killed Christ himself.
For with such salt was the speech of the Papists seasoned, and poudered, if at
any time they meant to extrude, and set out to sale their pedlarie pack of
pardons, as they had commission, and commandment Souls delivered out of
Purgatory for money.
from the Pope. Some of them also were not afraid to auouche, that the soul,
which was tormented in the fire of Purgatory, did flee up into heaven at the
very same instant, and moment, in which a piece of money cast into the box
for it, did gingle.

To these may be added this their assertion: that the red Popish pardoners
blasphemous comparisons betwixt the red Cross, and the Cross of Christ.
cross with the Popes arms (which heretofore was wont to be erected in the
midst of the Church) had no less force, and might in it, to abolishe, and put
away sin, than the cross of our Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ. Moreover,
that if any man had purchased the Popes pardons, he needed not greatly any
repentance for his sins: only these (said they) were without all doubt
sufficient to salvation.

Nay, there have been men, even in our days, which would say that they had
saved more souls by the Popes pardons, than ever did S. Peter by his sermons.
What need many words? All of them stoutly, and confidently affirmed, that
indulgencies, and pardons were of power to forgive most fully as well the fault,
as the punishment: and that the superfluous merits of Saints, together with
these, might be communicated, and imparted to those, which would pay well, and
truly for them. For every man knows this, how that the Popes bull was wont
The Popes Bull.
to be recited, and read to those, which were at the point of death, in which
bull there was promised both a full, and absolute abolition of all crimes, and
also that the fear of Purgatory should be wholly taken away. These things
verily are such that our posterity may think them to be but forged fables,
which we notwithstanding know very well not to be feigned, but to have been
done indeed. Well, seeing that there are even now extant Non ficta sed facta.
sundry letters, seals, and monumentes of these matters, there will remain
(if they be kept still, and reserved,) an everlasting testimony of Popish
impiety, which without all doubt will be propagated, and continued to all
posterity. Hitherto perteines the Iubile instituted Popish impiety.
and ordained only to pick money out of men's purses: at which time what
mortal men soever went to see, and visit the holy places of the city of
Rome, obtained most full pardon, and remission of all their sins Iubile
appointed as a market for money.
and offenses, which they in all their life time had committed, which thing is
well known to all men. Boniface, the eight Pope of that name, was the first,
which ordained that this Iubile should be solemnized, and celebrated The first
deviser and inuenter of Iubile.
every hundred year: Clemens the sixth brought it to fifty years: at the
length Xystus the fourth brought it nearer, and cut it shorter, reducing it to
five and twenty years. What shall I speak of Invocation or prayer to dead
Saints.
the superstitious worship, and invocation of Saints? For heretofore almost
all men did so run to them for succor, and relief, did so desire, and crave
of them their aid, and assistance, as though Jesus Christ had not been at all
our Advocate, and Attournie with our heavenly father: yea as though the
Saints alone (keeping Christ The Papists did imagine Christ to be a little
preatie boy still, whom his mother might command.
streightlie under their tuition, and setting him to schole) had taken upon
them the patronage, and protection of men on earth. All men were persuaded,
that both by their merits, and intercession, they should find God favorable
to them, that they should be absolved, and loosed from the bands and fetters
of their sins, that they should be delivered daily from imminent perils and
dangers: so much was Christ forgotten, and almost quite out of all men's minds.
That I may not add further, that those Saints were sundry times called upon
in prayer, of whom it was not well known What Saints were prayed unto.
whether there ever lived any such, or no. Now, what a folly is it to
attribute Divinity to mortal men, and to request aid, and help at their
hands, whom man him self has numbered amongst Saints? to make of men that
are departed this life, Ethnicall and heathenish Gods? to abstain from
certain kinds of A rabble of rites and Ceremonies observed in the woorshippe
of Saints contrary to the first commandment: Thou shall have none other
Gods but me.
meats, in the honor and service of those Saints? to keep holy days for
their sakes, that so thou may give them this worship? to run (like common
Coursitours) into wodds, and hills? to crouch, and prostrate a man's self
before the graven pictures, Churches, and Chappelles of dead men? to adore
their images, to worship their ashes, and bones? also to build with infinite
cost and charges Temples unto them? to distribute, and part unto every
peculiar and particular Saint his proper virtue, unto every several Saint his
several, and singular function, and office? to hang up upon the pillars and
walls of Churches anathemaes or gifts and offerings, oftentimes to light
candels at noone day? to burn sweet franckincense, to pay thy foolish vows?
and who can recount all those things, which men do for the worship of
Saints, contrary to the first commandment of the Decalogue, which are not
only full of a certain superstition, but also of execrable impiety, and
idolatry: yea, which come very near well nigh to a certain Paganism. Such
a prayer and invocation is that which is openly soung of S. Peter in their
Churches.

O gloriose patron, A Popish prayer to Saint Peter.

Nostrae salutis opifex:
Tu es nostrum refugium,
Tu robur potentissimum,
Tu salus, and protectio. That is, O abominable blasphemy.

O glorious Patron S. Peter,
The woorker of our salvation,
Thou art our refuge,
Thou art our most mighty strength,
Thou art our safety, and protection.
Here verily we may see, that that, which ought to be attributed only to the
son of God him self, our Savior Christ Jesus, is ascribed to a mortal man,
and that contrary to the whole Scripture of the old and new Testament, which
is given by inspiration 2. Tim. 3. 16.
of God.

Thus you have hard how the sincerity of this doctrine (concerning trust, and
confidence in Christ) has been heretofore contaminated, and corrupted with
diverse, and sundry errors. Therefore as many as endeavored both to A brief
repetition of those things, which were thought necessary heretofore to the
obteining of salvation.
be truly, and also to seem to be Christians, did (as I said before) provide
that the sacrifice of the Mass might be offered for them, as well to obtain
pardon, as to make an atonement for their sins: they made long iorneis, and
undertook great travels, and perigrinations to holy places, they bought
dearly the Popes indulgencies, pardons, and bulls, they labored to be
chosen, and elected into the society, and fellowship of Friars, they got for
them selves both by suite, and silver the suffrages of Monks, and the
communion of their good works, they fled as suppliantes for succor, and
defense to the Sanctuaries of Saints. And they verily supposed (such was their
blindness) that by these things they had provided excellently well for their
salvation. So greatly did they swerve, and err from the true faith, and
belief in Christ, in that darkness of ignorance and errors: and took what
honor they ought to have given only, and soly to Christ, namely to have
placed all their affiance, and trust of salvation in him alone, that they
transferred to foolish things, and things full of impiety, notably
reproching, and dishonouring the son of God, crucified for us, whose death
they did believe, not to be of sufficient force, and of strength, to satisfy,
and to pacify God for the sins of mankind.

The same men of that time as often as either they entered The superstition of
holy water.
the Church, or went out of it, did lightly sprinkle them selves with holy
water in the Church porch, (which was commonly ready at hand there, through
the care of the Parish Clerk or Sexton) to wipe, and wash away by that means
the daily blottes of their offenses, The manner of Ethnikes to use holy water
sprinkle.
and spots of their minds: which thing also differs not much from the
superstition of the Ethnikes. For in old time, amongst the Gentiles, which
were wholly given to the worshipping of idols, if any were polluted, and defiled
with any heinous wickedness, they were wont to wash them selves (as Virgil
says) Flumine viuo, that is to say, with a fresh running river, to Virgil.
lib. 6. Aeneiad.
the end they might be both present at the sacrifices, and also that they
might the more purely call upon their Gods. Theodoret in the life of Julian
mentions a certain aspersion, or sprinkling, which was done by Theodoret in
vita Iuliani.
the Sextons of the Heathen, to purge with holy water all those, which entered
into the holy Temple: with which thing the Emperor Valentinian being offended,
and A good deed of Valentinian.
grieved, gave the Minister of the Church a box on the ear with his fist,
because he accounted him self to be rather defiled, than purified, by such a
sprinkling.

The same our ancestors in former time, entering The superstition of sticking
up wax candels before the Sacrament: also before the altars and images of
Saints.
upon the Sunday into the Church, did by and by stick up wax candels in the
place, where the consecrated bread was wont to be reserved. That seemed to be
not more duetifull, than honorable. Moreover, they lighted candels (which
thing was thought very necessary) to the image of S. Erasmus, praying him to
give them riches: to the image of S. George, praying him to save them in
battle: to the image of S. Barbara, praying her that they might not die before
they had received the Eucharist, then called howseling: to the image of S.
Apolline, that they might not be troubled with the tooth ache. They fell down
flat upon their knees before The idolatry of the former age how great it was.
these Saints pictures, they fixed their eyes firmly and steadfastly upon
them, they spoke with them, they kissed them, they requested what they would of
them. Now, how much this thing does differ from idolatry, let other men
judge. For, whereas they say that they do How Papists exeuse the woorshipping
of Images.
not worship the pictures them selves, but the persons after whose similitude,
and likeness those images are either painted, or graven, and to whose names
they were consecrated, it is no good shift. For the Gentiles, which were given
to the worshipping of idols, were in the same mind, that they would say, that
they did woorshippe, The Ethnikes pretend the very same for their idolatry.
pray unto, and reverence them, the likeness of whose countenaunces those
images did express, and represent unto us: which thing also Plato (if I be not
deceived) does mention in a certain place.

The same men in those days attributed no less, yea rather The blasphemous
Legend of lies.
(if we will confess the truth) more authority to those feigned, and forged
fables of Saints, which falsely they call the golden Legend, since that (as one
of their own Popish flock testifies) it was written Ab homine Ludo^icus
viues in lib. de causis corruptarum artium.
ferrei oris, plumbei cordis, that is to say, of a fellow that had an iron
face, and a leaden heart: also they gave no less credit to the history of
Lombardus, than they did to the most certain word of God, and to the Scripture
The history of Lombard.
given by inspiration of God. Yea, they esteemed more the authority of man's
traditions than of Gods Traditions. Decretalles.
precepts, of the Decretals than of the Gospel, of custom than of verity.

The same men at those days, if perhaps they had Superstitious vows
religi^ously observed.
vowed to any Saint one days fast, and hunger, or a Pilgrimage for to recover
their health: finally, if they had bound them selves with the promise of any
vow whatsoever, they took great care to perform it most devoutly and holily:
But that which they had promised The rrue vow of Baptism was neglected in
those days.
in their Baptism to renounce the Devil, and all his pompes (that I may use
the words of Arnobius) they never thought to perform the faith of such a vow,
neither did they here think, that they were greatly bound by any religion to
pay such a vow, and promise.

The same men at those days, that they might obtain Pardons for walking the
stations of the city of Rome. Stations are certain Churches where pardons be
granted.
pardon, and remission of their sins, used to run to Rome, there to walk
those stations in the city, which other men did use in visiting (after the
manner) certain Chapels and Oratories: there they obtained with a great
sum of money the Popes bull, to the end that they both tarying at home, and
falling down before the altars, and images of Saints at set times, and days
of the year, might be made partakers of such pardons, as well as if they had
been present in the city of Rome, to have walked their Romish stations.

The same our ancestors heretofore thought that Trifling satisfactions.
they did pacify, and satisfy God sufficiently for their sins, by
fastinges, watchinges, lying upon the ground, and such like trifles, and
follies, which breed in men's minds nothing but superstition: when as truly,
when all is done, there can be no other satisfaction, but the only death of
the son of God, who (as S. John says) 1. John. 2. 2.
is the one only propitiation, and reconciliation for our sins.

Neither do I speak these words, as though I How far forth the chastening
of the body is not to be disallowed.
did mislike, and dissallow every chastening of the body, if any man labor,
or go about by this means, that is, by fasting, by abstinence from meats, by
sobriety, by godly studies, and good exercises, to repress, to tame, and as
it were to bridle the violent rage, and fierceness of the flesh, which waxes
too lascivious, and exulteth too immoderately: (for I do deem that chiefly to
be allowed of, and think it to be very necessary:) but I do reprehend, and
find fault with the froward, and perverse opinion of men, which did believe
that almost only such things were of virtue, and power, to satisfy for
sins, and which imagined, that the whole service of God, and true godliness
did consist well nigh in these alone: when as in the mean time, in this
hardness, straightness, and austeritie of life, they being touched and
girded but with a word, would oftentimes rage furiously like mad men,
would burn in desire of reuengement, would stir up tumultes, and
Tragoedies in a matter of nothing, that I may add nothing more grievous. So
little true, and sincere piety toward God was there in those trifles, which
pretended such an honest, and goodly show.

The same men in those days, if they had been daily (...) of a (...) to ho^^e
water.
present at the sacrifice of the Mass, if they had been both at morning and
evening prayer, chiefly if they had been sprinkled with holy water upon holy
days in the solemn procession of supplicantes, or if they had tasted at all
in the Church (as the fashion is) of consecrated and hallowed salt, howsoever
otherwise they did lead their life they judged now all to be safe, and sure:
as men, who having all the spots of their wickedness, and iniquity put away
(if they were polluted, and defiled with any) were now by such an aspersion of
water, or taste of salt, beecome pure on every part, and holy, as the Canon
law teaches.

The same men, if peradventure they had not so duly The superstitious
observing of fasting days.
observed those fastes, which were proclaimed at set days and times of the
year, did now think that they did offend more grievously, than if they had
violated, and broken the commandments of God him self. On the contrary
side, if they had kept, and observed these fastes, they were persuaded that
they had now deserved, and merited remission of sins, that they honored God
with as great an honor, as might be, that they had given to God a godly
worship, and an acceptable duty. So great superstition was there in these
things, which men had instituted, and ordained.

The same men, if they had iterated and repeated to a certain number of beads
the Lords prayer, and the The Pater noster and Aue Maria was wont to be rolled
and trolled upon a pair of beads.
words of the Angel, saluting the virgin Marie, yea and that slouthfully, and
as it were doing an other thing, only to fill up their number, and to make a
sound without sense, they did believe that they had now incredibly delighted
Gods ears, that they had pacified, and appeased Gods wrath, that they had
truly praised God, that they had duly prayed unto him.

The same men of that time, if they had continued all their life long to
increase their wealth by any means How rich usurers did satisfy for their
sins heretofore.
whatsoever, to heap up goods and riches by right or by wrong, to circumuent
and defraud their neighbor, to rob and spoil the poorer sort by usury, if
at the length, when they lay on their death bed, they had either taken order
for the image of some Saint to be placed in the Church, or by their last will
and Testament had given I cannot tell what little legacy to the poor, they
thought that they did depart out of this life pure, and spotless, as though
nuw by this one thing all their sins had been purged, and clean put away.
Yea, moreover, lying now at the point of death, they commanded their executours
to see them buried in a Franciscan Radulph Agrico la, Longolius, and Frederike
prince of Mantua were so superstitiously besotted.
Friars weed: being verily persuaded, that the Devil had no power at all over
any man, that was lapt, and clothed with that holy garment, and so brought to
his grave.

The same men in those days, having buried their wives, and being now
widowers, thought that it was In time of Papistrie it was thought lawful to
keep a Concubine.
lawful for them to take unto them a concubine, the Magistrate wincking at so
great wickedness: and in the mean while, how many years did they for all
that live in so filthy a life, being touched with no godly sorrow, and
grief of their mind for their sins, neither abandoning, nor casting off
their concubine, never purposing to live chaste afterwades? Only in a certain
feigned, and hypocritical repentance, and to satisfy the commandment of the
Bishop of Rome, they came once a year to the Lords table: but how worthily,
and how faithfully, the matter it self does declare: with what fruit, any
man may easily conjecture by Saint Paul's commination. And 1. Cor. 11. 29.
yet in the mean time they seemed to themselves to be very fair, and good
Christians. Such was the blindness of former times, and such examples took
the Lay people from the Priests. Neither could they freely The Lay people
corrupted by the priests evil example.
enough find fault with the people, whom they did corrupt by their ill
example, nor condemn easily in the Laietie, that which any other man might
justly reprehend in them.

For, I pray you, with what face should the whoremaister Verres de furto, de
seditione Cethegus.
exhort an other to chastity, the impenitent to repentance, he that is
defiled with all kind of wickedness exhort an other to holiness? Or what
can his authority prevail, who is deprehended, and found faulty in the same
vices, which he reprehendeth in other men? and which him self does indeed
accuse his own faults, whilst he chideth other men not so guilty as he?
But let us return again to our purpose.

The same men of those days were wont always The superstition of the seal
called Agnus Dei.
to carry, and bear about with them in their bags a seal of wax
(consecrated by the Bishop of Rome) which of the imprinted image, or figure
they did term Agnus Dei, that is to say, The lamb of God: being verily
persuaded, that that same seal had in it a principal power, and a wonderful
virtue (by reason of the blessing of Christ's vicar, by which there was
divinely from heaven inspired into those kind of seals a certain secret
virtue) against all thunderclappes, lighteninges, and tempests, and I can not
tell what other euilles. Such a virtue they attribute to their Easter wax
candels, The superstition of an Easter wax candel, and of candels consecrated
upon Candelmasse day.
and to those which are consecrated upon the feast day of the Purification of
Marie, also both to blessed salt, and blessed holy water, in which things
they think there is a power, and virtue, to drive away evil Spirits, and
Diuelles. Such a like superstition there was amongst the Jews, and a vain
credulity of that The Jewish superstition of the name, Jehovah.
name, which they call Tetragrammaton: which being engraven in gold, they
supposed, that whosoever carried that about with them should be safe, and sure,
by the virtue, and efficacy thereof, from great and many mischiefs. The like
superstition also is that, which one Serenus Samonicus writes of that
ridiculous name The superstition of the name Abracadabra.
Abracadabra: that being written after a certain manner in a paper, and hanged
upon the neck of him that is sick of an ague, does by little and little drive
away the disease.

The same men of that time judged those to be good What works were
heretofore in time of Popery thought to be good works.
works, which there is no man at this day but will confess they were full of
superstition, and idolatry: as for example these, vowed Pilgrimages, gadding
into woddes, and hills, the redeeming of the Popes bulls, the woorshipping of
images and pictures, the adoration of images, the bowing of the neck before
Churches, perfuming before the altars of Saints, the burning of franckincense,
and wax candels, the fulfilling of vows, gifts hanged upon the pillars of
the Church, the adopting of household gods, superstitious fastes, choice and
difference of meats, abstinence from milk, cheese, butter, flesh, and eggs,
thread bare apparel, contemning and despising of marriage, often watchinges,
lyinges upon the ground, babbling of prayers which they did not understand,
voluntary vexing and tormenting Stationaries are those which wait upon the
Pope when he celebrateth his stations.
of their bodies, the offering of an hired wages to the Stationaries that
scratch and scrape for money, the election into the covent and fellowshippe of
Friars, building of Monasteries, founding of Masses, ordeining of altars,
memories, anniuersaries, the wearing of an image of wax consecrated by the
Bishop of Rome, invocation to dead men for help, the hanging of the Gospel
about their neck, the walking of the stations of Rome, supplication to the
couerings, and cushinges of Saints, the sprinkling of holy water, the tasting
of consecrated salt, the bearing about of images in public processions, the
worshipping and kissing of uncertain relikes, long tedious songs in the
Church, the hours of our Lady, satisfaction for sins, the Evening prayer of
the virgin, the censing of herbs and boughs, the profession of a
Monastical life, voluntary beggerie: and who can rehearse all the rest of
that trash?

Now, what authority of the mystical Scripture have All these forenamed
works are not grounded upon the sacred Scripture.
these works? What witness of Gods word? Where is there any mention at all
of these things in the writings of the Prophets, and Apostles? Finally, what
either commandment or example is there extant any where in the holy
Scriptures for these? Moreover, what do they avail to religion? Of what force
are they to obtain salvation? What rewards are promised, and proposed to
them? Who either of the ancient Divines taught these things, or who in the
first, and Primative Church did ever observe them? Last of all, what necessity
I pray you is there of these, either to the amplifying of Gods glory, or to
the profit and commodity of others? Thus verily it is plain, and evident how
great a mist of darkness there was spread over all men's minds in former
times, seeing that of those, which had the charge to teach others, such things
were inculcated into the ears of the people, indeed shadowed after the shape
of sanctity, and holiness: but, to say the truth, only foolish devises of
men. Such were in old time amongst the Jews those things, which they had The
additions which the Jews had put to the Law. Mat. 23. 5. Mark. 7. 3. 4
added, and put to the Law, which our Savior Christ mentions so often in
the Gospel: as for example, broad philacteries, long fringes of their
garments, often washinges of their hands, and of pottes, babbling of prayers,
ambitious fastes, and other such like things.

How much better had it been, to have inculcated, and beaten those things
only into their heads, which come nearer to true godliness, and wherein man's
salvation consists? Such we know are those good works in deed, both very
acceptable to God, and worthy of a Christian man, which both the Table of the
ten commandments What works are truly to be said good works.
does teach, and Christ does command, and the Apostolical doctrine does
commend unto us: as namely, the fear of God, repentance, trust in God, love
toward him from the whole heart, the confession, and propagation of the
Gospel, calling upon God in trouble and adversity, thankesgeuing in
prosperity, cheerfulness in miseries and afflictions, perpetual praise of
God, justice and upright dealing toward thy neighbor, diligence and
painfulness in thy office and duty, sobriety, temperance, chastity, and
such like. And those which are next in place to these, to overcome The duties
of a Christian man.
anger, to put away hatred, to repress the desire of revenge, to refuse
glory, to love our enemies, to bless them which curse us, to do good to them
which hate us, to pray for them which hurt us, rail upon us, and revile us, to
recompense an injury with a benefit, to give meat to the hungry, drink to
the thirsty, alms to the needy, to interteine and receive strangers into
thine house, to cover and cloth the naked, to visit the sick, to admonish
him that is in an error, to teach and instruct the ignorant, to help the
perplexed and doubtful man with thine advise and counsel, to make enemies,
and those that disagree, friends again, to comfort the afflicted, and such
like. What other thing does the Apostle S. Paul teach, but that we should
always Unto what good works Saint Paul does exhort us.
endeavor (not trusting to our own strength, but chiefly to Gods assistance)
and labor to live godly, justly, innocently, uprightly, holily, chastely,
soberly, temperately, profitably to the Church of God, friendly Tit. 2. 12.
for the life of men, agreeably to Christianity, and in sum, to live worthy
the Gospel of Christ? He wills Romans 12. 1. Gal. 5. 24.
us to walk in newness of life, and not to serve sin any more, to offer up
our bodies a lively, holy, and an acceptable sacrifice to God, to crucify our
flesh, with the affections and desires thereof, to keep our selves immaculate,
and unspotted of the world. He warns, and exhorts us, that we be renewed in
the spirit of our mind, and that we put on the new man, which Ephesians. 4. 23.
is created to the image, and similitude of God, in righteousness, and true
holiness: that we be followers of Ephesians. 5. 1. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 12 Ephesians. 4. 2. 3.
God as dear children, that we walk worthy of God, and as becomes Saints,
supporting one another through love, endeavoring to keep the unity of the
spirit in the bond of peace, being courteous, and tender hearted one to
another. He bids us to tame always, and to repress our natural
viciousness, and our wicked affections, neither to wax proud, and lofty in
prosperity, nor to be too much dejected and cast down in adversity:
whatsoever we do, to do all to the glory of God: no man to regard his own
things, but rather 1. Cor. 10. 31. Philip. 2. 4.
those things which are other men's. Moreover, to be such that no man may be
offended at any time with us, but that we provoke others by our good example
unto godliness, and virtue. Finally, he exhorts us that we Coloss. 3. 17.
pray without ceasing, that in all things we give thanks to God, that we
always sigh after heavenly things, and despise humane, and earthly things.
Every where verily From what vices does Saint Paul dehorte us.
both this same Apostle, and the rest do deter, and dehort us from
whoorehunting, from obscenitie, and filthiness of words, from hatred, and
heartburninges, from spiteful envy, from vaineglorie, from ambition, from
avarice, from pride, from surfeting and gluttony, and from all other vice, and
wickedness. And before all What manner of faith the Apostles teach.
things they do perpetually inculcate that faith, which look what an one it
is within, such an one does love toward our neighbor show it forth, and
represent it to be without. Thus you have heard what be the duties of a
Christian man, and the works which are truly good, acceptable in deed to
God, and which God has ordained, that we should walk in them, as S. Paul
says Ephe. 2. 10. Galat. 5.
to the Ephesians. And these verily are those good works, which both give
evident testimony of our faith, and declare our mind to be grateful, and
mindful of Gods The efficacy of good works.
benefits toward us, and commend unto Infidels our Christian profession, and
which allure, and inuit our neighbors to the study of godliness. If these
things had been in former ages diligently, and daily inculcated into the
ears, and minds of all men, truly there had not so many superstitions, so
many vices, and abuses crept into the Church, as there did: of which now we
will go on forward to speak and to entreat of the rest, which remain
behind. But first let us say somewhat of the Pope, the God upon earth, as the
Papists do call him.

They were drowned in a deep and great error, A foul and fond error to
think, that the Pope is the head of the Church, Christ's Vicar, and Saint
Peter's successor.
which were persuaded thoroughly, that the Bishop of Rome was by Gods law head
of the catholic Church, the high Priest of Christian religion, the vicar of
Christ, and successor of S. Peter, and (as it were) a certain God amongst
men, and partaker of both natures with Christ, and superior to an universal
Synod, or general Counsel: to whom it was lawful to broach a new doctrine,
which was contrary to the doctrine of the Gospel, to make a new article of
our faith in the Creed, to prescribe The Authority of the Pope how great it
was thought to be.
unto all men a new form and manner of living: who lastly might command, even
the Angels themselves, as his guard attending his beck, and who might at his
pleasure thrust out of Heaven whom he would: yea, those that were guiltless,
and had never deserved it.

I omit, and let pass, how that he commands that all the decrees of the
Apostolical seat should Decrees and Decretalles.
be received, as if they had been confirmed, and ratified by the divine voice
of Peter himself: that he will have us to bear the yoke put upon us by the
holy seat, yea though it be scarce tolerable: that he does suffer him self
to be reproved, and rebuked of none, though he does lead an innumerable sort
of souls to Hell with him: that he does take away in the Supper of the Lord,
rites instituted by our Savior Christ: that he transferreth to his own
constitutions, that glory, which is due unto God alone: that he goes on still
to manteine, and defend doctrines of Devils (for so does the Apostle call
them) concerning forbidding of 1. Tim. 4. 1.
marriage, concerning the use, and choice of meats, and finally, concerning
such like things: that he glories that both the swords are given to him, and
that he challenges A proud brag.
unto him self the power both of the celestial, and terrestrial Empire,
according unto that saying, Data est mihi omnis potestas in coelo, and in
terra, that is: All Mat. 28. 18.
power is given unto me in Heaven, and in earth: that he affirms himself to
have the right of translating the Monarchy which Caesar now obteineth: to be
brief, that he compels religion to serve his profit, that The arrogancy
and passing pride of the Pope of Rome.
he rules, and reigns like a King, that he increases his dominions by
wars, that he possesses, and holds strange cities by force, by fraud,
finally by any pretense whatsoever: in sum, that he desires him self to be
set both above the Scripture, and the Church, and almost above God him self:
that he makes a gain of Ecclesiastical matters, and of the holy Ghost: that
he reaches forth his feet for most noble Princes to kiss: that he
canonizeth for Saints dead men, whom he thinks will be profitable to him:
last of all, that he breaks leagues, that he breaks the faith, and religion
of an oath, that he gives leave for men to do against the commandments of
GOD, and that he permits subjects to forsake their allegiance, and to cast
off all obedience and loyalty to their lawful Prince: and what one man, I
pray you, can rehearse all his doings, of which there is neither end, nor
measure? For I let pass The negligence of the Pope in caring for the Christian
common wealth.
and pretermit many things, which were to be added: of the negligence of the
Pope in caring for the Christian common wealth (for he boasts that he is set
over it by God as chief President, whose charge is to see that it take no
harm) in correcting and amending corrupt doctrine, in abolishing wicked
worships, in assembling Synodes, and calling Councels, in amending the corrupt
manners of all states, finally, in governing and guiding other matters, and
affairs perteining to his office, and function. Yea, I thought good to pass
over in silence those Popish Edictes and prohibitions against all Scripture.
things, which all the world (almost) cries out upon: namely, that the Pope
forbids many things, which either are no where prohibited by Gods law, or
plainly permitted by the same: that he requires his own law to be of more
account, than Gods commandments, that he provides every where rather for
his own gain, than either for Gods, glory, or the salvation of Christian
people: that by his indulgencies, and pardons he both augme^teth the liberty,
and impunitie of sinning, and also cutteth away all occasions, and causes of
amendment of life: finally, that he neither cares to see his own canons
observed, nor endeuoreth to repress that infinite and unmeasurable riotte and
excess of the Cardinals of Rome. Hitherto you have heard of the Bishop of Rome
whom the Papists account to be our supreme Bishop, and most holy Lord.
Some salute him with the title and appellation of Prince, and Father of
mankind, othersome vouchsafe to give him the name, and honor of a terrene, or
earthly God.

Now let us come to Baptism, which since that it was instituted, Baptism
wherefore it was instituted of Christ.
and ordained by Christ him self for man's sake: namely, that they which are
borne by nature the children of wrath, may through a certain new regeneration
by the Spirit, beecome the sons of grace: and that by Baptism they might be
purged from the spots of sin, which they brought with the^ into the world,
when they were borne: this use the Papists in former ages maruellously
defiled. For they were not afraid to baptize sacring belles, and other belles
with great ceremonies, yea almost The abuse of Baptism. Belles had Godfathers.
observing the same rites, which were used in baptising infantes. For neither
exorcisme, nor unction is left out: they have godfathers, they have names given
them, and all the rest of the things, which were wont to be used in the true
Baptism, are practiced very devoutly, or rather superstitiously, not without
great reproach, mockage, and despite of the true Baptism: especially, seeing
here, as in baptising of children, every hedge Priest and Curate will not
serve, but only the Bishop of the Diocese, namely to this end, that there may
be more authority in the stage play, whilst that such a christening is full
of pomp. And because Baptism was ordained of Christ to be the lauer of
regeneration, and the washing away of our sins: the Papists were wont to
consecrate with The superstitious consecration of water with salt.
superstitious rites (for they had no commandment of Christ concerning that
matter) water with salt, by which either those that entered into the Church (as
I said before) or those which went out thence might sprinkle them selves, to
wash away the spots, and blottes of their daily sins, and those light
offenses and faults of theirs: which custom now also lasts in places of
Popery. The abuse of Confirmation.


Now what great abuse was there heretofore of confirmation, as they call it?
For whereas in it there ought to be had a diligent inquiry of doctrine, and a
profession of faith as a chief and principal thing to be required in bishoping
the Papists leaving and neglecting these, send the children away, after that
they have signed them in the foreheads with the holy Chrisme (to use Petrus
Lombardus words) and given them a box on the ear. So if you respect the true
use of confirmation, it has no place at all amongst the Papists: and the
thing it self being quite taken away, there remains only the name, and a
certain shadow of an old ancient custom.

There were also many intolerable abuses in penance, The abuse of penance and
confession.
and confession: as for example, that hard, and to scrupulous a reckoning up of
all our sins, reserving of certain cases, that appendix in absolution of the
merits of Saints, Romish indulgencies, humane satisfaction for sins, and if
there be any such like.

In the Supper of the Lord the cheifest abuse was of The manifold abuse of
the Supper of the Lord amongst the Papists.
Masses, especially that manifold number, and great variety of them, as for
travelers and wayfaring men, for sailers and seafaringme^, for women
traveling in childbed: item the Mass of the crown of thorn, the Mass of
the three nails, the Mass of Christ's uncircumcision: what? were they not
wont to flee for relief unto Masses, as many as desired, and wished to have a
prosperous and joyful event to all things, which they enterprised and went
about, which sought a remedy for their diseases, which would gladly escape,
and shun all imminent evils and dangers? Yea moreover, Masses were thought to
be profitable to deliver the dead from the fire of Purgatory. For the matter
was now come to that pass, that that Sacrament which was instituted and
ordained to excite, and stir up live men to the remembrance of Christ's death,
was almost wholly translated to the dead. I do omit the The Superstitious
reservation and ostentation of the Lords bread.
superstitious reservation of the Lords bread, and the pomp in which the same
is carried about, and showed both in public processions, and also in solemn
vewinges of the field in the Rogation week. I do furthermore omit and let
pass that taking away of one part of the Sacrament from the people, flat
contrary to the institution, and ordinance of Christ.

But let us come to matters of greater weight and importance, That the papists
heretofore either knew not at all, or else neglected the principal parts of
Christian Religion.
and first and foremost to the promises concerning Christ to come: in the former
age no man had any rememberance, or certain knowledge of that promise, which
is the first both in time, and order. Such clouds of ignorance, and error,
did so miserably darken the whole world. And yet there are some also at this
day, which think that we do wrest that place of Genesis (in which Genesis 3. 15.
is contained the first promise) to the vauntage and commodity of our own
cause: when as in deed the most ancient Doctors of the Christian Church make
with us: as Irenaeus, who not once, or twice, but often testifies, Irenaeus.
that the seed of the woman is that, which Marie brought forth into the
world, to wit our Savior. So Cyprian.
does Saint Cyprian understand that place, in his second book against the
Jews: so does S. Hierome likewise, Hieronymus.
which we have declared in another place: so does the Author of that Epistle,
De viro perfecto, whosoever he was that wrote it. I wot well, that to this day
it has been used to be read in their Bibles, Ipsa conteret caput A corrupt
Text.
tuum: that is to say, She shall bruise and break the Serpents head: as though
it ought to be understood of the woman, and not of the seed of the woman. So
Prudentius may seem to have read, and understood it, Prudentius.
when he says:

Author and ipse doli coluber
Plectitur improbus, vt mulier
Colla trilinguia calce terat.
And a little after he says thus:

Hoc erat aspidis atque hominis
Digladiabile dissidium,
Quod modo cernua foemineis
Vipera proteritur pedibus.
Edere namque Deum merita,
Omnia virga venena domat.
But (as I said before) all this is to be referred to the The seed of the
woman.
seed of the woman, which is the child of Marie: to wit, our Lord, and
Redeemer Jesus Christ, as Irenaeus interprets that place. Yea, and Saint
Cyprian reads it thus, Ipse conteret caput tuum: He, etc. having respect
rather unto the sense, than unto the word. So likewise the Greeks say,
(...): that is How it is read in the Greek text.
to say, He shall bruise thy head, that so (...) being put in the Masculine
gender, may be referred to the son of the woman, who is Christ: that is to
say, respecting rather the meaning of the place, than the bare word. And
Hierome upon Genesis has noted, that How it is read in the Haebrue.
it must be read so out of the Hebrew text, that it respects the seed: to
whose judgment as many as at this day are excellent, and skillful in the
knowledge of the tongues do condescend, and agree.

And that our adversaries may the less doubt of this (as all our sayings, and
doings are suspected of them) Picus Mirandula, a man most famous in the age
wherein Picus Mirandula.
he lived, does also witness the same thing. Yea, and Prudentius in another
hymn does refer this Prudentius.
promise to Christ, neither does he understand it any otherwise, than we do
at this day. For amongst other things thus he writes of the death, and
punishment of Christ:

Vidit anguis immolatam Verses of Christ his passion.

Corporis sacri hostiam:
Vidit, and fellis perusti
Mox venenum perdidit,
Saucius dolor multo
Colla fractus sibilat.
Quid tibi profane serpens
Profuit, rebus nouis
Plasma primum perculisse
Versipelle astutia?
Diluit culpam recepto
Forma mortalis Deo,
Here verily Prudentius (the Christian Poet) declares The meaning of
Prudentius his verses.
that the son of God, taking unto him the shape, and body of a man, whilst
he voluntarily offered him self to die, did break the head of that Serpent,
which by his craftiness, and subtle sleightes had deceived the first parents
of mankind, and that by the sacrifice of his own body upon the Cross, he
made an atonement for the fault, and crime, which our first parents had
committed. But let us proceed, and go on forward to the rest.

Heretofore the common sort of Christians knew Christ his Priesthood
hitherto unknown to the Papists.
nothing at all of the Priesthood, or Bishoppricke of Christ, who has both
instructed us in wholesome doctrine, and satisfied for the sins of mankind
by the sacrifice of his own body, whilst he sacrifices up him self upon
the altar of the Cross, and who daily and perpetually prays unto God for our
safety, and salvation.

Nay, they knew not in those days sufficiently the The difference betwixt the
old Testament and the new unknown. True justification heretofore unknown.
How much was ascribed to merits and good works.
difference betwixt the new Testament, and the old, betwixt the Law, and
the Gospel, betwixt Moses, and Christ, which thing brings a great light to
the whole Scripture. Neither did they think aright (which a man might
woorthily marvel at) of justification: because they did believe that good
works did almost only avail to the obteining of forgiveness of sins, to
the satisfaction for crimes committed, to the obteining of righteousness, to
the deliverance from death, and hell fire: briefly, to the obteining of
eternal blessedness. Therefore, they both trusted to their own merits, and
put their confidence in their good works, and good deeds, and satisfied of
themselves sufficiently for their sins, and thought that heaven was due unto
them for their honest actions.

Neither wanted there Monks, and Friars, who Works for to sale.
would sell their idle and superfluous works of supererogation, if there were
any that would redeem them with money. So much some men did attribute to their
own merits, and good works. Yea, they knew The justice of faith unknown.
almost no difference betwixt that righteousness of faith, whereof Saint
Paul entreats to the Romans, and that political righteousness, which
contains the civil discipline of virtue, and manners: which thing the books
of our adversaries do plainly, and openly testify.

Neither were they sufficiently taught heretofore concerning The abrogation of
the law unknown.
the abrogation of the law: neither could they once understand, or suspect,
by what means we are delivered from the execration, and curse of the law, by
Christ.

Neither knew they sufficiently that distinction of a feigned, and dead
faith, which Saint James testifies The justifying faith unknown.
to be the faith of diuelles: and of the true and lively faith, which thou
may call (if thou will) both the Evangelical, and the justifying faith* and
which Augustine terms the faith of Christ, and the faith of Christian grace.

For, as often as they heard faith named, they dreamed that it was either that
naked, and bare historical knowledge of things comprehended in the Scriptures,
or else the profession of religion: they were utterly ignorant of that assured
trust of Gods grace, and of remission of A definition of the true Christian
faith.
our sins, and of the mercy promised for Christ's sake, which one only faith
is in deed the true Christian faith, by which we both call upon God, and boldly
approach, and come unto him: and finally, have peace with God Romans 5. 1.
through our Lord Jesus Christ, as the Apostle says.

Neither heretofore knew they any difference of Difference of works unknown.
works: yea, they reverenced as much both the rites found out by men, and
also that childish Paedagogie of ceremonies, as they did the works prescribed
by Gods laws, and those works, which are necessary to salvation.

Neither could they judge what difference there was Difference of sin
unknown heretofore.
betwixt venial, and mortal sin. Neither knew they in what point the
kingdom of Christ differed from the Popish common weal, or the true Church
from the false Church. Neither knew they what difference there was betwixt
fasting, and choice of meats.

Finally, they thought that by Gods law only the The true use of Gods law
unknown.
outward factes, and that civil justice were required they saw not, that the
whole, and most perfect obedience of the heart toward God was exacted, and
required of us. So by that means they stood in great admiration at the vain
shadows, and similitudes of good works, they did not behold the solid, and
express image, and picture of true righteousness.

It remained now, that we should bring forth more matter concerning the abuse
of ceremonies (of which by the way I have said somewhat before) concerning the
impure single life of Priests, concerning the superstition, hypocrisy, and
tyranny of the mendicant, or begging Friars, to be brief, of Pharasaisme in
the Frieries and Monasteries, of Epicurisme in the Collegies of Canons, of
Iudaisme in Ecclesiastical rites, of Paganism in the life and manners of the
Christians of the former age, of so many snares of men's consciences, of the
feigned miracles of Saints, and almost six hundred such like devises. But I
hope that every man will by these few, which we have spoken of, easily
conjecture the rest which remain, which are very many. For as I suppose, I
have showed sufficiently, what has been the state of Christianity now of late
years, and many ages past, and I have declared what superstitions, what
faults, what abuses have crept into the Church.

I beseech God, the father of our Lord and Savior A godly prayer
Jesus Christ, that as he has restored the light of his Gospel to those,
which heretofore were compassed with the thick clouds of errors, so he
would open the eyes of the adversaries of the Gospel, that they may be
converted from darkness to light, from the power of Satan to God: finally,
from the vain superstition of their ancestors, and forefathers, to the
worship of true godliness, Amen.

The second part of this Discourse, Wherein is declared what has been
amended, and corrected by our men in Ecclesiastical doctrine.
NOW will we come to the second part of this book: and we will briefly declare
what has been now at length amended, and reformed, From the creation of the
world there is but one way to obtain salvation by, namely, by only faith in
Christ.
in the doctrine of the Church. First therefore it is plain, and evident to
all men at this day, that from the beginning of the world, till now, there
has always been one and the same way to obtain salvation by: namely, by the
sole, and only trust and confidence in Christ, whom the godly did believe
should come as the Savior promised to Adam, and to the old fathers, even from
the original of the world: whom we now believe to be come already at a
determinate time, and to have brought salvation unto mankind. For our faith
also at this day is the very same with the faith of the Patriarchs, Prophets:
and finally, of the whole people of Israel in Our faith and the faith of the
Patriarchs is all one.
times past, because they expected, and waited for that to come, which we do
believe to be already done. Now, though we conceive in our minds, that the
holiness of the Patriarchs was exceeding great (which without all doubt
was singular, and most notable) The sanctity of the old Patriarchs.
notwithstanding, they were saved by no other means, but by faith in the
Redeemer of mankind, then promised to them, now exhibited to us, who is the
son of God, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. So that the holy fathers were
not as yet Christians in word, but in deed they were Christians, by reason
of our common The patriarchs were Christians not in name but in deed.
faith and belief in Christ, whom they did hope would come, whom we do
believe to be come long ago. Therefore all men must look for salvation from
this one, and only Christ: neither is there among men any other name given (as
S. Peter says) Act. 4. 12.
whereby we must be saved. For to this Christ give all the Prophets witness,
that through his name all that Act. 10. 43.
believe in him, shall receive remission of sins.

Seeing these things are so, who would not marvel The blindness of the
Papists.
much at the blindness of the Christians both in our memory, and in former
ages, which did attribute that to man's merits, which is due unto Christ alone.
For that can not be denied, which we have before declared more at large, to
wit, that mortal men did not heretofore trust so much to the goodness,
clemency, bounty, mercy, and grace of GOD alone, nor so much to the
satisfaction of Christ only for our sins, as they did to the dignity, and
worthiness of their own works. For whitherto tend Trust and confidence.
so many rites, and forms of woorshipping GOD: found out, and ordained by men,
so many will woorshippes, so many fraternities, so manifold variety of Masses,
moreover Pilgrimages, Pardons, a Monastical life, voluntary beatings, and
also whippinges of our own body, hungers, watchinges, lyinges upon the bare
ground, and who can rehearse all? Whereto (say I) do we believe that all
these things did tend, but to the obteining of forgiveness of sins, to the
satisfaction for offenses, to the deliverance from eternal death: briefly, to
the obteining of salvation, and blessedness? So now men ascribed their
salvation not to the son of God our Lord, and Redeemer Jesus Christ, who by
his own bloodshed satisfied for the sins of the world, and pacified the
wrath of God: but to the worthiness of their own works, and to their own
merits, and virtues. Now as the people As the Israelites trusted to the
Leuiticall ceremonies and sacrifices: so the Papists trusted to superstitious
rites.
of the Jews in old time were of that mind, that they thought the Leuiticall
ceremonies, and the sacrifices of the law were auayleable to the remission of
their sins, the Prophets in the mean time showing them a far other use of
the law, and warning them of that future sacrifice of the Messiah, which the
Leuiticall sacrifices did shadow: so the men of the former age observed and
kept superstitious rites, for that they were thoroughly persuaded, that God by
them was reconciled, that he by them was satisfied for our sins: our men at
this day condemning this so impious a persuasion, and testifying that all men
obtain peace with God, and pardon of their sins, and that all receive
salvation only by faith in Christ. For not man's ceremonies, but that seed of
the woman, promised to Adam, does Genesis 3. 15.
break, and bruise the head of that old Serpent, which (as John says in the
Revelation) is called the Devil, and Apoc. 12. 9. 1. John. 3. 8.
Satan: that is, the son of God, our Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ is he
alone, which does destroy the works of the Devil, to wit, sin, and
death. Not the Leuiticall sacrifices, but that lamb of God, whom John John. 1.
29.
Baptist points to with his finger, is he that takes away the sins of the
world. Not by our merits, and deserts, but through Christ is remission of
sins preached Act. 13. 38. 1. John. 2. 2.
unto us, as the Apostle says. Not man's satisfaction, but the son of God him
self (as S. John testifies) is the reconciliation for our sins. We have
obtained reconciliation, not by the intercession of Saints, but by our Lord
Jesus Christ, as S. Paul does witness. For this is he alone, which may
reconcile us to God, being the only Mediator betwixt God, and men, as the
same S. Paul says. Not he that buyeth, and redeemeth 1. Tim. 2. 5.
the Popes bulls, but he that believes in the son (as our Savior says in
the Gospel of S. John) has eternal life. Man is not justified by his own
works, but John. 4. 16.
by the grace of God freely through the redemption, which is in Christ Jesus,
as says the Apostle. No man Ephesians. 2. 8. 9.
is saved by his own good deeds, but by the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ
are we saved, as says S. Peter in Act. 15. 11.
the Acts. I suppose that I have declared sufficiently, how that we ought to
repose all our hope, and confidence of obteining salvation in the free mercy
of God, and reconciliation with us for Christ's sake (who by his own blood
satisfied God for the sins of all,) not in our merits, and good works: and
how that the whole Church has always from the beginning of the world been
justified, and saved by this faith.

Now, as God in Paradise did first rebuke, and reprove The way to rebuke a
sinner first and then to comfort him.
our first father Adam for sin (when as he being circumuented by the craft
and subtlety of the Serpent, had neglected Gods commandment,) then
afterward did raise him up (being afflicted) with the promise of Genesis 3. 15.
the deliverer to come, as Moses shows in Genesis and as Christ in Lukes
Gospel teaches his Apostles first to Luke. 24. 47.
detect and reprove sinners, afterward to comfort them by the Gospel, when as
he commands them to preach repentance, and remission of sins in his name:
Act. 20. 21.
whereupon S. Paul in the Acts says, that he had preached both to the Jews,
and to the Graecians the repentance toward God, and the faith toward our
Lord Mark. 1. 15. The order of our preaching at this day.
Jesus. And Christ in Mark says, Repent: by and by, putting no words
between, he says, And believe the Gospel: so we also at this day do, and
see that it be done in our Churches. For first we endeavor, and go about to
bring men to the acknowledging of their sin, which thing is brought to pass
by preaching the Law, and the ten Commandments. Then we bid them seek for
salvation by faith in Christ, which thing is done by teaching the Gospel. Now,
as he seeks not after the Physician, who knows not him self to be sick:
(for it is truly said, Initium sanitatis esse morbi sensum, That the
beginning of our health is the sense and feeling of our disease:) so he which
neither feels his own sins, nor the wrath of God against his sins, that
man has no great care, and regard of his own salvation. For (as a certain
Ethnike writer says) Initium Seneca, Epistola 29.
salutis notitia peccati, that is to say, The beginning of salvation is the
knowledge of sin. Neither do we only reprehend, and condemn (as they did
in former times) those manifest sins, and gross wickednesses, as perjury,
theft, rapine, sacrilege, whoredom, adultery, incest, manslaughter,
witchcraft, and such like: but also, yea and much rather, we labor to unfold,
and to set before the eyes of our mind, that inward uncleanness The manner to
correct sin in preaching is to rippe up the original infection of man's
nature.
acknowledged of few, and that impuritie of the heart defiled with manifold
affections of all sorts, that prauitie, and wickedness of the mind, and that
pronenesse to sin, sticking fast in the very bowelles, and entrails of us,
and that inbred vitiousnesse, from whence, as from a stock, and root, all
sin and wickedness whatsoever does budde, and spring. Neither do we Our
best deeds are stained and cainted.
that only, but also we declare, that even our very good deeds (if there be
any) are not pure, sound, and sincere: but that they are always polluted with
a certain mixture of vice: that they are not true, and solid, but as it were
shadowed and colored: that finally, they are not perfect, or absolute in
every point, but imperfect, and scarce begone: and we do make it plain, how
far off we are from the excellency of that righteousness, which God
requires of us, of which our righteousness may seem to be scarce a certain
image, or a printe lightly stamped, that I may not say a picture, or shadow of
it: and so at the length, we set before sinners both the wrath and judgment
of God, and the torments of Hell, we terrify the guilty, we accuse them,
we convince them, we condemn them: and now they being thus brought almost to
desperation, and in an inward trembling for the conscience of their sins,
fearing seriously that punishment, which they have deserved, and being amazed,
and beaten down with the fear of hell fire (which thing to do is the chief
office of the Law) by and by we comfort The Gospel joined with the law.
them with a godly consolation: and in these distresses, and anguishes of
mind, in this feeling of the wrath of God, in this taste (as it were) of
eternal torments, we bid those men, which are so terrified, and which have
bewailed their sins, to flee, as humble suppliantes, unto the exceeding
great mercy of God, through Christ, to ask pardon for their offenses, to
pray that GOD would forgive them: that thing is done by preaching the Gospel.
It is In our sermons we must chiefly note secret sins, because of Hypocrites.
truly marvelous hard, though very necessary, (which thing in former ages
has been neglected) so to lay open, those hidden and inward sins, so to
disclose that wickedness of man's mind and stubbornness of man's heart, which
Hypocrites do not see at all, being covered as it were with certain vailes of
pride, and self love, so to bring to light that malice, thoroughly fastened in
our corrupt nature, that the sinner, acknowledging his disease, may be
careful to seek for a remedy, may labor to flee unto Christ in fervent
desire to reconcile Gods will, and may believe that this Christ only has by
his death satisfied for the sins of all men. Neither do I make so many
words of this matter rashly, and unadvisedly Few Papists have known what
sin is.
for naught. For hitherto there have been few in the Popes kingdom which
could either understand them selves, or teach others truly what was sin.
Which thing the matter it self does plainly show to be true. For as they
accounted those heinous, and manifest offenses, which the laws did publicly
punish, to be sins: so they made nothing of that homebred vitiositie, and of
that native spot, and corruption of ours: neither did they acknowledge their
own deceitful dealinges, and (to use S. Paul's words) the counsels of 1.
Romans
their own hearts, by searching diligently all the inmost turninges, and
secreat corners of their own mind: neither did they see sufficiently their
own vain hypocrisy, or their vices, which deceived them with a certain
show of a feigned virtue. Yea, and often times they, Papists careless to
observe Gods precepts, but careful to keep man's prescriptes.
which would soon neglect the commandments of God, did carefully keep, and
observe the prescripts of men: and they which were not greatly grieved with the
neglect of them, sorrowed sundry times very much for the violation, and
breach of these. For what an heinous offense was it accounted, yea almost a
matter of Eating of flesh in the Lent.
life and death, if a man in the Lent (as they call it) had been so bold, as to
eat eggs, and flesh? On the contrary part, what a light trifle, and what a
small sin was envy, debate, hatred, spitefulness, avarice, riot,
drunkenness, whoredom, and such like thought to Papists punish more
grievously the transgressors of men's traditions, than the breakers of Gods
laws: so do they use to correct sin and wickedness.
be? Which thing thou may easily conjecture by this, for that these were
straight way remitted to him that confessed his fault by any sacrificing
Priest, and for that there were very light punishments appointed for them: but
the other were not forgiven but by the Bishops, or by those only, which bare
the greatest sway in the Church. So, that which was committed against the Law
of God, was easily pardoned: but that which was done against the prescripts of
men was very The neglect of singing in the Church.
hardly forgiven, and that not by every man. So the neglect of singing upon an
holy day in the Church, what a sin was it reckoned? But forgetfulness of God
in prosperity, ingratitude toward God, and other such like sins, how were
they nothing accounted of? I could bring forth well nigh six hundred such, but
that I think that this, which I have rehearsed, is enough for example sake.
Notwithstanding, I will yet relate one or two more, that thereby the whole
matter may the better appear. If the sacrificing Priest had by chance any The
neglect of mumbling up Mattins.
day omitted his hours of prayer, how great a sin was that thought to be,
how scarce pardonable? That the same man did keep a concubine, that the same
man did wholly abandon him self to bankettes, to wine, and to lechery, in that
there was no man, which was greatly offended.

So, if a Monk had not orderly enough finished his The superstition of Monks
in neglecting their Ceremonies.
ceremonies, good God what trembling and quaking was there? what anguish of
mind? finally, what fear, lest he should fall into hell? But for the same
man to bear privy grudges against his brethren, for to detract from other
men's fame, and good name, that was accounted The superstitious observing of an
holy day amongst the Papists.
no offense. If any man upon an holy day had done any work in the field, the
business requisite to be done, what an heinous offense? what an inexpiable
crime was it judged? But he that, neglecting the Sermon, had spent the same
day wholly in feasts, riottous and reueling bankets, in wine, in surfeting, in
dansing, in dicing, in pastimes, and sometime in bralles, and fightinges, he
verily was thought to have made a fair days work, and to have kept holy day
very well, and devoutly. So, if the Bishop should have made a married Whom
the Papists would admit to take holy orders, as they call them.
man Minister, though he were a godly, and a learned man, he accounted it a
wicked act, because it is against the canons, and rules of their order, though
it be permitted by Gods laws. But the same man is nothing at all afraid, to
choose into the number of Bishops, and Prelates, much more into the number of
Parish Priests, I do not say now dronkardes, covetous caytifes, and angry
wretches, but besides their extreme ignorance, incestuous persons, homicides,
parricides, Church robbers, dicers, sorcerers, that I may add no worse,
although the holy Ghost by the mouth of 1. Tim. Cap. 3.
Paul had flatly forbidden it. So greatly do they swallowe up a Camel, which
strain at a gnatte.

So verily the Jews thought it a cursed and damnable How superstitiously the
Jews observed their Sabbath day.
deed, to pull an Ox out of a dich upon the Sabbath day: but that Christ by
speaking the word did heal men upon that day, that verily they objected unto
him as the greatest crime that could be. And they that made a religion of it,
to enter the Judgment hall, namely, to the end they might John. 18. 28.
eat the Passover pure, and clean, without spotte, the same men were nothing
affraide to crucify an innocent, and guiltless man, to wit, our Savior
Christ Jesus. But let us return again to our purpose.

Now after that the man has truly acknowledged They which acknowledge their
own sins how they are to be comforted.
his sins, and being moved thereto by repentance, has sorrowed greatly in
mind for them, and has trembled at the anger, and judgment of God against
them, and sighing from the bottom of his heart, has aspired, and desired the
grace of Christ, we will him to hope well, and to be of good cheer: we
comfort him being sad, and sorrowful, by proposing, and setting before him the
clemency, and great goodness of God, who is wont easily to grant pardon to
the penitent, and to have respect to the contrite in spirit, and to him that
trembles at his sayings. We teach and declare, that the salvation of all men,
whosoever repent truly, and from their heart, The salvation of all men is
only of (...) mercy through Christ.
depends on the only mercy of God through Christ: that Christ has satisfied
GOD by his death for the sins of all men, and that he by his punishment has
suffered that punishment, which we did owe to the justice of God: that Christ
came into the Christ's benefits how they are to be applied to penitent sinners.
world to save sinners: that Christ gave him self the price of redemption for
all: that Christ was wounded for our iniquities, and broken for our
wickedness: that by Christ we were reconciled, when we were Gods enemies:
that by Christ we are delivered from the wrath of GOD: that by Christ's blood
we are all cleansed from our sins: that Christ does daily make intercession
for us at the right hand of God his father: that by Christ we are both
sanctified, and are the sons of God, and have life everlasting. Hitherto
tends that which our Savior says in John: So GOD loved John. 3. 16.
the world (says he) that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. For GOD sent
not his son into the world, that he should condemn the world, but that
the world through him might be saved. Hitherto also pertains that of S.
John: Herein the love of GOD 1. John. 4. 9. 10.
appeared toward us, because GOD sent his only begotten son into this
world, that we might live through him. Herein is that love manifest, not that
we loved GOD, but that he loved us, and sent his son to be a
reconciliation for our sins. Hitherto also belongs that, which S. Paul
writes to the Ephesians, and to the Colossians: By whom Ephesians. 1. 7. Coloss.
1. 14.
(says he) we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of
sins, according to the riches of his grace. And to the Corinthians: For also
our Passover (says he) is offered up for us, even Christ, 1. Cor. 5. 7.
And again: For he which was without sin, made he sin (that is the price
of sin) for us, that we might 2. Cor. 5. 21.
be made the righteousness of God by him. I will not stand any longer in
these testimonies of Scripture. For the sum of all is this, That GOD, through
The sum of the former doctrine.
Christ, is reconciled unto us, and that Christ has satisfied the justice of
God for the sins of mankind.

This faith therefore is conceived by the preaching How faith is conceived by
the preaching of the Gospel.
of the Gospel. For the Gospel, setting down the reconciliation of God
through Christ, and the satisfaction of Christ for the sins of men, does show
forth hope of salvation, and an assured confidence to them that repent.

After this sort, which you have heard, do we comfort him, which is
grieved for his offenses, and sorrowful for his sins. For we speak not a
word to him of Romish indulgencies, of Pilgrimages, of Monks suffragies, and
other such like trifles. We do again, and again inculcate, and beat into
his brain, which is repentant for his sins, Christ only, Christ only has
done the deeds for us.
so as the Scripture teaches. We declare that it is Christ alone, whom we
ought to use as our Spoakesman, Attourneie, and Sollicitour, in appeasing God:
that Christ is he alone, who both by the sacrifice of his body has satisfied
for the sins of mankind, and in whose only blood and merits, all mortal
men ought to repose the whole trust of their salvation.

And that there may not remain any little scruple in The use of the
Evangelical absolution.
the conscience of the sinner, we exhort him to repair to the Minister of
the Church, and confessing with an humble, and lowly mind his sins, to
desire of him sincerely, and from his heart with groans, weeping, sobbing,
tears, and with sighs, absolution, (as our men term The keys committed to
the Church.
it,) and the comfort of the Gospel. We show what keys of the kingdom of
heaven Christ has left unto his Church, that the Church has committed those
to the Ministers of Gods word: that it so comes to pass that Christ
himself by the Minister of the Church does restore man to Gods mercy and
favor, by the Minister does comfort with the word of God the afflicted
conscience, does raise it being fallen and cast down, does strengthen it
staggering: finally, by the Minister does now after absolution send him away
with a pacified, and quiet mind. For hitherto tends that which our Savior
Christ says in S. John's Gospel: John. 20. 23.
Whosoeuers sins ye remit, they are remitted. For, we must not think that
absolution is any other thing, but Absolution what it is.
the voice of the Gospel, sounding by the Minister of the Church, by which
that forgiveness of sins, promised in the Gospel to the penitent, is
particularly applied to every several man. Therefore we ought to hear the
voice of the Minister absoluing us, and to rest with our whole minds contented
with it, no less than to hearken either to the voice of Christ present, who is
truly our Bishop, and high Priest (as the author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews says) or to the voice of God himself speaking from heaven. For Christ
in Saint Mark. 1. 15.
Marks Gospel commands us not only to repent, but also to believe the
Gospel, that is, the preaching of remission of sins.

Now, to the end that this confidence of obteining The penitent person must
come often to the Lords supper.
pardon of sins may be increased with a certain heap as it were, and that
in this weakness of our minds, and pronenesse to distrust, it may be by all
means on every side bolstered up, underpropped and strengthened, we will the
party to be present at the Lords Supper, and to eat (so as Christ
instituted, and ordained it) the body of Christ, which was a sacrifice on the
altar of the Cross for the sins of men: and to drink his blood, which was
shead for the purgation, and satisfaction of sinn^^

For as faith is first conceived by the word of the Faith is conceived by the
preaching of the Gospel.
Gospel, concerning the promise of grace, and remission of sins, so the same
is stirred up, erected, and confirmed by the Sacrament: as Saint Augustine
testifies very well: Sacramentum est quasi verbum visibile, A Sacrament
Augustine.
is as it were a visible word: because that as Faith is confirmed by the
Sacrament.
faith is conceived, and bredde in us, by the hearing of the word, so the same
faith is confirmed and ratified by this external, and visible sign. By which
thing it The great love of God toward us, declared by giving a visible sign
of his invisible grace.
appears, how great the love of the eternal father toward us is, which
does not only by his word raise up those that are afflicted, and lie down,
but also has added to his word certain external signs, and visible tokens
of grace, which may stir us up to the remembrance of the promise concerning
pardon of sins, and which might teach us, and put us in mind of the
favorable, and friendly good will of God toward us.

Now, after that the penitent is mindful of the Lords What is to be done
after the receiving of the Lords supper.
death, which death was a satisfaction for the sins of the whole world, we
bid him both to give thanks from his heart to Jesus Christ for his exceeding
great benefits toward us, for that he offering up himself for us, has
appeased Gods displeasure, and for that he has suffered the punishments in
his own blood, which we by the justice of God should have felt (of which
thing this mystical Supper is extant in the Church as a perpetual sign, and
monument:) and also we will him to sing merrily and joyfully hymns, or songs
of praise, unto the same Jesus Christ, with a grateful mind, both with
himself at home privately, and also in the Church with the assembly of the
faithful publicly, and to give him that worship and honor, which worthily
he owes unto him: finally, to live godly, and holily, and in a certain
endeavor, and labor, to change as it were, and to The signs of a penitent
mind.
undo that, which has been done (which is a sure token of a mind truly
repentant) to amend his vices with virtues, to put away after a sort by doing
well the memory of his naughty deeds before God, and as it were to blot them
out: to be brief, to walk worthy of the Lord, as the Apostle says. For to
them which are justified by 1. The. 2. 12.
faith in Christ, after a true, and earnest repentance for their sins, which
now verily brings with it another kind of life, and which requires other
manners, the obedience of Gods law is then necessary, to the end they
Obedience of Gods law is necessary to the true penitent.
may now glorify God with honest actions, and godly works, that they may
adorn the doctrine of the Gospel, and that they may offer up spiritual
sacrifices acceptable to God, through Jesus Christ. For that is not the only
office, and proper function of the law (which The office of the law.
thing we have spoken of elsewhere,) to bring men to the acknowledging of their
sin, and to the feeling of the wrath of God, and to show unto the regenerate
their wicked affections: but also, that it should be unto the justified by
faith as it were a certain glass, wherein they The law does serve as a
looking glass to the faithful.
may daily view, and behold themselves, and by which they may know, how far
now they have proceeded, and profited in godliness, and how far they are off
from that perfect righteousness: and that it should be unto them as a certain
candle, shining in the darkness of this life, and as it were a guide to tell
them the next way to salvation, in which way they ought to finishe the course
of this life, and to travel straight to God: least they at any time offend in
any thing, or least they straying from the godly way of living, fall, and rush
headlong into sin: that so at the length, they perseuering constantly in the
true worship of God, may come to blessed immortality, and may finally
obtain the rewards prepared in heaven for them.

And surely wicked actions do not well agree with a Naughty deeds cannot
agree with a true faith.
true faith: neither can they which live wickedly, and filthily, and which
endeavor not as much as in them lies to keep the commandments of God,
promise unto themselves that God will be favorable unto them for Christ's
sake. For hitherto pertains that notable saying of S. Augustine: Fides tua
(inquit) iustitia tua: quia Augustinus.
vtique sicredis, caves: si autem caves, conaris: and conatum tuum nouit Deus,
and volu^tatem tuam inspicit, and luctam cum carne considerat, and hortatur vt
pugnes, and adiuuat vt vincas, and certantem spectat, and deficientem sublenat,
and vincentem coronat: that is: Thy faith (says he) is thy righteousness How
God does help him that strives against sin.
for verily if thou do believe, thou do beware: if thou do take heed,
thou do endeavor the best thou can, and God knows thine endeavor, and he
beholds thy will, and he considers thy combat and fight with thy flesh, and
he encourages thee to battle, and helps thee to vanquish, and veweth thee
striving, and succoureth thee fainting, and crowns thee being conqueror, and
victour.

Now, although the good deeds, and good works The good works of the godly
are never perfect, but ever polluted and defiled.
of the godly, that is, of those which are justified by faith, having their
sins forgiven them for Christ's sake, do now please God, whereas they have
as yet many faults in them, and are far from perfection, so that in respect
of us, there is no reward due to them: notwithstanding, The reward which God
promised to good works he pays for Christ's sake.
because that which is lacking in them, Christ does add and bring of his own,
therefore God does bountifully give, and pay that reward, which he promised to
every man's work, and that for Christ's sake, and of his free liberality,
not as the works themselves do merit, and deserve of themselves, which
verily as yet are many ways faulty, and maruellously polluted: neither as
they come from us, since that through our fault they are always (as I said
before) far from perfection: but in respect that they spring from faith in
Christ, and are wrought in us by the holy Ghost, who is wont to stir up in
the hearts of the faithful new affectes and motions, such as are agreeable
with the Law of God. For honest actions are flatly Gods gift in us: and
whatsoever Honest deeds are Gods gifts in us.
thing is in them right and good, comes wholly from God, and must be claimed,
and challenged as due to the goodness of God only. So that S. Austine says
Augustine
very truly (which saying is grown to a common Proverb,) Quum Deus remunerat
merita nostra, iam ipse coronat dona sua, that is, When God does reward our
merits, then does he crown his own gifts in us. So also says Fulgentius:
Quum Deus vitam aeternam donat, Fulgenti^^.
opus suum quod inchoauit iustificans impium, perficit glorificans iustum, that
is to say: When God gives us life everlasting, that work which he has
begone justifying the ungodly, he has perfected glorifying the just.

Therefore the works, and good deeds of the godly have their rewards in
heaven, not those verily which of them selves, and of their own nature they
deserve: for always there are in them some blottes and blemishes: but they
have those rewards through the grace, and mercy, and goodness of God that
promises them, and through the merit of Jesus Christ our Mediator, and
Advocate. Concerning the spots, and faults of our Our righteousness what it
is. Esai. 64. 6.
works, thou have them set forth in Esaie, who says, that all our
righteousness in the sight of God is as the filthy clout, or menstruous cloth
of a woman. Yea and S. Austine affirms our righteousness to be so great in
this life, that it consists rather in remission of sins, Augustine.
than in the perfection of virtues.

But nevertheless in the mean while, this righteousness The righteousness
of works how far forth it has his reward.
of works, albeit it be defiled, has his reward in heaven: neither has the
law it self power to condemn the godly, and the faithful, although (as I
said) they have not satisfied the Law of God so perfectly, and fully, neither
have kept his commandments in every part, and absolutely. For hitherto
belongs that which S. Paul says of the abrogation of the Law: Christ (says
he) has redeemed us from the execration or curse of Galat. 3. 13.
the law, he him self being made a curse for us. And that which the same
Paul has to the Romans: Now Romans 8. 1.
(says he) there is no condemnation to them which are engraffed in Christ
Jesus, which walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. Therefore God for
his sons sake, (as I said before) does accept, and take well in worth our
endeavor, and new begone obedience: by whose Whatsoever is wanting to the
perfection of our works, is pardoned for Christ's sake.
merit whatsoever is wanting to the perfection of our works, is forgiven us,
that acknowledge, and confess our own imbecillitie and naughtiness: and so
at the length we, which in very deed should never, yet now surely by
diligence do satisfy God for Christ's sake: so that S. Austine has said
very well: Omnia Dei mandata tunc implentur, quando quicquid not fit,
ignoscitur, that is, Augustine. How Gods commandments are fulfilled.
Then are all Gods commandments fulfilled by us, when as whatsoever is left
undone, is pardoned us. The same S. Austine, speaking of all the Saints of all
ages, when as he denies that they were endewed with perfect virtue,
notwithstanding he confirms, that whatsoever sin has by humane infirmity
crept into their lives to be streightway put away by the godliness of faith
And a little after: This (says he) is the one, and Idem.
only hope of all the godly, groaning under the burden of this corruptible
flesh, and in the infirmity of this life, that we have with the father Jesus
Christ, to be our Advocate, and Mediator: and the rest which follow in John.
He does verily intimate thus much unto us, that Christ does fill up that
which lacks in us: that is, that whatsoever is wanting in the works of the
faithful, through man's Our want supplied by Christ.
infirmity, is pardoned for Christ's sake, and that with this only hope, and
consolation, the godly do sustain them selves.

Therefore (to return to our former position) in a What kind of obedience of
Gods law is necessary to a true penitent person.
true conversion, and turning to GOD, there has need of a certain new
obedience toward Gods Law, and a desire to work well, as I showed before:
neither is it convenient, or comely for the penitent person, now to serve
sin any more, nor to give over his members weapons of unrighteousness: but
(as the Apostle says) to walk in newness of life, Works meet for the
regenerat to walk in.
to put off the old man with his deeds, to put on the Lord Jesus Christ, to
cast away the works of darkness, not to suffer sin to reign in him, to
mortify by the spirit the deeds of the flesh, to crucify the flesh with the
affections, and desires thereof, denying ungodliness, and wordly lusts, to
live soberly, Titus. 2. 12.
justly, and godly in this present world, to bring forth plentiful fruits
of righteousness to the glory and praise of God, to care for heavenly
things, not to regard terrestrial things, to be mindful of hospitality,
not to forget liberality toward the poor, to be courteous, modest, and
meek, to forgive others easily after the example of Christ, to pray without
Ephesians. 4. 32. 2. These. 5. 17. 1. Cor. 10. 31
intermission, to give thanks for all things: breefly, to lead a life
worthy of the Gospel, and other things, which S. Paul does every where in
his Epistles inculcate. Hitherto tends that of Peter: 1. Pet. 2. 11.
Abstain from fleshly lusts, which fight against the soul. And again: Be
ye all of one mind, 1. Pet. 3. 8. 9.
One suffer with an other, love as brethren, be pitiful, be affable, not
rendering evil for evil, neither rebuke for rebuke, but contrariewise bless.
And again: Be sober (says he) and watching in prayer, 1. Pet. 5. 6. 7. 8.
above all things having fervent love among you. Also: Be ye harborous one to
an other, without grudging: let every man, as he has received the gift, so 1.
Pet. 4. 9.
minister the same one to another, as good disposers of the manifold grace of
God. Also: Humble your selfs under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalte
you in due time, Cast all your care on him: for he cares 1. Pet. 5. 6. 7. 8.
for you. Be sober, and watch: for your adversary the Devil as a roaring
Lion walks about, seeking whom he may devour. Hitherto also perteinerh that
saying of S. John: Love not this world, neither the things that are in the
world. And again: Let us not love in 1. John. 2. 15.
word, neither in tongue only, but in deed, and 1. John. 3. 18.
and in all truth. And: God (says he) has sent his son to be the
propitiation for our sins, Beloved, if God 1. John. 4. 9. 20.
so loved us, we ought also to love one an other. And: If any man say, I love
God, and hate his brother, he is a lier. Moreover hitherto belongs that of
S. James: Pure Iam. 1. 27.
religion, and undefiled before God, even the Father, is this, to visit the
fatherless, and widows, in their affliction, and to keep him self unspotted
of the world. And, Iam. 4. 7. 10.
Submit your selves to God: resist the Devil, and he will flee from you.
Cast down your selves before the Lord, and he will lift you up. Speak not
evil one of an other, brethren. Finally, hitherto tends that saying of our
Savior Christ in the Gospel by Saint Matthew. 5. 16. 39. 42. 44.
Matthaewe: Let your light so shine before men (says he) that they may see
your good works, and glorify your father, which is in Heaven. And again:
Resist not evil, but whosoever shall smite thee on the right cheek, turn to
him the other also. Give to him that asks, and from him that would borrowe of
thee, turn not away. And: Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do
good to them that hate you, pray for them which hurt you, and persecute you,
that you may be the children of your father that is in heaven: who both makes
his sun Luke. 6. 35.
to arise on the evil, and the good, and also sends rain upon the just, and
unjust. And: Lend one to another, looking Matt. 7. 12.
for nothing again. And: Look whatsoever ye would that other men should do
to you, so do you likewise Matt. 25. 35.
to them. For this is the law, and the Prophets. Hitherto also perteine
Christ's words of feeding the hungry, of refreshing the thirsty with
drink, of enterteining strangers, of covering the naked, of visiting the
sick persons, and prisoners, and other such like deeds.

Now to the end that he, whom we have taken in The repentant fighting with
the flesh, the world, and the Devil must call upon GOD for his aid, and
assistance.
hand to teach and instruct, may live godly and holily, and may resist, and
withstand first that naughtiness, and pronenesse to sin, thoroughly settled
and fixed in our corrupt nature: secondly, the world, offering unto us daily
innumerable occasions, and causes to all vices: lastly the Devil, who makes
deadly war upon us, and who intermitteth not the least point of time,
wherein he does not either assault us with open force, or with privy
undermining, we do exhort him, being privy to man's infirmity and
weakness, to crave daily in godly prayers Gods assistance, and help in the
matter, setting aside all confidence, and trust of his own strength. For all
mortal men's endeavors, and labors, without the grace of God is vain, void,
and to no purpose. For as S. Cyprian says: Dei est omne quod possumus, Cyprian.
All that we can do comes from God. Therefore we bid him pray the eternal
father of our Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ, with all confidence, to bestow
upon him the We must pray to God the father for his holy spirit, who may
work in us all virtues beseeming a Christian man.
holy Spirit, and that he would vouchsafe to power the same his holy Spirit
upon him plentifully, and abundantly, and (as the Apostle says) richely, who
may now by his wholesome inspiration stir up in his heart new motions, and
such as are consonant to Gods will, who may excite him, and inflame him to the
love of God, and to charity toward men, who may compel, and (...) unto
true, and constant trust toward God, to invocation, unto thanksgiving, unto
perpetual praising of God, unto the confession, and propagation of the
Gospel: finally, to all the duties of godliness, unto patience in
afflictions, and calamities, unto modesty in prosperity, unto just and
upright dealing toward our neighbor, unto diligence in our duty and office,
unto temperance of life, unto sobriety, unto chastity, unto courteous and
mild manners, unto the study of peace and concord: breefly, to all virtues
beseeming a Christian man, to live godly, holily, innocently, friendly to the
life of men, profitably to the Church of God. For the holy Ghost is given of
God (so as Christ has promised) but to those only, which pray unto him for
it. Neither can any man keep the commandments No man can observe Gods
commandments without the help of the holy Ghost.
of God, unless he be assisted with the help of the holy Spirit. For he it
is, which illuminateth the mind of man, which inflameth his will, which
renews the whole heart, which stirs it up, which moves it to the
observation of Gods law, and to do those things always, which are
grateful, and acceptable to God. By the secret instinct of this holy Spirit,
we go about those things, which are right, honest, and good, and at the
length by the present help of the same Spirit, we finish, and perfect those
things, which we have well begone.

But before all things we admonish, and warn him A Caveat for Christians not
to grieve the holy spirit of God. Ephe. 4. 30.
that is careful of his own salvation to beware of this, that he do not
resist the holy Spirit, by obeying his wicked Iustes against his conscience,
or that he expel not, or (to use the Apostles word) grieve not the holy
Spirit. And because the holy Spirit does not help, and aid sluggardes, nor
those that pamper their own niceness, or that loose and slacken the bridle to
Whom the holy Ghost does help.
their lusts, nor those that rush headlong into voluntary destruction: but
those verily, or rather those only, which labor to tame by all means, and
to repress their inbred naughtiness, and their wicked affections: and who
take great heed, and are marvelous wary, that they have not received the
grace of God in vain: therefore we exhort him continually, to repress, and
keep under the flesh, to eschew surfeting, to live continently, soberly,
chastely: and we warn him not once, or twice, but very often, by fasting to
prepare him self to prayer, now and then: (for as saint Cyprian says:
Largioribus epulis Cyprian.
men's grauata, minus ad preces crationis euigilat, Othat Fasting.
is, The mind, which is over charged with large cheer, is the less
diligent, and watchful to pray:) and that ever amongst so many deceiptes,
sleightes, and assaults Prayer.
of the Devil, the world, and the flesh, he would in fervent prayer request
the aid, and assistance of God, neither that he would be fainte, and weary
in praying. And we show him, that he ought to be moved, and stirred up to
prayer not only with private miseries, and afflictions, but also with public
calamities, and common miseries.

Therefore we will him to pray, and to make requests daily unto God for the
Church, and Christian Common weal, and we bid him pray unto him for the
increase of true Religion, for the fall, and destruction of superstition, for
the concord, and amity of Princes, also for the peace of the Common Alms
must be joined to prayer and fasting.
weal, and for public tranquillity, we teach him that unto prayer he
ought to join both fasting, and alms, bounty, and liberality toward the
poor, and all kind of duties toward his neighbors, which things verelie
are a certain sign, and token of a mind, which gladly desires to please
God, and to approve himself to God only, which ought to be the sum of all
our prayers. And we tell him, that so it will come to pass, that God will
sooner hear the prayers of the supplicant, according to that of Esai: Break
thy bread unto the hungry, and bring Esai. 58. 7. 9.
the needy, and the stranger into thine house: when thou see the naked, see
that thou cover him, and despise not thine own flesh. Then thou shall call
upon him, and the Lord shall hear thee: thou shall cry, and he Tob. 12. 8.
shall say, Here I am. Yea, and the Angel in Tobie says: Prayer is good with
fasting, and alms deeds. Hitherto pertains the example of Cornelius the
Centurion, who (as S. Luke writes in the Acts of the Apostles) Act. 10. 2. 4.
was wont to give much alms to the people, and to pray unto God continually.
Therefore he heard of the Angel: Thy prayer is heard, and thine alms are come
up into remembrance before God.

But if this our penitent person offend in any thing, The relapse of the
regenerate into sin how it must be cured.
and fall again into sin (as we are all of us prone to vice, and the Devil
does always set before us some prouocations, and allurementes to sin) we do
with all diligence exhort him by and by to acknowledge his error, and humbly
to ask forgiveness of his most merciful father, not to suffer sin to
reign and rule in him, nor to go on in heaping one sin upon another:
finally, we exhort him to salve, by Gods help and assistance, the fault
committed, with greater good deeds, and becoming an honest man again, to
amend and refourme his life. Also we bid him to remember (as S. John says in
the Revelation) from whence he is fallen, Apoc. 2. 5.
and to repent, and to do works worthy of a man that is repentant: finally,
to endeavor (in a certain study, and desire to reconcile Gods will unto him)
to do those things which are well pleasing, and acceptable to God: last of
all, acknowledging man's imbecillitie, and procliuitie to offend, and chiefly
that inward stubbornness, and contumacie of the heart against the law of God:
moreover, setting before his eyes those things, wherein he has often offended
either of ignorance, or negligence, we bid him persevere in a continual
repentance: yea, and to cast himself down perpetually, as it were at the
feet of Jesus, with the sinful woman in the Luke. 7. 37.
Gospel, not doubting but that grace does abound above sin as the Apostle
says: We bid him, being now Romans 5. 20.
wholly displeased with himself, to request the mercy of God with an humble
voice, and knocking of his breast with the Publicane in the Gospel: Finally,
to purge continually Luke. 18. 13.
the old leven, and to mortify (that I may use Paul's word) by the Spirit the
relics of sin, which as yet stick fast in his flesh, and to chasten his
body, 1. Cor. 5. 7.
and to bring it into bondage, and to tame, and repress his vicious nature,
both with daily prayer, and with daily Romans 1. 13.
repentance, and with the acknowledging of Gods anger against sin, and with
patience in miseries, and How a man may mortify his flesh.
tribulations, and with the memory and remembrance of the last judgment, but
chiefly with a certain Christian courage of the mind, and with the invincible
strength of faith, and of the Evangelical spirit.

Whatsoever there are in the Prophetical, and Apostolical writings, either
testimonies of Gods wrath against sin, or examples of punishments against
the wicked, we do excite, and stir up this our penitent person, to the
remembrance of them: we show him both that God did not spare the Angels which
had sinned, and also that by a deluge or general flood of 2. Pet. 2. 45.
waters he extinguished almost all mankind for impiety, and ungodliness, and
that he ouerthrewe quite from the foundation the cities of the Sodomites, and
Examples of Gods wrath. against sin.
Gomorrheans, burning them into ashes, and that he made them an ensample unto
them that afterward should live ungodly, as Saint Peter says in his second
Epistle. We do set before him not only the punishments, 2. Pet. 2. 6.
wherewith God plagued Pharao, and the Egyptians: but also the great
calamities of the people of Israel, and their often captiuities under barbarous
nations: neither do we omitted either the destruction of the city of
Jerusalem, or other innumerable such like desolations. Yea, we do not
dissemble, and hide The sabuersion of Jerusalem.
from him those punishments, which God has taken oftentimes upon several
persons for their sins, as upon his dearest darling David, upon Osias, upon
Particular punishments.
Manasses: and all this we do to this end, and purpose, that he, being
terrified with such examples, may both temper himself from sin, and
wickedness, and also love, and embrace virtue and godliness.

Moreover, we set down before him certain places out of the holy Scriptures
(worthy to be remembered) which are fit for this purpose, and amongst other
sayings, that chiefly, which is in the Epistle to the Hebrews: He that
despises Moses law, dies without Heb. 10. 28.
mercy, under two or three witnesses. Of how much sorer punishment suppose ye
shall he be worthy, which treads under foot the Son of God, and counts
the blood of the Testament as an unholy thing, wherewith he was sanctified,
and does despite the spirit of grace? And that saying out of the second
Epistle of Saint Peter: For, if they, after they 2. Pet. 2. 20.
have fled back from the filthiness of the world, through the
acknowledging of the Lord, and of the Savior Jesus Christ, are notwithstanding
yet again entangled therein and overcome, their latter end is worse with them
tha^ their beginning. For it had been better so them, not to have known the way
of righteousness, than after they have known it, to turn from the holy
commandment given unto them. Saint Peter speaks these words of those men,
who like as the dog returns to his own vomit (as it is said in the
common Proverb) or, as the Sow that was washed, returns to her wallowing in
the mire: so they slide back again afreshe into their sins, and
wickedness. Wherefore by these, and such like both examples, and threats of
the Scripture, we go about to terrify, and call back the repentant person
from sin.

Before all things we exhort him to see well to this, We must not sin
voluntarily.
that not only he himself do not willingly, and against his own conscience
rush headlong into sin (for so he might loose both faith, and the holy
spirit, neither could he be in favor with God:) or that he do not pamper too
much (as the common sort of men is wont to do) the tenderness of his mind:
but also that with all might and maine he resist, and withstand Satan we must
resist Satan, who goes about to devour us.
moving him to mischief, that he always beware most diligently of the snares,
and trappes which the devil has laid for him, that he yield not to him,
that sets pleasure as an object before him, or to him which is desirous to
ensnare, and allure him with the inticementes of vices: finally, that he shun
all occasions, and cut off as it were the handles to sin.

Neither, if he once happily obtain the victory over his enemy, let him not
by and by hope for truce, and peace, we can never have any truce with the
Devil.
as though he were past all peril, but let him remember that he must always
stand in the forefront of the battle: neither, if he be vanquished and
overcome, let him despair, nor if he be victor, let him swell with any
secret pride.

And let him verily enterprise al these things, not trusting to his own
strength, and power, but having his hope, and his whole assurance placed in
Gods aid and assistance, and calling upon the son of God in godly prayers
for help. We must often receive the Lords supper, by which our faith in
Christ, and charity toward our neighbor is increased.


In the mean space, in our Ecclesiastical meeting, we warn him to repair
very often to the Lords table: to the end that he, by receiving Christ's
body, may both be stirred up to the remembrance of the promise concerning
forgiveness of sins, and also confirmed concerning Gods good will, and
celestial favor toward him. For the holy Ghost does use this Supper as a
mean, and as it were an instrument to raise up in us assured confidence in
Christ, and love toward our neighbor. Now, as Baptism is a perpetual sign
of that free remission of sins, and of that reconciliation for Christ's sake:
so the Supper of the Lord does testify, and witness unto us, that those
benefits last and dure for ever at all times in the Church of Christ, and that
they are not void, and of none effect streightway, no not in very great, and
grievous falls, if so be we, being touched with repentance, do flee unto the
exceeding great mercy of God for Christ, and if we desire forgiveness of our
sins, and that not without a fervent desire, and study, to return again
into favor, and friendship with God, nor without a most firm purpose to
amend our lives, and to keep, and observe hereafter Gods Pawe. And truly,
Christ would that this Sacrament The supper of the Lord is a pledge of
Christ's love toward us.
of his body, and blood should be a perpetual monument, and pledge of his
love toward us: namely, that we, repenting from our heart, may (after we
have received this pledge) stir up our faith, and be persuaded that we have
our sins forgiven us for Christ's sake, who offered up him self for us upon
the altar of his Cross a lamb immaculate, and unspotted, that we by this
assurance might comfort our selves, and might raise up, and hold up our
afflicted conscience, that we might give thanks to God for so great a
benefit, and that we might declare this our thankfulness toward God in
our whole life, and in all our actions, and that we might (as the Apostle
says) show forth the Lords death perpetually: finally, that we being put in
mind by this pledge, may every way boldly trust, that we are now the members
of Christ, and that Christ's benefits belong unto us. For this Sacrament was
chiefly why the supper of the Lord was instituted.
instituted for this cause (as I said before, but must say it oftener) that
we using it, might both exercise, and confirm our faith, and also that we
our selves might be comforted with the remembrance, and memorial of the
Lords death, which brought salvation to us: and that so at the length we
might give that thanks to God, and to the son of God, which we do
woorthily owe unto them. Very few in the former age knew this use of the
sacrament, called the Eucharist.

If perhaps any calamity fall upon him, or if our heavenly A preparation or
comfort in calamities.
father mercifully chastise him for some deserved offense, we bid him suffer
it stoutly, and with a cheerful mind, and to remember that by that means
he is called to repentance, that so God has given him an occasion to exercise
his faith, that so he is pricked forward to prayer, that so that
slouthfullnesse, and dead The fruits of adversity and tribulation.
sleep (which in prosperity possesses men's minds) is shaken off: finally,
that so our minds are stirred up, and awakened, to acknowledge our sins, to
amend our life, to despise all humane, and earthly things.

Now verily in public sermons, in which heretofore what manner of sermons the
Popish sermons were.
there has been almost no other thing wont to be entreated of, than of men's
traditions, of forged fables, lying tales, and feigned miracles of Saints, of
vain visions, and apparitions of shadows, of vows, of Pilgrimages, of
indulgencies, and pardons, of offering up a reward to the Stationarie
soldiers, of the cave or Purgatory of S. Patrike, and of such like trifles:
here our Preachers at this day in their Sermons do teach, and What manner of
Sermons ours are at this day.
tell us of faith in Christ, of charity toward our neighbor, of true
invocation, of the cross or affliction, of repentance, and of the fruits of
repentance, of justification, of those works which may be truly termed
good works, of the Supper of the Lord, of bringing up children in the fear
of the Lord, of liberality toward the poor, and of such like points
necessary to salvation: to be brief, they preach those things very much,
or rather those things only, which become wholesome doctrine, as S. Paul
warns Titus. Tit. 2. 1.


Also in the same Sermous (as likewise privately, and in secret confessions)
both the rude and ignorant are The manner of our private confession at this day.
taught, and instructed, and the unwary are admonished, and the slothful are
rebuked, the forward are incited, the weaklinges are strengthened, the
afflicted are raised up, those that straie, and wander out of the way, are
brought in again: they which are wholly displeased with them selves for the
guilte of their sin are comforted, they which sleep secure in sin are
terrified, and made affraide with threats: and (not to use many words) all
men alike are pricked forward to lead their life after the will, and imitation
of God, all men are willed to think upon death, hanging daily over our heads
by reason of uncertain chances, and to prepare them selves for that day,
wherein they must depart this life, neither to loose the time of repentance
given unto them by the benefit of God.

Lastly, in those Sermons of our men, there are What kind of doctors the
Papists do cite in their sermons.
not now wont to be alleged, and cited I can not tell what solemn
Doctors, there are quoted none of these subtle, none of these Seraphicall,
finally, none of these irrefragable Doctors: as, Albert, Thomas Aquinas,
Petrus Lombardus, Rabbanus, Nicolaus de Lira, Dunse, Dorbell, Occam, and other
such like, which heretofore were rife in the Papists mouths: but now Moses,
the Prophets, Christ, the Apostles, and the Evangelists, are cited, to What
Doctors our Preachers do allege.
prove, and confirm the matter, which they do there entreat of.

Thus you have our mind, and meaning: namely, what kind of man we at this
day would have him to be, who professes him self to be a Christian not
more in word, than in deed. You have also a sum of Christian doctrine,
comprehended very briefly in few words, the very same, which is taught
amongst us: Whereby you may easily learn, what has been amended in
Ecclesiastical doctrine.

Now we will proceed to declare, what has been either changed, or quite
taken away in Ceremonies: but first we will speak somewhat of the Pope or
Bishop of Rome.

All men (well nigh) heretofore, did believe as their Of the Bishop of Rome.
Creed, that the Pope was by Gods law head of the Church. But we after the
judgment of S. Paul do affirm, that Christ alone is the head of the Church.

For the place out of the Epistle to the Ephesians, and Ephesians. 1. 22. Coloss. 1.
18.
of the Colossians is well known. We deny not this, that the Bishop of Rome
may, by the general consent of the other Bishops, be appointed as it were a
certain How far forth the godly may tolerate the authority of the Bishop
of Rome.
superintendent, or ouerseer of the Churches, and a president of the Christian
common weal, and that he may both be, and also seem to be, as it were a
Censour of men's manners, and a master of Ecclesiastical discipline, if so be
he would use his authority granted not to get any Lordship, or souereigntie
over others, but to the profit of the Church: not to bring in superstition, but
to establish true religion, and if he would thoroughly do the duty
belonging to the function taken in hand: finally, if he would be bound to
certain laws of government, neither would permit (as he has done
heretofore) that his own lust, and license should stand for a law. Our men
verily hitherto have made war How those things are to be taken which
hitherto have been either said or written against the Pope.
only with the Popes kingdom, and with the Romish ruledome, and with that
power, which would advance it self both above the Scripture, and the Church,
and almost above God him self: neither seem they to grant unto any mortal
man whatsoever, as long as they can help it, to be able to do more than the
word of God, and the Church. Otherwise I know full well they will not refuse
the authority of the Bishop of Rome, if he will take pains to see that
Christian Religon be instaured, that superstitions be taken away, that the
Churches be reformed, that the manners of all estates be corrected, and
amended. And if that authority of the Bishop (which at the beginning was
granted for the better preservation of Christianity, and of consent in
doctrine) had not been turned into domination, or rather tyranny, our men
truly would never have been persuaded to have violated, cast off, and to have
banished (as it were) out of the Church, that authority. Therefore, no other
man, but the Bishop of Rome him self, is the cause, why that Apostolical
seat (as they call it) has been so despised: neither can the Bishop accuse
any man for that matter more justly than him self. The intolerable arrogancy
of the Pope descried in many of his sayings and doings.


For who can think it tolerable, that he should call him self, The
universal and Oicomenicall Bishop, who has the right to ordeine, and to
confirm, to displace, and remove from their office all the Bishops, and
Pastors in the whole world? that he does arrogate unto him self the
authority of making laws concerning the service and woorship of God,
concerning the changing of the Sacraments, concerning Ecclesiastical
doctrine? that he does think his own decrees to be equal with Gods laws,
so that all men's consciences are necessarily bound to the observing of them,
if they will see to their own salvation? that he does sit in the Temple of
God, as God: as S. Paul says of Antichrist, 2. These. 2. 4. Antichrist does
sit in the Church of GOD, and does defend himself and his doings by the
name of the Church: whereby i^t appears that the Turk cannot be Antichrist.
and that he does take unto him the right of changing the doctrine of Christ,
and the woorshippes appointed by God? that he does suffer him self to be
judged of no man, and that he does prefer his own authority before the
judgment of Councelles, and of the whole Christian Church? that he does not
suffer Ecclesiastical controversies to be decided rightly, and orderly, and
that in Synodes he does not suffer any thing to be judged, and concluded
against his sentence? that he challenges unto him self the authority to
translate from one to an other both kingdoms and Empires? that he sticks
hard to this: how that by Gods law he is Lord of all the kingdoms of the
world? finally, that he boasts how that he is the Emperors lawful
successor, when the Empire is vacant: and that he does confirm this, how
that it is necessary to salvation to believe it? But let us come now to
Ceremonies.

In baptising infantes we had rather use our own why we have changed diverse
things of the Papists in ecclesiastical Ceremonies.
vulgar tongue, than the Latin: because very few understand this, but all
understand the other: that is, both the Godfathers, and Godmothers, which are
brought thither, and adhibited as witnesses at the baptism of the child, and
also the rest of the congregation, if any be present: and lastly, the Priest
him self, which does baptize the child. Now it is very profitable, and
Wherefore in baptising we ought rather to use our vulgar tongue, than a
strange tongue.
necessary, that all should understand that language, wherein the child is
baptized: namely, to this end, both that the Godfathers may know what they do
profess, and promise to God in the childs name: and also that the rest, which
stand about, may not be ignorant what matter is in hand, how serious, how
divine, and how full of mysteries it is: finally, that the Priest may be
occupied in that holy mystery with greater attention of mind, that he may
thereby be excited to a more exquisite diligence: and that he may be forced
the better to do his duty for shame of all those, which are present,
understanding now what is done.

Justinian the Emperor makes for us in his Nouellis Justinian allows the
vulgar tongue in Baptism.
Constitutionibus, de capitibus Ecclesiasticorum sumptuum: whose words I do
omit, lest I should be longer than needed.

As concerning that ungodly rite and custom of A wicked custom of baptising
belles.
baptising belles, and of hallowing water with salt, brought into the Church
by superstitious men, we thought good in any wise to retain it no longer.

Concerning Penance, and Confession, if the abuses which have crept in, be
taken away, we both think and teach very highly of it. For we do The true
use of repentannce and of confession.
clearly, and plainly testify, that there can be no way any true faith in a
man, without repentance: that is, but in him who is truly sorrowful, and
greatly grieved for his sins: but in him which repents seriously and from
his heart, and which feels the wrath of God against his sins: but in him,
which purposing now to live godly, does call to God for mercy, does go unto
the Minister of the Church, and confessing his sins does desire absolution of
him.

We verily do nothing regard that their careful, The abuse of confession.
curious, and scrupulous enumeration, or reckoning up of their several sins,
with all the cirumstances perteining to it: as what was done, with what mind,
with whom, at what time, how long, where, how often, wherefore, how much,
how far forth, with what reason, and other such like: this we reject as
both full of superstition, and also every way unprofitable, and (as it were) a
certain snare, or rather a butcherie, and cross of miserable consciences.

Neither do we approve, or allow those manifold Christ's death is the only
satisfaction for sin and no other thing.
errors concerning Popish satisfaction. For that punishment, which Jesus
Christ suffered for us, and which brought salvation to us, is the only
satisfaction for all the sins of the whole world. And truly they, which are
of opinion, that sin may be recompensed with fastinges, with Pilgrimages,
with indulgencies, and such like toys, or that Gods wrath may any other way
be pacified, rather than by the death of the Son of God, do not
sufficiently ponder either the weight of sin it self, or the wrath of GOD
against our sin.

Notwithstanding in Penance we do not disallow what rites in penance are no^
to be disallowed.
the ancient rites and ceremonies, instituted either for example sake, and for
discipline, or perteining to some amendment of life, which smell not of gain,
or covetousness. And we do think that they, which confess their faults,
ought again, and again, to be exhorted to bring forth those fruits which
become true repentance. Yea, we bid even them which have fallen again into
sin to satisfy (as it were) and to pacify God through the sorrow of
repentance, through the sighs of humility, through the sacrifice of contrite
heart, as David says: also we bid them now Psalm. 51.
change their old ill manners for better, to reconcile God unto them by alms
deeds, and by liberality toward the poor, which is principally (to use
Tertullians Tertullian.
words) Dei misericordiae illex, that is to say, A very prouoker of Gods
mercy: finally, we will them to be wary, heedie, and diligent, to avoid
those sins, into which they have once fallen, we bid them take heed by all
means, and beware, that they offend not either in word, or deed: yea, that
they commit not any thing in thought, which is either evil to be done, or
wicked to be said.

Now, we neither can, nor ought, to allow that necessity wicked satisfaction^.
of certain works, which was wont to be put upon those, which had
confessed their sins, and that way of satisfying for their sins, and of
deserving deliverance from the punishments of Purgatory fire, prescribed to
the people by the sacrificing Priests.

As concerning the sacrifice of the Mass, thus we The supper of the Lord is
the true Mass in the Church of God.
think: that the true Mass in the Church of God is that common Supper of the
Lord, in which the body, and blood of our Lord is distributed, to renew the
memory of the most wholesome death of Christ, and of his torments, which he
suffered for the redemption of mankind. For the Fathers, and Doctors of the
Church in old time, used to call the Supper of the Lord, why the Fathers
called the Eucharist a sacrifice.
A sacrifice, for that it was instituted, and ordained to this end: to wit,
that the same might stir us up to the remembrance of that sacrifice of
Christ, who offered up himself to his father upon the cross a sacrifice for
the sins of the world, according to that saying of Christ: Do this in
remembrance of me. For least we should Luke. 22. 19. The Eucharist is a
memorial of Christ's sacrifice.
forgett Christ's death, Christ now ready to pass out of this world unto his
father, left unto us a memorial of himself: namely, his body in the
Eucharist, and mystical banquet. Wherefore we in our Churches have restored The
true use of the Eucharist.
the true, and right use of the Eucharist, according to the institution of
Christ, and according to the observation of the primitive Church: to wit, that
it might be the communion of Christian people, to the receiving, and
participation of the body, and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, that it might
also be a thankesgeuing why it is called the Eucharist.
whence it takes his name, of the Greek word Eucharistia: and finally, that
it might be a godly recordation, and remembrance of that one only sacrifice of
Christ, and of that immolation done upon on the altar of the Cross. We do
condemn, and take away the abuses The abuse of the Eucharist.
of those men, which with this sacrifice worship Saints, which by it deliver
the dead from the fire of Purgatory, which think they do obtain for others
either pardon of their sins, or an happy success in their affairs. And we
deny not that to be true, which that Erasmus or Luther is here meant.
instaurer of ancient Divinity complains of: namely, that heretofore the
Mass has been either a gain for filthy Massemonging Priests, or else a
trusty staff, and stay for all men, that have led an evil life. For we
must needs confess that, which by no means can be denied.

But also as concerning the taking away of the cup from the Lay people, which
is contrary to Gods institution, The taking away of the cup from the people is
against Christ's institution.
we do not think it to be in any wise allowable: as likewise neither that
reservation of the Lords bread, nor that ostentation, and open show of it in
public Processions, and Ecclesiastical pompes. We have what kind of
ceremonies have our men taken away.
wholly taken away those ceremonies, which help nothing at all to promote, and
further godliness: yea, which rather hurt, and hinder it: as the consecration,
and hallowing of salt, and of herbs, the aspersion, or sprinkling of holy
water, the circumgestation, or carrying about of images, and pictures, the
fuming, and burning of Franckincense before the altars of Saints, the
baptising of belles, the yearly exequies, and solemnities for the dead, the
observation, and keeping of the hours of our Lady, and other innumerable like
to these, which are joined with a certain impiety, and superstition. But
hitherto of these matters we have spoken sufficiently.

The third part of this discourse, wherein the objections of the Adversary
are plainly refuted.
Now let Us fall to the third part of this book, wherein, as much as in us
lies, we will labor to confute those things, which in this cause are wont to
be brought against us. First of all, many men are offended at this, that our
Preachers teach of only faith in Christ: but truly, if we will judge aright,
they are offended without any weighty, or probable cause at the least, much
more without any just, and necessary cause. For when as we say, that we are
justified by faith alone, They which teach that we are justified by faith
only, do not take away good works, but only confidence in works.
we do not take away good deeds, or honest actions: but we exclude
confidence, and trust in works, and we shut out men's merits, which ought to
have no place in the matter of justification. But all men (almost) were
heretofore fully persuaded, that these merits of men were of ability, and
power, to remit sins, and to satisfy for them: in so much that the Monks
would not freely communicate to others their works of supererogation (which
they had less need works of supererogation sold for silver.
of themselves to their own salvation:) but would set them to sale at a price,
if any man would redeem them with money.

Therefore we, excluding men's merits, do teach The assurance of our
salvation is in Christ only.
that all the trust, and assurance of our salvation ought to be put, and
placed in the only free mercy, and reconciliation of God for Christ, who gave
himself an expiatorie sacrifice for mankind.

And that which the Apostle says, Gratis, freely, excluding Freely.
verily the condition of dignity and merit: the same we do say with the
Ecclesiastical fathers, Sola fide, By faith alone.
by faith alone: least you should think the mutation of the words to change
the thing it self. These things, as I suppose, are both so clear, and
evident, that they may be easily understood: and also proved by our men with so
firm testimonies, that they can by no means be refelled. For in sum, we
teach this, that men obtain pardon All men's salvation consists in the only
merit of Christ.
of their sins, and are justified by the free favor, and mercy of God
only, promised for Christ our Mediators sake, if so be they do place the
assured trust of their salvation only in Christ our propitiator and
peacemaker, and if so be they do by faith embrace the merit of Christ, who by
his precious blood satisfied God for all men's sins. For there is no man which
can obtain salvation, but he which does by faith receive, and apprehend free
remission of sins, offered of God for Christ's sake, and which holds fast
this confidence unto the end. Therefore we are justified not through any
dignity, or worthiness of our works, neither we are justified freely and
by faith alone. Romans 3. 24.
through our merits, and deserts: but (as the Apostle says) by the blood of
Christ: and as the same Paul says, freely, by the grace of God himself
through the redemption, which is in Christ Jesus, whom God has set forth a
propitiator through faith by the means of his blood, etc. Hitherto tends
that of S. Peter out of the Acts: By the grace (says he) of our Lord Jesus
Act. 15. 11.
Christ we do believe that we shall be saved. To make an end: when as we say
that we are justified by faith what it is to be justified by faith alone.
only, we mean no other thing, but that salvation is given unto us of Christ
only, and that this salvation is to be received, and taken hold on by faith
alone, for otherwise it can not be applied unto us.

For, faith is (as it were) an instrument, or hand, by Faith is as it were a
hand.
which that salvation, which is offered, is received, and apprehended of us.
They which say that we exclude repentance, Baptism, Christ's merit, and the
grace A slander of the adversary.
of God, when we make mention of faith alone, are verily unworthy to whom we
should give any answer. For we are not disposed to refell those things which
are manifestly false, nor to reprove so impudent a lie. Only we take away
trust in our own merits, and we signify unto all men, that the hope of our
salvation we only take away confidence in merits.
ought to be put in Gods goodness, and clemency promised to us for Christ's
sake. Hitherto pertains that of S. Ambrose unto Irinaeus: Nemo (inquit)
glorietur in operibus, quia nemo factis suis iustificatur: sed qui iustus Saint
Ambrose.
est, donatum habet, quia post lauacrum iustificatus est: that is: Let no man
glory in his works, because no man is justified by his deeds: but he that
is just has it by gift, because he is justified after regeneration. It is
therefore faith alone which delivers, and sets us free by the blood of
Christ: because that he is blessed (says the Psalmist) who has his sins
remitted, and whose Psalm. 32. 1. Saint Augustine.
iniquity is pardoned. Yea, and S. Augustine also in a certain place
witnesses that the believing are justified and saved by the only grace of
Christ. The same S. Austine Idem contra Pelagianos.
writing against the Pelagians says thus: Vna fides est, quae omnes saluos
facit, qui ex carnali generatione in spiritualem renascendo saluantur, that is,
There is but one faith which saves all men which are saved, by being borne
again from the carnal generation, unto the spiritual regeneration. And
writing unto Bonifacius he says thus: Idem ad Bonifacium.
Quantaelibet fuisse virtutis antiquos praedices iustos, non eos saluos fecit
nisi fides Mediatoris, qui in remissionem peccatorum sanguinem fudit, that is:
For how great virtues soever thou do praise those just men of old time,
nothing saved them, but faith in the Mediator, who shead his blood for the
remission of sins, These things says S. Austine, speaking of the holy
fathers of the old Testament. But let us proceed on to the rest.

The Papists, adversaries to the doctrine of the Gospel An objection of the
Papists.
now renewed, do object unto us, that we attribute less to good works, than
indeed is meet, and convenient: and that they, being brought into contempt,
are now altogether neglected: yea, and that good works are indeed taken away,
and that they are left only in name. Let us briefly answer to these
objections.

First and foremost, albeit in the matter, and manner of The answer.
justification, we attribute no part, or parcel unto our works: (which
thing we do, lest we should make men's merits the price, and satisfaction
for sin, and for eternal death:) notwithstanding otherwise we do not at all
refuse them.

Hence it is, that our Preachers spend so much labor, How and to what end our
Preachers exhort us to good works.
and travel in expounding, and making plain the Decalogue, or ten
commandments. Hence it is, that as much as we may, we exhort men to good
works: because they do ratify, and testify, our faith to be a true faith,
and because they declare our will to be grateful, and thankful to God for
his benefits, and because they do adorn, and set out the doctrine of the
Gospel, and lastly for that they inuit, and stir up others to the study of
why we must do good works.
godliness. Yet for all this, we teach that they must be done, not through
hope by them to satisfy for our sins, or of a trust to obtain
righteousness by them: but either to the glory of God, or to the use, and
necessity of our neighbor. Also we show that our faith is Faith imperfect
without works of love.
maimed after a sort, and imperfect, if no good deeds or duties toward our
neighbor follow. For faith (as S. Ambrose says) is the root of all virtues:
the founteine, Ambrose. Augustine.
and welspring of all good works, as S. Austin says: the mother of every
good will, and just action, the Author of the book, De vocatione Gentium,
says: the breeder, and bringer forth of all right actions, as Chrysostom
says: the same faith is not idle, and slothful, Chrysostom.
but doing and working always, and S. Paul says to the Galathians it woorketh
effectually by love. Moreover, Galat. 5. 6. There can be no true faith in those
which go on still in a wicked life.
we deny that faith can be, and abitle in that man, which lives wickedly,
and ungodly, and which obeys his lusts, and yields to his concupiscences
against his own conscience. For we do judge, that neither manslayers, nor
thieves, nor extortioners, nor adulterers, nor covetous misers, nor proud
persons, nor dronkardes, and such like fellows, can (unless they repent) have
any faith and belief, that God the Father will be favorable, A purpose to
sin cannot stand with a true faith.
and merciful to them, through Christ. And we teach (as our adversaries do
agree with us) that these things, namely, the habit, purpose, and deliberation
of offending, are furthest off from a true faith. For he that sins
wittingly, and willingly, that man without doubt contemns, despises, and
nothing regards God. Now, such contempt can in no wise agree with a firm
faith, and steadfast trust in God. And seeing that, as S. 1. John. 5. 5.
John witnesses, the believers do conquer, and vanquishe the world, and
since that they, which persevere in vice and wickedness, are thought not to
believe: truly there can be no true faith in such, but perhaps a certain
hypocrisy, and a certain idle, and vain dream of faith, howsoever otherwise
the adversaries of wholesome doctrine do cry out against it: who, when as
light is now restored unto the world, had rather embrace darkness, than
love the light.

But here we must observe, and note a difference A distinction of works.
The first sort of works are the superstitious works of the Papists.
betwixt good works. For our adversaries do say commonly, that almost those
only are good works, which we have rehearsed before, to wit, Pilgrimages,
woorshipping of images, burning of Franckincense, and such like odours,
invocation of Saints, and such like joined with impiety, and idolatry, or
else full of the greatest folly, and madness that may be, and which God did
not prepare that we should walk in them, as Saint Paul says. These works
we do Ephe. 2. 10.
both flatly reprehende in word, and remove in deed.

There are also besides these other works, good The second sort of good
works consisting in bodily exercise.
indeed, but yet such as rather perteine to discipline, and to the exercise of
the body, than to true godliness: as, abstinence from dainty meats, often
fastinges, watchinges, lying upon the bare ground, the necessity of living
according to the prescript of man, and such like: by which the flesh is after
a sort bridled, that it may not wax wanton, and lascivious, and that it may
not exult too immoderately out of all measure. These works we very well
like, and allow of, albeit we do not esteem, and set so much by them
altogether, as the unskillful people was wont to do: but we do far
prefer before these works those, which come nearer to true godliness, of
which we will speak hereafter. And verily the common people, if they see any
men lean with hunger, broke with travel, brought low with watching, do much
magnify them for an opinion of holiness, and by these things they do esteem
godliness.

Neither comes it seldom to pass, but very often, that Many are moved with
the hypocrisy and outward show of good works.
men swell secretly in pride, and are puffed up in mind about that external
hypocrisy of good works, which so glories, and boasts it self in the
eyes of the people. Yea, those same works are now and then kept and observed
more superstitiously than needed, and well nigh with a Judicial mind, as if in
these the greatest godliness that can be did consist: whereas indeed they
bring small profit with them, unless those true works be in them to, which
Christ inculcateth, and beats into the ears, and minds of his scholars. And
it may be that he which pineth his body with fasting, which breaks it with
pains taking, which corrupts it with watching, which of his own accord
abstaineth for ever from wine and flesh, which goes in beastly and beggarly
apparel, which lies upon the bare ground, which bears heat and cold, it
may be, I say, that he in the mean time is not far estranged from ambition,
from wrath, from envy, from privy grudges, and hartburning, and from other
vices and wickedness, though by this hardness, and austeritie of life he have
gotten him a great opinion of holiness among all men, and though he
wonderfully please him self in these his outward works: as in fastinges,
watchings, lyinges upon the ground, and in the observation of such like
things, as did the whole company of Monks and Friars.

Last of all, there are works very good and Evangelical, The third sort of
good works, which are good in deed.
which Christ inculcateth, which the doctrine of the Apostles commends,
which the ten Commandments do contain. What they be we have declared
before: as, the fear of God, assured trust in God, invocation or calling upon
God, thanksgiving To lead a Christian life consists in these works.
to God, patience in afflictions, all kinds of duties toward our neighbor,
liberality toward the poor, and the rest which we rehearsed before. These
only are the works whereby you may know a true Christian man. For he is not
to be thought to live Christianly, and (as the Apostle says) worthy of God,
which does the first kind of works, which calls upon Saints, which
gaddeth 1. These. 2. 12.
into wooddes, and deserts, which redeemeth and buieth indulge^cies, which
sprinkleth him self with holy water, which wears a wax candle consecrated
by the who lives no^ Christianly.
Pope: nor if a man busy him self about the second sort of works, if he
fast, if he watch, if he lie hard upon the Monkishe works.
ground, if he tear, and rent his own body with stripes, if he flee, and
avoid all delicates, and dainties, the observation of which things was wont
heretofore to puff up the Monks, with intolerable pride: but he only is to
be thought to live Christianly, which studieth, who lives Christianly.
and endeavors to declare, and manifest his faith to the world, by the last
kind of works, that is to say: which repents perpetually, which fears
GOD truly, which loves him unfeignedly, which works meet for the
regenerate.
calls upon him in trouble, and adversity, which gives him thanks in
prosperity, which laudeth, praises, and confesses God at all times, which
is patient in miseries, and calamities, which is modest in the prosperity of
this life, which is diligent in his duty, which is temperate in his diet, and
apparel, which is just, and upright to his neighbor, which is bountiful to
the poor, which tolerateth injuries, which prays for the^ which curse him,
which bears good will to them which owe ill will to him, which deserves well
of them which hurt him, which feeds the hungry, which gives drink to the
thirsty, and the rest which we have rehearsed, which are truly and indeed
good works, and worthily beseeming a Christian man. Wherefore these works
we teach, to these works we exhort men, these works we urge continually
without end.

This greeueth our adversaries sore, that both we flatly reject the first kind
of works, and also that we set not Our adversaries are agrieued that we reject
the first and second sort of works.
such store by the second sort of works, as the ignorant people are wont to
do, and lastly, that we inculcate the third kind of works oftener tha^ they can
bear, and abide it.

Secondly, this also vexes them, that we had rather ascribe our salvation to
the free favor, and mercy of The Papists are angry with us, for that we
ascribe our salvation only to Chist, and not to man's merits.
God for Christ, than unto men's merits, and good works, that we condemn
them, which put their trust, and affiance in good deeds, which of them selves
seek to satisfy for their own sins, which promise unto them selves for
their works, both deliverance from eternal punishment, and also blessed
immortality: which think that heaven is due to their good deeds: and chiefly
them, which are accustomed not to communicate with other men freely their
ouerflowing merits, but for silver and gold ready told. Finally, they take it
very grievously, and in great snuff, that we do teach The Papists are
grieved that we condemn their superstition and idolatie. 1. Cor. 10. 14.
(according to that precept of the Apostle: Flee the worshipping of idols) that
their manifest superstition, impiety, and idolatry in worshipping of images,
in calling upon the dead, in the profanation of the Supper of the Lord, in
the trust of men's traditions, (wherein Monkerie wholly depended) ought to be
shunned, and avoided of all men.

This verily is the cause why they cry out so much that good works are indeed
utterly taken away, and left only in word and name. Now, as often as they cry
out, and complain, that religion is polluted, and defiled, that rites, and
ceremonies are violated, and broken, that the woorship, and service of God is
neglected: so often they do not speak of the third, and last forte of works,
which we do chiefly urge, but either of the light toys, and foolish trifles
of the first kind of works, which we (as I said before) utterly reject: or
of the labors, and exercises of the second sort of works, apperteining
rather to a strait discipline, than to sincere godliness, which exercises
verily we do not improve, and disallowe, if so be there be no superstition,
or other fault in them, albeit we accounte them worthy to be placed far
under the third kind of works, even as Saint Paul warns us to do. For
unto Timothy he 1. Tim. 4. 7. 8
writes thus: Exercise thy self unto godliness: for bodily exercise
profits little: but godliness is profitable unto all things. Now, although
perhaps a few fond fellows speak not warily, and wisely enough, of works,
the fault and blame of a few must not be There are and have always been some
indiscreet Preachers which have not spoken wisely and discreetly enough of
good works.
laid upon all. For even in S. Augustines age there wanted not certain
Pastors, and Preachers, which did offend almost in the like manner, and did
blab out many things amongst the people unadvisedly, and rashly, neither to
edification (as the Apostle says) nor to profit. Concerning which matter I
pass not much, if I set down his own words.

Absit (inquit) vt dicamus vobis: Vinite vt vultis, securi Augustinus.
estote, Deus neminem perdit, tantummodo fidem Christianam tenete. Non perdit
ille quos redemit, non perdet pro quibus sanguinem suum fudit: and si
spectaculis volueritis oblectare animos vestros, ite. Impleamini cibo, and
vino: ad hoc enim data est ista creatura, vt perfruamini, etc, that is, God
forbid (says S. Austine) that we should say unto you: Live as ye list, be
secure and careless, God destroys no man, only hold fast the Christian
faith. He will not destroy them whom he has redeemed, he will not destroy them
for whom he has shead his blood: and if ye be disposed to solace your minds
with shows and spectacles, go to them on Gods name. Fill your bellies with
good meats, and wines: for this creature was given of God to this end, that ye
should enjoy it, etc. But we at Phil. 2. 12.
this day do bid all men make an end of their own salvation with fear and
trembling, and to beware that their hearts be not ouerladen with surfeting,
and drunkenness, nor that they ouerwhelme themselves with wine, wherein is
excess: we bid them to watch, and to be sober: to eat meat not for pleasure,
but for necessity to sustain life: we bid them pray daily, and without
intermission, and eftsoons by fasting to prepare themselves to prayer: we
declare that the Apostle does Galat. 4. 21.
reckon amongst the works of the flesh both drunkenness, and riotous
banqueting, and that the same Apostle does deny that they, which are wholly
given to those vices, shall ever be heirs of Gods kingdom.

Now, that I may make an end of this confutation The Papists accuse us
unjustly as destroyers of good works.
concerning works, it appears plainly what notable injury they do unto
us, which say that we attribute less to good works than is meet, and
convenient: and which for that cause call us haters of all good works,
fighters, and warriors against good works, yea, very hangmen of good
works. For albeit we do not inculcate those monastical, and flat
superstitious works, Monks works.
to wit, filthy attire, hatred of wedlock, choice of meats, babbling of prayers
(as Christ calls it,) vows, watchinges, Matt. 6. 7.
fastes, and such like: notwithstanding we teach men both truly to forsake
the world (which thing we have all professed, and promised to do in our
Baptism) and also to live godly, holily, and religiously.

And we show verily that that same may be done, marie, what it is to refuse
the world, and to renounce the Devil.
not if thou thrust and shroude thy self into some wilderness, and hide thy
self close in a Monastery, which in old time was a foul fault, and a great
error: not if thou voluntarily seek, and procure thine own harm, and
cruelly afflict thine own body: finally, not if thou cast away of thine own
accord, and refuse those goods, and possessions, which thou have, nor by any
such means. How then I pray you? If thou take it well in worth whatsoever God
does unto thee, and howsoever he deals with thee: if thou do use thy
wealth, and all thy riches, with thanksgiving, when thou have them, and can
willingly be content to want them, as often as God takes them from thee. If thou
do neither procure voluntarily thine own vexations, and torments, nor refuse
calamities and sorrows sent of God: if thou neither despair in adversity,
nor be insolent and proud in prosperity: if both thou live contented with thy
present state, and also omit the carking care for things to come: if thou
neither murmur, and grudge at the grief of ill things, nor loath, and mislike
the plenty of good things: if thou have money, so that thou put no trust in
it, that thou spend it in godly uses, that thou be neither sorry for the loss
of it, nor be puffed up with the abundance of it: not to use many words, if
thou always bear and suffer with one, and the same mind, and countenance,
(how soever it shall seem good unto almighty God,) riches, poverty,
scarsitie, plenty, abundance, penury, glory, ignominy, honor, dishonor,
loss, gain, health, sickness, and such like, whether they be hard or soft,
sharp and sour, or pleasant and sweet: and if thou give thanks to the Lord
always for all things, both gladsome, and sorrowful things, howsoever
matters fall out, ill or well. This is only to renounce, and forsake the world
truly, this is truly to addict, and consecrate himself wholly to God, this is
truly to renounce Satan the prince of the world.

Hitherto also perteine these, to be far from pride, from avarice, from
excess, from ambition, from vain glory, from hatred, from envy, from desire
of revenge, and from such like affections, which are repugnant, and contrary
to the spirit of Christ. Also, both to do, and to speak courteously to all
men, to embrace other men with a certain brotherly good will and love, to
procure other men's profit, and commodity, before his own, to account other
men's misery his own, to weep at others men's calamities: what blessing, and
gift of God soever thou have, to impart it wholly to the helping of others:
briefly, in all things which thou think, speak, do, not to shoot at
any other mark, than at the glory of God only, and at the profit, and
salvation of thy neighbor: to refer all thy deeds, sayings, counselles,
and devises, all thy desires, endeavors, trauelles, all thy studies,
cogitations, cares, labors, watchings, and carfulness, to the amplifying of
Gods praise, and to the succouring, and releeuing of mortal men, in any thing
thou can do: and in the mean time to ascribe, and arrogate nothing to thine
own strength, neither to despise other men as sinners, but both to acknowledge
thine own imbecillitie, and also to trust only to Gods favor, and clemency.
Thus you have heard what works we do inculcate, and beat into the ears,
and minds of men.

They find great fault with us for this, that we teach, that it is a good
work to sweep the pauement, or The Papists find great fault with us, for
that we call that a good work, which every man does honestly in his
vocation.
floor, to hew down trees, or to cleave wood, and such like, since that the
Ethnikes also, and Pagans do that. As though it be not a good work, though
it seem a base, and contemptible labor, whatsoever a man does according to
Gods commandment, in his office, and trade of life.

Therefore that servant, which at his masters commandment heweth wood, and
the drudge, or kitching slave, which carries out of doors all the filth in
the house, does verily a work no less acceptable to God, than he which
preaches, prays, and sings. And what works please God, and what
displease him.
why so? because look whatsoever God him self has commanded to be done, he
does well accept it: as contrarily he refuses, and rejects those things,
concerning which he never gave commandment in any place.

Wherefore, this must be beaten into the ears, and minds of all men, (which
our adversaries are not ashamed to blame us for,) that every man endeavor to
defend duly, and to do rightly, that office and function which he bears.
And wherefore, I pray you, should a maid, preparing her masters dinner, or
making beds, less please God, than a sacrificing, or Mass Priest, which
mumbleth up his Mattins, or hourlie prayers, seeing that she does obey Gods
commandment, whereas he only obeys men's prescript? Yea, that I may urge
them more: If a serving man, being commanded of his master The dressing of an
horse, how far forth it is a good work.
(who is to ride a soudeine, and a necessary journey,) to dress his horse,
and to make him ready, would in the mean season be present either at service,
or at the Sermon, must he not be thought to do ill? For how could he well
do it, since that he ought not to refuse to do his masters will in those
matters, which are not repugnant to Gods precepts, as S. Paul in his Epistle
Ephesians. 6. 5. Coloss. 3. 22. Tit. 2. 9. 1 Pet. 1. 18.
to the Ephesians, Colossians, and to Titus and S. Peter in his former Epistle
teaches? If he therefore do amiss, as we must confess: why should any man
contemn those works, which our adversaries affirm that the very Ethnikes
do, having but nature for their guide? It appears I wis how little or nothing
of Christian matters they understand, who dare reject, and make no account of
the works of godly men, whih albeit they are to the show, vile and abject,
they are notwithstanding commanded of God. Who can deny but that How far
forth it is a good work to be at a sermon.
it is an excellent, and a not able work, to be at a Sermon? And yet for all
that a baser, and a more abiecte work must be preferred before it, to wit,
the dressing of an horse, if need so require. So the whole reason is altered
and changed, that look what the Ethnikes also do by natures lore, that same
must be preferred before that which Christians only do.

How much rather do you think that to be preferred before those ambitious
works which are done before men's eyes, and which vaunte, and boaste them
selves in men's sight, such as are these, Monastical feigning Works which
Monks brag and boast of.
of poverty, beastly garments, long and superstitious fastes, prayers of
Mass Priests, and songs in the Church, which they do not understand,
voluntary rentinges and manglinges of their body, and such like? Therefore,
how foolishly do they, yea how childishly are they wise, or rather foolish,
which prefer rites found out by men, not ceremonies instituted by God, before
the duties of men, which walk (as the Scripture speaks) in their vocation
and calling? How much better, I pray you, is it, and more agreeable to
religion, if every man do his duty in that kind, and trade of life, wherein
he is limited, and that in the mean time he neither prefer him self
before others, nor despise other men's works, though they be base, nor think
that they are less to be set by, and less to be esteemed than his?

Moreover, the Papists object unto us so many heresies An other objection of
the adversary.
every where abroad, saying, that this renewed doctrine has been the cause,
and occasion of them. What then? Were there not both more heresies, and more
hurtful The answer.
a great deal in the Apostles times, than there have been in our age? Of
which rhing we might bring There were no heresies in the Primitive Church than
are now.
forth Irinaeus, and Epiphanius among the Greeks, and Tertullian, the most
ancient Latin Doctor amongst the Ecclesiastical writers, as substantial,
and sufficient witnesses.

Have there not been some at all times, which have There have been always
certain which have resisted wholesome doctrine.
both oppugned the true doctrine, and also repugned, and resisted godly
teachers? Did not Iannes, and Iambres resist, and withstand Moses the man of
God in Egypt, as S. Paul witnesses to Timothy? Did not Baals 2. Tim. 3. 8.
Priests resist Elias in Palestina? Did not the false Prophets resist Jeremy?
Did not the Scribes, Pharisees, and high Priests afterward resist Christ him
self? Finally, did not both the Jews, and the false brethren, The cause of
heresies and tumultes is not in the Gospel, but in the malice of Satan.
and also the idolaters, resist the Apostles? Therefore the blame of so many
heresies, must not be laid upon the doctrine renewed, but upon the malice of
men, and of the Devil. The same you must think of troubles, and (...), raised
at the preaching of the Gospel, concerning which matter we have spoken more
at large otherwhere, in an other book.

Last of all, they object unto us our licentious living, An objection.
and they think that this instauration of Ecclesiastical doctrine, is the
cause of our dissolute life. The one of these two is truer than I would: but
the other is flatly The Answer.
false.

For it is the malice of Satan, that few at this day do tread that pathway of
living, which our Preachers The cause of loosnesse of life.
painefully, and diligently point unto, out of the precepts of Christ, and out
of the doctrine of the Apostles. And surely our Preachers labor by all means
Our Preachers labor to salve every sin with a several remedy out of Gods
word.
possible, to hinder, and stop the course of sin, and wickedness. So far
is it, that the renewing of holy doctrine should be the cause of
dissoluteness, and looseness of life. For we do exhort men to repentance
perpetually, and to amendment of life, we will all men to flee from the anger
to come, and we bid them Matt. 3. 2. 7. 8
bring forth fruits woorthily beseeming amendment of life. Also we show
them certain sovereign remedies almost against all sin, as it were against
certain diseases of the mind. He that bears privy grudges, or
heartburning against his neighbor, hearing this saying: Whosoever hates his
1. John. 3. 16.
brother is a manslear. The railer, and reuiler; hears this saying: Whosoever
shall say unto his brother, Matt. 5. 22.
Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire. And again: Cursed speakers
shall not possess the Galat. 5. 20. 12.
kingdom of God. He that is impatient, when he is iniuried, and which is
desirous of revenge, does hear this saying: Love your enemies, wish Matt. 5.
44. ^5.
well to them which curse you, do good to them which hate you, pray for them
which hurt, and persecute you, that you may be the sons of your father,
which is in heaven, etc. Item: If ye do not remitte, and pardon other men
their offenses, neither Matt. 6. 15.
will your heavenly father forgive you your trespasses.

He that is given to riot, and pleasures, hears the Luke. 16. 19.
parable of the Rich glutton, and Lazarus the beggar. He that is too careful,
and busy in heaping Luke. 12. 16
up riches, hears the parable of the rich man, which would enlarge, and
build his barnes greater, and destine hereafter to his soul a quiet, and
blessed life. Also he hears S. Paul's wise admonition: Having food, and
raiment, let us therewith be content. 1. Tim. 6. 8. 9
For they that will be rich, fall into temptations, and snares, and into many
unprofitable, and hurtefull desires, which drown men in perdition, and
destruction. For covetousness, or desire of money, is the root of all evil.
He that does not receive the poor, and strangers, hears this saying: Be
not Heb. 13. 2.
unmindful to enterteine strangers: for by this hospitality some have
received Angels into their houses unawares. And again: Be ye harborous 1. Pet,
4. 9.
one to an other without grudging. He that is proud, and ambitious, hears
this saying: He that exalts Luke. 18. 14.
him self shall be brought low. And again: God resists the proud, but he
gives grace to 1. Pet. 5. 5.
the humble. He that is a babbler, a chatterer, and a fond talker, hears
this saying: Men shall give Mat. 12. 36.
account, in the day of judgment, of every idle word, that they have
spoken. And again: Let Ephesians. 4. 29.
no filthy communication proceed out of your mouth.

He which lives secure, and careless, nor thinks upon the amendment of his
life, hears this saying: Be ye also prepared therefore: because the Son
of man will come at an hour, when ye Luke 12. 40.
think not. He which is an usurer, hears this saying: Lend, looking for
nothing by it, and your reward shall be great. He that is given to wine,
hears Luke 6. 35.
this saying: Ouerlade not your selves with wine, wherein is riot, and excess.
And again: Take heed Ephe. 5. 18.
that your hearts be not ouercharged with surfeting. And again: Woe be to you
that rise up early to follow Luke. 21. 34. Esai. 5. 11.
drunkenness, and to you that continue swilling till night, that you may be
inflamed with wine. And again: Be ye sober, and watch, because your
adversary 1. Pet. 5. 8.
the Devil, as a roaring Lion, walks about, seeking whom he may devour.
He that is a whore-maister, an adulterer, or defiled with the like sin, and
wickedness, hears this saying: Neither whoremongers, neither adulterers, nor
unclean persons, 1. Cor. 6. 9.
shall inherit the kingdom of God. And again: For this ye know, that no
whoremonger, neither unclean Ephesians. 5. 5.
person, nor covetous person, which is an idolater, has any inheritance in the
kingdom of Christ, and of God. And again: This is the will of God, to wit, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3.
your sanctification, that you abstain from fornication. And: For to avoid
fornication let every man have his 1. Cor. 7. 2. Heb. 13. 4.
wife. Item: Marriage is honorable among all, and the bed undefiled: but
whoremongers, and adulterers God will judge. And again: Flee fornication:
Every 1. Cor. 6. 18.
sin that a man does, is without the body: but he that commits
fornication, sins against his own body.

He that passes over the duties of charity toward our neighbor hears
this saying, Depart from me ye cursed into enternall fire, which is prepared
for the Devil, and his Angels. For I was hungry, and Matt. 25. 41.
ye fed me not: I was thirsty, and ye refreshed me not with drink: I
was a stranger, and ye received me not into your house: I was naked, and ye
did not cloth me: I was sick, and ye did not visit me. To be brief, we
do without end inculcate that sentence of the Apostle: For we must all
appear at the bar before the judgment seat of Christ, that 2. Cor. 5. 10.
every man may receive the things, which he has done in his body, whether
it be good, or evil. Moreover, we daily make mention of the judgment to
come, of the voice of the Archangel, and of the trumpet of God: of the Lords
tribunal seat, before which we must all be conuented, there to give
accomptes unto God of our whole life, who will pay unto every man as he has
deserved, rewards, or punishments, as both the Evangelical, and Apostolical
doctrine testifies. Yea, and every one is diligently put in mind of his
duty by our Preachers. The Prince, and the Magistrate How every man in our
sermons is admonished of his duty. Romans 13. 4.
hears this saying: He bears not the sword for naught. For he is the
Minister of God, to take vengeance on them that do evil.

And again: Princes are not a terror to them that The duty of the
Magistrate. The subjects duty.
do well, but to them which doeyll.

The subjects hear this sentence: Let every soul be subject unto the
higher powers: for there is no power but of God. Whosoever therefore resists
the Romans 13. 1. 2. 5. 7.
power, resists the ordinance of God. And again: Ye must be subject, not
because of wrath only, but also for conscience sake. Item: Give therefore to
all men their duty: tribute to whom ye owe tribute, custom to whom
custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor is due. The married man
hears this The husbands duty.
saying: Husbands, love your wives, and be not bitter unto them. And again:
So ought men to love their Coloss. 3. 19. Ephesians. 5. 28. Ephesians. 5. 22. 23.
wives, as their own bodies. The wife hears this saying: Wives, submit your
selves unto your husbands, as unto the Lord: because the husband is the wives
head. The wives duty.
And as the Church is in subjection to Christ, even so let Parents duty. Ephe.
6. 4. 5. 6. Childrens duty. Servants duty.
the wives be subject to their husbands in every thing. Fathers hear this
saying: Provoke not your children to wrath: but bring them up in instruction,
and information of the Lord. Children hear this saying: Obey your parents in
the Lord: for this is right. The servants hear this saying: Be obedient
unto them that are your masters according to the flesh, with fear, and
trembling, in singleness of your hearts, as unto Christ, not with service to
the eye, as men pleasers, but as the servants of Christ, etc. The master
hears this saying: The masters duty.
Ye masters show to your servants equity, and equabilitie, knowing that you
also have a master in heaven, neither is there respect of persons with him.
The Preacher, or Pastor of the Lords flock, hears this The Preachers
duty. 1. Pet. 1. 2.
saying, Feed the flock of Christ, as much as lies in you, careing for it,
not by constraint, but willingly: not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind.
The rich man hears this saying: Charge them that are rich in this 1. Tim. 6.
17. Rich men's duty.
world, that they be not high minded, and that they trust not in uncertain
riches, but in the living God, (which gives us abundantly all things to
enjoy,) that they do good, that they be rich in good works, that they be
ready to distribute, and willing to communicate to others, laying up in store
for them selves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may
obtain eternal life. The The customers duty. Luke. 3. 13. 14.
Publicane, Customer, or Toulner, hears this saying: Exact, and require no
more, than that which is appointed you.

The soldier hears this saying: Do violence to no The soldiers duty.
man, accuse no man falsely, but be content with your wages. Wherefore, since.
that our Preachers do daily, and perpetually beat into the ears, and minds
of all men, these, and other innumerable sentences of holy Scripture, 2. Tim.
4. 2.
seeing that they preach the word diligently, seeing that they are instant, and
urge men in season, and out of season, seeing that they improve, rebuke, and
exhort, as S. Paul warns Timothy, they are falsely accused to have hitherto
pampered, and fostered to much the licentious living of the common people. And
yet notwithstanding, that which our adversaries do object of vice, and
wickedness, which bears such a sway in this age, is (as I said before)
truer than I would it were.

Now, albeit there have been men always even from Christians in name, and not
in deed.
the beginning of the Church, which did profess Christianity rather in name,
and title, than in very deed, of which sort Hilarie says thus: They pray,
because they fear: they sin, because it is their will, and pleasure: they
Hilarie.
call them selves Christians, because they have a good hope of eternity: they
do heathenish things, because present things are flattering things: they
remain not altogether impious, because they have the name of God in some
honor: they are not godly, because they follow such things as are far
from godliness: notwithstanding, I do believe, that all vices did scarce at
The great corruption of this our age.
any time bear such a sway in any age, as in this our age. We do all of us
brag, and boast of our faith, but we do not declare, and show forth this
our A vain vaunt of faith without good works.
faith by godly works, and by charity toward our neighbor. We all
glory of the Gospel of Christ, but we study not to live worthy of the
Gospel of Christ. We teach, and preach, that we have received the pure
religion of Christ, but we do not perform in deed Much professing now a
days, but small practicing.
those things which are agreeable to it. We will (forsooth) both be and also
be accounted Christians, which name verily ought to make us somewhat ashamed
to break Gods commandments: but we do not endeavor with all our mind, and
labor, to lead a life after the imitatio^ of Christ. To be brief, we
confess God in words, as the Apostle says, but in our deeds Tit. 1. 16.
we deny him. So it comes to pass, that for our sakes, and for our sins,
and wickedness, the name of God is The doctrine of the Gospel is evil spoken
of because of our ill lives.
dispraised amongst the heathen, that Christian doctrine is evil spoken of,
that religion it self is contemned, and despised. For what goodness will the
Turks believe to be in that religion, whose woorshippers, and Professors
they see to be contaminated, and defiled with all heinous wickedness? O
ingratitude worthy of eternal destruction. How greatly am I afraid, least
for The great ingratitude of this age.
this one thing, that happen to us, which our Savior Christ does threaten to
those cities, which after so wholesome doctrine repented not of their horrible
sins? It shall be (says he) more tolerable for Tire and Sidon, and Matt. 11.
12
Sodom in the day of judgment than for you. The adversaries of the Gospel,
which will not acknowledge their manifest errors, and receive the true
doctrine, ought not so much to fear this so grievous, and horrible a
commination, as those which every where glory of the Gospel, whom God has
called out of darkness into his marvelous light: that I may use the words of
S. Peter. 1. Pet. 2. 9.


At the least, let those most sweet admonitions, Saint Paul's sweet
exhortations. Romans 12. 1.
and exhortations of S. Paul, move us to godliness of life: I beseech you
brethren (says he) by the mercies of God, that ye give up your bodies a
living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable serving
of God. And again: Calat. 5. 24.
They that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with Tit. 2. 11. 12.
the affections, and lusts thereof. And again, That grace of God that
brings salvation unto all men, has appeared, teaching us, that denying
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, and righteously,
and godly, in this present world. Ephesians. 5. 1. 2.
Item: Be ye (says he) followers of God, as dear children, that ye may
walk in love, even as Christ has loved us, and has given himself for us to
be an offering, and a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor to God.

And again: We are his woorkemanship created in Ephesians. 2. 10.
Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has prepared, and ordained that we
should walk in them. Hitherto pertains that saying of Christ in Saint
Matthaewes Gospel: Let your light so shine before men, Matt. 5. 16.
that they may see your good works, and glorify your father which is in
heaven. I do omit almost six hundred such like places in the Gospel.

Those places of Scripture ought verily to move us chiefly, and before all
other, which have the mention of Christ's death and punishment joined with
them. Such an one is that saying of Saint Peter: Christ (says he) 1. Pet. 2.
24.
his own self bare our sins in his body on the tree. For what does he
add? That we being dead to sin, should live to righteousness. The like
place is that to Titus: Christ (says he) gave himself for us. What does he
add? That he might redeem us from all iniquity, Tit. 2. 14.
and purge us to be a peculiar people unto himself, zealous of good works.
And to the Galathians: Which Galat. 1. 4.
gave himself for our sins. But he adds: That he might deliver, and take
us out of this present evil world. And to the Corinthians: Christ died for
all. 2. Cor. 5. 15.
He adds: That they which live should not live hereafter to themselves, but
unto him, which died, and rose again for them. And to the Colossians: Christ
has Coloss. 1. 22.
reconciled you in the body of his flesh through death. He adds: To make
you holy, and unblameable, and without fault in his sight.

Now, whom the devil (who, as John says in the Revelation, Against those
which sin through hope of Gods mercy.
seduceth the whole world) feeds with an hope of Gods mercy and goodness,
and whom he by that means reteineth still in their sins, and forbids them
to fear Gods justice, let those men again, and again see well, what they
do. The Lord is merciful, and gentle, says David in the Psalm. But the
same man says, The face of the Lord is against them Psalm. 13. 8. Psalm. 34.
16. Exodus 20. 6.
that do evil. I am the Lord thy God, showing mercy upon thousands, says
God in Exodus. What is added? To them which love me, and keep my
commandments.

I will not the death of a sinner, says God in Ezechiel. Ezec. 33. 11.
What follows? But that he turn from his ways, and live. He that believes
in the son, has life everlasting, says the forerunner of the Lord in John.
3. 15.
John. But Christ in the same S. John's Gospel says: They which have done
good, shall come forth into the John. 5. 29.
resurrection of life: but they that have done evil into the resurrection of
condemnation. John Baptist testifies of Christ, saying: Behold that lamb of
God, which John. 1. 29. Matt. 3. 2. 8.
takes away the sin of the world. But the same John says: Repent ye of
your former life, and bring forth fruit worthy amendment of life. Peter in
the Acts says: We believe that we shall be saved through the Act. 15. 11.
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. But the same Peter says: Amend your lives
therefore, and turn, that Act. 3. 19.
your sins may be put away. Christ him self in John says: GOD so loved
the world, that he gave his only begotten son, that whosoever believes
John. 3. 16.
in him, should not perish, but have life everlasting. But the same Christ in
Matthaewe says: Not every Matt. 7. 21.
one that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven,
but he that does my fathers will, which is in heaven. Paul says unto
Timothy: Christ Jesus came into the world to 1. Tim. 1. 15.
save sinners. But the same Paul unto the Corinthians says; Be not deceived:
neither fornicatours, 1. Cor. 6. 9. 10
nor idolatours, nor adulterers, nor wantons, nor thieves, nor covetous
persons, nor dronkardes, nor railers, nor extortioners shall inherit the
kingdom of God.

I would to God, I would to God, that we would acknowledge in part, and
study to be thankful for so notable a benefit of GOD, in restoring this
sacred doctrine, and that after so great ignorance, and blindness of men in
matters perteining to salvation, and which are chiefly necessary to be known.

Which thing verily would come to pass, first if How we may be thankful to
God for this great benefit of the Gospel.
we, thinking upon the infelicitie, and old superstition of former times, and
being as it were astonished at Gods great benefits, would break forth into
the praises of God, into Psalms, and hymns, into spiritual songs, singing
and making melody to the Lord in our hearts, giving thanks always for all
things unto GOD, even the father, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, as
the Apostle Ephesians. 5. 19. 20.
says.

Secondly, if we would labor to promote, and set forward the ministry of
the word, to keep, honor, to defend, and manteine godly teachers, if we
would labor to help, and relieve the necessary studies of the Church. Last
of all, if we would live godly, and holily toward God, patiently in
afflictions, vprghtly toward our neighbor, diligently in our duty,
temperately and soberly in our diet, and in our clothing, honorably toward
our parents, obediently toward our magistrates and masters, lovingly and
courteously with all men, liberally toward the poor and needy: to be short, if
we would live innocently, chastely, soberly, friendly to our enemies,
profitably to the Church of God, favorably to the life of men, agreably to
Religion, consonantly to Christianity, conveniently and meet for the Gospel,
and as S. Paul says, Live worthy of God: 1. These. 2. 12
that is, to speak most plainly, if we did both love God with our whole
heart, and from our very bowelles, and also, if we did bear as great good
will to our neighbor, as we do to our selves: if we our selves would do that
to no man, which we would not have done to us, if we were such toward others,
as we would other men were toward us: finally, if we did help, and succor
always our neighbor, either with our substance, or with our helping hand, or
with our good advise, and counsel, not regarding every man his own things,
but the things of other men: if we did study to profit all men, yea even our
enemies, to hurt no man, no not if we be provoked: lastly, if we would be
terrified from sin and wickedness rather with the love of God than for
fear, if we would not loose the bridle to our lusts, if we would do nothing,
which ought not to be done.

But O our execrable, and abominable ingratitude, we Our great
unthankfulness.
do not measure, and ponder, as it is worthy, the greatness of Gods
benefits, neither do we sufficiently consider with our selves how great
commodities this doctrine, instaured by God, has brought a good while ago
unto Christendom.

For in how many errors were we heretofore wrapped How great errors there
were in the former age.
in? in how great superstitions were we nusled in? to what pass was Christian
piety come unto? was it not come to this point, that it was thought a better,
and a more excellent thing for a man to be called a Franciscane, than simply a
Christian? that we did attribute much more to man's rites, than to Gods
precepts? that in obteining salvation we did trust rather to ceremonies, than
to the favor, and mercy of God, or to the merit of Christ? that almost
altogether excluding Christ, whose death was a pacification of Gods wrath
against sin, we did of our selves seek to satisfy for our own sins?
that we did not only judge that heaven was due to our merits, but also that
we did sell our good works of supererogation? Finally, that leaving, and
refusing God, every man did for him self woorshippe, reverence, and adore the
idol of his own heart? I do omit, and let pass lighter matters, how that
we did both fear vain apparitions, and shadows of walking spirits, and also
how that we did feign, and devise Purgatory fire out of Virgils Aeneades:
how that we Purgatory devised out of the sixte book of Virgils Aeneades.
gave that service and honor to mortal men long since departed, which should
have been given to God only: how that they which were delivered from the
plague, gave thanks to Saint Roch, they which returned safe from battle gave
thanks to Saint George, they which The superstitious honoring of Saints in
the former age. Saint Roch. Saint George. Saint Nicholas Saint Erasmus. Saint
Vrbane. Saint Apolline.
had escaped shipwreck gave thanks to Saint Nicholas, they which had got
good store of riches gave thanks to I can not tell what Saint Erasmus, they
which had a plentiful, and fruitful vineyarde gave thanks to S. Urban, they
which were eased from the torment of toothachegaue thanks to Saint Apolline,
they which had conceived and borne children without any great pain, gave
thanks to Saint Margaret. For we of these had Saint Margarete
plainly made Ethnikall, and Heathenish Gods: and as the Gentiles in times
past were wont to pray unto Aesculapius, The woorshipping of Saints in the
former age was not unlike the idolatry of the Ethnikes.
and Apollo, for the depulsion, and driving away of diseases, unto Mars for
victory, unto Neptune for a prosperous navigations, unto Juno for riches, unto
Bacchus for plenty of wine, unto Ceres for abundance of corn, unto Lucina for
an happy childbirth: so we were wont to beg, and crave the like benefits
of them whom we speak of. Yea, as amongst the Ethnikes in old time, every
city, or region, had their Gods, whom they did peculiarly woorshippe: for (as
the Ouide.
Poet says:)

Cecropia serves as God Minerua wise, and Creete Diana dame, The peculiar Gods
of several cities and countries amongst the heathen nations.

Hipsiphile soil adores the blacksmith Vulcane halt, and lame:
But Sparta woorshippes Iunoes grace,
Micaena honors Pelops stock,
The coasts of Menalis serves that Syluan God which Faunus hight,
And eke Lauinia land does woorshippe Mars that warlik wight.
So at this day Venice has her S. Mark, in whose tutelship she stands,
Millain has S. Ambrose, Paris has S. Several Saints Patrones of several
cities at this day. According to the number of thy cities are thy Gods.
Denis, Collin has the three Kings, or the three Magi, Francia has S.
Chilian, Polonia has S. Hedeuigis: finally, other have other Saints to defend
them. Also every several company, and order of crafts men has adopted
their peculiar patrons, and as it were household gods to defend them: as for
example: the Goldsmithes Iere. 2. 29. Several trades have several Saints to
be their patrones and Protectours.
have got them S. Eulogius, the Shoomakers S. Crispin, the Fullers S. Seuerus,
the Painters S. Luke, the Physicians S. Cosma and S. Damian, the Lawyers S.
Fuon, the Students of arts and liberal sciences S. Catharine. If we would
repeat and call to mind these, and other superstitions almost innumerable, we
should now the more easily measure after a sort in our mind the magnitude, and
greatness of Gods benefit: especially if we did remember Many countries are
as yet drowned in darkness.
that as yet there are every where very many countries which are overwhelmed
in most thick darkness of errors and ignorance, not differing at all from
those nations, which in times past were wholly given over to the worshipping of
idols: as well nigh all those people be at this day, which with so great
clamours, and outcries, call for that state of religion again, which they
vaunt to have profited so long the Christian common weal: who desire that the
ceremonies of their fathers may be worshipped: which would have the Emperor
bring this to pass, that look what religion they received when they were
children, the same being old men they should leave to their posterity: to be
brief, who had rather embrace and observe the institutions and traditions of
their Elders, old customs, men's prescriptes, than the rites of the Apostles,
than the verity of the Gospel, than the commandments of God: amongst whom
the Lombardicall history is of more authority, than the sacred scripture: the
Decretals, than the Gospels, the Bishop of Rome, than the son of God Christ
Jesus. Therefore how greatly what great thanks we owe to God for restoring
his Gospel.
are we bound to God for instauring the doctrine of the Gospel in this our
age? What thanks ought we to give, and render unto him? How greatly ought we to
take heed, and bew are that we do not by chance any thing unwittingly, which
might offend the author of this benefit? What great care ought we to have
always to labor, and travel about those things, which are grateful, and
acceptable to God, who loves us so entirely.

But how thankful to God the common people are for The ingratitude of the
common people.
this benefit, alas, it appears too plainly, and evidently at this day. For
the greater part of those men, who would be accounted Christians (without envy
be it spoken) is given to gluttony, to surfeting, to all kind of wickedness,
the mayor part, I say, lives nicely, delicately, riotously, the greater number
is carried headlong into all kind of pleasure, and intemperancie, they love,
they drink apace, they run a whore hunting, they snatch and catch, they
filch and steal, they swear, and forswear, they cogge and lie, they
defraude, and deceive: in sum, whatsoever ought not to be done, that they do.

Now amongst the Noble men vices prevail, and bear The ingratitude of Noble
men and Gentlemen.
too great a sway and (to be brief) these especially. Otia, vina, Venus,
venatus, balnea, lusus, that is, Idleness, wine, and Venus way, with hu^ting,
bathes, and diceplay. In Kings courts drunkenness rules and reigns: and
now to live there is naught else, but to vie drinking The corruption of Princes
courts.
there. In Noble men's gorgious buildings, and goodly houses, nothing else
almost (by their leaves) is done, but daily diceplaying, iollie tossing of
beer potts, daunsing to the sound of the Citterne, or Lute. I do omit, and
Some noble men take to themselves the Church goods, wherewith Pastors and
Preachers should be maintained.
let pass how that some of these Noble me^ have turned those possessions,
which by the liberality of their ancestors were left to the Church, into
their own use, and suffer the miserable Pastors of the Church to die almost
for hunger: so far are they off from helping and releeuing them as much as in
them lies. This verily is our gratitude, and thankfulness toward that
singular, and notable benefit of God, which he bestowed upon us, in taking
away from among us superstitions, and in instauring holy and sacred doctrine.
No man truly can either declare in word, or shadow out in thought, how
excellent, and how great this benefit of God is. For now at the length we have
learned which is the holy, Catholic, Apostolical, orthodox, and true Now it
is well known which is the catholic Church,
Christian Church: and what that communion of Saints is, whereunto they must
join them selves in faith, in will, in opinion, in prayer, and in confession,
whosoever will be members of the people of God, and of that mystical body
(whereof Christ is the head) in what part of the world soever they live in.
Now we have learned All men saved only by faith in Christ.
that thing, which almost no man heretofore knew, namely that all me^ are
saved by Christ alone, and no man by his own merits: that all men obtain
salvation, and eternal felicity through the Mediator the son of God, not
for the dignity of their works: by which Both we at this day and the
Fathers in old time were saved by the same faith.
means verily both the Patriarchs, and also the Prophets, and the people of
Israel, and finally all the godly, which have been from the creation of the
world unto this day, have been saved. For Christ, as he that should come to be
the deliverer of mankind, was promised from the beginning. Whereupon in the
Revelation there is that mention of the Lamb, which was slain from the
original of the world. Therefore the Gospel Apoc. 13. 8. The Gospel was
from the beginning of the world.
or Euangell, that is to say, that forgiveness of sins revealed, and
promised from heaven, by the free goodness of GOD for the deliverer to come,
has been always even from the very beginning of mankind, though not yet in
name, and in word, yet in deed, and in truth. For this redeemer Christ is that
seed of the woman promised unto Adam, which should break the serpents
head, that is, which Genesis 3. 15. 1. John. 3. 8.
should destroy the works of the Devil, to wit, sin and death. He is
the seed of Abraham, in which seed all the nations of the earth should be
Genesis 12. 3. Deuteronomy. 18. 15 Act. 3. 22.
blessed. He is that Prophet promised by Moses. He is the son of David,
who should reign over the house of Jacob forever. This is he which was
shadowed by the Leuiticall sacrifices, and foretold by the oracles of the
Prophets.

Therefore we have all the godly, which have been even from the beginning of
the world, joined with us in the profession of the same faith. For look in
whom the Patriarchs, the Prophets, and the people of Israel placed all their
confidence, in the Messiah promised to them: in the very same Christ now
exhibited unto us, both Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors: and finally, we all
put our hope of salvation.

And this is the true Church, which we have which is the true Church and
Communion of Saints. what kind of society the Church is.
learned out of this doctrine renewed: this is that communion of Saints,
which, being (as I said before) even from the beginning of the world, after
the promise concerning the deliverer to come, was first propagated, and
continued in the Patriarchs, and Prophets, afterward in the Apostles, and
Martyrs, and so on continues, and perseuereth unto this day by diverse
degrees, and orders of Christians, professing the same faith, and perfourming,
and showing obedience to the Ministers of the Church. The son of God our
Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ does, by his word, and Gospel govern, How
Christ rules and defends his Church.
and by his holy Spirit help, and assist this Church, and this communion of
Saints. O thrice happy, and four times blessed are they, which join them
selves unto the society of this Church, which has the son of The society
of the Church is perfect felicity.
GOD for her President, the Angels for her protectours, the holy Ghost for her
sanctifier: finally, all the godly, and elect of all ages, as many as are
ordained to eternal life, for her fellows, and companions. In this Church
thou shall find Adam, Noah, Melchisedech, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses,
Samuel, David, Esaie, Daniel, to be short, all the Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, Martyrs, virgins, confessors, and the holy Angels of God mixed
among all these. Who would not exclame, and cry out with the Prophet? O how
amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of hosts? My soul Psalm. 84. 1. 2. 4. 12.
faints, and consumes away, through the desire of thine house. Blessed are
they which dwell in thine house, O Lord, which extol thee with perpetual
praises. Blessed is he, O Lord, which puts his trust in thee.

How greatly, I pray you, do I think that other men are moved with these
things? Do I doat, and am I ravished out of measure with the mention of
these things? Or are other men also thoroughly touched with the like feeling
that I am?

Surely I my self, as often as I am conversant in the cogitation, and
remembrance of these things, conceive in my mind an incredible pleasure, and
as the Poet says, Secreat joys do creep into my silent breast.

And truly, both many other things do recreate, The great comfort and
consolation which a Christian man may receive by meditating and musing upon the
Communion of Saints.
and refresh me, as that communion of Saints, and that one, and the same
faith, even from the last original of the world, of all Patriarchs,
Prophets, and of the people of Israel, and of ours at this day in Christ,
promised indeed to them, but now already exhibited, and given to us: and that
most blessed company hereafter, with all the Saints in the celestial
kingdom, unto which I aspire with a fervent desire, which now also me
thinks I enjoy, and receive well nigh a certain taste of the future felicity,
and happiness in Heaven: and also the Captain him self and head of this
Church, our Lord, and Redeemer Jesus Christ, does after a marvelous manner
move me, Comforts which we receive by Christ crucified for us.
delight me, and well nigh bring me into a trance besides my self, when I
think upon him. For streightway it comes into my mind, that this specified
Christ is he, in whom to come all the Saints from the beginning have fixed,
and placed all their trust, and confidence: that this is he, to whom all the
Prophets Act. 10. 43.
give witness, that through his name all that believe in him, and put the hope
of their salvation in him, shall receive remission of sins: that this is he
who came into the world to save sinners, to seek, 1. Tim. 1. 15. Luke. 19. 10.
and to save that which was lost, and like to perish, to give his soul for
the redemption, and ransom of many: that this is he who was sent to preach
the Gospel to the poor, to heal the broken hearted, to preach deliverance
to the captives, Esai. 61. 8. Luke. 4. 18.
to comfort them that mourn, to set at liberty them that are oppressed:
that this is he, whom therefore the Father sent, not that he might condemn
the world, but that the world might John. 3. 17.
be saved by him: that this is he, for whom the heavenly father has
forgiven us all our trespasses, putting out the obligation, or hand writing,
which was Coloss. 2. 13. 14.
against us: yea, taking it quite out away, and fastening it upon his cross:
that this is he who commands all that labor, and are heavy laden, to come
unto him: and which promises to ease, and refresh them: that this is he which
died for our salvation, who by his blood satisfied Matt. 11. 28.
God for the sins of mankind, and who has by his passion suffered the
punishment, which we did owe Galat. 4. 5.
unto the justice of God: who being persuaded thereunto through exceeding love
toward us, gave himself Ephesians. 5. 2.
for us an oblation, and sacrifice to God of a sweet smelling favor: that
this is he which has delivered us from the Devil, from sin, and from
eternal death. Heb. 2. 14.
Who by his death has abolished and destroyed him, which had the rule, and
imperie over death, to wit, the Devil: who has redeemed us from the curse
of Gal. 3. 13.
the law, he him self being made a curse for us: that this is he, who has
overcome Satan by his cross, and has triumphed over the conquered, who has
beseeged and battered down hell, and has Coloss. 2. 15. Ephesians. 4. 8. Psalm. 68.
18. Romans 8. 34. 1. John. 2. 1. Heb. 9. 24.
made an entry, and passage into heaven: who ascending up on high, has led
captivity captive: that this is he, who sitting at the right hand of GOD the
father, does perpetually make intercession for us, who being our Proctour and
Advocate, we may easily obtain at our heavenly fathers hands, pardon, and
forgiveness of sins, that this is he, in whom only we have recovered that
which we had lost in our first father Adam, namely, to be created according
to the image, and similitude of GOD: that is, (as Saint Paul interprets it)
after righteousness, and true holiness: Ephesians. 4. 24.
by whom we are adopted of the heavenly father into the number of the sons
of God, to become partakers as of his name, so also of his kingdom, and to
become heirs of eternal blessedness: Finally, 1. Tim. 2. 5.
that he is the Mediator, Interpreter, and Pacificatour betwixt God, and men,
that he is the throne of grace, Heb. 4. 16.
our Bishop, and high Priest, to entreat daily for us, the propitiation for
the sins of the world, the Lamb of Ioh. 1. 29.
God, which takes away the sins of the world, the Pastor, and shepherd
of our souls, our hope, our life, our resurrection, moreover our wisdom, and
our righteousness, Ioh. 11. 25. 1. Cor. 1. 30. Esai. 53. 5.
and our sanctification, and our redemption: that this is he in Esaie, upon
whom the Lord has laid the iniquities of us all, and by whose wounds we are
healed: that he is that victour, and conqueror of death and of hell in Oseas:
that he is that Lord our iustifier, Osee. 13. 14, Iere. 23. 6. Esai. 7. 14.
in Jeremy: to be short, and not tedious, that he is that Emmanuel, father of
eternal life, Prince of peace, that son of righteousness, that light, and
lamp of the Gentiles: in sum, that this is he whom the old ancient rites,
and Leuiticall ceremonies shadowed, and prefigured, Christ is the scope both of
the law and of the Gospel.
to whom the whole law of Moses had respect, and regard, whom the Prophets,
and the universal scripture have proponed unto them, as the only mark to
shoot at.

Wherefore the remembrance of all these things being such, and so great, as
they are, does (as I said before) incredibly move me, and does maruellously
delight me, yea by thinking upon these things I do taste as it were a
certain sense, and feeling of the future felicity, and happiness in heaven.

And certainly, seeing that these things are at this Especially at this day
men ought to be thankful for the doctrine of the Gospel.
day inculcated, and beaten continually into the ears, and minds of all men,
surely all men ought to be merry, and glad, at the mention of these things,
and all men ought to give thanks to God for this doctrine instaured, and to
declare the thankfulness of their minds not only by singing of Psalms,
Hymns, and spiritual songs: Coloss. 3. 16.
but also by leading a life after the will, and imitation of God: and chiefly
they must endeavor, and travel, to grow in grace, and in the knowledge of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, as S. Peter warns us, and that daily 2.
Pet. 3. 18.
they profit more and more in it, or (as S. Paul speaks) abound more
every day than other in it. But, O the execrable and abominable negligence of
men, in repeating, Man's extreme ingratitude to God for his infinite benefits,
showed by his. wicked life.
and calling to mind Gods benefits, in rendering due, and deserved thanks to
so gracious, and bountiful a God. For we live so, that we differ nothing at
all from Epicures, that the name of God is for our sakes contumeliously
reproched, and evil spoken of amongst the Turks: that we do alienate all
men from religion, unto which we ought, by our honest manners, and good
conversation to inuit, and to allure all men.

And in the mean season, whilst we live so, we both grieve the holy Spirit,
and cause that wicked, and unclean spirit, to rejoice at us: and also we
yield our selves (whom Christ has redeemed by his blood) voluntarily to the
bondage, servitude, and slavery of Satan: we, whom Christ has delivered
from our sins, do wittingly, and willingly rush headlong again into sin:
we, whom he has made heirs of the heavenly kingdom, do cause our selves
through our own fault to be disinherited.

This verily is all the thanks that we give unto GOD for this doctrine of the
Gospel renewed, this is the thanks we give unto Christ for giving us
salvation, so we give our selves to be ruled, and governed by the holy
Ghost. With these deeds we approach, and draw near unto the Lords Table.
So do we expect, and wait for the coming of Christ, And, for ought that I
see, death is like to attache us so doing, so we are like to come unto Gods
judgment seat.

But, that I may return to my purpose, truly I my self thinking, and musing
with my self upon Christ, (whom we begin to confess, and acknowledge
truly by this doctrine instaured,) am incredibly moved, and affected: neither
is there any thing, whereby The remembrance of Christ's benefits of what
force it is with the godly.
I do receive either greater comfort, or greater pleasure, than by the
remembrance of Christ's benefits, and of the good will of our heavenly
father toward us, who has so loved the world, that he has preferred our
salvation before the love of his only son.

And falling into this cogitation, I can not temper, and refrain my self, but
I must needs exclame, and cry out, sundry times with Saint Paul: If God be
on our side for us, who can be against us? He that spared Romans 8. 31. 32. 33.
34.
not his own son, but gave him for us all to death, how shall he not with
him give us all things also? Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
chosen? It is God that justifies, who shall condemn? It is Christ which is
dead, yea or rather, which is risen again, who is also at the right hand of
GOD, and makes request also for us. yea, and in this cogitation of Christ
there is nothing at all, which may dismay what great consolation redoundeth
to a distressed conscience, by the right remembrance of Christ's benefits.
and discomfort a conscience laden with grievous sins, much less drive it to
desperation. For if the law being broken, and transgressed, does work a
fear, and terror in us, let us remember that Christ has redeemed us from the
curse of the law: if sin terrify us, let us remember that the blood of
Christ has cleansed Gal. 3. 13. 1. John. 1. 7.
us from all sin: if death daunt us, let us remember that Christ is the life,
and the resurrection: if the wrath and judgment of God amaze us, let us
remember John. 11. 25.
that we are reconciled to God by Christ: if Satan assault us, let us remember
that Christ has triumphed over Coloss. 2. 15.
him, being vanquished, and subdued: if hell fire make us affraied, let us
remember that Christ, having beaten down hell, has given us an entry into
heaven.

In such terrors, and in such a taste and feeling of eternal what comfort of
conscience there was in time of Popery.
death, you should in old time have sought for this consolation in vain in the
Popes kingdom. For that was nothing but man's satisfaction, Romish
indulgencies, and the communion of Monastical works bought both with suite,
and with silver, the sacrifice of the Mass, Pilgrimages to holy places, and
such other like trifles were opposed, and set against sins, and against death
everlasting. The habit, and weed of a Franciscane Friar, and that staff of
reed, that is, that help of their service for the dead, that help of
memories, of anniuersaries, of oblations, of nightwatchers, as were set against
Satan, and hell fire. These things I rehearse to what great thanks we owe
to God for the renouation of Ecclesiastical doctrine!
this end and purpose, that it may the better be understood, how deeply we are
indebted unto our heavenly father for this renouation of Ecclesiastical
doctrine, and that by this means we may be the more excited, and stirred up,
to pay with mindful hearts deserved thanks to God so bountiful, and so
benign unto us. For unless thou do often call to mind with thy self,
what great blindness there has been heretofore in Christendom, how gross
darkness, and thick clouds of errors and ignorance: unless thou by
diligent cogitation and consideration do often remember the superstition of
the former age, surely thou shall never understand how great commodity the
instauration of holy doctrine has brought unto us. And it is a certain A
part of thankfulness to acknowledge from whence we came.
part of gratitude, or thankfulness, to repeat in memory the euilles passed,
from whence thou art delivered, that so thou may the better ponder, and also
weigh the greatness of the benefit, that so thou may consider well what
good thing thou have received, that so thou may commend, and praise that same
benefit with a grateful commemoration, and that so thou may offer always
to God through Christ the sacrifice of praise: that is, that so thou may with
thy whole heart give thanks to Gods goodness, and that thou may pay thy
vows unto the Lord before all his people, as the Psalmist says. For God
requires of us this sacrifice called Psalm. 50. 14. What kind of sacrifice God
requires at our hands.
(...), or a sacrifice of thanksgiving. And if the Ethnikes, and Panims in
old time, when any thing had fallen out fortunately, and luckily amongst them,
were wont to declare their grateful good will toward the gods, by appointing
solemn Processions, and supplications to be said about all the temples, and
tabernacles of their gods, or by offering up sacrifices unto them: how much
rather ought we to see to this, in this renouation of the doctrine of the
Church (than which there could no greater benefit have been given unto us)
that we be mindful, and thankful, and that we declare, and witness to the
world this our thankfulness, by celebrating the praises of God continually, by
singing hymns to God both with our selves at home, and By what things we ought
to declare our thankfulness toward God.
also in the congregation, and company of the godly abroad, by assisting,
and succouring the Ministers of the word, by godliness, and holiness of
life, by doing our duties toward our neighbor, by suffering adversity
patiently: finally, by what means soever we can. And surely, in this
instauration of the doctrine of the Church, we may almost feel with our very
hands, (that I may so speak) the goodness of God toward us. The diligent
consideration of which thing ought worthily to stir us up (as I said before)
to give thanks to God for so great bounty, and benignity: who has called us
again unto the way of truth, when we were wrapped in so many errors, who
has converted us From what darkness and ignorance we are delivered.
from vnpure superstition to sincere religion, and piety, who has revealed
his mysteries, which lay hid many ages, and who has disclosed the secrets of
his will, who has brought us unto the true knowledge of the son of God, in
which knowledge man's salvation consists: of whom we neither had a right
opinion, neither did we know what a safeguard, and succor we had in him: who
dispelling, and beating away all foggie mistes of ignorance, in which we were,
has restored unto us the light of his Gospel, as the Sun being taken from
the earth: lastly, who has taught us to call upon him truly, to worship,
and serve him sincerely, and who has permitted us, being converted unto him,
to see, and behold his glory (as David says in the Psalms) which we could
not see before, being blinded with superstition, and with the worship of dead
men.

I will make an end, after I shall have added one certain thing. I have
spoken, and entreated hitherto, of the felicity, or happiness of this our
age, and now a great while I have uttered forth many words of this matter.
But some man will say unto me: Do we not see, that after this renouation of
celestial doctrine, God has afflicted the world with so many, and so great
calamities? An objection. Some do impiously lay the cause of all calamities
upon the renouation of this celestial doctrine.
As for example sake, with force and rage of tempests, with casualties by
fire, by lighteninges, with scarsitie or dearth of victualles, with penury of
all things, with hunger and famine, with the plague, and pestilence, also with
diseases so strange, that their very names are unknown of the Physicians,
with destructions and deuastations, with earthquakes, with deluges or floudes
of water, with incursions of wild beasts, with annoyance of locustes, and
chiefly with so many, so long, so cruel, so pestiferous, so miserable, so
deadly, and doleful wars: yea, and the same most commonly civil wars:
whereby it comes to Civil wars in Germany.
pass, that Germany does destroy her self with her own strength.

Our adversaries are not ashamed to assign the cause An aunsweare.
both of these, and other evils, to the religion now instaured. And as that
wicked Porphyrius coniectured, The wicked opinion of Porphyrius.
that the cause of the plague, which reigned and raged so long in his time, was
the worshipping of Christ, because that Aesculapius; and the rest of their
gods, which August. lib, 2. de ciuitate dei, Cap. 3.
would have succored them, were neglected: so at this day, these men, what
harm or ill soever happen publicly, do attribute it to the doctrine now
renewed, and revived, for that the Mass, and old ancient ceremonies, which
might appease Gods ire, and which might turn away all euilles from us, were
refused and rejected.

Yea, and the Ethnikes in times past transferred the So did Demetrian complain
as it appears by S. Cyprians reprehension.
cause of all common casualties, and mischances, upon the envy of the
Christians, and they thought, that the Christians were the cause of all public
destructions, and of all discommodities, which befell to the common people, as
Tertullian says: Si Tybris (inquit) ascendit in Tertullian.
maenia, si Nilus non ascendit in arua, si coelum stetit, si terra mouit, si
fames, si lues, statim, Christianus ad leonem, acclamatur. Oro vos ante
Tiberium, id est, ante Christi aduentum, quantae clades and orbem and vrbem
caeciderunt, etc. That is to say, If Tyber (says he) run and flow over the
walls, if Nilus does not ouerflowe and water the fields, if the heavens have
stood still, if the earth has moved, if famine, if pestilence, have come
amongst men, they cry out streightway: Away with the Christians: have them
hence to the Lions. I beseech you before Tiberius, that is, before the coming
of Christ, what great destructions, and calamities, fell upon both the whole
world, and also upon the city of Rome it self? etc. We will here bring in
nothing concerning the causes why God does afflict the world, with so many, and
sundry calamities: for the tractatition, and handling of that matter, does
not perteine properly to this argument, which we have in hand.

This I say briefly, that these calamities of the world Our age may be called
happy, although calamities come upon us. For the renouation of the Gospel
counterpaiseth all calamities.
are no let, and impediment, why this our age should be less happy for the
renouation of the heavenly doctrine. For, if we will judge aright, and
truly, the benefit which God bestowed upon us, in the restitution of the
Gospel, it is so great, that look what calamity soever chances, it is
easily overwhelmed with the greatness of the benefit, and it scarce
appears, especially amongst them, which have any care, and regard of their
own salvation. For these men, because they know assuredly, that this is life
everlasting, that we acknowledge the true GOD, and Jesus Christ, whom he has
sent, they esteem John. 17. 3.
so much this notice, and knowledge of the true God, and of his son Jesus
Christ, that in comparison of this one thing, they set naught by all humane,
and earthly things, whether they be good, or bad.

And seeing that they are thoroughly persuaded to have God friendly, and
favorable unto them for Christ's sake, they do easily contemn, and despise
all other things, they do easily suffer all adversity, and misery: yea, they
do not fear, and dread no not death it self. They know that their sins are
pardoned, and forgiven them for Christ, that they are reconciled unto God, that
they are adopted to be the sons of God, that the inheritance of eternal
life is promised unto them, they have learned to call upon God truly, and
unfeignedly. These things they so much esteem, and make so great account of,
that whatsoever befalles to them, they bear it patiently, and with a quiet
mind: yea, though the bruised world should slide, and fall, and ruins rush
upon their heads unawares, as the Poet says, yet they would not be affraide
or dismaide awhit. They well remember that they have no steadfast seat, nor
sure dwelling place in earth, but that they are here in exile, and banishment,
and that they live here as Pilgrims, and strangers. Therefore they always
sigh deeply, and desire fervently, that eternal and celestial 2. Cor. 5. 2.
country, and they use this world, as though they used it not, as the Apostle
teaches us to do. They do believe, 1. Cor. 7. 31.
that death is not the final end of life, but a beginning of blessed
immortality, and a passage out of this world unto the father. Wherefore, they
desire both Phil. 1. 23. Luke. 2. 29.
with S. Paul to be dissolved, and also with Simeon to depart hence in peace.

In the mean space, whatsoever happens, they suffer it stoutely, and with a
good courage. They put all their hope and trust in Christ alone. Neither for
all that, are the godly no whit moved, either with public euilles, How the
godly are moved with calamities.
or private calamities (for they ca^ not put off the nature of man, and they
can not refuse the common sense of nature:) but they do judge, that our sins
have deserved them, and they reckon that in respect, and consideration of Gods
will, all things are to be suffered of us. They do believe, that by this
means they are provoked unto repentance, that they are pricked forward to
prayer, to request Gods aid and assistance. Therefore they study to exercise
both there faith in prayer: and invocation, and also their patience in
tolerating, and suffering adversity, and ill happes. For they are persuaded,
that calamities come not upon men by chance, but that they are sent of God. And
truly, it is not to be Calamities come not by fortune, but are sent of God.
doubted, but that these are punishments for the sins of mankind. And our
men have learned out of this renewed doctrine, that both private miseries, and
afflictions, and also public calamities, are after Public calamities are as
it were the voice of the law.
a sort the voice of the Law, which stirs men up to the remembrance of
GODS wrath against sinners, and which exhorts them unto repentance. For,
because the Sermons, which are preached in the Church, concerning GODS
judgment, do not greatly move the obstinate, and stifnecked persons,
therefore GOD would that both public, Wherefore and to what end calamities
are sent of God.
and private calamities should preach unto us of repentance, that so we
might study to acknowledge our sins, and lament, and be sorry for them: For
look what John Baptist in Saint Matthaewes Gospel, Matthew. 3. 2. Mark. 1. 1^.
and our Savior Christ in Saint Marks Gospel says, Repent, and amend: the
very same do all kind of calamities seem to cry forth openly, to wit,
that we should repent, to the end we may not only shun, and escape the
temporal punishments of this life, but also be delivered from eternal
punishment in hell. So that, look what the Law of GOD could not do in
words, that does God labor to obtain by sending calamities. And the
greatenesse of GODS wrath against sin, which no man can express, as it is
worthy, by any force of speech: that calamities are wont to shadow out
after a sort unto us, how great it is. Seeing therefore, as I have showed
already, what ill soever does happen Calamities are tokens and witnesses of
Gods wrath against our sins.
privately, or publicly, as war, famine, plague, that is a sign, and
testimony of Gods great wrath against our sins, and seeing that no man
does easily feel the greatness of his wrath, such is man's dullness, and
blockishnesse, unless GOD by this means stir us up, and admonish us: the
godly do not only What fruit the godly reap of calamities.
suffer patiently, and with a joyful mind, what adversities soever happen
unto them: but also they give thanks to their most gracious father so inuiting
them to the amendment of their life, they acknowledge and confess their
sins, they flee unto Gods clemency as humble orators, and in their
oraisons, or prayers, they first ask forgiveness, and pardon of their sins:
secondly, they crave and beg of God, that those euilles may be mitigated,
and lenefied. In the one they bequeath, and commit them selves unto Gods
goodness: in the other they permit, and suffer him to deal with them
according to his good will, and pleasure, being namely ready prepared both to
do, and to suffer, whatsoever shall seem good unto God. They cry out in the
sense, and feeling of Gods wrath with David: Lord in thine indignation rebuke
us not, neither chastise Psalm. 6. 1.
us in thy heavy displeasure: with Esaie, O Lord be not sore an angered with
us, neither remember our iniquities perpetually: with Jeremy, Chastise us, O
Lord, in thy judgment* not in thy fury, lest thou bring us to Jeremy. 2.
nothing: with Abaccuch, Lord in thine anger remember thy mercy. But let us
return to our purpose. The manifold calamities which befall, do not hinder
(as I said before) why that this our age may not be passing happy. Yea, the
godly, whom this instaured doctrine of the Church has excited, and stirred
up, to the true and sincere woorshippe of GOD, whom it has brought unto the
acknowledging of the son of GOD our Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ, driving
away all darkness of former times, and unto whom it has showed the right
way, not only of leading a life here with joy, but also of departing hence
out of this life with good hope, the godly I say do set so much by this
benefit given of God, that the sorrow, and grief, which calamities do
cause, is easily overwhelmed with that joy, and pleasure, The joy of the
Gospel preached is greater than all calamities. Romans 8. 28.
which they in their mind receive, and reap thence. And as commonly all
things work together for the best, to them which love God, as S. Paul
testifies: so afflictions, miseries, and calamities, do after a sort profit
the godly to their salvation, and do fall out for the Afflictions happen for
the best unto the godly.
best, to wit, whilst they being stirred up to the remembrance of their
sins, and feeling the wrath of God, do repent, do humbly ask forgiveness,
do request Gods help, and assistance, do exercise their faith by prayer, and
their patience by suffering adversities: whilst by that means that grievous
dead sleep, that faintenesse, and that too much security, which in
prosperity possesses men's minds, is shaken off, whilst so the sluggish, and
slothful mind of man is awakened, and quickened with the fear of God, and
whilst by that means it is inflamed with the love, and desire of celestial
things. So then the godly are not only not How the godly suffer calamities.
grieved to see them selves afflicted with many miseries, but also they account
it a great benefit, because they are chastened of God wholesomely, and after
a fatherly fashion, and what casualtie soever GOD brings upon them, they
suffer it manfully, and with a joyful mind. I will not here add, how that
at all times, and in all ages there were certain fatal (as it were)
calamities of mankind, and certain punishments of the world, left that any
man should think, that some new thing had happened to this our age, or least
that any man should defame these present times (that I may use the words of
Orosius) as more infested, and annoyed with mischances, Orofius.
and ill happes, than other times were wont to have been, because of this
heavenly doctrine renewed, because we believe in Christ, and acknowledge him
to be the author of man's salvation, and because now God is most truly
woorshipped in spirit and truth. For as in our time, so there have been in all
ages past, many times, which have been either grievous by reason of wars, or
corrupt with diseases, or sorrowful for famine, or terrible for erthquakes, or
strange times for innundations and great floudes of waters, or fearful for
breaking out of fire, or cruel for blastinges, thunderboltes, and lightninges,
for boisterous blows of hailestones, or else (as the same Orosius says)
miserable times for murders of father and mother, and for all heinous
villainies, and wickedness that can be: which thing the Chronicles, Histories,
and monumentes of antiquity do testify.

God the eternal father of our Lord, and deliverer Jesus A godly Prayer.
Christ, who is to be praised for ever, grant for his unmeasurable, and
infinite mercy, and for his marvelous bounty and benignity toward
mankind, that we may both acknowledge the felicity, and happiness of this
age, and also that we may be most thankfully minded for that celestial
benefit, in restoring to us the doctrine of the Gospel, than the which
benefit there could not have been given a greater to men on earth: that we
may study to profess openly Jesus Christ, to celebrate him with perpetual
praises, Psalms, and hymns, to worship him, to call upon him, to adore
him, whom we have begone to acknowledge: that we may expect in a firm
faith and steadfast hope, and look for life, for salvation, for immortality,
replenished with all good things, by the same Christ only: that we may desire
to please him alone, to approve our selves to him by leading our life according
to his will, and after his imitation, and as S. Paul speaks, by walking
worthy of God, worthy of the Gospel of Christ: that we may yield 1. These.
2. 12
unto him duetifull obedience, by suffering patiently calamities, and
afflictions, and that we may believe, that this also is some part of
gratitude, or thankfulness: to be brief, that we may always go about
those things, which perteine chiefly to his glory, to the salvation of the
Church, to the profit and commodity of the Christian common wealth: moreover,
that we may all of us mutually amongst our selves be of one, and the same
mind according to Jesus Christ, that with one accord, and with one mouth we
may glorify God, even the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that we may all
speak the same 1. Cor. 1. 10.
thing, and that there be not dissentions, and schisms among us, but that we
be an whole body, being of one mind, and of one judgment, as the Apostle S.
Paul warns us. These things grant he who is the Author, and Phil. 2. 2.
founteine of all goodness, God most gracious, and most mighty, the Father,
the Son, and the holy Ghost, one infinite, eternal, omnipotent God and
Lord: whose both unity in trinity, and also trinity in unity we reverence,
worship, and adore. To whom be praise, honor, and glory, world without end:
Amen.

FINIS.
John. 3. 19.
This is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men love
darkness rather than light; because their deeds are evil.

2. Cor. 4. 3.
If the Gospel be now hid, it is hid to them that perish, whose minds the God
of this world has blinded, that the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ,
which is the image of God, should not shine unto them.

De foelicitate Germaniae.
QVam foelix hodie Germania, quae modo coepit
Ante ignoratum penitus cognoscere Christum?
Namque superstitio toto regnabat in orb
Impune, ac cuncti magna in caligine rerum,
Et densis tenebris iam versabantur vbique
Mortales, nec erat qui verum cerneret vllus.
Iam sacra fictitijs doctrina erat obruta nugis,
Commentisque hominum. Romanus vbique sacerdos
Iam dominabatur, cunctumque subegerat orbem,
Inuictosque suo terrebat fulmine reges.
Exiguo coelos vendebat saepius aere,
Et sibi quos visum stygias mittebat ad vmbras
Interea quocunque modo sua quisque piabat
Crimina, and omnigenas per opuscula inania culpas,
Aut sibi Papalis redimens diplomata Bullae,
Aut loca sacrapetens, aut sese vbi forte liberet
Ante fores templi spargens lustralibus vndis,
Degustansue salem, aut ieiunia tristia seruans,
Aut globulos numerans, aut (ne sim longior aequo)
Sancta cucullatae coemens suffragia turbae.
Quinetiam (sic impietas oppresserat orbem)
Diuos quisque suos in vota vocabat, humique
Saxea procumbens Diuum simulachra colebat.
Hinc and praesidium patrociniumque petebat,
Et peccatorum veniam, certamque salutem.
Nota loquor, miris quamuis haec pingere fucis
Conati quidam, sed quos res arguit ipsa.
Illum ignorabant, cunctis mortalibus vnum,
Qui modo cunque illi confidant pectore toto,
Perpetuae authorem vitae, aeternaeque salutis,
(Cuius par ipso recreari nomine) Christum,
Promissum patribus mox prima ab origin mundi,
Contereret stygij qui sibila colla draconis:
Exhibitum vero post plurima secula demum,
Et missum in terras quo visum tempore Patri.
Hunc igit^^ quoniam vita est aeterna profecto
Nosse, redemptorem mundi, authoremque salutis,
Quam foelix hodie Germania, quae modo coepit
Ante ignoratum penitus cognoscere Christum?
FINIS.
Ad Honoratissimum virum Thomam Vuilsonum, Regiae Maiestati ab intimis
Commentarijs, eidemque a secretis consilijs, Maecenatem suum benignissimum,
Ioannis Waluardi Oxoniensis Carmen (...).
TVrgidus haud semper bacchantibus Adria ventis
Concitus, e fundo spumantes proijcit aestus:
Sed quandoque Notiarbitrio, dominantis ibidem,
Sternitur, and tumidas ad tempus mitigat iras.
Non semper fluidam frigus condensat aquarum
Materiam, in glaciem rigida virtute coactam:
Sed persaepe nouam sensim sortita figuram,
Liquitur, and veteri renouat sub imagine fluxum.
Non semper niuibus canos imitata capillos,
Albicat, and gelidis riget horrida terra pruinis:
Verum aliquando leui, torpens dum flamine mulcet,
Mitior aura solum, latitantes elicit herbas.
Acris hyems placida veris vice soluitur, aestas
Excipit hoc, praeiens autumno messibus apto.
Tempora temporibus cedunt, aetatibus aetas:
Alta ruunt, quatiuntur firma, iacentia surgunt:
Omnia mutantur. Sic, quae modo cincta profundo,
Tantum candidulas ostentans Anglia rupes,
Insula parua fuit, tenuis, deserta, superbis
Gentibus haud inuisa, suis nutrita colonis:
Nunc subito aucta, frequens populis, censuque beata,
Dives opum, spolijs telluris adaucta remotae,
Inuidia petitur, quae solum altissima perflat.
Nam Deus immensa fretus bonitate, suapt^
Sponte, lubens, gratis, meritos nil tale, benign
Respexit toto diuisos orb Britannos.
Si mihi lingua foret varias edocta loquelas,
Aereosque sinus vox ferrea gnara secandi:
Si men's complectens rerum abdita sensa latentum,
Mystica percipiens artis secreta retrusae:
Si manus egregie fingens, digitusque peritus
Pingendi, cuiusque darent imitamina formae:
Nec recitare Dei lingua (...) valerem,
Nec lustrare animi radijs mysteria possem,
Nec manuum graphico simulachra polire labor.
Scilicet ille habitans lucem, quam gloria pennis
Ambit inauratis, fulgens splendore corusco,
Expers interitus, mortis vitaeque creator,
Mirificus caeli Dominus, terraeque monarcha,
Oceani rabiem reprimit, fluctusque coercet,
Ne praefinitas ausint transcendere metas.
Compages aptat terrae, stabilit ruituras
Particulas, tantae librat fundamina molis.
Aethera supremum, sphaeras vertigine motas
Perpetua, nulla grauitate laboris anhelas,
Atque vnaproprias elementa tenentia seeds,
Atque itidem contenta locis animantia certis:
Singularite regit. Quid enim vetat? omnia recto
Ordine dispensans, sua fert vtcunque voluntas.
Non igitur fortuna, leuis Dea, lubrica, mentis,
Consilij, rationis inops, and perfida, verum
Regnat in humanis diuina potentia rebus.
Illa soli foetus, sobolem, nostraeque beauit
Prouentus telluris: humus fert gramen, and herbas,
Herba rosas, flores ager, albaque lilia campus.
Semina mandantur sulcis, quae gleba subacta,
Contegit, and placido gremio complexa, parentis
Instar, eo vsque fouet, donec producta, superne
Vaginas, teneris culmis erecta, recentes,
Fibrarum ostendant nexus, and surgat arista.
Cum semel aestiuo maturae sole coquantur,
Ruricolae curua laetantis falce metuntur,
Ac tum perceptae conduntur in horrea, fruges.
Labitur in valles aqua, stant in montibus orni,
Frondiferae gaudent vmbroso tegmine syluae,
Arboribus pendent nutantia poma grauatis,
Piscibus vnda scatet, tenuisque volucribus aer,
In duris haerent praedulcia mora rubetis,
Epatulaque cadunt strictae Iouis arbore glandes.
Vbera distentae veniunt ad mulctra capellae,
Vellera, ouis, placidum pecus exuit, atque tegendis
Mollia suppeditat nobis velamina, lanas.
Bos gemit, and subdit sua colla iuuencus aratro,
Pergit equus, quocunque cupis, rediturus eodem:
In stabulis armenta, greges, pecudesque quie scunt,
Cumque volent, tuto per pascua laeta vagantur.
Non hic nocturnus circumgemit vrsus ouile,
Non lupus infestat raptos a matribus agnos.
Rara nocent pecori contagia, rarius imber
Corradit segetes, and Sirius ignibus vrit,
Quid dicam vel mella thymi redolentia flore?
Vel baccas rubidas, tumidasque in vitibus vuas?
Vel quae multiplici profert (...)
Commoda prouentu, quae commemorata loquacem
Delassare valent Fabium, occidentque legentem?
Iam (...) certent celebrare Poetae,
Pindarus, Ascraeusque senex, and caecus Homerus.
In quibus Heroas caelestem viuere vitam
Fingunt, qui nondum caeli dignantur honor.
Nobis nostra satis placet insula, cuius vt olim
Nomen ab aequoreis ripis fuit Albion albis,
Sic hodie a vario been dicitur Olbion (...).
Nec tamen algenti quoniam est vicina Calysto,
Et propius septem spectat sublata triones,
Temperieue loci nocua, minime que salubri
Est censenda situ: quasi non plaga frigida, versus
Immitis Boreae flatus, vbi Parrhasis vrsa
Pontigradas que rates, nocturnaque vela gubernat:
Praeque nimis rapido feruescens Zona calore,
Illic, sub Tropi(...) punctis, vbi Scorpius ardens
Aethiopum Meroen, confinia iuncta Syenae,
Mexiacos tractus, Taprobanaque regna fatigat.
Non foret indigenis valde viuactbus, atque
Longaeuis aetate, opulenta, ac laudis auara.
Verum vtcunque locus causa spectetur in ista,
Qui tamen eximie placuisse refertur Achiuis:
Cum primum emenso pelago, per transtra sedentes
Hesperias timidis lustrarent nauibus oras:
Ecce subest potior speciosi causa triumphi,
Causa subest (qualem nunquam videre priores,
Cuius gaudebunt seri meminisse nepotes)
Cur laeta Aoniae cingentes tempora lauri
Festa fronde, simul pueri innuptaeque puellae,
Cum senibus iuuenes, generi, socerique, parents
Pignora ducentes, Capitolia diua frequentent,
Non pia fatidico recinentes carmina Phoebo:
Nec vaga syluicolae celebrantes facta Dianae:
Nec sacra Cecropiae cantantes metra Mineruae:
Sed memori dignas fundentes pectore grates,
Ore recens Domino melos, ac Paeana canentes.
Eia alacres iter instituant, manibusque supinis,
Suppliciter flexis genibus procumbere discant
Ante Deum, Dominumque suum, cui voce litandum est,
Quem non thura iuuant, ligno sudato Sabaeo,
Victima non placat crepitantibus addita flammis,
Nedum vacca gregis niuei, lectaeue bidentes:
Non lyra, cum fidibus, vel consonatibia plectro:
Cymbala quid dicam, quid nablia, quidue sonora
Tympana? quid pileos, vittas, sacrasque tiaras
Atque inducta togis velamina linea latis?
Quid preculas strepero prolatas murmr? Christum
Sola fides, humilis circum praecordae virtus
Men's sincera mouet, fraudesque dolosque perosa.
Eia igitur properate, mora properate repulsa,
Audite Angligenae, vera pietate supernum
Qui colitis patrem: huc animos adiungite vestros.
Mir a canam, sed vera canam. Nam tempore nostro
Tempore postremo hoc, vasti cum machina mundi
Tendat ad interitum, cum tellus, pontus, and aer
In chaos, effigiemque status reditura prioris,
Tela statim expectent manibus fabricata Cyclopum:
Forte Deus facinus splendore notabile fecit.
Nam Pelusiacis tutos nos duxit ab vndis,
Excussit Pharij clemens iuga dura furoris,
Stigmata seruitij vtolenter inusta remouit,
Eripuit palmas ollis, cacabisque lacertos,
Stramine quaerendo vestigia lassarefecit,
Portantesque lutum, pondus servile, leuauit
Imbelles humeros timide data pensa sequentes.
Nos Mediastinos, Scapulares, Mastigiasque
Nos Ferritribaces, quos arcta catena manebat,
Suduculum, mastix, and acerbi verbera lori,
Compede Niliaca passim volitare solutos
Quam iuuat and recreat? Nempe vt Troezenius heroes,
Pirithoo laturus opem, cum regna subiret
Infera, and ad manes misero comes iret amico,
Cerbereos rictus, and Ditis atrocia passus
Vincla, minas, tormenta, and sesquipedalia verba:
Herculeam simulac clauam, exuuiasque leonis,
Et quam sperarat, vidit venisse salutem:
Carcere prosiluit, linquens loca senta, resumptis
Laetitiae varijs, post tanta pericula, signis:
Sic quoque nos Britones, quos mira licentia ponti
Fluctibus obruerat, mersosque ad Tartara pronos
Miser at, emersi, certissima gaudia mente
Hausimus, externo neque dissimulauimus ore.
Tempus erat, quo nos stolidos impune premebat
Is, qui regnator Latij, sessorque cathedrae
Pestiferae, non Petre tuae, dans iura malignis,
Gaudet Apostolicae celebri cognomine sedis.
Tempus erat cultu, quo ficta idola colebat
Turba peregrino, quibus ora carentia voce,
Surdae aures inerant, and inanes luminis orbs.
Tempus erat, sanctis cum mollia vota ferentes,
Sollicitare fuit licitum, vel lumine cassos.
Tempus erat, quo animos foedatos missa repurgans,
Tollere concretam labem, poenamque recepit.
Tempus erat, quo lingua sonos emisit ineptos,
Balbutire solens ignota, vt garrula cornix.
Tempus erat, quo dedecuit pia copula Clerum
Connubij, decuit meretrix, foedumque lupanar.
Tempus erat, purae quo inscitia plumbea legis,
Virtutis laruam, pietatis nomen habebat.
Tempus erat, stabilem quo quisque parare studebat
Non Christi virtute grauissima vulnera passi,
Sed macerando cutim, corpus cruciando, salutem.
Tempus erat, lauti quo vita monastica cultus,
Obseruata dies, solennia vota, precesque,
Virginitatis honos, ac taedia longa viarum,
Numinis iratos potuerunt flectere vultus.
Denique, tempus erat, meritis quo palma dabatur
Humanis, habita exigua ratione (nefandum)
Iustificae fidei, cuius vis vnica seruat.
Ista sibi sumptis, fugerunt tempora, pennis.
Quod fore prospiciens, docuit praesaga futuri,
Obscuris vera inuoluens, praedictio vatum:
Papismi perijt repetitis ictibus Hydra.
Bellerephontaeo deleta Chimaera labor est,
Quamuis ardentes e faucibus euomat ignes.
Cerberus ille triceps medias raptatur in auras.
Pantolabus Briareus contraxi^ brachia, centum
Orbatus manibus, quas passim extendit in orbem.
Nos laqueo eximimur, quem callidus abdidit auceps,
Accipitris rigidos, Itali vitauimus vngues,
Eruimur rabidis Latialis dentibus Apri,
Cuius ab ore venit fulmen, riget horrida ceruix,
Igne micant oculi, robustos spuma per armos
Cana fluit, setaeque pares hastilibus, horrent.
Is virides segetes, sata laeta, boumque labores,
Is Cererem in spicis spoliauit, vota coloni
Irrita, spem messis venturae fecit inanem.
Saeuijt in pecudes, quas non pastorue, canisue
Ausus erat tremulas trucis hostis ab ore tueri,
Donec Bernardus, Petrarcha and Sauonarola,
Wickleuusque, ferae vestigia pressa notabant:
Donec amicorum par dulce Bohemia, misit,
Heluetij geminos, generosum germen, Atreidas:
Vittemberga vigens, truculentum ambobus Achillem:
Allobrogum Geneua caput, Telamona, duosque
Tyndaridas: Phoenica, Lutetia: Pelea, Berna:
Hafnia Neritium Lelegem: Florentia dulcem
Nestora, qui nostras huc transmigrauit in oras.
Atque, vt pandamus nebulis propiora, remotis,
Cranmerus summa splendens virtute, probata
Ridlaeus grauitate, tuus Glocestria Praesul,
Oxonijque decus, flos, splendour, gemma Iuellus,
Affuerant reliquis spumantem agitantibus aprum.
Quis tamen extiterat pugna Meleagros in illa,
Iudicij haud facilis, quoniam sub iudice lis est.
Salua manet Calydon, Atalanta reportat honorem,
Virgo Deo dilecta, suis dilecta Britannis.
Illius auspicijs vigiles euasimus hosts,
Illius auspicijs Memphitica liquimus arua,
Illius auspicijs rubrum tranauimus aequor,
Patre Deo, monstrante vias, qui nocte per vmbras,
Nocte per horrificas, flamma praeeunte, tenebras,
Nube, per exortae clarissima tempora lucis
Incolumem eduxit populum nullius egenum.
Fudit Amorrhaeum dextra armipotente Sehonem,
Reppulit elatis confisum viribus Ogum,
Regnaque diuisit Cananaeo subdita scepiro.
O vtinam, quibus or a leaves crepitantia tricas,
Guttura sunt concessa meras modulantia ^^gas,
Cantaremus opus Domini, laud sque ^ehouae!
Cuius open, auxilioque triquetra Britannia floret:
Elisabeta potens, sancto praeconta verbi,
Voces Christ tuas, faustae bona nuntia pacis,
Passim promnlganda, pio molimine, curat.
Institiam oppressis miserae solatia turbae
Distribuit, ne quande molester compita clamor:
Parcere prostratis, meritis dare praemia nouit,
Sceptra tenens, tumidos reprimit, frangit que rebels.
O queties verse vita^i^ corpore structas
Insidias, dans retro pedem, paulumite recedens?
Nempe Genethliacae spreuit prasagia linguae,
Chaldaicas duxit, tanquam ludibria, sorts,
Canidias, Saganas, Circem, Magicamque cohortem,
Contempsit, pellex illam neque Colchica mouit
Sanguinolenta, truci spurcissima caede virago,
Thessala nec l^sit seeds experta simosas
Cera, nec extinxit metuens exire Sclopetum.
Niteris in cassum, in sanos imitare Gigantes,
Terrigenas, rabidos, caele capita alia ferentes,
Qui remouere studes reg^^^ detrudere quaeris,
Quam Deus euexit, charam and sibi pascere gentem
Impositam solio, legum moderamine, iussit.
Non potuit misero Northumbria caeca furore,
Non potuit fragili Cor^^b^^nixa bacillo,
Non potuit nuper medita^^ temeraria Ca^ber.
Nunc vbi s^^t vultus elati, cornua, cristae,
Ampullae Austriaci, que^^ Belgica terra tumentem,
Vidit, and insolita corr^ptum peste cada^er?
Nunc vbi sunt promissa, prece, and vota Duaci?
Nunc vbi sunt montes, nihil hic Bristone mouentes?
Angloduace fugam turpem moliris honest
Non potes in patriam sanus remeare quietam
Perfide, quam varijs ^urbis miscere volebas.
Ergo per aereas properandum est ocyus Alps,
Aut monumenta cito celerum Lotharingica cursu
Sunt adeunda pedum, aut quaerenda Hispana Toledo.
Roma exibit ouans to complexura, Salernum
Excipiet, gratus venies Antenoris vrbi.
Sanns ad Oceidua^ parts ne velaretorque,
Nec tibi regressus veniat tam dira cupido,
Alite Phocaeas diras imitare secunda,
Saxa leuata vadis simul imis, mersarenarint,
Et Padus Appuliae sublime cacumen oberret,
Et co^^ungat amor noua monstra libidine mirus
Tum conuersa do^^um plenis da l^^tea ventis.
Interea, reliquos confestim accerse Sinones,
Quorum quisque dolis armatus and art Pelasga,
Attestans superos, palmas ad fidera tollens,
Collachrymans, moestoqu^ trahens suspiria cord,
Talia voce refert, linguam in mendaciae soluens.
Fas mihi Romani sacra i^ra resoluere caetus,
Fas odisse viros, sas diuulgare profanos
Errores, teneor Papae nec legibus vllis.
Noster eris (Princeps ait) obliuiscere ritus
Lonanij, ex animo foedissima dogmata dele,
Impia purpurei dediscito iura Draconis.
At Cassandra Dei iussu, non credita Teucris,
Insidias fieri, fatorum conscia, narrat.
Laocoon exclamat, Equo ne credit Teucri,
Error inest, Timeo Danaos, and dona ferentes.
Et merito. Nans talia (...) vocantur (...),
Qualia, cum Pandora venustae plasma figurae
Iussa Iouis peragent, dementitradidit instans
Iapetionidae, tum quae Telamonius Ajax,
Andromachae dedit accepitque nociua marito:
Deianiratori socio, sed nescia, misit,
Et furiata recens nuptae Medea Creusae.
Nos autem, quibus est patriaepia cura salutis,
Nos e plebe homuli, fidissima turba, precamur,
Pestiferis ne quando locus detur caprificis,
Findendi solidos murorum, amplexibus, artus:
Nequis, vt Hircani, blandis alimenta ministret
Imprudens canibus, dominum laniare paratis:
Nequis, vt egregium fugiens Cleopatra triumphi
Dedecus, in proprium sibi comparet aspida letum:
Nequa pedes profugos exotica figat Erinnys
Hic, vbilaeta quies nitidis circum volat alis.
Quisque suum curemus opus, studijsque vacemus
Quae nobis vegeto tractanda labor supersunt.
Dona Dei ignotae per nos sint cognita genti,
Splendeat vt cunctis Domini clementia terris.
Quippe famem extinxit caelesti pane leuatam,
Angelicas epulas, conuiuia lauta, profudit,
E silicum venis, mundana per auia, potum
Elicuit, nobis dulcissima pocla propinans.
Vescimur Ambrosia, potamur Nectare, verbi
Nectare, quod caelo Deus huc demisit ab alto.
Discussit nebulas plenas errore, genarum
Abstersit lachrymas, curis mordacibus aegros,
Exanimes, tristes, trepidantes morte futura,
Laetitiae sensu peragrantis corda repleuit.
Humida nocturni fugit caligo vaporis,
Lucifer intrauit, roseis aurora quadrigis
Inuexit rutilos Phoebeae lampadis ignes.
Semifer interijt Theseacuspide Taurus,
Occidit ecce tuus meretrix Babylonica, partus,
Et prostrata iacent Veneris monumenta nefandae.
Quae steterat ductis sublata est sortibus, vrna:
Pendere desijmus rigido Minoi tributum.
Nostra dolos tectimiros Ariadnaresoluit,
Ipsaregens filo vestigia cae ca tenaci.
Cui Deus ad superos sed sero posse reuerti
Donet, vt obtineat melioris gaudia vitae,
Dissimilemque tuae, Minoia virgo, coronam.
Et dubitamus adhuc pietatem extendere factis?
Aut pudor ingratos prohibet benefacta fateri,
Quae Deus e pleno fecit prorumpere cornu?
O nos folices, o terque quaterque beatos,
Si bona, quae desunt alijs vel nosse ve^^^^us!
Flandria, luctificis languet depressa ruinis.
Gallia ciuilis fatalia vulnera dextrae
Passa diu, nouit quid bella lacessere prosit.
Heu quoties ea terra patentes stragis aceruos
Vidit? and o quoties in aperta pericula ciues
Impulit, vt calido manarent sanguine fossae?
Sequana cum Rhodano, quibus vna adiungere fas est,
Segnem Ararim, rubro inuiti fluxisse feruntur
Impete, transgressi duplicato flumine ripas.
Fortunam illius miseram deploro diei,
Qua praeter meritum, cum Gallicus occidit Atlas,
Tum reliqui proceres, quorum correpta sub vndis
Corpora mobilibus, tacito caruere sepulchro.
Inclyte Rame iaces, quem turpis Apostata, docti
Alcinoi interpres voluit perijsse, quod illum
Sic excellebas, vt stellas luna minores.
Mitto ea quae gessit, postquam peruenit ad altum
Imperij culmen, peior fratre alteraproles,
Dum studet Excetraeparere per omnia dirae
Macchiauelle tuas leges and iura colenti.
Si duo praeterea tales Medicea tulisset
Seruivirosque luposque, ad caedem and funera natos:
Gallia longinquis a Gadibus vsque remotam
Auroram, nulli impietate secunda fuisses.
Hispanus florens opibus quas India mittit,
Vt taceam Turcam, qui semper ei imminet, hostem,
Sacra domus sanctae tormenta subire veretur,
Qualia Trinacriae nunquam inuenere Tyrannt.
Iisdem subijcitur legum Lusitania fraenis,
Quae quali vigeat tam condition, doceto
Barbariae, quam fama tulit praenuntia, clades.
Nos tamen interea cum caetera turbet Erinnys,
Eumenide sque volent Erebi Ditisque ministrae,
Anguibus implicitae, cum stet Bellona flagello
Exarmata, ferox, ac implacabile numen,
Cumque cadant passimper mutua vulner a fratres,
Vt Cadmaea breuem vitam sortita iuuentus:
Nos (inquam) prope semper clausa, parentia raro,
Ferrea pacifici conspeximus atria Iani.
Nulla salus bello est, vbi pignora chara parents
Deplorant, caesum, coniux vbi fida maritum
Inuocat, and frustra lachrymosis vocibus vrget.
Bellum execramur, (...)
(...). Turno dulce est, ac non Diomedi,
Qui prius ad captaepugnarat maenia Froiae.
Non Drancae, potius coniunctae in foedera dextrae
Qua datur aptentur. Pacem te poscimus omnes.
Ac ne forte roges quae tantam commioda pacem,
Qui fructus comitentur, and emolumenta sequantur.
Mechanici sudant valde, inuigilantque labori:
Impiger occiduis soluens mercator ab oris,
Fluctisonum sulcans ratibus curuisque carinis
Aequor, agens cumulos, stridens refluentibus vndis,
Admouet Eoas vagaper commercia gentes.
Vrbani artifices, cultorque virentis agelli
Mane laborantes, cumsera crepuscula noctem
Inducunt, recreant languentia membra, sopore.
Sic agitur. Quid non mortalia pectora cogunt
Diuitiae, durisque premens in rebus egestas?
Supplicium sceleri, virtuti praemia dantur,
Tali subsidio respublica fulta, ruinam
Nullam sensit adhuc, and nunquam sentiat, ore.
Quod si Palladias iuuisere perplacet arces,
Musarumque choros, vbi mitis Apollo choragi
Fungitur officio, Charites, Nymphaeque decentes
Alterno terram quatiunt pede, Sed Cytherea
Reijcitur, tanquam Musis inimica pudicis:
Hebraic^^ iuuenes callent mysteria vocum,
Syriacam parili attingunt ratione loquelam.
Graecapuer mollis discit, belloque tenore
Perlegit, and diuersa notat discrimina linguae.
Infantes, voces emittunt ore Latinas,
Romanosque sonos (dictumirabile) mussant.
Grammatice sordes Dunsorum purarecludit,
Et satis euoluit, quid distent era lupinis.
Rhetorice quae sit vulgaris semita, pandit,
Et quae sit doctae luculentior orbita turbae:
Vnde mataeologi, verbosa caterua, sophistae,
Luxuries Asiae, breuitas constricta Lycei,
Atque aenigmatica vitio vertuntur apinae.
Reddita iam veteriest Dialectica tersanitori,
Quae modo sexcentis maculis aspersalatebat.
I am Scotus in tenebras repsit, texitque (...)
Nube caput, lucem fugiens, quam spreuerat ante:
Burlaeus, Dorbella, Bricot, Buridanus, Aquinas
Nomina barbariem Geticam referentia, long
Vltra Sauromatas abiere, Scythasque fugaces:
Solus Aristoteles regnandi iure potitur.
Musica delectat sensus doctrina sonorum,
Harmoniaeque sedet iudex and norma melodae,
Quamlibet antiquo multum deflexit ab vsis.
Ipsa suum fructum titulo docet ars numerandi.
Forma Geometria varia est, and nil nisi forma,
Cui parent aliae studijs famularibus arts,
Seu solidas rerum spectes, planasue figuras.
Quantum stellarum perfecta scientia profit,
Cosmographi doceant, quibus hand licet esse peritis,
Astronomos canones, sise nescire fatentur.
Agricolae vt glebas impresso vomere versent,
Vt recte messem peragant, ac semina spargant:
Vt cursum teneat Palinurus in aequore, discat,
Phaenomenis, quam sit vigiliratione studendum.
Hoc opus, hic labor est, quem fert neruosa iuuentus,
Dum cupiens gratos storum decerpere succos,
Mellificas imitatur apes, animalcula parci
Ingenij, veris breus depopulantia tempus.
Faxit vt Anglorum semper florescat Hymettus:
Ne desint apibus redolentis pabula odoris:
Vt fuci, pecus ignauum, pellantur ab alueis
(...)
(...), tantunt fruges consumere nati:
Vt Boreaestatus, stridens aquilone procella,
Moesta dies nebulis, australibus humida nymbis,
Frigora non obsint canis concreta pruinis,
Quo minus egressae per florearura vagentur,
Ac reduces dulci distendant nectare cellas.
Absit vt inuadat nostraes incuria mentes,
Officijque parum memores obliuio reddat,
Acsi somniferae biberemus pocula Lethes.
Absit, vt obfuscet tenebrosa philantia claram
Iudicij lucem: gignatue superbia freni
Impatiens, torue ventosum in lumine vultum.
Absit, vt ad celebris perducti culmen honoris,
Illico mutemus mores, animumque priorem
Instar Coralij, quod erat modo mollis in vndis
Herba, s^d aethereas quo primum contigit auras
Tempore, durescit, laeuem sumitque ruberem.
Absit, vt elati successibus, atque secundo
Remigio inflati, dum leni carbasa motu
Aeolij pellunt placidum per Nerea fratres,
Postea credamus nullas superesse procellas,
Cum tamen in portu possit ratis anxia mergi.
In querulos abijt Niobes fiducia luctus
Tantalidos, spernentis (...).
Thessalicus Phlegias, miseranda voce per vmbras
Testatur, quid sit prae se contemnere Diuos.
Gloria Teuerorum, Superum labor, Ilion ingens,
Excellens Asiae columen, Phrygiaeque columna
Firma, decennali cecidit prostrata duello.
In se magna ruunt, fateor. summisque negatum est
Stare diu: fato tamen illa labare, negandum est.
Magna ruunt, ratio est satis obuia. fingit
Fortunam sibi quisque suam, Dominique voluntas
Perficitur: nobis scelerum contagio poenam
Adfert, and propriae sumus vnica causa ruinae.
Sum Deus, cuius bomitate hic angulus orbis,
Nec maris obruitur transmissa mole voracis,
Nec contorta timet iaculatum fulmina Papam,
Anticipat tectosque delos, frandesque latentes:
Daprecor, vt gratis animis haec dona ferentes
Soli accepta tibi, tuainssa capessere proni,
Et mandata sequi, nunquam vertamus in iras
Te, quem sola iuuat miseris miseratio parcens.
Repprime letali laetantes caede Cethegos:
Macchiauellitas atheos his finibus arce:
In lucem veniant hypocriticaturba, Baalis
Sacrifici, laruisque ostendant ora, remotis.
Nulla fides placitis Epicuri habeatur ineptis,
Vt placeant, quaecunque tuo sunt consona verbo.
Denique succidatur bumo radicitus, impietatis
Fibra, nec exertas turbent zizania fruges.
Nunc cu^m vela legenda sient, statioque petenda:
(Vir venerande) quibus coelo te laudibus aequem?
Virtutisne prius mirer, studijne labores,
O nostri tutela status? quem culta Lycei,
Quem Demosthenicae dulcissima suada medullae,
Quem Stoa Zenoni rigido, platanusque magistro,
Discipuloque vmbrosa Academia sacra Platoni,
Quemque omnis doctrina, docens, loca pulchra docendi
Delectant, cuius lauds monumenta perennes
Illustrant, quae impressa typis venalia prostant:
Virtutem commonstrat bonos velut vmbra secutus:
Ipsa fidem Princeps, famam respublica, raros
Ingenij fructus, duplex Academia, voce
Praedicat vnanimi, nec dico, quid Aula, quid ipsa
Castra, quid explorans regiones Nauta, quid vrbis
Artifices, quid dives and infima turba loquantur.
Haec sunt nata domi praeconia, vera, sed illa
Pondus habent maiu^, quae defert Gallicus hospes.
Italus, Almannus, Flander, Lusitanus, Iberus.
Quae quia nec nostri ingenij est recitare, nec huius
Temporis, ecce alias ad missa redire statutum est.
Nam prius Arctophylax linquet sua plaustra Boots,
Rhinoceros motas quassabis in aere pennas,
Ignis aqua sedem, parts petet vnda supernas:
Quam cadat ex animo nostro pietatis imago
Vera tuae, viuax dum spiritus hos regit artus.
Dignum laud virum Musa vetat mori.

A Christian encouragement for the Translatour.
FOnd fancies pend in rolling verse,
and many wanton works of love,
As pleasures Palace, Fancies school,
and Venus court are rife, which move
Young youths to vain delights, and spurs
them forth to run a sinful race.
Alas, what grief is it to see
such poisoned baits deuourd apace?
Such shameless men would punished be,
and yet of some they praised are:
Such godless books ought to be burnd,
as chafe, yea, as enchaunting ware.
Good godly works fare worse for these,
as daily practice proves we see:
Yet be content, and take thy chance,
let no such scourge discourage thee.
Thy labor is not spent in vain:
for why, good men will like thy pains,
And eke allow this worthy work:
then care not thou for other gains.
No wise man now will discommend
this happy age of ours, but he,
Who with Demetrius the Smith, Acts. 19.

does gain by Popish trumperie:
Who measures godliness by gain, Matthew. 9.

who does for God his belly choose,
Who for his hogs with Gergesens,
does Gospel, Christ, and all refuse:
Whose faith an idle fancy is,
and doting dream on holy Church
Of Rome, or rather harlot vile,
who leaves him in the lash and lurch.
All godly men will render thanks
to God for this thrice happy day,
Wherein the Gospel flourishes,
our only harbor, hope, and stay:
The Lord preserve our gracious Prince,
who settes it forth with might and maine,
Our only gemme of joy: God grant
the Moon may wax, and never waine.
Ecclesiastes. 7. 12. Say not thou: Why is it that the former days were better
then these? For thou do not inquire wisely of this thing.

1. John. 2. 8. The darkness is past, and the true light now shines.


Post tenebras Lux.
Imprinted at London, at the three Cranes of the Vintree, by Thomas Dawson, for
Tobie Cook and Philippe Eede, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of
the Tygres head.


