TO THE RIGHT WORTHY Knight, Sir Julius Caesar, one of the Masters of his
Majesty's Court of Requests. etc.
Right worthy Sir.
IT is so familiar a custom to dedicate books to some person or other of note,
As he keeps not decorum with these times, that accompanies not the same
course. The fashion at first (questionless) was propagated by those two
parents, Affection, and Care: Affection, rising from the merrited good conceit
of the Patron; Care to prevent the malice of detractors, under the Shield of
some more potent Arm. By the first, I deuotedly bear this work to your
worthy iudge^ent, as one whose imminent knowledge in matter of State, well
fits a work of such ^ualitie: and the thing it self, though I imagine it
above the reach of short-armd detrac^ion, yet your judicial allowance may give
it a more quiet passage. If I seem ouer-bold in ^his sort to dispose it, Let
my good intent (I pray you) excuse me, which like true truth ap^eares nakedly
in plain terms. The Original was in Latin, dedicated to the Kings most
^xcellent Majesty; The matter such, as I thought pity should be locked from
those which want the perfection of that Language, and yet would be glad from
such a methodicall Picture of words, both to form their duty to the State, as
also to manage their private interests. Thus having according to my poor
measure, yielded the reasons for this my Dedication, as also the cause which
moved me to publish the same in English, desiring your pardon (if you should
distaste my boldness) I humbly cease further to trouble you. Resting

Your Worships most devoted, Edmunde Sadler.

The Contents.
Of Study. Of Governments. Touching Laws. The four Cardinals virtues.
General and particular. Of War. Of Peace. Directions for methodicall
disputations.
Concerning Study, and the way to frame ones Study.
In framing ones study, two things are to be considered.
1. What study is to be chosen: But it is chosen either of Necessity of State,
if one be poor. Nature, if the wit be somewhat dull.
Free will: when either A man is wealthy: By reason of these, some men set
before themselves Commo^ities. Private, As ^hey which follow Divinity, Civil,
Law.
Common, Physic. School disputations, and the like studies.

Public,
Delights of the mind, as they who give themselves to Philosophy, by help
whereof, they may 1. Judge ^ightly of matters. And this is called 1. Rational,
vz. Grammar, Rhetoric, the Art to speak to plea^e well.
to di^pute

Logic,
2. Moral. viz. Ethi^ke, Politic, And these are to be learned out of holy
Scriptures, especially void of all error. Propha^e Authors, as Aristostle,
Cicero, Seneca, Co(...) (...) (...)g more or (...), this or that way.
H^^^ori^^ graphe^s, ^^ets, O^at^rs, and ^^^ers.


Recommicke,
3. Natural: here are to be considered, 1. Profit, for it is available 1. To
purge the mind of corruptions. 2. To contemn e^rthly things. 3. To show the
frail^ estate of ^ll things. 4. To increase the care of the soul.
2. Objects. viz. the Elements, Earth, S(...), Mountai^^s, Rivers. Manners,
bou^^s, conditions of countries, and their gouernmets received. pronounced.
Virtue of Stones, Trees, Herbs, Living things and their story, generation
and parts.


3. Arts of a like nature, viz. Physic husbandry, warfare, building,
painting, engrauing* etc.


2. Utter their mind in fit^e terms. See after in A^.

Has store of wit given him.

2. How men ought to persevere therein. See after at B. b.

Aa 2. The care to express the mind in fit terms is twofold, 1. That you
may speak well, which is brought to pass, 1. In reading go^d and corrected
Authors.
2. By translating their works into the mother tongue, in significant words.
3. By rightly framing within our mind, whatsoever thing we go about to write
in ou^ Country language. 4. By expressing it in Latin words properly and
purely, signifying the same thing. 5. By endeavoring that whatsoever you are
about to write, that at the beginning you write it very purely, and in good
Latin.
2. That you speak eloquently; which will never be, unless your speech be
perfect and have all the parts.
Bb 2. Of the choice of study we have spoken. The way to persevere in our study
follows: And this is effected in observing 3. things. 1. In rightly
perceiving what we learn. This is a work of diligent reading, which is
conversant in thoroughly understanding the thing which is delivered. clearly
perceiving the force propriety of words.
construction garnishing
considering the force of expressing things in words.
and speaking
perseuering, although we happen upon a place obscure and dark, until time,
man, place, or reading, make it manifest.
2. In faithfully keeping that which we learn, This is a work of a trusty
memory, which partly consists by Nature. is helped by Art. vz. if when we
must plead, we take heed that we want not order and proportion.
an often use be applied. negligence and carelessness be removed. with most
diligent care we comprehend what we read. very often we require them of our
mind. the mind be free and quiet from the multitude of other cares.




3. In bringing forth and framing some thing out of these, which is a work of
continual exercise. This place comprehends two things,
1. The things which we learn to be had in a readiness. 2. Things to be
invented and made by our selves, out of those things which we have learned.
Here three things are necessary. 1. That we have certain heads, as are virtue,
vice: life, death: learning, want of learning: good will, hate: and other of
the same kind. Whatsoever things we learn, may well be directed to those
heads. But here we must note, that oftentimes one example or sentence may be
brought to the same heads, according to the signification of the words.

2. That out of those things which we learn, we carfully and diligently
confer the words together, and express them with a larger dilating. 3. That
we deduct these through all the places of Logic, whence will spring great
abundance, both for pleading and inventing.


Of Governments.
Perfect governments are three, Basili^, that is to say, Monarchy, or princely
government; as it is with us at this time laudable and mo(...) blessed.
Aristocratia, viz. The government of the Nobility, as was the government of the
first and former R(...)mane Co^^ulls. Politia, viz. The civil Magistrate and
politic jurisdiction; such as free Citizens, ruling by right, and(...) do
use.
Imperfect governments are three. Tyrannis, where the King abtruding his
commandments for all reason, undeservedly afflicts t(...) Commonwealth.
Oligarchia, is the usurping of a few, such as were some Senators, made by the
common people at Rom(...) inclining unto the wandering affections of the
multitude, that they might merit the peoples favor. Anarchia, is the
jurisdiction of the multitude, and of the mischeeuous and rash common people.
When as heretofore in Persia (King Cambyses being dead) the Kings Counselors
and Peers, viz. Darius, Megabiz(...) Otta^es, etc. had convented themselves in
the Parliament house, to consult of the safety of the Kingdom; as th^^ were
consulting, a controversy befell touching three things especially, (that is to
say) the foresaid three perfect governments. The three perfect, Monarchia was
preferred by Darius, through strong and very good reasons, as coming very
near vn^^ the d^^i^e and heavenly Kingdom. Ar^st^cr^tia, by most weighty
arguments, and most pleasant sweetness of speech, was preferred by M(...)
g^^iz^^, (as very long flourishing) Pol^^^^, ^^ked and best pleased Ottanes.
Tyrannis, These are rejected as most horrible, violent, and hurtful to humane
society; whereof proceeded the noble and excellent judgment of Tully,
concerning an ill governed Commonwealth.
Oligarchia, An^r^hia. He says; that the tyranny of one, is dangerous; more,
is worse: the common people is the most horrible plague of a Commonwealth.

(...) ancient governments and continuing many ages, alterations of times made
manifest all the foresaid perfect and imperfect kinds of governments; that is
to say, at Rome.

(...) Rome,
1. Monarchia, that is to say, Kings, Romu^us, Num^ Pompilius, Ancus Martius,
etc. who reigned 243. years. 2. Tyrannis, that is to say, Tyrants; Tarquinius,
Sy^la, Caesar, etc. 1. Aristocratia, the government of the Nobles, when the
Peers and first Consulls ruled, that is to say, ^^nius Brutus, Tarquinius,
Collatinus, Seruius Sulpitius, Manlius, Tulliu^, who ruled 301. years. A^^^r
them succeeded also Furius Camil^us, Paulus Aemilius, Fabij, Me^^l^^,
Scipiones, Cato^^s, Cicero, etc. All mighty in war and peace. 2. Oligarchi^,
the usurping of a few Senators; the discommodities whereof Rome felt, in that
dangerous office called Tri^mv^^atius; that is to say, the office of three men
in like authority, and appeared most perni^iously in that ambitious
Protectorship, and Triumviracy of Caesar, Crassus, and Pompey. And last of all,
in the triumviracy of Octauius, Antonius, and Lepidus. Whereupon Cicero says:
Let there be successiue Magistrates, that one do not ^^^ome proud with
continual government; and hope of ad^^^cement, comfort very many.

1. The policy of the civil Magistrate: who expelled the Decem^^^^, because
one of them, that is to say, Appius Claudius, ravished one Virginia, the
daughter of a noble Citizen of Rome. 2. Anarchia, the authority of the raging
and most audacious Commons, who, when Antoniu^ was moved and provoked with
anger, most wickedly and villan^^^^y murdered Cicero, and many states of Rome:
because the Senate created Octauius Caesar Consul, and passing by, put back
Antonius ambitiously, desiring the government.
This popul^^ state is unstaid, and very quickly goes to ruin, and easily
degenerateth into another tyranny. Whereupon comes this saying: Tyranny is
next to the victory of the Commons.

Not only the Romans, but also the Thebanes, Spartanes, and Atheniens, etc.
(flourishing with great soueraig^ties) have known all these kinds of
government.

It is to be noted, that a Commonwealth and the most perfect kinds of
governments, are very seldom found abs^lutely simple, but fitly composed
amongst themselves. For a certain mixture is voluntarily admitted amongst
them; y(...) so mixed and tempred, that in a triple form (as in a marvelous
and sweet harmoni^) one counsel signifies as it were o(...) mind. Yet the
Commonwealth keeps her name of the worthier part ruling the rest.

It is also to be noted, that a Commonwealth very seldom is long found firm
and strong, if God protect it not. F(...) it is resembled to the frail nature
and unconstant mind of men (the foresaid politic body being compact of
the(...) which are variably tossed hither and thither: one while they are
advanced from small to great: another while they a(...) thrown down from
their greatness into diverse perils of things. They are also endaungered, being
tossed too and (...) in very great and innumerable perils, one while of
sickness, another while of health: even unto the last period of li(...)
Whereupon comes this saying. As a Ship is subject to waves, so the mind is
to perils:
Now enioyning good, and then ready to perish through evils.


In this so wast a sea of perils, Gods help is to be craved.

Also an excellent sharpness of the wit, and an admirable quickness, and
wisdom, are requisite in inuenting the b(...) policies. By too long delay,
counsels wax little worth.

There is no treasure more commodious to a Prince and Commonwealth, then
Counselors excelling in virtue(...) wisdom, fidelity, and valor.

The grave counsel of Kings makes every thing know^n, which he would have
searched out.

A Prince ought to have many ears, and many eyes*

Theee sorts of men necessary in a Commonwealth.
Magistrates, who may rule justly: and these are by Plato called Golden men.
Captains and Soldiers: who may valiantly faithfully defend, and these are
called Sil^er Artificers, who by discipli^es and profitable Arts may help, and
these are called Brason

A well ordered Commonwealth, consists of Religion and pollitique Laws.

A Commonwealth, a City, and a family, will be alike eftsoons dissolved,
unless they be lincked together with the bands of Laws.

The next tempest brings shipwreck to that Commonwealth, the establishment
of whose laws is unconstant.

Therefore it is meet that we pass to the Laws.

Touching Laws.
(...)cero de Lege, defines a Law, to be a certain rule proceeding from the
will of God, persuading that which is just and good, and prohibiting evil.

^eraclitus, tells us, that we ought to fight no less for our laws then for
our city walls, because without walls our country may be safe, without
laws it cannot.

^s a body without a soul, so a city without laws cannot use her parts and
sinews, blood and members.

It is expedie^^
(...)blish (...)re ^ ^ ^ what things are most con^enient for every
commonwealth, and do bring forth commodity, or preservation, loss, or
destruction. whether they be profitable and prop(...) this Commo^-wealth, (...)
to a Common-wealt^ of another kind.


Overmuch liberty utterly subuerteth and extinguisheth every government.
Moderate liberty is profitable for every one, and for the Commonwealth. what
things in ^^mes past brought commodity, to our, or government.
to foreign
discommodity,

To di^anull wholly, when they are repugnant to Religion, Let that be the
principal regard which makes for Re^^gion.
policy.
in part, when some things are to be changed If any thing must be changed, it
must be changed by little and little, which b^ little and little has
increased. Destruction is very near to sudden alteration. It is a point of
wisdom, in difficult matters, freely to grant somewhat to the disposition of
the people.

To interpret. That is to be referred to the Interpreters of the law. In
expounding the laws, sanctity and equity are to be regarde^ Lest they make
white of black, and black of white.

To obsrue laws, the care whereof properly belongs to Princess,
Counselors, in whom are required understanding, to know what is just, and to
be done: what is evil, and to be repressed: who are worthy reward, according
to the quantity of the fact.
quality

punishment;

Authority; to punish the guilty and the wicked. defend the godly, and the
good. make famous the worthy, by titles and due promotions.
He receives a benefit, who gives to him that deserved it. Let virtue be the
chiefest merit for promotions. The Commonwealths safety, is preserved by
reward and punishment. There is nothing more Princely, than to give due
testimony to virtue. Let heinous offenses be punished with cruel punishments.

Judges: Magistrates in every countire and city: of whom are required
diligence, which ought to be fenced with Integrity against anger, we do not use
trobled water, until it stand still: much less must we use a troubled mind
until it come to it self. Socrates:
gifts, favor, intercescessions
Constancy and fortitude against fear of displeasure. danger.

care*




There must heed be taken, lest the respest of private matters, do hurt and
harm public affairs.
An uncorrupted Law is the keeper of equity, and the mistress of truth:

She has no affections, but rules causes by right.

The Law, whereunto a penalty is not joined, and penalty, which hope of
pardon ensues, are altogether vnprofi^^^^^

Right often passes to wrong, if the indifferent Magistrate do not prohibit
it.

Rulers and Magistrates offending, hurt more by their examples, then by their
offenses.

Where Judges and Magistrates do well and justly execute their offices for
their own dignity, and the estimation (...) their charge, there it must
needs be, that the same Commonwealth do flourish, and flow with all good
things; the peop^^ applauding and praising the excellent beauty of virtue
shining in their superiors, and set before their eyes to imitate (...) Cicero.

The Law, equity, execution of Laws, the dexterity of the Magistrate, are
the patrimony of a Commonwealth.

Where the Commonwealth reuerenceth and adoreth the Law, there is all
happiness.

Where the Law is in subjection to the Commonwealth, there is all impiety.
Where the Law is cast off by the Commonwealth, there is all confusion and
mischief.
Cicero.

It is very hurtful unto a Commonwealth, if holy and just Laws be not kept
firm and mutable; and if foolish Aud^tors do applaude every man (through
desire of novelty, and ostentation of wit and eloquence) overthrowing tho^^
things which are profitable, necessary, and well ordained for the good of all
men.

Let not persuasion bear down that thing which action has con^uted.

Let no Tobaccho-sellers be near a Commonwealth.

Let not the more noble, but the better judgment obtain the victory.

Many controversies arise of a Law containing many words.

Architas Commands, that in establishing laws, those things be first
confirmed which belong to God.

Next, those things which be honest and commendable.

After, things profitable. He says also, that it is meet (next after virtue)
that the Laws be contained in men's minds, rather than in books.

Of the four Cardinal virtues in general, and after of Politic.
^y the Cardinal virtues the soul is rectified in her power.

Prudence. rectifieth the rational power. Fortitude, the power of anger.
Temperance, the power of concupiscence.

But Justice rectifieth all the powers, and contains in it self all the
virtues, whereupon comes the saying;

Justice in it self comprehends all virtues.
Justice is is not only a special virtue, but also a general; containing the
direction of the whole mind toward God and our neighbor: and is called the
rectifier of the will.

By the Cardinal virtues a man is instructed in all good things, and is armed
against vices: as Augustine says.

Prudence teaches to Choose. Prudence consists in preventing deceits.
Fortitude Endure. Fortitude enduring sorrows. Temperance Use. Temperance
brideling wicked pleasures. Justice Distribute. Justice relieuing miseries.

It is the property of Prudence to know what may be. to be willing to do
most. not to presume of that which cannot be. to desire equity in all things.
Fortitude. Temperance Justice

These four Virtues are called Cardinal: because as the door is turned upon
the hinge, so on these, man's life is tu^ned and ruled.

They are also sometimes called Politic; because by these a civil life is
ordered, and they pollish and adorn a man and rule the life as touching
outward things, and as far forth as they fight against vices.

They are also called Humane; because they are gotten by man's study, except
they be infused by God.

They are also called Consuetudinall; because they are gotten not by one
action, but by custom.

These Virtues have their degrees of perfection, according to which they are in
them which begin one way, an^ there way in them which profit, and a third way
in them which are perfect.

To conclude, even as God is a divine sampler of all things; so these patterns
of virtues abide in him, and flow unto from the fountain of his divinity,
whereof they are called Exemplares.

Of Prudence.
Prudence, in as much as it is a politic virtue, is called the Rule of Reason,
enlightening our minds: which consid^reth what she does: she determines
without error: she wills or does no unseemly thing. Whence comes the sayin^

Amend what is past, rule what is present, see what is to come:
For a wise man is accustomed to observe these things.
Consider the things present, and fore see that which is to come.
Prudence as it is a virtue of a well instructed mind, is to know only divine
things.

Prudence Exemplare, is the divine understanding, whereunto all things are
uncovered and open.

The parts of Prudence are three Understanding, Providence, Memory.

Understanding, is that by which the mind perceives the things which be.

Providence, is a virtue (as Cecero says) by which some future thing is seen
before it be done.

Memory, is that by which any one remembers the things which have been.

The office of Prudence, is to sustain other virtues in their actions,
according to all the parts of man.

Moral Philosophy; which are Ethicke, Oeconomicke, 1. Orders the manners, as
touchig man, 2. Sets a family in order, 3. Rules Cities and Kingdoms.
Politic. Prudence is triple.

1. The first of the heart: and this is in disposing things present, in
remembering things past, and foreseeing things to come.

Deuteronomy. 32. Would God men would be wise: that is to say, by things past: and
would understand, that is to say, things present: and would foresee the last
things: that is to say, things to come.

2. The second is of the mouth: and this is in government of our speeches.

Prou. 10. He is most wi^e, who can rule his lips.

The third is of work: and this consists in eschewing the evil, and
choosing of good.

Psalm. 33. Decline from evil, and do good.

We must note, that there is worldly, humane, and heavenly wisdom.
1. The first, is in getting temporal things. 2. The second, in commodity of
the flesh. 3. The third, in divine service.
The office of Prudence is, to direct the actions of other virtues, and to
esteem and ordain every thing according to virtue. Seneca.

To conclude, as an empty ship is to be fenced and furnished with convenient
tacklings: so a life, with the effect of Prudence. Socrates.

Of Fortitude.
Fortitude, in as much as it is a politic virtue, is to bear a valiant mind,
to fear nothing, but dishonest things: manfully to endure adversity, or
prosperity.

Fortitude of a purged mind is, to be ignorant of passions, not to fear, that
it knows not to be angry, and desires no dishonest thing.

Exemplare fortitude is, to be unchangeable; because it is always the same,
and is not at any time changed.

The parts of fortitude are four, Magnificence, Confidence, Patience,
Perseverance,

Magnificence is the cogitation and exployting of great and high matters, with
a certain honorable purpose of mind Confidence is a virtue, whereby the mind
it self in great and honest matters has reposed much in it self, with a
certain hope of trust.

Patience is a voluntary and continual sufferance of hard and difficult
things, for honesty and commodities sake.

Perseverance is a virtue sure and permanent in a well advised purpose.

There are many effects of Fortitude 1. it triumphs over ones enemies, Mark
5. and he a most valiant man. 2. it keeps a man's goods: Luke. 11. when a
strong man armed, etc. 3. it enricheth, -- Prou. 10, the hand of the strong
get^^th riches. 4. it adorneth, -- Prou. 31. fortitude and comeliness his
garment.
Fortitude consis^th in five things, In aduenturing upon hard things: Many
things help fortitude, 1. The exhortation of wise men. In despising earthly
things: 2. The example of the strong. In suffering tribulation: 3. Exercise in
fight. In resisting ^emptations: 4. Hope of reward. In fighting against vices.
5. The help of prayer.
As Hearts have great Horns in vain, seeing they want courage: so it is not
sufficient to be strong and to be of power in other things, unless Fortitude
be adjoined. Plutarch.

Of Temperance.
Politic Temperance (according to Macrobius) is, to desire nothing to be
repented, in nothing to exceed the rule (...) modesty, to tame desire under
the yoke of reason. Whence comes the saying: Will thou be crowned? will thou
be filled with delicates?
Have this short saying always before thee; Be sober.


Temperance of a purged mind, is, not only to repress, but quite to forget
earthly desires.

Temperance as it is an Exemplar virtue, is, a certain turning about toward
it self with continual diligence.

There are three parts of Temperance, Continence. Clemency. Modesty.

Continence (according to Tully) is a virtue, by which the desire is ruled by
the government of counsel.

Clemency is a virtue, whereby the motions of the mind, being stirred with
rashness, to the hate of some one, are stayed by gentleness and pleasantnes^e.

Modesty is a virtue, by which an honest shamefastness gets an honorable
and durable estimation.

There are again three forms of Temperance, Sobriety, Abstinence, Modesty.

The first consists in taste: which Sobriety moderateth.

The second consists in touching, wherein Abstinence and Chastity put a
mean.

The third consists in words and deeds. But a deed, as it is here taken,
does appertain to three senses* about their propper matters,

Seeing, Hearing, Smelling,
This deed pertains also to touching, not only in things using the act of
generation, but also pertains to others, whose instruments are hands to smite
and take, and feet to walk.

In all these, Modesty sets down a mean.
The dignity of Temperance is seen in these two things;

1. First it preserves Nature, because Nature is delighted in mean things,
and through extremes is corrupted. Keep a mean, if thou will not loose the
end.
Blessed men have kept a mean, says Bernard.


2. It adorneth the mind. For as in Natures the form is more comely, than the
matter: so also in manners, the manner, is more commended than the action it
self. Whence comes that old common saying; We merit not by Verbes, but by
Aduerbes: that is to say, not in that we speak or do any thing, but in that
we speak well, or do well.

It is manifest by an example in that Widow, who, offering two mites, is more
commended by our Lord, then they who cast in great gifts into the Treasury.

Temprance is compared unto the Sun, which is the midst of the Planets, and
most glorious amongst them all.

Socrates said, that a temperate habit of the mind, and contented with it
own, was like a short and pleasant life. For has much peace, and little
labor.

Of Justice.
Now time requires that we enter into the holy closets of Polliticke Justice:
whose property is to keep to every (...) his own: where also a respect of a
just and honest fact is busied, with a religious observation: and nothing is
termed p(...)fitable which may seem dishonest.

Justice of a pure mind is, so to be with that high mind, that it keeps with
it a perpetual league by imitation.

It is a property of Exemplar Justice, by an ever during Law, not to be
turned from the perpetual continuation of work.

There are six parts of Justice. 1. Religion, 2. Piety, 3. Thanks: 4.
Revenge, 5. Obeisance 6. Truth. To these mercy seems to be fitly joined,
being a virtue most accepta(...) to God; which will not only pity, but also
succor the aduersiti(...) another.

1. Religion is a virtue of a certain superior nature, which men call divine,
and brings with it care and ceremony.

2. Piety is, when duty and diligent reverence is given to them who are
linked to us in blood and good will.

3. Thanks is that, wherein are contained the remembrance and desire of
requiting the amity and offices of another.

4. Revenge is a virtue, whereby violence and injury and every obscure thing,
is repelled by defending and revenging*

5. Obeisance is a virtue, whereby men excelling in some worthiness, are
vouchsafed with some reverence and hono(...)

6. Verity is a virtue, whereby those things are said to be changed, which
have been, are, or shall be hereafter.

Here is to be noted, that Justice is not so much a special virtue, as a
general, as is abouesaid in the Cardinal (...)tues.

But Justice may be perverted three ways.
1. Through love of the person, or of money. Isa. 5. Woe to you who justify
the ungodly, for a reward.

2. Through fear, Mat. 10. Fear not them who kill the body, etc.

3. Through envy. Mark. 15. Knowing that for envy they had betrayed him.

Many things draw us to Justice: that is to say;
The Scripture, Eccles. 4. Even unto death strive for Justice.

Our natural inclination. Augustine. Naturally Justice is in the heart of man

Also brute beasts admonish us to Justice by their agreement and innocence.

There are many effects and blessings of Justice.
Mat. 5. Blessed are they who hunger and thirst after Justice.

^et. 3. Blessed are ye if you suffer any thing for Justice.

^ccle. 4. Who works Justice, shall be exalted, and is blessed.

^r^^. 10. Justice delivers from eternal death.

It rewards. Psalm. 17. My lord will reward me according to my Justice.

It crowns. Tim. 2. The crown of Justice is laid up for me.

To conclude, Justice is called the vpholder of the Commonwealth, the life and
Queen of all virtues.

The Sun is most pleasant to them who can behold it: so also is a Prince to
them who love Justice.

Concerning War.
Of War. War is offensive, or defensive.

In Offensive war the consideration is either General: where we ought to
respect the kind. For it is either Necessary, or not Necessary.
the moment. For it is either dangerous, or not dangerous.

Particular. See afterward. Here also the Places, are to be considered.
Means and Times The rules. To know the fittest time, and to take hold
thereof, an unknown commodity, Strength without advise, overthrows it self
with it own weight. Strength is small worth abroad, unless there be wisdom
at home. Let no man through confidence of his own wisdom or strength,
undertake dangerous and unnecessary things. For God in a sudden moment can
overthrow the greatest glory of things. The story of Craesus amongst others, is
famous, who through error of judgment and confidence of his own power, he
rashly stirring unnecessary War against Cyrus, procured most grievous
calamities to himself and his whole kingdom. Whence comes the verse. All
worldly things hang at a slender thread. And they fall by sudden mischance, who
have been mighty. And he is suddenly a beggar, who even now was exceeding
rich.
Things present are to be retained; and things certain are not rashly, and for
uncertain and unknown things, to be hazarded. Do nothing but what is needful
to be done. And one rule which God has given, is to be followed. A Prince must
fight sometime, not because he will, but because his enemies constrains.
It is also well known by the Law of Nations, that War may be repelled by
War. Also delaying of future War, is for the most part a great loss and
shame to a Prince. Liui^^. It is also the duty of a wise man to try all things
by advice before he fight. And if war cannot be avoided, because all are in
danger, he must wisely attempt it, and valiantly repel it; and a diligent
preparation is to be thought upon, and used in time of peace.


In a general consideration it must be regarded What Captains are to be made,
removed.
what store of food and victuals is necessary: whence they may be had
certainly, verily, speedily.


How great an army our enemies or we in quantity have, are able to procure at
home, abroad,
to abstain now at the present time, in time to come.

in quality by Sea, that is to say, Soldiers on Sea. by land footmen, what
sorts of both. horsemen,

what furniture of war is necessary, that is to say, Armor, weapons,
Armor, or complete Armor.
Horses, Gunnes, Engines, Iron bullets, Cariots, wild fire powder, Carriages,
and other engines.
What places are fit to skirmish: There are three sinews of War, Gold, the
hand, iron.
What times are fit and convenient. Horsemen and footmen, armed men are called
the hands and legs of the Captain. Plutarch. But a Captain wanting money, is
said to have no belly. -- Soldiers are also to be kept in obedience, and they
may the better be governed, their wages is to be paid them in due time.

Particular consideration rests in the Captains wisdom and experience in
War, who ought to mark and foresee
Treasons, secret engines, privy whisperings, treachery, strangemes, etc. The
way of the soldiers going forth to battle, Places which are indifferent and
fit to fight, to skirmish, The opportunity of the place often times more
avails, than valor. Caesar.
to winter in.
Convenient places to enter into sight, by night, or by day. forthwith, or at
some other time.
leave off their fight, go forward, retire, make a stand, spare their enemies
being subdued, or to exercise cruelty against them.
They who with very small entreaty do pardon them which are overcome, do for
this cause, allure more to try the fortune of War against them. But there
appeared very manifestly in Pausanias, D^k^ of the Spartanes, not only warlike
virtue and fortitude, but also modesty, and the honor of chaste
shamefastness, Who, after the victory gotten at Platea, conquered himself
with a most glorious victory, and abstayning from Coa, being taken Prisoner
defended her. And with great praise of moderation and humanity, he raged not
against the dead carcasses of his enemies being slain, but said, it suffised
him, if that doing and speaking just things, he could please his Spartanes. On
what side he is to give the onset before, behind, on both the wings of the
Army, etc.
How War is to be made, either by field battles, in open field; or
subtly, and by Ambushes. fences of Bulwarks; or by sudden issuing out of
their Tents and Towns. whole Army, or by light skirmishes and Fortresses.
Spoiling the fields, and by besieging their cities. Making experiment with the
whole Army, in one set battle, or by many long battles.
How the whole host and army is to be ordered and set in array, when a
slaughtering and most cruel war is to be undertaken and dispatched. What
places are most meet for receiving their Garrisons, and what places are
inconvenient. What Captains and particular Bands and captainships they shall
have. From whom we may get food and victuals. Who wants food and victuals,
dies through hunger, not by the sword.
How we ought to use the victory being gotten. How our Soldiers subdued in
War, are to be comforted and encouraged in mind.

(...) defen^^e war,
It must be known, How our Country, City is fenced. by Nature, by land, by
sea, with rocks, with mountains, with woods, with marshes.

By Art, with Havens, Castles, Fortresses, Ditches.

may be fenced with -- new havens, Castles, Munitions, Trenches and ditches.


what things are necessary, and of what for the Garrisons of our own Soldiers
or of forreyners are, because if they want, it is requisite that they be
augmented they are ouer-many, that they be ^bated.

what places are fit for our enemies to assault us, that we leave strong
places. Let that be the chiefest part of a City, for whom it is most
expedient that all things be quiet.
that we fence dangerous places.
us, to defend our selves, It is more easy to keep out the enemy, than to
expel him being let in.
It must be considered what wars many years have been made in our country,
or in other places, how they have been managed. Let not continual war be
made, although with an (...) experienced enemy.
upon what causes they arose. how they were ended. It is very easy to judge
the like of the like things. But he who follows ancient and excellent
examples without particular observation, shall sometime greatly err.
We ought to see how many what friends we can call to aid us; lest we
rashly provoke them who are mo(...) mighty then we.

We must prevent the injuries of them who are more mighty, not by rashly
revenging, but by taki(...) heed of worse turn(...) Improuident and blind
have, is unfortunate: but delay stopping the wa^dring vehemecy of the mind,
pro(...)teth much, which although they straightway appear not, yet in due time
any one may certainly find (...) To conclude, weee must take heed least in
ending war, or succouring others, war be so extinguished abroad, tha^ be
kindled at home.



Of Peace.
The most firm league, peace and amity is, that, which is purchased through
opinion of virtue, likeness of manners, and consent of Religion.

The best league is, to do well, for with such men GOD himself is confederate,
says Isocrates.

Pe^ac is either to be made. Here we ought to offer Conditions, where care is
to be had of the Time. For sometime these conditions (in convenient time) will
be thankfully and willing accepted, which afterward may be suspected and
rejected. Reasons, whereby our adversaries are persuaded to accept our
conditions of peace, being offere^ Persons treating of peace. For very often it
happens, that the self same truces are confirm(...) or rejected, by reason
of the inequality of the persons handling the matter. Conditions themselves,
least they seem Dangerous, Crafty and bold policies are at the first sight
pleasant, hard to (...) handled, and in the event doleful. The unequal
conditions and policies of Lycidas and Circilus a(...) to be shunned.
Herod(...) Some cures are more grievous then the disease it self, where it
better die, then by them go about to recover health.
Difficult, Intolerable, Dishonest.


Preserved. To accept conditions. Where it must be considered. Upon what cause
our adversaries to make a league with us, whether they are persuaded.
voluntarily, or upon necessity.
what aid we or our enemies have to make war.

How the Soldiers are affected. what kinds of conditions they be. For if they
appear to be just and honest, we must beware lest in refusing them, we seem
Obstinate or stiff necked, as the Jews were in the siege of Jerusalem. Proud
and hawtie, as Pompeius, etc. in contemning truce with Caesar, who when Cicero
brought most indifferent conditions of peace, was willing to dismiss his
army; but Pompey despised him, as his enemy, but afterward was slain in
unfortunate war, wherein also two hundred thousand men were slain. Philo
tells us, that it is better to have peace, although not commodious and
indifferent, than to undertake war with great mischiefs. Peace is a work
full of virtue, peace is the sum of labor. Peace is the reward of finished
war, and the reward of danger. A man unhurt, will sleep better, than he who
is wounded.
The beuers, in hunting, bite of their stones, when as they perceive that for
this cause they are pursued: so it is the part of a wise man, sometime to cast
away that thing, for which he is endaungered. Plin.



^ith (...)rreine people
adjoining, who love us, who malign us, who carry themselves indifferently
toward us. Here we ought to see with who^ we ought to make leagues. to
preserve frie^dship, to show love and good, will, either by deed, or counter
fait it only by word. by whom how openly, how secretly, how long.


By what offices we may pacify the offended, confirm the doubtful, persuade
the suspicious,



dwelling far of:
Peace is preserved by avoiding offenses and enmities with domestical people:
which may arise through negligence and defect of Instructions, which do not
respect the education of youth. For it is especially to be considered. what
doctrine ought to be taught in a expelled from Commonwealth.

what studies are convenient for every age, to adorn the mind with Divinity.
moral Phylosophie. Histories, etc.
stir up strength Agilitie of the body.
health

How much time is to be spent in learning, etc. Good education is called the
foundation of wisdom.
Ordayning of Magistrates how many, what Magistrates the commonwealth wants.
who are worthy and fit for every place, t^^ these may be called tobeare office,
lest (...) envious do speak in reproach of the (...)there: according to that
of the Poet.


Two things especially do rule all the counsels and actions of wise men in the
common-wea(...) and private life, vz. Hearing, o^ precepts, set down in the
word of God, in Philosophy, and honest laws. Examples of counsels, events and
punishments: which are more notable, and more effectual(...) move and pearse
the minds of the ruder sort. An History wisely written (as Cicero says) is
the mistress of life, and the witness of times, (...) light of truth, the
messenger of antiquity, and Thucididies calls it the picture and theater of
(...) life, agreeing to all times of this world: wherein as the nature of man
continues the same: their dispositions, manners, businesses, occasions,
counsels, events, misdoings, and also for t(...) most part, the same offenses
continue. Only the persons and Actors of the History, do succeed new every
age; and the names bei(...) changed, the stories are now told as it were of our
selves. Oh shame! men unwise, and of a gross brain, Despisers of learning
(who have only care of dycing, Or to feed dogs, horses and hawks, And to
lead a childish life in continual sportes) Do bear the Scepters, rule the
people, and govern Cities. Hence come so many thousand scabbes of errors, so
many sinkes of follies, so many thousands of mischieous deeds.




Appointing of gifts and rewards, for every one that well deserves, whether
they be
1 Noble, or For it is not well if Ignoble, 2 Soldiers, Peacemakers, 3
Learned, Unlearned, 4 Magistrates, Private men, 5 Clergy men, Lay men. Good
men be obscured, as it were with darkness enuironing them, and be not
regarded: be adorned with no praise of due honor, be difficultly, faintly and
coldly, preferred.
Where there be few which desire offices, there the common wealth is in
danger. By rewards and honors, excellent wits are stirred up with a more
earnest vehemence of mind, to the study of virtue. Let no estate of men be
deprived of hope to attain any pre-eminence, saving what belongs to the
King. Let a more honorable office be given to the more noble, a more gainefull
office to the poorer sort, other things being equal. Bad men be preferred as,
Tale-bearers He who gives more to him that ill deserves it, and less to him
who well deserved, is injurious and unjust. Good turns ill bestowed, are
esteemed ill deeds. Let wicked and mischievous men be punished.
Scoffers, False accusers Dishonest, Flatterers, etc.


Remedies are to be invented, and applied to the sicknesses and diseases of the
common wealth. Ambition: which disease is spread far and wide, and increases
daily. Covetousness and pride of Noblemen. It is uncertain what the evening
brings, therefore we must not be proud in adversity.
Magistrates. Angry men hate pride, wise men deride it.
Prodigal spending of ones wealth, especially of them who are indebted unto
others. Want and need of others: for many kept under with want, have desperately
robbed the common wealth. Impuritie of offenders, and injurious men, make the
Laws to be contemned.
Injuries are offered to the inferiors by their superiors: that is to say, To
the common sort by the Nobles: Thereby we read in the Roman Empire, that the
Kings were expelled, and that the state of the commonwealth was plucked diverse
ways and altered.
To private men by Magistrates: Thereby also in Heluetia, the Magistrates and
Nobles were driven away, and the policy of the people erected.

To equals by their equals, that is to say; To Magistrates by Magistrates.
Hereby deadly war have oftentimes arose. Empires have been rent and torn
asunder.
The times of Sylla and Marius were most lamentable to the common wealth of
Rome By one private man to another Through a rod kindled, or a candle left
negligently in a house^ the whole City is oftentimes set on fire: so of
private ha(...) and dissension, a public damage sometimes arises. Inward
sedition is by so much more hurtful than war, (whereas it is archieued
against forreyners with agreeing minds) by how much war is worse then peace.
We ought to contend at all times, not with privy grudg^^ and hatreds, but
whether of all can best deserve of o(...) Prince and Country, and do most
good for it. Aristides. Themistocl.
All things are to be ordered and governed at home, with counsel and the arts
of peace. The disagreement of degrees is the bane of the commonwealth. The
ambition of superiors are to be taken heed off. The envy of equalles The
suspicion of inferiors Withdraw the matter, and the fire will be quenched.
Take away the occasion, and hatred or envy will cease, Friendship ought to be
immortal, andenmities ought to be mortal.


^ouching food and victuals necessary for ^he sustenaunce of a common wealth.
In preparation of food and victuals necessary to sustain the commonwealth.
etc. we ought To consider all things In their kinds, for either they are
ministered to us, by foreign Countries: or are at home, and growing in our own
Country.
in their quantity How much the commonwealth will need in time of war and
peace.
how much will be spare to transport to whom, when, how.
how much is to be dist^ibuted to every one in war, and peace,


To take heed least by the malice and envy of some our common wealth be
destitute, and afflicted by unlawful transportations, or Monopolies at home.
our friends, being in great want, be not satisfied and refreshed, our
ennemies do freely eni^y our benefits and commodities.


Hereof many men make grievous complaint, and therefore g^^eat care is here
to be used.

For it suffiseth not to have laws and proclamations touching love and
charity, and moderating our desires and superfluous exp^n^es, but (covetousness
and blind lusts being repressed,) to deal more moderately and religiously
toward our Country and neighbors. For not our words, but our deeds ought
to agree to holy laws.

The sight also, and almost the feeling of most woeful calamities, the long
continuance and great burden of wars, famine, pestilences, seditions and
great slaughters, which for very many years has spoiled adjoining countries,
ought to move us through true penance, godliness and obedience of our whole
life, to put away henceforth, the anger of God* and perhaps the like
punishments hanging over our heads.

It comfort me to have escaped so many Grecian cities, and to have kept the
middle way through my enemies. Virg.
We ought also to be mindful that d^^th hangs over every man's head, and we
must once tread the way of death. Therefore we must provide such wealth, which
(the ship being broken) may swim out together with their master. There is
nothing worse, nothing more hated, nothing more repugnant to Gods ordinances,
than the crime of avarice, and cruel outragiousnesse.

Cursed is that covetous Steward whose master is bountiful. Bernard.

As in quicksilver all things swim, except gold; for this is one thing it
draws too it: so nothing sinketh into the mind of a covetous man, beside
gain. Charity, piety and honesty, swim on the top: they descend not into
the heart.

The fish Polypus, being otherwise a blockish creature, uses incredible skill
in catching the oyster: so some men are ver^ wise only in gayning; in other
things they are mere beasts.

Let him that is condemned of Avarice, envy and impiety, be excluded from
every office of the Commonwealth.

Touching the principal and chiefest notes, wherein we must pursu^ a matter in
disputation.
Persuades ^n a ques^ion Simple, we must urge that this is possible, easy,
honest, religious, laudadle, honorable, profitable, necessary, safe, pleasant.
Comparatiue: more possible, more easy, the ten ways, as above.
more honest, etc.

Disswadeth in question. Simple, here we must urge that this is Impossible,
hard, dishonest, Irreligious, discommendable, Ignoble, unprofitable,
unnecessary, dangerous, unpleasant.
Comparatiue: more impossible, the ten ways as above. more difficult, more
irreligious, more dishonest, etc.


Touching the Method which is to be observed in persuading and disputing.
Invention of Arguments wherewith we may prove things. refute amplify
we may effect the Auditors. beningnely, pleasantly, vehemently with hope, with
fear,


Placing of Arguments, for arguments of greater efficacy and virtue are to be
placed in the beginning. ending.
of lesser moment are to be heaped together n the midst.

(...) with what excellent sentences and el^quent (...)

Here also is to be noted, that arguments are to be taken from places of
Rhetoricians, which are called A^tributes of Persons where are comprehended
the name of a man. the nature
are related the -- Nation, country, kindred, flock, sex, age, commodities,
discommodities, of body, of fortune.


Herodotus admonishes us sometime to imitate the natures and manners of men,
the natures of the countries and places wherein they are borne. Life: where are
considered the fosteres, and helpers, Schoole-maisters and teachers, friends,
servants, profession, Sort, state.
Habit of Body, mind.
Studies and counsels. Accidents which have happened to them. Conferences and
often speeches. Actions. Things: whereof are numbered Time, place, fact, matter,
cause, power, instruments, and the manner of doing.


Logicians according to Ramus vz. by the Causes, Effects, Subjects, Adjuncts,
Disagreeing things, Comp^red things, Name, Distribution, Definition,
Testimony.

But now Method and order require that this my Epitome began with holy
things, should be ended with holy and divine things. Let it please you
therefore, that few things be in general explicated touching the three
Theological virtues.

It is necessary, that our soul, as touching the superior part, wherein the
image of God consists, be rectified by the three Theological virtues, Faith,
Hope, Charity.


Faith (according to the Apostle) is said to be the substance or foundation of
things to be hoped for through Grace, and an argument of things not seen,
inclining the understanding to believe those things which appear not. This is
a very excellent description of faith by the Effects, because it represents
things, as yet consisting in hope, and puts invisible things as it were
before our eyes.

Hope is a certain expectation of future blessedness, proceeding from the
only grace of God.

Charity (according to the Apostle) is said to be a divine love and right
will, altogether turned away from all worldly and present things, unseperably
joined and united to God, kindled with a certain fire of the holy Ghost (from
whence it is, and whereunto it is referred) free from all pollution, not
knowing to be corrupted, desirous of divine contemplation, the life of virtues,
and is accounted the end of all heavenly precepts.

Faith directs in believing the chiefest truth.

Hope in imitating and expecting the chiefest hard thing.

^ut ^^aritie in desiring and loving the chiefest good.

^^ese virtues h(...) their proper actions. Faith makes us assent to God. Hope
makes us trust in God. Charity makes us to love God.
They also work diverse ways by reason of the object Faith is conversant about
the truth, Hope a difficult thing, Charity good. Lastly, they differ by reason
of the effect. -- Faith, follows God, presently. Hope accompanies to Heaven.
Charity everlastingly embraces Almighty God.

Hence it is manifest, that amongst these three Virtues, Faith is accounted the
greatest, as which (according to the Apostle) is not abolished in the life to
come, as the others; but is perfected. Because whereas Faith and Hope is carried
into promised and future things, when we have obtained them present, to what
end should we have Faith and hope. But there both we shall always mutuallie
love God, and God will love us truly and perfectly. To conclude, even as God
has placed in Heaven the Sun, who represents him toward all men, both in
Theological, and also in Cardinal virtues, (that is to say, Temperance,
Justice, and Liberality.)

FINIS.

