The descripcion of the Sphere or the frame of the world, right worthy to be
red and studied on, of all noble wits, specially of all those that be
desirous to attain any perfect knowledge in Cosmography, or true descripcion
of Reagions, Towns, or Countrees, set forth by Proclus Diadochus, and
Englysshed by wyllyam Salysbury.

a king and queen Ptholomeus.



To his very loving Cosyn, John^ Edwardes of Chryke Esquyer, Wyllyam
Salysbury, wissheth long life in contynuall health.
WHere as of late days ye have written unto me to provide you some book,
tractyng in English of the description of the Sphere of the world Now at the
last I come in, with mine answer, which even as it shall not altogyther like
you, So I trust (if ye have a respect to my benevolence) It shall not utterly
myslyke you. I walked my self round about all Poules church yard, from shop
to shop enqueryng of such a treactyse neither could I here of any yt either
wrote of this matier proposely, nor yet occasionaly. But what trow you did I
than by my faith sir, I returned back even the same way (but wondering much
at the hap) and asked again for the same works in latin, whereof there
were.iij. or four of sundry Aucthors brought, and showed unto me, among all
which (for the breuyte and playnes) I chose Proclus his doing. And this a
Gods name intended I than (for thac complyshement of your will) to traducte
into the English tongue. That was M. Thomas lynacte.
But would God that he which translated it into the Latin had taken so much
pain, for his country sake as to english the same also. English was his
natyue tongue. Greek and Latin as well known where as English to me of late
years, was wholly to learn, the Latin not tasted of, the Greek not once hard
of, whom although even at this present I might rather and true lie with less
reproach deny to have any knowledge in at all, than to profess the perfect
phrase of any of them three. Why than shall I attempt for any man's pleasure to
go about to translate a Science unknown, out of a tongue unknown, into a tongue
no better known unto me. Surely I am very loath to do it. But yet because
perhaps ye be so persuaded that I can do some what therein and paraduenture would
take it for unkindness that I would not take in hand, to prove the feyct to the
uttermost of my power? I will therefore wrest it rather than truly turn it,
and that for lack of farther conning I can do none other, that you may be
assured, yt if ought be well done in this matier, it flows out rather of the
vehement love and feruente affection that your manyfolde demerytes has most
depely engraffed in my heart, than of any learning that I already was endued
withal. Moreover I know well that you stamer somewhat both in the Latin tongue
and in this science also, and so do I in setting forth of the same, where fore
you shall better understand me than a perfecter doer therein. And where you ar
else excedyngly well seen in all Geometrycall Deuyses, where you excel in all
humaynefabricature and where you far pass all other men in universal
knowledge, fine and subtyle practice in all the Mathematical sciences, yet
being almost Ygnoraunt (for the seldomnes of the science) in the speculacion
of the wonderful, goodly and dyuine fabricature of the world do so ferue^tly
desire some knowledge therein, I can no less but further you thereto to the
vttermoste of that small smatter that I have. Promessynge farther that if I
perceive you to profecte^ any whytte thereby I will (GOD willing the same) be
more earnestly dylygent herafter in perusyng my said attemptes.

Thus fare ye well.

At Thames Inn, in Houlborne. Anno du^i. 1550.
To the gentle reader.
a man wearing a hat and sword, surrounded by stars

IN this of all other sciences (gentle reader) I dare best entermedle as well in
writing as otherwise not that I of all men can best skyll on it, or that I can
comprehend the celestyall reasons, the subtyle ymaginacions and the dyuyne
mysteries of the Art. But because I know well all the professors of it, to be
so fre and so gentle hearted, and of such excellent humanytee and natural
Judgment, that they will rather gladlye accept and take in good worth, my
good will and all others which offer them selves into the nombre of their
retinue, than reject, despute, and set at naught, where as the lewd manners of
some that profess other Scyences, is to gnarre, snuff, and snatche, at whom
soever shall utter ought of his mind (specially if it swerve but a hear
breadth beside the line of their phantasy) in their faculties, even as though
they were never ygnoraunt them selves therein, either by the reprehension of
other, they might attain greater glory and estymacion, either else that they
claim to them selves a pryuate property in the Scyences only, but which so
it be, it is small commendacion worthy. Yet because I am in a manner thorowlye
persuaded that the doers in this heavenly knowledge will rather gently, and
brotherly correct a fault, where fault is, than malyciously espy out two
for one. I will be so un shamefastly bold as to set before them this mess
of these mine unripe first fruytes, trustyng much more to their gentylnes than
in the worthynes of the preparacyon of the banquet.

Of the Axtree, and the Poles.
THe Thoro we met.
Diameter of the world is called his Axtree, diameter is a syne that denideth
any fygurt into. ij equal parts.
where about he moves, and the ends of the Axtree are also called the Poles
of the world. Of whom one is called the north Pole, and the other the South
Pole. The Northern is he that is always seen in our habytacion. And the
Southern is that, which is never seen above our Horizon. And there be certain
places on earth where as the Pole that is ever in our sight, can not be seen
with them that dwell there. And the other Pole, which is ever out of our
sight, is in sight to them. Again there is a place on earth where both the
Poles have even like sytuacion in the Horizon.

Of the Circles of the Sphere.
SOme of the circles of the Sphere, beparallels, some be oblyque, some other go
cross over the Poles. The Equal dystaunce.
parallels are they, that have the same Poles as the world has. And there
be.v. parallel circles. The Artik, the Estiuall tropik, the Equinoctial, the
Brumal tropik, the Antarctik. The Arctik circle is even the greatest of all
those Circles that we have contynually in sight, and he scarce lie touches the
Horizon in one poynete, and is altogether prevented above the earth. And all
the stars that are included in this circle, neither rise nor set, but a man
shall espy them all the night long keep their course round about the Pole.
And that Circle in our habitacion is drawn of the further foot of The great
beat, otherwise called Charles wayne.
Vrsa mayor. The Summer.
Estiuall circle is most Northward of all the circles that be made of the son.
Whom when the Son remoueth into, he returns back from his so^mers
circuit, than is the longest day of all the year and the shortest night, and
after this so^mer return, the Son shall not be perceived to progress any
ferther toward the north, but rather to recoyle into the contrary parts of the
world, wherefore in Greek this Circle is called The return.
Ionixos. The Equinoctial circle is the most greatest of all the.v. parallel
circles, and is so parted of the Horizon, that the one half circle is above
the earth, the other half circle lies hyd under the Horizon. The son being
in this circle causes.ij. Equinoctials, one in the spring time, and the other
in Harvest. The Winter.
Brumal tropik, is a circle most South of all the circles, that by the mouynge
of the world be described of the son, which when the son is once entered
into, he turns back from his wynters progress, than is the longest night,
and the shortest day in all the year long. And beyond this winter marcke, the
son progresseth never a whyt farther, but goes into the other coostes of the
world, wherefore this circle is also named Thonixos, as who say returnable.
The Right contrary to the Arctik,
Antarctik circle, is equal in quantytie and distaunce with the Arctik circle,
and touches the Horizon in one poyncte, and his course is all together under
neth the earth, and the Stars that be placed in this ar always invisible
unto us. The greatest of all the said circles is the Equinoctial, and than the
Tropikes. And the least (I mean in our habitacion) ar the Arctikes and these
circles must be understand without breadth, and be reasoned of according to the
situacio^ of the stars, and by the beholding of the An instrument of geometre.
Dioptra. And but supposed only in our imagination. For there is no Circle
seen in all the heaven but only Commonly called the way to Jerusalem, or the
way to saint James.
Galaxias. As for all the rest they be conceived by imaginacion.

The reason why five parallel circles are only in the Sphere.
Five Even like fat.
parallel Circles alone, are wont to be descrybed in the Sphere not because
there be no mo parallels than these in all the world. For the Son makes
every day one parallel circle equaly dystaunt to the Equinoctial (which may
well be perceived) with the turnynge of the world: In so much that.clxxxij.
parallel circles twyse be descrybed of the son between the tropikes, for so
many days are within the two returns, and all the stars are daily carried
withal, round about in the parallalel circles, How be it ever ye one of
them can not be set out in the Sphere. And though they be profectable for
diverse things in It is almost as much to say as Astronomy.
Astrologia, yet is it impossyble yt even the stars may be descrybed in the
Sphere, without all the parallel circles, or that the length
Magnytude of days and nyghtes may be precisely found out, without the same
parallels: but in as much as they be not demed to be so necessary for the
first Introduction of Astrology, they are left out of the Sphere. But the
five parallel circles for certain special instruction that they exhybyte, for
the first in sight of Astrology be described in the Sphere. The Arctik circle
seuereth the Stars which we ever se: the Estiual tropik contains the going
back of the (...) Son, and it is the furthermoste part of his progress
into the North. And the equinoctial Circle contains the Equinoctials. And the
Brumall tropik is the farther most poynct of the way of the son toward the
South, and is even the marcke of the winter return. The Antarctik Circle
determyneth the Stars whom we can not se. And so seeing that they be very
expedient for the introduction in to Astrology they be right worthy to take
rome in the Sphere.

Of the apparaunce, and none apparaunce of the five parallel circles.
ALso of the said five parallel circles, the Arctik circle appears altogether
above the earth. And the estiual tropik circle is divided into.ij. parts of
the Horizon: whereof the greater part is above the earth and the lesser lygheth
underneath it. Neither is this Tropik Circle equaly divided of the Horizon / in
every Town and Country, but according to the veriete of the Regions it has
diversities of vprysynges: and this Estiual circle is more vnegually divided in
the Horizon to the^ that dwell nerer the North than we do, and farther there is
a place, where the Estiual tropik is wholly above the earth. And unto them that
draw nerer to the South than we, the Estiual Tropik is more unevenly parted in
the Horizon. Farthermore, there is a cooste (but south from us) wherein the
tropik Circle is equaly divided of the Horizon. But in our habitacion the
Estiuall tropik is so divided of the Horizon, that the whole circle being
divided into viij. parts.v. parts shall be above the earth, and.iij. under
the earth. And in deed, it seems that Aratus meant by this A portion of the
world between north and South wherein is varyacion of times. etc.
Climat when he wrote his Book of Phenomenon. Where as he speaking of this
Estiual tropik circle saytth on this wise.

When this Circle divided is, in to eight parts even just,
Five parts above the earth and.iii. underneath remain needs must,
The restes Son in summer hot, from this returns back.
And so of this division it follows, ye day to be of.xv. equinoctial hours,
and the night of.ix. equinoctial hours long. And in the Horizon of Rodes, ye
Estiual tropik is so divided of the horizo^ that the whole circle being divided
into.xviii. parts, there shall appear.xxix. deuisyo^s above the horizon,
and.xix. under the earth, by which division it appears that the longest day in
ye Rodes has but.xiiij. equinoctial hours in it, and the night.ix.
Equinoctial hours, with.ij. half hours more beside. The Equinoctial circle
in every habytacion is so justly divided in the mids by the Horizon, that the
one halfcircle, of it is above the earth, and the other halfcircle is vndeneth
the earth. And this is the cause that the Equal Length of day and right.
Equinoctials happen always in this circle. The Brumal tropik circle is so
deuidd of the Horizon that the lesser part shall be above the earth, and the
greter part under the earth, and the vnequalte of deuisions has even like
diversity in all climats as it is supposed to be in the Estiual tropik circle,
and by this mean the deuisions of both the tropicall circles be precysely
correspondent each to other. By reason wheof the longest day is of one length
with the longest night, and the shortest day equal with the shortest night. The
Antarctik Cyrcle every whyt, lies hyd under the Horizon.

Of the bygnes of the.v. parallel Circles.
BUt of the said v. parallel circles, some keep still the same bygnes thorowout
al ye world and of some the bygnes is altered by reason of the Habyracions.
Climats, so that some Cyrcles be bygger than other, and some lesser than
other. The tropik circles and the Equinoctial do no where alter their
quantities, but the Arctikes vary in bygnes, for somwhere they appear bygger,
and some where less. For unto the Northward dwellers the arctik circles seem
bygger: the Pole being raised on high, the arctik circle touching the Horizon
must need also appear bygger and bygger, continually, and unto them that dwell
farther North sometime, the Estiual tropik shall wax the Arctik circle, so that
the Estiual Circle and the Arctik also, mete together and be taken but instead
of one. And in places that be yet farther. North, the arctik circles shall
appear greater than the Estiual tropik circle. Than at the last, there is a
place so far North, where that the Pole appears over head, and the arctik
circle serves for the Horizon, and remains with it in the meuynge of the
world, and is as wide as the equinoctial: in so much that the.iij. circles
(to say) ye arctik, the equinoctial, and the Horizon be placed in one order and
sytuacion. Again to them that dwell more South, the Poles appear more lower,
and the Arctik circles lesser, yet again there is a place being South in
respect of us which lies under the equinoctial where the Poles be under the
Horizon, and the Arctik Circles be altogether gone: so that of the five
parallel Circles there remain but three circles, (that is) the two Tropiks, and
the Equenoctiall.

Of the nombre of the parallels.
Neither for such sayenges, is it to be thought that there continue.v.
parallels always but so many to be imagyned for our habytacion sake, for in
some Horizons, there be but.iij. parallels only, and there be habytacions on
earth, where the estiual tropik circle touches the horizon: and even for the
tropik Circle is the second taken, which is called the habitacion under the
Pole. The third habitacion is of whom we spoke a little before, which is named
the habitacion under ye equinoctial.

Of the order of the.v. parallel Circles.
Wherefore, neither the order of the five parallel Circles, is every where the
same, but in our habitacion the first shall be called the Arctike, the second
the Estiuall tropik, the third the Equinoctial, the fourth the Brumall, the
v. the Antarctik. But they that dwell more North than we, some time the first
is accounted as the Estiuall tropik, the second as the Arctik: the third as
the Equinoctial: the.iiij. as the Antarctik: the.v. as the brumal tropik, and
because the arctik circle is wyder tha^ the equinoctial ye said order must
need be observed.

Of the power of the five Parallels.
Likewise, Neither are the powers of the same.v. parallel circles alyke. For
the circle that is or estiual tropik is to Tois antiposin.
them that dwell in a contrary habytacion, the Brumal tropik. Contrary wise
that which unto them is the Estiual tropik circle is the Brumall tropik unto
us. But such as dwell under ye equinoctial, even the.iij. circles be in power
estiual tropikes unto them, I mean those that dwell just under the course of
the Son, for in conferring one to another, that which is the Equinoctial
with us shall be their Estiual tropik Circle. And both the Tropikes shall be
Brumals. So than the Estiual tropik circle may be said by nature bnyuersally
all the world over, which is next to yt habitacion: therefore unto the^ that
dwell vnderthe equinoctial the equinoctial it self serves for ye estiual
tropik, as wherein ye son has his course directly over their head, and all the
parallel circles shall take the rome of the Equinoctials, being divided by
equal deuysyons in the Horizon.

Of the space between the Parallels.
Neither the spaces of the circles one from the other do remain the same
thorowout all habytacions: but after the description of the Spheres, they are
dyscussed on this sort. Let any Meridian be divided in.lx. parts, the Aretik
shall be described from the Pole.lxvi. parts of. And the same on the other
side, shall be.lxv. part dystaunt from the Estiual, and the Equinoctial shall be
from either of the Poles.lxiiij. deuisions of. The Brumal tropik circle
stands from the antarctik.lxv. parts of. Neither have these Circles the same
distaunce betwne them in every town and Country. But the tropiks in every
declynacion shall have even like space from the Equinoctial. Yet have not the
tropiks equal space from the Arctiks at every Horizon, but in some place
less, and in some place more dystaunce. Likewise the Arctiks have not in every
declinacion one certain space from the Poles, but somwhere less, and somwhere
more. All the Spheres, be made for the Horizon of Greece.

Of the Colurs.
THere are Circles that go cross overthwart ye Poles which of some me^ be
called Colurs. And they be so framed that they conteyne within their circuit
the Poles of the world. And be called vnper perfect.
Colurs, by reason of those porcyons of them that be not seen. As for other
circles they be seen whole, the world mouyng round about. And there are
certain parts of the Colurs invisible, even those parts that from the
Antarctik lie hyd under the horizon. And these circles be sygned by the
tropical points and they divided into.ij. equal parts, the circle that
passes through the mids of the zodiak.

Of the zodiak.
THe Circle of the xij. signs is Slont wise.
oblyque and is compounded of.iij. parallel circles: of whom.ij. are said to
show the breadth of the zodiak, and one is called passing through the myd
signs: thus touches he the.ij. equal circles and parallels, the Estiual
tropik in the first degree of Cancer, and the Brumal tropik in the first degree
of Capricorn. The breadth of the zodiake is.xij. degrees. This circle is called
oblyque because he crosses over ye parallels awrye.

Of the Horizon.
THe The under.
Horizon is a Circle that sondreth us, the part of the world seen, from the
part that can not be seen, so he deuideth the whole Sphere of ye world
into.ii. parts, even that he leueth the one half sphere above the earth, and
the other half sphere underneath the earth. And there be.ii. Horizons, one
sensyble, the other ymagyned by understanding. The sensyble Horizon is that,
which of our sight is lymyted at the vtmoste of our Look
kennynge. So that his Diameter is not passing. M. furlonges, even thorowout.
The horizon that is ymagyned by understanding, is for the speculacion of the
Sphere of the fyxed stares, and he deuideth the whole world into.ii. parts.
Wherefore there is not ye same Horizon, thorowout every habytacion and town,
but to a man's Sight
wyttynge he remains the same for the space of.iiii. C. furlonges almost. So
that the length of the days, the Clymat, and all the apparaunces remain the
same still. But with the mo number of furlonges for the diversity of the
habytacion, the Horizon, the Climate, yea and all the apparaunces shall vary.
So than the change of habitacion must needs happen in going Southwarde or
Northward, beyond.iiii. C. furlonges. And they that dwell in one parallel for
every exceeding great nombre have a new Horizon, but they keep the same Climat
and all the apparaunces likewise. the begynninges and endynges of days chance
not at the self same time to all that dwell in the same parallel. But after
very exact curiosite the lest mouyng in the world hither or thither, even for
every poynct the Horizon is changed the Clymat and the apparaunces do vary.
The Horizon in the Spheres is not after that manner descrybed, for all the other
circles are carried together from East to West, with the mouyng of the world,
and the Horizon is immounable by his own nature as long as he keeps the same
situacion. And so if the Horizon were set out in Spheres when they should be
turned about, he might so happen to move, and sometime to be ouerhead, and that
were a thing most inconuenyent and farthest out of reason in Sphere matier.
yet for all hat, there may be a place assygned for the horizon in the frame of
the Sphere.

Of the Meridian Circles.
THe Myd day,
Meridian is a cicrle that goes through the Poles of the world, and through
the That poyncte is commonly called zenith.
poynct that is just over our hedes. In whom when the son is come to, he
causes myd day, and myd night. And this circle is also immouable in the
world, as long as the self same situacion is kept in all mouynge of the
world. Neither is this circle drawn in globes
Spheres that be painted with stars, by cause he is immouable and receives
no mutacion. But to man's conjecture by wit for iij. C. furlonges almost,
the meridian a bydeth the same. But after a more exact ymaginacion, for every
foot stepped into East or West, there waxes another meridian. But than go
North or South even.x. M. furlonges and the same meridian shall serve but
going from East West ward alters the meridian.

Of the Cyrcle Galaxias.
THe cyrcle of Called of the common people Watlyng street, and in Washle, (...)
(...).
Galaxias is oblique also, and this to, goes over the tropiks awry and it is
of the substance of fine Clouds, and the only vysyble circle in the heavens,
neither is it certain what breadth he is of for it is narrower in one place
than in another. And for that cause the circle Galaxias is left out in many
Spheres. And it is one of the greatest circles. And they be called the greatest
Circles which have the same Is eue^ the myddelmoste poyncte in a thin^^.
center as the Sphere has. And there be.vij. of the greatest circles, the
Equinoctial, the zodiak, that which goes through the mids of the signs,
and that which goes by the Poles, the Horizon of every habytacion, the
Maridian, and the circle of Galaxias.

Of the.v. zones.
THe outward facion of the earth is Koun He, as a Pall.
Sphericall and is divided into.v. zones, of whom.ii. which be about the
Poles are called the cold ones, because they be very far from under the
course of the Son, and be little inhabyted for the great coulth: and their
compass is from the arctiks to the Poles ward. And the zones that be next
unto them, because they be mesurably sytuat toward the course of the son be
called temporate, and about in the Fyrmament upon the tropiks and arctiks
Circles, between whom they lie. Now the fyfth which emonge the said.iiij.
circles is myddelmost, for that it lygheth under the way of son is named the
hot, and it is divided of the Equinoctial of the earth, into.ii. which lygheth
and about, under the Equinocciall of the world. But of the two temperate
zones, one is inhabyted of them that be of our habytacion being in length
nyghe a. C. M. furlonges, and in breadth, about half the same.

Of the Celestial Signs.
THe signs that be blased with stars are divided into.iij. parts, some of
them be placed in the circle of the zodiak. Some be called Northern, and some
be called Southern. And they yt be situat in the circle of yt zodiak be xij.
Lyuelynges.
Beasts, whose names we have declared in another place, in which.xij. beasts
there are certain stars, who for certain notable marks espied in them,
have taken their proper names for the fyxed stars that be in the back of
Taurus be called The. 7. stars, which Maroners do use in trienge of costs.
Pleiades. And the stars that be placed in the head of Taurus be.v. in nombre
and are called 7. stars, in whose rising and going down it lyghtlye
rayneth; always.
Hyades. And the Star that stands before the fete of Gemini is called
Propus, and that cloudelyke substance, that is in Cancer, is called The Crybbe.
Praesepe. And the two Stars that stand nyghe Presepe are called The Asses.
Asini. And the bright Star that is in the heart of Leo, (according to the
name of his place) is the Lions heart, and it is called of some men, the Royal
Star, for that they that are borne under it are thought to have a royal
natiuite. The fair Star that styeketh at fyngers ends of the left hand of
Virgo, is called the Or the ear.
Spike. But the little star that is fastened by the right wyng of Virgo is
named Protrigetes. And the.iiij. Stars that be at the right hands end of
Aquarius are called The water pot.
Vrna. The stars that be spread one after another behind Pisces tail are
called the lines. And in the South line, there are.ix. Stars, and in the
North line.v. The bryghte star that is seen in the lines end is called The
Knotte.
Nodus. So many are accounted for the Northern as be set betwyxt the zodiak and
the North. And they be these The great bear.
Vrsa mayor. The liteli bear,
Vrsa minor. And The drake, or Dragon.
Draco that lies betwyxt both. Vrsa or boores.
Arctophilax The crown.
Corona, Engonasin, the Serpentine, the Serpent, the Harp, the Bird, the
Arow, the Egle, the Dolphyn, Protome Hippi, the Horse that stands by
Hipparchos, Cepheus, Cassiopeia, Andromeda, Perseus, The Dryuer.
Auriga, Deltoton. And he that was stellyfyed of Callimachus, Bernykes hear.
Again there be certain stars who for certain plain apparaunces that they
have in the^, have had their names given them. For the no table Star that
lies above the mydsh ankes of Arctophilar is called This lies at the rail of
the great (...).
Arcturus. And the shyning star that is set by the Harp, even by the name of
the whole sign is called the Harp, and the Stars that be at the top of
Perseus left hand are named the Gorgones. And the thycke small stars that
are espied at the right hands poyncte of Perseus, make as it were a sithe. And
the clear Star that is set in the left shoulder of the Dryuer is called the
Goote. But the two little stars that be at the out termoste of his hand be
called the Kyddes. And all those be Southern signs, that lie on the South side
of the zodiak. And their names be these. Orion, the Centaurus, the Beast that
Centaurus holds in his hand. Thyrsylochus whom Centaurus sets before, the
sensar, the Southern fysshe, the Whale, the water powered of Aquarius, the
floude of Orion, the South Crown, which of some is named The heuenlynge.
Vraniskos, the Rod that lygheth by Hipparchos. And again in these there be
certain stars that have taken them propre names. For the bright star that
is in Prokyon, is called Prokyon. And the Glysterynge star that is in the
Dogs mouth, for that she is thought to cause more fervent heat, is called
the Dog, even by the name of the whole sign. The Star that shyneth in the
top of the starne of Argo, is named Canopus, and this is uneath seen in the
Rodes, except it be from high places. But in Alexandria, she is not seen at
all, where the.iiij. part of the sign, does scantly appear above the Horizon.

FINIS.
Faults escaped in Pryntynge.
The first leaf, second page, read Chyrk, for Chrykes.

Third leaf, second page, the.xxi. line, read Thauies, for Thames.

Syxte leaf, second page, last line, read Tropicos, for Ionixios.

And in the.vii. leaf, first page, last line, read Tropicos, for Thomxios.

Imprynted by me Robert wyer. In the year of our Lord GOD a. M.D.L. dwelling
at the sign of saint John^ Evangelist, in saint Martyns parysshe beside
Charynge cross.

And fynysshed the.xi. day of February.

Cum priuilegio, ad imprimendum solum.


