A true Remonstrance of the State of the Salt business, undertaken (for the
furnishment thereof between Barwick and Pool; they with the I Will of Wight, and
members inclusive) by the Society of Saltmakers of South, and North-Shields,
and of Scotland.
IN the times of Hostility with Spain and France, which was in Anno 1627. 28,
29, 30. there was such a scarcity of Salt in this His Majesty's Kingdom, that
it was sold at extreme rates, Viz. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10s per Bushel and upwards,
and in many places of this Kingdom, Salt not to be had for any money: and
that, which in those times was imported (unless by way of Reprizall) was
imported by Hamburghers, and Flemings, who made their advantage of our
necessities for so useful, and necessary a commodity.

When the Peace was concluded between His Majesty, and the French King; the
French King made an Edict, that no Salt should be exported out of His Kingdom,
upon confiscation of Ship goods, and life.

In which straight, in December 1630. The Lord Mayor, and Aldermen, and the
Company of Fishmongers of the City of London, together with the Mayor,
Aldermen, and Cominalty of the Town of Kings-Lynne, the Bailiffs, and Aldermen
of Great Yarmouth, and diverse others in behalf of themselves, and the Fishermen
Inhabiting amongst them, did petition to the right Honorable, the Lords, and
others of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel (in haec verba.)

Petition inhiting exportation.
HUmbly showing, That whereas by an Edict made by the French King about six
Months since, the exportation of any Salt was forbidden, whereas since that
time, the Dutch for their supply have repaired to Newcastle, and places thereto
adjoining in this Kingdom, and have there bought, great quantities of Salt,
which they export out of this Kingdom, into their own Country, who before the
said Edict, for the advance and benefit of their own people, did make a decree,
that no Newcastle Salt should be imported into their Country, upon pain of
Confiscation: and now by their daily, and continual exportation of Salt out of
this Kingdom, the Fishermen here should be altogether unprovided of Salt, for
their voyages to Wesmony, Iseland, and North-Seas.

And forasmuch as all other things to furnish them to Sea, are now at excessive
rates, as victuals, Cordage, and all other materials: and also Salt by reason
of the said exportation, much inhaunced in price, by reason whereof the
Fishermen shall be disabled to go to Sea, their voyages overthrown, and thereby
this Kingdom destitute of victual, which is by them brought in.

The Petitioners humbly pray this Honorable Board, to take into consideration,
that it concerns the maintenance, and employment of many thousand Seamen, the
Nursery of Navigation, the supply of this Kingdom with Fish, and therefore to
restrain the exportation of all Salt from Newcastle, and places thereto
adjoining, out of this Kingdom, until Midsomer next; by which time we hope
this Kingdom, which is now destitute in all parts, may be supplied out of
Spain,

And your Petitioners shall pray, etc.
Whitehall the eight of December, 1630.
Ordered that none be exported.
Their Lordships upon mature advice, and deliberation had thereof, have thought
fit, and ordered, that the exportation of all Salt, as well from the Ports of
Newcastle, as from all other Ports of this Kingdom, into foreign parts, be
hereby strictly prohibited, and that no Salt shall be laden or Shipped at any
Port of this Kingdom, before good security be given, that the same shall be
brought to some other Ports of this Realm, and there sold and disposed to his
Majesty's Subjects, within the same. Hereof the Lord Treasurer is prayed, and
required, to take notice, and give directions to the several Ports
accordingly,

1630.
The Peace being concluded between the Crowns of England, and Spain, diverse
Merchants of this Kingdom sent to Spain, between 2. and 300. sail of Ships,
to fetch Salt for the supply of this Kingdom, and the King of Spain taking
advantage of our necessities, did not only along time imbarge the said Ships,
but did also impose upon his Salt 30 Ryalls per Moy, and 3 Moys making a London
weigh, and the principal price of the Salt was formerly but 12 to 15 Ryalls
per Moy; so the Impost on every weigh, was 45' per weigh: by which means of
imbargement, and Imposition His Majesty's Subjects were damnified in that
voyage (though Salt was sold here at a very dear rate) at the least forty
thousand pounds sterling.

Whereupon diverse of the said Merchants for their relief, did a long time
Petition His Majesty, and the Board, for imbargement of their Ships, and
impositions laid by the King of Spain, upon the said Salt, but could get none.

Thereupon His Majesty, in His Princely care, with the advice of His most
Honorable Privy Counsel, and His Council learned in the Law, fell into
consideration how to erect a native manufactury within His Majesty's Kingdoms
of England, and Scotland, for the supplying of these His Kingdoms (without
dependency upon any foreign State) with Salt, being so necessary and useful,
as cannot be wanted, His Majesty being informed, that there were sufficient
materials (as Pan-coales, fit for no other use) within His Kingdoms of
England and Scotland, to go on with the work, and by which means many thousands
of His poor Subjects should have employments in making the said Comodity:
which has been proved, and will be maintained to be as sufficient for Sea, and
in land uses, as any foreign Salt whatsoever. And that Fish salted with that
Salt, does out sell Fish salted with any Foreign Salt in any Market whatsoever.

Vndecimo Caroli. The first Society.
Upon which weighty considerations His Majesty was pleased to give
encouragement by incorporating many of His Subjects of England and Scotland, to
erect works for the making of Salt, enabling them with diverse liberties and
privileges, for the regulating of the said Trade, or Mystery for the term of
fourteen years, with Proviso, that in case His Majesty, and the State should
find any better way for the settlement thereof, within three years, their
Charter of Incorporation to be surrendered: wherein the said Societies were
tied to these particulars.

1 To make a sufficient quantity of good and Merchantable Salt for the supply
of His Subjects within the limits between Barwick and Southampton, they with
the I Will of Wight included.

2 At a certain moderate price, not exceeding three pounds per weigh for
Land-use, accompting forty Bushels to the weigh, and ten Gallons to every
Bushel, and 50s per weigh for Fishery-use, out of which they were to pay His
Majesty for what they did make, 10s per weigh for Land-use, and 3s 4d per weigh
for Fishery use: In recompense to His Majesty for what he should loose in his
customs by restraint of foreign Salt.

3. To permit any that had any Salt-workes erected within the Limits to make
and sell, they conforming themselves to such meet orders of the said Society,
for the regulating of their Trade, as were not repugnant to His Majesty's Laws.

His Majesty covenanteth with the said Society.
1 To regulate the Society of Saltmakers in Scotland.

2 To inhibite foreign Importation within the Limits under a nomine penae of
48s 6d per weigh to support the native Manufacture at home.

Not long after, several Merchants of Southampton, and the West parts with
some Salters in London Petitioned the Board against the said Inhibition of
foreign Salt, and procured liberty to import great quantities of foreign
Salt, pretending the Native Salt, was insufficient to save their Newfound-Land
Fish, and for other uses thereby intending rather to destroy then support so
good a Native Manufactury in this Kingdom, as the making of Salt was.

Shortly after one Nicholas Murford proposes to His Majesty a new way of
making of Salt by the Sun, and to supply the whole Kingdoms of England and
Ireland, with sufficient Salt for all uses, and to pay His Majesty out of it
10s per weigh, for all Land use, and 3s 4d per weigh for Fishery but propounded
no certain price to the Subject: Which proposition of Murfords, and the liberty
of Importation to the Merchants of Southampton caused the first undertakers, to
Petition His Majesty to be discharged: Whereupon many disputes arose between
the Societies of Scotland, and them of South, and North-Shields, and the said
Nicholas Murford: For the hearing whereof, His Majesty, and the Board appointed
a day to hear the said parties at Greenwich in July 1638. when the said Murford
proffered His Majesty, and the Board to farm his said duties of 10s. and 3s 4d.
and 48s 6d per weigh, and give ten thousand pounds per annum for the same,
provided none might import any foreign Salt, but the said Murford to whom the
said duties were let at 10000l per annum. And, the Society of South, and
North-Shields left to use their Pans, and sell as they please; provided, they
paid His Majesty's duties of 10s per weigh for Land use, and 3s 4d per weigh
for Fishery expense.

Which caused the Saltmakers of South and North-Shields (seeing the said
Murford was permitted to import what Salt he pleased, and set up what works he
would, which assured them, that nothing less, then their undoing could befall
them) for their relief therein to Petition His Majesty at Oatelands the 15 of
July 1638. that they might either be discharged of the duties of 10s and 3s 4d
per weigh, or have some course taken that they might have sail for what they
made at moderate rates, so as they might subsist in their Trade, else they
could neither pay His Majesty, nor subsist.

His Majesty thereupon conferring with His most Honorable Privy Counsel,
wished some course might be taken, that they might be relieved, and that they
should think of some better course, and attend him at Oatelands the then next
sitting of the Lords. At which time, the present Society of Saltmakers made
some propositions to His Majesty, both to pay His Majesty, and serve His
Subjects at more moderate rates then formerly, which together with the said
Nicholas Murfords were read, and consider of at Oatelands, July 29, 1638. and
an Order as follows, was thereupon made,

At the Court at Oatelands, 29 July 1638.
A draught of the Contract about Salt, on the behalf of Nicholas Murford, being
this day read at the Board, also a Proposition made by Thomas Horth Merchant,
and others owners of Salt-Pans at South, and North-Shields, and another
Petition on the behalf of the Town of great Yarmouth, after long debate, His
Majesty with the advice of the Board, did refer the consideration of the
security presented by the said Nicholas Murford, to the Lord High Treasurer of
England, and the Lord Cottington, and if their Lordships do approve thereof,
then to proceed with to finish the contract with the said Murford, or as they
should find most expedient for his Majesty's service.

The said Lord High Treasurer of England, and Lord Cottington to whom the
business for settlement was referred, made choice rather of the new Society,
their propositions then of Mr Murfords. As by their report to his Majesty made
in August 1638. appears, and for these reasons following.

1 Because their price was certain, and at cheaper prices then formerly.

2 That their means of making, was certain, being made only by Salt Water and
Fire.

And Master Murfords undertaking uncertain.
1 By reason he depended on hot and dry weather, which was uncertain, without
which he could make little or no Salt.

2 He would set no certain price, but would be left to his will to raise, and
fall in it, as he pleased.

3 That none should import any foreign Salt but he. As by the order of His
Majesty, and the Board the 15 day of July 1638. appears.

Whereupon His Majesty in His Princely care, tendering the good of the Weal
Public, was pleased to admit freedom of dispute, what could be said in
opposition by all the several Ports within the Lymits, with the City of
London, Fishmongers, and Traders in Salt there; appointing a particular day for
the hearing of all their complaints, reasons, and discourses for the full
clearing thereof, before the settlement thereof, expressed as follows.

At Whitehall the ninteenth of December, 1638.
This day upon consideration had at the Board (His Majesty being present in
Counsel) of the several Petitions presented in the name of the Cinque Ports,
and their members the Towns, and Counties of Southampton and Poole, and the
Towns of Weymouth, and Welcomb Regis, the Town and Fishery of great Yarmouth,
Jews, and of the Traders in Fish, and Salt of the City of London, touching the
vending and making of Salt at Shields: And upon hearing of the Agents of the
said Ports, and their Council, and the answer of Thomas Horth, and the new
undertakers of the said Saltbusinesse. His Majesty, and the Board conceiving it
to be a matter of great advantage to the Kingdom, that Salt made within His
Mies own Dominions should be preferred, and used before any foreign Salt, and
finding upon debate, that the Salt made in His Majesty's Dominions is
sufficient for all uses; Did therefore order that the said business be forth
with established, and that for the price, the Lord Treasurer, and the Lord
Cottington should be hereby prayed, and required to call before them some
Fishermen, and others, and upon hearing of them, and the said Horth, to set
down what rates and prices Salt shall be sold at by the undertakers, which was
by their Lordships settled accordingly.

Since which settlement, the said present undertakers, have been always
furnished with sufficient quantities to serve within the limits, and have not
at any time sold the same above three half pence per Gallon at the most, but
for the greatest part they have not sold for above one penny per Gallon.

The second undertaking began 14o Caroli.
And they are able to make such quantities of good and sufficient Salt, to serve
within the limits, and the whole Kingdom, if need be, at jd. ob. per Gallon,
which is far cheaper than it has been at many years before, or since the
surrendering and discharging the said undertakers. It having been sold, before
either of the said Societies were settled; at 4l. 3l. 15s. 3l. 10s. and 3l. the
Sheilds weigh, many years together: And since the discharge of the said
Charter, Salt has been sold in London by the Ingrossers, Forestallers, and
Regrators, at 2s. and 2s 6d. the Peck, Land-measure, which is lightly measured,
whereby they make 5 Pecks and half out of every Bushel that they buy from the
Merchant, which is 13s. 9d. per Bushel, accounting 40 Bushels to the weigh, As
in the months of January and February. The French King for mixed clothes. The
States of the Netherlands for white Salt.
is 27l 10s the weigh; which cost them not at the dearest (laid up in their
houses) above 5l per weigh, which in the being of both the Charters was not
sold at above five pence or six pence per Peck at most by the Retayler: which
moderate rate was occasioned by the certainty of the price: And therefore the
Retailers of Salt in London, with the Refiners of Salt. And some Western
Merchants trading to the Newfound-Land; are the main opposers of this Native
Manufacture, which all other Princes and States, do so nuch cherish when they
can erect any Native Manufacture within their own principalities, to give
employment to their own Natives, that they prohibit the importation of any such
Commodity, upon confiscation of Ship and Goods.

Objections by the opposers: Are
1 That it is a Monopoly. 2 That the Imposition laid upon the foreign, and
Native Salt, is contraty to Law. 3 That the prosecution has been unjust, and
with violence. 4 That the Comodity is not sufficient for the Fishery Trade. 5
That the prices are extreme. 6 That there cannot be sufficient quantities made
to serve the Kingdom. 7 That it is a very great decay to Navigation. 8 That it
is an Enbargement to Free Trade.
Answer
1 The Charter was granted for 14 years with proviso, that if His Majesty or
State should find any better way for the settlement thereof, to be surrendered
at three years. It debarres no man from making, that formerly had any works, no
man from erecting of new works, only requires them to be of the Corporation,
and to pay the duty imposed by His Majesty, and to serve the Subject at the
rates agreed on. If a Monopoly be a sole Vendition, the Society are not the
sole Vendors, for all Salt Retaylers are free to come and buy at the works, or
without the lymitts. Chief Justice Popham, in the Case of Currents.
2 It is a Judged case, that His Majesty may under a nomine penae prohibit
importation of any foreign Comodity, it has not at any time been adjudged
against His Majesty, that without a nomine penae he cannot prohibit the
Importation of any foreign Commodity that he intends to make a Native
Manufacture. 3 The prosecution is warranted by order of the Lords, and yet not
prosecuted with violence, but with great moderation. 4 It is sufficient to cure
both Cod and Ling, and does sell at any Market dearer and better then that
which is cured with French or Spanish Salt. 5 During the Charter, Salt has
been cheaper then before or after the Society selling it at such moderate Rates
to the Retaylers, that the Commonwealth from the Retaylers of Salt, might be
served at any time at 2d or 3d the Gallon at the most, and yet the Retaylers of
Salt, sufficient gainers thereby, but since the Delivery up of the Charter,
Salt has been, and is sold by the Retaylers to the Subject at two shillings
the Peck, as at this day. 6 The Society of both Kingdoms, are able to make
far greater quantities then His Majesty's Kingdoms can Vend. 7 Navigation
shall not be prejudiced, but rather beneficed by the Manufacture, for it will
appear upon Examination by the Books of entry returned by the Officers of the
Ports, that whereas there is one English bottom that formerly has imported
Salt, there have been ten strangers to one, but hereby will be many hundreds of
English Barqes employed from Port to Port of His Majesty's Subjects only. 8 The
complaint of want of free Trade concerns the Complainants private ends, and
not the general good, they intending in their particular way by ingrosing,
forestalling, and regrating to make a scarcity at their pleasure, to the great
abuse of the Weal public, which they cannot so well do if this Comodity be
made a Native Manufacture, and settled at a certain moderate known rate, as
aforesaid.
Inconveniences.
1 THe importation of Salt, by the French, is the exportation of the treasure
of the kingdom although the Law command, that the money, taken for Salt etc,
shall be employed in the Commodity of this kingdom, yet not one stranger of ten
imploys his money in England, for between the Buyer, the Officer, and the
Seller, there are only factionall Bills of employment, but no employment. 2 If
Salt prove scarce in France, then our English must dearly pay for that
scarcity. 3 If the French King lay an Edict, that none shall be transported (as
he has done) upon confiscation of Ship, goods, and life, then these Kingdoms
cannot be served with that most useful and necessary Commodity. 4 If wars fall
between the Crowns of France and England, then we can have no French Salt, but
such as is imported by Flemings, or some other Neutrall States, who (as they
have done) will make advantage of our necessities. 5 In the like Case we stand
with Spain, to both of them we shall be Subject to what tax or Imposition they
please to lay upon that Comodity which we cannot be without, nor the
Commonweal at any certainty, unless the Manufactures be supported.
Conveniences BE it war, or peace, Scarcity or plenty in foreign parts His
Majesty's Kingdoms and Subjects, may be served with a sufficiency of good
Salt, many thousands of his poor Subjects set on work, and gain their daily
livelihood, the materials that the Salt is made by, not useful for these
Kingdoms, only for the Salt works, being Salt water and Pan-coales, Navigation
no ways prejudiced, much less destroyed, nor any Enbargement of any free
Trade to the prejudice of the Weale-publike, why should the Manufacture be
destroyed to the dishonor of His Majesty, the ruin of such His Loyal
Subjects, who by His Majesty's command, and Princely Encouragement, have spent
many thousands of pounds to bring the work to perfection, beside the miserable
distress that many thousands of His Majesty's poor Subjects will be left in,
who eat their daily bread, by their daily labor in that Manufacture. Which
reasons are humbly offered for the supportation of so absolute, and necessary a
Comodity which must of necessity be destroyed, unless the inhibition of
importation of foreign Salt, within the Lymitts be ratified and confirmed.

The consideration whereof is humbly presented to the most honorable Houses of
Parliament.

