An exposition in English upon the Epistyll of saint Paul to the Philippia^s
/ for the instruction of them that be unlearned in to^ges: gathered out of holy
scriptures / and of the old catholic doctors of the church / and of the best
authors that now adays do write. By Lancelot Rydley of Cantorbury.



Over seen by the right reverend father in god Thomas by the sufferaunce of
God archebysshop of Cantorbury.

Quisquis amas verum huc aderis nec me^te recedas
Inuenies verum scripta sacrata lege^s.
Reuerendissimo in Christo patri ac dn^o, dn^o Thome Cantuariensi archipresult
graciam ac pace^ Lancelotus Ridleus. P.
CUm omnibus satis persuasu^ sit Cole^dissime presul dominatione^ tuam bonas
litteras amare venerari ac colere, and nulla re magis delectare quam bonis
litterarum studiis, maxim vero sanctaru^ scripturaru^ lectionibus, nihil que
tue celsitudini magis gratu^ et acceptum fore, quam pias quasdam scripturarum
expositiones, in quibus nihil relucere videtur quod non sit pium verum ac
sanctu^, vel multum adiumenti afferens tum ad dei gloriam tum ad aliorum
edificationem, e quibus errores et hereses per euangelii veritatem euelluntur,
false fiducie vane superstitiones eradicantur, sordes vitiorum abluuntur,
romanenses feces expurgantur, omnia denique vitiorum semina prorsus
extruduntur, et in vitiorum loca virtutes inseru^tur, euangelii veritas pro
mendatio docetur, et quicquid est boni adhortatur amplectendum ab omnibus qui
vitam cu^ Christo queru^t eternam.

Quando istac in re gaudet et delectatur dominatio tua adeo vt in nulla re
magis, visu^ est mihi dominationi tue dedicare hanc expositione^ in epistolam
Pauli ad Philippenses a nobis rudi minerua impolito que sermon scripta^ tua
celsitudine omnino (in fallor) non indignam, quod in ea expositione nihil
piolectori perspicere licet, quod non euangelii veritatem sapiat, vitioru^
odium moneat, virtutis amorem suadeat, dei gloriam illustret, et alios in vera
cognitione Christ et beneficiorum eius no^ erubiat, vt magis gauderes maiore
euangelica veritate iam vel ipsis rudibus et indoctis in lucem edita, vti verum
decet episcopum, quem nihil magis ornare posset quam sincera euangelit
explicatio, pura que illius predicatio, ex qua est fides, sine qua impossible
est placere deo, et quicquid cedit in cibum vitam et salu^em animarum, quaru^
curam oportet epis^opis esse maximam, ne pereant, sed vt salve ^iant* ne
rationem deo reddant episcopi pro his qui illoru^ negligentia perieru^t, hinc
episcoporum est sibiipsis et gregi Christi attendere, et vigilare, ne in gregem
intrent l^pi rapaces, et ingressos ab ouili abigere, errores et hereses
euellere, superstitiones omnes resecare, puro vire verbo pascere, instruere et
exhortari per doctrinam sanam contradicentes conuincere, errantes ad caulem
veritatis omni mansuetudine et leuitate reducere, vt omnes christo
lucrifaciant, non que sua sunt singuli consider antes sed que sunt aliorum, et
havere animu^ omnibus prodesse semper paratum, nocere vero nullis, nu^quam
denique non totis quod aiunt viribus anniti vel omnes si fieri posset et
quantu^ in ipsis est ad Christu^ attrahere per vera cem euangelii sermonem,
cuius maximum patronum at propugnatore^ esse tuam dominationem sciunt omnes qui
te vere noscu^t, quamuis ab inuidis male audit no^nu^qua^ dominatio tua* sed
quis a sicopha^tarum calu^niis omnino erit imunis? adeo vt ne Christus ipse
agnus ille immaculatus qui peccatum non fecit nec inventus est dolus in ore ^ue
ab horum calumniis fuerit expers, perge igitur Colendissime dn^e quo cepit
dominatio tua a recto euangelii tramite latum quod aiunt vngue^ non discedens
aliquando, et canu^ oblatra^tiu^ calu^nias no^ curabis vnqua^, vincet tandem
veritas, et o^a spartam qua^ nactus es, ac ea que decent sana^ loquere, et
alios que vera et pia sunt loqui iubeto ea authoritate qua in eos polles, vt
fidelis apud deum patrem celestem inueniaris in nouissimo, hoc enim si feceris
non tantum gioriam dei illustrabis maxim, veru^etiam te et alios multos
saluabis, alios deo rationem de tale^tis concreditis redditurus es maximam die
et hora qua nescis. Nam cui multum donatum est, multum ab eo requiretur. Deu^
optimum maximu^ precor, vt in omnibus ita in hoc mortali corpore te geras, et
in ea vacatione ad qua^ a deo es vocatus vt oportet ambules, deo per omnia
placens, vt cu^ apparuerit pri^ceps ille pastorum reports immarcessibilem
glory corona^ bonis oi^bus ante co^stitutione^ mu^di paratam a deo patre, cui
cu^ filio and spiritu sancto sit omnis honor et gloria in secula. AMEN

The preface to the reader.
GRace and peace from god the father of our lord Jesus Christ be unto all the^
that loves favors and promoteth the treweth of gods holy word. Amen. For
as much as lies hyd in the letter and unknown to the lay people the greatter
part of the profyt of holy scryptures now commanded by the Kings Majesty
to be had and red in English, for the the which thanks are to be given to
god, high laud and praise to the Kings Majesty, that would his people should
not lake the necessary food of their souls, which is the word of god to
feade them spiritually in their souls, that they should not perysh, but live
here a life acceptable to god always in the love and fear of god, by true
knowledge of him, which knowledge commyth by hearing reading studyinge of
gods word, or by preaching of it, or by reading of some exposition or
co^mentary wrytyn in latyne or in ynglysh, where in godds word is purely and
syncerly opened and declared to gods glory and to the profyt of other.

That part of this great profyt should the better be known and optayned I
(although I know my talent is of the lest sort) have written this exposition
in ynglyshe upon the Epistle of saint Paul to the Philippians for the glory of
god more to be dilated, his word better known, god loved and dread more and
for their sakes that do not understand the latyne tongue, but only can red
ynglyshe, that these might attain to some part of the fruit and profyt of
holy scryptures that lies hyd in the letter, and unknown to the most part of
the^ that can read ynglyshe. Although they shall read in ynglyshe the letter of
holy scripture, and do understand the ynglyshe tongue, yet oftymes they another
attain unto the mind of the holy ghost, by whose inspiration the holy writers
of the scripture of god wrote. 2. Peter. 1. Nor yet they atrayne to the great
comfort and consolation of holy scryptures. Therefore some reading the letter
of the holy scryptures have little swetnes therein or love to god the author of
holy scripture, gets little comfort or nothing at al, yea some gather
poison for good meat, error or heresy for veryte and treweth, death and
damnation for health and salvation which comes of them selfs, and not of
holy scriptures, for the scriptures of god be the necessary food of the soul.
Mat. 4. Light to our feet. Psalm. 118. The word of truth that saves our
souls Jacob. 1. That brings the spirit of god and life everlasting. John.
5. But this fruit lies hyd in the letter to many readers and appears to many
to be nothing less, the^ that it is in very deed, it appears to some to be
rather poison to kill them then wholesome meat to feade them and save their
lives, rather to bring in errors and hereses the^ to expelle them and to bring
verite and truth, rather to hold me^ still in darkness the^ to bring in light of
gods word, expellynge all darkness ignorance (...) and preposterous
judgments idolatre, ^persticio^ false trustes vain hopes, in the which the
people was wrapped in of a long time, that darkness was thought light,
ignorance knowledge, death life, damnacio^ salvation, and all for lack of
knowledge of gods holy word false interpretated by bysshoppes of Rome, and
keped from the Christian people, as a thing not necessary nor yet profitable
for them to read or know, thynking by that means to have keped the people
still in ignorannce darkness and blyndnes, that their usurped power and their
false marchandyse should not have been known nor espied, their honor and
glory not mynished, or their worldly profyt not decayed. For they know what
time the word of god should come to light that their usurped power should be
espied, glory and the their profit of false the^ marchandyse should decay. And
seeing there is nothing that more brings to light the usurped power the
crafty falsed, feyned lies pretensed holiness of the bysshoppes of Rome and
conde^neth it the^ the word of god trewly preached expounded or declared, and
that seeing it perteyneth to every one to expel the usurped power of bysshoppes
of Rome and their feigned holiness, I meruell there is so few (of so many great
learned men in this Realm) that sets forth the holy scryptures by some
commentary or expositions to deliver the people from ignorance darkness errors
hereses superstitions false trustes and from many evil opynyons fyxed and
roted in the ^tes of many for lack of true knowledge ^ ^oddes holy word, and
to expel the vsurpe^ power of the bishop of Rome and all romyshe dregs.
Because I did se few or none to go about this thing but many rather to study
to keep the people in ignorance error and in evil opynyons still. Therefore I
as one of the lest learned of all, as it has pleased god to give me his grace
herein, have set forth rudely (more regarding to open the sincere doctrine of
the holy ghost, to gods glory and to the edifyinge of other then I have
studed for eloquence in words) an exposition in the Epistle of sanyt Paul to
the Philippia^s opening this part of holy scripture as I trust according to
the mind of the holy ghost by whom it was written, exhorting all men to read
the holy scriptures and expositions of them with all reverence to god and to
his word in meakenes of spirit desirous to know god, love him and fear him
and to know their dewty to god and to there nyghboure and to use their knowledge
with all sobryete and to flee vice and take virtue, if not for love of god yet
for fear of punishment of god for vice and sin, for the end of sin is
death To. 6. And so I trust I have opened this Epistle according both to the
mind of the holy ghost the author of holy scriptures, and also to the true
use of holy scriptures with all sobriety not passing the bounds of scripture.
And to do this thing I have used the help both the tongues and also of the
catholyky authors that best declares the holy scriptures and most for the
glory of god and the edifiyng of the unlearned in the latin tongue, as shall
appear more planly to all them, that will read with a good mind desirous to
know god and love god this rude exposition partly set forth for the discharge
of my conscience and small talent given me of god not to be idle, but to
exercise it to gods glory and to the edifycatio^ of other, and partly to
excite better learned men then I am to set forth in prynte some commentares or
expositions in latin or in english, that gods word might the better be
known and god more gloryfied of all me^, vice destroyed and virtue and godly
living brought in the stead of vice used and evil living. And so I would
wyshe that hye Ruelers and bysshoppes would set learned men on work, and cause
them to set forth some godly expositions upon the holy scriptures, that the
unlearned people should not err nor take amysse the holy scriptures, or
otherwise gather any sense of them, then the holy ghost wylleth. And for that
cause and other I have here in this little epistle showed my mind after the
talent given me of god. if this my rude labors and pains do agree with holy
scriptures as I think they do agree, I beseech the gentle Reader accept them
in goodworth, and give laud and praise to god the author of all goodness and
not to the writer of this exposition whose mind is and ever have been to profyt
all men and to hurt no man. And if this my rude labors shalbe-thought
profitable to the christian congregation of England as I judge it shall be
counted, god willing I intend to set forth like things in other places of
holy scripture in english or in latin, if it shall be thought good or else I
will absteyne from writing. But if any thing by ignorance or otherwise has
escaped me in this rude exposition that I have here written other wise then
gods word teaches refuse it gentle Reader, and know that I am a man and
may err and that to one man be not all knowledge given less he should be to
proud in him self and contemn al other. Therefore as holy writers of
scriptures says of their doctrine so I say of my sainges or wrytinges, that I
would they should be judged trwly by the holy scriptures and no further to be
believed then they may be prouede and confyrmed by holy scriptures as knows
god to whom be all honor and glory ever AMEN.

The argument of the epistle to the Philippians.
Paul the apostle of Jesus christ being at Rome in prison hearing of many
pseudoposteles runninge about busely i^ every place where as they hard the
doctrine of Jesus christ to be preached set planted or sown. And that they
labored with all their mightes powers lies falsed or craft, to pluck it up
again by the roots, and specially Paul's doctrine to be lytyl regarded they
studed, calling it heresy and Paul an heretyke wordy pryso^ cheynes and
fetters he was cast in, for his evil doctrine he had taught. Also he hearing
in prison these pseudoposteles busely to have gone about these Philippians to
have seduced them, and to have plucked them from Christ's doctrine and from
true faith in Christ, and that they as yet had nothing prevailed agynst these
Philippians in the apostolycall doctrine and in the faith of Jesus Christ very
constant and sure, Paul hearing these things in prison, what culd he think
but them to be men, and that they might be subverted by these pseudoposteles,
and offended by his imprisonment, and think him evil that is cast in prison
and in such grievous bonds as he was. He therefore like a loving father
desyryng the health and life of these Philippians prepared this Epistle as a
present remedy to deliver them out of peril and ^opardye, and to take away
all things that might hinder the^ to run in the way of Christ in the which
they had run and did ru^ne still. In this Epistle first he commends them
that they had received y^ faith of Jesus Christ and were constant in it, for
the which he gives thanks to god, then he teaches them not to be offended
with his bonds for the gospells sake, showing great profet to come to many by
his affliccions, great forderaunce to the gospel of god, and to him self
laud and praise, and therefore of his bonds he was not ashamed, but rather
greatly did rejoice in them, and was contented to suffer death for the gospells
sake, and and so to be with Christ, which thing was better for him although
him to live was more for the profyt of these Philippians and of other mo.

Secondly he exhorts them to unite and co^corde, to think one thing being
humble meke seeking not their own but these things that be to the profyt of
other, after the example of chrih, desiring them to live vpryght in ye mids
of a froward nation, that no man should justly compain of them, teaching them
not to be sorry but rather to rejoice in afflictions for the gospels sake,
shewi^g that he would send Timotheus to them and after shortly to come him
self he trusted, after he should know what should be come of him self. In the
mean time he send Epaphroditus their apostle that they should be more glad
seeing him have recovered from his syckenes.

Thrydly he wylleth them to be ware of pseudoposteles who^ he calls dogs,
evil workers, sawers of dissencion ioynyng the works of the law to Christ
who^ he reproves sharply teaching only Christ to be our justice health
life and salvation with out the works of the law, or of merytes of other
which he estemeth for hurt or hynderance to true justice before god, wyllyng
us to follow him and like to him, and not pseudoposteles enemies of the cross
of Christ, whose god is their belie, their end death, their glory confusion
for they seek eartly thyngys, he wylleth their conversation to be in heaven and
with Christ their savior.

The last chapter co^tenueth some moral lessons and good examples to follow
with meke and gentle salutatio^s desiring the grace and favor of god to be
present with them always.

The first Chapter to the Philippians.
Paul and Timotheus the servants of Jesus Christ to all the saints which are
at Philippos with the Bysshoppes and Ministers. Grace be with you and peace
from God the father, and from the lord Jesus christ. Saint Paul writing to
the Philippia^s this Epistle first salutes them with a christian salutation,
and then shows the matter that he would have them to know. And in this
salutation first he shows the names of them that wrotte this Epistle
inspired with the holy ghost, as was all they that wrote the holy sciptures. 2.
Peter. 1. that this Epistle should the better be esteemed and received, knowing
it to be sent to the^ from their well-beloved friends Paul and Timothe, by whom
they had received many benefytes of God, and was made the well beloved children
of God, which before was the children of the ire wroth and indygnatio^ of God,
and was justified and made ryghtuos, which before was sinners and wicked,
bound to sin death and hell, but now delivered from all captivity of the
devil, sin, and death, has opteyned grace, marcy, and forgeuenes of syfies
by the grace of the gospel, which Paul and Timothe preached unto them as is
written. Acts. 16. And therefore letters send from Paul and Timothe, was
welcome to them and thankful, and very comfortable, as be letters sent from
one hearty friend to a another. Secondly in this salutatio^ he shows to who^
this epistle was written that it was written to all the sai^tes and holy me^,
that was faithful and had received the true faith of Jesus christ, for such be
called sai^tes of saint Paul and often times in the holy scriptures, that we
should not think none other to be called sai^tes in the holy scripture but
such as bysshoppes of Rome well paid for there pains has canonyzat and
sanctified for saints, all though some time it is uncertain unto us whether
they were sai^tes or no: sanctyfyed by christ's blood or no: for they be the
true saints before god, that be santifyed be christ and by his blood, whether
they be ded or on live, santifyed or canonyzat by the bishop of Rome or no.
Saint Paul dedycated this epistle to the saints at Philippos, that is to say,
to the faithful men that were at Philippos living, to who^ he would have this
Epistle red, and of it red, have much profytte and spiritual food, than it
is euydent, he dedicated not this Epistle to the ded saints which culde not
read this Epistle, nor here it red, nor yet any fruit take of it, but to these
that were living saints, that is to the faithful in christ, as Crisostomus
says. Roma. 1. And therefore let it be known to all men that these, that live
well and in the faith of Jesus christ here in this present world be called
saynctes in the scriptures, as these that be departed this present life. The
ignorance of this thing has been the cause of much false trust, vain hope,
idolatrye, and superstition, and that some men has made creatores of
creatures, and have desired of men that was only to be desired of god, has
prayed to saynctes departed as to god, put trust and confydence in the^ as in
god, yea I will not say in their images, such was their ignorance and
blyndenes, and asked of them such things as should be asked only of god, as
health of bodi, deliverance from perils, and ieopardes by water and by land,
from the power of the devil, from lyghtnynges, tempests, fire, water, and all
soden death, and some had one patron, some another of the saints called, yea
of their images, whom they called upon before god, and above god. As some
called upon saint Antonye for their swyne, upon saint Mudwyne for their kye,
upon saint Loy for their horse, upon saint Roche for the pestilence, upon saint
John shorn for the ago, upon s. A polyne for the tothe ache, upon saint Blase
for a bone in a man's throat, our lades gyrdle was for a full remedy for a
woman that labored of chyldebyrth, that she should be delivered with out pain,
and the child sure to be christened, such was the trust that many had in our
lades gyrdle. And this was a meruell that learned prelates and bysshoppes would
suffer so long, the people thus to be blinded, and to have such false trustes
vain hopes, and so to dishonor god, gyuyng to saints that honor and glory,
trust and confydence that should only be given and ascribed to god, the gyuer
of all goodness perteynyng to the body or soul.

The saints nor their images be not the geuers of good things that we have
need of, that we desire in our prayers, but all goodness comes of god the
father. Iacobi. 1.

2. with the bysshoppes and ministers.) He shewyth this Epistle to be written
not only to the saints that live at Philippos that is to the faithful
congregation of christians of the people, whom he would have to read this
Epistle, and to take comfort, and profit of it red, but also it was dedicated
to the bysshoppes, and decanes that was there, of the which it is evident that
there was diverse ministers in the church of Philippos, as bysshoppes to teach
and instruct them in the law of god, to feade them with spiritual food of
the soul, as necessary to feade the soul, as meat and drink to feade the
body, and more to be desired of christen men then corporal food for the
body, for asmoch as the soul, is a more precious thing then the body is, but
would to god we were as desirous of the food of the soul, as of the body,
then learned men in gods word, and sincere preachers of it, should be more
regarded and esteemed, bysshoppes should preach ofter then they do, they should
desire ^o learned men to be about them, and in their dioces, and make more of
them then they do, then the people should the better esteem and regard gods
word, which now in a manner be contemned and despised of the most part of the
people, and counted as a thing of little price or valewe, because bysshoppes do
not preach them selfs, or if they preach, it is very seldom, and do not
prefer gods word, before ceremonies or traditions of man. Negligence in
setting forth of gods word in them, to whom it pertayneth to be setters
forth of it, is a great cause why that it is so little regarded, why that there
is so great ignorance and blyndnes, so many evil opinyons, preposterous
judgments, false trust, vain hopes, idolatry and so much superstition as
has been, and yet is in some parts of this realm, and not as yet fully
plucked away by the verite of gods holy word, for there is very few sincere
preachers of it, and fewer like to be, if god do not provide by some good
persuasio^ to the hye powers and rulers to whom it perteyneth to provide that
their subjects perisshe not for lake of spiritual food of their soul, for
if they lack it, it must needs follow that the people shall run hedlyng into
errors, heresies idolatry, and many false trustes and vain hopes, and call
that is good evil, and evil good, light darkness / and darkness light, sweet to
be sower and sower sweet, and so co^dempne that is good and godly doctrine for
heryse, and in so doing condemn them selfs to everlasting death, and
dampnatio^. As Esyas. 5. says / woe be the^ that call good evil, and evil
good, light darkness and darkness light, so for lack of knowledge of gods
holy word, of true and sincere preachers of gods holy gospel, the people
shall perish and hate their own salvation. There fore I pray god that hye
powers ordynated of almighty god, chefly to set forth his glory and to promote
his word to the salvation of Christ's people derely bought by no corruptyble
price, as by gold or silver, but by the precious blood of the unspotted lamb
Jesus christ. 1. Pet. 1. that they would diligently look upon the health and
salvation of the souls of their people subjected to them, yea of their own
health and salvation, for of them a cownte shall be required to whom they have
committed the cure of christ's flock, and whether they were diligent in seeing
christ's people truly feade with the bread of life or no, and if any of the
spiritual pastors have been nygligent, or have had evil ministers under
them, as evil chancelers or officyalles, that another knows gods word them
selfs, nor be preachers of it, yea scarce favorers of it, but rather
adversaries and enemies to gods holy trweth and no setters forth of it, but
bynderers all that they might, then it pertayneth to hye rulers to reform
such negligent bysshoppes and prelates, and to command them to look better
upon there cures, and se that they be such as saint Paul. 1. Timo. 3. would
have, and to have chauncelers, officialls, comysaries / such as knows gods
word, be preachers of it, and setters forth of it under them, or else if they
would not be reformed and to look diligently upon their cures as they should
above all things to make the^ bysshoppes or prelates quo^dam, and to set in
their stedes such as both culde and would teach and preach gods word
sincerely, as did Titus, and Timotheus, bysshoppes ordynated of saint Paul /
which diligenly taught their people wholesome doctrine, and were not negligent in
their offices, and had servants according, that was both sobre / dyscreat /
and learned in gods word / and also lovers of it / which things are greatly
to be desired in our bysshoppes and in their chancelars officials and
comysaries. At Philippos was not only bysshoppes abydyng and dwelling among
them preacheynge truly the doctrine of god / and therefore had of the
Philippians / all necessaryes abundantly / and had in great honor and
estimation for the words sake that they preached / and for the lords sake
whose faithful servants they were / but also there was decanes whole office
was to provide for the pore / that the pore should not want necessary meat /
drink / cloth / or logyn / such was the fruit of the gospel that Paul had
preached among these Philippians / which was desirous of it and so obedyent
to do that thing that pertayned to the office of christenme^ / that they with
great gladness kept bysshoppes to teach the^ / and decanes to provide for the
poor people / for they regarded more the health of their souls then the
corruptible riches of this world / yea these Philippians of there costs /
kept many bysshoppes / which at the beginning cast Paul and sylas in
prison estemynge them to be herytykes / and preachers of false doctrine / but
afterward / god by his word preached / turned their hearts and made of them
christenmen / which before was hethen / and lovers of his word which before
hated it worse then a dog / such is the goodness of god that makes good me^
of evil men / his servants of servants to the devil / for the which god is
to be gloryfyed, like he did in Paul Acts. 9. Also of this place we may
plainly se that all bysshoppes or pastores / was not such as Paul and barnabas
was, having no place to rest in / bownde to no church more then to another /
having necessareis at the will and pleasure of them to who^ they preached / for
these bishops was abydyng at Philippos / and bound to the Philippians above
other / and of them only they had al necessaryes abundantly / yea peradventure
a certain stype^de assygned out for they^ lyuynges, or else how cold they keep
hospitalyte and prouyd for the poor, as there office does bind them as says
saint Paul. 1. Timo. 3. Titi. 1. And this thing makes against all them
that would that bysshoppes and pastors should have no certain living or
stipende assigned for there lyui^g / but to live only of the almosse and
goodwylles of the people to whom they preach / which thing is contrary to
saint Paul. 1. Timo. 3. That requires of bysshoppes to keep hospytalyte, to
provide for the poor / to have meat drink / clothe / apparel, according to
his state and degree / to bye books and all other necessaryes required / for
students in divinity / no small cost it is to have books sufficient for study
in diuini^e / and in all tongues to be learned necessary for that study / and
that students in divinity should be without care and troble, and quietly to
give them selfs to there dyuyne study / it is therefore necessarely required /
that they should have an honest stypende assigned for their living, and to have
it quietly / or e^s few or none will be students in divinity and preachers of
it.

And peradventure some may move here a question / and ask whether it is
better for gods glory / and the salvation of man / that bysshoppes and
pastores should have a certain living asygned as dew to them / to require for
there living / and to require no more / or to live of the only almosse / that
the people would give unto irew preachers of gods word / which god says /
is wordy their meat Matthew. 10. The workman is wordy his meat / by meat he
understands all necessaries for him to live / and quietly to study with out
care for an honest living: to this question I answer / that I think it more
for the glory of god / for his word trewly and syncerely to be preached / and
more for the health and salvation of christ's people / that bysshoppes / and
pastoures should have a certain living assigned out for their portion / then
that they should have noth^ng certain. The first reason that moves me so to
think is / that they should by that means preach / and teach / gods word
more trewly / and more syncerely / more freely / and frankely rebuke vice and
sin / and not to flatter men in their sins / or to hold their peace / and
wynke at the fautes of men / of whom they looked for their living / for if they
should live only of the good wylles of me^ and should frankely / and freely
reprove the fautes of some men / they should have a small living / they
should go oftymes hungry to bed and have many pore dynners / and worse suppers
/ yea peradventure be suffered to dye in the street for lack of necessaries /
therefore that vice and sin should be more freely rebuked and the danger thereof
showed should fear men from sin / lest the plage of god which is death /
should fall upon such sinners / which would contynew stylle in their sins /
and provoke god to power upon them his plage of vengeance for their sins /
which they should not know to be sin^e or to displease god / if that prache^s
should flatter them / wynke at their sy^ies / and not rebuke them / nor yet
show the danger of sin / and the punishment of god to impenitent sinners
that will not forsake sin / and live a new lyte in virtue and godlynes / what
was the cause why that beggyn freers did use so much flattering and coryed
favor on every side? but by cause they lacked lyuinges / and therefore they
sang placebo / and preached plesa^te things / norysshyng me^ in idolatrye /
superstitions / false trustes / vain relygions / preposterous judgments and
soch like / to the which they perceived the people to be inclyned to of their
own nature / by the which every one is inclined to evil rather then to good
and godly things / for to do or believe evil things we have it of our selfs
/ but to do good / to believe well / we can not without the grace of god / and
these things did the false flateryng friars to get a chese / or their quarter
grote / and yet for all their flattery they culde scarce get an honest living /
kylling spiritually their own souls / and the souls of many other men and
women deceived by the^ / to who^ they promised life. Secondly if students in
divinity be not quiet at there study / and have not their mind upon that they
study / but be unquieted / careful for their dinner and supper / ^acke wholesome
meat and drink / lack fire or warm clothes / little profyt they shall do at
their book / they shall not be able to come to such learning as is necessarily
required for gods glory and the salvation of christ's people. Thyrdly in the
old testament the living for the levites that served in temple was certain /
and appointed by almighty god that there dewty should not be denied to them he
commanded by Moses law / how much more now should it be certain / what
thing should be dew to the minister of gods holy word / that he might have
both to live on for him self / his servants and howseolde / and also for
hospitalite to be kept for other that needs. And how can he keep hospitalite
except he have some thing where upon he may keep hospitalyte / and feade other
corporally as he should do. Fortlye to assign a certain living to the
menister of gods word / for his living shall be less pain and less troble
to the people to pay it / then if every day / or weke they should be trobled
to give to him, that thing should be very tedyous to the people and very
troblesom to the pastor. Therefore seeing that gods law commands / and god
has so ordynated that he that preaches the gospel should live by the
gospel. 1 Cor. 9. Hye powers and reulers has done well assignyng to every
pastor his living in a certanty to be received with out troble or besines. But
would to god that the hye powers / that as they have assigned by their godly
laws this thing, so they would se that the people should trewly pay^ it / with
out all grudge / or murmur to there pastors that trewly feadeth them with
gods holy word / would to god that hye rulers should cause every pastor to
do his duty / and suerly to have his dwety again / and no part of it to be
with drawn from him / for the work man is worthy his meat. Math. 10.

3. Grace and peace from god the father and from our lord Jesus christ be unto
you.) Here is showed what things Paul and Timotheus desired to these
Philippia^s, they wysshed not kingdoms and impyres of this world / not
wordely honors / or riches / not fat benefyces / or bysshoprykes / not hye
honors / or wordely dignites / as carnal men wysshes to the^ friends / and
lovers / children / or kynsfolkes / but they wysshed to them the grace / favor
^ and the love of god / which things far passes all these corruptyble
wordely riches / they also wyshe them peace with god the father / which peace
comes not of man / nor of the me^yies of man / by warkes / deeds wrought by
man / but of the mar^y and goodness of god / and this peace with god in their
conscience has not evil men / for they always fear god / and rekeneth him as
a cruel judge which without mercy will punish sinners / and brekers of his
laws / and therefore says the prophet: The evil say peace peace / and they
have no peace in there conscience with god / but these that be justified by
faith they have peace with god / i^ there conscience ^ and lovely fear god.
And here we may learn grace / favor / and love of god / peace with god not to
be of our selfs / but to be the gifts of god freely given them to whom it
pleases god to give these gifts. Here also we may learn what thing one
christian should desire to an other / and wyshe in their letters, salutatio^s
or other wise, most chefly / and before all wordly goods or riches / that is
the great favor of god / and peace in conscience with god / for what thing
in this world can be pleasant to that man / that in conscience is not at
quietness with god? surely nothing / and if thou will have peace with god / se
thou be in peace / concord / and unite with thine neighbor / or else thou can
not be in peace with god.

I thank my god as often as I remember you (which I always do in my prayers
for you all, and pray with gladness) because of your felowshyppe which you have
in the gospel, from the first day unto now, and am surely certyfyed of this,
that he which has bego^ne that good work in you, shall go forth with it,
until the day of Jesus christ, as it becomes me to judge of you all,
because I have you in my heart, as those that are partakers with me of grace in
my bonds, in defending and stablysshynge of the gospel, for god is my
record, how I long after you all, even from the very heart root in Jesus
Christ. After the salutation the Apostle begins to show the things that
he would have known to these Philippians / and first of all he grueth thanks
to god for these Philippians / that they had received the faith of Jesus christ
/ and that they did stand sure and constante in it / not shrynkynge away from
christ / for no affliccion or persecution / by no craft / or sutteltey used by
false apostels to bring them from christ's faith / and in this thing the
apostle teaches us to give thanks to god / for benefytes of god given to
other / and not to be sorry / as some be for gods gifts given abundantly to
other / which they them self lack / and therefore they are sorry that other
should have that they lack / as more knowledge / learning / or connyng in
gods word then they / they are blind and ignorant and would have all other
as ignorant / and blind as they be. He prayseth them that they were co^med in
to the communion of the gospel / and made pertakers of salvation by christ /
showed to the^ be the gospel / and this he does because he would have them
more desirous of the gospel / and of the knowledge of christ / and to be more
constant in the faith of christ. Virtus enim laudata crescit. Virtue commended
does not make good men proud / but more diligent to increase virtue and to
attain unto it. Also we be here taught to pray for other to be glade of gifts
of god given / and specially above all things for the word of god purely and
sincerely preached / of the which comes faith / for faith comes by herynge
/ herynge of the word of god. Rom^. 10. So these people received faith by the
preaching of saint Paul / and was made pertakers of the gospel / and of health
/ and salvation by christ. Acts* 16

2. From the first day unto now / having this thing persuaded unto me /
that he which has begone this good work in you will go forth with it until
the day of the lord.) This thing the apostle would have persuaded unto these
Philippians that god which has begone this good work in them / that has
called them from infidelite / superstition / idolatre / fornication / auoutre /
and from many other gentle facions / and hethen manners, to the faith of Jesus
christ / and to an holy conversation of living / he that has begone this
good work in them that he will go forth and increase them more and more in
faith and true holiness by the knowledge of gods holy word. And here he
shows the common saying oftymes to be true. that of good begynni^g comes
good endyng / and that god contynueth in good men / and obedient persons /
these good works, that he has in them begun / here we may learn^ to judge
these to fynish well / and bring their matters to a good pass, that begin
well / yea this place teaches us to know that it is god / and not we that
begins a good work in us / and also that it is god that bring to a good
end a good work / of the which we learn the beginning of faith / or of good
works and the increasment of them to be not of us / of our myghtes strength /
power or merytes / but to be of god only / and of his fre grace / and goodness.
This place shows that we of our own fre will / with out the grace of god /
are not able to begin any good work / nor to go forth with it / nor to
fynysh it / for we of our selfs are not able to think any good thought as of
our self / but all our abylyte is of god. 2. Cor. 3. Of our self we are not
able to will any good work / for god works in us / wylling of good things
for his good wylles sake. Philip. 2. And christ says in John. 6. with out me
you can do no thing / then what shall we ascribe / to our fre will with out
christ / and without the grace of god / surely nothing that is good / evil
comes of our self / and all goodness of god the father of light. James. 1.
And if these be true as they be in very deed / then me thynkes that they err,
and are to be blamed that say that we of our fre will may do good / may
assent and receive the grace of god / offered to all men / or not to assent to
it / and forsake it if we list / and at our pleasure / and fre will / o^ else
our will they say con not be fre or called a fre will: of these men I would
ask one question whether to assent to the grace of god offered and to receive
it is good or no? and if it be good / as I trust none will deny / then it is
of god the father / and not of us. James. 1. To this question sancte Augustyne
make answer / and says that in outward works indifferent another good nor
evil of them selfs / that we have a certain fre lyberty to do them / or not
to do the^ / as to lift up a straw or to lay it down again, but to do any
thing that is acceptable to god / or merytorius as they were wont to call
works pertaynyng to our justification / or to the salvation of a christen man
/ we can not without the grace of god / nor yet to will it / nor to assent to
it / it holy hanges of god / and of his grace / and not of us or of our merytes
or good will without gods workyng in us / and making our will ill of it
self, good and conformable to his will / for the grace of god heals our
evil will / and makes it agreyng to his godly will / and so conformable to it
/ that we wyllyngly and freely and with gladness do these things that god
wylleth and commands / so we holped with the present grace of god of a good
will and gladly do the works of god, not we do gods works, but rather the
grace of god in us. Augustine in his book of grace and fre will thus says.
Cooperando deus in nobis perficit, quod operando incepit, quoniam ipse vt
velimus operatur incipiens, qui volentibus cooperatur perficiens, propter quod
ait hic apostolus, quonia^ qui operatur in vobis opus bonu^ perficiet vsque in
diem Jesus christi, vt ergo velimus sine nobis operatur, cum aute^ volumus, and
sic volumus vt faciamus, nobiscu^ cooperatur, tame^ sine illo vel operante vt
velimus, vel cooperante cum volumus ad bona pietatis opera nihil valemus. Beda
hec colligit verba ex augustino in hunc locu^ Pauli.

3. As it becomes me to judge of you all.) In these words the apostle shows
his hearty and loving mind toward these Philippians, that he did not flatter
nor deceive them with feyned and deceytfull words, but symply as he thought of
them, so he spoke and judged of them, for he culde think none other but that
good beginning should have a good ending / and here he teaches all in their
yougth to use and exercise vertuosnes, for as the common sayng is, he that in
his yougth no virtue will use, in age all honor will him refuse, a saying not
more common then true / and also they say that tymely crowketh the tree, that
good cammoke will be, use therefore in yougth true virtue, and get godly
learning, that thou may have honor among men, and glory with god
everlasting. The cause why he thought just and convenient thus to think of
them, because the grace of god leueth or forsakes no man which before do not
leave and forsake god and well doing, and therefore he thought that god would
not forsake them doing well, and ever going for wards in the knowledge of
gods word / and in holy works commanded by it to be done of the
christians, and to walk in the^. Ephe. 2 And therefore he thought that god
would work in them mo and mo good works, and that he would not leave them
until the hour of death, and until the day of the lord, when he shall come
to judge the quycke and dead, and to reward all good works, that is to say
all these works that god has wroght in us God is so good and lovynge that
these works which he works in us, he calls our works, and will reward
them as if they were only our works, and not by his grace. Esaias. 36. says /
Lord thou hatst wrought in us al our works. Also Lyra here says, as the
beginning of a meretorius work is of god, so is the contynuance and the end
of it of god. The apostle speaks these words not that he would make them
proud, or to be negligent to do well, but rather that he should provoke them
the more to go forward in well doing, and to increase the good hoope he had
conceived, and not to lose by negligence the grace of god, the assystent help
and aid of the lord.

4. Because I have you in my heart, as those that are partakers with me of
grace in my bonds in defending and stablysshyng of the gospel.) Here be
tokens of love toward them showed, that he remembers them in heart, and in
his bonds, and presonme^t which was not for his fautes but for the gospel of
god, which bonds was not to him any shame or rebuke, or hinderance to the
gospel of god, but to his great laud and praise, and to the forderaunce and
increasement of the gospel, and that by his bonds the gospel was not
slaundered but promoted defended and surely confirmed, of the which we may
learn afflictions persequutions inprysonment bonds chains, and fetters to
the true preachers and reachers of gods word to be no new thing, to be no
shame nor rebuke to such faithful prechers, although flesh and carnal
wosdome other ways do think and judge, flesh judges affliccions
persequucions impresonments to be shameful to hinder the word of god, but god
do make these affliccions to promote his gospel and increase it, and makes the
wisdom of the flesh, and of the wordly wysemen to be folyshnes before him
and in his sight. Here the apostle brynketh these Philippians to his love
first in that he did give god thanks for them, that they had received the
gospel, and was made partakers of eternal health declared by the gospel to
them. Secondly he gets their love in that he prayed for the^ always in his
prayers to god, desyryng and wysshing them good and godly things, as mercy,
peace, fouour and love with god the father and such like. Thirdely they culde
not but love him which not only in wealth and prosperyte did remember the^,
wysshe them good, and prayed for them, but also did remember them in his
affliccions and in preson for the gospel sake preached to the gentyls, and
wrote unto them so comfortable, and also profitable an epistle. Also here he
remembers his affliccions which he calls the defense and confyrmatio^ of
the gospel, and therefore rather to be loved and wysshed for, then to be hated
of any christian, so the apostle calls his affliccions for the gospel the
defense of the gospel. 2. Timo. 4. In my first defense no man was present
with me (I pray god it be not imputed to them of god) but the lord, which
was ^uer present with me and did strength me, that by me the gospel should be
preached and the gentyles here the gospel. And I was delivered from the mouth
of the lion (so he calls Ne^o the Emperor, a lion for his ^ruelnes) so Paul
used him self in preson and defended the gospel, that the gospel was stoutly
defended and also greatly increased by his imprisonment as here after is showed
/ so afflyccions imprysonment persequutions and death of faithful preachers be
not shamful worthy rebuke nor be hynderaunce to the gospel, but be lawdable
defend promote and increase it, and therefore faithful ministers of gods
word have no cause to be sorry in their trybulations for the gospels sake, but
rather to rejoice and be glade, for such be blessed of god that suffers for
christ, and for his word, and shall be pertakers of glory with christ, and so
shall they all be that suffers with christ. Roma. 8. wherefore he says you
Philippians as you be partakers of my affliccions and so with me suffer with
christ / if you contynew with me in mine affliccions you shall be partakers of
the grace glory and everlasting life with me, which thing I think it meat to
think of you all, for so good begyn^ynges makes me to have that good hoope in
you, that you will co^tynew to the end well doing. 5. For god is my record,
how I long after you all, even from the very heart rote in Jesus christ.) The
apostle brings in god to wytnes, which knows all things and the secrets
of man's heart, for god is only the sercher of the heart, that he spoke these
words of no carnal affection, or for any lucre sake, but for the pure love he
had toward them, and that he loved them for no other cause, but that he did
se them lovers of christ and of his holy word, and them such as declared by
their living that they loved god, had received his word, and was doe^s of it,
and that they were constante in it, and therefore worthy praise. Here we may
learn of Paul that it is lauful for christ me^ so^times to bring in god for
wytnes, as here Paul did confyrme the truth spokyn, which thing was for the
glory of god and for the profyt of other, and to confyrme bounds of peace made
the better to be keped because of the promise confyrmed by an oath, which
should in no wise be broken, sweryng in every try^yng matters and for light
things, nor yet in daily communication and where no need is to confirm gods
trweth nor profyt to other should not be among christen men, less by
ofttymes sweryng men run in to perjury to blasphemy of god, on reverent take
gods name, and so break gods commandment, offend god and provoke him to
anger, and to power his vengeance upon such swearers for it is written that
the sword of gods vengeance shall not go from the house of him that is
perjured, fear therefore to swear that you may esca^e the punishmente of god
that is threatened for such as take the name of god in vain, and will swear by
the blessed body of our lord, by his arms sides feet legs gottes and by
all his members, by the holy mass at every word they speak, or in every small
matter where no need is to swear, where no just cause compels them to
swear, to such it is spoken Deuteronomy. 5. that he shall not be unpunished that
takes the name of god in vain, or brings in his name onreuerenly, for his
name is to be sanctified and hallowed always, and god is not to be brought in
wytnes of a false matter or to confirm our lies, for god will punysshe al such
that abuse his holy name / it greueth al good men to here the great swerynge
that is used comenly of all men, and specially of soudgers, serving men, and
courchars, how at every word gods holy name shall be blasphemed, and that they
rebuked for it will not, or can not leave sweryng because they have accostemed
them selfs with blasphemy of god, but if they will contynew still in their
evil custom, it will bring them to the devil, everlasting death and
dampnation, it were better for them to leave their evil custom be time, then
to go to the devil. Also god will not suffer such blasphemers to be on
punyshed, but he will other punish them here in this world or else in the
world to come, or peradventure in both, as oftymes it chan^t^ that swears be
both punished here and in the world to come, here god punysheth such with
poverty hungrye cold imprysonment sp^knes evil deaths and sodene deaths,
yea and with this punishmente they be pun^shed here, that all good men flies
their company abhors their co^municatio^ and hates their blasphemous
words, and this thing are great swearers sure of, that these that be great
swearers be lest trusted, therefore if fear of god wy^l not with draw euy^l
men from swearynge and blasphemy, let the wordly punishment pluck them from
it, let hye ruelers make strait laws for pe^iury and sweryng, let them swear
not them selfs but when need shall require, let them use few oaths, for the
multitude of oaths makes oaths less set by, and perjury unpunished makes it
to be counted as no sin or offense to god, nor to man, wha^ queste impanneled
and sworn by an oath upon a book wy^ not do some thing contrary to their oath,
at the request of them that bears the rule and swing in that shyre they are
in what thing shall not go on their side? and at their peasure? examples may be
seen in to many places and shyres, god amend it, and make hye rulers to look
upon the matter that perjury and blasphemy of gods holy name may be avoided,
and this evil use of sweryng left, that gods name may not be called on but
in a trwe matter when need shall be with great honor and reverence according.

And for the same I pray, yt your love may increase more and more in all
manner of knowledge, and in all experyence, that ye may prove, what is best,
that ye may be pure, and such as hurt no man's conscience unto the day of
christ filled with the fruits of ryghtusnes, which come by Jesus christ unto
the glory and praise of god. Consider here good reader what Paul desires in
his prayers to these Philippians, he desires them to be increased more and
more in charity, and in all knowledge and spiritual understanding of god and
of christ Jesus, and in these he teaches us what thing we should desire to
other, and to wisshe charity and spiritual knowleg to be increased more and
more to other / he also teaches that it is the office of every good christian
to desire and get more and more knowledge of god and of christ Jesus, and that
we may as long as we live ever get more and more knowelege of god, that no
man be he never so well learned should think him to have all knowledge of god
or so suffient learned that he should desire no more knowledge, and as they do
increase in spiritual knowleg, so he would have them increase in faith an^ in
charity and in godly living. And this place is ag^ns these men that would the
lay people that be very ignorant of god and of his word to have no more
knowledge then they have, and be sorry they have so much knowledge in gods word
as they have, this place reproves all them that be idle and will not learn or
study to have spiritual knowledge, but be so idle that they had rather spend
the hole day yea the hole weke and month at tables, cards, dyse, then to
here a sermon, to read a chapter of the new testament, or of the old, such
be many curates and blind prestes and pastors in inglande that be ignorant in
gods word and will not study to have more knowledge, but will spend the hole
day and weke at tables and cards raylyng upon learned me^ and true preachers
of gods word, calling them heretykes, and saying it was a merry world when
there was not so much spoken of gods word, nor so much knowledge, cursyng and
bannynge them that brought so much knowledge of it to men / sayng they would
go a hundredth mile barfot to burn such heretyke knaves* well how so ever they
rail of true preachers that seeks only gods glory the health of such blind
guydes or blind prestes and the salvation of the people committed to their
spiritual charge, such idle curates or people be here reproved, and
admonished to study to get more spiritual knowledge of christ Jesus / also
this place ^ecketh all them that co^tempneth and dispiseth holy scripture and
the holy learning of it, that will not come to sermonnes, and lec^ours of holy
scripture when they may, but will walk in the church in the time of the
sermonde, or keep them idle at ho^e, or evil occupied when they know there is
a sermonde of gods word, or will at that time get them to brekefaste that
they absent them from the sermo^de, so they f^ee from god to the devil,
forsake their salvation, and ronnes hedlynges into death and dampnation,
except they repent and amend. This place also makes again all them that go
about to persuade the lay people that it is sufficient knowledge for them to
learn and know their pater noster, so they call our lords prayer, and that
they have no need to know any more of gods holy doctrine, but these that be
wise, let them leave such doctrine, and they them selfs use all diligence to
learn more and more knowledge of gods holy word, and teach all other so to
do and increase in the same, and as they increase in learning so let them
increase in godly living.

2. That you may prove, what is best, that you may be pure, and such as hurt
no man's conscience, unto the day of christ, filled with the fruits o^
ryghtuosnes, which come by Jesus christ, unto the glory and praise of god.)
Here is the cause declared, why he desired them to get all spi^ytuall learning
and in^rease in the same, that they might disce^ne and trewly judge what is
good, what is evil, what is for their salvation, what is against it, that
they might know light from darkness, and darkness from light, sweet from
sour and sour from sweet, and not to judge light darkness and darkness
light, life to be death and death life, and so to run into dampnation,
thretned to such ^uyll iudgers. Esaye. 5. And here he requires of every manne
that they should have a pure and just judgment which can not be with out
true knowledge of gods holy word, by the which good is known from evil, and
light from darkness, life from death, and this place reproves and condempneth
all untrue and false judgments, preposterous judgments in matters
perteynynge to salvation of the soul. Lack of knowledge of holy scripture is
and has been the cause of much myschefe and of many peryllous and false
judgments in the world, as had all they that judged christ Jesus that
innocent lamb that never did sin, in whose mouth was found no disce^t nor
falsed or craft to be a sinner a dronkerd a deuourer of meat, like in sin
to publicanes and syfiers whose company he used to make them good, as ^e did in
deed, that called him a blasphemer of god, a deceuer of the people, that cast
out deuylles in the name of Beelzebub, and that he had a devil with in him /
such was the false judgments here reproved of the scri^es and pharyseis of
christ Jesus. So Tertullus the orator Acts. 24. Called saint Paul an here
tyke and a pestile^^ man and his doctrine heresy, so now a days many call the
doctrine of the gospel of god new doctrine and heresy, and the teachers of it
heretykes, all such false judgments the apostle here reproves and condempneth
them that so judge to hell fire.

Esaye. 5. If they do not here repent and amend and learn better knowledge,
that they judge better and more trewly. Also here is reproved all preposterous
judgments as was all the judgments of them that preferred voluntary works
as pilgrimage, offering up of candells to images, gyltynge of images and such
like not commanded of god before the works of marcy commanded of god to the
christians to do, ignorance was the cause why voluntary works was preferred
before gods commandments, if men had known works of mercy to be more
thankful to god, better to have pleased him, and more acceptable to him, I
think many good men much given to voluntary works, more then to works of
marcy, for more they did bestow upon such voluntary works then they did give
for the relefe of the poor, yea they were much more ready to do voluntary
works then to fulfill gods commandments, which was agreat token and sign
they thought and judged voluntary works to please god better then works
commanded in holy scripture, for to these works scarce they culde be brought
to by any persuasion to give a crown or a noble to a poor man in sickness but
to gylte an image, and to spend. xx^. of the gyltyng, they of them selfs were
ready enoughe, and yet there be such that had lever give a croune to gylte a
image if they culde be suffered with out blame then. xii d. to a poor blind
same man that be in extreme necessite. So you se the apostle here requires of
all true christians a pure and true judgment, and excludes all false and
preposterous judgments from christ's people, and that they should know to
judge among good works if one be better then an other to chose out the best,
that best pleases god, and with all gladness of mind to do it. Secondly he
desires they may be pure and clear from all vice and sin, from all craft
and falsed, from evil affections of the flesh, from carnal desires and
lusts, from pomp pride and al vanite of the world that they be such as
another by word nor deed do offe^de any that is, do not give just occasion of
evil / sometimes occasion of evil may be taken where no occasion is given,
as many was offe^dyd by christ that never did offend never did sin and yet
he was evil spoken on, and was slander and a stonne of offense, that is
occasion of hurt to the scribes, pharisees and the unfaithful Jews, which
offense come not of christ, but of the wyckednes and maliciousnes of evil me^
that took occasion of hurt where no occasion was given, and were offended
where they should not have been offended, but rather they should have been
offended with them selfs and their noughty manners, evil living, perverse and
preposterous judgments, and have mendyd them, then that they should have been
offendyd by christ, in whom was no offense, nor by him offense given in word
or in deed. Here the apostle forbyddes to give just occasion of offense to any
man, and that not for a day or two, but unto the day of the lord, that is all
your lyftyme, holy living is required of every good christen man and woman.
Thyrdly learn that it becomes all christians to be fulfilled with the fruits
of justice, that is verite justice faith hope charity and all works of marcy
wrought by the spirit of god, and not by our merytes deservings or suffrages
of other, but only of gods grace by Jesus Christ our lord, and that to the
glory and praise of god, and not for our own praise or commendation, nor that
by our works we should merit or deserve gods grace or favor, reconcyle us
to god, satisfy for sin and obtain life ever lastyng of the merit and
wordynes of our works, but good works we must do to the glory of god, to
show us thankful to god, of whom we have received so many benefytes, to
declare our faith not to be ded, to agree to our creation and vocation, that we
be not created and made to be idle, but to labor profitable labors ordynated
not of us but of god, that we should walk in and serve god after our vocation
as we be called, and as god have commanded us, showing our selfs always
obedient to gods will and pleasure.

I would you understood brethren that my busynes so happened un to the greater
forderaunce of the gospel, so that my bonds in christ are manifest through
out all the judgment hall, and in all other places. In somoch that many
brethren in the lord boldened through my bonds, and dare more largely speak
the word of god without fear. The apostle here declares more plainly how
his imprisonment and bo^des was no hurt ne damage to the gospel, but rather
did promote it and set it forwards, that these Philippia^s should not be
offended by Paul's bonds in prison, nor yet think him to be evil, or an
heretyke, or sower of evil seed, or false doctrine, and for false doctrine to
be cast in prison, in featers, to his great slander and infamy, and to the
rebuke of the gospel preached by Paul. And here he shows two commodites to
come to the gospel by his imprisonment and bonds. The first is, that by this
occasion the word of god come to many, not only to the commen people that
come to him in preson to whom he preached gods word, and wanne diverse to
christ, as Omesymus and diverse other, but also it come to the judgment hall
and into the palles of the hall of Nero the Emperor, yea the word of god was
scatered and spread through out all the world, for at Rome was at that time
people of all nations, that wrote home to their countres what things was done
at Rome, they being at Rome, they wrote of Paul and of his pure and sincere
doctrine, and how he was cast in preson and in cheynes for the gospel of
christ, and not for his fautes or iniquites, yea Paul's constancye in
preaching and setting forth the word of god in presonne, and in judgment
before Nero a eu^ll Emperor an enemy and ad^ersary to gods gospel, and the
patience that Paul had in presone and in bonds with all humilite and
^eakenes did declare to all good men, both in Neroes curte and with out, that
Paul suffered bonds for Christ's gospel and for Chris^e and not for any
fault in him. The second commodyte that come by Paul's imprisonment was that
some that had received Christ's gospel and had professed the treweth, favored
and loved it, yet they were fearful, and for fear of ^erse^tion afflic^ions
loss of wordly goods and life durst not boldle and openly profess the
truth and Christ's gospel, such be many now a days that shrynke a way from
god and from the verite of his truth other for ^ucre sake worldly, for fear
of afflictions, loss of men's favors or of worldly gooddes, or for fear of
imprisonment or of life, but these that were fea^rfull and durst not boldly
profess Christ and his gospel were made bold by mine afflyctions and
^ondes, and by pacyence they saw in me, and set all fear aside boldly freely
and frankely professed Christ and his word and publyshed it with great
boldness, and was of god preserved from the mouth of the lion, as I was, and the
gospel was promoted by mine imprisonment, magred to the head of the aduersares
of gods word, which though to hinder and let gods word, and clear to
abolysh it and dystroy it by mine afflictions, but god frustrated and made
vain all their evil purposes, and made them to serve his glory and to promote
his word, and set it forth by that means that aduersares had compased to
destroy gods word and his glory, so we se that evil men's purposes commes
not always to affecte, they atteyne not that thing they go about, they labor
against god, but in vai^e for there is no labor, no counsel, no wisdom no
prudence, no power, no might that will ser^e against god, yea god is so good
prudente and mighty that he turns the purposes of evil men* and makes them
serve to promote his will and pleasure, as here Nero the Emperor thought to
have oppressed and destroyed gods word clearly setting Paul in preson and
in fetters, but god made his doing to forther the gospel so much as nothing
^u^d further it more, such is gods goodness that at the lenght they la^or in
vain, that labors against god or against his word, the truth may be hyd and
obscured for a time, but at the length ^t will bruste out and be openly known
in spyte of all his enemies. Learn here that Paul was in prisone at Rome when
he wrote this epistle, and had no cause to be ashamed of his impresonme^t or
bonds, but rather might rejoice in them, for they were for the glory of god
and the promotion of his word, so may all other rejoice afflicted and
imprysonned for Christ and his gospel, for by such the gospel is defended
confyrmed increased and promoted.

Some preach christ of envy and strife, and some of a good will. The one part
preaches Christ of strife and not purely supposyng to add more aduersyte unto
my bonds, the other part of love, for they know that I lie here for the
defense of the gospel. what then? So yt Chist be preached al manner of ways
(whether it be done by occasion or true meani^g) I rejoice therein, and will
rejoice. The apostle said before that the gospel was pr^ached more lyberally,
and more with out fear occasion taken by his imprisonment, now he in a manner
corrects him self, and says this thing not to be done of all men that had
received the faith of christ and his gospel, nor yet all that preached
Christ's gospel did like wise preach it, for some preach the gospel of envy
ma^yce and contention, some preched it of a good will, so we may se not all
men of like goodness nor of like faith, or of godly living, for some be good
and brings forth good fruits, and some be evil and brings forth evil
fruits.

2. The one part preaches Christ of strife, and not purely, supposing to
add more aduersite unto my bonds.) He shows for what end and purpose some
preach Christ not purely but of strife and of contention not seaking gods
glory, nor yet the salvation of Christ's people, but they chyde and brawell sow
discord and debayte, and with great hatred of me preach the gospel,
thinking by that means to add more and more aduersite and afflyctione unto
me, to make me more hated of Nero the Emperor, knowing that it was persuaded
to Nero that the preaching of the gospel should be destruction to him and to
his empire, and therefore Nero would have no preaching of the gospel, but hated
the gospel worse the^ a serpent or a dog, and therefore he cast Paul in
prison, and thought to have killed him, and the more the gospel was preached
the more Nero hated Paul, as they knew well a nough which preached the
pospell not purely, but knew all the blame should be laid upon Paul's back,
and that he should ru^ne the more and more in the ire and indignation of Nero
the emperor, and so Paul should suffer for all, and so more punishment to come
to him. Se how some times, what deuelly she persuasions is brought into the
heads of hye princes and rueiers, yea persuaded unto them, as here was to Nero
the emperor, that the preachi^g of the gospel of Christ should be the
destruction of his realm, and the cause of rebellion of the subjects against
their heads and ruelers, when there is nothing that is more for the salvation
of the people then is the preaching of gods word for that is the mean by
the which god has ordained to save his people. 1. Cor. 1. Nor nothing more
keeps the people in a good order and in dew obedyence with all humylyte and
subjection to their heads and rulers then the word of god truly and sincerely
preached. It is a great meruell that the devil should persuade this to any man
that life is death, and light is darkness, the word of god it is life and
brings with it life and the spirit of god as says Christ. Ihon. 6. The
words which I spoke unto you they be life and the spirit, that is they bring
life and the spirit of god. what is a greater offense then to call life death
and death life to whom the prophet Esaias. 5 Thretneth everlasting woo? what is
more bla^phemy to god the^ this? yea it is sin against the holy ghost (to
call the gospel of god to be the destruction and death of the people, when it
is the only health and salvation of the people) which is not forgyuen in this
world nor in the world to come. This is an old craft of the devil to
persuade to hye princes and ruelers worldly the preachi^g of the gospel to be
the destruction of the people and decay of their worldly realms honors and
dygnytes, when the gospel mayntayneth ki^gdomes, preserves honors and
dignites, and saves the people from the devil and hell fire and everlasting
dampnatio^* what other cause was that christen princes and ruelers would not
suffer the holy scriptures to be in their mothers tongue as they call it that
not only pres^es but also lay men might read the holy scryptures to their
comfort and edyfyeng in god and in Christ, but that it was persuaded to them,
that the holy scriptures was not profitable nor to the health and salvation of
their people, but that they were hurtefull, brought errors and heresy
contempt of maiestrates and ruelers, and so was the death and destruction of
their subjects, and therefore the holy scryptures was shytte up from the lay
people unlearned in the latynge tongue, less they should take hurt of them,
when the holy scryptures be the spyrytuall food of the soul, and the soul
lacking this spiritual food must needs dye, as the body wantynge corporal
food, the holy scriptures brings life health and salvation as is said
before, except some evil men do abuse them, and by cause some have or do
abuse the holy scryptures to their destruction is it mete to take them from all
lay men? for what thing is so good so holy that can not be abused? that some
have not abused or do abuse? fire water meat drink apparel be things
necessary for man, and yet some has abused them, to their great hurt loss
shame and rebuke and death, but because some evil abuse good things, is it
meat or convenient to forbid al me^ the good use of these things? I think
you will say no, for then we should have another fire ne water, bred nor
drink, cote nor gown, but this thing I think it meat, that these that do
abuse good things be punyshed, and by punishment taught to use good things
better with thanks gyuynge to god, like wise I wyshe and desire that the
readyng of holy scryptures should not be forbyden all lay men and women, but
forbyden such as do abuse them, and do not take the^ and read them to their
comfort in Christ, and for amendment of their lives, and that such might have
them lawfully to teach them and their housolde virtue and godlynes.

3. Here also we may learn that Paul although he preached gods word
purely and syncerly yet he had many enemies and adversaries, yea of that sort
that preached the gospel as he did to the people, (and so they would be
counted as to preach the gospel of god for gods glory and for the edifienge
of the people) for envy and hatred they had to Paul, and to bring Paul in
more hatred to Nero the Emperor, and by that means to increase Paul's pains
and torments, for they knew that Nero would be more ferse and cruel against
Paul the more the gospel of god should be preached abroad and more publyshed.
Here we may se what envy and malice do, and that wicked men sometime pretend
holiness, that they may do displeasure to him whom they envy, and to bring him
to more torments and pains, as these aduersares of Paul did preach not
purely nor syncerely, but of envy and of contention. And if there was such in
Paul's times that so enuyed saint Paul, let us not meruell if there be such
in our time, that envy all good preachers, and would bring them to pains
presone and torments. Also here we may se that as impiete and destruction of
the people was persuaded to Nero for the health and salvation of his people, so
to many christen princes and hye ruelers it was persuaded the translation of
the holy scriptures in the mothers tongue to be the destruction of the people,
so princes have erred for a time, but thanks be to god that error is taken
away from many princes and hye ruelers, and the treweth in the place of error
persuaded, that the holy scriptures in the mother tongue be very profitable for
all me^, that will use them well, and these that do abuse them, let them be
punyshed in example to other, that other may fear to abuse the holy scriptures
of god given for our salvation.

4. Some preach Christ of a good will.) Now he touches the other part
saying, some men preach Christ purely and syncerly and of a good will, and they
be which of charity and of love to gods glory and the health of the people
preach gods word truly nothing else regarding but gods glory and the
edyfyenge of Christ's people, not seeking thereby their own lucre avantange
honor and glory. Here we may se that in Paul's life there was some good
preachers, some evil preachers, nor every one did not think well of Paul,
for some thought him an heretyke and a deceyuer of the people, and therefore
they labored with all diligence to increase his pains, and studed to bring
Paul to shame rebuke turmentes and death, other there was that knew Paul to
preach the truth and to defend the gospel by his afflyctions, and they made
bold by his constancy and patience to preach and publyshe Chrstes gospel
without all fear, and that in the court and hall of Nero. But here
peradventure some will ask, did all know paul to preach the truethe? no for
god did not lighten every man's mind with the light of treuth, for some did
count the treuth to be falsed and lees and the gospel to be heresy and did
hate it, as now yet some do call gods word heresy and true preachers of it
heretykes, and do hate them and persequute them, the cause is, they are not
lyghtned with the light of truth, but be blind in it, whether that blyndnes
has deserved their malice which has bli^dyd them, or the prince of this world
have blinded their eyes that they can not se, nor yet here the truth of gods
word preached.

5. So that Christ be preached whether it be by occasion, or true meaning I
rejoice there in and will rejoice.) Here the apostle reioseth the word of god
to be preached how so ever it be preached of them that preach, whether they do
it of a good mind, or of an evil purpose and intent, it is better the word
of god to be publyshed abroad, then to be hyd under the candelstyke, and so hyd
to profyt none, for publyshed it profytes some and go^th not in vain Esaye.
55. For although they that preach it of an evil mind to hurt other or to
make other more punished do not profyt them selfs so doing, nor do no
profitable work to them selfs, yet they do a work profitable to other, will
they, nyll they they promote gods glory, so god order the matter of wicked
men. So here we may learn that Christ may be showed of evil men, which
profyt not them selfs so doing, but other, so evil men some times do works
profitable to other, but not to them selfs. if it had not ben a good work and
pleasante to god Christ to be openly preached of evil men Paul would not have
reioysed in it, wherefore we may se; that it is better an evil man to give a
penny to a poor man, and to speak well of god then to give nothing at all, or
to speak nothing of god that is good, this work done of an evil man is not
merytorius as they call it, for it is not done in faith, but it is called bonum
opus in genere, a good work in it self, if it were done of a good faithful
man and of a good intent, it should have his reward but because it comes
from an evil man and of no good purpose it lacks his reward before god, for
god does not esteem works done out of faith and of an evil man, such works be
not acceptable before him, nor he promyseth life everlasting to such as labor
without faith and lacks charity, such works do not profyt to opteine
eternal felicite and endless Joy with Chiste. 1 Corin. 13.

For I know the same shall chance to my salvation, and through your prayer,
and mynystrynge of the spirit of Jesus Christ, as I look for and hoope, that
in nothing I shall be ashamed but that with all confydence (as always in
times past eue^ so now) Christ shall be magnyfyed in my body, whether it be
through life, or through death. For Christ is my life, and death is to me
advantage. Before he has showed the evil purposes of them that preached
Christ of contention and of a prete^sed holiness and not of a good mind or
will, but to hinder the gospel (which they promoted so doing) although they
intended the contrary, and also to have added to Paul more grievous pains and
affliccions. Now he declares that his aduersares culde not hurt him, nor
bring him to death, but rather the contrary he trusted through their humylle
prayer and adminystration of the spirit of god given to him, which can and
will make all the labors of the aduersares vain, and make them to serve gods
truth, and to be profitable to gods mynisters rather then hurt to them. Now
how Paul surely trusted the evil purposes of his aduersares to be profitable
to him and to the gospel of god by two things, the one is by their prayer for
he knew the prayer of a just man to be much worth before god. Iame. 5. And
therefore he used much prayer, and desired oftymes the prayers of other to
teach us to do such like. Secondly he hoped the evil doings of his
aduersares not to hurt but rather to forder the gospel by the admynystration
of the holy ghost, to whom nothing is impossible or dyfficulte, but he will do
what thing that shall be most to gods glory, to the forderaunce of his word,
and the health of the people.

2. As I look for and hope that in nothing I shall be ashamed.) The apostle
shows that his hope should never deceive him, for he was sure that these that
put their full trust and hoope in god should not be confunded, should never have
cause to mystrust god, should at the lenght opteyne that thing they hops for
of god, as it is written oftymes in David's psalter, our fathers have hoped in
the good lord and they are not confounded, they have opteyned the thing they
hoped, yea also he suerly trusts, that as god has been present with him other
times and in places in his afflictions so he trusted that god would not leave
him now destitute his aid and healpe, but would be with him and healpe him,
and deliver him to the preferrement of the gospel. Here we may learn of Paul
to desire other to pray for us, and know the prayers of other to be
profitable, and to have a sure trust in god, and hope, that god will not leave
his servants without help and comfort, although for a time he suffer them
to be in affliccions.

3, As Christ always in times past, even so now shall be magnifyed in my body,
whether it be through life or thorugh death.) Here the apostle shows what
thing he hoped of god, that Christ should be always magnified by him, both in
life and in death, that if so be it he should live he would preach and teach
alwhere Christ's glory and make it famous to all the world, that al me^ above
all worldly things should desire and study to set forth honor and glory to
god, and to our savior Jesus Christ, and to think them borne for this end
and purpose, and most speeyally bishops prelates pastors and curates whose
hole study should be to promote gods word by pure and sincere preaching of
it, and so by it puerly preached Christ should be magnifyed in their bodies,
that is by them living in this life in their bodies says he, and if it should
chance me to dye as to suffer death for the gospells sake I do nothing dowte,
but there by my death Christ Jesus should be magnifyed, and that he is the
only savior, and that there is no salvation with out him, that there is none
other in whom we shall be saved, but only in Jesus Christ, and if I shall
suffer death for the gospelles sake I should have no hurt by that, but much
profyt, which thing I desire that I might be delivered from much sorry pain
and many euylles in this world and to come to the heavenly joys that last
always, unto the which I cannot come without I be first delivered from this
mortal body by bodily death after the example of Christ, which first did
suffer death and so entered into his glory, so must they do that shall be
partakers of his glory. Here we learn of Paul that death is more profitable
to good men then life.

But in as much as to live in the flesh is frutful to me for ye work I wot
not what I shall chose, for both these things lie hard unto me. I desire to
be loused, and to be with Christ, which thing were much better for me, but to
a bide in the flesh is more needful for you. And this am I sure of, that I
shall abide, and contynew with you all for the furtheraunce and joy of your
faith, that ye may abundanly rejoice in Christ Jesus through me, by my coming
to you again. The apostle opens now more plainlye, why he said his death
should be to him auau^tage, for by it he should be delivered from the myseries
wrechednes pains torments and affliccio^s of this world, and that he should
be with Christ in heaven in glory and joy, and to live in this life he knew it
was but pain and labor for him.

2. what I shall chose I wot not.) Two things came to the apostles mind, the
one what was good for him only, the other what was more profyt to the people of
christ Jesus, as for him self he knew it was much better for him to dye then
live, for by that means he should be delivered from trobles of the world,
from imprysonme^ts and chains, from rebukes and tauntes of the world, but for
the people he knew his life should be much more profyt then is death, for he
knew he should more profyt the people and bring the^ to salvation by faithful
preaching of gods holy word, and for the peoples sake, lokynge to their
profyt he did not desire death, but rather to live in his flesh, that he might
bring them to Christ and so to eternal salvation with Christ. But of these two
considered all things he chosed rather to dye then to live, not that he
refused labors or to suffer pains of imprysonment or of fetters or of death,
for these things he was contented to suffer, but that he might be delivered
out of the myseres and wretchedness of this life, and that he might come to the
eternal fylycite and joy with Christ Jesus in heaven always to be in bliss.
Here we learn of Paul death rather to be desired then life, and death of
good me^ to be much better to them, then this present life, that they should
be no longer pylgrymars or far from god, but always to be present with hi^ in
glory and filycite. And therefore holy me^ desired of god to be dissolved from
this body and this noughty world full of noughtynes and unhappiness, that they
should displese god no more, that they should be wrapped no le^ger i^ the euyls
and myseres of this world full of al euylnes, that they might be with god in
joy and in heavenly glory, so after the example of good men should we al desire
rather death the^ life as they did. The apostle here reproves them that fear
death, and shrynketh in their bodies when they here of death, as does carnal
and worldly men, whose heart and mind is all upon carnal pleasures and
worldly desires honors and dignytes, for the flesh fears death and
shrynketh at the voice of death, as Christ did after his humane nature, but he
over came death, that we should nothing fear death of the body, which we know
shall arise again an immortalle body. 1. Cor. 15. But if we will consider the
matter well as we should do, there is no cause why we should fear death,
because death is the det of nature, which detre we must needs pay nyll we, will
we, for the sifie of Adame brought to us naturally, and therefore we must al dye
the death of this mortalbody and suffer that pain imflicted for syfie. Many
places of holy scripture shows us that we shall dye. Paul to the Hebreus. 9.
Says, that it is decreed of god that all men ones shall dye. Eclesiasticus. 2.
says also, that the wysema^ and fool dies, the learned and the vnlaerned.
Paul. 1. Cor. 15. All we shall sleep, but all shall not be changed. All we
shall stand before the justice of Christ to give a count for these things we
have done in our bodies, whether it be good or evil. Roma. 14. we have commed
naked from our mothers womb, and we shall return again naked. 1. Timo. 6.
Then seeing we can not eschew death, why do we fear death? it is a folyshnes
to fear that thing that through fear can not be auoydyd. There fore there is
no cause why we should fear death, but this is to be feared, that we do not
provide for death as we should do, that we do not prepare us to dye as we should
do, that the death of the body might bring unto us no hurt ne damage but much
profyt joy and bliss. Diverse examples shows us plainly tha^ we all shall
dye, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, Iosephe, Dauyd, Esaias, Hieremy, Danyell,
Christ and his apostles all, Patryarkes, Prophets, our Fathers, Mothers
Graunfathers, Graunmothers, Princes, Kings, Emperors, Lords, Hearles, Dukes,
Prestes, Munkes, Channons, that was before, is al ded, for they were mortal, so
shall we all dye, whether we be good or evil as they were, the time of death,
the manner of it, the place is to us uncertain, but as the hour of death is
most uncertain, so there is nothing more certain unto us then that we all
shall dye from this corporal and this present life. Death as Christ says.
Mat. 24 Shall come to us like a thief, and in the hour that he is not looked
for. Example in the stowe seruante and in the folyshe virgyns. Mat. 25. Also
the life of man is assembled to grass. Esaias. 40. To a shadow or to a cloud.
Sap. 2 which shortly passes away. And. Job. 14. says, that a man borne of a
woman lives a little time, and is filled with all miseres, and goes away as a
flower, and is trode^ down, and flees as ashadow, and never taryeth in one
state. Therefore let us not make much of our panted sheth, that is of our
freale and corruptyble body, a lump of hearth which is as a tente to tarry in
for a little time as Peter says. 2. Peter. 1. Let us think that if the house
of this tabernacle should be destroyed we have a building with god, a byldynge
everlasting in heaven not made by man's hand. 2. Cor. 5. Therefore let us
watch that death stele not upon us slepynge, and come upon us unawares and
unprovided, less we be excluded out from heaven and from heavenly joys, let us
take good heed that the door be not shytte to us, and we not suffered to come
in, let us provide for death, that when god shall come and call us by corporal
death we be not then found sloo and unprofitable seruaunces, not lokynge for
the coming of the lord, lest he be angry with us, and deuyde us, and put our
parts with hypochrytes, where as shall be weeping and gnasshynge of teath, let
us be ready altymes for death and then we shall not fear death, let us have a
true faith in Christ, puere charity to our nighbors, and live virtuously, and
then death shall be welcome to us at all times.

There is three things that makes death terryble and fearful to men, but they
are not to be feared.

The first is an evil opinion of late days creped in and risen by the
anabaptists, or by other ignorant in gods holy word. Some there be that
thinks the souls of good faithful men departed this present life do not go
to rest, peace and glory with Christ, but that they sleep with out perceiving
good or evil, and that they lack the joy of heaven till the day of
judgment, and this evil opinion makes some to fear corporal death but let
this evil opynyo^ fear no man to dye and to depart his present life, for they
that dye i^ Christ be blyssed and in peace rest comfort and with Christ and
so in joy and bliss, as I shall show more at large by the holy scriptures of
god. The second thing that makes men to fear death is the old inueterated
opinion of the third place sometime called purgatory in to the which place all
the souls as they have said goes of them which is in this world has not
fully satysfyed for their sins by works here in this present life done, and
in that third place grievously punyshed with great pains and intolerable
punyshmentes, which nothing dyffer from the pains of hell as they say, but
that the pains of purgatory called have an end, the pains of hell have no
end, but always shall endure and be more grievous and grievous to such as
shall suffer in hell and the pains thereof, but if we live well and dye in
Christ we shall not need to fear the pains of this third place after this
life, for holy scripture put good men in more comfort, then so, as a none by
gods grace ye shall read here by holy scriptures. The third thing that
makes men to abhore death is the pains of hell thretened of god to evil
lyuers for their sins to be justly punished, which pains men should fear
in deed, and leave living evil and live well after gods laws as they have
professed to live. Men persueryng when they should dye and change this
corporal life, and that they must go either to heaven, purgatory, or to hell,
and that noue goes straight to heaven without he have full satisfied for his
sins here, as few or none do, and if any do, yet the evil opinion says
that they shall not go to heaven till the day of the last judgment, but to
that time be with out joy and bliss, and if they shall go to the third
place, or to hell, they be in extreme pains and torments, men these things
considering it is no meruell though they fear death, how can they not fear
death that thinks their life after this present life not to be better but
much worse, in pains and great punishments. But these three bugges should not
make us to fear to dye in Christ. For the first opinion is an evil opinion
and contrary to the holy scriptures which says that the souls of good men be
with Christ, and if they be with Christ they lack no joy ne comfort glory or
felicite. Saint Paul says here I desire to be dissolved from this mortal
body and to be with Christ, he thought to be with Christ, if he were dissolved
from this corruptible body, and like it is spoken. 2. Cor. 5. As long as we be
in this body, we be far from god, therefore we would be far from this body
and to be present with god, such as be present with god be in joy and
felicite. And. Math. 26. Christ said to the thief crucified with him upon the
cross, this day, not to morrow or at the last judgment thou shall be with me
in paradise. Sapience. 3. Confyrmeth this thing sayng. If the just man be
prevented by death he shall be in refreshme^t, and again the same says that the
souls of good men be in the hands of god, and no torments of malice touch
them, they appear to the eyes of the wicked to dye, but they be i^ peace Also.
Lu. 16 shows plainly that Lazarus was in joy and comfort and the rich man
in pains and torments. These places of holy scriptures and many mo that might
be brought for the same purpose does sufficiently prove that the souls of good
men departed this life are with god and with Christ in joy bliss peace
refresshynge comfort and in rest without all pain of malice as the holy
scriptures before alleged does sufficienly prove. As touching the secode thing
that brings men in fear to dye I think we need not to fear that bugge, for
that place is uncertain to us and the name of it, the state and condition of
souls departed (as the kings book says spekyng of the third place called
sumtyme purgatory) if they be not with god or in hell. The holy scriptures does
appear to make no mention of it, and then be the same authoryte it is affirmed
by the same it may be confuted as says Jerome. Mat. 23. And if it be such a
thing as bishops of Rome may rob and spoil at their pleasure, and will
not, if there be any such pains as they have said or feyned to be, then they
be very vncharytable and vnmarcyfull, charity requires to do to thy neighbor
as thou would be done to, Marcy persuadeth delyueraunce from pains and
torments, and if money which bought popes pardones indulgence in pylgrymages
and in masses said ad scala celi might ryd men out of the great pains of that
place, then it appears that rich me^ was always happy, for they be their
monye byenge perdons was sone delyueryd out of pains, and poor men ever
vohappy, that had not money to bye pardons, for they must lie still in
torments, but how that does agree with Christ's saying. Luke. 6. I can not tell
he says. woo be to you rich that laughed for you shall weep, not all rich men
shall weep, but such as abuse their riches, but of this third place I will not
speak, but this the scriptures does say that he that dies in the faith of
Jesus Christ he rests in peace with Christ, and if he dye out of faith he
is judged, he that beleuyth has life, and he that do not believe is now judged.
John. 3. He speaks of a true and lively faith workynge by charity at all
oportunite and occasion given, and after his habilite. And as for the third
bugge that brings men in fear of death that is the thing that should fear
men and pluck them from sin and sinful living, less they come to the
pains of hell and there be in torments ever more without end, to the which
pains they shall come that here live wyckedly contrary to the will and
commandment of god, if they before death do not repent and amend and call to
god for grace and mercy and opteyne pardon and remyssio^ of sins and walk in
a new life having sure faith in Christ hope and charity, contynew and increase
in them.

2. Here we may learn of Paul rather to desire death then life, and death is
rather to be desired of true christians then to be dred, and that for many
causes, and much profyt to us First where is a true faith it makes them
certain of eternal life as says saint John. 3 He that believes has eternal
life unto the which we can not come without the death of the body, therefore
death is to be wysshed of us that we may come to life.

Second. If we believe god to be our father, and if we love him above all
creatures in this world we will desire above all things to come unto our
father so loving so kind so meryfull full al goodness riches and glory, to our
father we can not come except before by death we be separated from our mortal
bodies, therefore let us desire death that we may come to our heavenly father
whom we love above all things.

Thirdly. As long as we are in this mortal body we be far from god. 2.
Cor. 5: To be present with god we always desire, to be present with god we can
not, without we be ded from this corporal body, death therefore is not to be
feared, but desired, that we may be present in glory with god.

Fourthly. Pylgrames and strangers far from home desires ever homewardes,
and is not merry nor quiet till they come home where their treasure riches
friends lands and possessions be, we christians as long as we be in this life
we be as strangers and geastes far from home wandrynge with much care and
heavy hearts, having hear no dwelling place. Hebre. 12. But seeking the
habitation to come which is in heaven, where is our home our riches our
treasure laid up, surely keped for us, and our lands and possessions, yea a
kingdom an empire, our friends and kynsfolkes, and thither we can not come
except before by deeath we forsake this corruptyble body, death therefore is of
us all greatly to be desired and not to be dred, for by it we enter to take
possession of our heavenly inheritage joy and bliss.

Fiftely. As long as we are in this noughty body we are subjected to many
euylles and much mysery, many sickness and diseases as to fevers agues palsy
dropsye gout pockes pestylence and to many other sorrows pains and trobles
from the which all death delyuereth us, and without death we can not
bedelyuered from them, therefore death is to be wysshed that we may be
delivered from all myserys and wretchedness of this presen life. Syxtly. No
hurt or damage we suffer by the death of the body but get much profyt and
commodite, by death we be delivered from mortalyte and made immortal, we are
ryd from pains and brought to joy, receive life and heavenly salvation, and
then we shall be like to god in glory in eternal felycite and in heavenly
inheritance, to the which Christ has called us and redemyd us with his
preceous blood, and in heaven we shall be in such joy and glory as no tongue can
tell nor eye has ever seen, nor hear hard, nor man's hart^ can not compass
that glory and joy that god has prepared for them that love him 1. Cor. 2.
But to these joys and felycytes we can not attain unto, except we first dye
and be delivered from our mortal bodies, these things if we will consider
them well and deaply in our hearts wey them, there is no cause why we should
fear death of the body, but rather we should desire it as Paul and other holy
men did desiring to be out of this corruptible and noughty body and to be
present with god.

3. I desire to be lowsed, and to be wtih Christ.) Paul desired to be
dyssolued from his mortal body that he might be with Christ, so should we do,
and not to fear death but desire death, if it were so the will of god, for
death is not to be feared to good me^, but rather to be desired, for the death
of good men says the prophet is precious in the sight of the lord. And
therefore many good men has desired death and to be delivered from this body
lode with sin, that they might be with god and with Christ Jesus in glory.

4. But to abide in the flesh is more need full for you.) Paul shows here
although it were better for him self to dye then live, yet he says that it
should be more profyt for these Philippians that he should live then dye, and
that they should have more profyt by his life then by his death, by the which
sayng he does appear to say that saints can not profyt men so much being
ded as if they were living, and so there prayers not to profyt men here living
so much as did their pure preaching of the gospel when they lived upon
hearth, and in their corporal bodies. 5. And this am I sure of that I shall
abide and contynewe with you all, for the furtheraunce, and joy of your faith,
that ye may abundantly rejoice in Christ Jesus, through my coming to you
again.) Not how sure Paul was that he should return again to these
Philippians and abide and contynew among them, and that to their profytes
both to the increasemente of their faith, and also to their greatter rejoice
in god by his coming to them, here we learn that god shewethe sometime to
some these things that do follow, as here paul shows his delyueraunce and
coming to these Philippians and the profyt of his coming. Also this place
wylleth that the coming of the bishop or pastor to his cure should not be
without spiritual profyt for his flock that it should be to the increasment
of faith by pure and sincere preaching of gods word and that they should
more and more rejoice in god, knowing gods benefits the better by the word
of god purely preached by the bishop pastor or curate. And this place does
somethyng reprove these bysshoppes that be du^me and will not preach when they
come into their diocese, that will not feade their people with the food of the
soul, but suffer them to perysse without food for them, how should bishops
increase the true faith of the people that will not preach to the people
gods word, for as faith comes by hearing of gods word, so it is
increased by the same word. And as Paul more regarded these things that
should be profitable to other then to him self, so should all other do both
bishops pastores curates and all the lay people, but alas for petye few or
none seeks others profyt but their own, and so they be well and live in ease
rest and pleasure, they care not what become of other, what pains or torments
other suffer, but let every one amend this fault, and study to be profitable
as well to other as to him self, for we be not borne for our selfs alone, but
to gloryfye god and to profyt other by words consell works and deeds as god
has given his gifts and talentes, for that purpose not all gifts be given to
one, but to diverse, that every one should be an helper to an other, and every
one needs healpe of another.

Only let your conversation be as it becomes the gospel of Christ, that
whether I come, and se you, or else be absent, I may yet here of you, that ye
contynew in one spirit and one soul laboring (as we do) to maintain the
faith of the gospel, and in nothing fearing your aduersares, which is to
them a token of perdicion, but unto you (a toke^) of salvation, and that of
god. Now the apostle exhorts them, that they would live, as it becomes the
profession of the gospel, and as it becomes christians that have professed
Christ in baptyme, and him to serve their liftyme, and to frame them self
after Christ's doctrine, that whether he come unto them, or be absent from them
preaching Christ to other people nations and countres according to his
vocation and calling of god. And hear the apostle teaches all men to live as
it becomes christians to live, whether their bishop pastor curate be present
with them or absent from them, that they may obtain eternal life prepared by
Christ in heaven.

2. That ye contynewe in one spirit, and one soul laboring to maintain the
faith of the gospel as we do.) To what thing he exhorted the^ to, specially
here is showed, that they should contynew in one spirit, that is in spirit of
unite and concord, with all dilygente studyeng to maintain defend and
increase the faith of the gospel, that is faith in Christ gotten by the
gospel preached. To. 10 And to help them that labor for to set forth or
preach Christ's gospel, and to help so^our and comfort them, if it shall
happen these that preach Christ's gospel or other ways set it forth to be
cast in preson in fetters and chains as oftymes chances to them, and here he
calls them that puts the^ selfs in iopardy of loss gooddes favor of men
and danger of imprisonment and death of body to maintain the faith of the
gospel, to fight for the faith of it, and to fear no aduersares nor yet their
torments or punyshmentes for the gospel sake, knowing that they are blyssed
before god, that suffer for Christ and for his gospel. John. 12. And shall
find life with Christ, how so ever they be here in this world esteemed or
counted, or waht cruel death soever they shall suffer here for the gospel.

3. And in nothing fear your aduersares, which is to them a token of
perdition, but unto you a token of salvation, and that of god.) That none
should think they suffered hurt or damage of their adversaries, which cast
in preson or put to death the faithful preachers or setters forth of the
gospel, he says that persequution imprysonme^t or other cruelnes of enymes
used to good mynisters of gods word to be to them no hurt but profyt, no
perdition but salvation to them that pacyenly for the gospelles sake such
great pains and torment does suffer, and the same afflictions persequutions
which be to the good men cause of salvation be to the persequutors enemies and
adversaries to gods word the cause of their damnacio^. And this place should
greatly fear all aduersares of the gospel, that they should no more persequute
the gospel or the faithful preachers of it, less they persequuiyng the
gospel get unto them selfs eternal damnacion in hell. And also this place
may comfort such as suffer afflictions for Christ and for his word, that
their afflictions be not to their hurt but to their profit health and salvation
of this place also we may learn that it is evil and damnable to persequute
torment^ or otherwise to punyshe the true preachers or setters forth of the
gospel, or these that live after the gospel, for to them this place of Paul
threteneth perdition and da^pnation, and to them that be afflicted for the
gospel, and pacienly suffer it promyseth salvation. So one work may be the
cause of salvation and dampnation the cause of salvation to the good, and the
cause of dampnation to the evil, and that thing is not of man, but of god,
that so orders the matter that makes the persequution of the gospel to
serve to his glory, and to the salvation of his people, such is gods goodness,
which turns the malice of evil men to his glory and to the profyt of other.

For unto you it is given, not only that you should believe on christ, but also
suffer for his sake, and to have even the same sight which you have seen in
me, and now here of me. The cause is here showed why it was said afflictions to
be the cause of health to these Philippians, and that not of man but of god, for
to them it was given not only that they should believe in christ, but also that
they should suffer for Christ, and so they be pacyente sufferynge to have
health, life, and eternal salvation, and that this salvation should not be
ascrybed to corporal afflictions as though afflictions and persequutions
worldly deserved that thing, but to god is salvation only justly attrybuted.
This place shewethe that faith and patience inaduersite be gifts of god, and
comes of god, and not of our myghtes or powers without gods grace, for
faith and patience be gifts of god.

2. And to have the same sight in you, which you have seen i^ me.) It appears
of this place the Philippians to have stand styfly in defense of the gospel,
and in it to have been constante, and pacyente inaduersite for it after the
example of Paul, as is written Acts. 16. The examples of good men healpe much
to virtue and to pacyence in aduersite, as these Philippians followed Paul in
faith and in patience of afflictions.

The second Chapter to the Philippians.
IF there be among you any consolation in Christ, if there be any comfort
of love, if there be any feloshype of the spirit, if there be any compassion
and mercy, fulfill my joy, that you draw one way, having one love, being of
one accord, and of one mind, that there be nothing done through strife and
vain glory, but that through mekenes of mind every man esteem another better
then him self, and let every man look not for his own profyt, but for ye
profyt of other. The apostle exhorts all men to the study of concord and to
the unite of the spirit of god showing great mischefe to come of discord and
much good of concord peace and unite in Christ, that by that means he might
clearly expelle discord and bring in concord and agremente in all goodness
and godlynes. And first of all note in Paul the apostle of god great humilyte
and gentylnes, that when he might by his authorite have commanded them and
charged them under the pain of suspension or excommunication to concord, yet
he used not his authorite as bysshoppes of Rome and their ministers does and
has done, as we charge you, we commau^de you under the pain of suspensio^
excomunication interdiction or such like to do this, or that, but he used a
more gentle facio^ to win them, and to bring them to fulfill his request,
that was by humble peticion and desire, by the which meke and humble hearts be
sooner wo^ne and ouercommed, then by roughe and sharp words stubburne and
froward. And by gentylnes he thought he should win them and bring them to
accomplysshe his purpose rather then by lordely commandments and evil
thretenynges, teaching all bysshoppes and pastores to use all gentylnes rather
then great threttes and cruel punishemente and so by gentylnes they shall be
conquerours.

2. If there be any co^solatio^ in christ, if there be any comfort of love.)
His humble manner and ge^tyl facio^ is now expressed saing if there be any
co^solatio^ in Christ in you, and if any christian exhortation hauy place
among you, or if you will do any thing for Christ's sake, fufyll my request
and accomplish it, if there be any comfort of love in you other toward god,
your nyghtbore or your self or your own salvation do that I require of you.
If there be any communion of the spirit of god in you, if the holy ghost be
among you and you partakers of him and of his gifts, by whose might and
power you are all knyt together in one body and made one with Christ Jesus. If
there be any tender marcy in you as should be no other wise then the mother
has to the child borne of her own body, and one man should have toward
another, and not in you vayntyng or dried up, for all these and for the love
that you have not only to me but ^o your own souls health and salvation
fu^fyll this my request and joy, for there is nothyn^ that can be to me more
joy then the fulfyllynge of this my request. Behold the gentylnes of Paul
by the which he humbly and instantly desires them, when ^e might iu^e^y have
commanded them and charged them by great thretes, to Paul be unlike these
that do not desire but charge and command under great pains to the breakers,
when so wholesome things be another charged ne desired to the people. And two
things there was that might have mouyd them to accomplish his desire, the
place from whence Paul wrote these words, that was from the prison for their
sakes and for the gospel preached to them and to other gentyles. And the other
that he speaks to them after this sort, if you will comfort me now in
prison and in bonds for your sakes, as I know you would comfort and help me
all that you can, if you petye my pains and be sorry I am in prison and in
bonds and would do pleasure to me and comfort me, do that thing that is most
to my comfort and joy, which is the accomplyshment of my request the other
thing that might move them was the request and the manner of desire of it in
all humblenes and gentelnes.

3. That ye draw one way, having one love, being of one accord and of one
mind.) Now is showed what thing the apostle so interly desired of them, he
desired not them that they should labor and make sure that he might be
delivered out of prison and out of fetters, he desires not that shu^de be
profitable to him or for his pleasure carnal, but that thing that was most
for the profyt and commodite of these Philippians, that was they should be like
affected in manners and conditions having the true knowledge of Christ Jesus and
their judgments directed after Christ and his lernyng, and that they should
all think one thing and be of one mind and affection according to the true
measure of Christ's word having one charity, that is being all to gether in
perfyt charity and in love, that there should be no hatred ne malice among
them, that they should be of one mind and will and affection reioysyng to
gether and having petye and compassion to gether. And hear the apostle
declares that he was not careful for him self, nor sought his own profyt or
delyuerance out of prison and bonds, but rather was careful for other, sought
the profyt of other more then his own profyt. Here we learn that a clear
conscience and a just cause diliuereth him that is in prison from carefulnes
for him self, makes him glade rather then sorry or heavy, it makes his pain
or affliction to be to him as no pain at all, but that such be careful for
other and desires that other may live a life mete for a christian, and lament
the euylnes and malice of evil men, and prayth god for the evil that he will
convert them from their euylnes and malice, and to make them good of evil men.
And nothing helps more that we should be like in manners and conditions, then
that we first all a gree in relygion and in true holiness after gods word,
for seldom they can agree in manners that be diverse in the opinion of true
holiness and and sincere knowledge of gods holy word.

4. That there be no thing done through strife and dayne glory.) The cause
why he would have them of one affection and mind is that nothing should be
done among them of strife contention or of vain glory, for many
inconnenientes and much myscheffe comes of strife and vain glory, of strife
comes contention debate chiding brawlyng feghtyng and murder, in contention
the treweth is suppressed and falsed and lies be set in the sted of treweth and
the veryte is other bannyshed, or else put to silence, vain glory expels
true faith as Cstriste says. John. 5. How can you believe, which do seek
glory one of another, vain glore makes good works to louse there reward
with christ Mat. 6. Vain glory makes me^ to condemn another and to go by the
ears together, yea vain glory causes all evil and makes men to be
contempned both of god and man, therefore flee vain glory, for there is no
cause, why we should desire it for what have we that we have not received, or
what good can we do of our self without gods grace? suerly no thing that is
good but that is evil, therefore for all good things we do let all thanks be
given to god and all glory, for to him it is most dew and most conuense^t. 5.
But that through mekenes of mind, every man esteem another better then him
self, and let every man look not for his own profyt, but for the profet of
other.) Two remedes is declared against two vices that is to say vain glory
and co^tempcion. The first is humblenes of mind to think him self to be
worse then other, and to think he has nothing where of he should be proud
or desirous of vain glory, and that every one should think another better
then him self and wordy more praise then he, for when every man pleases him
self to much in his own conceyte or mind, and thinks that he does is best
done, and that no man's wisdom or counsel is to be preferred before his own,
and will have his mind acco^plyshed and none else, and that all men's wit
or wisdom be nothing except his wisdom shall approve the same, where such
a mind is there is vain glory and it must be remedyed by humblenes of mind
to prefer other men before him self, and other wits or wisdom before his
own, that unite and concord may be had for amongst proud me^ as says
Solomon there is no concord but strife, but among humble and meake men there
is peace unite and co^corde and other gifts of the holy ghost. The other
remedy against contention and vain glory, is that every one should search and
study for the profit of other, as for his own profyt, for when every man
studyeth, inordynatly desires his own profyt and cares not what hurt or
damage come to other so he be well him self, there must needs rise discord
and debate and many inconveniences, which chance not where as every man
studeth the profyt of other, and prefers other before him self I would they
should read and mark diligenlye what the holy ghost requires, they that be
proud and vain glorious more diligent sekers of their own profyt, then of
others, yea who does this place not rebuke and co^dempne, and let us all pull a
way al vain glory, and let us study not only to profyt our selfs but other,
and be not such as care for none but for our selfs and our own belyes and
belly chere, this place reproves us al for to much love of our selfs and to
little of other, it reproves the^ that care not what chance come to other so
they be well them selfs, so they live in wealth and pleasure having all thing
at will and pleasure and commandment, let all such remember in the mids of
their pleasures, that from these carnal pleasures they shall go, and that to
pains, if their pleasures have been with the displeasures hurt and iniurye of
other, contrary to gods will and pleasure.

Let the same mind be in you that was in Christ Jesus, which being in ye
shape of god, thought it no robbery to be equal with god, but made him self
of no reputation and took upon him the shape of a seruante, bycam elyke another
man, and was found in his apparel as a man, he humbled him self, and was
obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. The apostle here exhorts
us to humblenes, and to seek the profyt of oath after the example of Christ
Jesus, which so humbled him self althought he was equal with god the father
in deite substance and dyuyne power, that he was becommed as aseruaunt and
dejected him self under other as though he had been the most vylest servant,
when he was lord of all lords, and king above all kings of this world,
this thing did Christ to teach us humylite and to humble our selfs, Christ
being in the shape of god equal to god in deite and dyuyne power essence and
substance thought it no robbery him to be equal with god, that is by no
oniuste tytull he thought he had possessed that honor, and no injury was done
to god the father, for Christ is god as the father is god and Christ and the
father be one John. 17. says Christ. I and my father are one. And therefore he
knew he should not lose that tytul, that he should be equal with the father in
substance and deite, nor feared not the losing of it, as these do that by
robbery or unlawfully get any name or tytull of honor or dygnite, Christ
being by nature god thought it no robbery him to be equal with the father. If
christ did humble him self our lord and king it is a shame for us servants
and subjects to be proud seeing we have nothing good but of him, by him and
for his sake as John teaches. John. 1. All things are by him and without him
nothing is made. This place shows in Christ two natures that is to say his
dyuyne nature and his humayne nature, after his dyuyne nature he is god and
always equal to the father, after his humayne nature he humbled him self and
took the shape of a servant upon him, and in shape and manner of living was a
man and took all the infirmites of man upon him sin only excepted (for he
never sinned nor in him was any craft found) and thus Christ did humble him
self that by his humblenes he should exalte us, and bring us to heaven, and
by his example of humilite reprove our arrogante hearts and stomakes, and
teach hu^blenes of heart and mind in words and works, and not only christ
humbled him self i^ the shape of a seruante or as a servant, but also he
humbled him self to death and that to the death of the cross, that by his
death we should be delivered from death, for by death he over came death and
brought us that was ded by sin to eternal life, unto the which we should
never have comed if Christ had not suffered death for us to bring us to life.

Therefore has god exalted him and given him a name, which is above all names,
that in the name of Jesus every kne should bow, both of things under the
earth, and that all tongues should confess that Jesus Christ is the lord unto
the praise of god the father. Because before he showed the humylyte of Christ,
and that unto the death of the cross, that no man should think Christ always
to be in that humblenes of the cross, or think that Christ was so received
of the father of heaven as he was of the world, now he shows of the
exaltacion or of the glory of christ that followed his humblenes of the cross,
that no man should think men to lose any honor or glory by humilyte, but
rather to get thereby hye honors with men and great glory with god. For the
scripture says. Math. 19. That he that humbles them self shall be exalted,
and he that exalts him self shall be humyliated and made law. And here of a
reward that is of exaltyng he exhorts men to humylyte after the example of
Christ Jesus, we may be ashamed to be proud, when our lord and master is
humble, and if we will or desire to be exalted, let us be humble and lowly in
our selfs, for the way to hye honors be by humylite and by the cross,
although flesh and worldly wisdom do not judge so, but the contrary.

2. He says that god has exalted Christ Jesus to hye honors and given him a
name above all names, which saying are to be understood not so, that Christ
was not always in highest honors, or that his name was not always above all
other names after his deite and divine nature, by the which he was like to the
father and one with him i^ substance deyte and glory, but this is spoken after
his humayne nature, and after it he was exalted to hye honors and to a name
above al other names, and his name is taken in this place as oftymes in
scripture for his power and majesty, which Christ had above all other powers
and majesty above all creatures of the world, that all creatures in the world
in heaven and in earth should be obedient to him should bow their knees to him
and give him honor and reverence and acknowledge him to be lord over all
creatures.

3. And that all tongues should confess that Jesus Christ is the lord unto
the praise of god the father.) God has exalted Christ Jesus also that all
tongues of angels of men and of all other creatures should confess Christ
Jesus to be lord over all them, and that of him have they health life and
salvation, and of none other but of him alone and by him and in him, and that
unto the glory of god, that all things should be done to gods glory, and
that o to honor Christ is to the glory of the father.

Wherefore my dear beloved as ye have always obeyed (not only in my presence,
but now also much more in my abse^ce) even so work out your own salvation
with fear and tremlyng. For it is god which works both the will and the
deed, even of his own good will. Of these words that go before he now as it
were gathers a conclutio^ after this wise. you se what is the love of Christ
toward you, that did redeem you from sin death hell the devil, and all the
thraldom of the devil, and that by no corruptyble thing, but by his precious
blood. 1. Peter. 1. you also have barde what was Christ's humilite unto the
death of the gross for our sakes, to bring life unto us all by his death, and
how he sought always the health and salvation of other, do you such like as
Christ did, be humble and meke, loving and charitable, always seek the profyt
of other, and contynew in the same, and you shall be exalted with Christ unto
glory, not by your selfs, but by Christ. And here he exhorts them after this
manner, derebelouyd hitherto you have been obedient to my counsel which I did
give you for your heithe both in my presence and absence, and you have been
folowers of Christ, walkyng according to your vocation, now do that I desire of
you for your profyt, and here he prayseth them for their true obedience to him
that by that means he might make them now more obediente to his wholesome
counselle and do them with more gladness. So we learn that we should do good
not only in the presence of the pastor but also in his absence, as the
servant is bond not only to do well in his masters presence but also in
his absence. Ephe. 6. For in so doing, they serve god which is present always,
and always do se them, and look upon them, and they trewly and faithfully
serving their master do serve god. So let us always be obedient to god and to
his word, be humble and meke, seeking always things profitable to other, and
we shall be sure to be exalted with Christ to glory in heaven.

3. with fear and trembling work your own salvation.) Here is showed what
thing he would have them to do now in his absence, that they should do and
work not these things that should tend to profyt or commodite to him but to
their own health and salvation and that they should work their own salvation
with fear and trembling, as they do which works with fear and dread they
take good head that nothing be done amysse or otherwise then it should be
done. And he byddeth them work their own salvation, not that he meaned they
could do that thing without Christ or without the grace of god, for that they
can not do, as it follows after wards here, but he thought to have concord
unite of the spirit of god, humblenes of mi^de to seek the profyt of other
that these be things perteynyng to salvation, and these that do these things
he calls to work their own salvation, for these works they do that shallbe
saved by Christ and these that shall not be saved, do not these works, but
contrary works.

4. For it is god that works in you both the will and the deed / even of his
own good will.) These words he adds, lest any man should attribute or
ascrybe his own health justice or salvation, to his myghtes powers merits or
works done by him or them with out gods grace or without Christ, therefore
he says that it is god that works in us that we do will good things, and
that we do good works, and that of his own good will and mind, and not for
our good wylles sake, for we without gods grace can not will any good thing
of our self, as of our self, but we helped with the grace of god do will and
do good things by gods grace, by the which our evil will of it self is
made comformable to gods will, and so wyllyngly* and gladly we do good
things. Mark also here what manner of speaking the scripture uses, which
when it does seem to ascribe to us or to our works our iustifycatio^ health or
salvation by and by after it does, as it would correct him self, other by
some words going before or coming after, less to man it should be
attributed or given that is dew to god or to Christ Jesus, which is the
pryncypall auctor of all good works and deeds, and suerly no good thoughts
wylles deeds or works can be in us without gods will preventing all our
thoughts and wylles and workynge with our wylles made comfortable to gods
good will, as is said before.

Do all things without murmurri^ges and disputynges that ye may be blameless
and pure, and the children of god, without rebuke in the mids of the crooked
and perverse nation, among who^ se that you shine as lyghtnes in the world,
holdyng fast the word of life unto my reioysynge in the day of Christ, that
I have not run in vain, another labored in vain. Here the apostle moves
them to join to concord and humilyte good living and puernes of life, and
that they should do all things without murmuring or conte^cious disputynge or
troublesome reasoni^ge in matters above their lernyng or capacite, he would not
have them to murmur other against god or against potestates or powers, as the
people of Israel in the wyldernes did against Moses Aron and Hur, lose they
be not smytten of the fyrey serpents as they were for their murmuring, for
god would have men to do good and to work good works of a good heart and of a
cherefull mind, and not of a lothsomnes, as some do, ever murmuring against
god and against man, never content with their chance or sort of living, but
ever murmuring other against god, that gives no better living or against
some man whom they think have better living the^ they have, or better living
the^ they have deserved. He excludes here also all contentious reasonynge in
matters perteynynge to salvation and wylleth that all communycation in such
matters should be done with hu^blenes and mekenes and of a good mind with all
sobryete, only for that intent to konw the true honor and worship of god from
the false, and for the amendment of their life that they may know to live
better.

2. That ye may be blameles and pure, and the children of god without rebuke
in the mids of the crooked and perverse nation.) The apostle requires of them
an holy conversation of living pure and clear from all vice and sin, that
no man may justly reprove them for any fault, yea he would have them live so
holyly that they should be without all offense given by word or by deed to any
man, yea that they should be fautles, that no hethen nor perverse men should have
any just occasion to be offended with them, or to report evil of them,
although no man can live so holyly in this world, but there will be some
peradventure that will speak evil of him, yet the apostle would have us to
live so godly, that no man culde reprove other us for our life or for our
doctrine, or for our relygion keeping. There is some men so evil of them selfs
that they will speak evil of the best lyuers, and from their evil tongues and
slanders no man can flee, or be sure to be fee from their evil reports or
malicious words, as Christ him self although he never offended, never did
fault or trespace, yet he was not clear from mysreporte and slanderous rebukes
of evil men, how much more can we not be clear from evil tongues, for who is he
that can stope all evil tongues.

3. Among whom se you shine as lyghtes in the world, unto my reioycynge in
the day of Christ.) He would they should shine as lyghtes in the mids of a
perverse nation, he would have them live so holy, and so without fault among
evil men, that evil men culde have no just cause to speak evil of them.
But to report all goodness of them, and to gloryfye god by their virtue and holy
living as is taught. Math. 5. Let your light so shine before men, that they
may se your good works and gloryfye god the father which is in heaven. This
place reproweth all them that live evil, that give just occasion of offense
to other either by word deed or other conversation of living. This place
checketh froward men, chyders brawlers fyghters raylers of other and all that
hurt other by their corrupt manners or fylthy words draws other to evil,
or provoke other to that thing that is evil and contrary to gods will.

4. Holding fast the word of life to his reioycynge.) He would they should
in no wise let go the word of life which is gods word and called the word
of life because is brings life with it, to all beleuers and doers of it. And
as the light shows the strayth way from the wrong way and a sure way from
perylls and iopardes, so the word of god it shows the strayth way to heaven,
and byddes be ware of that way that brings to death hell and damnation, it
shows what things men should take, and what thing they should refuse and
forsake. This place shows how profitable the word of god is to us, that it
is so profitable and so necessary that without it we can not live a life
acceptable or pleasant to god, for it is the food whereby the soul lives.
Math. 4. And the light to give light to our feate, for wantyng it, we walk in
darkness knowing not whether we go, to life or death, heaven or hell, to god or
to the devil, they that take gods word, thynkes oftyme to please god when
they displease him, run into damnacion thynkyng them to do works of
salvation as in times past, we wantynge the light of holy scriptures has
wandered in strange hills, valles mountains wooddes and pastores sekyng
saviors other then Christ, takenge death for life thinking darkness to be
light and lies for the treweth, but thanks be to god for his goodness the light
is spronge up to such as satt in darkness, and in the region of shadow of
death, the night is gone the day is come as the apostle says. Roma. 13.
Therefore let us put away works of darkness, and put on the armor of light,
that in the day we may walk honestly without fault. And these things he
desires that he might rejoice in them and with them unto the day of Christ
Jesus, them to walk in faith hope charity humblenes patience unite of spirit
seking the profyt of other, shynynge with all good works in the mids of an
evil nation of people was great rejoice and glory to the apostle, that
nothing culde be more Joy to hi^ the^ that was, as nothing is more rejoice
to master then is to here his scolers go forwards in good learning godly
virtue and to persiste in it and ever more and more increase in learning and
virtue.

5. That I have not run nor labored in vain.) The apostle he had run in
vain and losed his labor among these Philippians, if they should have
shrynked from Christ from his word from faith hope charity and from good
works, which thing should have been a great grief to him, as it is a grief
to the master when his scolers do not profyt nor go forwards in learning and
virtue, or shall at any time go bakewardes forsakyng lernyng and virtue. This
place wylleth us to rejoice in all them that increase in learning virtue and
goodness, to be sorry for the contrary, for decay of learning virtue and godly
conversation of living, and it reproves all them that rejoice in evil, and be
glade of others aduersite.

Yea and though I be offered up upon the offering and sacryfice of your faith,
I am glad, and rejoice ye with me. Now the apostle turns him to his
afflictions of the which he speaks of in the friste chapter before, and he
speaks after this sort. I am not sorry for mine afflyctions which I suffer
in prison for you and for the gospelles sake, but am further even for the
gospel of god. I am contented to be offered up and to dye, and if it shall
chance me to dye for the gospells sake and for your profyt I have wherein I
may rejoice, not only for my own cause, but also for you, for my self I may
rejoice that our lord Jesus has withsafe me to suffer for his name and gospel
and so by sufferynge to be made pertaker of his death and of his glory, in you
I may rejoice, that by me you instructed in the faith of Christ Jesus are made
a thankful sacryfyce unto god, and content to suffer with Christ, and so by
sufferynge to be made partakers of his passion and glory. If for many causes
says the apostle mine afflictions bonds and death is pleasant to me, as they
be in deed, then they should not be to you bitter or grievous, because I have
you all as fellows partakers of my joy and comfort, for it is a laudable
thing to suffer for the gospells sake, and all afflictions for it, and as
gladness and comfort to be counted. And here peradventure the apostle does
allude to the offerynges and sacrifices thankful to god in the old law
offered up to god, as he should say. If it shall chance me to be offered up,
or to be killed because I have preached the only sacryfyce of Christ ones
offered up for the sins of the world to be purged, to be a sufficient
sacrifice for ever to take away all the sins of the world, and by this
preaching I have preached and made you a lively sacryfyce acceptable and
pleasyng god, and therefore I reiose, and you shall rejoice with me also, if
this thing shall come to pass.

I trust in our lord Jesus to send Timotheus shortly unto you, that I also may
be of good comfort, when I know what case you stand in for I have no man
that is so like minded to me which with so pure affection cares for you, for
all other seek their own, not that which is Jesus Christ / But ye know the
proof of him, for as a child unto the father, so has he minystred unto me in
the gospel, him I hope to send, as soon as I know how it will go with me.
But I trust in the lord, that I also my self shall come shortly. The
apostle shows his great love and care he had for these Philippia^s, and for
their comfort he trusted in the lord that he should send to them Timotheus,
whom he hyghly co^me^deth unto them, which both would teach them by the word
of god and also be as diligent to profyt them, as I Paul if I were present
amongst you, for he is none otherwise offected toward you then I my self,
and is as careful for you as I am, and would as gladly profyt you, ye he will
confirm you in the true faith of Christ Jesus. This Timotheus I send unto
you, that he might know your state and that you be of one mind, humble and
meke, very constante in true faith and love of god and of his word, and that
from it you do not shrink for no afflictions, nor yet for fear of no man, and
that he might certifye me of your state that I might be glad and rejoice with
you. Paul here commends Timotheus both for his good mind he had to god and
his word, and also for the zeal he had to profyt them, his lernyng, his
sobryete and other virtues he needs not to commend to them, for they should
be declared in him self when he comes amongst them. Timotheus is here
commended of Paul for his virtue and godly lernyng, of the which we may
learn, what becomes a faithful mynister of Christ, and of what things he
should be esteemed. Also this place shows to whom bishops should commyt
weyghty matters, as the cure of their flock and of soul, suerly to none other
but to proved men of good fame and name, to men well learned in holy scriptures
as Timotheus was, and to them that do not seek only their own fylthy lucre
carnal ease rest or pleasure, but above althynges these things that pert
ayne to Jesus Christ, and to the health and profyt of other, and specially the
health of their souls that be committed to their spiritual charge, lest the
bysshoppes suffer pain for the blood of them that peryshe by their
negligence, and the blood of such as peryshe be required of their hands which
committed cure of souls to the unlearned and to the blind, that one blind
should led another, and so both fall in the diche, and that is the great
cause why the world is so blind and ignoraunte, and haters of gods word,
or so little regard it, for as the pressed is, so is the people for the most
part, if the curate love god and his word the people do likewise love god and
his word. if the curat be ignorant and unlearned blind both in learning
judgment and in affection his flock oftimes be such like, and so both the
unlearned curat or pastor and his flock hatynge god and his word shall peryshe
in their fautes. And the bishops that committed the cure of his sheep to such
gready wolfes and lions. 2. For all other seek their own, not that which is
Jesus Christ.) The apostle complay neth of mynisters of the gospel, and of
other that was about him, that sought rather their own glory and profyt then
the glory of god, or the profyt of other, much more we now in our time may
complain upon such vnfayth full gospellers as they would be called, which not
regard gods glory or his word further then it do make for their carnal
lyberty, worly profyt honors and dignites and voluptuous living, and yet they
will be called gospellers and fauerers of gods word, when their works do
show that they fauer gods word only for their carnal pleasures and worldly
commodites, and make gods word to serve for their carnal purposes, and so
they abuse gods word, but by such talkers and not doers of gods word the
holy word of god hears evil and be evil reported of. For many says that
there is no man so carnal, so sensual so covetous, so desirous of gooddes
riches lands possessions honors dignites, so crafty, so false in word and
deed so disobedient to all good order as some of these be, that would be called
gospellers or favorers of gods word. But although some be such carnal men
and abusers of gods holy word despisynge all good ordinance for their
carnal lyberty to be fulfilled, yet the more part of the gospelers as I trust
be good men and uses the gospel to gods glory and to the profyt of their
own souls and of other, fleyng all carnal lyberte and obeynge with gladness
to all good and godly ordynaunces. And for one or two evil, all is not to be
contempned, nor to be rayled on, or esteemed evil, but he that abuses a good
thing he is wordy blame rebuke and punish meant and none other.

3. But ye know the proof of him, for as a child unto the father, so he
mynistred unto me in the gospel. you know Timotheus well anough, I need not
greatly to comme^de him to you, whose learning sobryete is known well
enought to you, he has served and mynisterd here at Rome to me in presone as
the son should serve his father with as great dyligence and faythfulnes. And
him I trust to send shortly unto you after that I shall know what shall become
of me, for the apostle looked that he should shortly be called before Nero to
justice, and then other to be put to death or else to be delivered out of
prisone, and out of bonds, but rather he thought he should be delivered from
the cruelty of Nero, and as soon as this should be done he promised to send to
them Timotheus to their comfort and rejoice as he trusted to the lord, to
whose will he committed the hole matter, teaching us so to do in all things
and not to be sloughfull or negligente in our office or in our vocation.

Nevertheless I thought it necessary to send unto you the brother
Epaphroditus which is my companion in labor, and fellow soldier and your
apostle, and my mynyster at my need, for somoch as helonged after you al, and
was full of heaviness, because ye had hard that he was sick. And no dowte he
was sick, and that nigh unto death, but god had mercy on him, and not of him
only but on me also, lest I should have had sorrow upon sorrow. Paul did not
se^de to the Philippia^s now Timotheus, whom he commendyd to them so hyghly,
but one Epaphroditus a faithful mynister and preacher of the gospel, and the
apostell and true pastor of these Philippia^s, this Epaphroditus brought to
Paul in prisone money and other necessary things send from the Philipians to
help and comfort him in prisone. This Epaphroditus Paul did send again to
the Philippians with much praise and co^mendations, for his diligent service to
him in prysone, and for his faithful mynistration of the gospel. This place
shows that it is lawful somtymes and good to praise faithful mynisters and
diligente in their vocation, not that thereby they should be proud in their
selfs, but more humble and meek and more studious to increase virtue and good
learning for the which they be commended of good men, although they them
selfs thinks them not to be wordye such commendations. For they that desire
praise or laud of men, they lost their reward before god. Math. 6. They for
that desire be onwordy praise, and they shall lack their praise of god they
desire or look for of me^ 2. It appears of this place that Epaphroditus whom
Paul here calls his fellow and companyo^ and the appostell of these
Philippians that he was their peculiar and proper pastor assigned and appointed
specially to these Philippians, and that he had of the^ above all things
necessary for his living, and that he gathered of them certain monye or
subsydye and carried it to Paul in pryso^, and there served him, provided for
paul such things as was necessary for Paul. Epaphroditus being absente from
the Philippians his proper flock and sent to Paul and serving him in prison
for lack of other mynisters does show that the proper pastor may be somtymes
absent from his flock for a time and for certain causes, as here Epaphroditus
was abse^t from these Philippia^s, so they be absent for like causes as he was,
so that in their absence their fllocke be not left without a faithful pastor
as Paul left Titus in Cret and Timotheus at Ephesus, when he went abroad
preaching the gospel of Christ Jesus to other people and nations of the
gentyls winning them to Christ. So I would desire that all pastores and
bishops that if they be absent from their special cure, that they should not
be idle, live in carnal pleasure and rest, but be occupied in preaching and
teaching gods holy word to other as Paul was. This Epaphroditus mynistred
to Paul in prison all things necessary for him, bringing to Paul a subsydy
from the Philippians, and served Paul in prisone as an hired servant should
serve his master diligently and faithfully. Here we may se that amongst the
gentylles prisonners was not so strately kept in prisone, but that there was
passage to any manne to come and go at their pleasure without any evil
suspicion, and without all blame. As you may se here to Paul in prison
resorted diverse which did mynister to him necessari things and which was to
him as servants whom he might have sent to men abse^t to do his business, as
here he had Timotheus and Epaphroditus. wherefore this place does also show
that it pertayneth to the living of the mynisters of gods word to have
servants to serve them, to mynister to them necessares, whom they may send
of their business, so should pastors of gods word have a living not only
suffycient to find him self necessares as meat drink cloth aparel house
fire books, but also to find him servants and mynisters necessary, that he
in his study of divinity have no trouble ne care for any necessary thing to
him.

3. Paul desired to send to these Philippians rather Epaphroditus then
Timotheus to comfort them and to deliver them from their heuines they were in,
because they hard that Epaphroditus was weary sick, and at the point of death
therefore to se him recovered from his syckenes should comfort them more then
he should have send Timotheus to them. And here is a great argument of love of
the pastor when he desires to take away all heaviness from his flock, and
again an argument of love of the people to their pastor or curate when they
are sorry their pastor to be sick or any aduersite to chance to him, and that
they can not be merry or glade till they here he be made hole, or delivered from
his trouble, as these Philippians was in great heaviness for the syckenes of
Epaphroditus and was merye when they did se him recovered from his syckenes,
and therefore Paul sent rather Epaphroditus to them, then Timotheus. And as you
hard that Epaphroditus was sick, so he was without doubt and nigh death, of
the which we may here learn that good men not always to have been without
sycknes of the body, for such sycknes is comme^ both to the good and the evil,
yea oftymes the worse sort of men have more health and wealth and pleasure
riches and glory of this world, then good men, for by trybulation afflictions
god proweth and tries his elected people whether they will be constante in him
in faith hope charity pacyence and etc. or no? But paraduenture some will ask
here why Paul did suffer Epaphroditus to be sick and at the point of death,
seeing that Paul healed so many from sycknes and restored them to health
again why did he not this to Epaphroditus? To this Ambrosious makes answer
saying miracles done by the apostles to be made for the infydels sakes, and
not for the faithful, furdermore he syath that god proweth his elected people
with many and diverse afflictions to prove their constancy and pacyence, and
finally he says that signs and gifts of healynge was not in the apostels at
their will and pleasure, but when the will of god was they should heal or do
miracles, and when the glory of god did require them to the confyrmation of his
word and for the profyt of the people where they were done.

4. But god had mercy on him, and not of him only, but on me also, lest I
should have had sorrow upon sorrow.) Here is showed who takes away sickness of
the body and who delyuereth men from their bodyly syckenes, suerly no other but
god the creator and governor of all things, therefore god is to be called upon
in all aduersites sycknes and tribulations by Jesus Christ our mediator and
advocate to the father of heaven. 1. Ioh. 2 Know of this place that the apostle
says that god not only to have had mercy of Epaphroditus whose sickness he
took away, but also of him being in prison, that he should have a faithful
seruante to minister to him necessares in prison. And here we learn that it is
of the mercy of god that sickness be put away and that those that be sick be
made hole, and not of any virtue or holiness, of any hewn stone carved or
painted post or pyller, or of any image made carved or painted. wherefore they
have erred from the treweth, and have robbed god of his glory, that has
ascrybed health of body to this or to that image made of stone or of woodde and
not to god alone, and to him alone has not given dew thanks as to the only
aucthor of their health only of his mercy and grace. The apostle shows
another cause of the marcy of god to him in the recovery of health to
Epaphroditus, that he should not have sorrow upon sorrow here you may se Paul
not to be clear from all afflictions of the flesh, as from all joy and
sorrow, but to such carnal affections subjected and to have sometimes been
troubled with all, as other men be living in this world, wherefore they that
thynkes the apostels to have been without all joy gladness or heaviness in this
body, they do not think as they should of the apostels, but to think them as
deed stones and logges without life or sense, for so they were not, but rather
as Paul was, which was sorry of Epaphroditus sickness and glade of his
amendment. Behold the life of a goodman is very profitable to the living
people, and therefore they rejoice of his corporal health and be sorry of his
sickness, or of his death, but not as the hethen do, as there were no life joy
ne bliss in a another world after this present life in the world to come,
where as good men shall be made immortal and in such joy bliss and glory as no
tongue can tell, nor heart think that glory that god has prepared for them
that shall love him in the end of their lives. 1. Cor. 2.

I have sent him therefore y^ more hastily, that ye might se him, and rejoice
again, and that I also might have the less sorrow. Receive him therefore in
the lord with all gladness, and make much of such, for because of the work
of Christ he went so far, that he came nigh to death, and regarded not his
life, to fulfill the service which was lacking on your part toward me.
Paul now sent to the Philippia^s Epaphroditus that in the sight of hi^ they
should greatly rejoice, and in his amendment from his sickness, and their
rejoice was a sufficient proof they loved him, and so it becomes the pastor
to be loved of his flock that they both rejoice of his coming to them, and
also of his delyueraunce from sickness or other aduersite. And this place
reproves evil pastors that be another loved of their parysh, because of
necgligence of their office and also for their unprofitableness among their
flock. Behold the apostell was very careful for these Philippians, he would
rather lack the necessary^ service of Epaphroditus the^ they should lack their
comfort and joy by the absence of him from them, for Paul was not sorry for
the joy of these Philippians but rather was without sorrow and all heuines,
that he might do the office of charity the better, that is to rejoice with them
that rejoices and weep with them that wepes.

2. Receive him in the lord therefore with all gladness.) He that byddeth them
receive Epaphroditus send to them with all gladness and in the lord, and to set
much not only be him, but also be all them that be such like as he is, that
is faithful preachers and teachers of gods word, which be wordy double
honor. 1. Timo. 5. And reverence not for their own sakes, but for the word
they preach and for their masters sakes whose word and will they teach. And
this place iecketh all them that rail upon preachers teachers or setters forth
of gods holy word, and that co^temneth or despyseth such preachers or makes
of them a laughing and mocking stock, because they do not approve the manners
and facions of this world.

3. Make much of such for because of the work of Christ.) He wylleth them to
make much of Epaphroditus and of such faithful mynisters of gods word that
cares not for them selfs but for other, and cares not what pain or labors
they take so they may profit other, yea that cares not for their life's for the
gospels sake, as this Epaphroditus refused no labors to serve Paul in
prisone and had none or little respect to his own body and by reason of his
great pains he cast him self into sickness that he was nigh death, he chused
rather to serve Paul in prison with the infyrmyte of his body, then to be in
health to follow the worldly honors and pleasures of the flesh.

4. To fulfill the service which was lacking on your part toward me.) Here
is the cause showed why Epaphroditus was so diligent to serve Paul and put him
self in such iopardy of syckenes, it was to fulfill their office and deuty
they ought to have done to Paul, therefore he says, that deuty you ought to
have done to me this Epaphroditus has fulfilled it in your presence to me by
his service done to me for you, therefore you should receive him with gladness and
love him. And here you se what service the people owe to their pastor besides
the gyuynge to him sufficient living for him and his necessary mynisters, and
that one may supply sometime the office or dewty of another. And let every man
be diligent in his office or vocation that he is called to of god, and not
tender him self his flesh to much or make to much of him self, for we
should not study to live long, but to live well, for to live long it is not
in us, but in god, who knows the time and hour of death which be unknown
to us, nor yet the manner of our death nor the place where we shall dye,
nothing is more certain then that we shall dye, but nothing more uncertain
then the hour place and manner of death. Therefore let us be ready at altymes to
dye and look every day for death and prepare for it, having a sure faith
adorned with hope and charity and then we shall not care how sone death, come
to us.

The third Chapter to the Philippians.
Moreover my brethren rejoice in the lord. where as I write ever one thing
unto you it greueth me not, and makes you the surer. Beware of dogs, beware
of evil works beware of dyssention. For we are the circumcision, even we that
serve god in the spyrite, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confydence
in the flesh. The apostle speaks after this sort, hitherto I have taught
you that Christ's passion was sufficient for your salvation without the works
of the law, and that another circumcision nor sacrifice commanded in the law
be necessary for your salvation, but that you may be saved by Christ without
the works of the law. Now from hence forth se you rejoice in nothing but in
the lord for as without the son there is no light, so without Christ there
is no joy no peace no justice no reconciliacion to the father no remission of
sin, no way to heaven no truth no life but Christ is all these things to
the beleuer, in god alone therefore rejoice as I have written before so I write
still, and I am not asshamed to write to you the same things of Christ and it
is sure for you to trust these things. And here we learn of Paul to rehearse
one thing ones or twyse specially if they be things necessary to be known
and should be sure fyxed in the hearts and stomakes of the people, and therefore
it is no rebuke to rehearse such things diverse times that they may be known
and i^ minds fyxed more surely, although some say over much of one thing is
naught, yet I say with the apostle that a good tale may be twyce told as
this. That in Christ be all things perteynynge to our salvation without the
work of the law. 2. It is sure to you.) As he would say althought I write so
often one thing and am not ashamed of it, for it is sure for you to know the
same thing and to confyrme you to that doctrine that is always one, and like
it self, teaching the treweth, and showing the way that brings to life,
and not apply your selfs to that doctrine that now teaches one thing, and
then another new thing, and is contrary to it self, and teaches dyuersites,
of which incertayne doctrine speaks saint Paul. 2. Tino. 4. Sayng the time
shall come when they shall not here hole and wholesome doctrine, but after their
own lusts shall hepe unto them doctors, whose ears do yche, and they pluck
their ears from the trweth, and they shall turn them to fables and lies. Here
we may learn the propertye of true doctrine, it is always constant and one
thing teach, it do not teach now one and now another, or the contrary it
taught before, it is always constant to it self, it shows truth no fables
nor lies, as the false doctrine does teach lies errors heresy pleasure and
lusts of men, now one new thing now another to please men with all, and that
doctrine tr^uly is to be suspected that shows much diuersites of religion
faith justice remyssion of sin and diverse ways to come to eternal life with
Christ Jesus.

3. Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of dissencion.) Three
things he monissheth them to beware of and to flee them. The first is he
wylleth them to beware af dogs, he means pseudoposteles whom he calls
dogs, for as dogs do bark err girne gnasshe and byte, always enuiynge
other and tredyng under the foot that dog that is over throune and byte him
and kill him if they can, so the pseudoposteles do hate envy bark against true
preachers of gods holy word, do byte them both by their slanderous tongues
with raylyng iestyng upon them calling them loulers heretykes deceyuers of the
people abiectes rounagates apostates ragget newfangled knaves and many other
like names call them, trede them under their fete, and keep them down in the
mire or in prison, bytynge them with bonds cheynes fetters bringyng in and
sekyng false witness against them, and all to kill if they can the true
preachers teachers setters forth of gods holy word, these pseudoposteles
saint Paul calls dogs who^ he would the^ to eschew and flee, and in no wise
give credence to them or to their false doctrine not agreynge with holy
scriptures, but greatly dissentynge. Second he money sheth them to be ware of
evil workers these pseudoposteles he calls evil workers, not because they
denied good works, but because they preferred their own good works as their
traditions ceremonies laws costomes and other decrees made of them selfs
without gods word above the precepts and commandments of god, or at the least made them equail with gods law, thinking no less offense before god
to break one of their tradicions then to break gods commandment, yea they
thought it more offense, and greatter puny shment was had for the breakyng of
an small tradicion of man, then for gods commandment brokyn, examples of
this was many both in religion, and out of religion before comysares
chauncelars and officiales, but to al these Christ thretneth everlasting woe.
Math. 15. Saying woe be to you that makes void the commandment of god for
your traditions. Also he calls pseudoposteles evil workers because they made
equal the works of the law as circumcision and other works of the law with
the keeping of gods commandment, and thought them as necessary as the other
works of god commanded, and that without the works of the law no man culde
be saved, as without circumcision no man to come to eternal salvation, which
saint Paul writes again through out all his epistels, and also it was
decreed of the apostels. Acts. 15. Circu^cisio^ not to be necessary for
salvation, but salvation to come to the gentyles without circumcision, and
there is no necessite of circumcision to salvation. Thridly he calls
pseudoposteles evil workers that they did their works not in that name or end
they should be done, for they did all their works that they might be seen of
men, and have the vain praise and glory of the world, and so they lost their
reward before god. Math. 6. Finally they did their good works that they should
merit and deserve the grace of god, reconciliation to the father again,
remission of sins and satisfaction for their sins and life everlasting, and
that of the merit and wordynes of their outward work, so to their works
they attrybuted their justification and salvation.

And therefore the apostell moves them to be ware of such workers of iniquite
and not to follow them nor their works, nor to work after them. Fortly he
wylleth them to beware of dissension, which these pseudoposteles cause that
preach circumcision as a thing necessary for salvation and without it no man
to be saved. These preach not circumcision but concision dissension for they
preaching circumcision as necessary to salvation they preach not circumcision
but concision and separation from Christ, and they separate the people of god
from god and from Christ by their evil doctrine, and he calls circumcision
concision as we alludynge of a good thing out of order say it is deformed,
when other call it reformed chau^ging a letter or a sylable keeping a like
sound in the word not much differyng from words before spoken. 4. For we are
the circumcision, even we that serve god in the spirit and rejoice in Christ
Jesus, and have no comfort in the flesh.) Here the apostle teaches carnal
circumcision which false apostles so much esteemed and preached and of
necessite enforced and required not to be necessary to salvation, as false
prophets did say contendyng us to be purged from our sins and grafted in
Christ only by external circumcision and not by Christ, but Paul here
teaches the contrary and boldlye pronounces them to be made the people of
god not by circumcision, but by Christ and to be purged from their sins
only by Christ, and that they are the true circumcision that have mortified
and cut away all carnal affections and lusts of the flesh which do worship
Christ in the spirit and serve him by a true faith and by parfyte charity,
and rejoice in Christ and have no confidenre in the flesh, trusting health
and salvation to come none other way but only by Christ and by his death to
us all. And here he wylleth us not to rejoice in me^, in the law ceremonies
outward sacrifyces in conning learning in riches honors worldly wysedom or
policye, but he that will rejoice let him rejoice in the lord. Hieremi. 9 Gala.
6. He would also we should not trust in the flesh in carnal sacrifices and in
outward works to trust to be saved by them by the wordynes of the outward
work but that we should trust to be saved only by the marcy of god and by
Jesus Christ only.

Though I have whereof I might rejoice in the flesh if any other man think
that he has whereof he myhht rejoice in the flesh, much more I which was
circumcised on the eight day, one of the people of Israel, of the trybe of
Beniamyn, an hebreue of the hebrews, as concerning the law a pharisey, as
concerning feruentnes I persequuted the congregation, and as tochyng the
ryghtuousnes which is in y^ law I was unrebukable Here is more at large
expressed what it is to trust in the flesh, by the flesh he understands
circumcision works of the law, the stock of Jews he came of, his fathers, as
Abraham Isaac and Jacob, the holy sect of the pharisees and their holy
institution of living, his good zeal he had to keep the law of Moses, for
the which he persequuted the^ that openly professed Christ or Christ's
religion defended, in the which things outwardly if any man might rejoice or
trust in them much more says Paul he him self might rejoice and trust in
them, and give no place to no man in these things, but other to be equal
without the pseudoposteles or else to excede them all. Mark that it helps
much to affirm any thing when he that affirms may declare him self equal
to them that would extolle them self above other, as here the apostle showed
him self to be equal with the pseudoposteles bostynge the^ selfs as far
above Paul, when they were inferiors to him as tochynge the flesh. we learn
here that it is good to take example of our self if we will teach humilyte and
submission when we may awance our self above other but of humblenes we do not.

2. The apostle compares him self with the pseudoposteles and in their glory
of the flesh he gives no place to them, as if any would say, I come of the
holy fathers Abraham Isaac and Jacob, and am circumcised, in them will rejoice
and bost them selfs. In the same things says Paul I may as well as they
rejoice, for I come of these holy fathers that is of the israelites y^ of the
trybe of Beniamyn and was circumcised the eight day, borne of the Jews and
not of the gentyles or proselytes, new commed and professed the law of the
Jews to keep. And if any pseudoposteles do bost him of his holy sect or
profession of religion and say he is of the most holy sect of the pharisees
the best and holiest religion of all amongst the Jews, of the same may I
rejoice says Paul, for I am a pharisey, and of that religion a brother, or if
any do think them selfs famous of zeal and love they have to the keeping of
the law in the^ selfs and in other, in that thing I need to give no place to
any man says Paul, for I kept that law blameles, so that no man cold justly
reprove me for it, and as tochi^g other that was thought to have transgressed
the law I persequuted them, and brought to prison, and to death, such was my
zeal as touching the law which both I kept and would other should have
kept it. This place shows us that Paul was a Jew borne both of father and
mother, of the trybe of Beniamyn, circumcised the eight day, of the sect of
the pharisees, a keeper of the law outwardly without reproach and of a blind
zeal to the obseruacion of the law to have persequuted christen me^ and women
as is written more at large. Acts. 9.

But the things that were vantage unto me, have I counted loss for christ's
sake, yea I think all things but loss for that excellent knowleges sake of
christ Jesus my lord, for whom I have counted all things loss, and do judge
them but donge, that I might win christ, and be found in him not having
mine own ryghtuousnes which comes of the law, but by the faith of Christ
(namely) the ryghtuonsnes which comes of God in faith to know him and the
virtue of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his passion, that I may be
conformable unto his death, if by any means I might attain to the resurrection
of the dead. Now the apostle do not much bost him self of his kynred the
Jews, of the holy fathers he come of, of his circumcision, of his holy
religyon, of his diligent keeping of the law outwardely without fault or
blame, of his zeal of the which he has auanced him self before men and
before the world, and have counted these things as lucre to him or aauntage,
and much to have helped him to sustice before god, but he now bosted not him
of these things, for he knew they profited him no thing to true
iustifycation before god, for that justice before god commethe not to us of the
flesh, of holy fathers, of works of the law, of out good blind zeales
wantyng gods word, but of the mercy of god by Jesus Christ.

2. Chynges that were vauntage unto me have I counted loss for christ's sake.)
Mark how saint Paul altered and changed his judgment, that these things
which he counted sometime before he came to the true knowledge of Christ to be
vauntage to him and to help to justification before god, these same things he
after wards when he came to the true knowledge of Christ, he esteemed the^ as no
helpers to true justification before god, but rather for hurt and hinderau^ce
to his justice in the sight of god. So amongst us there has been many things
which we have esteemed for virtue and to further our ryghtuousnes be fore god,
which now we know another for virtue nor yet to help to our justification before
god, as was many diverse religions of men and women, their obseruances,
ceremonies service and traditions more straytly keped amongst them then gods
word, and the breakyng of them more straytly punyshed then the breking of gods
law, yea how many was in religion that thought they should be sauyd by their
religion habyte coote coull beryed in their habit with in their monasteries as
they called them. But let all these not be ashamed to alter and change their
judgments with Paul, and know that all these things will not iustifye them
before god without faith in Christ, amendment of life and walkyng in a new
life. Also how many has thought perdons pylgrymages deckyng of Images with
golden clothes of sylke velvet dammaske, and offering up of candells to the^
not to have been meritorious works and be to preferred before works of mercy
commanded of god, or else they would not have been so ready to do these works,
and so loath to do other works commanded of god: but now let them with Paul
acknowledge their ignorance and blind judgments and change them, as Paul
did brought to a more trewer knowledge of god and of his treweth, and not be
ashamed to think and judge other ways then they have judged before, when they
were in ignorance, and in blyndnes, lackyng true knowledge of gods holy
word, by the which they are delivered from their ignorance, for the which
laud and praise be to god ever amen.

3. yea I think al things but loss, for that excellent knowleges sake of
Christ Jesus my lord.) Now he declares more at large, wherefore he counted
these thing hurtful to him which before he counted for his advantage, that
was for the excelle^te knowledge of Christ and of his treweth which he wanted
before when he of ignorance and of a blind and wicked zeal persequuted the
church of Christ Note here what true knowledge of Christ does, it alters and
changes men, their judgments and manners, and makes these as they were new
made again, and to condemn these works which they before esteemed and judged
good works, yea it makes me^ to count all worldly riches goods lands and
possessions as hurt dunge or duste for Christ and for the knowledge of Christ,
that he might win to him Christ whom the good men prefers above all
worldly riches or treasures, that he might be made just only by Christ. Here
we learn of Paul to repete one matter wordy to be noted and surely prynted in
all men's minds ones or twyse or thryse if need be, that it might be fyxed
and roted more suerly in men's hearts and minds. Here he prefers Christ and
the knowledge of him above all riches or treasures of this world, showing that
it is better for us to lack all worldly riches the^ to lack Christ and his
word, for he that has Christ he has all things and all riches, for in
Christ be put all the treasure of the wisdom and knowledge of god. Colo. 2.
For Christ is our justice holiness wisdom redemption the light the way the
veryte and the life, by whom comes all goodness, therefore he that has Christ
he has all things, and he that wants Christ he has nothing, and if we
lose Christ we shall lose light justice, the way to the father, treweth and
life. And I am soore afraid that we shall lose Christ shortly from amongst us
in so much that the knowledge of Christ and of his holy word is so little
esteemed or regarded, specially of bysshoppes and hye rulers who should most
regard it and prowyde that there should be many to preach and teach Christ and
his doctrine, and for such provide honest lyuynges with quietness, or else there
shall be none or few that will or shall be able to preach and teach Christ's
gospel, and so shall Christ be taken away from us, and the people peryshe.

4. And be found in him not having mine own ryghtuousnes which comes of
the law, but by faith of Christ.) He goes forward showing wherefore he
contemned all worldly gooddes, that he might win to him Christ, that he might
be justified by christ and not by the law, his merits or suffrages of other.
Here Paul makes two iusticies, the one of the law after the which he walked
when he persequuted the church of god and was without blame before men, of
that justice none is made just before god. The other justice is of true faith
in Christ Jesus that works by charity at all oportunite and occasion given,
of the which is justification received and had as by the mean, for god is he
which iustifyeth. Roma. 8. And by whom we be saved only of his mercy, through
faith and not of our works, lest we should rejoice. Ephe. 2. And yet we may
not cease from doing of good works which necessaryly be required of us to
walk in as to repent of our further life in sin, to amend our life, forsake
sin, have faith hope and charity, and finally to walk in a new life in all
virtue and godlynes.

5. To know him, and the virtue of his resurrection and the fellow shype of his
passion.) yet he contyneweth showing wherefore he counted all his for dounge or
dust, that he might have true justice by faith in Christ that is remyssion of
sins and life everlasting, which they opteyne with Christ, which trewly
knows Christ his resurrection and the virtue thereof, before made pertakers of
his passion, that have dyed with Christ and be beryed with him, that have died
from their sins, return no more again to them, but ded from evil life by
the spirit of god, and walk in a new life, such shall come to the knowledge
of Christ's refurrection and be made partakers of his glory, and for that end
Paul contempned all worldly riches pleasures, that he might come to the
resurrection of the ded, that is, that he might be partaker of immortal glory
with Christ, the cause of the resurrection of all them that be ded in Christ,
the author of all their joy and glory. And that he might come to that glory
which they now have that died in Christ. Thus Paul contempned worldly things
for the excellent knowledge of Christ, to win Christ, to find ryghtuousnes in
Christ, to know the virtue of Christ's resurrection and the fellowship of his
passion, to be made confirmable to Christ's death, that he might come to the
resurrection i. unto that glory that they have that died in Christ. To teach
us to do such like to him, and to count all worldly things nothing in
comparyson to Christ's gospel and to these holy things we obtain by Christ.

Note that I have attained unto it all ready, or that I am all ready perfect,
but I follow if I may comprehend that, where in I am comprehended of Christ
Jesus. Brethren I count not my self yet that I have gotten it, but one thing
I say, I forget that which is be hynde, and stretche my self unto that which
is before, and preese unto the mark appointed to obtain the reward of the hye
calling of god in Christ Jesus. Although Paul had optayned ryghtuousnes by
faith before god, yet he thought him self not perfect and without all sin,
which no man can be living in this sinful flesh as says the Euangelyst
saint John. 1. John. 1. Therefore every one must study to mortyfye carnal
affections and put away all sin by the spirit of god, that he might attain
true justice before god and to be as perfect as is possible for him to be in
this corporal body. Here we may learn of Paul that holy men in this life
was not without all sin and carnal affections, nor in all things perfect
as here Paul confesses him self not to have attained all justice before god,
nor yet to be perfect, but to labor and endeavor him self with all his
myghtes and powers to come to perfection, so let us study and with all
dylygence, enforce our self to come to perfection that we may be holy and
godly, and so without fawte or blame, that these sins which be in us be not
imputed to us of god for sins, that we may be blessed, for he is blessed,
not he that has no sin but he to whom god imputes not his sin as says
Dauyd in the. 31. psalm.

2. I forget that which is behind, and stretche my self unto that which is
before.) Here the apostle shows plainly that he had not attained as yet that
thing he desired, but that he with all diligence study and labor counted to
come to it and optaine it, and therefore he forget these things that was
behind him, as all worldly things, as holy fathers circumcision keeping of the
law, his holy religion his zeal of the law and such like, and did look at
these things which was before his eyes that was unto the glory and life to
come. And here he takes a similitude of these that run in a renke for a
wager, such runners do not look behynd them to se how much ground they have
run, but they look before them, and unto the place they run, desyryng
victory and the wager promised to the wynners, so let us all not look behynd
us, that is to our old sinful life and to the way of perdicion in the
which we have run in times past, but look before us that is to amend our
life, forsake sin and let us walk in a new life, desiring justice only by
Christ, and with diligence and study let us endeavor our selfs to come to the
eternal life promised to such as shall walk in the commandments of god and
kept them justly and so run in the renke of this world till he come to the
end and obtain vyctory over all his enemies and receive the wager promised to
such as shall run trewly according to their vocation that is everlasting
glory and life in Christ Jesus, and by Christ our only redemer and savior.

Let us therefore (as many as be perfect) be thus minded, and if ye be other
wise minded I pray god even open this un to you. Nevertheless in that where
unto we are commed let us proceed by one ruele, that we may be of one accord.
Now the apostle exhorts the^ to co^tynew and go forwards in the doctrine of
truth he taught them, in the which he said Christ to be our only savior,
and that Christ's sacryfyce was a suffycie^t sacrifyce to iustyfication, and to
take away the sins of the world, and to bring us to life without the the
works of the law, and here he monyssheth all them that think them self
perfect to know that their is none other name under heaven in whom we shall
be saved but in the name of Christ, and that Christ's justice is sufficient for
us and that we by Christ have remyssion of sins without our merytes or
deservings of that grace coming only of gods mercy and goodness. Here
peradventure some will ask how the apostell calls him self perfect, which
as before is written calls him self imperfect? to this it may be answered
that a man may be called perfect and imperfect having respect to diverse
things, if you look to the grace of god and to faith in Christ Jesus so a man
may be called perfect, if you look to the flesh and to the infirmytes of the
flesh so he is imperfect, so Paul lokynge to the grace of god and to faith
in Jesus Christ calls him self and other like to him perfect:

2. And if you be other wise minded I prae god open even unto you this.) He
wylleth us to suffer the weyknes of them that be weyke and to pray for them,
that they may be strong, as he should say. Suffer these that be weyke amongst
you unto the time that god show to them that Christ is only our justice and
our life, and pray to god that they may perfitely know that thing, which
they can not do, but by Christ, or by the holy ghost certyfyynge them in their
hearts that Christ is our righteousness. This place wylleth us to pray for them
that err from the treweth that god might bring them to his treweth, and not
to call such phariseys aduersares to god, blide gydes, dumme dogs and belly
beasts. etc.

3. Let us proceed by one ruele, that we may be of one accord.) He wylleth us
to consent and agree to the treweth of gods holy word, and with one consent
and mind go forwarddes in the treweth and the treweth known with all our
myghtes and poweres defend and set it forth, and not to shrenke from it for
fear of persequution cruelnes of men, for loss of favor worldly gooddes
riches lands or possessions promocyons or degnites, nor yet let us not shrenke
from the treweth for fear of offendyng such as be weyke, before whom we must
forbear and not use always our lyberty or that we may do, but not forbear to
show the^ the trwth, that they be not always weyke children having need of
milk, such must be taught the treweth in all gentylnes and mekenes, and the
treweth may not give place to them, but they to the treweth, and receive the
treweth, that they may be strong me^ and no weyke children. And although some
will say the treweth may not be spoken for breakyng of co^corde and unite
saying by co^corde small things do increasse and grow to great things, and
by discord great things to come to naught? to this is answered that,
concord is by the which the treweth is not obscured oppressed hyd or put to
silence, nor these that be weyke do not contynewe weyke, but by it brought to
strength that they may eat strong meat, the apostle would not have us
always children having need of milk, but that we should grow from children
to men, that we might be feade with strong meat of men. Thus let us all agree
in one way of the treweth and let us follow that way, and walk no more in the
ways of perdition, in the ways of error and heresey. In the ways of lies
fables evil customs long used contrary to the will and pleasure of god, and
contrary to the health and salvation of our souls. And as the apostle prays.
Roma. 15. God grant us all to be of one mind that we may all think one
thing not after men, the world or the flesh, but after Jesus Christ and his
doctrine

Brethren be ye the folowers of me, and look on them which walk even so as
you have us for an example. For many walk (of whom I have told you often,
but now I tell you weeping) eue^ enemies of the cross of Christ. whose end
is damnation, whose god is the belly and whose glory shall be to their shame,
which are earthly minded. But our conversation is in haven, from whence we look
for the savior Jesus Christ the lord, which shall change our vile body,
that it may be like fashyoned unto his glorious body, according to the
workynge whereby he is able to subdewe all things unto him self. Note that the
apostle sets him self an exampler to us to follow that after his example we
should walk in the way of treweth, and not shrynke from it for no
persequution, for no cruelnes of me^, for no craft of pseudoposteles, for no
loss of worldly gooddes, favor of men, punyshmente of body or for loss of
this present life. Here we learn how we should worship saints that is to
follow their footsteppes in all holiness and in true virtue in faith in hope in
charity and in patience and to follow the doctrine of treweth as they did and
to contynew in it to the end after their example. Another way we be taught in
scripture to honor saints, that is to gloryfy god in his saints, to give
glory and thanks to god which has made and does daily make good men of evil
men. As the church of the Jews gloryfyed god in Paul that he had made him a
preacher of his word, which he before did impugn and persequuted. Thirdly we
may honor saints in confyrmynge our faith certifyenge us that we shall come
to that glory where in they are, if we live here as they did, learning gods
word and living according to it. yea it helps very much to persuade, when a
man bring him self an exampler to be followed as here the apostle did. would
to god that all bysshoppes lives where so holy so good that their true
preachynges and holy living were exa^plers to other to follow and wordy to be
tolowed as Paul was in his true preaching in the contynwance of the same
with holiness of life.

2. And look on them which walk as you have us for an example.) Lest any man
should think that Paul had set him self only for an exampler to follow, he
wylleth them to observe other which walked after his example, and to take them
for an examplar to follow, that we should follow holy men's footsteppes, and to
follow them in faith pacyence mekenes, conte^nyng the world as they did, and
always have an respect to the world and life to come.

3. For many walk (of whom I have told you often, but now I tell you
weeping.) He shows the cause of this admonition wherefore he exhorted them to
follow him and such other that walked in the way of truth and in innocente
living, that they should not be deceived by no pseudoposteles that walk not
after Christ's doctrine, but after them selfs, their own immaginations and
fantasies, after men, and traditions of men, and not after Christ's doctrine,
whom to eschew and to fle their company, and wicked ways I both present with
you and also absente from you has monyshed you, both by word and by letters.
Here we learn of Paul that it is not enoughe to show what should be done,
but also it must be showed what should be avoided and eschewed, that good
things might be taken, and evil things refused and forsaken. And as the
apostle had showed them before to beware of these walkers in iniquite, and to
fle them and their wyckednes so he does now exhort them again with weeping
tears, so sore he lamented that there should be such evil walkers and
deceyuers of other, that they should take head of pseudoposteles and to fle
their false and deceyuyng doctrine. Here we may se that there was in Paul's
time pseudopostles deceyuers of the people and preachers of false doctrine not
agreynge to holy scryptures and that it greuyd Paul much there should be such.
So it is now in our time, there be some false teachers clothed in shepes
skins but within they be gready wolfes pretending much holiness, but little
in very deed showing, who^ we should eschew and fle, and as it grieved the
apostle such to be in his time, so it greueth all good men that there should
be any pseudoposteles amongst the people to pulle and pluck the people of god
from gods word and his treweth.

4. They be enymyes of the cross of Christ, whose end is damnation, whose god
is their belie, and whose glory shall be to their shame, which are earthly
minded.) Now he discrybeth these pseudoposteles in their own clothing and
apparel. First he says they be enymyes of the cross of Christ, for they
ascrybe to the law, to works of the law as to circumcision, sacrifyces and
ceremonies of the law, to works and traditions of men, merytes of saints the
grace of god freely given, reconcylyation to the father, remyssion of sin,
satisfaction for sin, life everlasting which things should be ascrybed
only to Christ that suffered upon the cross death to obtain these things to
us, therefore they ascribing these things to other things then to Christ
alone be enymyes to the cross of Christ, or that preach the law ceremonies or
sacryfyces of the law in the sted of Christ, and ascrybe justice or
ryghtuousnes forgyuenes of sin to any other thing then to Christ or to
Christ's passion they be enymyes of the cross of Christ, such ware they that
brought us the bysshope of romes perdones, masses at scala celi, to go hither
and thither on pilgrimage, to set up candles before images, to say five pater
nosters, five aue mary's and a creed before this image or that image in this
place rather then in that place, promising to us by these things to be
released from the pains of purgatory so many days lentes and years, yea
promysyng by these things, ones in our life and at the hour of death clear
remyssion of all our sins both a pen^ et a culpa so they called their
remyssion promised, but these be enymyes to the cross of Christ ascribing to
the inventions of man these things that only should be attributed to Christ
alone and to none other. Secondly he says their end is perdition showing to
what end and purpose the doctrine of pseudoposteles bring, that it brings
to death and damnation, therefore they and their deuylyshe doctrine are to be
eschewed and avoided of all good men, lest men be brought by them and with them
to death and damnation both of body and soul. Thirdly he says their god is
their belie, in this he shows for whose sake they preached the law and the
works of the law, and did all things they did, that it was for their belly
whom they preferred before god or his treweth, that they might live easyly in
quiet rest pleasure honor and in all delyciousnes of life, and have all
things at their wylles and pleasures, honored, and had in great reputacion
above all men. And that other did for gods cause, these belly beasts did it
for their belie sakes, and as other good men does prefer god above all
things, so did these slo belyes prefer their belyes above all things, of
such saint Paul speaks. Roma. 16. And byddes us beware of them saying
brethren I beseech you that you would consider them which causes debate and
offendycle against the doctrine which you have learned, and that you turn
from them, for they be such that serves not Jesus Christ, but their belyes and
by flattery and fayer speaking deceive the hearts of the simple, of them also
he speaks. Gala. 6. saying, These that after outward face would please you
in the flesh they would compelle you to be circumcised only for this end
that for the cross of Christ they should not suffer. Let men therefore look
about whether there be such preachers teachers, yea such that pretend to
favor gods word and would have the name of setters forth of it, and would
be counted to do all things for gods word sake, and yet they do it for the^
selfs, and for their belyes sake, for they do not work for the glory of god,
but for them self and for their belly sakes that they might live in ease rest
quietness in wealth and in all carnal pleasures in honor and dignyte, get
worldly gooddes riches lands and possesio^s, and have all things at will and
pleasure, se if there be any such among us, and pray god for them that at
length yea shortly they may be changed and turned to god and to seek ernestly
gods glory, the salvation of other more then their own glore, woldly profyt,
carnal lyberty or pleasure. Fortly he says their glory shall be to their
shame, he notes these pseudoposteles to be ambicious and vain glorious
desirynge laud and praise of the world and to be honored of al men, but
their glory shall be turned into their rebuke shame and confusion, for their
hole institution of living, their hole doctrine sauoreth nothing else but earth
and carnal things, as circumcision, carnal works of the law, choosing of
meats, difference of days, man's tradicions ceremones and such like things,
which they teach and affirm for no other cause, but that they them selfs
should suffer no afflictions, no part of the cross of Christ, but that they
might live in wealth and pleasure and in worldly honors. They seek not heavenly
things as faith hope charity paciente meaknes the glory of god, health life and
salvation of other, and therefore their glory shall be turned in to rebuke shame
and confusion that seek rather earthly things them heavenly things. And it is
greatly to be feared that the glory of many pastores bysshoppes prelates, hye
ruelers, maiestrates lawers judges gentle men and of other that be in
authoryte in great honor and glory having great riches lands and
possessions, it is to be feared that their hye glory be turned into rebuke
shame confusion yea into damnacion because they seek earthly things and
worldly pleasure, more then the glory of god, and prefers worldly things
before godly things, yea prefers men and men's commandment before god and
his commandment. I pray god it be not spoken to them at their death as
Christ spoke to the scribes and pharyses. Math. 15. saying, woe be to you
scrybes and pharyses, for you have made void or broken gods commandment
for your traditions, I pray god it be not spoken like to other, woe be to you
that have neglected or broken gods commandment to fulfill your carnal
pleasures to get you worldly riches honors dignites lands and possessions,
and to get them and to maintain the^ have not cared what sorrow pain or troble
have comed to other, have not cared for god and for his word no further then it
served for their carnal pleasures or worldly riches.

5. But our conversation is in heaven from whence we look for the savior Jesus
Christ the lord.) The apostle settyth him self as one contrary to these
pseudoposteles, and shows his conversation of living to be contrary to the^,
as he would say, they al together savor earthly things, their heart and mind
is all upon the earth and upon earthly things and carnal pleasures and wordly
commodites fyxed, my mind heart will study intent and affection is in heaven,
and upon heavenly things, and therefore I look not for worldly riches or
pleasures, but for our lord Jesus Christ which shall alter and change our
vile and corruptyble bodies subjected to corruption and carnal affections, and
shall make it an immortal body comfortable to his glorious body, and make it a
gracious body in the day of judgment, when he shall exalte this corruptible
body with the soul to i^mortall glory joy and bliss. The souls of them that
be ded in Christ now are in glory the body lies in the earth and rotteth
unto the day of judgment and then shall arise, with the soul be joined
again, and shall then receive glory. This place reproves all them that set
their hearts to much upon this world, of worldly honors riches and carnal
pleaces, and not has their hearts lokynge up to heaven desyryng heavenly joys
and bliss. ye this place iecketh them that denies the resuerection of the
body, and the immortalyte of the soul, and the last day of judgment, in the
which the mortal body shall be made immortal, and a glorious body conformable
and like to Christ's body as towchynge the immortalyte glory joy everlasting
felicite and bliss.

6. According to the workyng whereby he is able to subdewe all things unto him
self.) Lest any should ascrybe the resurrection of the body to any might or
power of the body or of the soul be says that god works this thing of his
omnipotent power by the which he works all things good, and has al things
subjected to him, and as he created and made all things of nothing, so easily
he may gather together the bodies lyenge in the dust of the earth and join
them again with their souls and make them to arise immortal bodies and
receive life joy and salvation. And this hope have good men, and look for that
day of the general resurrection that they may be made like to Christ our
savior in immortalite and in glory by Christ.

The fourth Chapter to the Philippians.
Therefore my brethren dearly beloved and longed for, my joy and my crown,
contynew so in the lord ye beloved. I pray Euodias and beseke Syntiches that
they be of one mind in the lord. yea and I beseech that my faithful yock
fellow help the women which have labored with me in the gospel, with Clemente
and with my other helpers, whose names are in the book of life. Because before
he had taught them that Christ was our only justice resurrection and life,
which thing they knew by faith in Christ where in they were very constant
and sure, now he exhorts them to constancy in true faith by certain knowledge
of Christ's doctrine and desires them to stand in the lord and be constaunt
in him and as they have begone in the lord so he would have them contynew in
the lord, and not to turn from the lord to the law or to works of the law,
or to nedy ceremones or to tradicions of men that culde not iustifye them, nor
purge them from their sins, and these things now he thought he might desire
of them for as much as they were dear beloved to him, his joy comfort and
his delectation, and therefore be right he thought he might desire more of them
then of his enymes.

2. I pray Euodias, and beseke Sentiches that they be of one mind in the
lord.) He desires two weme^ Euodias and Sentiches to be of one mind, and no
longer at discord, for it appears that these two women did not agree, but were
at debate, and that the one envied the other, and therefore the apostle studeth
to take from them their debate, and to reconcile them to gether again, and to
join them to gether in mutual benevolence, and love one to another. Here we
learn that discord or debate may arise amongst good friends and favorers of
the gospel, but that displeasure or discord is to be teased or quenced by
other friends as shortly as can be possible, that these that were at discord
may be a^ concord and agree in the lord Jesus.

3. I beseech the my faithful yockfelowe help the women which have labored
with me in the gospel.) Here the apostle desires a true kind and faithful
woman in the lord which has labowred with him, and take pain with him in the
gospel, when he preached with great pain and labor, this woman did take pain
and labor with him whether she was his wife as sum authors do think, or it
was some other good woman it makes no great matter, nor of it I will not
dispute, but leave it to other to judge. I think rather it was a woman then a
man, (all though some translate this word in the masculyne gender and not in
the femynyne ge^der) and that the apostle desires one woman to help another,
and these that labowred with him. That did mynistre to him meat drink cloth
fire and other necessares he calls the^ here cooperatores euangelii cum illo,
that is fellows or workers with him in the gospel, that they mynistred to him
preaching the gospel, or in prison these things he had need of. Among whom
he names on Clemens of his gentylnes and true heart and mind in all gentle
facyon he had to the gospel preached by Paul, he moves them to favor and
help all his helpers in the gospel, whose names he says are not for gotten
with god how so ever they are conte^ned or despised of men, but are in the
book of life written and enrolled not to be blotted out again. And here we
may learn that it is a work acceptable to god to be a worker of the gospel,
or a fellow to him that laboreth in the gospel to preach teach or set it
forwards or to mynister to such necessares, to fauore them, to help them if
they need, or be in presone, or to put them self in peril or danger for the
helpyng of the^ that set forth gods word trwely and sincerely. And this is a
great comfort for these that suffer for the gospels sake and contynew in the
same patiently to the end that their names are written in the book of life
before god, and shall not be raised out again, although here peradventure
before men they be conte^ned and despised for evil doers or evil speakers
punished or put to death, yet remains their names in the book of life with
god, which knows them as his servants.

Rejoice in the lord always, and again I say rejoice. Let your softnes be
known to al me^. The lord is even at hand. Be not careful, but in all
things let your peticious in prayer and supplycation with geuynge of thanks
be known before god. And y^ peace of god which passes al understanding keep
your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus. The apostle exhorts men to rejoice in
the lord, and not in no other thing of this world, not in honors riches,
me^ friends kynred, gold silver lands possessions, no^ in wisdom or in
prudence of the fl^eshe, or in strength of body as the prophet; acharye. 9.
byddeth sayng. Let not the wise man rejoice in his wisdom, nor the rich in
his riches nor the strong man in his strength, but he that will rejoice, let
hi^ rejoice in that he knows me says god by his prophet, which I am god
that makes judgment justice and faith, therefore he that will rejoice let him
rejoice in god which is the author of all goodness delyuerer from all euylls and
aduersites. Therefore says the apostle. 1. Cor. 1. He that will rejoice let him
rejoice in god, and so shall his Joy be full sure constante permanent and
perfect. And here he rebukes such as rejoice more in worldly things then in
god, as these that rejoice in riches lands possessions, in men, in
maiestrates, in nobilite of stock in their religion, instition of living, in
conynge lernyng or in such like more then in god, all such be here reprouyd,
rejoice therefore in the lord always in all time and in all places.

2. ^ your softenes be known to all men.) Now he teaches them good and godly
manners and commands them to put on all good manners and innocence of living,
and wyileth their holy conversation of living to be known to all men not
only to good men but also to the evil, that every man might take example of
godly virtue of them, and follow the^ in virtuous living and so gloryfye god with
them which is in haven, as is written. Math. 5. And good example of lyui^g
helps very much to virtue, and oftymes one folowes another in virtue or i^
wickedness.

3. The lord is at hand.) Less modest meke and paciente me^ should think
them selfs forsaked of god or should despare of god or of his goodness as he had
left the^ and forsaken the^, suffering them to be afflicted of the evil, or to
want necessaries, he says that god is nigh to all modest good and godly men,
and that he for gets them not, although he suffers them to lack comfort
for a time and help, but in time of need god sends to them both comfort and
help, for he is careful for them, and nigh to all that will call upon him in
unite and in trewthe.

4. Be not careful.) He moves them not to be careful nor to mystrust god,
that he will not give unto them all things necessary, when they shall have
need, or that he will not deliver them from trouble and afflyctions that
chance to them, and that they should not dowte in these things he said the
lord was at hand to help them at their need, and that they should not be
careful for their living with a mystrust in god, he byddeth them here as
teaches more largely Christ. Math. 6. And here he takes a way couetuousnes
or vnmercefull layng up of riches to live in old age, as some say mystrustynge
god, thynki^g that god will not give unto them necessaryes in age as he did in
their yougth. Let us put a way all such dyffydence of god, and let us seek
first his kingdom and his justice and god will give us all necessaryes without
our trustles carefulnes, as is promised. Mat. 6. And here the apostle does not
forbid labor or a godly prouydence, but he forbyddeth carefulnes mystrustynge
god, and vnmarcifull layng up in store from the poor.

5. But in all things let your peticions in prayer and supplycatio^ with
giving of thanks be known before god.) Now he teaches how we shall have al
necessares, and by what means, that is of god the father marcyfull geuer of
all good things, and that by humble meke and faithful prayers made after the
will of god, desiring necessares as it shall please god to give them,
appoyntynge with god no time no place nor manner of gyuynge, but referryng all
to his dyuyne will and pleasure, and if in these prayers we shall co^tinew
desiring these things that shall be to the glory of god and for our health and
salvation, at the length we shall obtain of god these our petycio^s made in
faith for Christ's sake, always geuyng thanks to god for his benefytes given
to us, taking prosperity and aduersite as we should do, that is not proud in
prosperity, nor yet comforties heavy or sad in aduersyte, no there murmuryng
against god, nor yet enuyenge others felycyte and joy.

6. And the peace of god which passes all understanding keep your hearts and
minds in Christ Jesus.) Here is showed what follows them that bears
prosperyte and aduersite as they should do, that they have peace and quietness in
their hearts and conscience with god, which peace have none but such as be
iustyfied by faith, Roma. 5. we justified by faith have peace with god, the
evil says peace peace but to him is no peace with god as says the prophet.
And this peace or quietness of the conscience it far passes all things that
may be apprehended of the understanding, and this to be true shows the
conscience of such as fall in desperation of gods mercy for their sins as
Cayn and Judas did. And also it is declared in the cananes, which was almost
ded without heart comfort spirit or life in their bodies, when they hard the
children of Israel to have entered their country or land to possess it as
their own, and that they were sent to kill them down like beasts without
mercy as is written in the book of Iosue. And this peace of conscience is not
gotten by our mightes or powers sacryfices or ceremones but by Jesus Christ
that all laud and praise might be given to god for it, as of whom all goodness
do come to us for Christ's sake.

Furthermore brethren what so ever things are true, what so ever things are
honest, what so ever things are just, what so ever things are pure, what so
ever things partayne to love, what soever things are of honest report. If
there be any ^ertuous thing, if there be any laudable thing, have those same
in your mind, which ye have both learned and received, and herd and seen in me,
those things do, and the god of peace shall be with you. Now the apostle
making an end of his Epistle exhorts them to think and do not only these
things which be wordy praise, but also that they following his example may
have god of peace with them, and be fulfilled with faith and all good works.
And first he moves them to do and follow true things, whereby he puts away
all deceyt craft hypochrysy and simulation, as Christ is the treweth and
loves the treweth, so he hates all craft and falsed, and it is a meruell that
any man will love that thing, that god hates so much, as falsed craft deceyt
and simulatio^, it is a toke^ they love the devil a false liar better the^ god
which is always true and hates lies and falsed, it is a wonder to se how some
men will give credence to the devil lyenge rather then to god saying treweth,
and promising necessares to all them that seek him in treweth, that seek first
the kingdom of god and his justice, it is a token that such be rather the
servants of the devil then of god. And thefore they mystrustynge god runs
hedlynges to the devil and use his craft and falsed with much deceyte and
many lies gettes their living to the great hurt of other, to their own
judgment and damnation, therefore leave the crafts of the devil and follow
Christ and his treweth if you will be saved and come to everlasting salvation.

Secondly follow honest things semynge and becommyng for christians wordy
praise, and mete for these that abhors vnhonesty fylthy vain folyshe and
tryflyng things, in the which sayng the apostle would that our behauyour of
our body in habyte vesture word deed lack countenance going and all things
about us should be honest and comely for our state and degree, and in this
thing he reproves all them that keep not semely manners or facio^s in habyte
gesture words deeds as becomes their degree or vocation. The apostle would
all things to be done semely and after a comely order. And here he reproves
such as their vocation requires them to be sober sad and discrete men and
men of grauite and wisdom, that be light in manners full of words, that do not
become their vocation, mockers and scorners of other, iesters and raylers of
all others manners, and such as cause men to laugh, when it becomes their
state and vocacio^ to be men of grauyte sobriety and to give to other example
of sobernes. And here he reproves all unclean communication fylthy or baudy
words, vncle^ly manners or iestynges, all scoffing raylynge that do not become
christians, sober wise and discret men. Thirdly he exhorts them to do all
just things, for justice is that thing whereby is given to every one that is
dew for him, whereby no man should desire but that is his and equal and just to
be given to him, by the which saying he condempneth all injuries wrongs
rapynes theft murder craft falsed in byeng sellyng in chaungynge one thing
for an other, and by justice we be taught to render to god that perteyneth to
god, and to give to man that pertayne to man, and in this he reproves those
that ascribe to them selfs to their myghtes merits powers the grace of god,
preseruacio^ of them from evil, remyssion of sins and life eternal, and that
of the merits and wordynes of their works These things must be of justice
ascrybed only to Christ our savior that is to reconcile us to the father of
heaven, to iustifye us, to take away our sins and to give life everlasting
these be works of god pertaynyng to god, and to him only to be ascribed, and
to none other, nether men word ne deed. Fortly he exhorts men to pure and
clean living, for it becomes christians to be pure and chaste in heart mind
soul and body and to flee all adultry fornycation fylthy and unclean
communication, and not one fylthy word to come ones out of their mouths as
the apostle says. Ephe. 4. Let no fylthy word go ones out of your mouth, yea
he byddeth these Ephesians. Ephe. 5. That no unclean communication be hard
amongst them, for the vengeance of god comes upon such. Fyftly he wills
them to do all things that pertayne to love, to do good to all men both to
friends and foes, and to please all men in all goodness and humblenes, to hurt
no man, but profit every man, to offend no man, and so do good always, and in all places, after their habilite. Syxtly he wylleth them to do these things
that may get them a good fame and name, and to do these things that be wordy
laud and praise before god and man, that is to do the will of god and to
pleace god and to keep gods commandments, and in all good works to walk,
and that not for to get them a fame or name, but that the name of god might in
all things be magnifyed and gloryfyed always of all me^ in the world. 2. If
there be any virtuous thing, if there be any laudable thing.) He moves them
to follow all virtuous things, and all things that be wordy laud or praise
before god or man, and not in these things seek their own praise or
commendations, but the praise of god, that god might be gloryfyed, and his name
sanctified by the virtuous living of good men amongst the hethen nation,
amongst whom gods holy name here much evil, and is evil spoken on for the
wyckednes and sins of evil christians, that lives not according to their
profession at the font stone. He would they should have in mind all virtuous
and laudable things which they had learned of him, hard and seen in him
practiced, would to god that all bishops pastors prelates, Kings Princes
Emperors Dukes Earls Lords Laweers would live so virtuously so holyly so
godly, that their lives might be a myrrour or glass to look in, and to spy in
them all virtue all humblenes and mekenes, love of god and of his word
unfeignedly, and that they sought the glory of god the health of their people
more the^ their own glory pleasure or commodite, then the name of god should
be more gloryfied then it is, then the name of god should not here evil
amongst the hethen, amongst whom the name of god is blasphemed because many
christianes live worse then does the hethen people.

3. The god of peace shall be with you.) Now he promyseth to them god of peace to
be present with them, if they will follow Christ, here his doctrine and learn
it, live after it and go forwards in all virtue and godlynes, as he teached
them showing a reward always to follow virtuous living as the god of peace to
be with them to pacifye and quiet their conscience, that they should be at
peace with god, and so of a reward he exhorts them to virtue.

I rejoice greatly in the lord, that now at the last ye are reuyued again to
care for me, as ye cared for me before, but ye lacked opportunyte. I speak not
this because of necessite, for I have learned in what so ever estate I am,
there with to be content. I can be low, I can be hye. Every where and in all
things I am mete, both to be full, and to be hungrye, to have plenty and to
suffer need. I ca^ do al things through christ, which stre^gketh me.
Notwithstanding you have done well, that you bear part with me in my
trybulation. The apostle gives thanks to these Philippians for their dewtyes
and offices done to him, and for their charity send to him in prison by
Epaphroditus, here we learn to give thanks to our benefactours for their
benefittes done to us, lest we should be counted unthankful or without good
ciuilite or ge^tyl manners, although these that do kyndnes were bound of dewty
to do that thing they did, as these Philippians was bound to do no less to
Paul then they did, ye here Paul reioyses in the lord that their readiness to
help him was in them revived again and quyckened, and they did return to do
their deutye they had omytted for a time toward him, wherein he teaches us to
rejoice of the amendment of them that has for a time neglected or omytted to
do their dewty to any man dew, or to pay their dettes, or to give to their
pastors that is dew to them for necessares to be paid or given.

2. In the which you were careful, but you lacked opportunite.) Here he partly
excuse them of their negligence that they ceased of for a time to send him
necessares in prison, as he would say he speaks, I know you were careful for
me, and that you would have send to me such things as you thought I should
need, I think you did not forget me, I do not reprove you for your dewty
undone to me, I know you lacked no good mind or will, but you had no
opportunite, nor man convenient messanger faithful and trustye by whom you
should have sent your charity with all, which you sent to me by Epaphroditus.
And here privily he reproves them of their fault, and slouthfulnes teaching
them what they ought to have done to him, but he preue^tyng their excuse says
that they wanted opportunyte to send to him such things as he neded, and so
opportunite stands in the stead oftymes of an excuse or else by opportunite
he understands their afflyctions and tribulacions by the which they were
let for a time to send to him necessaries, and so opportunite then was a
just excuse for them.

3. I spoke not this because of necessite.) I say not these words because of
your fault or negligence I lacked necessares or was in great need, or culde not
live without your help, for I have learned to take all chances of living as
they chance to me by experyence, and to be contented with my lotte as it shall
chance. If I have plenty of riches, I give lyberally to the helpyng of the
poor and nedy, if I have no plenty, I draw back my hand, and fasshyon me
after mine habilyte, and give as I may and not as I would, fulness do not
corrupt me if I have plenty and more then for my necessites, nor hunger do not
deiecte me or put me out of comfort, if I lack somtymes these things I would
have, or be necessary for me. Here the apostle teaches the true use of riches
and of poverty, the true use of both is to be contended with his lotte, it
pertayneth to the rych man not to be proud for his riches, or to think him
self thereby better then other be, or to contemn other, or to think he had
his riches of him self of his own wit or polyce works and labors and not
of god the author of all riches and geuer of al goodness, or to keep them to him
self vnmarcifully from the nedy, but it pertayneth to the rich man to know
he has his riches of god to give god thanks for them to be humble and meke
and to be liberal to the poor and nedy. Also here we may learn it is not
evil to have great riches, but it is evil to abuse great riches as to be
proud for riches given, to extolle them selfs above other to contempne or
oppress other, to trust in riches to make riches their god, to shyt up their
hands from helpyng of the nedy, so riches are not to be despised, but the
abuse of rich is to be dispysed, for many holy saints as Abraham Isaac Jacob
Loath Job Dauyd had great riches, but they did not abuse their riches but used
the^ well, bestowed the^ to the glory of god, and was liberal to such as had
need, and keped hospitalite and received nedy into their houses and mynistered
to the^ necessares more gladly, the^ the gestes oftimes desired, and therefore
they brought gestes home to their houses as it were by inforcement or against
their will, so ready they were to do the marcyfull work of hospytalyte and
they lacked not their reward of god. Hebre. 13.

4. I can do all things throught Christ, which strength me.) That I do bear
riches and poverty as I should do, it is not to be ascribed to me to my myghtes
or powers in me, but to Christ my savior by whom I may and can do all things
well, both suffer aduersite eat and digest it, and in prosperity not to abuse
godds gystes, but to use them well as is said before, if riches do come, the
heart may not be fyxed upon them, if poverty do invade us, let us think we be
rich anougthe, if we have god, and possess a clear conscience from sin, let
us think we may do all things by Christ, and without his help or power we
can do nothing, without whose grace great riches can not profyt us nor other,
ye they will come to great decay and to naught, therefore let us all together
hang up on Christ, of his help and favor, and by him be contented with our
lot taken in good worth what soever thing chance to us, be it prosperity or
aduersite, saying with Job. Job. 1. The name of god be blessed thanks be god
for all his gifts.

5. Notwithstanding ye have done well, that ye bear part with me, in my
trybulatio^.) These words he adds, less he should be thought to have
contemned their kyndnes or reward sent to him in prison by Epaphroditus,
therefore he says you did well and as you should have done that you send your
charity to me, by the which ye are made partakers of my afflictions and shall be
with me partakers of my joy, and as you send your kindness and reward of a good
mind to me to recompense your dewty omytted for a time, so I of a good mind
except it with thanks given to you for it. Note that these that communicate to
the works of good me^ shall be pertakers of the glory with good men, for a good
work shall not lack his reward of god.

But ye of Philippos know, that in the begynynge of the gospel when I departed
fro Macedonia no congregacon bare part with me concerning geuyng and
receyuyng but ye only. For unto Tessalonica ye sent once. And afterward
again unto my necessite. Not that I seek gifts, but I seek the fruit that it
be abundante in your reckoning. For I have all, and have ple^tye. I was even
filled when I received of Epaphroditus that which came from you, on odor of
swetnes, a sacryfice accepted and pleasant unto god. Paul here shows the
benefytes of these Philippians toward him with given of thanks, and these
Philippians he commends above other, that they sent him help when he was in
prison, and when he first preached the gospel going from Macedonia and calling
to the faith of Christ, and that these Philippians did send to him when no
other congregation helped him, nor communicated to him, and so was partakers
nether of geuyng nor receyuyng. As he would say, there is no cause why you
should think me dettor unto you because you sent to me necessares and no
congregation but you alone, for in so doing you did but that thing you were
bound to do to me, for it is mete that he that gives should receive. If we
preach unto you and sow spiritual sede amongst you, do you count it a great
thing if we shall repe your carnal things? As says Paul. 1. Cor. 9. I have
sown amongst you spiritual sede gods word therefore you ought to have
given to me necessary food. And he calls their subsydy sent to him by
Epaphroditus a count of given and receyuynge, they receauyd of Paul spiritual
food therefore they ought to have given to him carnal food. In that he says
no congregation to have mynistred to him help but only these Philippians we
learn that Paul did not receive of many congregations temporal food or
subsydy as he might have done, for the workema^ is wordy his meat, but he
abstened and would not receive temporal food of all congregatio^s of people
for diverse causes. First that he should not be an offendicle to the gospel,
and that they should not say that he preached for a living or for lucre sake,
or for his belie chere, and that he would give other example to labor for
their living, he with his hands got living for him self and for these that
was with him. Acts. 20. 2 Thessalonians. 3. And that other should not be ashamed to
labor with their hands and to show no dishonesty for prestes to labor handy
labors.

2. That was necessary for me you sent me.) He prayseth them not for that they
sent to him at Tessalonicam that was necessary, or that he desired of them such
a stypend or some of money, or that he should by praise or by gyuing of thanks
provoke other congregacio^s to do such like, but rather that he required and
wysshed to them a reward of god for their beneuole^ce to hi^. And here we
learn more to consider and wyshe for a reward of god to be given for almose
done, then to wysshe to us help of our poverty or relesse of our necessite.
And so we should look more at the profyt of other, then for the taken away of
our need after the example of Paul here

3. For I have all, and have plentye.) Now he shows the cause that he desired
not money of any congregacions, for he had no need of money at that time, for
he had money plentye, and therefore he desired not money of other, but other to
be rewarded of god for their beneficialnes, and he calls their beneuole^ce or
almos a savor of swetenes, a sacrifice acceptable and pleasante to god,
alludynge to the acceptable sacryfices in the old law of Moses commanded to
be offered up to god, which smelled well and thankful sacrifices was called,
if they were done as god commanded them to be done. This place shows
temporal sustentatio^ given to them that preach the gospel to be pleasant
and tha^kfull sacryfyces to god, although these that do give the^ be bound to
give an honest living to the preacher of gods word as Christ says. Mat. 10
The workma^ is wordy his meat. Note that they please god that does their dewty
and payth their dettes, and gyues their temporal dewty by laws appointed to
their pastors, and they that do not displease god.

My god fulfill all your need according to his riches in glory in Christ Jesus.
Unto god and our father be praise for ever and ever. am^ As these Philippia^s
sent to Paul al things that was necessary for him, so again he wysshed to
them all necessares they had need of, he wysshed not to them great abounda^ce
of all riches or any great excess, but necessares to the use of their life, to
teach us to wysshe so both to our self and also to other. Excess and
abundance of riches oftymes brings infamy slander offense of god and of our
nyghbour, moderate riches has less iopardy and more true glory. Therefore he
wysshed to them no excess but sufficyent living and that to be given them of
god the author and geuer of al goodness, whose riches cannot be consumed by
gyui^g to other, for he has all riches, and his barnes is full of riches and
cannot be wasted or spent, but the more he gives the more he may give and
gives, to him be al honor and glory ever more world without end. A.

Salute al ye sai^tes in christ Jesus The brethren ye are with me salute you.
All y^ saints salute you, but specially they ye are of the Emperors house. The
grace of our lord Jesus christ be with you all. am^ Now he fynisheth his Epistle
with salutations after his humble manner, and first he saluteth all the saints,
that is all the faithful beleuers in Christ Jesus santified not by bysshoppes
of Rome but by the blood of our savior Jesus Christ, in who^ they believe and
serve him by perfect charity keeping the commau^deme^tes of god living in this
world, such he calls here saints. Secondly he saluteth the^ in the name of
all the faithful brethren that was with him, that either came to him or did
mynister to him in prison necessares, or did other busynes for him, specially
he saluteth them in the name of the brethren that was abiding in the court of
Nero where as was many that boldly and without fear openly professed Christ
and his word, finally he wyshe the grace of our lord Jesus Christ to them all.
To god the father with his son Jesus Christ and the holy ghost be glory ever.
AMEN.

Prynted at Cantorbury in Saint Paul's paryshe by John Mychyll for Ewarde
whitchurche.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


