AN ELEGY UPON THE DEATH OF THAT WORTHY HOVSE-KEEPER, WILLIAM SMITH, Of
Crissing-Temple in the County of Essex, Esquire, who dyed the eleventh day of
February, 1630. aged 74. years.

depiction of a funeral procession

London Printed by G. P. 1631.

An Elegy upon the death of that worthy housekeeper William Smith of
Crissing-Temple in the County of Essex Esquire, who dyed the 11. day of
February 1630. aged 74. years.
LEt low deserts be raised by flattering verse,
Thy worth abundantly adornes thy Hearse,
And brings thee with high honor from the womb,
To swim in poor men's tears into thy Tomb;
To them unkind, only in this, to dye,
And leave them in their deepest misery.
Oh miserable Poor! whose foul offense,
And great ingratitude; heavens influence
Stopped first, and barren made the earth in seed,
Which strengthen should thine heart with daily bread:
Now with thy sins to increase thy penalty,
God takes thy never failing Granary:
Not that I blame the poor, the rich to spare,
We all must guilty plead at Heavens high bar;
God lets us live to see our sins just doom,
And takes away the just from the will to come.
If to do good, and to abstain from ill,
Be as in heaven, on earth to do Gods will,
And the whole law fulfild, is God above,
And next thy neighbor, as thy self, to love,
All this did he, for whom I bleed these tears,
Whose virtues far out numbered his years;
And (witness men and Angels) in good deeds,
Not hours, but minutes of his life, exceeds.
That of the dead's a blessed commendation,
Which to the living serves for imitation;
Yet future times may think, if they this see,
I write not what he was, but ought to be,
A fair Idea for applause and glory,
And not a true essential living story.
Well of a Temple had his house the name,
For like a Temple he did use the same,
The morning and the evening sacrifice,
Never omitted in the comeliest wise,
And that which in these days is wondrous rare,
The Governors two living Temples were,
And labored to have all, that on them waited,
As they themselves were truly consecrated.
As older, more Religious he grew,
Making a conscience ay to pay his due
To Gods own Tribe, whom he so honored,
As watchmen over us set in Gods stead;
Like good old Abraham, most joyful, when
He Angels entertained in shapes of men.
Thus was he to his God: his conversation
With men, was no less worthy observation,
Even from the Throne to him that low does grind
At mill, he loyal, faithful was, and kind:
In his relation to his Sovereign,
Although his outward presence was but plain,
His actions were most noble, just and wise,
Conducing to the highest enterprise,
Yet to state-secrets he would not intrude,
Nor foment factions of the multitude;
The question whether, hard was to debate,
He honored more his King, or loved the state.
He always did in highest favor stand
With greatest Lords, and Rulers of the Land,
With whom he was familiar as their host,
And where he once gained favor never lost.
To friends, and neighbors evermore most dear,
Where he so equally himself did bear,
All strife and quarrels he in peace did end.
The orphans father, and the widows friend,
With whom they trust their states in confidence
Of good improvement by his diligence.
To his inferiors always so was he,
As our Superiors we would wish to be:
Friendly to all and loving: To the poor
So bountiful, as if God sent him store
And plenty, it amongst them to dispense,
And to releeve their pressing indigence.
Thus he abroad: How in his family?
Oh now my numbers turn all Elegy!
And first his dearest Turtles loss bemoane,
Who after fifty years is left alone,
Ever to her most gentle, loving, wise,
And never as the weaker, did despise;
But as both were one body, mind and heart,
Both lived, and loved, and never bed did part;
So kindly drawing in this loving yoke,
One would have wished it never might have broke,
Or that we had some fruit of such a pair,
But's lot to choose was, not beget his heir:
Whom under him like to himself he bred;
But I the living praise not, but the dead:
Yet this fair heritage, as often it fares
With other heirs, cannot dry up his tears.
I boldly say they far preferred his health,
Before th'inheriting of all his wealth.
You of his own blood and affinity,
Your burden bear in this sad melody:
Was he not as a father to you all?
On whom, unasked, he let large blessings fall.
And you his servants! ah that once you were,
And are not still, had he not greater care
Of your preferment, than your service due?
And though he many kept, yet had few new:
Before your outward mourning does begin,
I see your hearts for sorrow bleed within,
All act our parts in this sad Elegy,
The Poore's the Chorus of the Tragedy.
As for my self, I need no Fathers urne,
Nor dead sons bones to move my muse to mourn,
Hearts grief will most abundantly indite,
If I my sorrows for my losses write.
Oh! I have lost a sweet familiar,
A friend, a father, and a Counselor,
Whose Actions all, like precepts of the wise,
Directed me true virtues exercise.
One above all; I never heard he uttered
Least ill of them, that falsely against him muttered,
Although (as 'twas with Christ) foulem-outh'd detraction
Basely traduced the best of all his action;
Heavens school him taught to love his enemies,
And retribute rewards for injuries:
Graces are like high stairs, Humility
The Basis, This sure is the Summity,
To which none can ascend but by the rest,
And many stepps there are to make man blessed:
Easier heavens stars, than all his Graces tell,
Never was such a Smith in Israel.
Like living spring whose streams are never dry,
But more you draw, does fresher still supply,
Such was his inexhausted liberality,
His mind unlimitted for hospitality:
And to leave nothing that he might fulfill,
He left large Legacies by his last will,
For to sustain the needy hungry poor,
And feed them at his grave, as at his door.
Like Tree close planted by the Rivers side,
He flourished Aetatis 74.
long, and fruitful did abide,
Even to his last; his leaves all fresh and green,
His body sound, and no decaying seen;
All fair and wide his goodly arms dispread,
And all that came near to him sheltered;
Until the Lord chief owner of the ground,
Finding him living Timber, good and sound,
Bid cut him down to be exalted higher,
Preserving all for Timber, none for fire:
That as he long on earth continued,
To be a dead material Temples head,
He might be of heavens immateriall,
A living Pillar never more to fall.
Wherefore let us not be disanimated,
As without hope, he is but hence translated,
Whither, if we will do, as he has done,
We in good time with joy to him shall come.
Mean while here his brief Character is told,
As we in little Globes the heavens behold.
The Epitaph.
NOble by Birth, in Fortunes Favors Low,
Thrift, by Gods blessing, made all plenty flow
Within my Gates, yet I my heir left more,
Than any of mine Ancestors before.
In Spiritual husbandry, let all men know
This Rule: They plenty reap that plenty sow;
And Talents are improved more by well spending,
Than Usurers can, increase their Coin by lending.
No Titles I affected, my desire
Was sole by Grace and Goodness to aspire,
To Heaven from whence I came: Time all to light
Will bring: and give me after Death my Right.
FINIS.

