THE LIFE OF THE MOST HONORABLE AND VIRTUOUS LADY THE LA. MAGDALEN
VISCOVNTESSE MONTAGVE.

Written in Latin, and published soon after her death, By RICHARD SMITH,
Doctor of Divinity, and her Confessor.

And now translated into English, by C. F.



Mulier timens Dominum, ipsa laudabitur.

Prou. 3. Permissu Superiorum, M. DC. XXVII.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE ANTONY-MARIA, Viscount Montague, My very good Lord,
and Master.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
HAVING finished this little Translation, the Author of the Work, whose Will
was to me a Commandment to undertake the same, did also enjoin me to address
it to the protection of some worthy Patron; which once resolved, I made no
difficulty of the choice. For as your Lord.p may of due justice challeng the
whole interest of all my actions and labors, this subject in particular has
most proper relation, before any other, unto your Lordiship. For besides that
it contains many passages of the life, and to the Honor of your Lo.ps most
Worthy, and Honorable Grandfather, so near, and dear unto your Lordship;
this Honorable Lady (whose Virtuous Life is the scope of this treatise) though
she were not the natural author of your Lord.ps life, as in Consanguinity
descending from her; yet did she prove herself a true and tender Mother, and
Grandmother (which many even natural Parents neglect) in preserving both your
Lord.p, and your Honorable Fathers life: and what her sincere affection and
continual care, was of your Lord.p in your tender years, none can better
testify then your Lo.p. And though your Lo.p were not nourished with the milk
of her breasts, yet your Lo.p has sucked the true taste of her Virtues, and
made your self an heir of her Honorable talents. I hope therefore that your
Lord.p, in regard of the Subject, will favor and countenance the Work, and
bear with the rudenes of the style, which yet I presume contains nothing but
Truth: and therein is the more conformable to this Worthy, and Honored Lady,
who though exteriourly affected no curiosity, yea prudently shunned it; yet
contained in her, the sincerity of true Virtue and Piety. I beseech Almighty
God, to grant your Lord.p all Happiness and Prosperity, for your present
Comfort, and eternal Felicity for your future Glory.

Your Lord.ps most obliged Servant, C. F.

THE PREFACE OF THE AVTHOR to the devout Reader.
THOSE ancient Fathers (devout Reader) who by their writings, either gave
ornament to the Christian Religion, or defended it against Heretics, did also
accustom to commend to writing the lives of such pious women of their times,
as either by affinity, or familiarity were conjoined unto them. Whereof,
whosoever has been but indifferently The cause of this Work.
conversant in the works of S. Hierome, S. Augustine, S. Gregory, or others,
cannot be ignorant. For these most holy men understood, that thereby they did
satisfy their own devotion, gave honest intermission to We judge virtues by the
mind not by the sex.
their grauer studies, praised God in his Saints, and finally by these
examples induced others to piety. I imitating their proceedings, though in a
far meaner degree, omitting for the present, my writing against our modern
Heretics, (which also by enjoined employments, I was Hier. de obit. Marcellae.
enforced to interrupt) have undertaken to write the life of the right Virtuous
Lady Magdalen, with whom I familiarly conuersed many years, and was her
Confessor. The manner of writing.
In writing whereof, as I have endeavored to avoid barbarous language, so have
I purposely abstayned from the pleasing vein of eloquence, and the flourishes
of Rhetorike. For as the one uses to offend the ears of the Reader, and
sometimes to auert him from reading the matter written: so the other by
overmuch delighting makes him less attentive to the matter it self, and
sometimes makes him doubtful of the truth thereof. The beauty of a chaste
Matrone ought to be as free from paynting as from uncleanness. Let those be
adorned with words whose life is not adorned with deeds. Our Magdalen does so
shine with Virtues, that she needs not the sple^dour of a pleasing discourse.
Yea rather, as she ever abstained from painting, and never made use of a
looking-glass: so is it requisite that all unnecessary flourish of speech be
shunned in the description of her life. My principal aim shall be at the truth,
that I write nothing, but what The fidelity of this writing.
my self have seen, or have received from the mouth of this Lady her self,
or of other witnesses worthy of credit: so that with S. Hierome writing the
life of S. Paula, I may call JESUS to witness, and his Saints, and the very
Angel who was Guardian, and companion of this admirable Woman, that I speak
nothing for favor, nothing in flattering manner; but what I am to say, I
speak as a testimony, and less then her merits. And that which may be a great
satisfaction to indifferent Readers, what I here commit to writing, I uttered
before a great audience at the funeral of the Lady Magdalen, her familiar
acquaintance there present; and diuulging it within the space of 19. months
after her death, if I lie, I may be disproued by the mouth, eyes, and testimony
of all that knew her; and especially of Heretics, who since they could not
endure true glory to be attributed unto her living, would less permit false
honor to be feigned on her, dead. Therefore their silence in this matter may be
an assured testimony That the live so some pious people may be written.
unto posterity of the truth of my discourse. But as I fear not calumniators
of the truth, so do I desire to satisfy others, who perhaps think that the
lives only of such persons ought to be recorded, whose worthy Sanctity meriteth
that they be enrolled in the Catalogue of Saints. From the judgment of these I
cannot but dissent, considering, that not only the lives of S. Paula, and S.
Marcella, but also of Blesilla, Fabiola, and the like are written For example.
by that most grave Father. S. Hierome; and the life of S. Monica by her Son
S. Augustine, whiles he fears that she was yet detayned in the pains of
Purgatory. And with good reason; for as Gods power does not only shine in the
composition of the sun and moon, but appears also in the fabric of the
lesser stars: so his heavenly grace does not only give a luster in the
perfection of famous Saints, but shines even in the worth of every pious
person. Besides the sun and moon, to have added also stars unto the
heavens, was not the least increase of their ornament; and so to record the
lives of some pious people, will be some addition to the glory of God For the
honor of God.
and of his Church. And as men for the most part do rather admire then clime
the highest mountains, who yet by the lownes of little hills are invited to
ascend: so, more do commend, then imitate the virtues of famous Saints, who
yet with no great difficulty aim at the piety of less virtuous persons. And
unto these I propose a woman, not famous for rudeness of habit, or rigor of
diet, or severity of discipline, or abnegation of the For edification of our
neighbor.
world; but one that was humble, chaste, meek, patient and pious, neither
resplendent by miracles, but abounding with virtues: so that they who despair
to imitate the admirable sanctity of S. Mary Magdalen, may see themselves
capable to attain the piety of Magdalen Viscountesse Montague. Neither yet do
I enrole her in the number of Saints, or the Blessed: Mine intention is only
for the glory of God, and edification of my neighbor, sincerely to commend her
life to writing; whether she deserved the opinion of sanctity, let others
judge. Thus much (devout Reader) I desired to premonish thee, before thou
take in hand, the reading of the life of our Magdalen. Make thou the benefit
thereof, and farewell.

THE LIFE OF THE LADY MAGDALEN VISCOVNTESSE Montague.
Of the Birth of the La. Magdalen Viscountesse Montague, and her Education
under her Mother.
CHAP. 1.
THE most Ho.ble and Virtuous Lady Magdalen Viscountesse Montague, was borne in
England, of most Noble and Catholic parents, at Naward Castle, the
Mansion House of her Father, scituat in the County of Cumberland, not far from
the borders of Scotland, the year of The Father of the La. Magdalen.
Christ 1538. the 20. of January. Her Father was William Lord Dacre, Baron of
Ghisland, a man, besides the most ancient Nobility of his family, of such power
and estate, as that he possessed seven Baronyes (which scarce any Noble man of
England ever had) and was of eminent authority His nobility.
in the North parts of England, and both himself and his ancestors of very
famous esteem in England, in regard of their notable prowess in matters of
war, for the safety and honor of their Country. Neither was he of less His
piety.
piety toward God, for when King Henry the VIII. calling a Parliament, purposed
by the voices of both Houses to renounce the obedience to the Church of Rome,
and by an unheard of President to arrogate unto himself the title Sander. de
schism. l. 1. p. 120.
of head of the Church of England, fearing least the Lord Dacre would not only
refuse to assent unto his lust, but by his example and authority would animate
others to the defense of the ancient faith, he took order to have him called
in question for treason; wherein notwithstanding he was easily declared
innocent. And when afterward the King told him, that by the consent of
Parliament he was made Head of the English Church, and demanded his opinion
what he thought thereof; scoffingly deriding the vanity of the King, he
answered: Hereafter then when your Majesty offends, you may absolve your
self. Another time when Queen Elizabeth the daughter of Henry, exceeding her
Father, endeavored utterly to exterminate Catholic Religion out of England,
the Lord Dacre exhorted the Nobility not to give consent to such an enormous
act, and to certain of them offered himself and his forces for defense of the
Catholic Religion. Her Mother was a woman of like Nobility and Piety, the
daughter of N. Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury; whose ancestors for their The Mother
of the La. Magdalen.
most heroical victories gotten in France, are exceeding famous both in the
French and English Chronicles. And so terrible has the name of Talbot been
heretofore unto the French, that Mothers and nurses to still their crying
children, accustomed to say, Talbot comes. Of these most noble ancestors
descended the La. Magdalen Montague, which I relate not, as though she did much
esteem thereof, but because, though Nobility do not augment the valor of
virtue, yet it does add a kind of luster, and ornament unto it, and makes it
to appear more gracious in the sight of man. For, as we may say with the Poet:
Gratior est claro veniens de sanguine Virtus. Virtue has more grace, when it
descends of noble race. For as a pearl is of great price, though it be hidden
under the earth, or covered with ordure be trodden under foot; or to use S.
Hieromes words: A Jewel glittereth in loathsome Epist. 2^.
matter, and the splendor of a most pure pearl shines even in dirt; yet it
is more gracious and delectable, when it is set in gold. So virtue is very
estimable with whatsoever ragged poverty it is joined; but where it is vested
with Nobility, as it were with purple, it does move a greater admiration; and
as the Sun in a clear day dispersing the clouds, does far and near dilate
the beams of his light. For as nothing appears more pleasing and beautiful
to those that cast up their eyes, then the heavens in a clear night glittering
with diverse stars: so to us casting down our sight, nothing appears more
gracious, then Nobility, adorned, and as it were glittering with diverse degrees
of virtue. For Nobility illustrated with Virtues, is a heaven situate on earth
adorned with stars. Which in these times we may auerre to be so much the more
true, as the conjunction of Virtue with Nobility is more rare. There was a time
when Kings, Queens, and Princes, Many holy Kings and Queens in England in
time past.
men and women in England, as they excelled others in dignity, so did they
endeavor to exceed them in virtue: whence we may find recorded among the
Saints, near twenty Kings of England, and as many Queens, but of Kings
children, Princes and noble persons more then may be nu^bred. But now (O
grief) our Princes saruing from the faith of their predecessors, the Nobility
also (for the most part) degenerate from the piety of their ancestors. Wherefore
this noble woman deserves the greater praise before God and men, who would not
stain her Nobility with vices and impious heresy, but endeavored with all
her forces to adorn and illustrate it with virtues, and the purity of the
Catholic faith, as in the discourse of her life shall appear. Till the
thirteenth year of her age she had her education in her Fathers house, under
the pious government of her Mother, where although, as well in regard of her
youthful years, as by example of her sisters, and the custom of other Noble
Virgins, as also by the delight of the pastime, she might have bin induced to
She deligteth not in hunting.
the sports of hauking and hunting, she notwithstanding contemning all this
pleasure, made choice by example of the B. Virgin, rather to abide in quiet
repose at home, then after the manner of profane Diana, by chasing wild
beasts and foul, to stray in the mountains and forests; and so without a
teacher she fulfilled the counsel which S. Hierome gives to Virgins: Let her
never go forth, least those Epist. ad Laet^^.
who wander about the city do find her, least they strike, and wound her, and
bereave her of the veyle of her chastity.

Of her Education, under the Countess of Bedford.
CHAP. II.
When she was now thirteen years of age, she was by her Father commended to
the Countess of Bedford, to be educated under the prudent discipline of that
Catholic and Religious Lady. Of whom she accustomed to make this relation,
which for the instruction of other women, I thought very requisite to commit A
barren woman immoderatly desires children.
to writing. Whereas she was barren, and had a vehement desire to have a child,
she for a long time both by her self and others besought Almighty God to
vouchsafe to grant her a son. But as Christ said to his disciples, Nescitis
quid petatis, ye know not what ye ask; and as S. Augustine witnesses, God
sometimes in anger grants our petition: so this pious woman by the ill event
experienced, that she knew not what she asked, and instead of a benefit,
requested a punishment of God. For she brought forth a She is punished by them.
son, but such a one, as not only fell into heresy, which she did extremely
abhor, but did oftentimes so impiously behave himself toward his Mother, as
that she would sometimes with exceeding grief and tears publicly confess,
that she grievously offended God, when desiring a son, she had not added this
condition, If it might be for his glory, and her comfort; and therefore (said
she) I am justly punished by the thing I immoderatly desired. Which may be a
document to pious parents, that sterility is not always to be esteemed as a
punishment inflicted of God, nor that children are always to be reputed as a
gift, and testimony of divine favor; and that they should demand no temporal
thing of God, but as far forth as his divine providence foreseeth it to be
agreeable to his pleasure, and profitable for them. But let us return to the
La. Mo^tague. She lived three years under the said Countess, whom she so
diligently attended, that she did not only perform the office of her
gentlewoman, but in the absence of her chamber-mayd, discharged her service
also, being ready every hour of the night whenever the Countess called
(which by reason of her old age and infirmities she often did) to rise out of
her bed, and diligently to attend her. Yea the right Noble Virgin being
delicately educated, did not disdain, of her own accord, and unknown to the
Countess, to perform that base kind of service, which curious ears refuse to
hear related. So much had God prevented her with his benedictions, and Her
rare humility and duty.
had endued her with such humility, even in that age, wherein, as being the
flower of youth, women are ordinarily puffed up in pride and insolency. And
this act she sometimes accustomed to relate to her Grandchildren without
blushing, yea with a kind of complacence, by such example to exhort them to
humility.

Of her living at the Court, under Queen Mary, and of her Marriage unto the
Viscount Montague.
CHAP. III.
When in this manner she had spent three years in all virtue and piety, under
the discipline of the Countess of Bedford, it happened that K. Edward the sixth
being dead (whose childhood certain impious men abused to overthrow Catholic
Religion in England) Queen Mary, not without evident miracle, and the great
benignity of God, against all power and policy of heretics, obtained the
Kingdom of England; and expelling perfidious heresy, restablished the ancient
and true Religion. She admitted Magdalen to the Court, and to She is Maid of
honor to Q Mary.
the number of her noble wayting-women (who are usually called Ladies of
Honor) where her virtue and virginal modesty got, not only more ample place
to demonstrate it self, but also found greater occasion and example of
progress and increase. For at that time the Court of England was a school of
virtue, a nursery of purity, a mansion of piety. The Queen her self did shine
What the Court of England was under Q Mary.
as the Moon in all kind of virtue, whose praises all histories do record.
Her Ladies and women did glitter as the stars; and what shining stars they
were, the Reader may conjecture by what I will relate of one of them from the
mouth of the La. Magdalen. She accustomed to arise from her bed very early, and
attyring her self with all possible speed, hastened to the Chapel, where
kneeling against a wall, and the other part of her face covered with her head
attire, she accustomed to spend certain hours in devout prayer, and to shed
abundance of tears before Almighty God. And yet withal, would she not be any
time absent from any office of piety prescribed to her, and her companions.
Neither was she content in this sort to spend the day, but arose from her bed
in the night, and prostrate on the ground applied her self to prayer a good
part of the night. Which, when the La. Magdalen had once perceived, she finding
her devotion to be discovered, no otherwise then if she had been apprehended in
Rare devotion of of one of the maids of honor.
some notorious Iewd fault, falling on her knees, with many tears she besought
her for the honor of God, that she would not bewray her secret exercises of
piety to any creature whiles she lived. O humble, O truly pious virgin, and
truly a Maid (as she was called) of Honor! for she was a maid of Honesty, of
Purity, and of Piety. O happy Court with such Courtyers! and happy England with
such a Court, which for virtuous life, gave not place to many Cloisters, and
whence, as from a fountainhead, examples of piety did flow into all Provinces
of England! Would to God this purity had continued in our Virgin Courtiers, and
the Mother thereof, the Catholic Religion, had still flourished; then had not
the Court of England been spotted with the notorious infamy of lasciuiousnes, as
soon after it was. But that I may express my grief in this cause, I desire
my Countrymen to consider the notable purity of the maids of Honor under
Queen Mary, and the infamous reproaches which some The difference of the Court
under a Catholic and an heretical Queen.
of them have incurred under Q. Elizabeth; and they will find what difference
there is between a most chaste Religion, and a most impure Heresy. Under such a
worthy Queen, and with such Companions the La. Magdalen being educated, she
had scarce lived two years in the Court, but that the rare virtues, and
ornaments both of her body and her soul, drew the hearts of many principal
Courtyers to affect her. Among whom, two especially at one time did earnestly
seek her in the way of Diverse desire to marry the La. Magdalen.
marriage. The one was Sir John Arundell knight, commonly (for his great wealth
and authority) called the Great; who afterward under Q. Elizabeth, suffering
long imprisonment for the Catholic Faith, dyed a glorious Confessor. He was
so enflamed with chaste affection toward this Lady, that he would never desist
to solicit her, till he understood that her Espousalls with another were
published. Then having lost his hope, though not his affection, he came to her,
and congratulating her espousalls, wished her the most fortunate and happy
marriage that ever woman had. The other was Antony, Lord Viscount Montague, the
issue of the most famous Marquess Montague (who descended both of the house of
Lancaster, and of the most ancient Nobility of England) one of the privy
Council of the Queen, and knight of the most Noble Order of the garter. This
Nobleman, before he opened his desire unto the La. Magdalen, sought by letters,
the consent of the Queen, who with no small commendations of her Maid, wrote
him this answer: Having considered The letter of Queen Mary.
her person, her virtuous report, birth, great number of friends and other
benefits which this Alliance will bring unto you, with other like motives,
which I perceive you prudently ponder, I confess that I so favor this matter,
as I do not only give free consent, that you treat with her thereof, but also,
so fit do I esteem this match to each of you, that with my heart I wish it a
happy conclusion; and shall exceedingly joy, that you have found so convenient
a wife, and she so fortunate a condition. The most Ho.ble Viscount having in
this sort obtained first the consent of the Queen, and then of the Lady, of
her Parents, and friends, married her in She is married to the Viscount Montague
London at the Kings house called S. James, the Queen her self with a great
train of the Nobility being present. This then was that Isaac, whom God
prepared for this most chaste Rebecca, of whose heroical Virtues, I will
briefly note some few, which I received from this Ladies mouth, because they
give some light to the relating of her Piety.

Of the worthy Virtues of the Viscount Montague, husband of the La. Magdalen.
CHAP. IV.
THe first Virtue that occurreth to be related of this A rare affection unto
chastity in the Viscount.
Noble man, is his rare affection unto chastity. For when (his Mother being
dead) his Father kept a Concubine, as soon as this young Gent. understood
thereof, he went alone to his Father, and on his knees besought him to leave
that course of life, so hateful unto God, damnable to his soul, and
dishonorable to all his friends; and to take to wife some honest Gentlewoman,
with whom he might live honorably before men, and in the favor of God. To
whom his Father smyling, said: Thou do give me such counsel, Son, as
will be thirty thousand pounds out of thy way. But the pious youth answered,
that he nothing regarded that loss, whereby he might gain his Fathers soul
and reputation. And so much did the pious admonition of the Son prevail with
the Father, that dismissing his Concubine, he married a wife, with whom he
spent the rest of his life honestly. And the Son in this one act showed great
piety toward his Father, religion toward God, and with contempt of riches an
admirable love of chastity, even at that time when, heresy being newly crept
into England, in a manner all the youth was corrupted with all kind of
lascivious liberty. Neither was this a sparkle, which after a little blaze is
suddenly extinguished, but a true flame of affection unto chastity, and a firm
purpose rather to hazard his life, then his chastity. For when afterward he was
Ambassador in Spain, and was fallen into a most perilous and molestfull
disease, and the Physicians gave judgment, that he could not recover, unless
he had the company of a woman; and at that time there lying directly over
against his lodgings a most beautiful English queen, who by all lascivious
allurements endeavored to induce him to lewdnes; notwithstanding, neither by
the Counsel of the Physicians, nor the persuasion of others, He prefers
Chastity before his life.
nor the wanton allurements of the queen, nor the love of his life could he be
moved, to prefer the health of his body before the safety of his soul, or
the love of his life before his charity unto God; but utterly rejecting all
lewd Counsel, he was never quiet till he had banished the queen out of those
lodgings. O holy man! O chaste Joseph, whom neither the pleasure of sin, nor
the impunity and secrecy of the fact, nor the hope of health, nor the fear of
death could induce to incur the loss of his chastity, to violate his faith
plighted to his wife, or to offend God. And albeit, being shortly after by the
Queen recalled into his Country, he recovered of this disease, who yet would
not esteem him equal, or very like to B. Leopoldus, and other most holy men,
who chose rather to loose their lives, then to abuse their bodies
incontinently? And this his worthy chastity was accompanied with equal, or
rather greater love of Gods worship and Religion. For when K. Edward the sixth
(or rather others in his name) abolishing the religion of his predecessors, as
an other Jeroboam, had erected a new Altar, and set up golden calves (I mean a
new worship, or rather superstition) and almost all people, either for
affectation of nouelty, or for fear of punishment flocked to that new and
enormous superstition, this pious youth would not stain himself with such
heinous crime; but like an other Tobias sought out the service of God,
practiced by his Parents, and both devoutly, and publikly, and with due
reverence frequented the same. For which matter being He is committed to prison
for the service of God.
committed to prison, he was so far from being dejected therewith, that
adorning his chamber with tapistry, he thereby gave his persecutors assurance,
that his purpose was, rather with Daniell to live in prison, then to abstain
from the divine service of his God. Neither did he alone so constantly embrace
the Catholic Religion, but did also animate others to the like constancy. For
when his Father by the impious advise of some others, for to avoid the offense
of Heretics, was persuaded to absent himself from the Parlame^t, that day
when under Edward the sixth it was consulted of changing Religion; when the
virtuous yo^g Gent. understood thereof, he never desisted till by prayers,
tears, and such other reasons as he could, he had wrought his Father to go to
the Parliament, and courageously to give his voice for the true Religion. And
when afterward under Q. Mary the true Religion did flourish again, none was
more studious then he to advance the Catholic faith. For which his zeal, and
other virtues worthy of such employment, he especially was chosen He is sent
Ambassador to the Pope.
of that Queen to go Ambassador to the Pope, and desiring pardon of the
schism past, to promise future obedience in the name of the whole kingdom.
Which he performed to his exceeding praise, the honor of his nation, the glory
of God, and the applause of the Christian world. But when a few years after
(with griese be it spoken) by commandment of Queen Elizabeth, there He
exhorts the Nobility to maintain the Catholic faith
was consultation again among the Nobility of the Realm for suppressing the
Catholic Faith, this most Noble Viscount, making a grave, eloquent, and pithy
oration, exhorted the^ not to permit themselves to be carried away with every
wind of new doctrine, nor to dissolve that, which themselves so very lately had
ratifyed, and with solemn ceremony had promised inuiolably to observe; nor to
abolish that Religion, wherein all their Christian ancestors lived with such
splendor, and dyed with such piety, to embrace that which a small number, and
they base, voluptuous, turbulent men of no reputation, and disagreeing among
themselves, had invented, and which had never set foot in England, had not in
famous lust, and greedines of Church-goods depraved K. Henry the VIII. But when
he perceived the principal of the Nobility of the realm, partly being deluded
with the vain hope of marrying the Q. partly blinded with the covetous desire
of earthly riches, not to admit good Counsel, but like the deaf aspe to stop
their ears (as the Psalmist says) at whatsoever voices sweetly enchaunting,
what he could not persuade others, himself constantly maintained, and
observed. And if sometime afterward he went to heretical Churches, it was not
so much to be imputed to him, as to his Priest, a learned and piousman indeed,
but too fearful, who supposing it expedient something to give to the time,
durst not determine such a fact to be sin. For when that Priest being dead,
he had entertained another, who with Priestly courage told him that it was a
grievous offense and hateful to God and the Church, and pernicious to his
soul, to be present at heretical service, he was so far from defending his
fact, that (as I received from the mouth of one that was present) instantly
putting of his hat, and falling on his knees, both with gesture of his whole
body, and with his tongue, he most humbly submitted himself to the censure of
the catholic Church, and piously promised never thence forward to be present
at heretical service, which all the rest of his life he exactly observed. Many
other notable things might be related of this right Nobleman, but that mine
intended subject calls me another way, and therefore I will add only one
thing, that the Reader may understand in what pious manner this worthy man
ended his holy life. When it pleased God to purge the rust of his sins in
this life, he permitted him to fall into a tedious, troublesome, and lingering
kind of infirmity, whereof he dyed. Which in the opinion of many, happening unto
him by witchcraft, (from which opinion himself seemed not to dissent) though
certain Sorcerers promised to restore him to his former health, if he would
but give way thereto; he not only refused to consent to their iniquity, but
detesting all helps of the slaves of Satan, severely forbad his friends ever
to use such detestable remedies, for the recovery of his health. And so
declaring, not only in words with the Psalmist, but even in deeds: Meliorem
sibi misericordiam Psalm. 62.
Dei esse super vitas, That Gods mercy was better to him then life, being by a
long trial purged, he piously ended his life in our Lord.

Of the mutual love between the La. Magdalen, and her Husband; of her issue,
and of her rare Charity toward her husbands children.
CHAP. V.
BY the aforesaid piety of the Viscount, it will be easy for the Reader to make a
conjecture of the conversation of his Lady, who being of her own nature and
The exceeding love betvveene the La. Mag. and her husband.
education addicted unto piety, by the further iuduceme^ts of her husbands
example, more speedily ran the course of virtue. They lived together in great
love and amity 36. years: and whiles I was writing this, I lighted by chance
on a letter of D. Langdales, who was for many years their Confessor, wherein,
in testimony of their love and piety he thus speaks unto them: Fare ye well,
most loving couple, of one mind, of one love, and (which is rare in this world)
of one piety. She (as S. Augustine left written of S. Confess. l. 9. c. 9.
Monica) being joined to a husband, served him as her Lord; and God made her
beautiful, and reverently amiable, and admirable to her husband. Her husband
had by her eight children, Sir George Brown, and Sir Henry Brown honorable
knights, and Elizabeth wife to the Lord Dormer; of whose praises The children
of the La. Magdalen.
because they yet live (according the Counsel of the wisema^) I will be silent;
the residue dyed either infants or unmarried, leaving no issue, excepting Mrs.
Jane Brown most like her mother in virtue, married to Francis Lacon Esquire, to
whom she brought forth many children. And Fateor nulla sic amabat liberos.
Hier, de Sancta Paula.
albeyt the La. Magdalen most tenderly loved her children and (what she could
without injury to others) carefully aimed at their preferment; yet her husband
having by a former wife one only Son, of exceeding tender constitution and
infirm, who only was to precede her Sons in his Fathers in heritance, she had
nevertheless so sollicitous a care of his health, as if he had been her own
child. Yea his Son, the present most Honorable Viscount Her worthy charity
toward her son in-lavv.
Montague, both by words (as I understand) and by writings (as we shall
hereafter recite) imputes the benefit of his own, and his Fathers life to the
rare piety of this Mother-in-law, which is also confimed by the testimony of
others. And when also, by an offense which her husband conceived, occasion was
presented whereby she Infrac. 16.
might exceedingly have raised the fortunes of her own children, she was so
far from making use thereof, to the She preserves the life of her sonne-in
law, and of his son.
injury of her Sonne-in-law his child, that she pacifyed her husband, and
reduced him into favor. So much did either the love of her husband, whom she
affected in all his children, or the ingrafted Nobility of mind, or finally the
love of God, and equity prevail with her. In which proceeding she showed a
worthy example to all Mothers-in-law; and so much therefore did she purchase the
love of the present Viscount, that none of her own children exceeded him in
filial affection. And though, at the time that her husband dyed, she seemed in
the judgment of many, to be nearer death her self; yet so much force did love
add unto her, that arising out of her bed, she held him in her arms whiles he
yielded up his last breath. And as S. Hierome writes of the most noble widow
S. Paula: She so bewailed him, as if she would have dyed with him; she so
betook her self to the service of God, as she seemed to have wished his
death. For whereas formerly obliged to wedlock, she was constrained to think Her
piety and gratitude toward her husband deceased.
(as the Apostle says) how also to please her husband, now that band being
dissolved, and having gotten a more settled freedom of exercising her virtue,
she applied herself more attentively to the service of God. Neither yet did
she neglect the care of her husbands soul, for whom she twice every week
caused Mass to be said, and herself said the office of the dead; every year
she procured a solemn Aniuersary on the day of his departure, and most
frequently when she took her repast, and often at other times, even to the
last day of her life, she was most gratefully mindful of him, using these, or
the like words: God be merciful to his soul who left me this. But now leaving
her husband let us come to her virtues. Whereof before I begin to speak, this I
must profess, that I neither know them all, nor can I according to their worth
express any one of them. For if the most eloquent Father S. Hierome confessed,
that although all his members were converted into tongues, and all his joints
did sound with humane voice, yet could he deliver nothing worthy the virtues of
S. Paula: What may I hope for, In vita S. Paulae.
who am not worthy to carry the books of S. Hierome, and yet am to write the
life of that widow, who as she did equal S. Paula in Nobility, so did she
imitate her in virtues. I will therefore partly imitate those painters, who
being to describe some Army on a tablet, do draw the just proportion of some
few soldiers, but of the residue they make appear only their heads, or the
upper part of their helmets, or the points of their spears, whereby they
intimate the number of the soldiers to be great, which they can rather propose
to the understanding of the beholders, then exhibit to their eyes. Thus I see
I must endeavor in writing the life of this pious Lady, that I may describe
some few of her virtues most apparent unto me, but the rest I must leave to be
conceived in the secret judgment of the Reader. Although even in this I shall
easily find the Pensill of the Painter more fortunate then my Pen, for he can
draw the just stature and true proportion of all the members, at least of some
of the soldiers; whereas my Pen cannot fully and entirely describe any one
virtue of this pious Lady. Which that I speak without amplificatio^ is apparent
to all that knew her, and the prudent Reader may easily conceive as much, by
what I am to relate.

Of the excellent Humility of the La. Magdalen.
CHAP. VI.
BEcause, as the most grave Doctor of the Church S. Hierome writes in the
life of S. Paula: The first, or chief In act ho^ 30.
virtue of a Christian is Humility. And as S. Chrysostom says; It is the
Root, Mother, and Nurse, the support, and bound of all good things; therefore
being to write the virtues of this pious woman, let us begin with her
Humility. That she was eminent herein, is apparent by her speech, her
conversation, Her humility in speech.
attire, and acts. For her speech was mild and peaceable, and free from all
contention, and more ready to give way to, then to contend even with her
inferiors. Neither did she disdain to speak unto any, yea In her
conversation.
when she walked abroad, she sometimes took occasion of discourse with such
poor people as she casually met with all, and sometimes went to their houses,
and familiarly discoursed with them of their affairs. She shunned not the
conversation of any honest person, yea she In her apparel.
visited the poor, thereby to get them the more estimation among their
neighbors. Her attire, after the death of her husband, when she was not bound
to please the eyes of any man, was such, that as S. Hierome writes of S.
Paula: Who had not known her, would not take her to be who she was, but to be
the meanest of the hand-mayds. On working days, she had her head dressed with
plain linen, covered with an ordinary Hat, used in England commonly, by
seruing-Maydes. But on Feasts (in honor of the Days) she put on a
French-hood. Her gown in Summer was of say, in winter of Cotton, on which, to
keep her shoulders from cold, she commonly wore a course Irish mantle. She
never wore knit stockings, either of silk, worsted, and wolle^, but She never
adorned her self by a glass.
only and altogether of Kersie. Her smock was of rude and course linen, such
as noble women would esteem a pe^nance to wear. She never in her life dressed
her head, or adorned her self by a glass, which in a woman, especial Noble,
and a Courtier, may be esteemed as a miracle, since women otherwise devout, have
been subject to this defect. In so much, as S. Hierome writes of Blesilla; That
she looked all the day in a glass, to see what she wanted. For what do women
more anxiously aim at, the^ to adorn their face, who, dum moliuntur (as he
said) dum comuntur, dum In vita Paulae.
pectuntur, annus est. A year does but suffice to adorn, attire and beautify
themselves. And whereof should that woman be proud, who neglects her face? That
it may be less admirable, that our Magdalen was free from that imperfection,
whereunto even S. Paula in her youth was subject, by the confession of S.
Hierome, to wit, of painting her face with cheek vernish, ceruse, or other
like colorings. For her endeavor was to adorn her soul with virtues, and
the glass wherein she daily beheld the same, was her conscience, as by that
which we shall hereafter relate, shall more clearly appear. And that we may
speak a little of Her acts of humility.
the acts of her humility, what I pray you, was that which we formerly
mentioned, when in her tender youth, unbidden, and unknown to her Lady, she
freely performed such a base office? What was that other act, which she
frequently exercised, as to be present at the travel of diverse mean, and
poor women, and her self girded with an apron diligently to assist the^?
These certainly were worthy and evident testimonies of profound humility; yet
of all the rest is this most excellent, known only to my self. Whereas she had
made choice to use me in the Sacrament of Confession, I advised her of a
certain method of discussing her conscience, more convenient for her (in mine
opinion) then that she had formerly used. Wherein I did perhaps so imperfectly
express my meaning, that the pious Lady understood me to suspect, that she did
not sincerely discover her sins, but did conceal something requisite to be
opened. And what (think you) did this Lady, no less emine^t in Estate then in
Nobility, so deeply touched (as to her seemed) in her honor, and so iniustly
condemned (as she conceived) of so heinous a crime as is sacrilege, and the
abuse of almighty God in the Sacrament? and this by him whom she so much
esteemed, as before any other she chose him for guide and Pastor of her soul?
What did she I say? did she by countenance, word, act, or gesture discover any
sign of offense? Yea, did she excuse her self, or ask what moved me to give
so grievous a censure of her? None of all these; but making most humble
reverence, departed, and so remained a whole week, showing in all that time no
token of displeasure. But yet, when almighty God had by this means tried A
rare humility in secret.
the humility, and patience of his servant, thereby perhaps to let me know what
an humble soul he had committed to my care, he suggested unto her in her next
confession to ask me, for what cause I suspected that she had concealed
something in confession, more fearing my judgment, then relying on her own
innocence, and doubting that I did perceive something, which she saw not in her
self. O submissiue humility! O profound resignatio^ of the soul of this great
Lady! And truly great, because in her own eyes she was so little. Some
Penitents perhaps would have taken it grievously, to have been questioned of
such lesser faults whereof their consciences accused them; others would take
it offensiuely, to be examined of those crimes, whereof there might be just
suspicion that they were guilty; but this humble and truly penitent woman, was
content not only to be examined of her sins (yea this she very much desired)
but even (as she conceived) to be condemned, not of some slight defect, but of
a most grievous crime; and out of her humility, more feared the judgment of her
Confessor, then confided in the testimony of her own conscience. And therefore
if according to the greatness of her Humility, we will measure the worth of her
other virtues, (as he did who by the foot-step of Hercules aimed at his whole
stature) we may without any other argument collect, that the rare submission of
this soul was consequently accompanied with many excellent virtues. For where
God laid so solid a foundation of humility, out of all doubt he built a notable
edifice of virtue. For where there is much Humility, there is much Sanctity.
Whence the most sacred Mother of Christ, and his Precursor, as they exceeded
all other in humility, so did they precede them in sanctity. Of this her
Humility then it proceeded, that she frequently An humble saying and deed.
accustomed to say, that she was a sack of dung; and when in her last sickness
her drink did once displease her, suddenly reprehending her self, and bitterly
weeping, she said: Why should I mislike my drink for whom any drink is too
good? And she at length had gotten so perfect a victory over Pride, that a
little before her death, with great confidence in God, and consolation of mind,
she told She triu^pheth over pride.
me, that thence forward she feared not pride. O happy woman, who in earth cold
triumph over that vice which threw the highest Cherubims down from the highest
place of heaven, and cast our first parents out of Paradise, and then which,
Piety has not a more capital enemy! For as it is most difficult to suppress
a flame; so is it hard not to glory when one has done any thing worthy of
praise. How highly then has God now elevated this woman, who promised to exalt
the humble? and how justly might she challenge a place of the lapsed Angels,
who by humility ascended thither, whence they by pride did fall?

Of her notable Chastity.
CHAP. VII.
THE next virtue of this pious woman whereof we are to speak, is her Chastity.
This in both sexes is most precious; for as the Scripture witnesses, There is
no sufficient Ecclesiast. c. 29.
worthy esteem of a continent soul: Yet does it especially shine in women, as
the principal flower in their garla^d, so that the same scripture says:
Gratia super gratiam, mulier Cap. 26.
sancta and pudorata. But a woman wanting this virtue, tanquam stercusin via
conculcabitur, as the same scripture says. Cap. 9.
But this woman's Chastity did equal her humility, whereof in the time of her
virginity, of her wedlock, and of her widdowhood, she gave evident
testimonies. For whiles she lived a maid of honor in the Court, on a time King
Philip who had married Queen Mary, youthfully opened a window, where by chance
she was washing her face, and sportingly putting in his arm, which some other
would perhaps have taken as a great honor, and rejoiced thereat, she knowing
that the condition of virgins was not unlike unto flowers, which with the least
touch do loose of their beauty, having more regard of her own purity, then of
the Kings Majesty, she took She sharply rejects the Kings jesting.
a staff lying by, and strongly stroke the King on the arm. Which fact the
prudent King did not only take without offense, but it was the increase of her
honor and esteem. And in what manner, think you, would she have disdayned
any other, who so rejected the King? or what would she not have done against
the King, attempting any lewdnes, who so entertained him jesting? When she was
married, she so carried her self, that as S. Hierome writes of S. Paula: She
was an example to all Matrones, and so behaved herself, that the tongues even
of ill speakers never durst forge any ill of her. For who could speak any
dishonest thing of her? who ever heard impute speech of her mouth? who could
charge her with any wanton cast of her eye? who could discover in her any
unchaste affection? Yet did she not want occasions of incontinencie, whiles her
hushand was thrice out of England, nor did there want lewd sollicitors, even of
the chiefest rank of England, whose discourse when she perceived to tend
thereunto, she with a certain pious indignation so rejected them, that they
durst not twice attempt the same. And this her chastity was so perspicuous, and
well known, that it so repressed the inclinations, and brideled the tongues
even of shameless She bridleth the wantonness of shameless persons.
persons, as that they were ashamed to attempt, or utter any lewd matter in her
presence. And albeit she chose not the highest degree of Chastity, which is
Virginity; that, perhaps may rather be ascribed to want of advise and counsel
(whereof she often lamented to have bin destitute in her youth) then of desire
to follow the best. For when, being 18. years of age, and newly married, her
husband was sent to that famous seige of S. Quintius, she made a firm
resolution, if he should dye, never to know any other man: so that we may judge
of her, as S. Hierome writes of S. Paula: Having once entered Matrimony, she
never thought of other thing day or night, but, the fruit of marriage being
rendered, how to attain the second degree of chastity. For her husband being
dead, the Lord Cobham, a man of great estate, honor, and authority in the
realm, did most earnestly She refuses second Marriage.
seek her in marriage, and offered her a very fair dowry, but she gave him so
resolute a denial, that thence forward she was no more solicited by suitors.
This example is not ordinary in England, in this so corrupt an age, where
sometimes women of honor, after the death of their husbands, not finding
others equal to themselves in dignity, do mary even their servants, or men of
mean condition. In this manner lived this Hon.ble Lady all her life, without
reprehension (as S. Paul speaks) in the midst of a crooked and perverse
Nation, among whom she shined as light in the world. And Phil. 2.
albeit these be arguments of rare chastity, yet I will add one far more
singular and eminent, the truth whereof though it depend on her only testimony,
yet since God does divide to every one (as the Apostle says) according as he
will, and imparteth 1. Cor. 12.
greater guiftes unto his servants; and she being so worthy a Lady, as
whosoever knew her, could have no suspicion that for vain glory she would
delude her confessor, I little fear, but that it will find credit with the
impartial Reader; and this it was: that in all her life she never The La. Mag
never felt the rebellion of the flesh.
felt the inuoluntary stings, or (as they call it) rebellion of the flesh,
whereby her mind should be provoked to lust. O singular chastity! O what kind of
taste of the state of innocence! O wonderful arguments of Gods love toward
this woman! For with what purity did God beautify her soul, who so adorned her
flesh? what treasure did he lay up in so rich a chest? what pure Tabernacle of
the holy Ghost was that soul, which inhabited so pure and chaste a body?
Neither yet is this all, that in this kind I can relate of this chaste woman,
but as S. Hierome says of himself writing the life of S. Paula: I am
constrained to omit many things, least I should exceed the belief of things,
and by detractors be reputed a liar. But what chaste soul, think you, had she,
who was freed from that interior, and cruel enemy of her chastity? And if
some time the enemy did suggest that unto her soul, whereto her flesh did not
allure her; if she were waking, she did instantly not only reject it from her
mind, but even with spitting, or some exterior sign, did declare how much she
detested it. But if it happened in her sleep, when reason had not power to give
her assistance, yet did her body so strive and labor to expel that filthy
suggestion, that it awakened her mind, after which the victory was easy. O
happy woman, whose very flesh (in which, even in holy men, as the Prophet Psalm;
7.
speaks) there is no soundnes, but their loins are filled with illusions,
and their reins do afflict them even unto night) was free from turpitude! S.
Gregory esteemed it a rare degree of chastity, 6. Moral. c. 17.
When Gods grace (says he) perfectly rewards some abstinent, not to feel
the stings, or violence of the motions of the flesh. But this woman felt
neither the violence of the motions, nor the motion it self. O what jewel of
chastity did the earth loose! how much did heaven gain by her death! But now
let us consider her patience.

Of her singular Patience.
CHAP. VIII.
Our Savior affirms Patience to be so necessary to every man, that he
declares, that therein we shall possess our souls; as if without it, man were
not master Luc. 1.
of him self, but were carried hither and thither with the blind fury of
affection: and this virtue in the La. Magdalen was not inferior to the former.
For it appeared admirable Her continual patience.
to all that knew her, not for a certain time, nor in some company, nor upon
certain occasions, but in all the whole course of her life. Nor did she carry
her self patiently toward strangers only, or her equals, but even toward her
familiars, and her very servants; from reprehending of whom, if they had
offended her, she accustomed She would nor chide her servants least she should
be angry.
to abstain, least (as she often said) she should be moved to anger; being
more careful of her patience and tranquillity of mind, then of conscruing her
temporal estate. For when any matter was committed deserving reprehension, she
accustomed to say to one: Go, and chide such a one. And so far was she from
the vice of chiding, that she understood not all the words which brauling A
mild speech of the Lady.
people accustom to use; and therefore when not long before her death, she
heard one woman scolding with another, she openly said, that till that day she
never heard such kind of speeches. She used to say: A good word is as easily
spoken, as an evil. And (...) of her Her notable patience tow^^^ (...).
(...) not only (...) the (...) would (...) him (...) which Patience
overcomes adversaries.
her (...) him. It was doubtless an act of great patience, (...) ^^^meles an
injury of her servant, but a greater to conceal it; but the greatest, in that
she accustomed to induce her adversaries by benefits to acknowledge their
fault. And so much did this her Patience prevail with two of her notorious
adversaries, that upon their knees they asked her pardon People of all ages and
conditions delighted in her conversation.
of their offense. And this her patience was in her so much the more admirable,
as she was by nature cholerike, and so much choler was found in her body after
her death, that such as saw it, and knew her most meek manner of living, were
exceedingly amazed thereat. So mild and sweet was her conversation, that she
allured people of all conditions to her company; and, which was to be admired,
every age, every degree, and both sexes did seem equally to be surprised with
the love of her company; and she did so accommodate her self to the civil
comportments of every one, that yet she admitted nothing unworthy of her self,
or unbeseeming her age and gravity. She was very unwilling to offend any by
word, gesture, or act; yea to take from others occasion of complaining,
whatsoever seemed molestfull, she took it her self: and that which S.
Augustine calls a great gift of God in his She concealeth the discord of
others.
Mother, that when one had secretly complained unto her of another: She would
speak nothing of the one unto the other, but what might tend to their
reconciliation; this, in this woman was rare and perspicuous. And this kind of
Patience she exercised, not only when she had her perfect health, but even in
her grievous sickness, as shall appear 9. Conf. c. 9.
hereafter in our relation of her extreme infirmity, wherein not content with
the torments which her disease did inflict, she often inuocated almighty God
with these words: Excellent patience.
O Lord, more pain, and more patience.

Of her prompt Obedience.
CHAP. IX.
HOw obedient the pious Lady was, may easily be collected by what we have
related of her singular humility. For what would she disdain to do, who had so
humble a conceit of her self? what commandment would she refuse to perform,
who uncommanded executed the most bast kind of service? And how seriously may
we think she obeyed her husband, who so diligently attended her Lady? Out of
doubt, she both piously obeyed her parents, for which almighty God blessed her
with long life, and carefully submited her self to her husband, and
sollicitously fulfilled his will, whereupon she often said, that The saying of
the La. of her obedience.
she left her will at S. James, which was the place of her Marriage. Besides she
religiously submitted her self to her Confessor, whereof I could allege many
examples, but I will be content with one. This humble and obedient Lady, by
counsel of her Phisician, and by admonition of her Confessor in her last
infirmity, and even on Ash Wednesday (which she never did in her life before,
and did piously abhor it) was persuaded to eat flesh. She then preferred the
request of her Confessor, before She fears scandal.
her own will, and her most ancient and Religious custom. Yet she did this
with such caution and fear of scandal, that she commanded her little
Grandchildren to be out of the way, least being incapable of understanding the
cause wherefore she did eat flesh, they might afterward abuse her example. For
which cause also, when a Protestant coming into her chamber, found her eating
of flesh in the lent, she forgot not to advertise him, that she did not eat
flesh for gluttony, or in contempt of the precept of the Church, but rather in
obedience to the Church, which, by counsel both of the spiritual and
temporal Physicians, gives leave to the infirm to eat flesh. Another time
also, when to comfort and encourage her, it was told her, that she being so
extreme weak, and eating flesh by the counsel of both her Physicians, might
merit more by eating, then others by fasting, she requested to forbear such
kind of speech, least people over prone to give way to gluttony, should
contemn fasting. But when it was answered her, that not simple eating, but
only eating of obedience was preferred before fasting, for so much as in
fasting, is abstinence from meat, but in eating of obedience, is abnegation of
ones own will, which people prefer before eue^ the most delicate meat; and
that her example was not of simple eating, but of eating upon obedience against
her own will, wherein she was not like to have too many imitatours; when (I
say) she heard these words, she was silent, and showed A most obedient saying.
her self ready to be disposed of any way, often using these words: Do with
me what you please, for I will no longer have my will. And certainly such was
her obedience all the time of her tedious infirmity, either in abstayning
Notable obedience in her sickness.
from that which she desired, or in accepting what was offered her, that it
moved great admiration in all the women that atte^ded her, who found no more
difficulty in governing her, then if they had attended an innocent child.

Of her Liberality toward others.
CHAP. X.
OMitting to speak of her liberality toward her brother, and kindred, or of
her hospitality toward Noble persons, because this is accustomed to be
attributed rather to nature then to virtue, I will only speak of her
liberality toward others. She maintained a great family, which consisted of
eighty persons, and sometimes more, and almost all Catholics. And these she
maintained not only for her honor (as is the manner of noble persons) Her
great family.
but also to support them in the Catholic Religion; and to these she allowed
not only plentiful food, and competent wages, but (which is much more to be
esteemed) afforded them the same benefit of the word of God, and the
Sacraments, that her self enjoyed; and as far as she could secured them from
vexations, and persecution of Heretics. How many benefi^tes proceed of
maintayning a Catholic family.
Which kind of liberality is far to be preferred before even the distribution
of very great sums of money in alms. For in this kind of alms, only money is
given, but in the pious liberality of this Lady, not only money is bestowed but
meat, lodging, defense from persecution, the exercise of Religion, and the use
of the Sacraments and a visible Church or Company of Catholics is assembled,
and conserved. She maintained three Priests in her house, and gave
entertaynment to all that repaired to her, and very seldom dismissed any
without the gift of an Angel; she redeemed two out of prison at her own
cost, and attempted the like for others, and gave money to other Catholics both
in common and particular. Her alms distributed every second day at her gates
unto the poor, were plentiful, and such, as some of the richer Protestants
did calumniate that they augme^ted Her alms
the number of beggars, and nourished their idleness. When she desisted from her
prayers, she accustomed to spend much time in sowing shirts or smockes for
poor men and women, in which exercise she seemed to take much pleasure;
sometimes also when she had leisure she visited the poor in their own houses,
and sent them, either medecines, or meat, or wood, or money as she perceived
their need; and when she could not perform this her self, she sent her
waiting women. Which kind of Charity she omitted not even in her greatest, and
last infirmity, but even then enquired how it fared with the poor, and
lamented their infirmities, when her self of all other needed most
commiseration.

Of her Zeal and Constancy in supporting, and professing the Catholyke Faith.
CHAP. XI.
HOw grateful is is unto God to profess his faith, it appears by those
words of Christ our Savior: Every one that shall confess me before men, I
also will confess him before my Father. And also on the contrary, how odious
it Matthew. 10.
is unto God to deny his faith, is ^uident by that which follows: But he that
shall deny me before men, I also will deny him before my Father which is in
heaven. But how constant the La. Magdalen was, not only in keeping, but even in
professing the faith of Christ, is evident, not by one act, but by the whole
progress of her life. For in those times, so turbulent, and so exceeding
subject to mutation under the Kings Henry the VIII. and Edward the six, and Q
Elizabeth, she remained most constant in her faith. And if in the beginning of
the reign of Q. Elizabeth she went sometimes to heretical Churches, that may
rather be imputed to the defect of instruction, then want of zeal. For when
she understood it to be unlawful, she did most co^sta^tly abhor it. And
albeit that under Q. Elizabeth she endured no other persecution for matter of
Religion, then that she was once accused to the pretended Bishop of Canterbury,
her house twice scarched, and her Priest once taken, and imprisonned; yet was
she prepared to suffer whatsoever it should please God, and did expose herself
to the peril thereof. For whereas she had two goodly Mansion houses, the one
upon the Thames side near London Bridge, in which, from the first beginning of
persecution The house of the La. Magd. a common refuge for Priests.
by Q. Elizabeth was a common retire for Priests coming in, and going out of
England; and also a refuge for such as resided in London; wherein also one
Priest had his residence, to minister the Sacraments to such Catholics as
resorted thither. In this house happened a matter worthy observation, which by
the way I thought requisite to relate. When in the chapel of this house
(which sometime appertayned to the Canons-Regular) some persons did dig in the
place where the high Altar had formerly stood, under the same altar, or near
thereunto they found a leaden coffin, and within it the body of a Religious man
lapped in linen, and bound hard with cords, there buried many years before,
so sound, flexible, and of so lively a color, as it seemed alive. The La.
Magdalen, as her self told me, putting her fingers into his mouth, did a little
pull out his tongue, which was fleshly red and dry; and another with a knife
cut a slash in the flesh, which within seemed very sound and fatty, no sign
appearing either of Balm, or any other thing that could conserve that body
from corruption. And of this matter many eye witnesses worthy of credit are yet
living. In her other house, which, being distant four miles from Hastings, of
that famous field which there was fought between William the Conqueror and
King Herald, is called Battle, where herself with her family did for the most
part reside, she kepr three Priests, one of whom was M. Thomas More, great
grandchild, and direct heir of that famous Sir Thomas More sometime Lord
Chauncellor of England, and a most worthy Martyr; who seeking to participate
rather of the virtues, then of the lands of his great grandfather, having
resigned unto his younger brother a most ample patrimony, and being worthily
adorned with learning and virtues, and made Priest, devoted himself wholly to
the conversion of his Country; in which industry he has laudably employed
himself these 20. years. Another was M. Thomas Smith Bachelor of divinity, a
man no less venerable for his learning, worthy piety, and vnwearyed endeavor
in helping his Country, then for his gravity of years. The third was my self.
These did minister the word of God and the Sacraments, not only to the La.
Magdalen, and her family, but to all Catholics repayri^^ thither. She built a
chapel in her house (which in suc^ persecution was to be admired) and there
placed a very fair Altar of stone, whereto she made an ascent with steps She
built a chapel with a Quier in her house.
and enclosed it with railes: and to have every thing conformable, she built a
Quire for singers, and set up a pulpit for the Priests, which perhaps is not to
be seen in all England besides. Here almost every week was a sermon made,
and on solemn feasts the sacrifice of the Mass was celebrated with singing,
and musical instruments, and sometimes also with Deacon and subdeacon. And
such was the concourse and refort of Catholics, that sometimes Solemn Mass
celebrated.
there were 120 together, and 60. communicants at a time had the benefit of the
B. Sacrament. And such was the number of Catholics resident in her house, and
the multitude The resort of Catholics.
and note of such as repaired thither, that even the heretics, to the eternal
glory of the name of the La. Magdalen, gave it the title of Little Rome. O happy
woman, and true mayntainer of the Roman faith, who, where the very name of
Rome is to most so odious, that they use all The house of the La. Mag. called
little Rome.
their industry and utmost endeavor to extinguish it; there, she did not only
preserve the memory there of, but made it so famous, as she deserved to have the
title thereof given to her house. Let others nominate their houses by what
titles they please, this only title of Little Rome, given by Heretics unto thy
house, O Honorable Magdalen, by reason of the Roman faith there professed,
appears more famous, and more illustrious then all other titles! Whiles she
was present either at Mass or Sermon, she did not co^ceale herself for fear
to be betrayed by some false brother, as it sometimes happens in England, but
she did serve God publicly in the sight of all, that by her example she might
encourage all; and when she walked abroad, by her Beads, or Cross which she
used to wear about her neck, she professed herself to be a Catholic, even to
whatsoever Heretical beholders; and so manifest was her religion, that scarce
any in England had heard ^^r name, who knew her not also to be a Catholic. She
^^^dered none from hearing Mass in her house, if any Catholic had but the
least knowledge of them, using these words: Let these poor people come, they
desire comfort as much as we. And that which to others did strike a fear of
trobles, was unto her occasion of great joy: to wit, when on festival days,
she saw a great number of Catholics in her Chapel, in so much as she would
sometimes shed She offers leave to print Catholic books in her house.
tears for joy, and would thank God, that by her means so many pious souls
received spiritual consolation. Yea so far streched the fortitude of this
blessed woman, in propagating the Catholic faith, that she twice offered me
leave to set up a Press to print Catholic books in her house; which had bin
done but that it was most difficult, and almost impossible in such an ample
family to to conceal such a matter from Heretics. This her courageous
Constancy bred her great Envy, in her Heretical neighbors: wherewith some of
them being moved, presented her name, and the names of almost all her family so
the Judges in public assizes, for not observing the law of coming to Church
every month. By which law it is commanded, that whatsoever person of the age of
16. years shall abstain, for a month, from the Protestant Churches, shall be
confined within the compass of five miles of his house, and shall pay, at the
choice of the King, either 20.^^ every month, or two thirds of his lands and
teneme^ts, with the loss of all his goods: and if he keep any Catholic The
La. Mag. first of all the Nobility in England accused upon the statute of going
to heretical Churches
servant, he shall pay besides for each one, 10.^^ every month, Upon which law
the La. Magdalen was the first of the Nobility, that ever in England was
accused in public judgment. But she was so far from being terrified with this
most hard proceeding, or dismissing of any of her servants, that, having
intelligence thereof, with a pleasing Countenance she said: If the King will
have two thirds of mine estate, I will joyfully live with the rest, and I thank
God, who has permitted me to enjoy it hitherto, and now permits that it be
taken from me, for profession of his faith. When there was danger of searching
her house, she was more sollicitous of her Priests then of herself, and when
in the time of that notorious powder-treaso^, she was terrifyed with extreme
Her manly courage in present peril.
and imminent dangers, that she should not be able to keep a Priest in her
house, she did not yet give way thereunto, but dismissing the aduertiser, with a
manly courage and full of confidence in God, she said to her Confessor: Let us
say the litanies, and commit this matter to God. And as well at other times
often, as when she lay in her extreme infirmity, She reduces two of her
nearest kindred unto the Church.
she strictly commanded her children, encouraged her servants, and
importunatly exhorted all persons, to neglect the wealth of the world,
constantly to retain the Catholic faith, and to repose their hopes in God. At
which time Almighty God gave unto her this consolation, that by her example and
admonitions she reduced two of her nearest kindred into the lap of the church.
And certainly it is to be much attributed to her Piety, that whereas she left
living above thirty of her children, Nephews She desires her children might
suffer death for the Catholic faith.
and Neeces, she left them all constant professors of the Catholic faith. And
albeit she most tenderly affected her children; yet she so much preferred faith
before nature, that she would often say, she should exceedingly rejoice to see
any of them to dye for the Catholic faith. Neither do I doubt, but if Almighty
God had tried her, we should have seen in her the courage of the Mother of the
Machabees.

Of her notable Piety toward God.
CHAP. XII.
THe nurse of all Virtue is piety and devotion toward God, which in the Lady
Magdalen was very remarkable. For she was every day present at the morning and
evening service which by her Priests was daily said The devotion of the La.
Mag. unto the Mass.
in her chapel. For the most part, she did every day hear three Masses, and
more would willingly have heard, if she might: and such was her affection to
this divine sacrifice, that when upon any occasion in the winter it was said
before day, she in that cold and unseasonable time, could not contain herself
in her bed, but rising, endured not to be absent from that heavenly Sacrifice.
In her private devotions, she did every day say three offices, Her daily
private prayers.
that is, of the B. Virgin, of the Holy Ghost, and of the Holy Cross; whereto
she added at least three Rosaries, the Jesus Psalter, the 50. prayers of S.
Brigit, which because they begin with O, are commonly called her 15. Oes, and
the common Litanyes; and finally sometimes the office of the dead. Which
prayers, when in her infirmity she could not say her self, she procured to be
said by others, distributing to every one a part. And that I may What time she
spent in prayer.
comprehend much in few words, she spent a very great part of the day, and much
of the night in prayer. For rising early in the morning, she for the most part
employed the rest of the time, even till the hour of dinner in prayer, and
sometimes she would retire her self alone after dinner into the chapel to
pray; as also before supper she spent an hour, or often two hours in prayer;
and before she went to bed she omitted not the Litanyes, and the examen of her
conscience. And I have some times observed that on Christmas Eve at night, from
an hour before midnight till a little before dinner, she never went out of the
Chapel but only a little to attire herself; but was all that time watchfully
employed in prayers, and devout actions. She was often found in her chamber
prostrate on the ground in prayer, albeyt she accustomed, when the heat of
devotion did move her, to shut the doors. In the night also, when others took
their sleep, she was heard of her women to say her Beads, which to that end
did always hang at her beds side. And as S. Hierome writes of S. Lea, She
instructed her family more by example then by word, and with her piety induced
all to devotion. And although Epist. 24.
she was by privilege of her age exempted from fasting, yet did she piously
observe all the fasts of the Lent, the She did often fast.
Ember days, and whatsoever other, either commanded by the Church, or
introduced by the pious custom of the Country, as are the fasts of Fridayes,
and some others: to all which, of her own devotion she added some wednesdayes.
O right pious woman, and imitating that holy widow, which did not depart from
the Temple, serving Luc. 1.
God day and night, in fasting and prayer! And she was so moved with love unto
prayer and devotion, that the care of worldly estate was tedious unto her,
which she would willingly have imposed upon some other, and did sometimes
co^ferre with me of that matter, that she might wholly deuote her self unto God,
but that there were some impediments which her self could not remove. She
showed a respective reverence to her Priests, for the honor of Her exceeding
reverence to her Priests.
God, and did most humbly on her knees, morning and evening ask their
benediction, which she did also observe toward other Priests at their coming
and going. Which honor exhibited to our Priests from the beginning of the
English Church, as testifyeth S. Bid in the third book of his History, and
26. Chap. but long time intermitted, their frequent deaths for the Catholyke
faith has reduced; for within 30. years, above 120. secular Priests have bin
crowned with Martyrdom in England. Every Sunday, and festival day besides,
she did purge her sins by holy Confession; which she performed She frequently
confessed and with great contrition.
with great preparation of mind, and discussion of her conscience. She opened
her sins with exceeding sincerity, and bewailed them with such abundance of
tears, that whosoever had seen the^, would have thought her another sinful
Magdalen, but the hearer of her sins thought of the innocence of S. John
going into the wilderness, least he should maculate his life with the least idle
word. For what she confessed were sometimes so small, that I thought it
necessary, to advise her to accuse herself of some former sins, fearing
least otherwise there might want matter of absolution. And yet as I said, she
did so bitterly lament them, that she forced me to tears; for which cause I
desired to hear her confession before I confessed my own sins. For in her,
as S. Hierome writes. of S. Paula, Thou would believe to be fountains of
tears, the so bewailed slight sins, as thou would think her to be guilty
In vita Paulae.
of grievous crimes. Every year, at least once, whiles I had care of her, she
made a general confession of all her sins, not upon any scruple, but that
she might obtain that, which the Prophet, having already obtained pardon of his
sin, requested when he said: Wash me more from my iniquity, Psalm. 50.
and clenfe me from my sin; and with all, that she might the more humble her
self, and have her sins always before her eyes. And albeit she was very
sollicitous in discussing her conscience; yet she did frequently request me,
that if I perceived any vice in her conversation, I should not omit to admonish
her thereof. And she was so severe toward her self, that she would desire more
penance then was enjoined her, and would say, that she never She desired more
penance then was enjoined her.
met with a Confessor that would enjoin her sufficient satisfaction. And for
that reason perhaps, for some Months before her last sickness, she accustomed
every week after her confession to give me ten shillings, to distribute in
alms, so to supply that which to her seemed wanting in the imposition of her
penance. Concerning which Money, this happened worthy of observation, that when
she was sick, and could not according to that custom give An admirable thing
concerning the money she gave for satisfaction.
me every week that certain sum, she commanded one of her servants, to
deliver me such money as he had of hers, which money came not to a farthing more,
nor less then ten shillings, for every week she lived. This then was the piety
of this worthy woman in confessing frequently, in confessing with great
sincerity, contrition, and desire of satisfying God for her sins; whereto was
answerable her like devotion toward the most B. Sacrament of Her piety toward
the Sacrament of the Eucharist.
the Eucharist. For when in this manner she had purged her soul from sin,
she came with an hungry desire to receive the bread of life, and with what
external reverence, and humiliation of body, she both came to the sacred Altar
of Christ, and returned thence, with what tears in her eyes, and with what
reverence in her countenance she received that sacred banquet; they well
perceived who beheld her. But with what in teriour piety, and with what
enflamed charity toward God, she entertained her Savior in her heart, he only
saw, who sees the secrets of hearts.

Of the admirable Providence of God, toward the La. Magdalen.
CHAP. XIII.
AS this holy woman had a peculiar care to serve and please God, so it
appears that correspondently he had a particular providence, and care over
her, whereof I will allege a few examples. Whiles she was a married woman she
fell into an extreme, and continual grief and affliction of mind, upon the
ruin of her family procured (as she sometimes said) by him in whom she had
placed the hope of best relief thereof; which melancholy affliction being such
as exceeded the art of all Physicians, and the counsel and comfort of her
friends, almighty God at length compassionating his servant, vouchsafed to cure
her by another means. For in a dream (as she particulerly God cures her
tedious affliction.
related unto me) it was clearly and manifestly demonstrated unto her, what she
should do to be freed of her inward grief. Which when she had performed, (it
being a very pious action) she was insta^tly cured of that affliction of mind,
which no humane art, medicine, or counsel could prevail in. Of this trial,
as she often confessed, she obtained a better knowledge of her self, and more
benefit the^ of any other thing; in so much that she confidently affirmed, that
by her own experience, she had learned that God works all things for our
good. And by this means almighty God did meruailously free her from spiritual
desolations, and did convert them to her advantage and consolation; neither did
he less protect her from her corporal enemies. For whereas some few years
before her death certain Protestants, in hatred of her Religion, sought the
destruction of her, and all her family, yet did they not prevail in their
malice. For the principal of them Sir The judgment of God upon the heretics
that soght the ruin of the La. Mag.
Tho. May, being a Knight and Justice of peace, and having given commaundment
for apprehending the servants of the La. Magdalen, was himself a little after
ignominiously conuented before public authority, and cast into prison for
debt, where he lay long, and at the setting forth of this work, was shamefully
dismissed of the Commission of the Peace. But the author and firebrand of all
evils was Nicholas Cobbe, who a little after he began to seek the ruin of the
La. Magdalen, had a knife thrust into his belly by his own wife; and being for
some heinous fact apprehended by officers, and even by heretics pursued to
punishment, did at length by letters beg pardon of the La. Magdalen; and what
affliction yet expects him, almighty God knows. The third inueterate
Heretic called N. Benet, who perceiving that nothing, of what himself and his
Confederates had conspired against the devout Lady, took effect, on a
market day held at Battle, falling on this knees before the gate house of the
Viscountesse, did vomit out his bitter imprecation, praying God to confound
her, and all her family. But the dart which the impious fellow cast against
heaven, did soon fall upon his own head. For the third day after going early
in the morning out of his house, he drowned himself in a pit at the towns
end, toward London: Whereupon being taken up by Protestants, and by their
judgment found guilty of his own death, he was buried like a dog in the high
way. At another time also when (as before is said) Note the speedy judgment of
God.
she was called in question for not going to heretical service, she was so
far from incurring any detriment thereby, as that it wrought her more security
then before. For the Kings Council by their public letters addressed to the
Attorney General dated the 19. of April 1607. commanded that no sentence
should proceed against her. Which letters because they testify both the true
allegiance of the Lady Magdalen to the King in temporalityes, and also that her
molestation was merely for Religion, I will here setdowne part of them, out of
the original which is The La. Mag. questioned for religion, is otherwise
faithful to her Prince.
in my custody. For so much (say they) as the Lady Montague the wife of Antony
Viscount Montague deceased, is lately called in question for default of
conformity in Religion according to the laws of this Kingdom; in regard that
she is a Noble-woman, aged, and by reason of her fidelity, in the time of Q.
Elizabeth, was never called in question, it pleases the Kings Majesty that in
her old years she be free from molestation. These therefore, shall be to require
you, that you forthwith do procure the accusation which is presented against
her in the County of Sussex or else where, to be removed by writ of Certiorari,
into his Majesty's Court of the Kings bench, and thereby you shall have power to
stay all process against her person, grounded upon that presentment, or
whatsoever other, till we shallbe further certifyed. And in the same manner,
when under pretense of search for the powder-traytors, Protestants did often
search her house, she obtained letters from the Kings Council dated the 5. of
April 1606. And subscribed by ten of the same Council, that none besides
four by her self nominated, should search her house. By which The La. Mag.
exposing herself to peril for religion became more free from danger.
letters she obtained, that herself, whose house especially was always free
to all Catholics, and who, in admitting Catholics to the Sacraments, exposed
herself to danger more then all others, proved thence forward to be more free
from peril then any else. Whiles she lay in London in the year 1606. a
Protestant seeing one go into her house, whom he suspected (but falsely) to
be one of those whom the King had proclaimed guilty of the powder treason,
declared the same to the Kings Council, who instantly authorized Officers that
most watchfully beset both hers, and the adjoining houses, from Wednesday at
two of the clock in the morning, till Saturday noone following, and in that
time very diligently searched hers, but especially her neighbors houses. The
Lady Magdalens Priest was then absent, who was gone toward Battle, she
intending immediately to follow him; but understanding that two of her family
were fallen grievously sick, instantly taking horse, returned to London, the
same day that the search began. But almighty Her Priest twice eue^ miraculously
escaped the hands of heretics.
God so protected the Lady Magdalen, that at the very instant when the Priest,
suspecting no danger, entered into the house, the Watchmen for a quarter of an
hour were gone aside. And even two days after when it was esteemed most
dangerous for him to remain there any longer, he went again out of the house
in the midst of the watch, not one of them apprehending him, albeit amongst
them there were three that knew him well, to be a Priest, and did speak of him
to each other, and with their fingers pointed at him. Not many months after
the same Priest going from the house of the Viscountesse at Battle, was
discovered to the aforesaid impious Cobbe, and Again an other time
the Priest being scarce out of sight, Cobbe having a vehement malicious desire
to apprehend him, ran every way to hyre a horse to pursue him; but Almighty God
did so preserve the Lady Magdalen, that he permitted not any Protestant, though
her grievous enemies, to lend Cobbe a horse, nor suffered him to follow the
Priest a foot, or by outcry (as is the manner in England) to raise the people
to pursue him; whereas the Priest, not suspecting any danger, walked on a foot
pace, expecting one that was to accompany him, might easily have been
apprehended. Both which escapes the Priest himself ascribed to the piety of
this Lady whom God protected, least her Priest being taken, her life had been
brought in question for entertayning him. With the rehearsal of one admirable
thing which happened in her house, I will end the discourse of these things.
There stood upright against a An admirable thing of an Altar-stone.
wall a great marble stone, which in Catholic times had been an Altar-stone for
the service of almighty God; and a woman of curiosity desirous to see that side
thereof which rested against the wall, so drew the stone toward her, as it fell
upon her. And albeit the stone was of that huge greatness and weight, as eight
men could hardly with whatsoever leauers remove it from one place to another,
and nothing lay between it and the woman that might save her from the fall of
it, yet was it so taken up without the least hurt of the woman, as if a bed of
feathers, not so huge a stone, had fallen upon her. Whereupon the stone was by
commandment of the Lady Magdalen, removed into the Chapel, consecrated
again to divine service, and applied to his former use. But now, though with
grief, let us come to declare her death. For who (as S. Hierome writes of S.
Paula) can with vnwatered eyes relate the death of the Lady Magdalen?

Of her happy Passage unto God.
CHAP. XIIII.
When she had piously and blessedly lived complete 70. years, and had seen
her third generation, and above thirty persons of her issue, and all by the
grace of God Professors of the Catholic faith, the next day after her
birthday, to wit, the 21. of January of the year 1608. at which time there
was such an extreme frost An extreme frost in England.
in England, that the River Thames being frozen, men, horses, and carts passed
over upon the ice, yea meat being roasted thereon, people did banquet there, as
upon the firm land; at such time (I say) as the frost gave such a general The
Lady Magd. falls into a palsy.
horror, the Lady Magdalen fell into a Palsy, whereby she lost the motion of
the right side of her body, and much wanted the use of her tongue. Within two
days, the most prudent Lady perceived her disease to be mortal, neither yet
did she desire any medicine, or sent for How she prepared for death.
any Phisician, but calling for her Co^fessor, desired to participate of all
the sacraments of Christ, which in such case are requisite. Which having with
exceeding devotion and tranquillity of mind received, and delivering her last
will and testament to one, she prepared herself for death, requesting that
thence forward she might be free from all molestation of temporal affairs.
But almighty God, for the greater glory of his name, for her merit, and our
edification, did prolong her infirmity for eleven whole weeks, to wit, till
the eight of April. In which time it cannot Her admirable meeknes and patience.
be uttered, what admirable patience she showed, both in words and deeds, never
wayward, or tedious, but always thankful, even to the meanest of her
servants, when they had done any thing about her; and oftentimes even in her
extremest torments, praying God to increase both her pain and patience. Her
accustomed prayers (as before I said) she distributed amongst her friends. She
heard Mass every day, at which time she would be lifted up in her bed, which
she omitted not, even the last day of her life. There did hang at her beds
feet a silver Cross Her devotion in her sickness.
gilded, of Christ crucified, which was sometimes her Grandmothers, the famous
Countess of Shrewsbury; to it she did very frequently lift her eyes, and
sometimes (as she could) her hands, without uttering a word, but with great
signs of devotion: sometimes she would double those petitions of the Pater
noster: Fiat voluntas tua sicut in caelo and in terra. Dimitte nobis debita
nostra, sicut and nos dimit^imus debitoribus nostris. Et ne nos inducas in
tentationem. At other times she prayed with us, or gave ear to the reading of
the Passion of Christ, or some pious book, and now and then would admonish us
to put her in mind of heaven, and heavenly things. Sometimes she enquired the
estate of other sick persons; and as occasion was presented, she did exhort
Catholics to constancy in their faith; and sometimes also she spoke to
Heretics of embracing the Catholic faith. But how much at that time she was
enflamed with the love of God, even by this it may appear, that once she
exceedingly loathing a certain potion, when after many importunate requests
one had desired her to take the same for his love, who for her drank vinegar
and gall, presently without giving any answer, she took the cup and drank it
all up; so suddenly did the memory of the Passion of Christ make that seem
sweet, which before was very loathsome unto her. She so little feared death,
that from the beginning of her sickness, to us who much desired her life, she
seemed too much to desire her death; and therefore when we did propose unto her
the examples of She rather wishes then fears death
S. Paul, S. Martin, and others, who for the consolation of their friends were
content to live, she would humbly answer: The will of God be done. And when
once, she falling into a sound, her servant cried out in lamentation; as soon
as she returned to her self, she reprehended her, saying: Weep not for me, but
weep for thy sins, and I command thee that thou pray not for my life. O
singular confidence of a pure conscience! O contempt of this life, and desire
of the future! After this patient and pious manner did the La. Magdalen spend
that tedious time of her grievous infirmity, wherein certain things were
observed, which perhaps may seem special marks of her excellent piety
toward God, and The body of the Lady Magd. breathed a sweet odor.
of his divine favor toward her. For albeyt there was nothing about her, that
could produce any sweet odor, yea every day ointment applied to her neck and
arm for cure of the Palsy, which gave a loathsome smell, yet one day her body
seemed to yield a pleasing savor, which not only Catholics, but even some
Protestants which then by accident were present, did feel, and admiring,
demanded whence that sweet odor was. To others it seemed another kind of
savor, yet most delicious and beyond all common savors. To me it seemed much
like sweet balm, so that reflecting on the odor of virtue which she left
behind her both to Catholics and Protestants, I reputed that saying of
Ecclesiasticus to be fulfilled in her: Sicut balsamum aromatizans odorem dedi.
Another time also of her sickness, a certain very A most delicious savor came
forth of the place where he accustomed to pray.
grave and pious man kneeling to pray without the Chapel, but behind the
place wherein she accustomed to pray did five or six times feel a certain
breathing of the most delicious savor that ever he felt in his life, to come
forth of the Chapel; which savor he likened to the gum of the balme-tree,
yet far exceeding all earthly odor, and filled him with exceeding admiration
and pleasure. But what do we admire so sweet a savor to proceed from the
place where the Lady Magdalen accustomed to pray, when she (as the Apostle
says) Was a sweet odor of Christ in every place? Another thing which to me
seems worthy of consideration, was, that whereas the Physician three or four
days before her death, gave us hope, either of recovering her health, or at
least of prolonging her life, neither indeed did there appear to us any sign
of imminent death; nevertheless the seventh of April, which was the day
before her death, she requested me to entreat my brethen the other Priests (for
we were then five) that we would all that day say mass for her in honor of
the Blessed Virgin: and I demanding of her, to what end The admirable
perfection of the La. Magd.
she desired those masses to be celebrated; That (said she) I may have no will
but the will of God, and that his most sacred will may be fulfilled in me,
either in life, or death. O admirable perfection of this woman, prepared either
to live or dye, as it should please God, and of herself desirous of neither,
but only of the fulfilling of his divine pleasure! And behold, whereas before
this time (as is said) we saw no signs of imminent death, not long after the
celebration of the Masses, the very pangs of death did assault her, neither did
they ever leave her, till they bereaved her of this mortal life. And albeit
those pangs were very violent and continual from Thursday three of the clock
in the after Death speedily ensued after she said she was prepared for life or
death.
noone, till almost midnight of the day following, which was the eight of
April, when she gave up her Ghost; yet did she persevere with the same
admirable patience and tranquillity of mind. In so much that the Friday
morning, being asked how she had passed the precede^t night, she answered: The
best of all that ever I passed. For the most prudent woman perceived death to
draw on, and that night to open unto her a day which was never to have end.
Whiles her senses continued, she prayed with us, and in one hand she held a
Cross till her forces failed; in the other a hallowed light, which she held so
fast even after her death, that without force it could not be wrested from her.
Her last words which could be understood, were She peaceably departs.
those of our Savior: Into thy hands (O Lord) I commend my spirit; which
without any resista^ce or reluctation she peaceably yielded up, a little before
midnight: at which time, as the Scripture says, There was a clamor made,
Behold the Matt. 25.
bridegroom comes, go ye forth to meet him: she with the holy women, within
the Octaues of our Lords Resurrection, arose out of this valley of tears, and
her lamp being prepared, entered, as we hope, with the Bridegroom to the
Marriage. Her bowels were buried at Battle where she dyed, in the monument of
her husbands Father, and her body honorably carried to Midhurst, and there laid
in the Sepulcher of her husband.

Of the shape of her Body, and Mind.
CHAP. XV.
OF Stature she was very tall, so that (as Saul amongst men) she among women of
middle stature appeared from the shoulders upward, and yet very upright;
neither did she stoop in the least manner even till her death, her very body
being erected by her upright mind. She was fat and gross in body; her head was
round, and in regard of the greatness of her body seemed little; her hair in her
youth was fair and enclining to yellow, her face beauttfull and long, her
forehead flat, her eyes sharp, and of the color of an hasell-nut; and her
sight so continued, as in her last days, she could discern a tower fifteen
miles of, and with spectacles could cut even the finest linen cloth by a
thread: and in the same manner had she the use of all the residue of her
senses. Her nose was straight and sharp, and somewhat short, and her chinne
great; her countenance very grave and venerable, and her gate upright, sober,
and full of Majesty. And this was the external form of her body. But
concerning her mind, she was of a sharp wit, and of a notable memory, which yet
she said was decayed by her foresaid long and tedious affliction. She was also
of a profound judgment, and of a stout and manly courage, so that of her may be
said, that which is written of S. Thomas of Canterbury, viz: She was humble,
but A^^d Su^ium tom. ^.
amongst the humble, for among the potent and proud, she seemed more lofty, and
potent. And thus far, to my ability, I have described the life of this pious
woman: now let us hear other men's opinions of her.

Other Men's Judgments of her.
CHAP. XVI.
FIrst, the most Reverend Archpriest of England M. The judgment of the
Archpriest and other Priests of England.
George Birckhed in his letters directed to me, lamented her death, as it were
(said he) of a great Mother in Israel; and the Priests in England did every
where extol her as the worthy Patroness of the holy faith, and the singular
ornament of the Catholic religion in England. A Catholic man of worthy piety,
and a man of good judgment, albeit he formerly had known her well, yet
visiting her in her sickness, and observing her singular patience and piety,
said, he would not for any money have missed the sight Also of a Catholic
Noblema^.
of such her excellent virtue. But above all, the most clear and evident
testimony of the virtues of the La. Magdalen may be gathered out of the letters
of the present most honorable Viscount Montague, whose testimony is the more
estimable, in that she was the stepmother of his Father, and himself (as all
that know him can witness) most free from flattery, and a most constant
Professor of the Catholic faith, for which he has often bin imprisoned, Of
the right honorable the Viscount Mo^tague.
and at the setting forth hereof was prisoner in his own house. This then so
worthy a man, the year before the death of the La. Magdalen, sending his
daughters to visit her, in this manner wrote unto her: Most loving La. and
Grandmother, as in my former letters I mentioned, I now in most humble and
dutiful manner send these my children unto your most Honorable Ladyship, most
earnestly desiring, that every one of them in their degree may so carry
themselves toward your Ladyship, that in some part they may express that care
which I have always had, to plant in them so much love, and such dutiful
respect The La. Mag. preserved the life of the Viscount and of this Father.
toward your most Noble and worthy person, as both from them and me, is justly
due unto her, by whose singular care, and tender affection, I do not only
believe (as I have partly heard and partly experienced) that my worthy Fathers
life, and mine, as by the most principal earthly instrument, were preserved;
but also do acknowledge so many worthy offices both in matter of temporalities,
and in other things of greater moment, in reconciling and conseruing
(whenever occasion was offered) the most wished favor of my right Noble She
reco^cileth and conserueth the favor of his Gra^dfather toward him.
Grandfather toward me; so that scarce any La. that was Mother of so many
children, nor any of less virtue, ever performed the like. Which certainly
enforces me exceedingly to honor and admire your person. In other letters
also written in the year 1606. when he was requested by the La. Magdalen, to
vouchsafe to be Executour of her Will and Testament, he answered, that although
he did neither desire, nor would willingly see the mournful day of the death
of the La. Viscountesse; yet if almighty God should so dispose, Such fidelity
(said he) as I owe unto my own heart, the same I promise to perform toward
your honorable Ladyship. Which he did afterward most abu^dantly perform in
deeds. For he did not only exactly execute her testament, but did give mourning
apparel to all his family, whereof the number was great, distributed a good
sum of money for her soul, maintained the The Viscount promised and performed.
whole family of the La. Magdalen for three months after her death, and diverse
her principal seruans he entertained into his own service, and some of them
he rewarded with stipends for their service done unto her; and such was the
love between him and the Viscountesse, as they may be an example to all
step-Mothers, and Sonnes-in-law. The opinion of Q. Mary
And this was the worthy testimony both in words and deeds of this Viscount,
touching the Virtues of the La. Magdalen. What esteem Queen Mary of famous
and worthy memory had of her, is formerly alleged. From whose judgment in
this matter (though almost in all other goodness she was far different) her
sister Q. Elizab. did not disagree. For thus the La. Scudamore, a Lady of her
bedchamber, in her name wrote to the La. Magdalen: The Also of Q Elizabeth.
Queen commanded me to signify to your La. that she is persuaded she fares
much the better for your prayers, and therefore desires you, ever hereafter to
be mindful of her in your prayers. What esteem the Kings Council had of her,
appears by the forerecited letters. And the worst that in their judgment any
Protestants, though her peevish enemies, said of her after her death, was that
which doubtless was her greatest honor, to wit, that she was an earnest Papist.
I will conclude these testimonies with the judgment of a certain worthy
Catholic, who albeit in the life of the La. Magdalen The judgment of a worthy
Catholic
he seemed little to favor her, yet she being dead he doubted not to say, That
she left nor her like in all England. And truly of her we may use those words
of S. Augustine touching his Mother S. Monica: Whosoever of thy servants (O
God) did know her, did in her much praise, honor, and love thee, because they
perceived thy presence in her heart, the fruits of her holy conversation
testifying the same. She was the wife of one husband, Confess. l. ^. c. 9.
sherendred mutual affection to her parents, she governed her house piously,
she had her reputation in good works, she gave her children good education; as
often as she saw them stray from thee, so often did she bear them anew. And
all which things to be most true in this pious woman, all that knew her, will
testify with me.

THE CONCLUSION.
But now Magdalens box is broken, and the house is filled with the odor of her
ointment; now the lantern of Gedeon is broken, and the light appears which
darkeneth the sight of the Madianites; now the body of our Magdalen is
dissolved, and her most rare and fragrant virtues dilate themselves more
clearly, and more abundantly. England may lament, that it has lost such a
pillar of Faith, so worthy an ornament of Religion, such a rare example of
virtues. Nay it may rather rejoice, that once it had, or rather has such a
one. And certainly the La. Magdalen may rejoice, that she has found the thing
so long, and so much desired, that having left the world, she is more
absolutely joined to almighty God. A happy The La. Mag. happy touching the
world.
woman (no doubt) touching the world; in that she was of noble birth, married
to a man of worthy fame and honor, for a long time enoyed wealth, honor,
prosperous health and fortune, long life and worthy issue. Happy touching her
body; to whom God had given a sound, beautiful, and healthful a body. Happy
touching her soul, Touching her body.
being endued with a most piercing wit, an excellent memory, a profound
judgment, a stout and manly courage. But most happy toward God, who had given
her so much grace, as to make use of her birth, honor, marriage, Touching her
soul.
wealth, beauty, issue, and finally of all the gifts and graces of her body
and soul, to the glory of God, and her eternal felicity. If then (as the
scripture testifyeth) they are Blessed Most happy toward God.
who dye in our Lord; how blessed shall we esteem this woman, who not only
dyed, but also lived in our Lord; and not for a short time, but all her life;
and that not indifferently, but most piously and religiously; and that in the
land of Hus, where is the hour and power of darkness, where piety is sharply
impugned, and freedom given to vice. Rest now therefore, O Magdalen, from thy
labors, from thy frequent fastes, and daily devotions, and from thy other
exercises of piety; rest from the implacable The La. Magd. dies the day before
the translation of S. Monica.
hatred, curses, accusations, and inquisitions of Heretics: For thy works of
mercy, piety, chastity, humility, faith, hope, and charity do follow thee. But
because this pious widow was translated (as I hope) to a better life, the day
before the translation of that most holy widow S. Monica, to whom she may be
resembled, I will conclude my writing of her, with the same words which S.
Augustine concluded his, of his Mother S. Monica: Confess. l. 9. c. 11
which is thus: Albeyt being revived in Christ, her flesh not yet dissolved,
she lived so, as thy name (O God) may be praised in her faith and conversation,
yet dare I not say, that from the time thou did reg^^^^^ are her by
baptism, no word proceeded from her mouth, against thy precept, and woe to the
laudable life of men, if, thy mercy removed, thou discuss the same. Therefore,
O God of my heart, forge^^^^g a little her good acts, for which I joyfully give
that thanks, I no^ implore thee for the sins of my (Lady;) hear me by the
cure of our wounds, which hung on the Cross, and sitting at thy right hand
mediateth for us. She desired memory should be made of her at thy Altar, where
she assisted without one days intermission, where she knew that holy oblation
to be dispensed whereby the debt whereto we were subject was cancelled, to which
Sacrament of our redemption thy handmayd eyed her soul by the bond of faith.
And inspire. O my Lord God, inspire thy servants my brethren, thy children my
masters, that as often as they shall read this, they be mindful at thy Altar,
of (the Lady Magdalen) thy servant, with (Antony) sometime her husband. Amen.

Of the day, place of birth, death, and buryall of the La. MAGDALEN
Viscountesse MONTAGVE.

The twentieth day of January, first vital breath her gave;
The eight of April stopped it quite, and brought her to her grave:
Naward life did first affoard, which Battle took away;
And Midhurst yeldeth to her Corpse rest, till the Judgment day.
FINIS.

