APOSTOLIC OBEDIENCE.

Showing the Duty of Subjects to pay Tribute and Taxes to their Princes,
according to the Word of God, in the Law and the Gospel, and the Rules of
Religion, and Cases of Conscience;

Determined by the Ancient Fathers, and the best Modern Divines; yea even by
those Neoterickes who in some other things, put too strict Limits to Regalitie.

A Sermon preached at Northampton, at the Assizes, for the County, Feb. 22.
1626.

BY ROBERT SYBTHORPE, Doctor in Divinity, Vicar of Brackley.

Tributa vero et Census, ijs qui a vobis constituti sunt, ubique inprimis
conamur pendere. Just. Mart. Apol. pro Christian. ad Anton. Pium. LONDON,
Printed by Miles Flesher for R. M. and are to be sold by James Bowler. 1627.

I Have read over this Sermon upon Romans 13.7. preached at Northampton at the
assizes for the County Feb. 22. 1626. by Robert Sybthorpe Doctor of Divinity,
Vicar of Brackley, and I do approve it as a Sermon learnedly and discreetly
preached, and agreeable to the ancient Doctrine of the Primative Church, both
for Faith and good manners, and to the Doctrine established in the Church of
England, and therefore under mine hand give authority for the printing of it,
May 8. 1627.

GEO: LONDON.

TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE CHARLES, by the Grace of God King of Great
Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Most gracious and dread Sovereign;
THE smallest Brooks have their original from the Ocean, and return thither
to pay their Tribute; So these my poor Meditations, which were first conceived
upon Instructions directed from the Kings most excellent Majesty unto all the
Bishops of this Kingdom, and fit to be put in execution, agreeable to the
necessity of the times.
your Majesty's Instructions, and afterward brought forth upon At Northampton
Ianuar. 12. when, by the right Honorable the Lord President of the Counsel,
and the Earl of Exeter, etc. I, with other Divines, was put upon it, to
deliver my opinion in case of Conscience, and Religion, Whether it were lawful
to lend to the King or not?
your Commission, and lately learned to speak in a At the Assizes at
Northampton.
Solemn Iuditious Assembly, being now adventurous to walk abroad, presume to
present themselves to your Gracious goodness, in their duty of Allegiance and
gratitude, Humbly beseeching your Highness protection, that they may pass
securely in your Kingdom, where they may tell your Subjects of that Duty,
which being understood to be grounded upon Conscience and Religion, they will
(no doubt,) rejoice that they have been so willing and ready to perform it;
with Prayers for which, and for your Majesty's long and prosperous Reign over
us, I rest

Your Majesty's Loyal, Obedient, Humble Subject Rob: Sybthorpe.

TO HIS DEAR AND NOVRCEING MOTHER, THE Church and Commonweal of England.
An humble Son, and devoted Servant, prays Peace and Prosperity.
Holy and happy Mother:
I Know his Majesty's Love desires to have you united and near unto him, and
so much he has In his Majesty's instructions to all Bishops, etc.
enjoined us of the Tribe of Levi, to certify unto you. Wherefore I thought it
not my part to separate you, especially in a business which so nearely Being
the protection of Religion, and safety of the State.
concerns you as well as him; But earnestly to entreat you to take
Consideration of the innocence and obedience wherewith our Religion has
hitherto been crowned, (which I here point at briefly, and could demonstrate
at large,) and the Peace and Prosperity which it has produced. And whereas
the As appears by his Majesty's Commission for the Loan.
Prince pleads not the Power of Prerogative, nor the leading of Presidents, so
much as Piety for Religions protection, the States occasion, and the
inevitable Necessity of the season. Oh! let not the People stand so much upon
pretense of Liberty, as to lose Safety. Nor let Forms bring the Matter to
Privation, but let all meet in a sweet Mean for the Preservation of the
Universe; for which perpetually praying, I continue

At your service and dispose, ROB. SYBTHORPE.

APOSTOLIC OBEDIENCE.
ROMANS 13.7. Render therefore to all their Dues.


TRue was that saying of Solon which affirmed that Co^mon-weales consist of
Reward and Punishment, and that when these be taken away, the whole discipline
of Cities fails and is dissolved; For the care of Equity and Justice waxes
cold in the minds of many, unless there be due honor for virtue, neither can
the wilfulness of wicked men be restrained, but by severity and chastisement
of pains: wherefore, whereas the principal part of Justice is, Vnicuique suum
tribuere; To render to every man his own; a more proper Text in my opinion,
cannot be selected for this Judicious and Judiciary Assembly, then this of the
Apostle proposed unto you; Render therefore to all their dues.

For the general Exposition and Cohaerence of which words, it is obvious to
every understanding observer, That after that our Apostle had descended from
Dectrinall points of Faith (which he handled in the eleven first Chapters) to
Moral Inferences and instruction for life; as conclusions to be drawn out of
the premises, Chap 12. And had therein mixed the mutual duties of sundry
vocations in the general; He in this Chapter from the first verse to the
eightth, deciphereth the special prerogative, and absolute obedience, which
Souereignes have, and Subjects owe, in particular: which he inforceth by a
kind of Rethoricall Syllogism. The Major whereof is in the first words of the
first verse, Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers: The Minor to
confirm his Position in the latter end of the same, and in the 2.3.4.5. and 6.
verses following, for there is no power but of God; the powers that be are
ordained of God: VVhereupon he grounds and draws a Conclusion in this verse,
part whereof I only handle, Render therefore to all their dues.

The Minor of this Rhetorical Syllogism consists of diverse Prosyllogismes,
out of every of which is deduced the proposed Conclusion, in this manner:

There is no power but of God, and the powers that be are ordained of God:
verse 1.

But a Prince is a special power, and ordained of God:

Therefore for the Ordainers sake, which is God, Render to all their dues.

Whosoever resists the power, resists the Ordinance of God. And they that
resist shall receive to themselves damnation: ver. 2.

But he that resists the Prince, resists the power and ordinance of God,
and consequently shall receive damnation:

Therefore for your souls sake, Render to all their dues.

Rules are only a terror to the wicked, but for the praise of those that do
well: v. 3.

But they that resist, it is a sign that they esteem them a Terror, and
expect no praise from them, and consequently that they are wicked and not well
doers:

Therefore for avoiding that imputation, Even for your credits sake, Render to
all their dues.

The Ruler is the Minister of God for thy good: verse 4.

But it is just by the Law of Nature, that we should give to those that
minister for our good:

Therefore for Natural Justice sake, Render to all their dues.

The Ruler bears not the sword in vain, but is the Revenger of wrath on them
that do evil: verse 4.

But there is no man which does not evil in some things, and consequently is
subject to wrath and revenge:

Therefore even for Policies sake, Render to all their dues.

Ye must be subject, not only for wrath, but also because of conscience: verse
5.

But whatsoever a man is bound to do for conscience as well as for fear,
every man is bound to do in duty:

Therefore for duties sake, Render to all their dues.

Non mirum est Paulum tot modis and rationibus commendare nobis obedientiam
erga Magistratum; afficile enim aliequi est superbos hominu^ sensus in hoc
officio continere, volumus enim omnes esse domini and parere nemini. Pet. Mart.
in loc.
You pay tribute to Rulers for this Cause, because they are Gods Ministers
attending continually upon Government: verse 6.

But whatsoever men attend upon continually, they are to be paid that which is
due for it, and consequently Princes which attend upon government continually
are to be paid the due for it, which is Tribute:

Therefore for Conscience sake, Render to all their dues.

And so from the Paraphrase I descend to survey the Particulars; only let me
entreat leave by the way, that although the special scope of my Text aim at
the dues to Athana. or Volgar. or Theophil. Aquin. Lyra. Bruco. Claud. Calvin.
Marlorat. Paraus.
all Princes, whether good Governors or Tyrants, (as I shall also prosecute it)
yet I may not be so tied up, but that I may extend this (All) to al persons,
Princes and People, Magistrates and Ministers Superior and inferior, Nocent and
Innocent; as S. Ambrose, Gorran, Musculus, and Rolloc understand it: Where
hence in stead of a Division, let me commend to your consideration these four
positions:

First; Vide Chrysostom. (...). Anselm. in loc. Sedul. Luther. Ositud. Muscul.
Arct. Brent. Fulk etc.
That Christian liberty has not freed us from Civil Obedience, but that
Christians are bound in duty one to another, especially all Subjects, to all
their Princes, according to the Laws and Customs of the kingdom wherein they
live, intimated in this word (Dues.)

Secondly; That those duties to which Christians are so bound, are not only
imposed upon some, and others loose, but as they are promiscuous, so they are
universal Duties, implied in these words, (to all.)

Thirdly; That although there be duties to which Christians are so obliged and
all have their part in the marter of that Obligation or Duty, yet they have it
in a different degree or manner, every one in his particular place and order,
designed in this word (their.)

Fourthly; That those duties of every man according to his order, to al
Princes, are not to be performed merely for compulsory Necessity, but
voluntarily and cheerfully, denotated in this word (Give or Render.) Render
therefore to all their dues.

First; That Christian Liberty has not freed us from Civil Obedience; but
that Christians are bound in duty one to another, especially all Subjects, to
all their Princes, according to the Laws and Customs of that Kingdom wherein
they live, intimated in this word (Dues.)

Whosoever can put difference between the body and the soul, between this
present transitory life, and that eternal which is to come, he shall easily
understand, That the spiritual Kingdom of Christ, and the Civil government of
Princes, are things of a different nature, John 18.36. And that the liberty of
the Soul from Jewish or over numerous Ceremonies, and of the body from
subjection, have no relation, nor carry any correspondency the one to the other,
but that it is a Jewish error to enclose the kingdom of Christ under the
elements of this world, and to confound the licentiousness of the flesh with
the liberty of the spirit, sithence spiritual liberty may very well agree with
civil bondage, 1 Cor. 7.21. and it is not material, whether thou be bond or
free, Jew or Grecian, Barbaria^ or Scythian, in what degree or estate, or under
the Laws of what Nation thou live, (so that thou keep the Law of God
inviolate) Thou art bound to perform civil obedience to the Laws of the Land
where thou live; yea, ex necessitate justitiae tenentur subditi, says, In
loc:
Aquinas; Subjects are bound to obedience by the double obligation of Justice
and of Necessity; except they will suffer as Rebels, or ill-doers, or
busybodies in other men's matter, as 1 Pet. 4.15.
S. Peter phraseth it. Or except they will have that inconvenience granted,
that the General Laws or Government of a Nation, must be dispensed withal
according to the particular conceit and apprehension of every private person.
Whereout what Tolleration of heresy, what Connivence at errors; what danger of
Schisms in the Church, and Factions in the State, must necessarily follow, is
easy to be conjectured: so that the common Adage under Nerva's Empire would
be verified, It is ill to live under a Prince under whom nothing is lawful,
but worse to live under him under whom All things are lawful; under the one a
Tyranny consumes some, under the other an Anarchie confounds all, which if we
will avoid in a Christian Commonaltie, then where the liberty of a few
erroneous consciences, brings the Bondage of many regulated Commands; Calvin.
Instit. lib. 3. cap. 19.12.
Habemus necessitatem vindicandae Libertatis, si Such as were those false
apostles, who mixed Iudaisme with Christianity And such as are those factious
Preachers, who countenance Libertinisme, and Disobedience to Princes, under the
color of Religion; unjustly exacting that from the people to themselves, which
they ought justly to give to God and their King.
per iniquas exactiones pseudo-apostolorum ea infirmis in conscientijs
periclitetur, says Calvin; and we must prefer the general before the
particular, and not let every one be let loose to their list and affection,
but all must be kept within the lists of their Duty and Subjection, (Dues.)

For the better accomplishment whereof, we must consider in the second place,
That those Duties to which Christians are so bound, are not only imposed upon
some, and others loose, but as they are promiscuous, so they are universal
Duties, employed in these words (To all.)

Which that we may survay without Confusion, we must consider that the 1 Cor.
12.
Body politic, like the body natural, consists of the head and members: Those
Members either Confusedly make up the Trunk or Corpse, or more Particularly are
Distinguished into more, or less principal; The Superior and Inferior Orb,
as Physicians phrase it; The Head represents the Prince or King; The Truncke,
the Commonweal or people; And as in the body Natural, every Member has his
office, either to minister nourishment and help to, or to suffer and be
compassionate with, the other; except it be withered, dried up, dead,
insensible, and vselesse. So in the body Politic, every one of the foresaid
Members, has his Duty to perform to, and his due to receive of others.

The Prince who is the Head, and makes his Court and Counsel, as the seeds
sensuum, has his Duty to 1 Direct, 2 Command, and 3 Protect. Videtur mihi
Apostolus hic summatim velle comprehendere quibus in rebus sita sint subditorum
erga Magistratus officia, Nempe ut ipsos in pretio ac honor habeant, ut eorum
pareant edictis, legibus, iudiciis, ut tributa and vectigalia persolvant, non
portoria modo and indistiones, sed et alios quoque redditus. Calvin. in loc.
And his Due to be, 1 honored, 2 obeyed, and 3 maintained.

His duty to 1 direct, 2 command, and 3 protect.

First, to direct and make laws, Eccles. 8.3.4. He does whatsoever pleases
him, where the word of the King is, there is power. And who may say unto him,
what do thou? Secondly, to command execution of law and justice, Proverb.
16.10. A divine sentence is in the lips of the King, his mouth transgresses
not in judgment; But the wrath of the King is the messenger of death, verse
14. So that Nemo leges Regum impune reprobat nisi Reges ipsi, in quibus
praevaricationis crimen locum non habet, Prudenter enim dictum est, impium esse
qui Regi dixerit, inique agis, says Saint In Ioh. l. 12. c. 56.
Cyril. Thirdly, to protect the laws and people commanded by him, and
committed to him, The Emblem and Motto of Alphonsus King of Naples, which was
a Pelican drawing blood from her own breast with her beak to revive her young
ones, with this Inscription, Pro lege et grege, being a proper ensign for
religious Princes. Which duties being performed by a Sovereign; he may rightly
require these dues of Subjects; (yea whether he perform his duty or not, he
may require these dues of them, as even Calvin and Bucanus grant it) to be 1
honored, 2 obeyed, and 3 maintained.
1 First to be honored in their persons; For this is a due that we find not
only required by Saul, 1 Samuel 15.30. Honor me before the people; but justly
taken by David, 1 Reg. 1.23.31. whereupon Paraeus makes the last words of this
verse, honor to who^ honor belongs; to be proper and peculiar, especially,
Personae Principis.

And this due consists in a candide construction of all their actions, Vid.
Pet. Mart. Talman: Helhus.
although they commit some errors; as we have example in that speech of
Bathsheba, when she found Adonijah aspiring to the succession in the Kingdom,
contrary to David's oath to her concerning Solomon, She does not unreverently
tax the King, but with a modest excuse for him, tells the error; Behold Adoniah
reigns, and now my Lord the King thou know it not, 1 Reg. 1.18. So far
should Subjects be from Amand. Polan. partit. Theolog. et Tilenus, Pet. Mart.
Calv. in Ier. 29. etc.
suspicion, rash censure, and slander, that they should esteem it as a
reviling and a blasphemy committed against God, to scandalize the Ruler of the
people, Exodus 22.26.

2 And as Rulers may justly challenge this honor to their persons, so may they
with no less right call for Obedience to their laws and commands; Sive
Princeps sit fidelis, sive infidelis; sive just, sive avare, aut dure imperet,
says, And Aug. in Psalm. 124. Julianus extitit infidelis imperator, nonne
extitit Apostata? iniqus? idolatra? milites Christianiser vierunt imperatori
infideli, vbi veniebatur ad causa^ Christi, non agnoscebant nisi illum qui in
coelo erat. Quando vo lebat vt Idola colerent, vt thurificarent, praeponebant
illi Deum: quando autem dicebat, Producite aciem, ite contra illam gente^,
statim obtemperabant: distinguebant Dominum aeternum a domino temporali, et
tamen subditi erant propter Dominum aeternum etiam domino te^porali. Bez in
Conf. fidei Chr. etc c. 5. s. 45. Neque aliud vilum remedium proponitur
privatis hominibus tyranno subjectis. praeter vitae emendationem, and preces
and lachrymas. Aret. loc. com. similiter.
Bucanus (who is no Royalist) whether the Prince be a Believer or an Infidel;
whether he rule justly or unjustly, courteously or couetously and cruelly; For
whereas there are but duo legis Termini; Two effects of the law; 1 The one to
perform the Commandment: 2 The other to undergo the punishment. If Princes
command any thing which Subjects may not perform; I know no other case but one
of those three wherein a Subject may excuse himself with Passive obedience,
but in All other he is bound to Active Obedience.
because it is against the laws of 1 God, or of 2 Nature, or 3 impossible; yet
Subjects are bound to undergo the punishment without either resistance, or
railing and reviling. And so to yield a passive obedience, where they cannot
exhibit an active one; yea and in that passive obedience there must be still
actually retained, 1 fidelity, free from conspiracy, although they had power
and opportunity for it, 1 Samuel 26.8.9.10. Ierem. 29.7. And 2 piety to pray
even for their oppressing Rulers; ut det illis Deus vitam prolixam, imperiu^
securum, domum tutam, exercitus fortes, populum probum, orbem quietum, That God
would grant to them along life, a secure reign, loyal Courtiers, valiant
Soldiers, obedient Subjects, and peaceful neighboring Princes, as the
Primitive Christians, prayed even for Ethnicke Emperors under whom they lived,
as Apol. c. 30.
Tertullian teaches; whom the Artic. 40.
French Confession, together with the Confessions of Cap. 16.
Bohemia, and Artic. 16. et Apol Eccles. Anglic. c. 6. divis. 1.4. et defens.
Apol. part. 4.
Auspurge, seem to imitate. Nor are Princes only thus to be 1 honored, and 2
obeyed, but 3 maintained also.

For maintenance is to be allowed for Princes both for the common charge of
every office, and Calvin, et Bucan: de Magistrate. et Paraeus in loc.
their private Royalty, which is conjoined with the honor of the State: And
that not only out of their Calvin 4. Instit. c. 20.
Crown Lands, and residues, and portions, mentioned Ezekiel. 48.21. But also by
imposed Taxes; whether it be Capitibus,
(...), Tributum, in this verse; Ordinary Taxes upon immoveables; Solo,
(...), vectigal, in the same verse, imposts upon Trades, Traffiques, and
Merchandise. Bonis immobilibus.
(...) Census, Mat. 22.17. Toll or Tithes upon their Lands, or Et Portoriaseu
vectigalia de Mercibus. Bucan. loc. 49 q. 52.
(...) Matthew. 17.24.25. As for example, statute for Subsidy, Jacob. 21. Pole
money of all Strangers, Denisons, or not And Statute for Subsidy, Carol. 1
Pole money of al Strangers, Denisons, or not. And also of convict Recusants
above 17 years, being not Subsidy men. And in many other places of our
Statutes. Habet ius exigendi (...), ordinaria Tributa seu taleam, De
Pole money of their persons; at some times, and upon some occasions.

Tribute, being due to Princes by a Triple Obligation, as In verse. 6. observat.
2.
Paraeus affirms, (who I hope all will confess is no parasite to them) Iure 1
divino, 2 naturali, and 3 civili, By the Law of God, as the sign of our
subjection, by the Law of Nature, as the reward of their pains and protection;
by the Law of Nations, as the sinews of the States preservation. Sithence that
without money, Soldiers cannot be waged for war; Counselors cannot be
supported for peace; Intelligence cannot be procured from abroad; Laws cannot
be executed at home; nor Church can flourish; nor Commonweal stand firm:
The consideration of which things, no question, made Ad Philip. Ep.
Polycarpus, Ep. ad Tolos.
Martialis, In Apol. pro Christian: ad Anton. Pium.
Justin Martyr, Vbi supra and ad Scapul.
Tertullian, In Iul. orat. 1.
Greg: Nazianzen, Ep. 33.
Ambrose, Ep. 42. ad frat. Madaur.
August. In Mat. can. 23.
Hilarie, Sent. 99.
Prosper, Vbi supra.
Cyril, Ep. 170. ad Reg. Ludovic.
Bernard, In Roman.
Anselme, (but what name I so many?) yea all Antiquity to be absolutely for
absolute obedience to Princes in all civil or temporal things: And the more
moderate modern Divines, as Sleid. Com. l. 5.
Luther, In Resp. ad Artic. Rusticorum, Quando quid praecipitur contra publicam
justitiam, cuius generis sunt bonorum exactio, aut corporis vexatio, subditum
in hujusmodi injuriis obedientia decet.
Brentius, Apud Luth. tom. p. 463. Quamvis videamur promisisse obedientia^ hac
co^ditione siligitime imperet Magistratus, tamen no^ ideo licet injusta^ vim
Magistratus vi depellere. Vid Aret. loc. 153.
Melancthon, Instit. l. 4. c. 20 s. 24. to 30 ac ubi supra.
Calvin, Vbi supra.
Beza, Sub Hen. 8. de Christ. hom. instit
Cranmer, and the Bishops and Divines of England, The opinion of the
Congregation, Art. 39. Edit. An. 1564
The Ministers of the Reformed Churches, We know that though we be free, we
ought wholly in true faith holily to submit our selves to the Magistrate both
with our body, and with all our goods. vide Harm. conf. tit. Civil. Magistr.
the former Confession of Helvetia, the Confession of Art. 36. All men of what
dignity, state or condition soever they be, ought to be subject to their
lawful Magistrates, and pay unto them Subsidies and Tributes, and obey them in all things which are not repugnant to the Word of God Vide ubi supra.
Belgia, Vbi supra.
Bucanus, De Magistrate.
Chytreus, yea and In loc.
Paraeus (some of which otherwise are not so just to Princes) acknowledge in
this particular, That if a Prince impose an immoderate, yea an unjust Tax,
True Piety binds the subject to desire a good Sovereign, but to bear with a
bad one, and to take up the burden of Princes with a bended knee, rather in
time to deserve abatement, then resist authority. View reign Hen. 3.
yet the subject may not thereupon withdraw his obedience and duty; Nay he is
bound in conscience to submit, as under the scourge of his sin,; for,
Quanquam actio immoderata, sive expilatio injusta est, tamen passio est justa,
says Bucanus. So that, as Paraeus (for I still intend especially to make use
of Anti-royalists, because they cannot be excepted against in this point) as
Paraeus, I say observes upon those words, verse. 6. For this cause pay you
Tribute also: Non dicit Apostolus propter hoc etiam Tributa exigunt, sed
Tributaeis solvitis; docens semper just solvitributa a subditis, licet
aliquando non just exigantur a Magistratu: The Apostle does not say, For this
cause they exact Tribute; but you pay them Tribute; thereby teaching, that
Tribute may always be justly, and with a good conscience, paid by the
subject, although it be sometimes unjustly imposed and exacted by the Ruler:
and he gives the instance in the Jews and Romans; Romani male ad se traxerunt
censum Templi, quem just pendebant Iudaei: And we might amplify it in our
Savior, paying tribute although free, and rather working a Miracle to pay,
than have offense taken by the Ruler, Mat. 17.25.26.27.

Nor was this only the Custom of Conquerers, in foreign Kingdoms, which
they invaded; but even of Native peaceful Kings, to their natural Subjects,
in those Dominions whereto they were elected, or wherein they succeeded; as
appears in Non id jure facturi erant reges, quos optime ad omnem continentiam
lex instituebat, sed jus in populum vocahatur, cui parere ipsi necesse esset,
nec obsistere licet; ac si dixisset Samuel, eo se proripiet licentiae Regum
libido, quam cohibere vestrum non erit, quibus hoc restabit unum jussa
excipere, ac dicto audientes esse. Call. 4. inst. cap. 20. 26. I dispute not
here whether this be jus Regni, or praxis Regum: but suppose it be but the
practice of Kings, and more than right, yet ye see Calvin's judgment is Hos unum
restat jussa excipere.
Saul taking both the substance and Persons of the Israelites, 1 Samuel 8.11. to
17. And in Solomon laying Taxes upon the same people, 1 Reg. 12.4. And how
fearful the very indeavoring to shake off these Burdens, (though too heavy
to bear) has proved, may appear by that instance never to be imitated, of
that people in Rehoboams time, where the attempt to free their bodies and
states from Sovereign Invasion, captivated their souls under Idolatrous
Superstition, 1 Reg. 12.16.26.33.

Oh, let not us then conceive to our selves a Conscience grounded upon
suspicious conjectures, de futuris contingentibus; concerning which, no man can
set down certainties; And we are bound to believe the best concerning all men,
much more concerning our Sovereigns promises, as Quibus debetur candor
(justitia politica distributiva:) cu jus est, interpretari omnia in bonam
partem, proximo non detrahere, and detrahentibus aures non praebere, cum quo
pugnat calumnia seu obtrectatio, suspicacitas, and diffidentiae.
Polanus and Tilenus truly. Nor let us square our consciences by the Lesbian
Rule of Jesuits and Schismatikes, contrary to all the current of Antiquity, as
even themselves are forced to confess, whilst Bellarm. de To. Pont. Buchanon
de jure Regn. apud Scot.
they childishly answer, that the primitive Christians obeyed their Rulers,
only because they had not then power to resist; which besides that Et Clem.
Romans Recognit. l 1. fol. 22 and Aug etc vid. Belson tract. of Christian
Subjection part
S. Cyprian ad Demetrian, clears to the contrary, whilst he tells us, Nemo
nostru^ quando apprehenditur reluctatur, quamvis nimius, and copiosus, Et
Widdrington Apol. cont. Bellarm. pro. jure Princip. et Confut. of the Reply of
T.F.
noster sit numerus. I hope Saint Paul's doctrine, both in this Chapter and 1 Timothy 2.1.2. and Saint Peter's, 1 Pet. 2.13.14. is the same to us, it was to
them: yea and our Saviors Reddite Caesari, Mat. 22.18. was not with a Rebus
sic stantibus, like that Granted to the Papists in England at the procurement
of Campian and Parsons 1580.
Bull of Gregory the thirteenth.

O let us not therefore, I say, conceive to our selves such scruples, as not to
give Tribute where and when Tribute is due, or to refuse a For it is but
borrowed. Vid. Martin Hist. of 20. Kings Ed. 3. an. 14. 1339. p. 109. et
Hollinshed. Hen. 8. 1522. p. 874. and ibid. ann. 14. 15. 1523. p 877. and an.
34. 1541 p. 957. And the most, if not al of those who best know the laws of
this kingdom, have lent at this time, which assuredly they would not have
done, if they had not known that it was neither unjust nor unlawful
Loan, or any other Aid, which is not unjustly exacted; and which is In his
Majesty's commission and Proclamation.
promised shall not be immoderately demanded, especially, considering that
thereby, we who are bound 1 John 3.16.
to lay down our lives for our brethren, may by laying down a little of our
estates, save our own lives, and our brethrens: Yea further considering, that
it is not our brethren only, but our selves also that are in danger, as is
more than probable by the proceedings in foreign parts. And further this may
be considered also, that not only our bodies are in danger of war and
wounds; but our souls, of Heresy and Superstition; Religion it self (as it
is established in this Kingdom) being the mark that is shot at in this
business.

Oh consider what it would avail to win the whole world, much less our
wills, and lose our souls; And seriously consider, how as Jeroboam took the
opportunity of the breach betwixt Rehoboam and his Subjects, to bring Idolatry
into Israel: So the papists lie at wait, if they could find a Rent betwixt our
Sovereign and his Subjects, (which the Lord forbid) to reduce superstition
into England: I speak no more than I have heard from themselves, whilst I
have observed their forwardness to offer double Anno primo Reg. Carol. the Act
for the subsidy of the Laytie, whereby Popish Recusants were to pay double
according to an act of Parliament so providing; yea to profess, that they
would depart with the half of their goods: And how or why can this
forwardness be in them, but in hope to cast the imputation of frowardness
upon us? and so to seem (that which the Jesuit will not suffer them to be)
loving and loyal Subjects. Nor speak I this as a For it is well known that I
preached diverse Sermons in the Lucture at Brackley to persuade to the relief
and aid of Religion, the State, and our afflicted Brethren and Confederates,
long before there was any speech of the Loan.
Sycophanticall Timeserver, nor as a Statizing Court Orator; or one who had
left God to preach for the King; as some are too apt uncharitably to censure;
unchristianly dividing God and the King. Yea sooner would I with Eusebius. l. 2.
c. 23
James the first Bishop of Jerusalem, have my brains beaten out with clubs;
or with Idem. l. 8. c. 20
Romanus the Martyr, have my tongue plucked out of my head; or with those
ancient Martyrs of Ibidem. c. 12.
Antioch, or ours of later times, burn off my own hand, than my brains should
be made the Instrument to invent, my tongue to utter, or my hand to write and
defend that, by which Christian Liberty should be captivated; Tyranny
erected; Bacon, Hen. 7
Heaven forced to descend to serve Earth; Divinity made the Handmaid of
Policy; or Religion the Stalking-horse of the State: But out of an unfaigned
fear of future Events at home and abroad, to the Church and State; out of an
earnest zeal to God and Religion; Out of a fellow-feeling of our Brethrens
Miseries; out of a religious desire, that we may all avoid that sentence from
the Almighty, Curse ye Meroz, yea curse them bitterly, because they went not
out to fight the battles of the Lord, to help the Lord against the mighty,
Judge. 5.23. Out of an affectionate endeavor that each particular may escape
that imputation; The divisions of Ruben were great thoughts of heart, Judge.
5.15.16. As of sincerity, as of God, in the sight of God, I speak my
conscience in Christ, both concerning what is the duty of, and the due to the
head of this body politic, which is the King. And I earnestly pray, and
steadfastly hope, that he which does, and they which shall sway the Scepter of
this Kingdom, will consider, that Ambros. in loc. Reddi vult ab omnibus
debita, quia et potentes sunt debitores inserioribus ut respondeant meritis
illonem. Sic Calv. Instit. l. 4 c. 20. s. 29. et conf. Bohem. et Bucan. c. 49.
q. 30 et Chyt. in procept. 5
Rulers also owe mutual duties to their Subjects, as 1 to establish and defend
Religion, and the law of God; as (the Lord be praised) ours has done; 2 to
maintain the fundamental Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, as we may
certainly perceive he does and will do; 3 to provide for the Common Safety
and Peace of the Subjects; as all may see he is doing; 4 Not needlessly to
exhaust, nor prodigally to mispend the Treasure of the State; which assuredly
no man can say he has done; yea and I doubt not but he and they will easily
discern, what a difference there is betwixt his happy Throne, and the
tottering State of those, who should govern in a Commonweal, where the
Religion was directed by L. 5. de Pont. Romans c: 6.7.
Bellarmine, Jnstit. Cathol tit. 46. s. 75.
Simancha, L. 1. instr. c. 13
Tolet, Doleman
Parsons, Philopater
Creswell, De visib. Monarch. l. 2. c. 4.
Saunders, Didymus. p. 261
Stapleton, and that Jes. l. de justa abdicat: p. 46. Raynaldus de justa
autorit. p. 8 Azorius Inst. mor. c 15. Bozius de Eccl. monarch. temporal. ad
Clem. 8.
Iesuited society; Or by De iure reg. apud Scot.
Buchanon, Apol. et Histor
Knox, De Polit. Christ. l. 2. c. 6
Danaeus, Conference etc. and before the King and Council. December. 21. 1585.
James Gibson, In Q Mary's time, etc. vid. Bilson part. 3. cit. p. 516.
Goodman, before the time of his Recantation, and that factious fraternity;
The one of which makes the Church above the King, and the Pope above the
Church, and so dethrones Princes by his Thunderbolts of Excommunication and
Deprivation. The other make the Law above the King, and the people above the
Law, and so depose Princes, by their Tumults, and Insurrections; yet that I may
not wrong them, (nor we wrong our selves and our Sovereign, by opinions
borrowed from them, but misunderstood,) the later sort (if I understand)
stretch not so far, as against an Hereditary successive Ruler; but only to
those, Paraeus in loc. explic. dub. de potestate civili, proposit. 2. rat. 3.
And Buchanon de jure regni apud Scon about the latter end of that factious
discourse, lays the like ground for all his Rebellious positions.
qui constituuntur, vel per populi consensum, vel per senatum, velper
electores, velper alios Magistratus; who are placed over the people, 1 either
by the consent of themselves in general; 2 or by the Senate or Parliament in
special; 3 or by Electors in particular; 4 or by other Magistrates and Rulers
which are Superiors; And of these they hold, that quorum est constituere,
eorum est etiam enormiter grassantes coercere; which paradoxe, although I have
not time to dispute, yet I may conclude positively, that, howsoever this
trencheth not upon our Princes, nor warranteth any waywardness in our State.
And therefore I leave them and their digladiations about Elective Dignities,
and praying for the peace of our hereditary settled Kingdom, descend to take a
view of the Trunk of this body Politic, which is the Commonweal. Where,
although I name only the Commonweal, yet I would not be understood as if I
intended to exempt the Clergy; The Church and State being so nearely united,
that though they may seem two bodies, yet indeed in some respects they may be
accounted but as one, in as much as they are made up of the same men, which are
differenced only in relation to spiritual or civil ends; so that whereas
verse. 1. Every soul is enjoined to be subject in performance of this duty;
Ostendit Apostolus quod ista imperentur omnibus, and sacerdotibus, and
monachis, non solum secularibus; Etiam si Apostolus sis, si Evangelista, si
Propheta, sive quisquis tandem fueris, says S. Chrysostom; whatsoever the
Pope and his Shavelings gloss to the contrary. But leaving them, as not so fit
subjects for the present occasion: Although the Commonweal be safest and most
beautiful when it is at unity in it self, and divisions are always
dangerous, yet that the speciositie may the better appear to us, we must
survey it by particulars; Of which the remainder of this short hour here, will
give us leave to show but a few: Nor know I whether the Law should be reckoned
in this rank, or as a medium betwixt the Prince and People: But whereas the
Law is a mute Judge, and the Judge a speaking Law; so that these two are
sometimes Termini convertibiles; and the State can as ill stand without the one
as the other; the Law restraining the Judges affection, and the Judge supplying
the Laws defect; I will here point at them promiscuously, in these four
particulars following.

The Duty therefore of the Law and Interpreters of the same is, just, without
tyranny; not, Sic volo, sic jubeo, stet pro ratione voluntas; That were too
cruel for a Conqueror. Equal without partiality: The same Law shall be to
him that is borne in thine house, and to the stranger, Exodus 12.49. And thou
shall not respect the person of the poor, nor the rewards of the rich in
judgment, Exodus 23. this is needful even for a Justice in the country.
moderate without extremity, for Summum jus summa injuria; But this is most
proper for an arbitrary trial, or the Chancery. plain without ambiguitie: Not
like those Laws in the Conquerors time, of which Hollinshed complains, that
the peoples estates were confiscate, before they knew the Law, or understood
the meaning of it; And this I take to be proper and peculiar to you, who are
the Reverend Grave Interpreters in these Solemn Judicious Assemblies; which I
hope you will so explain, that these times shall not need to complain, that
they are made snares and traps to catch men. Jeremy 5.26.


And as there are these Duties of the Law and Lawgivers; so is there Due to
the Law, Execution, which is the life of it: Obedience, which is the fruit of
it; punishment, which is the power of it: So that whosoever will not do the
Law of God, and the Law of the King, the Judges must judge him, and let
judgment be executed speedily upon him; whether it be unto death, or unto
banishment, or to confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment, Ezra 7.25.26.

Wherein I need not to pursue the explanation of what is due to every
particular offender; As that he who is a Traitor to the King, should be
destroyed, and made an Example of obloquie to posterity, as Big-than and
Teresh, Esth. 6.2.

He that sheds man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, Genesis 9.6.

He that wounds another, must suffer an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a
tooth, Exodus 21.24. Although not lege talionis, yet Retaliationis, by making
satisfaction, verse. 19.

He that endeavors to damnifie another credit by false rumors, or his state
by false witness, as he would have done to another, so shall it be done to
him, Deuteronomy. 19.16. to 20. either patiendo, by suffering punishment, or faciendo,
by paying Damage, or by both.

These I say and infinite others, neither will time permit, nor does your
experience stand need; nor will the difference betwixt the Jewish and Christian
Commonweals give leave, to parallel in all particulars; Only as I am
assured that you which are to judge, will do it as for the Lord, and not for
men, 2 Chronicles. 19.6. So I humbly and earnestly entreat, (for I will not presume
to advise) whereas by the Law of God, a disobedient riotous person, and a
drunkard, upon complaint of the parents, was to be stoned, Deuteronomy. 21.20.21. yea
and by the laws of this Land, such are to be severely punished. And whereas
there are daily complaints of their natural parents, (although not coram
Iudice) against them with sighs and tears; whilst they feel their substance
exhausted, hear their names discredited, see their neighbors abused, yea
oftentimes their own lands, (which they in hope to advance them passed over to
them) passed away and wasted in their life time, and all their hopes
frustrated. And whereas almost hourly, their spiritual Parents complain
against them in the Pulpit, and their Political Parents, threaten them pro
Tribunali, and yet can have no amendment; I humbly and earnestly entreat you,
that you will not suffer such Locusts to consume that, which might maintain
many able men, to do the King and Country service; and they thereby make
themselves unfit and unable for all employment; And that you will not suffer
the Horse-leach, the Alehouse-keeper, the sink and common receptacle of the
sins of a Town or City, to thrive by the undoing of the Spendthrift and of
the Commonwealth. Let not Dalilah be in riched by betraying Sampson to
slaverie, nor the Harlots ruffle with the Prodigals portion, whilst he eats
husks with Swine; but let these fratres in malo, partake together of the
punishment, as they have done of the sin.

And whereas, there is not only a Law of God, but even of man against the
profaning of the Lords day; which concerns the fourth Commandment. And
another against swearing, which concerns the third Commandment; Let not the
one be broken even before your seats of Judicature, whilst you have a Pleader
vouch his Assertions with his own oaths in stead of other evidence, as if he
would make good the defects of his Rhetoric with his reputation; or as if he
had received a Double Fee, the one to Argue, the other to make Affidavit; and
yet pass unpunished, for examples sake. Neither leave you God, as the Father
of Gideon did Baal, to plead for himself, Judge. 6.32. lest he plead against
you with that Record, Zach. 5.1. to. 5. which will consume your houses with the
Stone and Timber; Lest he witness against you with that evidence, Malac. 3.5.
which speedily shall convict you; lest he pass that sentence of guiltiness
upon you, from which you can procure nor pardon nor reprieve. Let not the other
which concerns the Lords day, seem to have been consented to, only upon the
importunity of a few precise persons, but never intended for execution, lest
God set such a memorandum upon them and you (who will not be careful of the
memento set upon that Commandment) that who so hears of it, both his ears
shall tingle.

And as you must be thus single-hearted, who are the Heart of this Body
politic, so to the end that the whole Body may be clear, those which are to
be your eyes, the Jurors, and those which are to be their Optickes, the
evidence, must take heed that they be not blinded, either with 1 fear, 2
affection, or 3 reward; for if the eye be dark, Mat. 6.23.
(...)? how far out of the way must the best members wander?

Let not therefore a great man's Livery, prove like Achans Babylonish garment;
nor a rich man's purse, like his wedge of gold; neither let any be found amongst
you of the Jury, who (like the High Priests against Christ) have so much
respect to the Common cause, (for fear it should prejudice your own interest
hereafter) that you will forfeit your Private consciences for the present; If
we let him alone, the Romans will come and take away our government: Ioh.
11.48. So if you let this or that pass, it will be a leading case against your
Command or Commodity, and therefore crush it, be it right or wrong.

Yea and those which are to be your Hands, (for I must still follow the
Allegory of the body, and it fits us,) your servants and officers, must not be
like Blastus, Herod's Chamberlain, who so they may have the feeling of a Fee,
from them who give it for love of their own Licentiousness, and not of Law or
Justice, will procure a peace for men as wicked as Tire and Sydon; Act. 12.22.
These things if you beware of, you will make up a sound body, beseeming so
becautifull a Head, as was before described; and upon the accomplishment of
these Duties, (Right Reverend Sages) you may expect and cannot miss of these
Dues; Commendations and Cherishing from our Sovereign; Thanks from your
Country, in the general; prayers from the Suitors, in particular; Temporal
honor upon earth; and eternal glory in Heaven;

In hope of which Duties to be performed by you, and Dues to be prepared for
you, I will proceed to the Third Thesis, which is

That although there be Duties to which Christians are so obliged, and all have
their part in the matter of that obligation or duty, yet they have it in a
different degree or manner, every man in his proper and peculiar place and
order: designed in this word (Their) Their Dues.

The People must not be busybodies to pry into the Princes Duty, the Laity
into the Clergies, or the Iuror into the Judges, but every one into his own,
as we have a President, Luke 3. verse. 10. to 15. where the people do not come
and complain of the Exaction of the Publicans, nor the violence of the
Soliders, but inquire of their own duty, what shall we do? and receive
directions accordingly. The Publicans do not complain of the backwardness of
the people in payments, or of the Soldiers in clamorousnesse, but inquire,
what shall we do? and are instructed in their peculiar duty. The Soldiers,
do not complain how the people rebelled and the Publicans with held their
pay, but come with what shall we do? and are instructed according to their
calling. Teaching us that none should be Curiosus in aliena Republica, and
Desidiosus in sua: Aug. Stella, and Gualter. Quid de me loquuntur homines? what
say men of me? and who am I? is the question of a careful man; exemplified in
our Savior, Matthew. 16.13. Tu quis es? who or what art thou? is the question of
a captious man, represented in the Pharisees Messengers, Ioh. 1.19.22. But, Quid
hic faciet? what shall this man do? is the inquisition of a curious man, Ioh.
21.21. yea and Saint Peter himself cannot pass with it, without the
reprehension of (...)? what is that to thee? verse 22. For often times it
draws upon them who delight in it, such deserved destruction, that Funcius his
funeral verses had been a more profitable Meditation, then this their
Polypragmaticall disposition;

Disce meo exemplo mandato munere fungi,
Et fuge ceu pestem (...).
Let my death teach thee how to frame thy life.
Fly censure like the plague, it breeds but strife,
Which that every man may be the better contented to do, and to contain
himself within the Lists of obedience and limits of his calling, I will only
briefly point at the manner of practice required at every man's hands, to the
end that he may perform his duty according to this order which must be

not for mere Compulsorie necessity, but voluntarily and cheerfully:
denotated in this word Give or Render.

Cranmer and Thomson, render it [Give] intimating that it should not be done
grudgingly or of necessity, as the Apostle speaks of Charity, 2 Cor: 9.7. For
Nec leprosa obedientia, nec canina patientia, Deo commendatur, Bern. A lame
obedience, which comes slowly after, and a dogged patience, which goes
snarling and grumbling on, lose part of their grace and grateful acceptance.

A Christian must do his duties with cheerfulness, Romans 12, 8. and 2 Cor.
9.7. before cited; for Conscience sake, and not for Necessity, verse 5. of
this chapter. Give as of good will, although it were not his duty to render or
pay.

But the Vulgar, Tremelius, Beza, and the Kings Bible, read it [Render] which
agrees with the Greek Text (...); By which word as In loc.
Marlorat observes, significat debitum quoddam inexcusabile subditis impositum
esse; The Apostle signifies, that there is an inexcusable debt lying upon the
Subjects; which he seems to have borrowed from Or Theophil. Vid. similiter,
Pet. Mart. Muscul. Gualt. Aret.
Athanasius, or Volgarius; who add further, quod solvere principibus debeas,
which ought to be paid to Princes; which might teach the Subject even in case
of policy to take out that lesson, Fiat voluntarium quod futurum est
necessarium; Do thou thy self make that voluntary, which others may make thee
do of necessity: And if it were but even for this Cause, Render therefore to
all their dues.

FINIS.

