A COMMEMORATION OF THE INESTIMABLE GRACES AND BENEFITS OF GOD, INFVSED
THROVGH THE bright light of the knowledge of his holy word, in our most dradde
soueraygne lord HENRY the eight, by the grace of god king of ENGLAND and of
FRANCE, defender of the faith, lord of Irelande, and in earth the supreme heed
next and immediate under CHRIST of the Church of England, with hartye praise
and thanks gyuyng un to GOD for the same, composed upon the glad prophecy and
ioyefull psalm of Benedictus dominus deus Israel. etc.

ANNO. M. D. XL.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS LORD CRVMVVEL knight of the noble order of the
Garther, lord keeper of the privy seal of our most souerayn lord the king, and
also vicegerent of the spirituality, your humble and faithful servant, John
Pylbarough desires long health and prosperous per seuerance in honor.
CONSIDERING often times in my self, (my syngular good lord) the inestimable
graces and benefytes, with the which god of his infinite goodness has most
largely indewed our most sovereign lord the kings most noble majesty,
whereof his grace has abundantly imparted also unto us his most humble and
loving subjects, by the illustration of goddis most holy word, and unto
what consolation, joy, and comforet, from our long peynefully suffered
thraldom, dreadefulle darkness, and dangers of our bodies, souls, and all
that we had besides forth, we be now most blessedly delivered and comme,
through the same, I have thought and yet assuredly do think, there is no
faithful or true english heart, that can reteyne and keep to him self the
memorial thereof, and not ernestly and with all diligence endeavor and apply him
self, by all such means and ways, as his wit power and counnynge, which
god has given him, will serve him, to utter and set forth the same, both to
the condign laud and praise of god therefore, and unto the perpetual renown
and gloriouse fame of our said most soueraygne lord, as the very minister,
in and by whom GOD has thus wonderfully wrought in us, and as in whom (as
Paul says) our reioysynge might abound and increase by Philipp. 1.
Jesus Christ, by reason of his return home again to his right and just
title of godly ministration and power over us, whereof he, and his most noble
progenytours, have been unjustly, by usurpation, long deprived. Whereupon for
my part, in discharge of my conscience and duty toward god and his majesty
in this behalf, I have applied my best will (according to my Matthew. 25.
litell, and not unknown to all men most least) gift, which I have
thankefully (notwithstanding) received of god amongst other, to bestow and
employe to his use, to compyle this little treatise, upon the joyful psalm,
Benedictus dominus deus Israel. etc. the glad prophecye and Luc. 1.
praysegyuynge unto god by zachary, which by interpretation is asmoch to say,
as remembering god, of and for the universal spiritual visitation and
redemption of mankind, by Christis becommynge incarnate, and commendation of
his chosen mynister thereunto, John Baptiste: whereof and of whose conception
also he was inopinable at the time of the revelation thereof, by reason of the
very old ages of him and his wife, to thente^t the same, which I would to god
were as effectuously showed and set forth by me herin, as I have both heartily
and faithfully pourposed and meant it, might be an occasion and example for us,
both to laud and praise god of and for our specyal visytation and redemption,
through the light of goddis most holy word, whereof we were also inopinable and
faythelesse at the first pronouncynge thereof, by reason that the same was
long hid from us, and man's traditions and inventions crepte between. And
also to commend worthily our said most sovereign lord, gods holy minister
thereof, in perpetual memory, and from generation of us into generation, lest
we which as adoptiue Israelytes by faith do presently enjoy so high and
godly benefytes by god and his said mynyster the kings majesty, should be
accounted any less thankful therefore, then was zachary, who being satisfied
with only hope, thanked and praised God and his holy mynyster John Baptiste,
for the merits of Christ's incarnation, then to come. Which Treatise most
temeraryously I have dedycate unto you, whom I have always esteemed, like the
right virtuous and faithful Saphan, unto his most godly prince Josias, a
gracious favorer of all honest and holy purposes, and my very syngular good
lord: Trusting that although both for the gross handlynge of so fine a
matter, and also the rude and inornate style and phrase thereof, it be nothing
worthy such preferrement in deed, yet never the less your accustomed
benignite will vouchsafe to reform the same, wherein it may seem unto you
convenient, and also accept and make it worthy, agreinge to my good will
intended therein. And for my part, I shall not only most hartly praise and
thank god therefore, but also according to my bounden duty owe unto your
good lordeshyppe my hearty prayer and humble service while I live.

GOD SAVE THE KING
Benedictus dominus deus Israel: quia uisitauit and fecit Redemptionem plebis
sue.
FOR AS MUCH AS in the Scryptures of the old Testament and the new, it is no
rare thing, that diverse persons ben named some before their birthes and some
when they have continued with one name, have had the same changed, according
and for such occasions or qualities as have risen or ben in them, or for some
synguler merytes given unto them (whereof to make an hole rehersall, it were no
less to my capacytie impossyble, than to your readyng tedious) I am and dare
be bold (without offense to any person) for the godly occasion and virtuous
qualities (which now ben apparent in us most christian english people) to
repute and ascribe worthyly to us the name of Israelites. For like as Jacob,
Genes. 25.
which is as much to say, as a supplanter, was an apt name for him,
according to his quality than, because he had supplanted his brother Esau,
Gene. 27.
both of his byrthright and fathers blessing, wherefore Esau said of him, he may
well be called Jacob, for he has twyse vndermynded me, and Esaus name was
changed into Edom, as who should say (read) by cause he had sold the said
byrthright for a meace of read meat, as like apt a name was after for the
same Jacob Genes. 32.
(Israel) which is interpreted, a man saying the lord) by cause he had seen
god and his wonderful Genes. 28. Psalm 113. Exodus 12. Exodus 13.
heavenly syghtes. Which Israel and his generation god chase to him a
peculiar people, and in them extended his holiness and strength, and saved
them in Egypt, from the grievous plague through the bloudde of the lamb. And
for them Christ said also, I came not but to cure Matt. 15.
the sheep of the house of Israel, that were perished: Even so because we now
se the lord god by his scriptures and by his holy word, be sanctified and
strengthed in him, and spirituallye cured through the blod of our redemer
Christ, we may right well and aptly be called Israelites, a people seeing god, a
people sanctified and strengthed with Esai. 62. Et uocabunt eos populus sanctus,
re dempti a domino. Titum. 2.
goddis word, and cured with Christis blood. For the grace of god our savior
has appeared unto us, and opening the eyes of our understanding, has taught
us to see and know Christ. Fantasies nor dremes, men's inventions do not now
blind or deceive us any longer. For the broad busshell of hypocrisye, which
overwhelmed the bright candell (goddis word) is now taken away, and we see
all over the house of our own consciences: and we se thauctour of light, and
the very light it self, that lyghteneth (with diversity of graces) all
reasonable creatures coming Joan. 1.
into this world. And whom (although he was in the world) we being seduced
and led blyndefulle by vanities, could not perceive or know tylle now at the
last, while we were a people wandrynge in darkness of ignorance, and dwellers
in the shadows of death, which is syn, accompanied with death: the great
light of goddis most holy word did appear unto us, and Esai. 9. Roma. 13.
our redemption was nerer tha^ we were aware. And where we were before in
darkness, a people ignorant of god, we be now inlyghtened with Ephesians. 5.
the bryghtnes of knowledge in our lord god: who has commanded the light to
shine out of darkness, which has shyned in our hearts, for to give the light
of the knowledge of the glory of god in the face of Jesus Christ, that is in
the Matt. 16.
faith, which Peter and his fellow apostles by him, one answering for all,
confessed in Christ to be the son of the living god. Upon which Christ, and
faith in him, and upon, or in none other, our catholyke congregation immediately
is firmly settled. Let us therefore now, having received this light of god,
imprynte the memorial thereof in our hearts, with perfect belefe thereof, and
magnify god therefore, that it may fructify in us good works, and make us
blessed through the same, before all nations, as was the holy virgyn Mary by
Elisabeth, saying unto her, Blessed art thou among women, and Luc. 1.
blessed is the fruit of thy womb. For because thou haste mekely received the
holy word of god, and glad tidings by his angel: Those same things shall
be performed in the, according as the same angel has said unto the. And
also by example of Zachary, who because he believed not the possibility of
goddis word, which the angel did show unto him, was Luc. 1.
made specheles for a time, but when he saw the perfection thereof, being sorry
for his infidelity, did receive again by goddis goodness, his speech,
augmented with the grace and spirit of prophecienge and thanks gyuynge unto
god for the same: being repentant and detestyng, that we have been so long
mysbeleuyng of the word of god, showed and set forth unto us by goddis holy
doctors and prechers, whom the Satan of Rome has dyuellishly tormented,
burnt, and slain, to keep us faithles, and make us dumb, that we should not
blow out his errors and abuses, nor kings and temporal rulers should be
learned of their godly auctorities over their subjects (which the same Satan
had usurped) let us now, not like as the ten, which were Luce. 17.
healed of their leprie, whereof one only came ageyn to give thanks to God,
but holly and entierly togythers, even as the three which were in the forneys
of fire, lauded and glorified god, as Daniel. 3.
it had been with one mouth, brast out like the day spryng the light of the
faith that is in us, and reioysyng in the birth of John, that is in the holy
gospel new risen amongst us by the grace of god, praise and thank most
heartily with Zachary our lord god of Israel, which has visyted Benedictus
dominus de us Israel qui a uisitauit and fecit ^edem ptionem ple bis suae.
us, illumynyng our feeble ignorant hearts with the knowledge of his most holy
word. Where by he has caused the redemption of us his peculyar people, from our
thrall captivity of our gostely ennemy the devil, and our both goostly and
bodyly enemy, the bishop of Rome, and his complyces.

ET erexit cornu salutis nobis in domo David pueri sui.
ANTICHRIST of Rome has long dissimuled with us, foodynge us forth with
vanities: As pardons, pilgrimages, bulls, never right calued, supersticions,
counterfeite religion, feyned relyques, and such other innumerable sort of
trashes, haberdashery ware, and all for money. For the old proverb, Omnia
venalia Rome, said by the Pagans, long before Christ Salustius.
was incarnate, is not left unpracticed by the said Antichrist our most holy
father (as they call him) his cardinals and bishops. whereof the chief
merchant of myschiefe is the said holy father. I pray you, what thing was
and yet is not sale kind at Rome, sauinge our english souls: for the which
we have now of late found a better mart? And that which is most abhorred of
god, the said Antichriste, and most adversary of Christ, had brought us into
the ge^tils worshipping of falls goddis. Oh god of Israel, for thy tender mercy,
into what blind fantasies of mad myschiefe were we thy selye creatures
brought by the hydynge and shutting up of thy holy word from us? And what
injuries did thy most faithful ministers, and yet for the most part do
sustain, to be so arrogantly deprived of their princely regymentes under the,
by thambycious wrastyng of thy said word to the mayntenaunce of a dyuellyshe
power against thy right power? whereby the due obedience of subjects was
converted into rebellion, and the concord of commonties dissolved: Thou layest
good god, as thou had ben a sleep, and did suffer us to dream by the, Even
as thou dyddest from Adams fall, unto the time thy only son became incarnate,
whereof zachary prophesied a little before, saying, That thou had raised up
an horn for our health, meaning, Et erexit cornu salutis nobis In domo David
pue^i sui.
that Christ should be borne the universal strength power and glory of our
salvation, and that in the house of king David thy elect servant. But now
through the light, which is sprung in us, upon thy holy word, (against an
usurped power and reign of Lucifer, most untruly counterfayte, upon thy most
undoubted true word) thou have raised up to us thy peculyas people, a godly
dew power of health, our natural most soueraygne lord king HENRY the VIII.
by thy grace, which is also a true strength and ryghtfull kyngedome,
apperteynyng to the most noble house of his most famous progenitors, for
our great consolation, tranquillite, and wholesome safety, both of our bodies
and souls to. Whose majesty we recognize and believe through thy said word,
to be thine holy enoynted, immediate minyster, and vicar over Roma. 13. 1.
Petri. 2. Sapien, 6.
us: and unto whom only thy goodness has committed the cure charge and
governance of us, and whom we owe to obey love and dread, and to whom also we
owe only to have recourse as unto thy chief herdeman. But alas we have 1. Pet.
2.
ben long (yea and to long) wandrynge from him, and have sought a strange
shepherde, which semynge unto us as meke and humble as a lamb, (what by him
self and what by his whel pes) has been a very devouring wulfe of us, and
more rauenouse then a wulfe. for he has not only consumed the sheep, but the
flece and bones also. But now being returned home again by the diligente
search and labor of our 1. Petri. 2.
said most loving kind and holy pastor, let us not err nor straye again
from him, for he is loathe to lose one the worste of us, let us not then lose
him, but most kyndely follow him, stycke by him, defend him, obey him, and
louyngely dread and honor him, even for gods sake, and for conscience sake,
because gods Roma. 13.
holy word teaches and byndeth us so to do.

Sicut locutus est per os sanctorum: qui a seculo sunt prophetarum eius.
CHRIST WAS not suddenly borne, but his incarnation and coming to be borne
in the house of David, was spoken of god, by the mouths of his prophets, from
the beginning of the world: that we should faithfully believe it. And therefore
undoubtedly Jeremy, Daniel, Esais, Micheas, zachary, and all the Hiere. 23.
Daniel. 1^.
residue of the prophets cessed not, to prophecye Esai. 11. Miche. 5. Zacha. 6.
and show Christ's incarnation. And the same also did the deeds of Adam, Abel,
Enoch, and of al other the fathers of the old testament manyfestly set forth:
as undoubtedly also does the same fathers, and prophets, and other the residue
of the old testament, if due application be put thereunto, partly by their
deeds, and partly Esai. 14. Ezec. 22. 23. 24. 34. Hiere. 29. Daniel. 12.
by their prophecies, both show and set forth the pompous pride and
vsurpatio^ of the bishop of Rome, and the mischiefs captiuities and
abominations that have ensued thereupon to god des flock. and yet the same
bishops, captains of al those myschiefes, neither have nor shall escape quyte
away: for utter confusion, deep falls, and perpetual damnation, both has and
shall, as sure as god lives, come upon their necks therefore. And the same
fathers and prophets 3. Re. 10. 3. Reg. 1. 2. Par. 29. 2. Para. 30. 2. Para.
31. 2. Para. 23.
do like wise show and set forth, that of very godly right and justice,
kings princes and other temporal rulers, ever from the beginning of the
world, have and ought to be the only governors orderers and rulers of and
over their people, naturally brought up, congregate, 2. Par. 34. Sap^. 6.
and being within their prouynces realms and dominions, of what so ever sort
degree 4. Re. 17.
or condition they be, spiritual or temporal, as we call them: And what
honorable and hum 2. re. 18. 19 3. Reg. 1.
ble obedyence the subjects of every kind and sort, owe to use and bear
toward their kings Daniel. 4.
and rulers, and that god was the only setter up and putter down of them: And
that god 1. Regum. 15. 16. 3. Reg. 2.
took, and assuredly will take, sore and greuouse vengeance upon such, as
dysturbed the royal seat of any king or prince: And how gracyousely 1. Reg.
10.
also god does preserve kings and princes, infusynge in them special godly
gifts above other. And the said fathers and prophets 1. Reg. 15.
do warn and exhort the subjects, incessant ly to pray for their kings
princes and rulers. All which prophecies and deeds of the said prophets and
fathers, Christ him self, after his coming, affyrmeth, and by his own most
holy word and examples does teach and straightly bind us, to do and follow
the same. For he being of two differente natures, that is both god and man,
and being king of kings, and the supreme power, as he says in the last
chapter of Matthew. Al power is given to me in hea Matthew. ultimo.
uen and in earth. In heaven, because he had it so, as god, before he was
incarnate: In earth, because he was god and man after his incarnation, and
refusing and detestynge all worldly honor and kyngedome, chargynge also
Peter, and all his true folowers, to do likewise, did most humbly meke him
self, and taking upon Philipp. 2.
him the fashion of a servant, was wyllyngely most poor and most obedient
subject to the worldly powers. For he says of him self. The Luc. 9.
foxes have dens, and the birds of the air have nestes, but the son of
man has not wherein to thrust his heed. And his obedience was so great, as none
could be more. For he was obedient un to his fathers will, and to worldly
powers will, also even unto the most shameful death of the Luce. 23.
cross, by the judgment of the ruler Ponce Pilate. And to set forth this
obedience with all, Christ teaches us a lesson upon the resolution of the
perfydous and fraudulent questyon, demanded of him by the messangers of the
chief of the scribes and phariseys, which Luke reher Luc. 20.
seth in the.xx. chapter, Whether it be laufull to give tribute to Caesar or
no. To which Christ answered thus in effect, yield to Caesar that which is
Cesars, and to god that which is goddis. As who says, because your temporal
ruler and soueraygne lord, has power over your bodies and goodis, and is your
defender and preserver, and also charged in his spiritual ministry with you
under god: yield to him tribute, a knowelege of your subjection. And because
god gives you body and soul, and all that ye have besides Deuter. 6. Matthew. 22.
forth, and has power over all, and asks nothing but your soul for all:
yield him that.

And Christ an other time to verify his said Luc. 21.
poverty, and for an example of obedience, that his true folowers should bear
to the temporalle powers, he commanded Peter, to take money out of a fyshes
mouth, because neither of them Matt. 17.
had any, to pay to the gatherer for them both. Peter also taught of Christ
to set forth this obedience, 1. Petri. 2.
gave commandment to all the faithful, to be obedient for goddis sake to the
king, as to the chief head, and to other his substitute rulers and deputies: And
Paul co^ma^deth the same, addyng Roma. 13.
thereunto, that every power is of god, and is goddis minister, and not
otherwise, and the resista^ce thereof is damnation. And Paul writing to Titus,
Titum. 3.
byddeth him to charge the people, to obey princis, and the higher powers. And
Peter, Paul, 1. Cor. 3.
and other the appostels, call them selfs in holy scriptures but minysters,
and their power a mynisterye. And according to this, Peter was obedyent in
mynistrynge at the commandment of the Galath. 2.
other apostelles, to goo to Samarie with John. And also Peter was appointed to
be a preacher among the Jews, and John and James with him: and Paul and
Barnabas with him, among the gentyles. And Paul bosteth, that Peter and John
gave him their right hands. And Paul says also, that he blamed Peter openly,
because he followed not the truth of the gospel. And innumerable mo
auctorities of scripture are to be rehearsed hereof. But now, lest I should
seem to long in this place, let this little pretye piece, though it were
much less, cut out of the right large, true wrought, and most beautyfull
cloth, goddis holy scriptures, concerning the Iudaical Antichrist of Rome, and
his adherentes, which stand best in their own pernyciouse conceytes, like
the Jews, whose blyndnes caused them to believe John Baptist, better then
Christ, not with standing the great number of signs and prophecies, which
they had, witnessing that he was come, be sufficient to lay before them, for a
patron, to stayne and utterly shame all their counterfayt clothes of falls
interpretations, and colored gloses of their feyned gospel. And thank our
lord god of Israel, that he has so clered our sight, yt we have now at the
last, found a right Paul, our said most souerayn lord the king, to comptroll
and abolyshe Peter's dissimuled successors counterfayte gospel, and to
auaunce, and prefer goddis own most true and faithful gospel.

Salutem ex inimicis nostris, and de manu omnium qui oderunt nos.
OUR ANCIENT enmy, who because he had been so high a creature, above other, and
become from an angel of high heaven, a devil Esai. 14.
in deep hell, for that that he would have been equal with the highest, never
ceased after to strive against god, and his best beloved creature mankind. In
so much, that so sone as ever he perceived the first parents were formed and
setlyd in the pleasant place of Paradyse, and that god had bound them to a
certain obedience, he infected Genesis 3.
them with his pestilent pride of disobedience against god, for the which they
were exyled that place, and both they and their posterity brought to rume and
captive bonds of the same ennemy and his innumerable sort of evil angels,
which contynually lay in awayte of them, until the birth of Christ, who was
and is the universal horn power strength and glory, for the health of
mankind, against the said enemy, and his said aungelles, which yet
nevertheless desisteth not day and night, nor never will according to his
old custom, by a thousand ingyns and means to plant debate between god and
man, and between man and man, power and power, and every where causes
disobedience, and rebellion of subjects, against their souerains, and ledeth
mankind by fantasies and illusions from one mischief to an other, until he
bring them to forgette god, and unto what order they were appointed first by
god, as by experic^ce amongst our selfs, here in England we have cause best
to perceive. For what by our said enmye the devil, and what by our ennemy the
bishop of Rome, his traditions and falls doctrynes, his vanities and dreams,
his hypocrisy and feigned relygion, the dyuels snares, we were brought in case,
that we did set more by the^ than by god, or any part of his doctrine, ana
feared more the bishop of Romes curse, than goddis vengeance, which began to
come in hand apace by the most contagious plagues of commotions and
rebellions amongst our selfs. But Salutem
that god, which is the inlyghtner of the heart of man, and the health of man's
soul, of his inestimable mercy and goodness, raised up for us his power of
health of glory and of strength, our godly Josias, and most soueraygne lord
the kings majesty, to wake and consider us his corrupt and wandrynge flock,
and having received by the hands of his right virtuous scrybe Saphan, 2. Par.
34.
even the grace of god, the book of the law of god long hid, did set forth the
same with all diligence, by which our ignorant darkness is become a perfect
knowledge of light, And we perceive clearly, that we did abuse our selfs in
disobedience both against god, and our said souerayn lord, whom god has
ordained our Michaell, our Dauyd, Ex inimicis nostris,
and our only health in earth, against the pompous Lucifer, and monstrous
Golyath of Rome, and all our enemies of every sort, and who is an able power
and strength by god, to defend and preserve Et de manu omniu^ qui oderu^t
nos. Psalm. 88.
us, from the hands of all them that hate us. For god says of him, I have
put help in the power, and man of might, and have auaunced, whom I have
chosen among my people, I have found David mine own servant, whom I have
anointed with my holy oil. And therefore my hand shall help him, and mine
arm shall confirm him, his enemy shall not prevail at all in him, and the
child of iniquity shall not prease to hurt him, I shall make his enmyes fall
down by heaps before his face, and shall put to flight such as hate him, my
troth and mercy shall be ever with him, and in my name shall his horn of of
glory, power, and health, be exalted. Lo, this is most comfortable health,
consolation, rejoice, and glory of all faithful loving hearts, and most
terrible fear, quakynge dread, and utter confusion of all untrue, malicious,
and hateful traitors: which are goddis and our most detestable and
abhorrible ennemies and haters.

Ad faciendam misericordiam cum patribus nostris, and memorari testamenti sui
sancti: Iusiurandum quod iurauit ad Abraham patrem nostrum daturum se nobis.
ZACHARY PRAYSETH GOD, that by the horn of power and health, which he has
raised up for us in the house of David (as is before mentioned) he should do
and show his mercy with the fathers, Abraham Isaac Jacob, Ad facien da^
misericordia^ cu^ patribus nostris.
and all the other of the old testamente, that they being dead before
Christ's coming, should be part takers with their children and folowers, of
the benefytes of his passion, wherein they had perfyte hope while they lived.
And he byndeth god thereunto in the true performance of his most Genes. 15. Et
memo rari testamenti sui sancti, Ius iuran. etc.
holy covenant that he promised Abraham: The most blessed vyrgine Marie
being conceived with Christ also (as in the same first chapyter of Luke is
rehearsed) magnifieth god most humbly for the same, after this manner, That all
that is in her does magnify god, because he has behold the mekenes of his
hand maid, whom al nations shall bless. For his might has done Luc. 1.
great things to her, and therefore his name is holy, and his mercy is
infinite, for he has not on ly showed it in her, but from generation to
generation, such as fear him. he has taken up his servant Israel, being
remembered of his holy couenante, according as he promised Abraham, and his
seed for ever more. Which Mary and zachary both, enforce us now also (as
true Israelytes and seers of god) to magnyfie and praise our lord god of
Israel, for his great mercy and holy covenant late showed and performed in us.
For like as it is also written. That there fell an heavy sleep upon Abraham, and
great darkness Genes. 15.
fell upon him. And the lord said unto him, know this of a suertye, that thy
seed shall be a stranger in a land that is not theyrs. And they shall make
bondemen of them, and entreat them evil, four hundred years, but the people,
whom they shall serve, will I judge, afterward they shall go forth with great
substance. Even so was it come to pass with us, for our fathers and also we
being seduced and led blind with fantasies and men's inventions, by the
subtyle practice of the ambicyouse Romanyste Lucifer, and his accomplices, were
cast into an heavy sleep, and great darkness of ignorance in god, and his
most holy word, and thereby also were we as subtylly and slylye conveyed, and
made captyue strangers at Rome, because we had of right nothing to do in
that city or land, and therefore were we evil entreated of them, with their
myschiefes and abominations accordyngelye, And as men use their bondemen, so
used they us. For they set us besyly and vylye a work, to clyme the ladder, to
bring them word what god did in heaven, but the more we did clyme, the
farther down we went, And then we must seek this saint, and that saint,
this block and that stock, this toye and that toye, offer here and offer
there, and kiss here and lycke there, tylle it was time to rest for werynes.
The Egipcian tirannye was never more laborous to our forefathers. And what so
ever we could get or gather together was shortly after their own good, and
had nothing therefore but clean remission of thrift. And neither would they
manumise one of us, but take our cheuage and let us go till a another time and
gather more. And this continued more the^ four hundred years, until our lord
god of Israel, whose inestimable mercy and goodness, whose inenarable
ryghtuousenesse and troth excedeth al thing that is, vouchedsafe of late time
to illumyne most graceousely our said darkness, with his holy word, whereby we
have perceived Christ the auctour of our light, and our only savior, to be as
it were newly come and incarnate for us: and that through the faith which we
have in him, we be (as Paul says) reputed justified as Galath. 3. Roma. 4.
was our father Abraham, whose children adoptiue and multiplication of his sede
by faith, we now also be. And the very partetakers with our said forefathers
Abraham Isaac Jacob, and all the remanaunt of the old testamente and new
both, and they with us, of the merytes of Christ's blood, promised by god to
Abraham and his said sede for evermore, to whom the bloudde of a lamb was a
figurative salvation in Egypt. Exodus 12.
And we perceive also, by the illumination of the said holy word, that the
bishop of Rome, to whose tyranny we were thus as is said, thrall, is judged
of god, to be Christ's utter adversary, and the usurper of the ryghtful power
of kings and princes, gods right mynisters over his people. And we newely
adoptiue Israelites from Exodus 12. 13. 14.
the said thraldom of the said bishop, through the same word also, no less
wonderfully delivered into great welthe and joy by our most godly captayn the
kings highness, then were our forefather Israelites from the captivity of the
tyran nous Pharao into the plesaunt land of promission by their holy prophet
and leader Moses.

Vt sine timore de manu inimicorum nostrorum liberati seruiamus illi: In
sanctitate and iusticia coram ipso omnibus diebus nostris.
SINCE through thonly inestimable goodness, Vt sine timore de manu inimicorum
nostroru^ liberati
mercy, and love of god toward us, and not by any part of our deseruyng
toward him, we be thus graciously carclesse and without any fear delivered,
from the hands of our before rehearsed ennemies, and are become the seers of
god, and the adoptyue children of Abraham by faith, through the illumination
of his most holy word in us, and converted from the night in to the day, that
is from the darkness of the ignorant knowledge of god to the bright knowledge
Seruiamus illi.
of him: it behooves us with all our mind with all our heart, with all our
soul, and with all that which is or may be in us, to love and dread him, and
with pure and sincere holiness and faithful In sanctitate and iusticia,
ryghtuousenes, serve and honor him, like as Paul says, god has not called
us to live impurely, Roma. 12.
but to live holyly, not to fasshion our selfs unto this world, but to be
changed through the renewyng of our mind. And therefore Paul Ephesians. 5.
byddeth us to be the folowers of god, as most derely beloved children, and
to walk in love as Christ loved us. And putting us in remembrance, that we
were sometime darkness, and now light in our lord god, bids us to walk as
children of the light. for the fruit of the spyrite is all manner of
righteousness and troth, and to prove what is pleasynge unto the lord. And
have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather rebuke
them. And Peter also comfortyng us in our chosen generation, our 1. Petri. 2.
holy nation, and that we be a peculiar people, wills us, that we should show
the virtues of him, which has called us from darkness unto his merueylouse
light, Even we, which are now a people of god, which sometime were not so,
and which now have obtained mercy, which some time we had not, and
commands us to set a side all vice, that they, which backebyte us for
evil doers, may se our good works, and praise god in the day of visitacion.
And he there subioyneth diverse rules of good works, of the which the first
is, that we should submytte our selfs unto all creatures for gods sake,
whether it be unto the king, as unto the chief head and most excellent above
other, or unto any other his substitute rulers and deputies, which are sent by
him, for the punishment of the evil, and praise of the good, for so is the
will of god. And briefly amongst other he compileth this lesson, Honor all
men, love brotherly fellowship, fear god, and honor the king. And our auctour
of light, Christ says of him self, I am the light of the Joan. 8.
world, and who that follows me, walks not in darkness, but shall have
everlasting life. And what shall be our common pathe says he, but do Matthew. 7.
all such things to other men, which ye would they should do unto you. And
that we should know our time of workynge, he byddeth us to work while we have
light, and lest we also should spend our time of light vnprofytably (like as
Paul warns us, that we should not receive grace in 2. Cor. 6.
vain) he thretneth us by example to take it from us, and to bestow it better
upon other. For he says, A certain servant, to whom his master had
delivered a portion of money to employ, hyd ye Luc. 19.
money, and did nothing therewith: and therefore when his master came to have
account of him and other, and found he had made no increase thereof, he blamed
him sore, and caused it to be taken from him, and delivered unto one of his
other servants, whom he had tried a profitable servant. And therefore Paul
says unto us, As ye have received of 1. Tes. 4.
us, how ye should walk and please god, so walk that ye may increase the
more abundauntly. and as Peter says, if you be good lovers and folowers 1.
Petri. 3.
of Christ, who can hurt you? And yet our service must be such as god
allows holy and Cora^ ipso
rightuous, orels it were better undone. And there fore Christ taught his
electes, how their service Matthew. 5.
and works should be accepted of god, saying unto them, ye are the light of the
world, and men use not to light a candell, and ouerwhelme it with a bushel
when they have done, but sets it upon a candelstycke, that it may light al
them that be in the house, even so let your light shine before men, that they
may see your good works, and glorify, whom? you? nay, but your father,
which is in heaven. as who says, you can or shall do no works (seem they
never so holy) that shall be accepted of god, that are not done for goddis
honor but for your own. For so did the hypocrite phariseis set abroad the
skyrtes of their garments, and vsyd al their doings to be seen and praised of
men. But Peter byddeth us sanctify ourlorde Christ in our hearts. And Paul
also 1. Pet. 3. 1. Cor. 6. 1. Cor. 10.
says, Glorify and bear god in your body. as who says, Let al your
outward good works be inwardely for goddis sake, and his glory. But how
far think ye our popysshe monkery and fryerye, and all other disguysed
rables of every kind of the feigned and popeholy relygion (which thanked be
god for his grace. are in a good towardnes to be made out of our ways for ever
more) be and have be differynge from Zacharies before rehearsed holiness and
righteousness before god? surely as far as between zacharies acquayntance
Matthew. 7.
and theirs. And therefore all though they cry in never so great a route, and
until they be hoorse, lord lord open for us, and have in never so fast, yet
will heaven gates open never the more. For Christ will answer them, I
neither know your new fashioned apparayle, nor you, ye be not my sheep of ye
house of Israel, for whom I made my holy covenant, ye be the Idolaters, the
gentyls, ye never received my gospel, nor did my fathers will, ye imbrased
Antichrists gospel, and were thexecutours of his will, even the works of
darkness and of death, ambition, sedition, vayn glory, and such like
abhomynations. I loved and taught above all things poverty and obedience, ye
made a promise, and swear vain oaths, Osee. 10.
to follow me in them, but you hated them for all that above all things.
Hypocrites, ye promised gold, but ye paid fylthy things, you made your selfs
possessioners and lords of the earth, and were sedycious disobeyours of mine
ordynances and holy laws made by mine elect mynyster and right follower of the
good Josias, whom you dissimuled 2. Par. 34.
your most soueraygne lord, bearing an usurper in your corrupt bosoms, that
he should redress your idolatry and abhomynable fashyons of ungodly living,
and to put to better uses your treasures and possessions, which you did enjoy
without just title by me. I say to you therefore yet ones again, I know you
not, get you hens Matt. 7.
from me into damnation with all your iniquites. And not withstanding these,
yet be there other things, whereby our holiness and righteousness ar likewise to
be made perfect beforegod, which we must also observe, as that there be no
diversity of opinions amongst us, but as Paul says, that we draw all one
way, having one love, being Philipp. 2.
of one accord and of one mind, that there be nothing done through strife and
vaynglory, but through mekenes of mind, and in that, whereunto Philipp. 3.
we are come, let us proceed by one rule. And it is also to be observed, that
we bost not ungodly of our gostely renewynge in the light of the Ephesians. 4.
knowledge of god, as who says, it came of our 2. Cor. 10. Roma. 12.
selfs, lest while we measure our selves by our selves, and hold only of
our selfs, we understand nothing. And lest perauenture, while we 1. Cor. 10.
seem to stand, we fall suddenly or we be ware. It behooves than therefore,
that we esteem our selfs as Paul estemeth him self, and follow his example
therein, saying. It is the grace of god, that Philipp. 3.
I am such a one as I am, I am not al ready perfect, but I follow, if I may
co^prehende that wherein I am comprehended of Christ Jesus. Brethern Omnibus
diebus no stris.
I count not my self yet that I have gotten it: but one thing I say, I forget
that which is behind, and stretche my self unto that which is before, and
prease unto the mark appointed, to opteyne the reward of the high calling of
god in Christ Jesus. And also our holiness and righteousness must have a
durable contynuance in a right perfection, and not for a time, or now good
and than evil, but all times good, so as it may be said, gods word was sown
in a good Luc 8. Matthew. 1^.
land, which fruitefully abides to the full time of harvest, and not in stony
ground or among busshes, so that it may not fructify and tarry the full time.
For what avails it to have be never so long counted noble, wise, or
counnynge, and at the last, through wylfull ignorance and obstinate
frowardnes (as we of late have known many) to be condemned to shameful
death, and to be noted in perpetual memory most wretched and most folyshe?
Or what avails a man to have lived all his days in holiness and
righteousness, and at the last moment of his life, to conceive a myschiefe, and
be damned for evermore? yet better it were to live long evil, and dye well, as
did he yt honge on the right hand of Christ, then to live long well, and dye
evil, as did Judas, who was long good after he was called, and yet dyed
most myserably. And therefore as Christ says, persevere in goodness, and thou
shall be sure to be saved by Christis death. Let us then, having continually
before the eyes of our hearts the unspeakable goodness and mercy of god showed
unto us through the light of his most holy word, not only serve and honor
him, our self in perfect holiness and righteousness before him all our days,
but so show and set forth unto out children, and such other as we have in
charge under god, how great things god has done for us new Israelites,
that they also, and from generation to generation, may like wise serve and
honor him for ever more.

Et tu puer propheta altissimi uocaberis: preibis enim ante facie^ domini,
parare uias eius: Ad dandam scientiam salutis plebi eius, in remissionem
peccatoru^ eorum: Per uiscera misericordie dei nostri, in quibus uisitauit nos
oriens ex alto: Illuminare his qui in tenebris and in umbra mortis sedent ad
dirigendos pedes nostros in uiam pacis.
LIKE AS ZACHARY after that he had prophesied and set forth Christ's
incarnation, the most comfortable health and salvation of man's soul, and
lauded and praised god therefore, he did also prophecienge set forth the
graciouse qualities of his young son John (for as much as he Et tu puer pro
pheta altiss^ mi uocaberis, Prcibis en^ ante faciem domini parare uias eius.
then knew him by the remembrance of the revelation of the angel before he
was conceived) to be a necessary minister appointed of god. and therefore called
him the prophet of the most highest god, to go before him to make ready his
ways, and to do other divine ministeries for him. It is convenient also, that
we (now that Christ is plainly and truly by his holy word showed and set
forth unto us, and as he were new borne again for us) with all hartye good
will and mind should auance into perpetual fame our said most soueraygne lord
the kings most excellent majesty, whom (by very expert perception of most
godly commodities) we know now to be a necessary minister of god for our both
bodily and gostly health. And as it was showed by the angel, that many should
rejoice in John's nativity, even so have we great joy (through the light of
gods holy word) in the most ryghtuouse restitution of his godly title
power and mynystery over us, whereof he and his most noble progenitors have be
long by usurpation deprived. And being also replete with the grace of god,
both after the interpretation of the name of John, and his graciouse
antecellent virtues, resembled to John's, and for his blessed travail in true
setting forth his lord and master Christ, may be and ought to be esteemed
of us an other John Baptist, and holy prophet of the most highest god. In
whose sight by his godly minystration, his highness gothe before him to make
ready and plain his ways in the souls of us his regenerate people of Israel,
committed by him to his charge, whose hyghnes also (declarynge the true Ad
danda^ scientia^ salutis plebi eius.
difference between the very right and pryncypall things perteynynge to our
salvation, and thaccidentall laudable ceremonies and rites, not perteynynge
necessarylye to our salvation: like as John Baptist puts difference between
his baptism of penance in water only, and Christ's baptism in the holy
ghost, affyrmynge his baptism to give neither remission of sin nor spiritual
grace, but Christ's baptism to give them both abundantely) does give unto us
(by the sincere preaching and setting forth of the most comfortable gospelle)
knowledge and understanding In remissione^ peccatorum eorum.
of the health of our salvation, which is Christ, the only remytter and
pardoner of sin, through the tenderness of gods holy mercy toward Per
uiscera misericordie dei nostri, in quibus uisitauit nos oriens ex alto Zacha.
6. Psalm. 77. Illuminare his qui in tenebris and in umbra mortis sedent ad
dirigendos pedes nostros in uiam pacis.
us. And not by any other means or sacrifice, then by the death of Christ,
which for the nones came from above, like a spryngynge light of justice, to
light us which satte and abode long both in the darkness of the ignorance of
god, and in ye shadow of death, which folowid us every where for our sin. And
to direct and lead the fete of our souls from the obstinate rebelliouse
generation of our forefathers (whose hearts were not direct unto god, nor
their spirit beleuynge in god, but rather in men's traditions and fictions,
besides Christ's gospel) into the way of gostly works of ryghtuousnes before
god, which is peace with god, to whom be eternal glory praise and empire for
his before rehearsed inenarrable graces and benefytes infused in our said most
soueraygne lord, whereof he has also imparted unto us so plentyfully that
thrughe the bright light of gods most holy word, we be both borne again a
peculiar fortunate and blessed people of god, in pure knowledge of him, and also
delivered from the horrible and captyue thraldom of our most cruel and
tyrannous enmies the dyuell and the bishop of Rome. Desyryng yet also gods
infinite goodness, so to illumyne (with his holy word) other temporal princes
and rulers, and their people (which yet sytte in like darkness and shadow of
death as we did, because god has not showed nor opened his iugementes Psalm.
147.
unto them, likewise as he has done unto us) that they with us and we with
them (all usurped power the only rote of discord, between and in all nations
and of all other abominations grown thereby clearly extincte) might
participate the aforesaid godly ryghtuousenes and peace with god. As one
heavenly flock under one most chief herdeman (Christ) committed by him to
the sondrye charge and governance of kings princes and other temporal rulars
upon earth: And finally (having a continual devout meditation of gods said
graces and benefytes) Let us diligently in most hearty wise (according to
Paul's exhortation in this behalf) pray unto god, for the most joyful
prosperytie Tim. 2.
and long good health of our said most soueraygne lord the king: the
most gracious lady queen Anne, his most lawful noble wife, and the most
noble Prince Edward his most lauful son and heir apparent, and unto us
most excellent preciouse tewel and treasure: And that god will vouchsafe both
to add unto either of the terms of their lives prefinite and appointed, as he
added unto the good Ezechias, and also grant that the said Prince may late
long succeed his Ezec. 38.
said most noble father, both in kyngdomeand graciouse virtues, with
increace of children to them both also, Vsque in consummationem seculi, And
after this worldely reygne, celestially to reygne with god. Amen.

FINIS.
LONDINI in aedibus Thomae Bertheleti typis impress. Cum priuilegio ad
imprimendum solum.


