AN EPISTLE OF A RELIGIOUS PRIEST UNTO his father: exhorting him to the perfect
forsaking of the world.
TO THE WORSHIPFVL his very good father, R. S. his dutiful son R. S. wishes
all happiness.
IN children of former ages, it has been thought so behofull a point of dewty
to their parents, in presence by serviceable offices, in absence by other
affectuall significa^ions, to yield proof of their thankful minds, that
neither any child could omit it, without touch of vngratfulnes, nor the
parents forbear it without just displeasure. But now we are fallen into such
calamitye of times, and the violence of heresy has so crossed the course, both
of vertew and nature, that their ingraffed laws, never infringed by the most
savage and brute creatures, cannot of Gods people without peril be observed. I
am not of so unnatural a kind, of so wild education, or so unchristian a
spirit, as not to remember the root out of which I braunched, or to forget my
secondary maker and auctor of my being: It is not the carelesnes of a cold
affection, nor the want of a dew and reverent respect, that has made me such a
stranger to my native home, and so slack in defraying the debt of a thankful
mind, but only the iniquity of our days, that makes my presence perilous
and the discharge of my dewty an occasion of danger. I was loath to enforce an
unwelcome courtesy up on any, or by seming officious, to become offensive,
deeming it better to let time digest the fear, that my return into the realm
had bred in my kindred, then apruptly to intrude my self, to purchase their
anger, whose good will I so highly esteemed. I never doubted, but that the
belief, which to all my friends by descent and petegree is in manner
hereditary, framed in the^ a right persuasion of my present calling, not
suffering them to measure their censures of me, by the ugly terms, and odious
Epitheetes, wherewith heresy has sought to discredit my function, but rather
by the reverence of so worthy a Sacrament, and the sacred doom of all former
ages. Yet because I might very easily perceive by apparent conjectures, that
many were more willing to hear of me, then from me, and readier to praise,
then to use my endeavors, I have hitherto bridled my desire to see them, with
the care and ielosy of their saftye, and banishing my self from the sent of my
cradle, in my own country I have lived like a forreiner, finding among
strangers that, which in my nearest blood I presumed not to seek. But now
considering, that delay may have qualified fear, and knowing my person only
to import danger to others, and my per swasion to none but to my self, I
thought it high time to utter my sincere and duetifull mind, and to open a
vent to my zealous affection, which I have so long smothered and suppressed in
silence. For not only the original law of nature, written in all childrens
hearts, and derived from the bowels and breasts of their mothers, is a
continual soliciter urging me in your be half, but the sovereign decree
enacted by the father of heaven, ratified by his son, and daily repeated by
instincte of the holy ghost, binds every child in the dew of Christianitye,
to tender the estate and welfare of his parents, and is a motive, that
allows no excuse, but of necessity presses to performance of dewty. Nature
by grace is not abolished, but perfited, not murdered, but manured, neither are
her impressions quite rased, or annulled, but suited to the colors of faith and
vertew. And if her affections be so forcible, that eue^ in hell where rancour
and despite chiefly reigns, and all feeling of goodness is overwhelmed in
malice, they moved the rich glutton by experience of his own misery to carry
the less envy to his kindred: how much more in the Church of God, where grace
quickneth, charity enflameth, and natures good inclinations are abettered by
supernatural gifts, ought the duty of piety to prevail. And who but more
merciles then damned creatures, could see their dearest friends plunged in the
like peril, and not to be wounded with deep remorse of their lamentable and
imminent hazardes? If in beholding a mortal enemy wroung and tortured with
deadly pangues, the toughest heart softeneth with some sorrow: If the most
frozen and fierce mind cannot but thawe and melte with pity, even when it
sees the worst miscrea^t suffer his deserved torments: how much less can the
heart of a child, consider those that bredd him into this world, to be in the
fall to far more bitter extremities, and not bleed with grief of their
uncomfortable case. Surely for my own part, though I challenge not the
prerogative of the best disposition, yet am I not of so harshe and currish an
humor, but that it is a continual corrasiue, and cross unto me, that whereas
my endeavors have reclaimed many from the brincke of perdition, I have been
least able to employ them, where they were most dew, and barred from affordinge
to my dearest friends, that which has been eagerly sought and beneficially
obtained of mere strangers. Who has more interest in the grape then he that
planted the vine? who more right to the cropp the^ he that sowed the corn? or
how can the child owe so great service to any, as to him who^e he is indebted
unto for his very life and being? With young Tobye I have travailed far, and
brought home a freight of spiritual substance, to enrich you, and medicinable
receites against your ghostlye maladyes. I have with Esau after long toil in
pursuing a painful chase, returned with such pray as you were wont to love,
desiring thereby to procure your blessing. I have in this general famine of all
true and Christian food, with Joseph prepared abundance of the bread of
Angels, for the repast of your soul. And now my desire is that my drugges may
cure you, my pray delight you, and my provision feed you, by whom I have been
cured, delighted, and fedd my self, that your courtesies may in part be
counteruailed, and my ducty in some sort performed. Despise not good Sir the
youth of your son, neither deem that god measures his endouments by number
of years. Hoary senses are often couched under green locks, and some are
riper in the spring, then others in the Autumn of their age. God chose not
Isai him self, nor his eldest son, but young David to conquer Golias and to
rule his people. Not the most aged person, but Daniel the most innocent infant
delivered Suzanna from the iniquity of the judges: and Christ at twelve years
of age, was found in the temple questioning with the grauest Doctors. A true
Elias can conceive, that a little cloud may cast a large and abu^dant shower,
and the scripture teaches us, that God reuealeth to little ones that which he
concealeth from the wisest Sages. His truth is not abased by the minority of
the speaker, who out of the mouths of infantes and sucklinges can perfect his
praises. Timothy was young, and yet a principal pastor. S. Ihon not old and
yet an Apostle, yea and the Angels by appearing in youthful semblances, give
us a pregnant proof, that many glorious gifts may be shrouded under tender
shapes. All which I allege, not to claim any privilege surmounting the rate
of usual habilities, but to avoid all touch of presumption in aduising my
elders, seeing that it has the warrant of scripture, the testimony of examples,
and sufficient grounds both in grace and nature. There is diversity in the
degrees of our carnal consanquinity, and the preminence appertains to you,
as superior over your childs body. Yet if you consider our alliance in the
chief portion, I mean our foul, which discerns man from inferior
creatures, we are of equal proximity to our heavenly father, both descended of
the same parent, and no other distance in our degrees, but that you are the
elder brother. In this sense does the scripture say, Call not any father upon
earth, for one is your father which is in heaven. Seeing therefore that your
superiority is founded upon flesh and blood, which are in manner but the bark
and rine of a man, and our equality upon the soul, which is man's maigne
substance, think it I pray you no dishonor to your age, or disparagement to
your person, If with all humility I offer my advise unto you. One man cannot be
perfect in all faculties, neither is it a disgrace to the goldsmith, if he be
ignorant of the milleners trade. Many are deep lawiers and yett shallowe
Divines, many very de liver in feats of the body, and curious in external
complementes, yet little experimented in matters of their soul and far to
seek in religious actions. I have studied and practiced these many years
spiritual physic, acquainting my self with the beating and temper of every
pulse, and travailing in the scrutiny of the maladies and medicines in cident
unto souls. If therefore I profer you the fruits of my long studies and make
you a present of my profession, I hope you will construe it rather as a
duetifull part, then any point of presumption. He may be a father to the
soul, that is a son to the body, and requite the benefit of his te^porall
life, by reviving his parent from a spiritual death. And to this effect did
christ say these words: my mother, and brethren are they, that do the will of my
father which is in heaven: Upon which place S. Climacus showing to what kindred
a Christian ought chiefly to rely, draws this discourse. Let him be thy
father, that both can and will lay his labor to disburden thee of thy pack of
sins. Let holy compunction be thy mother, to depure thee from thy ordure and
filth. Let him be thy brother, that will be both thy partner and co^peditour to
pass and perfect thy race toward heaven. Take the memory of death for thy
perpetual pheere, and inseperable spouse. Let thy children be bitter sighs
of a sorrowful heart, and possess thy body as thy bondsman. Fasten thy
frendshippe with the Angelical powers, with which if thou closest in familiar
affiance, they will be patrones unto thee in thy final passage. This (says
he) is the generation and kindred of those that seek God. Such a father as this
Saint speaks of, may you have of your own son, to enter you farther in
the fore recited affinity. Of which happily it was a significa^t presage,
aboding the future event, that even from my infancy you were wont in merime^t
to call me father, R. which is the custumary style now allotted to my present
estate.

Now therefore to join issue, and to come to the principal drifte of my
discourse, most humbly and earnestly I am to beseech you, that both in respect
of the honor of God, your duty to his Church, the comfort of your children,
and the redres of your own soul, you would seriously consider the terms you
stand in, and way your self in a christian balance, taking for your
cou^terpoise the judgments of God. Take heed in time, that the word Thecel
written of old against Baltazar, and interpreted by Daniel, Dan. 5. be not
verified in you, whose exposition was: you have been poised in the scoale, and
found of to light weight. Remember that you are in the waining, and the date
of your pilgrimage is well nere expired, and now it behooves you to look
toward your country. Your force languisheth, your senses impair, and your
body droupeth, and on every side the ruinous cottage of your faint and feeble
flesh, thretneth fall. And having so many herbingers of death to premonishe you
of your end, how can you but prepare for so dreadful a stranger. The young may
dye quickly, but the old cannot live long. The young men's life by casualty may
be abridged, but the old men's by no physic can be long adiourned: and
therefore if green years sometimes must think of the grave, the thoughts of
sere age should continually dwell in the same. The prerogative of infancy is
innocence, of childhoode reverence, of manhood maturity, and of age wisdom.
And seeing that the chief properties of wisdom are, to be mindful of things
passed careful of things present, and provident of things to come, use now
the privilege of natures talent to the benefitte of your soul, and procure
hereafter to be wise in weldoing, and watchful in foresight of future harms.
To serve the world you are now unable, and though you were hable you have
little cause to be willing, seeing that it never gave you but an unhappy welcome
a hurtful entertainment, and now does abandon you with an unfortunate
farewell. You have long sowed in a field of flint, which could bring you
nothing forth, but a crop of cares, and affliction of spirit, rewarding your
labors with remorse and affording for your gain eternal domages. It is now
more then a seasonable time time, to alter the course of so vnthriuing a
husba^dry, and to enter into the field of Gods Church, in which sowing the
seeds of repentant sorrow, and watering them with the tears of humble
co^trition, you may reap a more beneficial harvest, and gather the fruits of
everlasting comfort. Remember I pray you, that your spring is spent, and your
somer ouerpast: you are now arrived to the fall of leaf, yea and winter
colors have already stained your hoary head. Be not careless (says S.
Augustine) though our loving Lord bear long with offenders. for the longer he
staieth not finding amendment, the sorer will he scourge when he comes to
ludgement. and his patience in so long expecting, is only to lend us respite
to repent, not any way to enlarge us leisure to sin. He that is tossed with
varietye of storms, and cannot come to his desired port, makes not much way,
but is much tormoiled: So he that has passed many years, and purchased little
profitte, has had a long being, but a short life. for life is more to be
measured by merittes, the^ by number of days, seeing that most men by many
days do but procure many deaths, and others in a short space attein the life
of infinite ages. What is the body without the soul but a corrupt carcass:
and what the soul without God, but a sepulcher of sin. If God be the way,
the life, and the truth, he that goes without him, strayeth: he that lives
without him, dies: and he that is not taught by him, erreth. Well says S.
Augustine that God is our true and chiefest life, from whom the reuolting is
falling, to whom the returninge is rising, in whom the staying is sure
standing. God is he, from whom to depart is to dye, to whom to repair is to
revive, in whom to dwell is to live. Be not you therefore of those, that
begin not to live, until they be ready to dye, and then after a foes desert,
come to crave of God a friends entertainment. Some think to snatch heaven in a
moment, which the best scarce atteined in the mou^tenance of many years. and
when they have glutted them selves with worldly delites, they would iumpe from
Dives his diet to Lazarus croun, and from the service of Satan to the solacy of
a Saint. But be you well assured, that god is not so penurious of friends, as
to hold him self and his kingdom salable for the refuse and reuersion of
their lives, who have sacrificed the principal thereof to his enemies, and
their own brutishe appetites, then only ceasing to offend, when hability of
offending is taken from them. True it is, that a thief may be saved upon the
cross, and mercy found at the last gasp. But well says saint Augustine that
though it be possible, yett is it scarce credible, that his death should find
favor, whose whole life has earned wrath, and that his repentance should be
accepted, that more for fear of hell, and love of him self, then for love of
God or lothsomnes of sin, cries for mercy. Wherefore good Sir make no longer
delays, but being so near the breaking up of your mortal house, take time
before extremity to satisfy Gods Justice. Though you suffered the bud to be
blasted, and the flower to fade, though you permitted the fruit to be perished,
and the leaves to dry up, yea though you let the bougheswither, and the body
of your tree grow to decay: yett alas keep life in the root, for fear
least the wholle become fuel for hell fire. for surely whersoeuer the tree
falls, there shall it be, whether it be to south or north, heaven or hell,
and such sap as it brings such fruit shall it ever bear. Death has already
filed from you the better part of your natural forces, and has left you now
to the lees and remissailes of your wearish and dyinge days: the remainder
whereof, as it cannot be long, so does it warn you speedilye to ransom your
former losses. For what is age but the calendes of death, and what imports
your present weakness, but an earnest of your approaching dissolution? You are
now impathed in your final voyage, and not far of from the stint and period of
your course: and therefore be not dispurueied of such appurtenances as are
behoofull in so perplexed and perilous a journey. Death in it self is very
fearful, but much more terble in regard of the judgment that it summoneth us
unto. If you were laid on your departing bed, burdened with the heavy load of
your former trespasses, and goared with the sting and prick of a festered
conscience: If you felt the crampe of death wresting your heart stringes and
ready to make the rufull divorce between body and soul: If you lay panting
for breath, and swimming in a cold and fatal sweat, weried with struggling
against your deadly panges: O how much would you give for an hour of repentance
at what rate would you value a days contrition. Then worlds would be
worthles in respect of a little respitte. A short truce would seem more
precious, then the trea sures of Empires. nothing would be so much esteemed as
a trice of time, which now by months and years is lauishly misspent. O how
deeply would it wound your heart, when looking back into your life you
considered many faults committed and not confessed, many good works omitted
and not recovered, your service to God promised and not performed. How
inconsolable were your case, your friends being fled, your senses frighted, your
thoughts amazed, your memory decayed, your whole mind aghast, and no partable
to perform that it should, but only your guilty conscience pestered with
sin, that would continually vpbreid you with most bitter accusations. what
would you think when stripped out of your mortal weed, and turned both out
of the service and housrome of this world, you were forced to enter into
uncouth and strange paths, and with unknown and ugly company to be co^uented
before a most severe judge, carrying in your own conscience your enditement
written, and a perfitte register of all your misdeedes: when you should see him
prepared to pass the sentence upon you, against whom you had transgressed, and
the same to be your vmpier, whom by so many offenses you had made your enemy:
When not only the Deuells, but even the Angels should plead against you, and
your self maugre your will be your sharpest appeacher. What would you do in
these dreadful exigentes? When you saw that ghastly dungeon and huge golfe of
hell, breaking out with most fear full flames: When you saw the weeping and
gnashing of teeth, the rage of those hellish monsters, the horror of the
place, the rigor of the pain, the terror of the company, and the eternity of
all these punishments, would you then think the^ wise, that would daly in so
weighty matters, and idly play away the time allotted to prevent these
intolerable calamities? would you the^ account it secure, to nurse in your
bosom so many serpents as sins, or to foster in your soul so many
malicious accusers as mortal faltes? Would yo not then think one life to
little to do penance for so many iniquities, every one whereof were enough to
cast you into those everlasting and unspeakable torments? Why then do you not
at the least deuote that small remnant and surplusage of these your latter
days, procuring to make an atonement with God and to free your conscience
from such corruption, as by your schism and fall has crept into it. Those
very eyes that read this discourse, and that very understanding that conceiueth
it, shall be sighted and certain witnesses of the rehearsed things. In your
own body shall you experience those dedly agonies, and in your soul shall you
feelinglye find those terrible fears, yea and your present estate is in
danger of the deepest harms, if you do not the sooner recover your self into
the fold and family of Gods Church. What have you gotten by being so long
customer to the world, but false ware suitable to the shop of such a merchant,
whose traficke is toil, whose wealth trashe, and whose gain miserye? what
interest have you reaped, that may equal your decrementes in grace and
vertew, or what could you find in a vale of tears parageable to the favor of
God, with the loss whereof you were contented to buy it: You cannot be now
inueigled with the passions of youth, which making a partial estimate of
things set no distance between counterfeite and current. For they are now
worn out of force by tract of time, or fallen in reproof by trial of their
folly. It cannot be fear that leads you amiss, seeing it were to unfitting
a thing, that the craua^t cowardice of flesh and blood, should daunte the
prowess of an intelligent person, who by his wisdom can-not but discern, how
much more cause there is to fear God then man, and to stand in more awe of
perpetual, then of temporal penalties. If it be an ungrounded presumption of
the mercy of God, and the hope of his assistance at the last plunge, (the
ordinarye lure of the Deuell to reclaim sinners from the pursuit of vertew)
it is to palpable a collusio^ to misleade a sound and sensed man, howsoever it
prevail with sick and affected judgments. Who would rely eternal affairs
upon the gliding slippernes and running stream of our uncertain life? or who
but one of diste^pered wits, would offer fraud to the decipherer of all
thoughts, with whom dissemble we may to our cost, but to deceive him it is
impossible. Shall we esteem it cunning to rob the time from him and bestow
it on his enemies, who keeps tale of the least minutes of our life, and will
examine in the end how each moment has been employed. It is a preposterous
policy in any wise conceit, to fight against God till our weapons be blunted,
our forces consumed, our limbs impotent, and our best spent, and then when we
fall for faintnes, and have fought our selves almost dead to presume of his
mercy, the wounds both of his sacred body, so often rubbed and renewed by our
sins, and every parcel of our own so sundry and diverse ways abused, being
so many whetstones and incentiues to edge and exasperat his revenge against us.
It were a strange piece of art, and a very exorbitant course, while the ship
is sound, the Pilote well, the sailers strong, the gale favorable, and the Sea
calm, to lie idle at rode, burning so seasonable wether: and when the ship
leaked, the Pilot were sick, the Mariners faint, the storms boisterous, and
the Sea a tormoile of outrageous surges, then to lanch forth, to hoise up
sails, and to set out for a voyage into far countries. Yett such is the
skill of these evening repenters, who though in the soundnes of health, and in
the perfitte use of reason, they cannot resolve to cut the gables and weigh the
anckers, that withold the^ from God, nevertheless they feed them selves with
a strong persuasion, that when their senses are astonished, their wits
distracted, their understanding dusked, and both the body and mind racked and
tormented with the throbs and gripes of a mortal sickness, the^ forsooth will
they think of the weightiest matters, and become sudden Saints, when they
are scarce able to behave them selves, like reasonable creatures. If neither the
canon, civil, nor common law allows, that a man perished in judgment,
should make any testament or bequeste of his temporal substance, being then
presumed to be less then a man: how can he that is amated with the inward
garboils of an unsettled conscience, distrained with the wringing fittes of his
dying flesh, maimed in all his habilities, and circled in with so strange
encombrances, be thought of dew discretion to dispose of his chiefest jewel,
which is his soul, and to dispatch the wholle menage of all eternity, and of
the treasures of heaven, in so stormy and short a spurt. No no they that will
loyter in seed time, and begin only to sow, when others reap: They that
will riotte out their health, and cast their accountes when they can scarcely
speak: They that will slumber out the day and enter their journey when the
light does fail the^. Let them blame their own folly, if they dye in debt,
and eternal beggars, and fall hedlong into the lapse of endless perdition.
Let such harken to S. Ciprians lesson. Let (says he) the greeuousnes of our
sore, be the sure of our sorrow. Let a deep wound have deep and dilligent
cure. Let no man's contrition be less then his crime. Think thou that our
Lord can be so soon appeased, who^ with perfidious words thou have denied,
whom less then thy patrimony thou have esteemed, whose temple with
sacriligious corruption thou have defiled. Thinckest thou easily to recover his
favor, whom thou have avouched not to be thy Master? We must rather most
instantly entreat, we must pass the day in mourning, the night in watching,
and weeping, our wholl time in plainfull lamentinge. We must fall prostrate
upon the ground humbling our selves in sackclothe and ashes. And having lost
the garment of Christ, we should be unwilling to be clothed with any other
having farsed our stomachs with the viande of the Deuell, we should now desire
to fast from all earthly food. We should ply good works to purge our offenses,
we should be liberal in alms to avoid the death of our souls, that Christ
may receive, that the persecutour would have spoiled, neither ought that
patrimony to be kept or phansied, with which a man has been ensnared and
vanquished. Not every short sighe will be a sufficient satisfaction, nor every
knock a warrant to get in. Many cry Lord Lord and are not accepted. The
foolish Virgins knocked, and were not admitted. Judas had some sorrow and yet
dyed desperate. Forslowe not says the holy ghost to be converted unto God,
and linger not of from day to day. for sodeinly will his wrath come, and in the
time of revenge he will destroy thee. Let no man soiourne long in his sinful
securitye, nor post over his repentance till fear enforce him unto it. Let us
frame our premises as we would find our conclusion, and endeavor to live as we
are desirous to dye. Shall we offer the main crop to the Deuell, and set God
to glean the reproof of his harvest? Shall we gorge the Deuell with our
fairest fruits, and turn God to feed on the filthy scraps of his leauings?
How great a folly were it when a man pineth away in a perilous languour, to
provide gorgeous apparel, to bespeake sumptuous furniture, and take order for
the rearing of stately buildings, and never thinking of his own recovery, to
let the disease take root within him? were it not the like vanity, for a
Prince to dote so far upon his subject, as neglecting his own regalty, to
busy him self wholly in advancing his servant? Thus says S. Chrysostom do
they, that when their soul has surfeited with all kind of sin and is
drenched in the depth of infinite diseases, without any regard thereof, labor
their wits in setting forth her garment, and in pampering the body with all
possible delights. And whereas the soul should have the sovereignty, and the
body follow the sway of her direction, scruile senses, and lawless appetites
do rule her as superiors, and she is made a vassal in her own dominions.
What is there says S. Augustine in thy meanest necessaries, that thou
would not have good? Thou would have a good house, good furniture, good
apparel, good fare, good cattle, and not so much but thy hose and thy shoes
thou will seek to have good. Only thy life and poor soul, thy principal
charge, and of all other things the most worthy to be best, thou art content
should be naught, and ly cancring and rusting in all kind of euelles. O
unspeakable blindness. can we prefer our shoes before our soul, refusing to we
are an evil shoe, and not caring to carry an ugly and deformed soul? Alas let
us not set so little by that, which God prised so much. Let us not rate our
selves at so base a peniworth, being in truth of so pereles dignity. If the
soul be such, that not all the gold and treasure of the world, nor any thing
of less worth then the blood and life of almighty God, was able to buy it. If
not all the deinties that wit can devise, or heaven and earth afford, but
only Gods own precious body was by him deemed a repast fit to feed it. If
not all the creatures of this, nor millions of new worlds, if so many more
were created, but only the illimitable goodness and majesty of God can
satisfy the desire, and fill the compass and capacity of it, who but of lame
judgment, or peruers will, yea who but of an incredulous mind, and pitiles
spirit could set more by his shoes, then he did by his soul, or be contented
to suffer so noble a paragon, so many months and years to ly chanelled in
ordure, and mired in all sin. Can we not see our servant sick, but we allow
him a Phisician, our horse diseased but we send for a leach, nor our garment
torn, but we will have one to mend it? and can we so much malign out soul,
as to let it dye for want of cure, and seeing it mangled with so many vices,
never seek any to restore it to the wonted inte grity? Is our servant nearer,
our beast more precious, and our coat dearer, then our own soul? If any
should call us Epicures Aethestes, rebels unto God, or murderers of souls, we
would take it for an intolerable reproach, and think it a most disgraceful
and opprobrious calumniatio^. But to live like Epicures, to sin like Aethists
to struggle against Gods callinges, and like violent rebels to scorn his
commandments: yea and with dailye and damnable wounds, barbarously to stab our
infortunat souls, this we account no contumely, we reckon for no discreditt,
yea rather we register it in the vaunte of our chief praises. O ye sons of
men, how long will you carry this heavy heart, aliking vanity, and seeking lies?
how long will children love the follies of infancye, and sinners run
careless and wilful to their ruin? Will you keep your chicken from the
kite, your lamb from the wolf, your faune from the hou^d. Dare you not suffer
a spider in your bosom, or a toade to come nere you, and can you nestle in
your soul so many vipers as vices, and permit it to be so long chewed, and
weried with the poisoned jaws, and tuskes of the Deuell? And is our soul so
vain a substance as to be had in so little esteem? Had Christ made shipwreck
of his wisdom, or was he in a rage of passion when he became a wandering
pilgrimme exiling him self from the comfortes of his Godhead, and passing
three and thirty years in pain and penury for the be hoof of our souls? Was
he surprised with a rauing fit, when in the tragedy of his passion so bloodily
inflicted, and so patitiently accepted, he made his body as a cloud, to resolve
into shouers of innocent blood, and suffered the dearest veins of his heart to
be lanced, to give full issue to the price of our souls redemption? Or if
Christ did not err, nor deem amiss, when it pleased him to redeem us with
so excessive a ransom, then what should we judge of our monstrous abuse, that
sell our soul to the Deuell for every vain delighte, and rather adventure
the hazard thereof, then of a selye pittance of worldly pelf. O that a creature
of so incomparable a price, should be in the demaine of so unnatural keepers,
and that which is in it self so gracious and amiable, that the Angels and
Saints delight to behold it, (as S. Chrysostom says) should by sin be
fashioned into so loathsome and disguised shapes as to become a horror to
heaven, and a sutely pheere for the foulest fiendes. Alas if the care of our
own harms move us no more, but that we can still be so barbarous to the better
portion of our selves, let us at the lest fear to injury an other party, very
careful and ielious over it: who will never endure so deep an impeachment of
his interest to pass unrevenged. We must remember, that our soul is not only
a part of us, but also the temple, the paradise, and spouse of Almightye god,
by him in baptism garnished, stored, and endowed with most graciouse
ornaments. And how think you, he can brook, to see his temple profaned, and
turned into a den of Deuels, his paradise displanted, and altered into a
wilderness of serpents, his spouse defloured, and become an adulteress to
his utter enemies? Durst we offer such usage to our Princes, yea or to our
farmers daughter? would not fear of the law, and popular shame, disturne us
from it? And shall not the reverend Majesty of almighty God, and the vnrebated
justice of his angry sword, terrify us from offering the like to his own
spouse? Do we think God either so impotent that he cannot, so base and sottish
that he will not, or so weak witted that he knows not how to wreake him
self upon so conte^ptuous and daring offenders? Will he so neglect and lose
his honor, which of all things he claims as his chief peculier? Will he
that for the souls sake keeps a reckoninge of our very hears, which are
but the excrementes of her earthly weed, see him self so much wronged in the
principal, and pass it without remo^strance of his just indignation? O dear
Sir remember tha^t the scripture terms it a thing full of horror to fall
into the hands of God, who is able to crush the proud spirittes of the
obstinate, and to make his enemies the footestoole of his feet. Wrestle no
longer against the cries of your own conscience, and the forcible inspirations
that God does send you. Embrace his mercy before the time of rigor, and
return to his Church lest he debar you his kingdom. He cannot have God for
his father, that refuses to profess the Catholic Church for his mother,
neither can he atchiue to the Church triumphant in heaven, that is not a member
of the Church milita^t here in earth.

You have been alas to long an aliant in the tabernacles of sinners, and
straied to far from the fold of Gods flock. Turn now the blaze of your
heart toward the sanctuary of salvation, and the city of refuge, seeking to
recompense your wandering steps trodde^ in error, with a swifte gate and
zealous progress to Christian perfection, and redeming the time because the
days be evil. The full of your springtide (...)


