AN ANSWER TO THAT QVESTION, HOW FAR IT IS LAW FVLL TO FLEE IN THE TIME OF
THE PLAGVE;
Extracted out of a Sermon preached in Alderman-bury, by THOMAS TAILOR.
PROVERBS XXII. III. And hides himself.


Calvin answers this question in one of his Epistles thus: A question rises
from the stupiditie of men without sense of humanity, Whether we may not
avoid the Plague? They would have no man change air, nor avoid contagious and
poisoned places, nor delight in any pleasing prospect, etc. Facessant paradoxa
hujusmodi, querum usus est nos exuere omni sensu. But, this answer being too
short for such as desire to walk by rule, we must consider, first, the
persons; secondly, the reasons; thirdly, the cautions; fourthly, the objections.

First, public persons, whom, by virtue of their special calling, the Church,
or Commonwealth, or the Family, cannot want, may not flee, unless they by
others may competently supply their own absence.

But private persons, whose Calling the Public may for a time want, may avoid
the danger: for,

Psalm. 91.
It is lawful to avoid an arrow coming upon us; and not to avoid it if we can,
makes us accessory to our own death. But this is an arrow coming on us, and
by good means to be avoided: it cannot be less lawful, than to avoid fire,
or sword, or poison.



David used many caves and hiding places: in a short time he fled from Saul
into twelve several hiding places; To King Achis, to the King of Moab, and to
the King of the Philistims, into the cave of Adullam, the Grove of Hareth, the
Desert of Ziph, of Maon, of Engedi, of Paran, etc. Yea, Christ and his
Disciples fled oftentimes from danger: and why not we till our hour also be
come, that in the mean time we may be the more serviceable to God and his
Church? Nay, God himself bids Elias go flee and hide himself from
persecution by the Brook Cherith. He could have kept him safe from Ahab and
Iezabel without his fleeing, in the midst of them; but he teaches us what
godly men may do in the like cases.



David prayed the removal of the plague, 2 Samuel 24.1 Kings 8. If thou send a
Plague and pestilence, and thy people pray in this house, then hear out of
heaven, etc. Number. 16.48.
So Aaron prayed, and stood between the living and dead, and the plague ceased.

Acts 27.31.
Not to converse with the infected, and to depart from the infected place so
far as salva conscientia and charitate we may. Paul believed none should
perish in the ship, according to the word of God, yet must they not be saved
unless they abide in the ship: for there must be shipmen to guide and govern
the ship to land, as it came to pass.

Thirdly, the cautions or conditions in fleeing the Plague.



John Baptist wishes men, by fleeing the cause, to flee wrath to come: 2 King.
14.19.
otherwise, Amaziah flees to Lachish; but death flees after him, and overtakes
him, because he fled not from sin the cause of his misery. For it is not change
of place, but of mind; not of bodies, but vices, which is the true refuge and
sanctuary. In returning consider, that faith and repentance must be your rest.
No, say they, we will flee upon horses. Esa. 30.15.
Yea, but your enemies horses shall be swifter than yours: no flight swift
enough to save him that will carry his sins with him. The first step in
fleeing, must be to flee thy self.



Sarah in the door of the Tent to entertain that messenger, and be ready for
death whenever the hour is come: nor yet incredulity or weakness of faith
force thee. But let faith lead thee forth, and let it be no loser. Noah by
faith went into the Ark, and staid, yea, till God led him out.



1. It follows not, because it is the hand of God, that it is not contagious.
Was not the leprosy a rod and scourge of God? and yet was it not infectious?
2. It follows not, because it is the hand of God, we must not use lawful
means to avoid it: for so is famine, sword, fire, war, the hand of God; and
yet who can deny we may use lawful means to avoid them all? Beside, it was the
law of God most carefully to avoid the Leprosy, and not to come near persons
infected? and why not the plague or other contagious diseases? Balaam's Ass,
seeing the drawn sword of the Angel, will shun it.




1. The providence of God, being the first cause, takes not away the second
causes, but stablisheth them, because he stablisheth and executes his decrees
by means and second causes: and it were a tempting of God, to refuse the
lawful and allowed means of preserving life, by which God ordinarily saves
whom he will save. 2. God indeed knows how many shall be smitten: and if we
knew the secret will of God concerning our selves, then were our wills to be
surrendered to Gods will: and an heart affected with Gods glory, will be readier
for death than life, if God reveal to it, that to die is better than to live.
But not knowing this, we are not loosed from the use of lawful means for the
preservation of our lives, till we see our hour to be come. 3. God knows and
has decreed how many shall fall by the sword in war, and yet who will say it
is unlawful to use weapons to defend our selves, and fight for our lives? So
God knows how many shall fall by famine, in time of dearth and scarcity: but is
it therefore unlawful to buy food to preserve our lives? Did not he command
Jacob to go and buy food in Egypt, whom he could have preserved without
means, but would not, because means were then, though far off.








We must abide in our callings, unless we be necessarily thrust out: but this
is no willing desertion, but a suspending of the exercise of it for a greater
and higher reason. For if for some occasions a man may leave his calling many
months, as for health, profit, pleasure; much more to save his life. 2. We
have promises to be kept in our way: but promises make not men slothful, nor
foolishly rash and temerarious, to thrust themselves into probable and certain
danger; for that is not our way.




1. Charity seeks not it self wholly or only, but yet destroys not it self.
Ordinary charity, in saving himself, seeks Gods glory, and the Churches
good, and not himself only. 2. Charity so respects the sick, as the sound
be not neglected: to comfort one, we may not hazard many; nor so look forth, as
forgetting our own home. 3. Charity seeks the good of several persons, but so
as it prefers the safety of the Universal. That is inordinate charity, when
other good means may be used for the comfort of the afflicted: a man casts
himself into manifest danger, and with himself, his family, if he be private,
and the Church and Commonwealth, if he be public.


This question was excellently beaten out between Zanchius and a godly pastor
named Curiensis. This pastor held it unlawful to separate from the Infected,
or to leave the places infected; and commended M. Bullinger, who being sent for
by a woman infected, went to her, and brought home the infection into his
family, and presently lost his wife and two daughters. Now M. Zanchie commended
the charity of M. Bullinger, but did not altogether approove his fact, because
the woman might have been otherwise comforted, than by his going to her bed
side, and sets down some directions, after long debating. That good pastor,
being too ventrous, was taken with the plague; and when he was near death,
cried out, O utinam Zanchij consilium secutus essem, Would to God I had
followed M. Zanchius his counsel.



Abraham and Jacob are in the famine with the Canaanites. The good Israelites
as well as the bad are under the oppressions of the Egyptians. Caleb and Joshua
bare the sin of Israel forty years with the murmurers. Elias was afflicted
in the hard times procured by Ahab and Ieazhel,) but are ever hid. For, 1.
Distinguish of punishments. Some are revenges; some, remedies, exercises of
grace, virtues keepers, as Aquinas calls them. The prudent are ever hid from
the former: but it were not good to be free from the latter. 2. Distinguish of
persons punished. Some are vessels of wrath, to whom even benefits are plagues:
some are vessels of mercy, to whom all evils work to good. These are ever so
far hid, as that the Lord never hides his face from them, but for a moment, but
that to embrace them with everlasting compassion. 3. Distinguish the manner of
hiding. The prudent cannot so hide himself, as to be free from feeling of
trouble: but he is freed so, as that he shall not fall in them; or if he fall,
God puts under his hand for a seasonable deliverance. But how are they that are
slain with the sword, or die of the plague, delivered?


Many are the troubles of the godly, and great: but the Lord delivers them out
of all. But deliverance is threefold.

1. Some are delivered temporally, that others may see and praise GODS goodness,
as Daniel from the den, the three children from fire, Ezechiah from the plague,
that fathers might tell their children, etc. 2. Some proportionally; not by
pulling them out of danger, but by pulling out the sting, and whatsoever is
hurtful, and arming them with strength, patience, and sufficient grace, that
in darkness they see light. 3. Some he delivers eternally from danger, by
suffering them to be overcome, and taken away by sword, plague, etc. and
deals with his vessels of honor, as we with ours: which when we would scour
the brightest, we oil, and soil, and foul them as if they would never be
clean again. And as with his natural Son: he will not remove the cup, till he
have drunk the last drop. Yet he leaves them not comfortless, but gives them
by death freedom and victory over death and deadly things; that when they are
slam, they are not overcome, but more than Conquerors. And one of these ways
the Lord ever hides his Children.
LONDON printed by T. P. for John Bartlet.


