The book of English, and Spanysshe.
THe First Chapyter is of god, of the Trinytie, of power, and of rythes.
EL primero Capi. esde Dios / y de la Trinidad / y de la potencia / y de la
requeza.
God Dios Godheade holy deidad santa the Trinite Trinidad Father son Padre
Fiso holy Ghost. santo espirito. Lord God Sen^or Dios savior redemer
saluador redemptor power mighty potestad potente might very rich potencia muy
rico rich poor requeza pobre pouerte pobreza a poor man pobrezillo Idols
Idolos almyghtye. omnipotente.
The.ii. chapter of the Paternoster and Aue Maria.
OVre Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name, let come thy kingdom,
thy will be done, even to in earth as it is in heaven, our daily bread, give
us this day, and forgive us our dettes, as we forgive our detters, and led us
not in to temptacion.
El.ii. capi. del Paternoster y dell Aue Maria.
PAdre nuestro qui eres / en los cielos sanctificado sea eftu nombre venga el
tuo reyno / faga se tu voluntad assy en el cielo como en la tierra / nuestro
pan / cotidiano dadle a nosotros / oy y perdonna a nosotros nuestra deuda como
nosotros perdo namos a nuestros deudores y no no^ triagas en t^ntacion.

But deliver us from all evil. Amen. Mas lifra nos de mal. Amen. All hayle
Marye full of Grace, the lord is with the. Blessed be you among women, and
blessed be the fruit of thy womb, Jesus Christ. Aue Maria plena de gracia el
Sennor contigo benedita tu / enter las mugeres y benedito el fruyto de tu
vientre Jesus Christo. Saint Mary mother of God, pray for us poor Sinners, now
and in the hour of our death. Amen. Sancta Maria madre de Dios tuego per
nosotros miseros peccadores agora y en la bora del nuestre muerte. Amen.
Wherefore Porque Why not porque no therefore por esso for naught por nada for
what cause por que causa let it be so above a sa bienda iuso beneth es atiba
suddenly soon subicamente presto now gladly, with gora de buena a good will
voluntad openly publicamente from hence de aqui from this side Alli fro yonder
de alli behind de tras before de lante ouerwharte altru^e without de fuera
from the side de lado after the length lue^go within a little dentro poco
Inoughe assaz to much assaz mucho much mucho with me comigo without me fyn
mi good chepe vuen marcado how en que maneta where a donde in what place en
que luger ye surely assi seguramente ye more mattavien by the myddest pro
medio thankefully de vuena voluntad one time Vna vez second time vna autra vez
many ways. diuerso modo.
The.iii. Chapyter is of speches.
El.iii. Cap. es de las palavras.
Evil pleased Mal^ contento I am evil plesed yo soy mal contento I am not
worthy yo no soy digno of my fas^hion Ami manera do after my mind Hazea mi
voluntad I will not No quiero wherefore will thou not Por que ne quieres It
pleseth me not No me plaze It pleseth me well Bien me plaze I am begyled Soy
agau^a^o Of whom De quien Of a knave De un vellaco Abide tarry let me do it
Espera dexa me hazer It is a man of his mind Labe^udo I marvel sore, in
doing such a thing Me patece muy estra ino vazer semiantes cosas It is so
who would have believed it Assy es quien lo cryesse I am sorye for his deeds
Duelo me de sus hechos Be pacyente Tene pacientia It is not true No es verdad
Me think not Me paresce de no Thou lie Tumi^ntes No verlye No a la fe I
believe the not No lo creo Why not Porque no It is done lor naught Es hecho por
nada aquello I will not do it for naught Nolo hazer por nado He was Idle all
the day through Ha folgado to do el die It is evil done Es mal hecho It is
well done Es bien hecho He is above Es ariba He is not at home No esta en casa
Where is he Donde esta I can not tell No se Bow the down Baxate Arise go
hence Leuanta te ve te What wylt thou Que quieres I will nothing No quito Sit
down Sienta te Give me rowme if thou wylt Da me lugerst tu quieres I thank
the y os lo agradesco Sit still Sienta quedo Go soon Va a priessa Cause it be
made Fas lo rehazar I have done it Io lo hize I have not don it No lo hize Thou
have don it Tu lo heziste Thou know Well who did it Tu lo sabes bienqui en
lo hizo It is fulle Est alleno It is emptye Est a vazio Come with me Ven co
migo Help me Ayuda me Show me him Muestra me le That shall I do yo lo quiero
hazer I have seen him yo le he visto I know him yo se cognosco In the fyelde
En la placa I am sure that they spoke of the and me yo foy cierto qui esse
habla de mi y de ti The right hand Lamano drecha The left hand La manoyz
queerda Who loves the Qui en te ama Begin thou Commienca Above measure Sobre
mesura What did thou with the money Que feziste tu con aquelos dincros Yet
have thou not given me my thing again Tu hasta agora ne me rendiste mi cosa I
shall give you it shortly yo to lo volue represto Look you do it soon, for I
may tarry no longer Guarda que lo hagas presto / por que yo no puedo mas
seperar He will kill me Aquell me quiere matar He is my deadlye enemy Aquell
es mi enemy go mortal He hates me and I wot not for what cause Aquell me
quere mal y no se por que causa Draw fast Tira fuerte Seek this Pruebaesta
Consydre it well before thou do it Piensa bien anteque lo hagas He thought
well upon it, when he saw it before his eyes Accorda base muy bien quando vino
I will prove it yo quiero tenter He will not Este no quere Wylt thou come
Quieres tu venit I will come now yo veendre agora Abide a little Especa vnpoco
Come thou Vines tu He sygheth sore Faze grandes sospiros He is vexed Es
turbado I hope Tengo esperanca I am content Soy contento It is to dear Mucho
caro It repents me Pesame What call ye this Como sellama aquella This man
wylbe very sure Aquell quiere ser bien surego I could not well tell it the No
te so sabria bien dezir Se that thou fall in no syckenes Guarda te de caer en
asguna enferme dad It becomes me to weep Conuienne me que Ilore It was need
for me to weep Ea necessario que Ilore Thou mockest me Burlas me All hayle
Dios vos salve God give you a good day Dios os de buenas Dias A good year
Buenos an^os God help you Dios vos ayude Much good do it you Buena pro os
haga I will yo quiero Thou would Tu quezist^ He will Aquell quiere I will do
it Quiero hazer I have done yo hize Go, stand Ve / esta Thou let no man
sleep Tu a niuno dexa^ dormyr Why? Por que? For thou do nothing all night
but snorke Por que toda la noche no hazes sino roncar Go sleep Ve a dormir Not
yet Aun non Go, for thou must rise to morrow be times Ve que es necessario que
te luau^tes man^ana / en buena hora What to do A que hazer Thou must bear
letters to Mylan Es necessidad que p^stole las letras a Milan My Leg greueth
me so that I cannot go on foot Tanto me duele la pierna que no pudo caminer a
pie Take a horse Toma e cauallo Chose me one Busque me vno Thou have an ea^sye
life Tu has bueno ti empo I roode Fui a cauello He went a fot^ Fue a pie I have been in that place yo fui na aquel luger Se that it be right Mira que sea
iguall I will go from hence yo quiero ander de aqui I may remain no longer No
puedo restar mas Thou byndeste to great a ferdell, you shalt not be able to
bear it Tu attas muy gran has no lepodros Ileuer I shall bear it well Portero
bien Thou shalt se Tu lo veras Let me care for that Dexa el cuyda do a my Give
it me Da me a mi Open the door A bre la puerta Give me the keye Da me la Ilabe
Will thou give it me Quieres me lo dar I will not give it the No te lo quiero
a tydar Give here Da ca I can not open it No lo se obrir Shut the door Cierra
la puerta Keep this Tien esso I am hungrye Tengo appetito de comer Art thou
confessed As te confessado From whence comes this De que viene eso He is
vannyshed Esta endestierro Go and draw wine Trahe dell vino Understand thou
Entendes tu Speak yt I may understand the Habla que tu entienda It belongs
not to the Eo es vuestto It is his Es suyo How much cost it Cue vale What be
tokeneth that Que significa esto Somthynge betokens it Algo significa Fair
work Obra harmosa It is true Es verdad I bare it gladly yo lo a softido de
buena gana I meddle not Ne me empaches After a little time, while De aquia paco
tie^po Of his own cost A su costa My name Nombro mio Thy name Nombre tuyo In
your name, on your behalf En nombre vuestro The name of god Nombre de Dios I
know not how they call him No se como sellama How thynkest thou Que te parece
Deal thou it before us all Part tuen presentia de nosotros todos The time is
not yet gone No es passado ell tiempo What is your pleasure Que os plaze Every
thing Toda cosa One thing Vna cosa A good Understanding Buen ente^dimiento
She holds me Essa me tiene It is shame He verguen ca If thou let me not go,
I shall tell thy father Sy no dexa / yo lo dite a tu padre Thou know not what
I have to do No sabes tu que he de hazer Have ye not yet sold your gere or
wares Aun no haues venoi do vuetras cofas Yes God be thanked Sy, gracias a Dios
What will ye bye I will bye some thing also Que quetroys comprar, que yo tam
bien querria comprar alguna cosa If ye knew any good thing Se teneis alguna
co sa buena Yea, I know spices, and other things Assy species / y otras cosas
Come with me, tell me truth Vent comigo dime la verdad What News think ye
upon Que de nueuo recuardas And for ever world without end. Amen. Sempeterno
en Syglos de syglos. Amen.
The.iiij. chapyter of the.x. Commandments.
El.iiii. Ca. de los diez mandamientos.
Ten precepts of GOD. Die^ mandamientos de Dios. Believe in one GOD Creo in
un Dios Love God Amaa Dios Love thy neighbor as thy self Ama al proximo tui
o como a ti mesmo Halowe the Sabbothe Buarda la fiesta Honor Father and
mother Honora padre y madre Thou shalt not kill No matares Thou shalt not
steal No furtaras Thou shalt not break wedlock No cud^ciatas Thou shalt not
bear false wytnes No dygas falso testimonio Thou shalt not coueyte another
man's good No codicies la cofa aiena Thou shalt not desire another man's wife.
No codicies la mugee de otro.
The.v. Chapyteris of the seven works of mercy.
El.v. Capit. de las seyte obras de miseri cordia.
The seven works of mercy. Seyte obras de misericordia. TO Feed the hungrye
MAntener los ambrientos To give the thurstye drink Dar de Bener a los
sedientos To cloth ye naked Ve feiti los desnudos To vysyte y^ sick Visiter
los enfermos To comfort the prisoners Confortar los encarcelados To bury the
deed Enterer los muertos And to lodge the strangers A coger los pelegrinos.
The.vi. Chapyter is of the seven deedly sins.
El.vi. Capi. de^ los seyte peccados mortales.
The seven deedlye sins. Seyte peccados mortales.
Pride Soberuia Lecherye Lux^ria Coueytousnes Auaricia Wrath Ira Glotonye Gula
Envy Inu^dia Slouthfulnes. Acc^dia.
The.vii. Chapter is of simple Nombre.
El. Cap. es de simple Numero.
ONE Vno Two Dos Three Trees Four Quatro Five Cinco Six Seys Seven Seyte
Eight Ocho Nine Nueue Ten Diez Aleuen Onze Twelve Dose Thyrtene Treze
Fouretene Quatorze Fyftene Quinze Syxetene Dieze seys Seuentene Dieze e seyte
Eyghtene Dieze e ocho Nynetene Dieze e nueue Twentye Veynte One and twentye
Veynte vno Two and twenty Veynte dos Three and twenty Veynte trees Four and
twentye Veynte quatro Five and twenty Veynte cinco Six and twenty Veynte seys
Seven and twenty Vyente seyte Eight and twentye Veynte ocho Nine and twenty
Veynte nueue Thyrtye Treynte Fortye Quarente Fyftye Cinquenta Sextye Sessenta
Seuentye Setenta Eyghtye Ochenta Nynetye Nouenta A hundred Ciento Two hundred
Dozentos Three hundred Trezientos Four hundred quatrozientos Five hundred
quinientos A thousand Myss Two thousand Dos myll Three thousand Trees myll A
thousand times thousand. Myll myllares.
The.viij. Chapyter is of time, year, month, weke and day.
El.viii. Ca. es dell tiempo / anno / mes / samana / y dia.
Time Tiempo Worldely Mundano Christen El Christiano The year Anno The month
El mes The weke La semana The day El dia An hour La hora Mydnyght La media
noche To morrow La manana The evening La tarde The noone day Mediodia The
spring Verano Harvest Autumno Whytsondaye Pascua de mayo Aduente Aduenimiento
Christmas Natiuidad Newyere tide Circumcisio The.xii. day Trees teys Sroftyde
Catnes tollendas Assencion Ascencion Myd lent Media quaresma Mau^dy thursday
Iueues santo Easter Pascua An holydaye Fiesta workedaye Dia de la brar To
labor Labrar
Sunday Domyngo Mondaye Lunes Teusdaye Martes Wednesdaye Miercoles Thursdaye
Iueues Frydaye Viernes Saturdaye Sabbato Yesterdaye Air To make peace Patto
fazer O that it must be done, the thing that pleases me. A mi voluntad falta
que se haga foque me plaze.
The.ix. Chapyter of servants
El.ix. Capitul. de los seruidores.
A foot man Pon A servant Mo^^ A maiden Moca To serve Seruir A young man
Mancebo Young men Mancebos A Child Mochacho Children Mochachos A man child
Varon A woman child. Mochacha.
The.x. Chapyter of Graunde father, and all the kynted.
El x. Capit. de lo bisaguello / y to do el parentesco.
Graundfather Bysaguello Graundmother Aguelo A Father Padre A Mother Madre A
stepfather Padrino A stepmother Madrastra A Son Et hiio A daughter Hiia A
stepsonne El a^iado A stepdoughter La ahiiada A Brother El hermano A Sister La
hermana A bastard son El bastardo A Bastard daughter La bastarda A kynseman
El pariente A frynde El amigo A Tutoure El tutor An Uncle El tyo An Aunte La
tya An Heir El heredero A neighbor El proximo An husband El maarido An
huswyfe La muger A woman La hembra A wife La muger Our maystres Nuestra muger A
Vyrgyn La donzelia An hondmayden Moca An whore. Putan.
The xi. Chapyter of Houssholde stuff and clothes
El.xi. Capitu. e^ del apareso casa y vestido.
Houssholde s^uffe. Apero de casa A coote Savo A sherte Camisa Breeches Braga
An hatte Chapeo A hoode Capa A sleue Magna A Partlet Collar Hosen Cascas Shoes
Capatos Slyppers Galochas Sockes Pantoflos A gyrdle Cinta Doublet Iube^^
Lynynge Ensorto A clock Manto Furre Pelleta A Purse Alhaia A Pearser to bore
through Hurador furada^ A garmente Vestidura A cheyne of gold Cananedora A
Ring Anillo A Glove Guantes Points. Correa agueati.
The.xij. Chapyter of bread, and Wine, and other things to be eaten.
El.xii. capi. es dell pan y / del (...) / y de todas sas cosos / de comer.
Bread Pan Wynt Vino Vynegre Vinagre Verioyce Agraz Mustarde Mostaza Fiesshe
Carne Fat Gordo A puddynge Gurduta Salt Sall Butter Longaniza Cheese
Manteca, queso Milk Leche Buttermylke Leche quasada Cream Nata de leche
Potage Cosina To eat Comer To make goo^ chere Triumphamos To drink Beuer
Adronkerde Boracho To sleep Dormir To arise Leuentar To go to bed Id a dormir
Brekefaste Cosacion a Dinner Comer a Rear dinner la merienda To eat at after
Noone Merendar We will break our fast Queremos fazer colacion God be thanked.
Adios gratias.
The.xiii. Chapter of the Deuell, of hell and of purgatory.
El.xiii. Ca. es los Diabolos / y dell inferno / y dell purgatorio.
The Deuell Diabolo Evil spyrite El spirito maligno Enemy everlasting death
Ennemigo eterna Muerte Hell Infierno Purgatory Purgatorio In the dark En
obscuro Light la luz, lumbra Pain Pena Torment Tormento Cursed Maldito
Dampened Dannado Cleansed Purgado Chastened Castygado To chasten. Castigar.
The.xiiii. Cha of gold, silver, and of all other metales yt may be cast.
El.xiiii Ca. es del Oro / y plata / y de to das las cosas que se deshazen.
Gold Oro Gyited Dorado Sylurt Plata Silver vessel Plateria Copper Cobre
Tynne Estanno Scomme of silver Peltrez Latton Laton Iron Fero Stele Acciell a
Kettell Calderon a Nail Clauos A Nedle Aguias a Thymble. Dedall.
The.xv. Chapter is of spyres.
El.xv. Capi. es de le espezia.
P^per Pimenta Gynger Gyngybre Nutmegges Nu^s muscada Clowes Clauos Long
pepper Pimenta luenga Cynamom Canela Incense Encienso Myrre Myrra Sugar Acucar
Safron Acasran Aloepaticum Aloepatico Soap Xabon Cotton sylke Algodon Almondes
Almendra Ryce Arros Rosyne Dua passa Fygges Figo Oil Aseyte Comyne Eomino Anys
Anys Chesnottes Castanna An aple Mancana A pear Pera A nutte Nuez A haselnot.
Auellanas Sylke. Seda.
The.xvi. Chap. of wars, bataylles and players.
El.xvi. Cap. de la guera / y de los Iugadores.
War Guera To just Iustar A pauileon Peuerson An do Exercicio Companies
Esquadras A banner Bandera To make peace Fazer paz Treason Traycion A thief
Ladron A rybalde Dellaco Knavery Vellaqueria A knave Dellaco To bewytche
Encanter The stews Putaria An whore Puta To rob Robar To play Iugar I have
lost.x. gyldens in playenge Perdi.x. floryns iugando That is thy loss Es tu
dagno It had been better for thee, if you haddeste Clothed thy self with that
money Meior fuera que te vestiaras came aquellos dineros Thou say truth Tu
dizes la verdad But so is it not done. Pero no es fecho.
Finis.
Imprinted by me Robert wyer: Dwelling in S. Martyns paryshe, at the sign of
saint John^ Euangelyst beside Charynge Cross.


