THE LAMENTATIONS OF GERMANY.

WHEREIN, As in a Glass, we may behold her miserable condition, and read the
woeful effects of sin.

Composed by an eyewitness thereof: and illustrated by Pictures, the more to
affect the Reader.

By Dr. VINCENT. Theol.

LAMENT. 1.12. Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by? Behold and see, if
there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me, wherewith the
Lord has afflicted me, in the day of his fierce anger. LONDON, Printed by E.
G. for John Rothwell, and are to be sold, at the sign of the Sun in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1638.

To the Reader.
BEhold here, as in a Glass, the mournful face of a sister Nation, now
drunk with misery; according to what God threatened by the Prophet Jeremy.
Should I endeavor by all the memorable particulars, which might be
accumulated, to amplify this sad theme, the third part would be sufficient to
weary thee or blind thy eyes with tears, if thy heart were not adamantine. I
record but a small portion of what I have seen, what I have had from
sufficient testimonies. Gall and Wormwood are tasted in a drop, and so may the
great Ocean. Only the thing I desire, is to move thy Christian heart to
compassionate the estate of thy poor brethren, so lamentable, and almost
desperate, that thou may (at least) by the vials of thy prayers poured out
in their behalf help to appease this wrath of Heaven which is upon them.
Remembering withal, that as we know not what hangs over our own heads, so
we are not ignorant of our own indeserts. Our Native Country did sometimes
suffer in like manner, if not measure, as in the civil wars, and other times.
Now we are free, and live in peace, every man under his own Vine, under his
own Fig Tree; Let us not forget to be thankful for this unto the God of
peace, and withal to shun those provocations, for which he makes a fertile
land barren, a populous Land desolate, even the iniquity of them that dwell
therein.

Thine P. Vincent.

A Preface exhortatory: Touching the use which is to be made of the ensuing
Narration.
Men and Brethren:
HEre follows (according to the Title) A true representation of the miserable
estate of Germany. A most grave, serious, and weighty subject, And above all
other most necessary for us to peruse, and ponder. We for the present have
Halcion days. Sitting as the people under Solomon, Every man under his own
Vine, and Fig Tree; No complaining in our streets, no carrying into
Captivity. For which all honor and praise be to him, whose mercy it is that we
are not consumed. And yet there may be a lengthning of our tranquillity, if
we would walk worthy of those mercies which we do enjoy and learn
righteousness by the judgments of God which are made manifest.

One especial means effectually tending hereunto, is to be acquainted with
the passages of Gods providence abroad, and to make such use of his dreadful
judgments as he himself in Scripture directs us to. For our information in
the state of things abroad, these ensuing schedules may help such as have no
better intelligence. Wherein such passages are related as may make both our
ears tingle to hear them. The heads insisted on are the Arrows of the
Almighty; Sword, Famine, and Pestilence, together with their pale and grisly
attendants. Extortion, Rapine, salvage cruelty, desolations, deaths of all
kind. A sad and dismal troop.

The subject on which all these evils light, is Germany; a neighboring
country well known. The Throne of Europes Empire. This is now the Stage
whereon most direful Tragedies are acted. And therein as well the Protestants,
(the more the pity) as the Papists: no difference for religions sake; nor any
respect of persons, ages, sexes or conditions. The Fowls of the air may
therein eat the flesh of Kings, Captains, and mighty men. The flesh of
horses, and them that sit on them. Yea the flesh of all men both free and bond,
both small and great. Rev. 19.18.

The instances and particulars which are here recorded are such as may seem
incredible, and cause wondering unto astonishment, yet is there nothing but what
may well be counted probable, a few things considered. As first, what God
threatens in this kind for breach of his Law. Deuteronomy. 28.53, etc. Thou shall
eat the fruit or thine own body, the flesh of thy sons and daughters --.
The man that is tender among you, and very delicate, his eyes shall be evil
toward his brother, and toward the wife of his bosom, and toward the remnant
of children which he shall leave: so that he will not give to any of them the
flesh of his children, whom he shall eat, etc.

Then what particular instances we have of like things upon like occasions in
Scripture, as in the siege of Samaria, 2 King. 6.28, 29. The certainety of the
generals is beyond all exception, among those that will believe any thing more
than they see with their eyes, and feel with their hands. The time, and space
that the wars have endured adds much to the probability of all effects
avoucht. The current year making up full twenty since the beginning. During
all which Germany has been Acheldama, a field of blood. Under this word
(war) more evil and mischief is comprehended than can be uttered. Weigh all
things duly, the several kinds of war, foreign and domesticke; by
invasions, by insurrections, the same persons, and places being to day
Conquerours, and to morrow conquered, over and over again, and all things
every day worse and worse; we may well conclude, the one half has not been
told us.

I hope none among us are so profane as to say what is this to us, be it all
be true? and few so ignorant as not to know what God requires of us in this
regard. Yet it is too manifest, that most are so careless, that they need a
Monitor to twit them by the ear. I have therefore partly upon entreaty, and
chiefly for affection unto the thing it self, endeavored briefly to speak
something unto that end. The Lion has roared, who will not fear? The Lord
has spoken, who can but prophecy, Amos 3.8. Salvian in his time, took great
pains to prove there was a providence, when the then supposed barbarous Goths
and Vandalls broke in upon the Empire, as the Sea does sometimes overflow the
banks. But me thinks that alone was enough to manifest the finger of God,
which bred the doubt in men Atheistical. How exceeding full is the Scripture
for the proof of this? That God is Author of all Judgments, and therefore in
all we ought to look up unto him. All Captains and their armies are but
Sergeants under the Lord of hosts; that man of war, and God of battle. The
Assyrian is the rod of Gods anger, the staff in their hand is Gods
indignation, Isay 10.5. There is no evil in a City but he does it. Behold
(says the Psalmist) what desolations the Lord has made in the earth, Psalm.
46.8. If a Sparrow fall not to the ground, but according to the will of our
heavenly Father, much less are millions of men mowed down with the sword, but
according to his righteousness in Judgment.

It is also clear out of Scripture, that we ought to lay to heart those
Iudgemements of God, which we are acquainted with, and especially his greater
Judgments. God sends one place to consider of another: Go ye now unto my
place, which was in Shilo, where I set my name at the beginning, and see what I
did to it for the wickedness of my people Israel, Ier. 7.12. says God to the
men of Jerusalem.

And who makes question, but that those Churches, Nations, Persons, and Places,
which have special relation one unto another, sacred or civil, in the bonds
of Religion, neighborhood or commerce, are more especially bound mutually to
consider and bemoane one another conditions.

This likewise is evident, that our Church and State, and every member of the
same, ought upon special considerations, to be cordially affected with the
miseries of Germany. They are of the same Religion with us, Christians as we
are; our peace is the weaker for want of theirs; many of our own have suffered
with them. But above all is the affliction of that Royal Lady, our Gracious
Sovereigns only sister, who has suffered already in her Royal Person, and
may suffer yet more in her posterity, but God forbid. But what is it that we
must do, or learn from the state of things in Germany? The particulars are
several, in several regards. In relation to God, to them, and to our selves.

In regard of God. We must acknowledge the infiniteness of his Wisdom, and
unsearchablenesse of his Judgments, and take heed of rash assigning the
cause. Some lay all the blame upon the Protestants, as if their divisions among
themselves, and unnecessary separation (in their phrase) from the Church of
Rome, were the root of all. But is it not more likely, that Germany drinks
now of the cup of wrath, because she has long drunk of the cup of sundry
great abominations? The general cause, which is sin, we all acknowledge: It
were a happiness to know the special, according unto that, Foelix qui potuit
rerum cognoscere causas. But such a spirit of discerning God gives not unto
all. They themselves best know their own ways, case and state, and therefore
we may leave it unto them to consider of the special causes, whom it most
concerns. But who will not fear the Lord, and glorify his Name, who only is
holy, and whose judgments are made manifest, Rev. 15.4.

In respect of them, first let us sympathize: grieve with them that grieve.
Romans 12.15. and weep with them that weep. We are all members of one and the
same mystical body, whereof Christ is head. Our peace and security is in a
great measure bound up in theirs: their troubles may increase ours; as they
have already occasioned many fears, cares and expenses: Witness the great
levy of soldiers at some times, and not a little chargeable Embassages from
our King and State. Next of all, we are to pray for them, that God would
restore peace, and make up all breaches. Giving the Lord no rest, until he
make Jerusalem the praise of the earth. Abraham interceded long for Sodom, how
much more ought we to do the like for them? And yet further, as we have ability
and opportunity, we ought to help and succor them, ministering to their
necessities, receiving of their profugates, and intertaining them into our
bosoms, when they fly from their own to us. Many of ours found among them a
shelter from the storm in our Marian days, and do still, no doubt, bless
God for our peace, notwithstanding their own wars.

In respect of our selves, there be many instructions which we may learn from
the Lecture of their calamities. No privileges can finally secure a sinful
people; for what have we to glory in that they had not? The seeds of all
their evils are sown in our fields. There be likewise diverse duties that we
should abound in the more: In repentance, lest we bring upon our selves the
like: In prayer, that God would bless our state and government, that by the
wisdom thereof we may be led along in such ways as may propagate our peace
unto posterity: In patience under those chastisments which we suffer. Though
the hand of God has long been upon many Cities and Towns, and his Arm be
stretched out still upon some of them, yet is our misery, happiness, in
comparison of theirs: If a gentle plague alone have affrighted us all, What
would Sword and Famine with it do?

There be also some sins in special which we ought to repent of; as
drunkenness, profanation of the Lords Day, and other holy festivalls, rash
oaths, quickly made, and as quickly broken, together with Sacrilege, all
which are most notorious, not among them alone, but among our selves also.

This we should do, but what do we? We put far away the evil day, and
cause the seat of violence to come near: We drink wine in bowls, and anoint
our selves with the chief ointments, but are not grieved for the afflictions
of Joseph, Amos 6.3. and 6. This is no small sin, and if once the day of our
visitation come, a small chastisement on Gods part will not be all. Oh that we
would consider, the Vialls of Gods wrath are pouring forth, as well on his own
Churches for correction, as on their adversaries unto destruction. Who knows
how fast the day may pass round? Gods arrows are all fleet. The curse of God
goes forth over the face of the whole earth, Zacch. 5.3. If the sins of
Sodom be found in Samaria, and the sins of Samaria in Jerusalem, they shall
all pledge each other: for God is no respecter of persons. Are there no
drunkards but in Germany? Or, does God hate sin in them alone? What are we,
that God should always spare us? Many cry, Peace, Peace, and I with the
Prophet Jeremy say Amen. The Lord do so, the Lord perform the words of them
which prophecy of nothing but good, Ier. 28.6. But its good to remember that
of the Apostle, when they cry, Peace, Peace, etc. Gloss. ordin. in Ier. 7.12.
Quicquid illi populo fecit Deus, timeamus: cum nos similia faciamus. Yet no
such clouds (blessed be God) arise over our heads, as those wherewith her
horizon is darkened. But storms arise suddenly. God creates good and evil,
brings both when there is no appearance or cause of suspicion. Not to fear, is
cause enough to be afraid, if we could so reflect upon our selves: As God
brings light out of darkness, so darkness out of light. How fair rose the
Sun upon Sodom, that day it rained fire and brimstone? How poor a thing was
a cloud like a man's hand, to prognosticate abundance of rain by? But I must
manum de tabula. Well then, read on, read and spare not, read and consider,
read and weep, imagine the Book to be Germany it self, their case ours, and
our souls in their souls stead. Do as Nehemiah did, when he heard of the
state of Jerusalem, and the Temple therein. He sat down and wept, mourned and
fasted certain days, and prayed before the Lord God of Heaven, Neh. 1.4.
Would we but do the like for our selves and them, God would assuredly restore
their peace, and continue ours, for which I shall ever heartily pray, and so
rest

A well-wisher to all the Churches of God.

Imprimatur Haec Epistola.

Samuel Baker.
London, Ian. 22. 1637.
CHAP. I.
Evils of Punishment are Gods, the evil of Sin is wholly ours. Whatsoever
was the impulsive cause of his judgments, our wholesomest use is, to attribute
them to our sins: to greater sins, greater Judgments, seeing God seems to
observe a proportion to our deserts: for, Ezekiel. 14.21. the Prophet speaks of
four sore Judgments, that is, greater and more grievous than the rest:
famine, sword, pestilence, and the noisome beast. With these has he lately
visited some nations; especially Germany, before a large, populous, fertile and
flourishing Country. What shall we say? were their sins greater than ours?
No, but except we repent, what may we expect? the sins of Sodom were pride,
idleness, and fullness of bread; and such they acknowledge theirs to have
been. I have seen their peasants served in plate, they slept with downe-beds
above and under them: their stoves kept them insensible of the winters cold;
they ate no dish of meat without his sauce; their plenty of corn and wine,
milk and honey, fish and flesh, did equal that of any other nation
whatsoever. A little labor brought them in much; delicacy of living, made them
incompassionate of others sufferings; and security blinded them, that they
could not see the storm a coming. Thus, while they swim in fullness and
pleasure, the Judgment that slept, was suddenly awaked, and the fire of war
was kindled in all their coasts; which blown with the bellows of exasperated
spirits, has depopulated their Land, and consumed their dwellings to the
ground: all lies desolate; the vineyards are not dressed, nor the fields
tilled: the sword is every where drunk with blood. Famine kills more than
the sword; and the pestilence, with other Epidemicke diseases (wars
attendants) devour their part also; and, which is worst of all, there is yet
no end of these things.

the blazinge star 1617

burgers and ministers. releued in prisson.

a divine tortured with a Catt.



CHAP. II. Of Extortions and exactions.
TO begin with war, which began the rest, who knows not that this
merciless fury has there played the tyrant ever since that burning Beacon,
the blazing star, gave them the alarm, 1617. which the best Astrologers
expounded the sword of Germany. A prophecy I have seen, long since, written
in a Book, which belonged to a canonick of Nimegon, and now in the Library at
Zutphen; that a time should come, when one Frederike should be King, and then
should the Princes of Germany, the Nobility of Bohemia, and the people of both
be oppressed, and war rage, beyond all precedent of former ages; this, if
ever, is now fulfilled in our days. And if in such disorder, it may be
possible, I will observe this order in speaking thereof: first, extortions and
exactions: secondly, tortures and torments: thirdly, rape and ravishing:
fourthly, robbery and pillaging: fifthly, bloodshed and killing: sixthly,
burning and destroying. These shall be the scenes of this first act. Famine and
pestilence shall stand for the other acts of this direful tragedy: in which,
as no action or passion was simple, or single, so can I not but with
intermixtion, and confusion rehearse them.

For the first, as no province or part of Germany can boast of her freedom
from these miseries (though some have been more free than others) so is there
no Prince, nor State, which has not suffered herein, no City, no Town, almost
no person. Every half years, every months, yea, weeks relation, tells us,
of hundreds, thousands, millions of rix dollars, or guldens, imposed, exacted,
extorted by the Conquerors, or spoylers, for the redemption of men's lives or
liberties, goods or dwellings, etc. Strange and impossible oft-times have the
ransomes been, with which they have taxed the Burgers, at the taking in of
towns.

And that they might have their wills in this kind, they have called the
Magistrates, and Burghers into the State-houses, threatened, imprisoned, or
otherwise abused them, till they condescended.

At Gryphenberg, they kept the Senators shut up in a chamber of the common
hall, macerating, and tormenting them so long with hunger and smoke, that some
of them dyed.

We left in Heydelberg Castle many Burgers to this their mercy; and diverse
reverend Ministers, who were imprisoned, and fed with bread and water, till the
charity of the reformed Churches could relieve them.

Presently after, they at Frankendale surrendering the town, upon necessity,
could not enjoy the articles granted them by the enemy; But were together with
the grave Counselors, and other Electorall Ministers, forced to endure such
conditions, as were fitter for slaves and dogs, than men. Some were cast into
prison, and there so handled, that many of them dyed through grief and sorrow.
Others, though altogether exhausted, redeemed themselves with unreasonable
ransomes. The goods of those that were fled, were confiscated: all the
inhabitants, though they were willing to leave their houses, with all their
furniture, were detained in the City, and their destruction most cruelly
plotted: after like manner have others been dealt with, contrary to all oaths
and promises, yea, contray to the laws of nations and common faith.

twisted out there eyes

Raced offe there skin with knifes

hanging up in the smoke

blood sprouted at fingers end.

plaining there faces

piss poured down there throats



CHAP. III. Of Tortures and Torments.
NOt to insist on these, look we upon the cruelties which the licentious
Soldier has exercised upon the persons of the inhabitants, without respect of
age, sex, dignity, calling, etc. and we shall rather think them banditos or
renegado's, than men of arms, rather monsters than mankind. Nor Turks nor
Infidels have so behaved themselves. Even Princes (sacred persons) though they
never bore arms, as the old Landgrave of Hessen, and others: yea some of the
female sex, as the old Duchess dowager of Wirtenberg, have been without any
regard or pity, taken prisonors reviled, abused.

Aronibeus reports from the Letters of the D. of Saxony, that some of Tillies
Soldiers caused his Subjects to be tortured, by half strangling them, and
pressing their thumbes with wheels.

His Soldiers, and those of Walsten, exercised yet greater cruelties in
Pomeren, and thereabouts. They made the people by force to eat their own
excrements: and if they would not, they thrust them down their throats and so
choked some of them.

Whom they thought to have hidden gold or other wealth, they have assyed, by
exquisite torments to make them confess. Yea Princely personages have suffered
like cruelty in this kind with meaner folk.

They have wound and tied about the heads of such, strong matches or cords, and
twisted the same till the blood came out of their eyes, ears, and noses, yea
till their eyes started out of their heads.

They have put and tied burning Matches betwixt their fingers, to their noses,
tongues, jaws, cheeks, breasts, legs, and secret parts.

Yea those parts which nature hides, they have either filled with powder, or
hung satchels of powder on them, and so giving fire to the same, they have in
horrible manner burst their bellies, and killed them.

They have with bodkins pierced, yea with knives raced, and cut the skin and
flesh of many, as some Artificers deal with Leather, or other stuff of like
nature.

They have drawn strings and cords through the fleshy parts of some, the
muscles of their thighs, legs, arms, etc. through their noses, ears, lips,
etc.

They have hung up some in the smoke, drying them with small fires, refreshing
them sometime with small drink, or cold water. For these being such as were
before overwhelmed with grief, they took care least in their torment they
should die too soon.

Some they have put into hot Ovens and so smothered or burned them. Some they
roasted with straw-fires.

Some have they stifeled, strangled or hanged. This was great favor to be
rid out of their pain.

To many they have bound so hard both hands and feet, that the blood has
sprouted out at the ends of their fingers and toes.

Of some they have tied both hands and feet backward together, and stopped
their mouths with clouts to hinder them from praying.

Some have they hanged up, with ropes fastened to their privy parts, and
hearing their roaring cries, have striven to out-roare and drown their cries
as in sport.

And yet more detestable, where they have found poor weak Creatures troubled
with ruptures or burstnesse, they have enlarged the same by villainous means,
filled them with gunpowder, and blown them up as a mine, by giving fire
thereunto.

Many have they trussed up on high, hanging on their feet stones and weights
to stretch our their bodies.

With Jizels or like instruments they have gone about to plain the faces of
some, pretending that they would make it equal and smooth.

Some householders have they openly gelded, in the presence of their wives and
children.

The mouths of some have they opened with gags, and then poured down their
throats, water, stinking puddle, filthy liquids, and piss it self, saying,
this is a Swedish draught. So growing sick, and their bellies swelling like a
tun they have died by leisure with the greater torment.

Down the throats of others, they have thrust a knotted clout, and then with
a string pulled it up again to move the bowels out of their place, or show
themselves exquisite in such divellish devices. And by these torments they have
made some deaf, or dumb, others blind, others lame and miserable creples, if
they killed them not.

If an husband did entreat for the wife, or the wife for the husband, then
took they the intercessour and he was tortured by them, after the same manner
before the others eyes.

And (which is almost beyond all credit) when these poor prisoners or
patients, were suffering or dying under their hands, and crying to God in their
anguish, these hellish executioners would command or force them to pray unto
the devil or call upon him.

Infinite and unspeakeable are the cruelties, which have this last year been
exercised by the furious Soldiers on all sides.

And some devils among them did proceed so far, that they consulted and
devised new and exquisite tortures, which they exercised upon innocent persons.
They took a Divine, (some write a Canon in those parts, and a reverend old
man) stripped him, bound him along upon his back on a Table, and a strong
big Cat upon his naked belly. They beat and pricked the Cat to make her fix
her teeth and claws in the poor man's belly. So the Cat and the man, partly
through famine, partly through pain and anguish, both breathed their last.

Some of their despicable and infamous ruytery cal^ed Croats or Crabats, have
labored much to teach their horses not only to kill men, but to eat humane
and Christians flesh, and have consulted how to find out torments more rare,
cruel, and exquisite then ever. What shall we say to these devils? Phalaris,
Nero, Dionysius, all other tyrants and tyrannies, are incomparable to these new
stratagematists and engineers. Caucasus bred them, Tigers fed them, hell taught
them, and thither I remit them.

Vn^^^sse in Churches

A maid Rauisched and after quarterd

Maids l^^pinge into Riu^^s.



CHAP. IV. Of rape and ravishing.
I Have said much of the former particular, and yet but little. I will now
speak little of this ensuing abomination, and (I fear) too much. Rapes and
ravishing scarce to be spoken or heard of, have they committed, beyond all
humane modesty. Maids, and matrons, widows and wives, without distinction
have they violated and forced, and that in the presence of their parents,
husbands, neighbors, etc. women with child, in childbed, etc. no pen can
write it, no faith believe it. No Chapel, Church, or place consecrated has
been free from the filthiest of pollutions or most sacrilegious barbarismes.
The very Hospitals and Bedlame-houses have not been spared: their divellish
madness has there found subjects for their purpose.

In Hossen-land, a poor lean bedlam woman, that had been kept in chains
above twenty years, was by these hell hounds let loose. About her they brought
diverse others, like her self, some mad, some dumb, all wretched. They tied
their coats about their cares, and so used them as I shame to express.

In Pameren they took the fairest daughters of the Countrey-dwellers, and
ravished them in the light of their parents, making them and their friends to
sing Psalms before them all the while.

In Holy, I have heard some with tear^^ ree^^^ the villainies perpetrated by the
German troops of Gallas and Altringer, when they besieged Mantua. Among the
rest, a beautiful maid was by her parents hid in the dunghill. But they sound
her out, had their pleasures of her, then cut her in pieces, hung her quarters
up in the Church, and bid her friends pray to the Saints for her succor.

The Sperenrenterish horsemen (as we came through Brunswick-land) took by
force a young maid ten years old, and carried her into a wood to ravish her.
The mother with upreard hands came running after our Coach, crying out to my
Colonel, who was here a stranger without command, and could not relieve her:
then saw we the two horsemen come out of the wood, where they had left the
poor child dead or alive, I know not.

Virtuous and chaste women have they offered to kill, or thrown their children
into the fire, to make them yield.

They have not spared the very Nuns in the Cloisters, but after they have
entered by force, broken open their Trunke^ and Cossers, and taken their goods,
they have likewise ravished them, and killed some of them.

I know the general, a troop of whose horse having done the like, (...)
commanded them all to be hanged, but because they were not all alike guilty,
they cast lots for their lives, and every tenth man died.

Some have leaped into rivers, into walls, or killed themselves because they
would not be subject to the filthy lusts of these hell-borne furies.

Not only sick and weak maids, and women have been violated till they died,
but these wretches have committed like filthiness with the dead bodies.

Merchants Rob^^ and (...)

persons priuelegdd Rifled

Divines cut in peaces



CHAP. V. Of robbery and pillaging.
NO man can now pass any where in Dutch-land, but he is robbed, stripped,
perhaps killed. The Merchants of Frankford, Nurenberg, Lipzig Hamburg, etc.
have had too woeful experience hereof: witness of infinite this one instance.
The Merchants of Basil, returning from the Mart at Strasburg, and other Faires,
to go to Shoffehausen, were set upon by the Imperialists in their lodging, and
though they offered to prove themselves Merchants, and craved their lives upon
their knees, yet they killed ten of them, saying they must die, because they
were heretics. The rest leaving their goods and garments behind, escaped by
flight stark naked in the night.

The very Convoyes which wait on those that travel to guard them are
oftentimes as bad, almost, as a strange enemy. They watch all occasions to take
from them what they have, their money and goods, their horses as they go to
watering, or out of the stables in the night, spoil their wagons when they
make a stand, rifle and strippe and meanest persons if they straggle from the
company, and so they served us all the way from Heydelberg to Hessen-land: that
we knew not which was worse our friend with us, or our enemy behind us.

Two Countesses of great nobility with their fair daughters and followers in
distress, were entertained by us in the Castle of Heydelberg, the one
immediately before, the other in the time of the siege. When our hope of
subsisting began to fail, they went away with the enemies pasport.
Notwithstanding which they were by them robbed and rifled in their coaches of
all they had, not sparing the very garments that covered them.

The privileged persons of royal Ambassadors, their goods and followers
cannot be secured from them, witness this year the shameful plundering of
the Danish Ambassador.

What quarter they give to the traveller, the like or worse they afford the
inhabitants. If they escape with their lives this is all, and well too: when
the time has been that one might have traveled safe from the one end of
Germany to the other with a white rod in his hand and an hundred pound in his
purse.

Indeed they rob one another every where out of their quarter: nor are they
fellow soldiers any longer, when they have opportunity to play the thieves.
Nor God nor devil do they acknowledge, but when they swear, nor is any thing
so vile but they will do it.

Priests slain at Altars Altars

Croats eat Children

Noses and ears Cut of to make hatbandes



CHAP. VI. Of Bloodshed and killing.
AS for killing, this is the least of all the rest. Death puts an end to all
miseries; only they that survive are oft-times the worse for want of them that
are dead. To report the bloodshed of this war, would be incredible: Alsted
says, that before the King of Swedens coming, it had consumed no less than
100000 If this be true, what has it done since? how many millions have
miserably perished? they have sometimes killed one another; and among other
precedents, this is not least remarkable, that Gourdon and Lesley, Scotch
Colonels, with Colonel Butler the Irish man, who killed Walstein, the Count of
Tirskie, and other Imperial officers then ready to revolt to the Swedish
party, are now, this year after the same manner, hurt or killed themselves
(as is written) by Gallas his followers, upon a dispute about that former
business; a document for all strangers to take heed, how they collogue with
those monsters, in such dangerous actions, who love the treason, but hate the
traitor.

The cruelty of the Soulder toward the inhabitants of those Countries is
inexpressible. Persons secular and sacred, have had the same measure. Near
Fryburg, Holck his Soldiers cut in pieces a reverend Minister, a man of rare
learning and piety. The dogs would not lick his blood, nor touch his flesh. So
his friends buried his mangled members.

At Landshood in Bavier, the Soldier entering by force, killed not only all
they found in arms, but the innocent inhabitants, yea, the very Priests
kneeling at the Altars; and diverse other instances of like nature I could
produce.

Now what may the poor peasant and countrey-dwellers expect? to kill them if
they resist or refuse them any thing, is but ordinary in this war: among the
Imperialists is a base sort of rascally horsemen which serve them, and are
called Croats. The tenth part of them are not of that Country: for they are a
miscellanie of all strange nations, without God, without religion, and have
only the outsides of men, and scarce that too. They make no conscience of
murdering men or women, old or young, yea, the very innocent babes; and like
the beasts among whom they are bred, do sometimes eat them, when other food
might be found: the poor people have by these been every where knocked down
in the fields and ways, slaughtered, stabbed, tortured barbarously.

Their fellow soldiers are not much behind them having some where left such
footsteps of their cruelty, that there scarce remain living, to relate the
sufferings of the dead. I have seen them beat out the brains of poor old
decrepid women, as in sport, and commit other outrages of like nature, which my
brevity will not permit me to relate.

It is now grown so usual with the poor people to see one slain before
another face, that (as though there were no relation, no affection of
neighborhood, kindred or friendship among them) none compassionateth, almost
none cries out, oh my father, or oh my brother.

As for quarter (that is mercy, and the saving of the lives of the vanquished,
when they beg it on their knees) the vanquishers have been often times
inhumane. The Croats, till of late, never gave any quarter, but killed
whatsoever enemy they had at their mercy. The like did the Curlins (the
regiment of hell) receive pay of them of Gaunt and Bruges, to bring the nose
and ears of their enemies away to their Masters.

Tilly, after the defeat of the Duke of Brunswicke at Heuxt on the Maine, drew
out of that town threescore poor Soldiers, and caused them all to be killed
in the cold blood, before the gate, saying, that he sacrificed them to Count
Mansfield their master. I could weary my reader with these examples. But I
forbear.

2000 villages burnt in Bauaria

No tillange nor Breding Cattle But dringe all in to Cities



CHAP. VII. Of burning and destroying.
FOr burning, pulling down and ruining of Churches, Cities, Villages, the like
has not been heard. The Swedish army burned above 2000 Villages in Bavaria, in
revenge of the Palatine cause: But their enemies spare neither foes nor
friends. What goodly houses of the Nobility and Gentry shall you, there, see
fallen down, or so defaced, as is scarce reparable without building new? From
what quarter soever the army rises they will be sure to leave some dwellings
in the ashes, some in the smoke. To that pass it is now come, that every one
that is a man, betaketh himself to arms. There is now no other abode, but
some camp, no other plow to follow, no other employment but the war: for he
that is not an actor with the rest, must needs be a sufferer among the
miserable patients. No tilling of the land, no breeding of cattle: for if they
should, the next year the soldiers devour it. Better to sit still, than to
labor, and ler others reap the profits. Hence an universal desolation.

Part of the people swarm as banished in strange Countries, as I have observed
in Suisse, at Lausan, Berne, Basil etc. in France, in Italy especially the
Venetian Territories. From Basil to Strasburg, from Strasburg to Heydleberg,
from thence to Marpurg, I scarce saw a man in the fields, or Villages. Little
better shall a man find it that travelleth from the Kingdom of France to the
middle of Bohemia, from the Alps above Auspurg to the Baltique Sea, a square
of land little less than thrice all Great Britain. Only here and there, as
the land has rest, the dwellers return. But alas, the far greater part are
extinguished by war, misery, or length of time.

Eateing dead horses

Fowls eat the dead



CHAP. VIII. Of Famine.
FAmine comes next in place, a thing so grievous, that David preferred the
pestilence in his choice. To see men slain by the sword, or die of contagious
diseases, is not yet so grievous, as to see them die of famine, or kill to eat
one another. In Samaria besieged by Benhadad K. of Syria, the famine was so
great that an Asses head was sold for 80. pieces of silver, and the fourth part
of a cab of Doves dung forfifty pieces of silver. Two women covenanted to eat
their children successively: and when they had boiled and eaten the one, the
other woman hid hers. In the siege of Jerusalem, mice, ratts, and hides were
good meat, and women did dress and eat their own children, the smell
whereof drew others that were hunger-starved to come to share with them. But
that Cities not besieged, and a Country naturally fertile should be so ruined
as not to be able, for so long a time to afford bread to a poor remnant of
people, but that they must be feign to eat carian, yea dead men, yea one
another living: this is pityfull, this is unheard of.

Had I not been provided of Viaticum, at my coming out of Suisse famine had
arrested me in Germany, for there was not any where meat for money. The
Italians and Spaniards, which had been at the skirmish at Nortlingen, and
without arms, wandered among the Duke of Lorraines troops at Nyburg and
Brisac, were so black and feeble through hunger, that had I not given them part
of my provision, I think they had rent me in pieces and eaten me.

Traveling from Nieustadt toward Frankendale in a snowie day, I met,
unexpected, the army of Duke Bernard, whose straggling forerunners, came riding
up to me by couples, and when I looked for a worse errand, asked only for
bread, which my guide gave them, so long as we had any.

From thence to Manheime and Heydleberg, many dead men lay strewed on the way,
especially on the fire places, which perished through cold and want.

Before we were besieged last time in Heydleberg Castle, some of my patients,
almost recovered of their diseases, sent me word, they were dying of famine,
as indeed they did, except our canon helped to shorten their miseries. For
being immediately shut up, we shot into the town night and day, almost
uncessantly.

Our soldiers at the first, killed more horses on a day, than they could eat,
lest they should famish for want of hay, and those they threw out of the
Castle, down the rock, which the enemy in the night drew into the town,
(though some in so doing were slain by our shot) and so they ate our horse
flesh, also our Serieant Mayor sallied with fifty men upon the enemy being 300.
entrenched on the hill on the East side of the Castle, and beat them out of
their works. Many were slain, some broke their necks down the rocks: but
which equallized the victory, the valiant Mayor was shot dead. Our soldiers
being masters of the trench, fell to ransacke the enemies knapsackes which they
had left behind them. But there was nothing in them, save our horse flesh,
which every day grew scarser with us: so that now we killed the horses which
stood fasting and sleeping on the dunghill, not out of compassion, but
necessity. Another Serieant Mayor had two very fair horses shut up, our
soldiers took the one and ate him, he thinking to make sure the other,
stapled him to the wall with a strong chain and a padlock, but they espying
their opportunity, cut off the horses neck, left the head in the chain, and
carried away the body and ate it.

At length, dogs and carian came into request, we could smell our meat afar
off, and on the table it was yet more loathsome, the taste did answer the
smell, yet, we ate it savourly, but our bread at last failing, we yielded to
necessity.

Carrion Sold in the Market As Dogs and Rattes

Tyteinge for Carrion



CHAP. IX. Of Famine.
THe armies now every where over-ranne the Country, devoured both Corn and
Cattle: so they that had goods left offered to give all for a little
belly-timber. But not so obtaining it they were feign to lie upon the streets
and high ways, (a thing not usual with them) and to crave for Gods sake
wherewith to refresh their dying souls. But no sooner had they swallowed what
was given them, but they fell down and died.

Memorable is that story which Reinmannus records of the Famine in Alsatia
the last year, which is at this present yet worse. Valentine of Engelin a
Citizen of Rufack, with the dead-burier, delivered unto the Magistrate upon
their oaths, that Anne the daughter of John Ehstein confessed unto them, that
she came from Colmar, where she had waited many days before the hangmans
door in hope to get a piece of hors-flesh to satisfy her hunger. But not
prevailing, she was now come to Rufack entreating them, that if there was the
body of any young man or woman unburied, that they would give it her to eat to
preserve her life.

And that two women and a boy did after the same manner speak unto them,
telling them that they had for a long time lived of dead men's flesh, which
being published the Cloister of the Churchyard of St. Nicholas where the dead
bodies were kept was locked up.

Lastly, that four young maids had cut in pieces the dead bodies of another
young maid of eleven years of age, and eaten every one their part.

At this day it is yet worse. Many that survived the loss of all they had,
have for a long time sustained themselves with roots, Acornes, green fruits,
grass, thistles, and weeds, that beasts would not have eaten, whereof they
grew enraged and died.

The famished have been so faint, that they have not had strength to bury one
another, in so much, that the dead have been eaten up of Dogs, Foxes and
Wolves, and some have run madd for hunger.

In some cities, the inhabitants by this famine, have been constrained to kill
all unedible cattle, without any difference, and to sell them publicly: as
Dogs, Cats, Rats, Mice, etc.

A woman at Hanaw, that had sold dogs-flesh ordinarily to the soldiers, was in
the streets assaulted by Dogs, all her garments torn off her back, that she
was feign to sit down on the ground to hide her shame. And, had she not been
rescued, she had been rent in pieces by the Dogs.

Where any man had a beast left that he carefully kept for his necessity, some
or other of his acquaintance, if he could come by it, would kill and eat it.

They have snatched one from another the very stinking carrion, which had lain
six or seven weakes dead and full of magots: yea and have fought and beaten
one another to get a morsel thereof, as lately happened at Dubach by Bachrack.

It has moved the great ones and governors of these quarters unto compassion
to see their people in such extreme want. In so much that the noble Earl of
Falkenstein seeing his subjects crave sustenance of him, commanded his man to
give them his hounds to satisfy their hunger which they presently killed and
ate.

3 women killinge and after eateing each other

Women Eat there own Children



CHAP. X. Of Famine.
AS the sickness spreads by the contagion of infected bodies, so has this
famine increased by the neglect of Providence in the disabled and famished.
When no more food was to be got, they were enraged like beasts one against
another, and gathering together by troops, have watched for one another upon
the high ways, and so murdered, dressed and eaten one another. Thenceforth no
man could pass safe on the way or in the streets, except well armed or
traveling with a convoy. And some of them have been taken and severely
punished by Justice, nevertheless they have secretly lurked here and there,
and set upon the passengers, as by many instances, I could show.

It is not good to be alone; for where there is company, the one will help
the other in distress. The hardness of these times being observed or rather
felt, three maidens at Odenheim in Dirmbstein by Worms agreed to dwell
together, and to partake of sweet and sower all alike. But the proverb is
true, that necessity has no law, and hunger is a sharp thorn. So pressed
they were with extreme famine, that they sought one another lives to save
their own. Two of them conspired together to take away the life of the third,
by strangling her in bed or otherwise treacherously to kill her, and after to
dress and eat her up. All which they did accordingly. Then the second
resolved to strangle her companion, and cut off her head, which when she had
done, her heart being hardened, she went to a village called Ridisheim to a
woman of her acquaintance, called Margaret, whose husband was a Farmer, and
kept himself away for a time in the town of Leyningen. The woman entertained
her kindly, rejoicing that she came yet once to see her. But in the night,
lying by the said woman, she cut off her head, bound the dead body upon a board
and brought it to Piedessen, where she dwelt and drew it into her house. The
sharpness of hunger pricking her, she had not the patience to cut the body in
pieces, but did cut off the head and both the hands only, and washed and
dressed them. The husband coming home missed his wife, and enquired for her at
the neighbors, who told him that such a maid was seen with his wife. He
went to her house, knocked at the door and asked her, if she had not seen his
wife. She answered him no. But such deeds of cruelty are hardr to be
concealed. Murder will out, they say, or the very bruits will discover it. He
goes into he house, casts his eyes round about, pryeth into every corner: At
length he espieth an hand to stick out of the pot, which hung upon the fire.
Hereupon, as overcome with grief he rages and rayleth against the
murderesse, threatens her with sharp words, so that she presently confessed
and revealed it.

Then went he to the Justice and complained. So she was brought to Slitzey
with three Musketeers. They made her hold the sodden hand in her hand, while
she was examined: and so she had her sentence from the imperial officers,
Burgrave Philip of Waldecke, and all the Lords of Justice, before the judgment
seat. They deliberated long about her punishment, whether she should die or no,
because some were of opinion, that she did it not as a rational creature but
as a brute, because the appetite of food is common to us with beasts. But
wickedness, though necessitated, may not ever go free. Some must be made an
example for the terror of others. She was led to the common place of justice,
her head cut off, and her body bound upon a wheel there to remain as a
spectacle.

I cannot but write with tears what follows.

-- Quis talia fando
Mysmidonum, Delepumve aut duri miles Vlyssis
Temperet a lachrymi? --
What Myrmidon, what Dolop, who that bears
Arms under harsh Ulysses, but his tears
Must flow at this relation?
No man ever hated his own flesh. But such are the children of our bodies. It
is even against nature to destroy such fruit. Yet the sharpness of hunger
brought this to pass. Oh! what is that necessity which makes us break stone
walls, forget the nearest and dearest relations, vanquish our natural and most
powerful passions and destroy that which we so dearly loved, so carefully
cherished! At Oterburg in the Palatinate, a widow woman dwelling by the
churchyard (her name well known) had a daughter of nine or ten years old.
This child with hunger was grown so faint, that upon a time, with sorrowful
eyes, she steadfastly looked upon her mother and said, sweet mother, I would
willingly dye, so I were rid of my pain. Oh! would you make an end of me, then
should I go from whence I came, or if I did kill you, you would be rid of
your pain. The mother looking upon her again, sighing said, and what would
thou do with me? The child answered, very sadly, I then would eat you, for
they say that man's flesh is very sweet. The mother fell a weeping, and broken
with her own thoughts, as a ship tossed and beaten between two rocks,
desperate necessity and her motherly affection, catches at her head, untyeth
her haire-lace, twisteth it about the neck of this innocent lamb, and so
strangleth her, when it was dead, she having nor knife nor hatchet to cut it in
pieces, took a spade, and therewith hewed it into gobbets, and so dressing the
head and part of the body devoured it. Some part thereof she sold to her
neighbors for four stivers the pound.

Her child being long missed, her acquaintance asked her where it was, and how
she came by that flesh. She answered it was hogs-flesh, which she had got of
the soldiers, who passed that way. But perceiving the truth would come out,
she at last confessed it. Whereupon she was complained of to the justice at
Keysars Lauteren, and put in prison by Ionker van Effren, and adjudged to an
half pound of bread, and a kanne of water a day, so to expect her sentence.
But being sent for out of prison and examined by the lords she told them she
was happy, that she was in prison, and would be glad to lie there all her life,
to slake her hunger and refresh herself with such food, her pricking pain
being thereby abated. This so moved the Lords to pity, that they freed her
from prison, and let her go as innocent.

I cannot but record another story of like nature, of the woman of Hornebach,
where was sometime the Princely school of Zwybruck, Having lately lain in
childbed and wanting milk to nourish her babe, she kissed and embraced it with
moist tears, and after a long discourse killed it with a knife. Afterward
she dressed and ate it. When it began to be known, she was examined before
the justices. The Lords asked her, wherefore she killed her child. She made
answer that mighty and intolerable hunger had made her so to do, and that it
was her own fruit, of which she might better make use, then of any other.
Nevertheless she was condemned to dye, and accordingly executed.

Dead Corpse digd out of there Grauesto Cate

Some take poison to hasten death



CHAP. XI. Of Famine.
I Am now weary of these lamentable relations. Yet more miserable (if more
miserable can be) have ensued. They have traced the dead bodies to the place of
their burial, dug them out of their graves dressed and eaten them. So that
in diverse places (at Worms especially) they have been feign to set watch at
the Church yardes, and over the graves to keep the dead from being stolen and
eaten.

In Saxony at this present the case is so miserable in this kind, that no pen
can express it. The Saxon-Austrian army (were they not beaten) must retreite
through hunger, having famished both the inhabitants and themselves.

After the same manner it is upon the Rhine, and many other parts, where the
armies are or have lately been.

To that extremity it is come, that some constrained by hunger, have taken
poison to advance death.

In a word, the very wild beasts in the woods do starve for want of prey.

My Lord the Earl of Arundel traveling homewards toward Franckefort on the
Maine, (...) boore or peasant of the country, being their guide, and having his
Legs bear, a fox pursued him, among my Lords followers, and would not forbear
snatching and biting at his bare heels, (such was his hunger) till they gave
him a blow in the neck, and so took him alive. Hi^ eyes were suncke, his
bones stuck out, and he^ was so extreme lean, that his sides almost me^
together. They carried him alive with them in the coach, and after a few days
he died.

An English gentleman arrived here the other day, who traveling from Vlmes to
Nurenburg, an^ so through Germany for England, with such companions as guided
him by-waies for escaping o^ the soldiers, reports that Wolves, Foxes an^
other wild beasts ly dead for want of food, an^ that in some places men live
only upon robbery and spoil of strangers, or one another The every being
become a trade.

in Basile 1633 died. 20000

in Trent 1634 died 30000

General Holcke offered 600 Rixdollers for a divine to comfort him.



CHAP. XII. Of sickness and diseases.
DIseases are more feared as they are more dangerous. Great diseases for their
difficulty of cure, acute or sharp diseases, because when they kill they
dispatch suddenly. But Epidemick and contagious maladies have yet something
more, besides their greatness, besides their acuteness to make them terrible.
And that is this, that they deprive a man of the comfort of his acquaintance,
neighbors, friends, kinsfolks, etc. Add hereunto that for these we seldom
know any specificall remedy, for the pestilence I am sure there is none, as
being Gods immediate judgment, though often times he uses the ministry of
secondary causes, for the executing of his further pleasure herein, I have made
trial of all sorts of antidotes vegetable, mineral, animal, and that
according to rational method, yet am I almost as far from the cure, as ever.
These diseases are often times wars concomitants or effects. Rare it is for a
great Army to stay long in a place, and not to leave some infection behind.
Beyond the Dona, after the Swedens departure from thence with their Armies,
diseases unheard of, and the pest withal swept away a world of people. The
like happened shortly after, about Nurrenberg in the high Palatinate, and on
the frontiers of Boheme.

Before Mastreicht, after the Town was taken, our quarters had contracted
infectious sicknesses: whereof I my self had my share, being left sick in the
Town of a purple Fever. But the year following both the Town and Country
were grievously afflicted, with Fevers, Fluxes, and the Plague above all.

The same year Elsas or Alsatia and the lower Palatinate, where the Armies of
the Duke of Lorraine and the Rhinegrave had lodged, did suffer miserably in
this kind.

The Army of the Prince of Orange having taken Rhineberg, and marching toward
Mastricke and Liege, left such infection in great Brabant, about Firkens-ward,
that the inhabitants the year after were afraid of their own dwellings.

About the same time, General Holck being sent by Wolstein, with 6000 to
invade Saxony, sacked the City of Leipzick and committed as great outrages as
Tillies Army had done before. But such a pestilence overtooke both him and his,
that most of his Soldiers died like sheep of the rot. And being infected
himself, he offered 600 Rixdollers for a Minister of the Gospel to instruct
and comfort him. But both himself, and his Soldiers had so behaved
themselves, that no Minister was to be found. In the mean all his friends and
servants forsook him, except his Concubine, who stayed with him to the last.
He had been both of the Religion and the Protestants party, but revolted from
both. So guilty of his own perfidiousnesse, and the execrable murders and
rapines that he had caused, he died despairing utterly of all future bliss. At
length came a Minister, but Holck was dead before.

The City of Basile that winter, lost above 20000. of the plague. They of the
City of Trent, their neighbors rejoiced at their sufferings, as being their
enemies in religion. But it fell out with the^, as with Edom in Obadiah, v. 15.
that mocked Jacob in his distress. The Winter following, 1634. the pestilence
so raged among the Tridentines, that we were forbidden to come that way, for
the sick and sound were mixed together, and that City (not great) buried above
30000.

Besieged in the Castle of Heidleberg I visited every day, diverse sick of the
Plague, and like diseases. But in neither of these two great plagues in London,
nor in any other, that I have been in did I ever find the cause so virulent,
the symptoms so incorrigible, the disease so incurable. Some died raging,
others were killed with their carbuncles, when the venom seemed to be
expelled from the inward parts, others were swollen and discolored, as though
they had taken poison, and some that died were so spotted, as I never saw the
like. If any soldier were but slightly wounded, presently it became a malign
ulcer, though all good inward and outward means were used. If the infection
got into a kindred, it killed parents, children, and almost all the blood, that
were present. Whence I persuade my self that Hippocrates his (...), that is,
the divine hand and finger of God was more conspicuous in this, than in any
other visitation I had seen, though I doubt not but our food with the air
might also help to empoyson our bodies extraordinarily.

Toward the end of the siege we had made an hospital in the roof of the
house. But packing out of the Castle, we left there our sick some dying, some
crying out at the windows not to be left to their sickness, famine, and
death, and which was worse than the enemy, of whom how they were used we may
imagine:

In the Town they were much visited before we were shut up: which could not
but be augmented by the multitudes of the enemy.

In the siege of Hanaw were buried (most of the plague) above 22000 people, and
had not God sent that sickness to diminish their numbers, they had yielded the
town through want of victuals.

In the same siege, Soldiers that went to the guard seeing and well, came off
stricken stark blind thirty at a time. Afterward the disease falling into
their legs, the most of them recovered.

In Bauier men not left to bury the dead, but Rattes and mice devoured there
carcasses.

Have pittey upon me, have pittey upon me, o ye my friends for the hand of the
Lord has touched me.



CHAP. XIII. Of sickness and diseases.
THe year 1635 almost whole Germany felt this punishment, in most grievous
wise. In Swaben the Country of Tyroll, all along the Rhine, and the Maine, it
was so furiously hot, that all places were alike safe. The King of Hungary was
feign to dissolve his Court and send them away into diverse Cities, for their
safer abode.

In Swaben the inhabitants of Memingen, Campden, and Isuen were utterly
consumed, and none left. In the Country thereabout, in which were more than
thirty thousand men heretofore, were not four hundred souls to be found.

In the confines of Bavier the living were nothing near able to bury the dead.
But Rats and Mice devoured their carcasses, most horrible to behold.

The low Countries smarted sore also. The University of Leyden buried thirty
thousand. The Country Villages and the Hague, (where I was shut up my self)
were miserably afflicted. The Infant Cardinal was forced to remove from
Bruxels and Antwerp, the sickness did so increase, in those places.

Nimegen, Emerike, Rees, Guelders, with other places near, were not only
visited therewith (whereof the Marquess of Aytona, the Spanish General, and
other Commanders died) but new contagious diseases, among which were strange
Fluxes, and a kind of pox unheard of.

The Emperors Army dispersing all over for want of resistance, did also
scatter the contagion from their quarters at Haylbrun, through the Land of
Wirtenberg, that many places hereby became utterly depopulated. But since
Gallas his taking in the Towns upon the Rhine such an infection happened
through the stinch of the dead unburied bodies, that in the Bishopric of
Meniz alone there died of this and hunger twenty four thousand people.

In Saxony, Brandenburg, Pomeren, Mecklenburg, etc. this year the pestilence
with like diseases have been so universal, that these and the sword, seem to
strive which shall be the greatest destroyer. The retraite of the Swedes, in
which they did not only evade, but cut in pieces many of the enemies troops,
is not so famous as these calamities. The very plague consumed in Saxony the
other day in the space of two months, no less than sixteen thousand souls.
Insomuch that the King of Hungary has given command, that none shall come from
thence to Prague, or the Cities of Bohemia.

As by the print of Hercules his foot you might guess at his stature, so by
these few particulars of the miseries of some places there we may guess at
the lamentable estate of the whole. The war having every where caught and
raged has left such wounds as will not in haste be recured, and perhaps
posterity for some generations will see the skars.

Thus is the Virgin daughter of that people destroyed with a great
destruction, and with a sore and grievous plague. Go into the field, Ier.
14.17.
behold the slain with the sword. Enter into the City, behold them that are
sick for hunger also. So are they smitten, but are not healed. They look for
peace, but there is no good; for the time of health, but behold trouble.

FINIS.
Relinquens Theologica and quae praeterea hac in specula occurrunt viris
Reverendissimis (penes quos ea censendi est auctoritas) cognoscenda, infandas
lamentabilis Germaniae calamitates haudquaquam reticendas, sed pia mente
memorandas censeo.

November. 12. 1637. G. Rodolphus Weckherlin.


