VERBVM SEMPITERNVM.

Printed at London by JO BEALY for John Hamman 1616.

TO ANNA Queen of Great Britain.
The Epistle.

GReat Queen, (the sum of this great little book

If your high Grace, will grace to euerlooke.

I know your goodness, puts disdain to flight,

And though detraction bark, she dares not bite.

IO. TAILOR

To the Reader.
THou that this little book do take in hand,

Before thou judge be sure to understand.

And as thy kindness thou extend'st to me,

At any time I Will do as much for thee.

Thine IO. TAILOR

Genesis.
Jehovah here, of nothing, all things makes,

And man before all things his. God forsakes.

Yet by the almighty's mercy, it was decreed,

Heavens Heir should satisfy for man's misdeed.

Man's age is long, and all are great, not good,

And all (save eight) are drowned in the flood.

Old Noah, second Sire to worst and best.

Of Cham the cursed, Japhet and Sem the blessed.

Of Abrams starre-like numberless increase

Of of-springs of-springs, and his rest in peace.

Of Isreal's going into Egypt, and

Of their abode and living in that land.

Of I^sephs brethren, faithless, and unkind,

Of his firm faith, and ever constant mind.

He pardons the^ that did his death devise

Hes^es his childrens children, and he dies.

Exodus.
Th'encrease of Jacobs stock is grown past number,

And fear of them, the Egyptian king does cumber

Who giving credit to th'inchanters tales,

Commands to kill all infant Hebrew males.

But Moses is preserved in the river,

To be a Captain Israel to deliver.

Stern Pharaohs Ciuel adamantine heart

Will not permit Gods People to depart.

Ten plagues from heaven are on th Egyptians powrde, Blood, frogs, lice, flies,
beasts scabs, hail thundering showrd, Grashopers, darkness, death of first
borne men.

These were The Egyptian plagues, in number ten.

The Isr'alites are freed, and Pharohs host

In chasing them, are in the Red sea lost.

A cloud does shroud them from the burning day,

By night a fiery pillar guides their way.

The murmuring people, fearing famine, railes, God raines down Manna from the
heaven and quails.

The Law is writ in stone, (to Moses given)

By Gods own hand to guide men unto heaven.

The Ceremonial sacrifice is taught,

As ripes of who^ our breast redemption's wrought.

Leuiticus
Here man is showed, it is the almighties will,

To guard the good, and to correct the ill.

The truest service of the highest stands

In no man's fancy but as he commands.

And cause men are so apt, from grace to swerue.

He shows them here, their maker how to serve.

The Leuite are appointed by the Lord

To preach unto his chosen flock, the word.

Numbers
Old Jacobs blessed offspring numbered are,

Their valient captains and their men of war.

Cursed Korah, with his kinsman desperate Dathan,

And bold Abiram, (three sworn sons of Satan)

Rebel against Moses, with their tongs unhallowed And by the earth, by heavens
just vengance swallowed.

The Isralites to fell confusion brings

Great Og, and Sibon, misbeleeuing kings.

Where Balaam thought to curse, of force he blessed,

And by his Ass was told how he transgrest.

Five Midian Monarchs, Iudaes host does slay,

And all their spoil divided at a pray,

The land of Canaan, measured is, and found,

That in it all things plenteous does abound.

Deuteronomy
This book again the Law of God repeates,

With blessings, cursings techings and with threats. Meek Moses dies, lies in
an unknown toome,

And Nunns son (Iosuah) does supply his room.

Joshua
Great captain Joshua, great in faith and courage

Through greatest dangers valiantly does forage

He passes Jorden with his mighty host,

And to the Tribes divides coast from coast.

The harlot (Rabab) does preserve the spies,

She knows the Lord that reigns above the skies.

They all pass Jorden, which is parted dry,

Whilst they securely march inuasiuely.

The fear of Cananites does much increase,

Iericoes rane, and Manna here does cease.

Vise Achan closly steals the cursed prey.

And Isr'els beaten from the walls of Ai.

Five Kings are hanged, and Phoebus stands still

At Iosuah's prai'r whilst he his foes did kill.

Just one and thirty mighty kings were slain,

Ere Is^^el could in peace the land attain.

Which being done, the bloody wars does cease

Their faithful captain (Joshua) dies in peace.

Judges
Judah is captain Anaks sons are slain,

The Cananite, as vassais does remain:

The Israelites rebel and serve strange gods, And are al plagued with heavens
correcting rods.

The men of M^dea, Is^^el much does grieve,

Stout Gideon comes, their sorrows to relieve.

And as Gods spirit does his servant move,

He ouerthrows Baals altar and his grove.

A woman's hand King Iabins host does quail,

And ki^de his Captain Si^'ra, with a nail.

Ahimel^ch (by wrong) the kinglome gains,

A woman dashed out his ambitious brains.

Victorious Iphtah, rashly swears (not good)

And ends his conquest in his daughters blood,

Great Samson's borne, whose ever matchles strength

Orethrowes the Philistims, in breadth and length.

Fair flattering Delilah, her Lord deceiues,

He Is taken himself, himself of life bereaues.

The Beniamites abusde a Levites wife,

For which all (but six hundred) lost their life.

Ruth
(According to the flesh) this woman Ruth

Was ancient Grandam to the eternal truth:

And though she from the Moabites does come,

It shows the almighty in all lands hathsome.

1 Samuel
The Prophet Samuel's borne, and Elies sons

To sin and flat confusion headlong runs,

The Isralites, are by the Lord forsaken.

And by the Philistines the Arc is taken,

The figured presence of this All in All,

Does make the Diu^is invention Dagon fall.

God takes his people to his love again,

The Ark's brought back, the Philistines are slain.

The sons of Sam'uel, wrong their Fathers trust,

By partial judgments, and with bribes unjust.

Saul seeking straying Asses, finds a crown,

And is anoin^ed King in Raman town.

The fell Philistines, Is'rel does oppress,

King Saul does proudly against the Lord transgress

God bids kill Agag, Saul will have him spared,

His will, more then his Gods, he does regard.

Goliath armed leads an host from Gath,

Defies the Lord of Hosts, prouoks his wrath.

Young David comes, and in his hand a fling,

And with a stone the giant down does ding.

Old Ishay: son, before the king's preferred,

And David has Saul's daughter for reward.

Th'ingratefull king seeks David's causeless death,

True hearted Jonathan preserus his breath.

Saul leaves his God, and to a Witch does go,

And so himself, himself does ouerthroe.

The Philistines his childrens blud did spill,

And with his sword king Saul, king Saul did kill.

2 Samuel
King David's royal heart is filled with woe,

For Jonathan and Saul his friend, and foe.

In Regal state he lives and flourishes,

And loves Saul's Grandchild ^ame Mephibosheth.

Affection blinds him on Vrias wife,

T'accomplish which, her husband lost his life.

The king's reprou'd by Nathan, and repents,

And by repenting, heavens high wrath preuents.

Incestuous Amnen, Absolon does kill,

For forcing Ta mar against her virgin will.

He Is reco^cilde unto his loving fire,

And pr^udly to the kingdom does aspire.

The old king flees and over Jordan hies,

The son pursuing and the Father flies.

Achitophel himself hangs in despair,

And Ab^olom dies hanged by the hai^e.

The King for his rebellious son does mourn,

His people numbered are at his return,

The Lord is warth, the pestilence encreast,

That seventy thousand dies, and then it ceast.

1 Kings
The kingly Prophet (valient David dies,

His throne is left to Solomon the wise.

Falfe Adoniah, Ioab, Shimei killed.

By his command, as erst his father wild.

With speed he sends for workme^ from far coasts,

To build a temple to the Lord of hoasts,

Before or after him was never such

That had of wisdom or of wealth so much.

A thousand women, some wed, some vnwed,

This wise king to Idolatry misled.

He dies, and's buried by his fathers toome,

And Rehoboam does succeed his room.

Now Israel from Judah is divided,

Both kingdoms by bad kings are badly guided.

Yet God to Jacobs seed does promise keep,

And raises faithful pastors for his sheep.

2 Kings
Eliah works wonders with his word,

By inspiration of the living Lord.

He Is taken up alive, and his blessed spirit,

Does doubly in E^shaes breast inherit.

Some Kings do govern well, most govern ill,

And what the good reformes, the bad does spil.

Till Isrel, Judah, King, and kingdoms lost,

To great Nabuchadnezzar and his host.

1 Chronicles
H^ere every tribe is numbered by their names,

To their memorial, and immortal fames.

And David's Acts t'instruct misguided men,

Are briefly here recorded all again.

2 Chronicles
The state of Isrel, Judah and their kings,

This book again, again recordance brings,

Their plagues of plague of famine, slau'ry, sword,

For their contemning heavens Al-sauing word.

Manassehs prayer.
Manasseh almost drowned in black despair,

Gains mercy by repentance, and by prayer.

Ezra
The Persian Monach (Cirus) grants leave,

The Jews once more their freedom should receive

When at Jerusalem they make abode.

They all with zeal repair the house of God.

Malicious men (with poysnous malice filled)

Makes Artaxerxes hinder those that build.

Yet God so works, that Isrels love and zeal,

Resumes again their Church and Common weal.

Nehemiah
The book of Ezra does concord with this,

Commanding good, forbidding what is amiss.

And godly Nehemiah here reformd

What sin and satan had long time deform^d

Ester
Here he that dwells in heaven does deride

Queen Vshty's and ambitious Hamans pride.

The Jews are saved by Esters suit from death,

And Heman and his sons, hanged, lose their breath.

Poor Mordecay is held in high account,

And to great greatness humbly he does mount

Thus God does raise all those his laws that seek,

He lays the lofty low, exalts the meek.

Job
No loss of sons and daughters, goods and all,

Makes not this man into impatience fall.

Assailing satan tempting wife, false friends.

With perfect patience he all woes defends.

I naked came (quoth he) into this world,

And naked hence again I shall be hurld.

God gives and takes, according to his word,

And blessed ever be the living Lord.

Psalms
The blessed kingly Prophet sweetly sings

Eternal praises to the King of Kings.

Gods power, justice, mercy, favor, look

For they are comprehended in this book.

Proverbs
The wisest man that ever man begot,

In heavenly Proverbs shows what is good, what not.

Ecclesiastes
Health, strength, wit, valor, wordly wisdom, pelf.

All Is naught, and worse then vanity it self.

Salomons song
This song may well be called the song of songs,

It to the heavenly Bride, and Groom belongs.

It truly shows Christ's love unto his love,

His Church, his wife, his virgin spouse, his dove.

Isayah
This worthy Prophet truly does foretell,

How Christ shall come to conquer death and hell.

Rewards unto the godly he repeates,

And to the godless he denounces threats.

Jeremy
This man of God long time before foreshoes

Ierusalems Captivity and woes.

Lamentations
He wishes here his head a fountain deep

That he might weep, weep, nothing else but weep.

That he might gush forth flowing streams of tears

For Iuda's thraldom, misery, and fears.

Ezechiel.
In Babylon this Prophet captive is,

And there he prophesies of bale and bliss.

How all must come to pass the Lord has said,

How judgment surely comes, although delaid.

Daniel
The Kings dark dream the Prophet does expound

For which he is highly honored and ^^nownd.

Nabuchadnezar does an image frame,

Commands al, pain of death to adore the same.

Three godly Jews by no means will fall down,

And for contempt are in the furnace thrown.

Where midst the flames unhurt they sweetly sing,

Which wonder does convert the tyrant King.

Here Daniel prophecies of Christ to come,

Of Babel, Persia, Gracia, and Rome.

Hosea
He tells misgouern'd Isrdel their sins,

And how the loss of grace destruction winnes.

Joel
This Prophet tells the stubborn hearted Jews,

How heavens consuming wrath apace ensues.

He therefore does persuade the^ to contrition,

And by contrition they shall have remission.

Amos
Man's thankelesse heart, and gods vnmeasurd love,

This Prophet does to Isrels faces prove.

Obadiah
He comforts Judah (ouerprest with woes,

And prophesies destruction of their foes.

Jonah
Here Jonah tells the Ninevites, except

Repentance, wrath of heaven does intercept,

In forty days, high, low, rich poor, great, small

The Lords hot fury shall consume them all.

With hearts vnfaign'd, the sinful City mournes

The Lord grants mercy, Jonah back returns.

Micah
He speaks of Isrels and of Iuda's crimes,

And tells them their confusion comes betimes.

Nabum
The Ninevites (again forsake the Lord,

And are subdude by the Assirian sword.

This Prophet comforts those that are oppressed,

And tells the godly they shall be releast.

Habakkuk
He does bewail th'oppression of the poor,

For mercy humbly, he does God implore.

To keep the captived Jews from fell despair,

He teaches them a heavenly form of Prayer.

Zephaniah
He fills the good with hope, the bad with fear,

And tells the Jews their thraldom draws near.

Haggay
H'exhorteth the^ to patience in their pain,

And bids them build the temple once again.

Zechariah
He tells the Jews why they have plagued been,

He bids them shun Idolatry and sin.

Malachi
For sin he does reprove both Prince and Priest,

And shows the coming both of John and Christ

Malachy
Which Christ shall be a Savior unto al,

That with true faith obeyes his heavenly call.

Apocrypha
These books do all in general intimate,

The state of good men and the reprobate.

In many places they do seem to vary,

And bear a sense from Scripture quite contrary.

In Tobit, and dame Judith disagrees

From text, and Razes, in the Mathabees.

For which the Church has ever, held it fit

To place them (...) themselves from holy writ.

SALVATOR MVNDI

Printed at London by JO BEALE for John Hamman 1616.

TO CHARLES, Prince of Great Britain.
The Epistle.

THou high-borne Of spring of the best of men,

To thy protection my unlearned pen

Does creep for shelter; though my book be small,

In substance, to is no less then all in all.

The Cedar shields the shrub from winters flawes,

And Greatness guards the least, from Enuies Jaws.

So I the worst, (that in these times do write)

Implores your Grace t'accept this worthless mite.

IO. TAIL OR.

To the Reader
Here, Reader, may thou read (for little cost)

How thou wast ransomed, when thou quite wast lost.

Man's gracelesnes, and Gods exceeding Grace

Thou here may read, and see, in little space.

I. T.

S. Matthew.
LO here the blessed Son of God and man (Newborn) who was before all worlds
began,

Of heavenly seed the eternal living Rock

Of humane race, of kingly David's stock.

Our blessed Redeemer, whom the Prophets old

In their true preachings hadso often foretold

In figures, ceremonies, types and trops,

He here fulfils their words, confirms their hopes.

The worlds saluations sole and total sum.

Poor mankinds Savior, lesus Christ is come.

From married Mary, wife and virgin springs

This heavenly, earthly, supreme King of Kings.

He Is naked born, and in a manger laid,

Where he and's mother (blessed wife and maid

Are by the Wise men sought, and seeking found,

And having found, their joys do all abound.

Where they their love, their zeal, their faith unfold,

And offer inense, mirre, and purest gold.

False hearted Herod seeks to destroy

This newborn infant, our eternal joy.

But Joseph by a dream is warned by night

T'ward Egypt with the Babe to take his flight. Amongst the Egyptians he not
long soiournes,

But back to Naz'reth he again returns.

To end the law the Babe was circumcised,

And then by John in Jorden was baptized,

When lo the Father from his glorious throne

Sends down the Holy ghost upon his Son,

In likeness of a pure unspotted Dove,

Which did his birth and baptism both approve.

Now subtle Satan's he attempt^ and tempts him,

And fasting, to the wilderness exempts him.

But Jesus power the foul fiends power destroi'd,

Commanding Satan hence, Avoid, avoid.

The fearful devil does flee, Christ goes and preaches, And in the mountain
multitudes he teaches:

He said, Repentance wipes away transgressings,

And to the godly be pronounced blessings.

He makes the lame to go, the blind to see,

Deaf hear, dumb speak, the leapers cleansed be.

The devils from the possessed out he drove,

The dead are raised, the poor the Gospel have.

Such things he does, as none but God can do.

And all is to bring his flock his fold unto.

All that are laden, come to me (quoth he)

And I will ease you, therefore come to me.

You of your heavy sins I do acquit,

My yoke is easy and my burden's light.

Upon Mount Tabor, there our blessed Messiah

Does show himself, with Moses and Elias.

Yet all these mighty wonders that he wrought:

Nor all the heavenly teachings that he taught.

The stiffeneck'd stubborn Jews could not convert But they Remain obdurate,
hard of heart.

The man (quoth some) by who^ these things are done,

It is the Carpenters, poor Joseph's son.

Some said how he these things to pass did bring

By power of Beelzebub the infernal king.

Thus with the poison of their envious tongues,

They guerdon good with ill, and right with wrongs

His own not knows him, Judas does betray him.

To Annas and to Caiphas they convey him.

From Caiphan back to Annas, and from thence

Is sent this everlasting blessed Prince.

Thus is this death, this sin, this Satan killer,

Among sinful wretches tossed from post to pillar.

He Is flouted, spitted on, derided, stripped,

He Is most unmercifully scourged, and whipped,

By impious people he is blasphemed and raild,

And of the Jews (in scorn) as king is hailed.

He like a lamb unto his death is led,

Nailed on the Cross for man, his heart-bloud shed.

He (after three days) glorious does arise;

He leaves the sinful earth, and mounts the skies.

But first to his Disciples he appears,

Where he their drooping half ded spirits cheers

S. Mark.
S. Mark declares how blessed bapti^ing John,

Forerunner was of Gods eternal Son.

Which John in wilderness baptises, teaches,

And of contrition and remission preaches.

Our Savior ^alles no Pharisees or Scribes,

Or princely people out of Iudah^ Tribes:

But Simon, Andrew, James and John are those

Poor toiling Fishermen which Jesus chose

To show that with the humblest smallest things

God greatest matters to perfection brings.

By sundry wondrous works our Savior Jesus

From sin and Satan lab'reth to release us.

And in requital the ungrateful Jews

Devise their blessed Redeemer to abuse.

Some inwardly do hate him, some belie him,

His servants all forsake him, or deny him.

But Peter thou wast blessed in thy denial,

Of thy presuming thou have found the trial.

Repentance washed away thy frailties crimes,

And thou a pattern art to aftertimes.

The son and heir of never fading heaven

Into the hands of sinful men is given.

He dies, he is buried, and in glory rises,

Triumphing over all his foes devices.

S. Luke.
Here Marie, and old Zacharias sings

In joyful manner to the King of Kings.

And aged Simeon in his arms does take

The Lord of life, and does reioycings make.

Christ teaches, preaches mercy unto all,

That by amendment will for mercy call.

He Is taken, and by false witnesses accused.

He Is beaten, scoffed, scorned, and abused.

He Is hanged upon the Cross betwixt two thieves

The one does rail on him, and one believes.

He dies, he is buried; rising he does quell

And conquer al ^is foes, sin, death and hell.

S. John.
In the beginning was the eternal word,

The word with God was, and that word the Lord.

In the beginning the same word with God

Was; and for ever has with him abode.

With it was al things made and made was nough^* Without this word the which
was made or wrought

Here Christ's divinity is told by John,

The blessed Trinity, one three, three one.

How God had now performed the oath he swore

To Abram, and to Israel long before.

How Christ should come, to ransom Adams loss,

And satisfy Gods justice on the Cross.

Though times and places far in sunder be,

Yet Prophets, and Evangelists agree.

In Jesus birth, his doctrine, life and death,

Whereby our dying souls gains living breath.

If all things should be writ which erst was don

By Jesus Christ (Gods everlasting Son.)

From Cratch to Cross, from cradle to his tomb

To hold the books the world would scarce be room.

Acts.
The Apostles praising God, and singing songs,

The holy Ghost in fiery cloven tongues,

Descends upon them, who are all inspired

With learned la^guages, adorned admired.

Saint Peter preaching, tells the people plain,

How they the living Lord of life had slain:

Some flout and mock, remaining stubborn hearted.

And many souls perverted, are converted.

The Church increases, daily numbers comes,

And to the Gospels furthring ^iues great sums.

False Ananias and his faithless wife,

In dreadful manner lost their wretched life.

The enui^us people stone the martyr Steven,

He praying for his foes; leaves earth for heaven.

The Churches archfoe, persecuting Saul,

Is made a convert, and a preaching Paul.

He Is clapped in prison, manacled, and fettered,

And through his troubles, still his zeal is bettered.

The Apostle James by Herod's put to death,

And Herod eat with lice, lost hateful breath.

Th'increasing Church amongst the Gentiles spreds

By Nero, Paul and Peter lost their heads.

Romans
The Apostle Pau^ from Corinth writ to Rome,

To strength the^^ faith, and tell the^ Christ is come,

He shows how high and low, both Jew and Greek

Are one with God, who faithfully him seek.

He tells how si^ in mortal bodie^ lurks,

How we ar^ saved by faith, and not by works.

In loving terms ^he people he ^oth move,

To faith, to ^ope, to charity ^^d love.

1. Corinths.
Paul to Corinthus from Phillippy sends,

Their zeal, and faith he lovingly commends.

He tells them (...) Gods service ^^ey regard,

The Eternal ^owne of life is ^^eir reward.

2. Corinthians
In this saint Paul sends the Corinthians word,

Afflictions are the blessings of the Lord.

He does desire their faith may still increase,

He wishes their prosperity and peace.

Galathians
He tells them that their whole saluations cause

Is all in Christ, and not in Moses ^awes.

The law's a glass where men their sins do see,

And that by Christ we only saved be.

Ephesians
Paul bids, Cast off the old man with his vice,

And put on Christ, our blessed redemptions price.

Philippians
He bids them of false Teachers to beware,

He tells them that humility is rare.

And though they live here, in a veil of striffe,

Yet for them is laid up the crown of life.

Collossians.
The Apostle does rejoice, and praises God,

That these Collossians in true faith abode.

He praises them, he bids the^ watch and pray.

That sin and Satan work not their decay.

1 Thessalonians.
He thanketh God his labor's not in vain,

So steadfast in the faith, these men remain

That they to others are a blessed light,

By their example how to live spright.

2. Thessalonians.
Again to them he lovingly does write:

He bids them pray, the Gospel prosper might.

He wishes them prosperity and wealth,

And in the end souls everlasting health.

1. and 2. to Timothy
Paul shows to Timothy, a Bishop must

In life and doctrine be sincere and just.

And how the Scriptures, power have to persuade

Whereby the man of God is perfect made.

Titus.
To Titus (among the Creetans) Paul does send,

And warns him what t'allow, or reprehend.

Philemon
Paul earnestly the master does request

To pardon his poor man that had transgrest

Hebrews.
Although this book does bear no Authors name, It shows the lews how they
their lives should frame.

And that the Ceremonial law is ended

In Christ, in whom all grace is comprehended.

S. Iame^.
Hear, speak, and do well, the Apostle says,

For by thy works, a man may see thy faith.

1. and 2. to Peter.
He counsels us, be sober, watch, and pray.

And still be ready for the Judgment day.

1, 2 and 3. of John
He shows Christ di'de, and from the grave arose.

To save his friends, and to confound his foes

S. Jude.
Jude bids them in all godliness proceed,

And of deceiving teachers to take heed.

Revelation.
Divine S. John to Pathmos I Will euilde,

This heavenly work, t'instruct us, he compilde.

He tells the godly, God shall be their gains.

He threats the godless with eternal pains.

He shows how Antichrist should reign and rage,

And how our Savior should his pride assuage.

How Christ in glory shall to judgment come

And how a^ people must abid^ his doom.

Prayer.
Oh thou whose name is greatest of all names

Preserve and keep the Race of Royal Iamet,

That Britains throne for ever may besure

Of one of them whilst Sun and Moon endure.

Amen.


