CHRIST'S KINGDOM DISCOVERED: OR, That the true Church of God is in England,
clearly made manifest against all Sectaries whatsoever.

By John Traske.

DAN. 12.10. None of the wicked shall understand; but the Wise shall understand.

MAT. 11.19. Wisdom is justified of her Children.

The second Edition.

LONDON, Printed by Tho: Creed, and Bern: Alsop, for Josias Harrison: and are
to be sold in Pater noster-row, at the sign of the Golden Anchor. 1616.

To all the blessed People of England, even all such as desire the peace of the
Land, together with the flourishing of the Church, grace and peace be
multiplied.
Here is offered to your view some help to the reading of the holy
Scriptures; the understanding of the Prophecies; but especially of the Estate
of the Church, that so you may no longer be carried up and down with every
wind of Doctrine. But as you have begun to attend upon the word preached in
England, and to practice those other Duties public and private, our Church
requires; so it will be comfortable to your souls, and profitable to the
Commonwealth, if you proceed, not turning to the right hand or to the left:
Wherefore it is desired, that you would read it once over without taking notice
of the quotations of Scripture; and having read once over, then try at the next
reading whether the Scriptures be rightly used, for that they seem to be
here placed: and know that the last Translation is followed, as that by the
which the Writer has often confessed, that he has received more benefit,
then by all the Expositors that ever he read. And thou art desired withal to
esteem that translation highly, and make it one cause of hearty thanksgiving
to GOD, who has given, and continued to us a King that has been a principal
mouer in such a great business; as also gifts unto Men, that so much light is
sprung out by their means. Albeit thou shall happily meet with some private
Spirits that will be ready to censure sharply; that, by the which the Church
of GOD, will (certainly) at length reap great benefit. And so desiring thy
fervent prayers for the advancement of Christ's Kingdom, I rest yet a while.

Mar. 2. 1615.
CHRIST'S Kingdom discovered: by three things. 1. The Inquiry this in; three.
1. What it is? in two. 1. The titles: these four 1. Kingdom of God: this only
referred to both estates. 1. To this Life. 2. To that to come.
2. Kingdom of Heaven. 3. Son of man's Kingdom 4. Kingdom of CHRIST.
2. the things: these seven. 1. A KING. 2. A SCEPTER. 3. LAWS. 4.
AMBASSADORS. 5. SVBIECTS. 6. OFFICERS. 7. ARMOR.

2 Where it is? in two. 1. on Earth, n t in heaven In this life, not that to
come: 2: In what place? this by three 1. It is not tied to any one Kingdom or
People. 2. It is above that Kingdom where it is. 3. Wheresoever the Saints
are, there it is.

When it began? in two (...) 1. It has been ever open to Belieuers. (...)


full not a^^
CHRIST'S Kingdom Discovered.
THere are two principal Ends, at which the whole Scripture aims. The first
is, Romans 11.36. Deuteronomy. 29.29.
Gods Glory. Romans 11.36. The second, our Good. Deuteronom: 29.29.

Concerning this latter: Two things are obserueable. First, our estate in this
life: Secondly, when this life is ended. About our estate here; There is one
thing necessary. Luc: 10.42. Luke 10.42.
And about this necessary thing, three necessary Circumstances: First, that it
is to be sought, or enquired after. Secondly, being found, to be seized on, or
entered into. Thirdly, being enjoyed as our own, we must be careful of the use
thereof; that we be not again deprived of it.

This one necessary thing; is Christ's Kingdom. This is that, which must be
Enquired for; or sought out: being Found, must be seized on, or entered into:
and having found, and entered; Diligence must be daily used to make a greater
Entrance, and continually to walk worthy of such a glorious estate.

That it must be sought, is plain: where it is written, Seek ye first the
Kingdom of God, Math. 6.33. Lu. 12.13. Matthew. 7.13.
and his Righteousness, Math: 6.33. Luke 12.31. That it must be entered into, is
plain: where it is written, Enter in at the straight gate, Matthew: 7.13.

And, Except your Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye can in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Ma. 5.20
Mat. 5.20.

That we are to Walk worthy of this estate; and daily to make a greater
entrance into this Kingdom: is plain also in that charge which the Apostle had
given to the Thessalonians: That they would walk worthy of GOD, 1 Thessalonians.
2.12.
who had called them to his Kingdom and Glory. 1. Thessal: 2.12.

And where it is also written, Give all diligence, add to your Faith, Virtue;
and to your Virtue, Knowledge; and to Knowledge, Temperance; and to Temperance,
Patience: and to Patience, Godlineso; and to godliness, brotherly kindness;
and to brotherly kindness, love; For if ye do these things, ye shall never
fall; For an Entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly, into the
everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. 2. Pet. 1.5.6. 2.
Pet. 1. 5 6.7.10.11.
7.10.11.

Now that seeking, we may find: it shall be showed: First, what this kingdom
is. Secondly, where it is. Thirdly, when it might properly be said to begin.
And first, what it is; It is that Spiritual Government, which God the Father
is said to give unto the Son, and which the Son is said to desire of the
Father: which also both the Father and the Son do order by the Spirit: Not
that one of them is before, or after other; That one is greater or less then
other in this Administration; but that all three are Equal, and as one do
order this great business. Even that Kingdom which the Son shall again at
the end deliver up unto his Father. As it is written, Yet have I set my King
upon my holy hill of Syon, I will declare the Decree: the Lord has said unto
me, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. Ask of me, and I shall
give thee the Heathen for thine Inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the
Earth, for thy Possession; Psalm. 2.6.7.8. And Peter writes thus, We have not
followed cunningly devised fables, Psalm. 2.6.7.8.
when we made known unto you, the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ,
but were eyewitnesses of his Majesty. For he received from God the Father,
honor and Glory, when there came such a voice to him, from the excellent
glory. 2. Pet. 1.16.17.
2. Pet. 1.16.17.

Also Paul writes thus: Christ the first fruits, afterward, they that are
Christ's at his coming. Then the End, when he shall have delivered up the
Kingdom to God, even the Father. 1. Cor. 15.23.24. 1. Cor. 15 23.24
Thus you see it is manifest; That the Son desires, God the Father gives,
according to his desire; and at the end shall again deliver up this which he
has received, to God the Father, and then GOD shall be all in all.

This Kingdom is sometimes termed the Church of the Living GOD; 1. Cor. 14.28.
1. Tim. 3.15. Heb. 12.23. Psalm. 15.1 Ezekiel 37.27. Reu. 21.3
^. Cor: 14.28. Sometimes the House of God, 1. Tim. 3.15. Sometimes the City
of the Living God; the New Jerusalem: Hebr: 12.23. Sometimes the Tabernacle of
God. Psalm: 15.1. Eze: 37.27. Revel: 21.3. Albeit neither of these do so
fully and clearly discover this great Mystery: as this Title Kingdom.

Yet herein God is to be praised, in that he vouchsafes so to descend to our
Capacity, as to use all these: that they which cannot conceive it by one, may
understand it by an other. As those that know but a Tabernacle or Tent, may
thereby be helped, to the apprehension of it; Those that are not acquainted
with a Tent, knowing a House, may yet conceive it: Such as know Tents and
Houses, yea Cities, may more fully see it: And such as know a Kingdom, may
be led (as it were by the hand) to the view of every part thereof. Thus,
God has proffered the view thereof to all: To Kings, discovering it by a
Kingdom, Dan. 2.44. To Citizens, by the view of a City. Psalm. 48.1.2. To
Householders, by comparing it to a House. 1. Pet. 2.5. To Soldiers, by using a
borrowed word of a Tabernacle, or Tent. Heb. 8.3. What shall I say? He offers
the view thereof, to Merchants; Matthew: 13.44.46. To Husbandmen, Math. 13.24.
Fishers. Math: 13.47. Women. Matthew. 13.33. Virgins. Matthew. 25.1. Servants,
Matt. 25.14. To All; Matthew. 22.1. That so, some of all sorts might receive it:
And all, be they what they will that refuse, might be void of all Excuse.

That now we may be yet more acquainted with it, let us consider of the Titles
and the Parts thereof.

The Titles are most usually four: The first, is the Kingdom of GOD: the
second, the Kingdom of Heaven: the third, the Son of Man's Kingdom: the
fourth, the Kingdom of CHRIST: The first, does indifferently concern the
estate we do here enjoy, with that hereafter. The estate hereafter, where it
is written, Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, neither does
corruption, inherit incorruption. 1. Corinthians. 15.50. 1. Cor: 15.50.
The other three concern the Church, here in this life: and either of them,
may be used indifferently, as may be made manifest, by comparing them
together; As where it is written, That a Ritch-man can hardly enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven; Mat: 19.23. Matt. 19.23.
And in the next verse, speaking of the same thing, we find it thus; It is
easier for a Cammell, to go through the eye of a needle, then for a Ritch-man
to enter into the Kingdom of God; Math. 19.24. Matt. 19.24.
Where we find the Kingdom of Heaven, or of God, used indifferently. So we may
also see of the rest: As where it is thus written, There be some standing
here, which shall not taste of Death, till they see the Son of Man coming
in his Kingdom. Matthew. 16.28. Matt. 16.28.
There it is termed, the Son of man's Kingdom: or more plainly, the Kingdom
of Christ. And speaking again of the same thing, in another place, it is thus
written, There be some standing here, which shall not taste of Death, till
they see the Kingdom of God: Mar: 9.1 Lu. 9.27.
Mark. 9.1. Luke. 9.27. Thus these three, may be used indifferently one for
another; yea, all the four Titles. Yea, and the first does concern most the
estate of the Church in this life, and is so always to be understood, where
there is no manifest difference in the same Scripture.

Now the Title, which does most fully and clearly set forth this great
mystery; Ephe. 5.5. Re. 11.15 1. Pet. 1.11.
and includes all the rest in it, is the last: which is, The Kingdom of
Christ; Ephesians. 5.5. Revel. 11.15. 2. Pet. 1.11. Termed the Kingdom of God:
because CHRIST is GOD; And the Kingdom of the Son of man, because he also is
MAN: And the Kingdom of Heaven; to show that he received his government from
Heaven. But not so much desirous to show the reasons of Titles, as the truth of
things: I have only thus briefly touched these, as some help to the
understanding of the Scriptures; wherein these terms or Titles are often found.

Now of the things, of which principally this Kingdom consists; and these
are seven, which shall be touched also briefly: And first, 1. King.
As in other Kingdoms, or Kingdoms of this World, there are Kings, from which
they properly are termed Kingdoms: So here is a glorious King, and blessed
Prince: even that Rod, out of the stem of Iesse; and that Branch out of his
roots. That man whose name is, The Branch, The Lord our Righteousness, Christ
Jesus: As it is written, Yet have I set my King upon my holy hill of Sion: And
in another place, Rejoice greatly, o Daughter Sion, shout o Daughter
Jerusalem; behold thy King comes unto thee, he is just, and having
salvation: lowly, and riding upon an Ass, and upon a Colt, the Foale of an
Ass. Is. 62.11. Zach. 9.9.
Is. 62.11. Zach. 9.9. Thus did Christ, as we read in the Gospel, Mat.
21.7.8. Mar. 11.2. Io. 12.15. Mat. 21.7.8. Mar. 11.2. Io. 12.15.
where they are said to cry Hosanna, to the Son of David: blessed is he
that comes in the Name of the Lord. And Paul speaking expressly of Christ,
applies that of the Prophet Isaiah to him thus; There shall be a root of
Iesse, and him that shall rise to reign over the Gentiles, in him shall the
Gentiles trust. Romans 15.12. 2. Scepter
And thus you have the King.

Secondly, as in other Kingdoms there are Scepters, to which Subjects must
stoop; and to which such as stoop not are yet Rebels: So here is a Scepter
in the hand of Christ, by which men are known that yield true Subjection. And
this Scepter is the righteousness of Faith. By this he rules his Subjects; as
Paul confesses, where it is thus written; I count all things but loss for the
Excellency of the Knowledge of Jesus Christ my Lord; for whom I have suffered
the loss of all things, and do count them but dung that I might win Christ:
and be found in him, not having mine own Righteousness, which is of the Law,
but that which is through the Faith of Christ; the Righteousness which is of God
by Faith. That I might know him, and the power of his Resurrection, and the
fellowshippe of his sufferings, being made conformable to his death: Phil. 3.8,
9, 10.
Phil. 3.8, 9.10. So it is written in the Psalm: Thy Throne o God is for ever,
the Scepter of thy Kingdom is a right Scepter. Applied by the same Spirit to
Christ: But unto the Son he said, Thy Throne o God is for ever and ever, the
Scepter of Righteousness is the Scepter of thy Kingdom. And so you have the
Scepter.

Thirdly, 3. Laws.
in Kingdoms of this World there are Laws and Ordinances: So also in this;
there are Laws that are perfect, sure, right, pure, clean, true, righteous,
desirable, and most sweet, Psa. 19.7, 8.9, 10. Yea, Psalm. 19.7, 8, 9, 10.
here are Laws, Statutes, and Judgments: Even, All Scripture given by
inspiration of God; and profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction,
for instruction in righteousness: 2 Timothy 3.16. 2 Timothy 3.16.
This was Prophesied of, where it is written, Remember ye the Law of Moses my
servant, which I commanded unto him in Horeb, for all Israel; with the
Statutes, and Judgments: Mal. 4.4. Mal. 4.4.
These are the Laws of this Kingdom; to which whosoever shall add, he is
accussed of GOD: Deuteronomy. 4.2. the 12.32. Deuteronomy. 4.2. and 12.13.
And from which, whosoever shall take away, God shall take away his part out of
the Book of Life: Reu. 22. Revel. 22.18.19.
18, 19. For, Till heaven and earth pass, one Jot, or one Title shall in no
wise pass from the Law, Mat. 5.18. 4. Ambassadors
till all be fulfilled: Mat. 5.18.

In Earthly Kingdoms there are also Ambassadors, whom the Kings send; and
being so sent, they represent their own Persons: either in calling in Rebels,
or by treating with Enemies, to proclaim War, or to offer conditions of
Peace unto them: So in this Kingdom, there are Ambassadors, which are termed
Preachers, Romans 10.14. Ministers, 1 Cor. 3.5. Stewards, 1 Cor. 4.1. And the
Prophets making use of their own words, have termed them Priests and Levites,
Is. 66.2^. or Saviors, Obad. 21. Gladtidings bringers, Is. 52.7: and the like:
As it is written; Behold upon the Mountains the feet of him that brings
good Tidings, Nah. 1.15. And Paul uses the words of Isaiah, and of Nahum,
where it is thus written: How beautiful are the Feet of them that preach the
Gospel of Peace, and bring glad tidings of good things! Romans 10.15.
Romans 10.15. And one of the Prophets has it thus; Saviors shall come upon
Mount Sion, to Judge the Mount of Esau, and the Kingdom shall be the Lords:
Ob. 21. Obad. ver. 21.
Also, it is written; We are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech
you by us: we pray you in Christ's stead, 2 Cor. 5.20. 5. Subjects.
be ye reconciled to God: 2 Cor. 5.20.

As in other Kingdoms there is a King, Laws, a Scepter, and Ambassadors; so
there are also Subjects, men of all sorts and ages: So in this Kingdom there
are also Subjects, which are the Saints, holy Men and Women, pure, clean,
undefiled, and harmless ones. As it is written; Thy people shall be all
righteous: Is. 60.21. And in another place; Is. 60.21.
Look upon Sion, the City of our solemnities, thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a
quiet habitation. And the Inhabitants shall not say, I am sick: the people
that dwelt therein shall be forgiven their iniquity: Is. 33.20.24.
Is. 33.20.24. Again, Who shall ascend into the Hill of the Lord? And, Who
shall stand in his holy Place? The answer is; He that has clean hands, and
a pure heart, who has not lift up his soul unto vanity, nor sworn
deceitfully: Psalm. 24.3.4. And in another place: Psalm. 24.3.4.
Who shall dwell with the devouring Fire? Who shall dwell with everlasting
burnings? Is. 33.14.
Is. 33.14. The answer is, He that walks righteously, and speaks
uprightly; he that despises the gain of oppressions, and shakes his hands
from holding of bribes, that stops his ears from hearing of blood, and
shuts his eyes from seeing evil, Ver. 15.16
he shall dwell on high; Ver. 15.16. Again, The Saints of the most high shall
take the Kingdom, and shall possess the Kingdom for ever and ever: Dan. 7.18
Dan. 7.18. Also, This ye know, that no Whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor
covetous man, who is an Idolater, has any inheritance in the Kingdom of
Christ: Ephesians. 5.5.
Ephesians. 5.5. And in another place, Be not deceived; neither Fornicators, nor
Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with
mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Reuilers, nor
Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God: And of this sort were every
one of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in
the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God: 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11.
1 Cor, 6.9, 10, 11. And once again the same Apostle gives thanks unto the
Father which has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the
Saints in Light: And (being so made meet by repentance) has delivered us from
the power of darkness, and has translated us into the Kingdom of his dear
Son: Col. 1.12, 13. And it is plain, Col. 1.12.13.
that there shall in no wise enter in (to the new Jerusalem) any thing that
defiles, neither whatsoever works abomination: Revel. 21.27. Revel. 22.14.
Revel. 21.27. But they that do Gods commandments, Revel. 22.14. That is, Do
truly believe in Christ: such only have right to the Tree of Life. And they
alone may enter through the gates into the City: Mat. 7.21.22. Mat. 7.21.22.
Thus then the Subjects of this Kingdom are none but Saints; holy, clean,
pure, and undefiled ones: such as are first washed, sanctified, and justified:
that is, Made meet by the washing of Regeneration, and the renewing of the
holy Ghost, to be made heirs, and so to receive their Inheritance amongst the
Saints in Light: Tit. 3.5.7. Tit. 3.5.7. 6. Officers.


Besides the King, Scepter, Laws, Ambassadors, and Subjects, in other Kingdoms
there are Officers: So in this also, as it is written; Thy Officers shall be
peace: Is. 60.17.
that is, in stead of Officers, thou shall have Peace: Yea, all the Subjects of
this Kingdom are Peacemakers: as it is written; Blessed are the Peacemakers,
for they shall be called the Children of God. Mat. 5.9.
They, and none but they: Mat. 5.9. And it is written, That a little Child
shall lead Christ's Subjects. Is. 11.6.
Is. 11.6. The humblest shall bear greatest sway there: as it is written,
Whosoever shall humble himself as a little child, the same is the greatest in
the Kingdom of heaven; Mat. 18.4. Mat. 18.4. Is. 66.12. 7. Weapons.
Yea, God has promised, To extend Peace like a River to those that dwell in
Sion. Is. 66.12.

Lastly, in a Kingdom of this world there are Weapons, with which the Subjects
do fight: So here are Weapons also, yea complete Armor, with which these
Subjects do also fight: as it is written; The Weapons of our warfare are not
carnal, but mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong Holds: 2 Cor.
10.4. 2 Cor. 10.4. Ephesians. 6.11 Ver. 12. Ver. 13.
And again, Put on the whole Armor of God, and stand, having your loins girt
about with Truth; and having on the Brestplate of Righteousness; and your feet
shod with the Preparation of the Gospel of Peace: above all things, taking the
Shield of Faith, Ver. 14. Ver. 15. Ver. 16. Ver. 17. Ver. 18.
the Helmet of Salvation, and the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of
God: praying always, with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit: Ephesians.
6.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. This is the Armor of righteousness, which the
Saints have on the right hand, and on the left: 2 Cor. 6.7. 2 Cor. 6.7.
Only the sober children of the day do put on the Brestplate of Faith and
Love, and for an helmet, the hope of salvation: 1 These. 5.8.
1 The. 5.8. Thus you have, as the titles, so also the principal things of
which this Kingdom consists: As of a King, a Scepter, Laws, Ambassadors,
Subjects, Officers, Weapons: And having this briefly seen what it is; it
follows, to be showed where it is: According to that question of the
Disciples; Where Lord? Luke 17.37. Luke 17.37.


Here shall be observed first, Whether on earth, or, in heaven? that is, in
this life, or, that to come? Secondly, seeing it is on Earth, where it is to
be found? For the first, it is affirmed before, and shall be confirmed by
testimonies now, that this Kingdom is on Earth: for so it is written; In the
days of these Kings shall the God of heaven set up a Kingdom which shall never
be destroyed: Dan. 2.44.
Dan. 2.44. And in another place, Ask of me, and I will give thee the heathen
for thine inheritance: and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession;
Ps. 2.8. Ps. 2.8.
Also, it is written, We are come to mount Sion: and, we receiving a Kingdom:
Heb. 12.22.28. Also, it is termed, Dan. 7.27.
The Kingdom under heaven: Dan. 7.27. And in the Psalms, Great is the Lord,
and greatly to be praised in the City of our God, in the mountain of his
Holiness, beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth is Mount Sion:
Ps. 48.1.2.
Ps. 48.1.2. Yea, it is said in the same Psalm, That Kings shall see the glory
of this Church, or Kingdom; and that with fear and amazement: Ver. 4.5.
ver. 4.5. Out of all this we may gather many forcible Arguments, to prove this
truth; that this Kingdom, City, House, or Tabernacle, is in this life: as you
have before in the Scriptures scited to that purpose in these words; It shall be
in the days of Kings of this world: also, It shall stretch to the uttermost
parts of the earth: also, We are come to it; not, we shall; but, we are: and,
we receiving a Kingdom: not, Seeing we shall receive a Kingdom; but, Seeing
we do receive: also, in the same Scripture, we are willed to hold it fast:
now there is no need of such an exhortation, if it were of the life to come, as
al will easily grant. Further, It is the joy of the whole earth. And Kings shall
behold it, and pass by with fear and amazement. What shall I say? Arguments
of this sort are very many in holy Scriptures: yea, Is. 6.5.17. the 66. Reu.
21. the 22. Ps. 16.11. Mat. 22.30. Mat. 13.43.
even those places which they most abuse to the contrary, do yield many plain
arguments to every impartial Reader: as, Isai. 65.17. the 66. Reu. 21. and 22.
and such like. And let this be observed, that where the holy Ghost speaks any
where of the life to come, it is always in very short speeches, or brief
sentences: as for example: Fulness of joy; pleasures at Gods right hand for
evermore. Ps. 16.11. We shall be as the Angels in heaven, Mat. 22 30. We shall
shine as the sun for ever in the Kingdom of our Father, Mat. 13.43. We shall
have everlasting life. Mat. 19.29. Mar. 10.30.
Where Christ is, we shall also be. Io. 14.3.
We shall behold his glory. Io. 17.24. 2 Cor. 4.17.
We shall have a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory: 2. Cor.
4.17. We shall appear with Christ in glory: Col. 3.4. 1 These. 4.17.
Col. 3.4. We shall be ever with the Lord: 1 These. 4.17. It is an inheritance
incorruptible and undefiled, that fades not away, 1 Pet. 1.4
reserved in heaven for us: 1 Pet. 1.4. When he shall appear, we shall be like
him; for we shall see him as he is: 1 Io. 3.2. 2 Timothy 4.8. Revel. 2.10. Mat.
5.12.
1. Io. 3.2. We shall have a Crown of righteousness: 2 Timothy 4.8. A Crown of
life: Revel. 2.10. A great reward in heaven: Mat. 5.12. These, or such like are
all those phrases which are used in the Scriptures, to set forth the life to
come unto us: and that blessed condition there reserved for us.

The Reason hereof might be, either the impossibility, in regard of the
straightnes of our bowels, 2 Cor. 6.12, 13.
to conceive of that blessedness: 2. Cor. 6.12, 13. Or as we speak, our
shallow capacity in the comprehension of such an excellent mystery: but it is
indeed the eternal purpose of God in hiding these things (as secrets) from us
till the Last day: as these Scriptures following may witness: That of Paul,
where it is written, That being caught up into the third heaven, he heard
unspeakable words, which is not lawful for a man to utter: 2 Cor. 12.2.4.
2 Cor. 12.2.4. Also, Now we are the sons of God: and it does not yet
appear what we shall be: 1 Io. 3.2. And it is also written, 1 Io. 3.2.
That this incorruptible and undefiled inheritance is reserved for us in
heaven, and ready to be revealed in the last time: 1 Pet. 1.4.5.
1 Pet. 1.4, 5. So that this may be a manifest note, either short, or more
large speeches, to help us to conceive of the difference between things of
this life, and that which is to come. Things of this life are always spoken in
express phrases, that we may conceive, because we are to speak of them again
to others: As it is written; Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have
entered into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that
love him: but God has revealed them to us by his Spirit: Which things we also
speak: 1 Cor. 2.9, 10, 13.
1 Cor. 2.9, 10, 13.

And yet further we may observe by certain phrases and usual speeches, that
the holy Ghost has put a difference between our estate here, and hereafter:
for speaking of our estate here, he speaks of coming to us, and sending to
us, and such like. But speaking any where of the life to come, he speaks of
fetching us to him, and the like.

This is not to be slightly regarded in reading the holy Scriptures: as to
instance in the places before mentioned, which are by some abused, to the life
to come. It is written, The glory of the Lord is risen upon thee: and, The
Lord shall arise upon thee: Is. 60.1.2.
Is. 60.1.2. Yea, that whole Chapter is full of strong reasons to enforce it to
be understood of the estate here. Also, where it is written, For behold I
create new heavens, and a new earth, and the former shall not be remembered,
nor come into mind: But be you glad, and rejoice for ever, which I recreate:
for behold, I recreate Jerusalem a Rejoicing, and her people a Joy. Here the
holy Ghost expounds the New Heavens, and the New Earth; to be meant of the
New Jerusalem, and the people thereof: Even that new worship which is now
amongst the Saints: and the new worshippers which have been, are, and shall
be on the earth; as is plain in the verse next before, to the which these are
added, as a further Illustration. In that verse it is written; That he who
blesses himself in the earth, shall bless himself in the God of Truth: and
he that swears in the Earth, shall swear by the God of Truth: and then is
added, For behold: as before; Is. 65.16, 17, 18.
Is. 65.16, 17, 18.

So in that of the Revelation, to omit other places, it is written, That John
saw a new Heaven, and a new Earth: And he saw the holy City, new Jerusalem,
come down from God out of heaven; prepared as a Bride, adorned for her
Husband: And heard a voice out of Heaven, saying; Behold the Tabernacle of GOD
is with Men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and
GOD himself shall be with them, and be their GOD: Reu. 21.1, 2, 3.
Revel. 21.1, 2, 3.

But clean contrary to these, are the Speeches which are used for the state
after this life: as, where it is written; Come ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the Foundation of the World: Mat.
25.34. Mat. 25.34.


And again, And these shall go away into everlasting punishment: but the
righteous into eternal life: Mat. 25.46.
Mat. 25.46. Also, the request of the Thief upon the Cross, Lord remember me
when thou come into thy Kingdom. And our Saviors loving answer; To day
thou shall be with me in Paradise: Luke 23.42,43. Luke 23.42.43.
Also, I go to prepare a Place for you: and if I go to prepare a place for
you, I will come again, and receive you to my self, that where I am, there
may ye be also: Io. 14.2.3
Io. 14.2.3. And again, in Christ's most comfortable Prayer we find it thus
written; Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me
where I am, that they may behold my glory which thou have given me: Io. 17.24.
Io. 17.24. Also our Saviors speech to Mary Magdalen; Touch me not, for I am
not yet ascended to my Father: But go to my Brethren, and say unto them; I
ascend to my Father, and your Father; and to my God, Io. 20.17.
and your God: Io. 20.17. To this we add that which the Apostle mentions;
That we which are alive, and remain (at the last day) shall be caught up,
together with those that were dead in Christ. The words ate these: The Lord
himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the
Archangell, and with the Trumpe of God? and the dead in Christ shall rise
first: then we which are alive and remain, shall be caught up together with
them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air; 1 These. 4.16.17.
and so we shall be ever with the Lord: 1 These. 4.16, 17.

Out of all this may be easily gathered, that our blessedness is not to be
enjoyed here on earth (as some would have it, the Creature being purged by
fire) but it is above, even there, where Enoch is; of whom it is said, That
God took him: Genesis 5.24. Genesis 5.24.
And the Apostle says, That he was translated, that he should not see death;
and was not found, because God had translated him. Heb. 11.5. Also we read of
Eliah, Heb. 11.5.
That the Lord took him up into heaven by a Whirle-winde, 2 King. 1.11.16.17.
Mar. 6. last. Luke 24.51. Act. 1.9, 10, 11.
and he was diligently searched for by fifty strong men, but not found: 2
King. 2.1.11.16.17. Add to this our blessed Redeemers Ascension into Heaven,
in the presence of many: Mark. 16. vlt. Luke 24.51. Act. 1.9, 10, 11.

Besides Stephens glorious vision, where it is recorded, That being full of the
holy Ghost, he looked up steadfastly into heaven, and saw the glory of God, and
Jesus standing on the right hand of God; Act. 7.55, 56.
Act. 7.55.56. Thus by the apposition of these Scriptures, the exposition is
clear, without further labor. They being always as different as light and
darkness to all that are not obstinate and wilfully Ignorant. The first
speaking always of earthly, the latter of heavenly things. The first, of
coming to us, and being with us: the latter, of fetching us to him: as you see
by express Scriptures, and plain examples, which it is not possible to
overthrow; no not Satan himself with all his wiles, and deepnesse, is never
able to deny or turn vpside down: Is. 29.16.
Is. 29.16. This then being clear and manifest, that this Kingdom, City,
House, Tabernacle, or Church, that has such glorious things ascribed, and so
many precious promises made unto it, is here, even in this life. In the next
place it must be showed in what place of the Earth it is to be found: Here
shall be observed three things: First, that it is tied too, or bounded within
no one Nation, or Kingdom in the World. Secondly, that wheresoever it is found
in any Kingdom, it is above that Kingdom or Nation. Thirdly, where the Saints
are, there it is. For the first, That it is tied too, or bounded within no
Nation or Kingdom, it is plain by that it is written: And the Kingdom shall
not be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces, and consume all
these Kingdoms: Dan. 2.44. And again, Dan. 2.44
His Dominion shall be from Sea even to Sea; and from the River even to the
ends of the earth. Zac. 9.10.
And it is also written, that as the lightning, that lightneth out of the one
part under heaven, Matt. 24.27. Luke 17.24.
shines to the other part under heaven: So shall also the Son of Man be in
his Day. That is, (as it is most plain, if ye consider the former words, and
upon what occasion this similitude is used) Christ's Kingdom, is not here, and
no where else; nor there, and no where else; as false Prophets would have it:
but it shall be in diverse parts of the earth, at one and the same time, in one
and the same manner: Even as lightning does disprerse it self, and show it
self alike in diverse places, at one and the same instant.

And thus this point is plain, that it is not bounded within any Nation, or
limited unto any one People or Kingdom. So that no man can say it is in this
Company, and no where else, as diverse false Prophets have assumed, and dared to
maintain; and yet at this day do not stick constantly to affirm, contrary
to that, where it is written; The Kingdom of God comes not with observation,
or outward show; neither shall men say, Luke 17.20.
Lo here, or, lo there: Luke 17.20.

Now that it is above every Nation, and Kingdom where it is: according to that
blessing to the obedient; He shall be above only, Deuteronomy. 28.13. Is. 49.23.
and not beneath: Deuteronomy. 18.13. This is plain by the excellent and glorious
situation thereof: as it is written, Then the Moon shall be confounded, and
the Sun ashamed, when the Lord of Hosts shall reign in Mount Sion, and in
Jerusalem, and before his ancients gloriously: Is. 24.23.
Is. 24.23. And again, Saviors shall come upon Mount Sion, to judge the Mount
of Esau; and the Kingdom shall be the Lords: Obad. 21. Obad. Ver. 21.
Also, It shall come to pass in the last days, that the Mountains of the
Lords House shall be established in the top of the Mountains, and shall be
exalted above the hills; and all Nations shall flow unto it. And many people
shall go and say; Come ye, and let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, to
the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways, and we will
walk in his paths. For out of Sion stall go forth the Law, Is. 2.2.3.
and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem: Is. 2.2, 3. This Mountain was
prefigured by that into which Moses ascended: Exo. 19. and 24. Exodus 19. and 24.
And that, that Mountain was a figure of this we now enjoy, is manifest by
that, where it is written; The Hill of God is an high Hill: why leap ye, ye
high Hills? this is the Hill which God desires to dwell in; yea the Lord will
dwell in it for ever. The Chariots of God, are twenty thousand thousands of
Angels; the Lord among them, as in Sinai in the holy place: Ps. 68.15 16, 17, 18
Ps. 68.15, 16, 17, 18. Also, Who shall dwell with the devouring fire? Who
shall dwell with everlasting burnings? The answer is, He that walks
righteously, he shall dwell on high, his place of defense shall be the
munition of Rocks: Even on high, on that Mountain, Is. 33.14.15, 16. Exo.
24.16, 17.
where the sight of the Lord is like devouring fire. Is. 33.14, 15, 16. Exodus
24.16, 17. Add to this; We are not come to the Mount that might be touched:
But we are come to Mount Sion, to the City of the living God; and we
receiving a Kingdom which cannot be moved, let us hold fast: For our God is a
consuming fire: Heb. 12.18, 22, 28, 29.
Heb. 12.18, 22, 28, 29.

This was yet further made manifest by that Mountain where Christ's most
glorious Transfiguration was seen by Peter, James, and John, where he talked
with Moses and Elias; at what Time his Face did shine as the Sun, and his
Raiment was as white as the light; yea, exceeding white, and shining so as no
Fuller on earth could white them: at what time also, a bright Cloud
ouer-shadowed; and a voice out of the Cloud was heard, which said, Mat. 17.1.
Mar. 9.2. Luke 9.28
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him: Mat. 17.1.
Mar. 9.2. Luke 9.28. This is again remembered, where it is thus written: We
have not followed cungingly devised fables, when we made known unto you the
power and coming of the Lord Jesus Christ; but were eyewitnesses of his
Majesty; For he received from God the Father, honor and glory, when there
came such a voice unto him from that excellent Glory: This is my beloved Son
in whom I am well pleased. And this voice which came from heaven, we heard when
we were with him in the holy Mount: 2 Pet. 1.16, 17, 18
2 Pet. 1.16, 17, 18. This Scripture does notably prove this point, and clear
the Transfiguration to be a representation of the glorious estate of the
Church here, not hereafter: And that by this especial circumstance; That he
received from GOD the Father, honor, and glory, from that excellent Glory.

Now what he received, he must at the last redeliuer; as has been before
proved: for he is said to receive it only for the finishing of the great
work of Man's Redemption: which when it is accomplished, Then comes the End:
when he shall deliver up the Kingdom which he has received, to God, even
the Father; that God may be all in all. And observe further, that Peter had
before preached of this glorious Kingdom of Christ; and he uses this but for
the confirmation of the Faith of those to whom he had preached, in that he
was with others an eye and eare-witnesse (as we speak) of the excellent
estate, prefigured in that notable and glorious Transfiguration: for he both
saw his glory, which he received from that excellent glory; and also he heard
the voice that pronounced him that blessed One, or, that King, Priest, and
Prophet, which was Prophesied of long before; that such a Prophet should be
raised up, and such a King should be set upon Mount (...); yea, such a Priest
should Offer a Sacrifice that should Justify many: Is. 53.10.11.
Is. 53.10, 11. even as many as were ordained to eternal life: as it is
written, The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet, from the midst
of thee, of thy brethren, like unto me, unto him shall ye hearken: According
to all that thou desireast of the Lord thy God in Horeb, in the Day of the
Assembly, saying; Let me not hear again the voice of the Lord my God, neither
let me see this great fire any more, that I dye not: Deuteronomy. 18.15. Deuteronomy. 18.15.
Here is his Prophetical, Kingly, and Priestly Office, prophesied of clearly:
as it is applied by Peter in that excellent Sermon of his, where we find it
thus written: Having spoken before expressly of Jesus Christ, he adds these
words: For Moses truly said unto the Fathers: A Prophet shall the Lord your
GOD raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me, him shall ye hear in
all things whatsoever he shall say unto you. And it shall come to pass, that
every soul which will not hear that Prophet shall be destroyed from among the
people. Yea, and all the Prophets from Samuel, and those that follow after, as
many as have spoken, have likewise fore-tolde of these days: Act. 3.22, 23,
24. Also, Act. 3.22, 23, 24.
to conclude this point; the very words of the voice do plainly note unto us
these three; where it is written, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased, hear ye him. This is my beloved Son: There is his right of being
King, in whom I am well pleased. That notes his Priesthood; Hear ye him. This
does manifest him to be that Prophet, which God has raised up. This Argument
is fully handled, and notably discovered in that most excellent Epistle to the
Hebrews. And thus it is manifest, that it is not tied too, or bounded within
any Nation or Kingdom of this World: but it is in diverse of them, at one, and
the same time; in one, and the same manner. And wheresoever it is, it has the
pre-eminence, or is above that Kingdom or Nation; as is plain by the
Scriptures which are mentioned before, which Scriptures also you see do
concern the Estate of the Church here, as has been also proved: So that it
is situate upon a glorious holy Mountain, upon an exceeding high Hill; which
is above all earthly Mountains, all earthly Hills. Now follows to be showed
how we may certainly, or infalliblely know where this Mountain, and so
consequently this House, Tabernacle, Church, City, or Kingdom is? For full
satisfaction in this, let us call to mind the Disciples question, before
spoken of; and the answer to the same, by him that could best satisfy the
doubtful in a point of so great weight. The question was moved upon occasion
of a large speech, which our Savior had made concerning this Kingdom. Luke
17.37.
And the words of the question are these; Where Lord? As if they should have
said: Thou have spoken often and largely of a Kingdom: and now thou have also
showed, ye men shall not be able to say; See, here it is; or behold, there it
is. Where is it then Lord, or how may thy children find it? Mat. 24.28. Luke
17.37.
The answer is; Wheresoever the Carkeise or body is, there, or thither will
the Eagles be gathered together. As if he should have said in more words thus:
Would you know where my Kingdom is? or where it may be found? Answer your
selves by your own experience: Did you ever see Eagles gathered together,
without a dead body or carkeise? If no, then may you also conclude* that
wheresoever true Believers are, there is Christ's Kingdom. According to that
where it is written, Wheresoever two or three are gathered together in my Name,
there am I in the midst of them: Mat. 18.20.
Mat. 18.23. or, There is my Kingdom: there is the Church: the City: the
House: the Tabernacle, which I have set up: Even there wheresoever two or three
are gathered or joined together in the same mind, walking in the same way,
confessing the same things, doing the same duties which I have commanded.
There, and and no where else is my Kingdom; with them, and none but such as
they are do I familiarly converse: This, and none but this is my house. This
is that Spiritual Tabernacle, not made with hands: there is that City of
which so glorious things are spoken.

For, as it is natural for Eagles to ceaze or prey on dead bodies: So it is as
natural for believers to ceaze or prey on Christ's Body: and as nothing will
draw Eagles together, but a Carkeise: So there is nothing will knit men
together in true friendship, and familiarity, but the Spirit of Christ.

The Truth of this most apt and excellent Similitude might be showed out of
many Scriptures: but let this be carefully observed: That by the Body or
Carkeise is lively represented unto us, the crucified flesh of Christ, and his
blood powered out: on which believers do only feed. This is done in the true
preaching of the Word, and the right administration of the Lords Supper. Both
these are plain where it is written; O ye foolish Galatians, who has
bewitched you, that you should not obey the truth, before whose eyes Jesus
Christ has been evidently set forth, crucified amongst you? Gal. 3.1.
Again, Gal. 3.1. 1 Cor. 1.23.
We preach Christ crucified: 1 Cor. 1.23. There is the Carkeise or Body in
true preaching. Also it is written, The Cup of blessing, which we bless, is it
not the Communion of the blood of Christ? The Bread which we break, is it not
the Communion of the Body of Christ? For we being many, are one Bread, and one
Body: for we are all partakers of that one Bread: 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. 1 Cor.
10.16.17.
Here is also the Carkeise or Body in the right use of the Lords Supper. To
both these add that, where it is written; Except ye eat the flesh of the
Son of Man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you: Io. 6.53. Io. 6.35.


Thus having done with the Body or Carkeise. That the Eagles also do notably
represent Believers, is plain by many things, wherein the holy Ghost has made
the Comparison. In the first place, Eagles do mount on high; as God says to
Job: Job. 39.27.
Does the Eagle mount up at thy command, and make her nest on high? So likewise
Believers are said to mount up with wings: Is. 40.31.
as it is written; They shall mount up with wings as Eagles.

Secondly, Eagles do dwell and abide on the Rock and strong Place: Job. 39.28.
Job. 39.28. So believers are said to dwell on high, even on strong defenced
Rocks: as it is written; He that walks righteously, and speaks uprightly;
He shall dwell on high, his place of Defense shall be the Munition of Rocks:
Is. 33.15, 16. Psalm. 103.5.
Is. 33.15.16.

Thirdly, Eagles do renew their strength, Psa. 113.5. So Believers renew their
strength: as is written; They that wait upon the Lord shall renew their
strength: Isa. 40.31. Is. 40.31. Job. 39.29.
Fourthly, Eagles do see a far off: Job. 39.29. So believers are said to see
a far off: as it is written: Where there is mention made of many believers:
it is concluded thus of them: These all dyed in Faith, not having received the
Promises; Heb. 11.13. Job. 39.30
but having seen them a far off, and were persuaded of them.

Fifthly, Eagles do suck up blood: Job. 39.30. So Believers, as it is written.
Who so eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life: and I will
raise him up at the last day: Io. 6.54. Lastly, Io. 6.54.
where the slain are, or where the carkeise or dead body is, there is he:
Job. 39.30
Job. 39.30. So believers are ever with Christ: for it is only the Spirit of
Christ that brings them together, or does cherish them asunder. Thus you have
briefly seen the truth of this apt and most excellent Similitude, how lively
and plainly it discovers this great mystery; which shall be thus summed, and
so concluded; Eagles mount on high: Believers do the like. Eagles make their
nests on safe places: Believers are also safe. Eagles renew their youth:
Believers do renew their strength. Eagles see a far off: Believers do no
less. Eagles suck up blood: Believers do the same. Eagles are never gathered
without a carkeise: nor Beleuers without the Spirit of Christ. But it may be,
some of my Countrymen may say; How shall we know it to be in England?

Let such answer themselves by this: It is proved, that where believers are,
there it is: Now if thou then be a Believer, and do know another as well as
thy self, thou may then safely conclude, that it is in England. And if thou
say further, How shall I know others? I answer, Labor first to be certain of
thine own blessedness; Get assurance that thou thy self art in Christ: and
when this is done, I doubt not to say thou shall know others also: yea many
others in England, to thy great comfort: as it is written; Since ye seek a
proof of Christ speaking in me: Examine your selves, whether ye be in the
Faith, prove your own selves. Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus
Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates? But I trust ye shall know that we
are not reprobates: 2 Cor. 13. 2 Cor. 13.3, 5, 6.
3, 5, 6. As if he should have said, The only way to know that We, (that is,
the true Ministers of Christ) are in Christ, is, by the knowledge of your
selves to be in Christ: Mat. 7.2, 3, 4, 5. 1 Cor. 2.^5, 16.
Giving us to understand thereby, that none can truly know a Child of God,
but he that is in truth the Child of God himself: Mat. 7.2, 3, 4, 5. 1 Cor.
2.15, 16.

But some may say further; I hear one cry out for want of Discipline; others
for Order; some for Christ's Officers: one says, Here is Christ; another, There
is Christ: Let such an one again satisfy himself, that Christ has made it a
mark of a Seducing spirit, to draw Disciples after him. Now we have learned
to have respect to all Gods commandments, Ps. 119.6: Ps. 119.6.
and amongst the rest, this is one; To beware of false Prophets: Mat. 7.15.
Mat. 7.15, 16.
This our most blessed Redeemer, was careful to press upon us his Redeemed
ones: where he says, If any man shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or
there, believe it not: for there shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets,
and shall show great signs and wonders, insomuch that if it were possible,
they will deceive the very Elect: Mat. 24.24.
Mat. 24.24. This is again repeated, to note the certain and necessary use of
such advise: Behold, I have told you before; wherefore if any shall say unto
you, Behold, he is in the Desert, go not forth: Behold, he is in the secret
chambers, believe it not: Ver. 25.26. Ver. 25.26.
And the holy Ghost warns us of times, wherein some shall give heed to
seducing spirits: 1 Timothy 4.1.
1 Timothy 4.1. As also, That there shall be false Teachers (even among the
Saints) That shall privily bring in damnable Heresies: And many shall follow
their Pernicious ways; by reason of whom, the way of truth shall be evil
spoken of. And through Covetousness, they shall with feighned words make
merchandise of the Saints: 2 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3.
2 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3. And we are willed, nay, commanded, not to beletue every
Spirit; but to try the Spirits, whether they are of God, because many false
Prophets are gone out into the World: 1 Io. 4.1.
1 Io. 4.1.

Therefore if thou be a Saint or true believer, abide in thy Place; and be not
drawn to any such Places, Companies, or Constitutions: but attend upon the
Word, and draw others thereunto; that as others have been examples to thee;
so thou may also be to others. Labor for the Peace of the Land, City, or
Place, where thou dwell, Ier. 29.7.
and do live: Ier. 29.7. Get thine own soul within the compass of Christ's
Discipline, and thine own Family into order. And know, that if thou must
needs grant that the Church of God is in England; thou must also of
necessity grant that Christ's Government is here also, unless thou will
separate him from that his Government: Mat. 19.6. Mat. 19.6
For he himself has said, That his Government is upon his shoulder: Is. 9.6.
Is. 9.6.
But some may further object: This Government is not visible; or, I cannot see
this that you affirm. Let such get Eye-salue, and desire God to open the
Mystery of it: For indeed the Church is glorious; but to whom? To those only
that are within it: as it is written, Ps. 45.13.
The Kings daughter is all glorious within: Psa. 45.13.

None can see the Light of this Candle, Mat. 5.15 Lu. 11.33 Io. 3.3.
but such as are within the House: Mat. 5.15. Lu 11.33. And Except a man be
borne again he cannot see the Kingdom of God: Io. 3.3. So that it is no
wonder seeing thou see not the Church it self that thou see not the
beauty and comeliness thereof. As it is no wonder, that a man cannot justly
find fault with the Building, that sees not the House: or with the Order,
that sees not the Army it self. And I must needs say, that if thou grant
that there is a Church any where, thou must of necessity grant, that Christ's
own glorious Order is even there also, though thou see it not. Blame then thy
blindness, complain of thine own Ignorance: For it is fearful to call in
question Gods wisdom: who being the Author of our blessed Church in England,
has also set a beautiful and glorious Order in the same: For he is not the
Author of Confusion, but of Order; Romans 9.20. Romans 9.20 1 Cor. 14.33, 40.
1 Cor. 14.33.40.

Lastly, let this be well observed: As thou love the life of thy soul,
beware how thou call in Question, peremptorily, things thou understand not,
or affirm things thou know not; lest thou deserve justly to be rancked
amongst those presumptuous and selfe-willed ones, that are not afraid to speak
of Dignities; whereas Angels, which are greater in power and might, bring not
railing Accusation against them before the Lord: 2 Pet. 2.10, 11, 12
2 Pet. 2.10, 11, 12. This being then dispatched; Namely, What it is? and Where
it is? A third was proposed; namely, When it began?

For satisfaction in this, observe that this Kingdom has been open to all
believers: Yea, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets, are said to
sit down here by faith: As it is written: We which have believed do enter into
rest: Heb. 4.3. Also, Heb. 4.3.
where upon occasion of the Centurions faith, our blessed Redeemer said, I have
not found so great Faith, no not in Israel: And I say unto you, that many shall
come from the East and West, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, Mat. 8.10.11.
in the Kingdom of heaven: Mat. 8.10, 11. And in an other Scripture, speaking
(as here) expressly of the Calling of the Gentiles, and rejecting of the
Jews; it is thus written: That there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth,
when ye shall see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the
Kingdom of God, and you your selves thrust out. And they shall come from the
East, and from the West, and from the North, and from the South, Luke 13.28, 29.
and shall sit down in the Kingdom of God: Luke 13.28, 29. And howsoever it
may truly be said, to be open to all believers: yet it may be as truly said,
that John Baptist was the first proclaymer of it, in plain terms (as we
speak) as it is written; In those days came John the Baptist, preaching in
the Wilderness of Judea; and saying, Mat. 3.1, 2.
Repent ye, for the Kingdom of heaven is at hand: Mat. 3.1, 2. After him the
King himself, or that great Prophet began to make the same Proclamation: Mat.
4.17, 23.
Mat. 4.17.23. And that the obstinate Jews might be left without all excuse,
he sends out his Apostles and Disciples into all their Cities and Villages,
to proclayme the same things. And to confirm the truth of the Proclamation,
Mat. 10.1, 7. Mar. 6.13. Luke 9.2.60.
they had power given them to cast out Devils, and cure Diseases: Mat. 10.1, 7.
Mar. 6.13. Luk 9.2.60. Yea, our Savior tells the Pharisees, that it is amongst
them, even at his being on earth: as it is written: The Kingdom of God, behold
it is among you: Lu. 17.21
Luke 17.21. As also his speech to the Woman of Samaria is notable for this;
The hour comes, and now is, when the true Worshippers shall worship the
Father in spirit and truth: Io. 4.22.
Io. 4, 22. It is now (says he) and shall come more clearly and manifestly
hereafter. For at that time it was so dark a Mystery, as that albeit the
Disciples, nay the Apostles themselus heard it daily taught, yea and privately
were instructed in it; yet they did not understand, nor apprehend the truth
thereof: as it is evident by their qunstion which they moved, even after
Christ's forty days abode with them, speaking of things appertayning to this
Kingdom: yet after that they asked this question; Lord, will thou at this time
restore the Kingdom to Israel? Supposing that it had been some outward
glorious restoration of their Nation to their former estate, Act. 1.3, 4, 5, 6.
that our Savior had so often taught; Act. 1.3, 4, 5, 6.

And we may further add, that this Kingdom began not clearly to appear,
until the Apostles received power from above; as it was promised them where it
is written, Behold, I send the promise of my Father upon you: but tarry you in
the City of Jerusalem, until you be endued with power from on High: Luke
24.49. Luke 24.49.
But especially it began at Ierusalems destruction. For those things which were
abrogated long before, even when the veil of the Temple rent from the top to
the bottom: Matt. 27.50, 51.
Mat. 27.50, 51: yet then they might be said to vanish, as it is written: In
that he says; A new, he has made the first old: Now that which decays and
waxes old is ready to vanish; For then verily the first had Ordinances of
Divine Service, Heb. 8.13 the 9.1.
and a worldly Sanctuary: Heb. 8.13. chap. 9.1. But this was fully made
manifest in that glorious coming of Christ, to John, in that wonderful
Revelation. Revel. 1.1.
Revel. 1.1. Accor-to his own prophecyes, where it is written: Verily I say
unto you, or I tell you of a truth, there be some standing here which shall in
no wise taste of Death till they see, or til they have seen the Son of Man
coming in his Kingdom, or the Kingdom of God come with power: Mat. 16.28.
Mar. 9.1. Lu. 9.27.
Mat. 16.28. Mar. 9.1. Luke 9.27. Also of John in particular, as of the
especial man that should see the Fullness of it, it is written, that his
Master said to Peter, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to
thee? Ioh. 21.21, 22.
Ioh. 21.21, 22. So that then was the truth of that seen which our Savior
prophesied to that Woman; Woman, believe me the hour comes, when ye shall
neither in this Mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem worship the Father: Io. 4.21.
Io. 4.21.
At that Time Ordinances of Divine Service, and worldly Sanctuaries vanished
away, which served but as shadows of heavenly, or good things to come, and
were not the very Image of the things themselves: Heb. 10.1
Heb. 10.1. Then, and not till then things made with hands were shaken, Heb.
12.26, 27. Is. 65.17.18. Revel. 21.1.5.
that things not made might remain: Heb. 12.26, 27. Is. 62.17, 18. Reu. 21.1.

The first point thus being pointed at, with the three branches thereof. The
second follows; which is, That it is to be entered into: For the first were
little worth: as, To know what it is? Where to find it? And when it began? If,
having found it, we make it not our own, by taking possession of it.
Therefore concerning our entrance, we will consider three things: First, What
the Gate is by which we enter? Secondly, Who, and when men may be said to
knock thereat? Thirdly, By what means we enter? The Gate or Door is Christ: as
it is written; I am the Door of the sheep: and in the same Chapter; I am the
Door, Io. 10.7, 9
by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved. Io. 10.7, 9. Here he
proclaymeth himself to be the Door or Gate by which we enter. And a little
before his departure, he tells his Disciples, That they do know whither he
goes, and the way also. But Thomas making a doubt, both of the place whither
he should go, and also of the way thither. Christ answers thus: I am the
Way, Io. 14.4, 5, 6.
the Truth, and the Life; no man comes to the Father but by me: Io. 14.4, 5,
6.

This is then that new and living way, which is consecrated to us by the flesh
of Christ: Heb. 10.20.
Heb. 10.20. And thus much for the Gate or Door by which we enter; Mat. 7.13
Lu. 13.24 Psa. 1.8.20.
which is termed, A Straight Gate: and we are willed to strive to enter in
thereat: Matthew. 7.13. Luke 13.24. Even, this Gate of the Lord: Psa. 118.20.

The Gate being known: the next thing is, who they are, and when men may be
said to knock at this Gate? For answer heereunto; know, that true penitent
sinners, such whose hearts are pricked, whose consciences are laded, whose
faces are covered with shame and confusion: these are they who knock thereat.
As we see at that Sermon of Peter's; where it is written, Now when they heard
this, they were pricked in their heart, and said unto Peter, and to the rest of
the Apostles, Men and brethren, Act. 2.37.
what shall we do? Act. 2.27. Here you see these knocking aloude at this
Gate.

So the Publicane being covered with shame and confusion, and full of
indignation against himself for sin: as we see, by that he stood a far
off; would not so much as lift up his eyes to heaven, but smote his breast,
saying; nay, rather crying out, with much vehemence: Lu. 18.13.
God be merciful to me a sinner: Luke 18.13. He also knocks aloude at this
Gate.

The Thief upon the Cross knocked also efectually at this Gate: when he was
come to himself: His Eyes being opened to see his fearful estate, and his
mouth also to reprove sin in his fellow, and to clear our blessed Redeemer;
and no doubt with vehemency he cried out; Lord remember me when thou come
into thy Kingdom: Luke 23.40, 41, 42
Luke 23.40, 41, 42.

Also, the Keeper of the Prison, when he was recovered of that desperate
purpose, at his sudden amazement, calling for a light, sprang in, and came
trembling, and fell down before Paul and Silas: and brought them out of the
Inner Prison, into which he had cruelly thrust them: knocking also powerfully
at this gate, Act. 16.27, 28, 29, 30.
when he said; Syrs, what must I do to be saved? Act. 16.27, 28, 29, 30.

So that we may very well conclude, that penitent ones only knock: yea, then
men do knock, when their eyes are opened to see their misery, and the
necessity of getting in: as it is written: Paul was sent to open the eyes,
Act. 26.18.
to turn (men) from darkness to light, from the power of Satan to God: Act.
26.18. So that the eyes must first be opened; according to that, where it is
written: I will power upon the house of David, and upon the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem the Spirit of Grace, and of supplications; and they shall look upon
him whom they have pierced: Zach. 12.10. Zach. 12.10.
Here also the eyes are said to be opened. So it is written, That the
Prodigal Son came to himself: Luke 15.17.
Luke 15.17. That is, (as it is plain) he saw his miserable condition, and
wretched estate. Thus men do then knock, when they see themselves shut out:
for there is a necessity of the sight of misery before ever men will in truth
call for mercy: So that this knocking contains in it, not only the sight of
sin; but also a godly sorrow for it, a confession proceeding from both, and a
vehement desire of mercy, craving it as for life and death: So that the eyes
being opened to see, Eze. 11.19. Eze. 36.25, 26. I ter. 8.6. he 31.19 Is. 1.16.
Mar. 9.43, 45, 4^
the heart is also changed to bewail and lament: The stony heart is changed
into a heart of flesh: Ez. 11.19. Now this godly sorrow, if it be indeed that
true sorrow, it works carfulness, which is a smiting on the thigh, by
saying, What have I done? Ier. 8.6. the 31.19. Also, a clearing of themselves
by an earnest endeavor to be freed of sin: Mar. 9.43, 36, 47. Is. 1.16. and
avoiding the occasions and means, by which they may be made more guilty.
Also, an indignation, which is an horror, even with gnashing of teeth at the
very naming or memory of sin: Lu. 18.13
Luk* 18.13. yea, such an unfeigned detestation thereof, as is not to be
expressed Also such a fear, as that such an one will tremble at the least
motion of sin: Job. 31.23. Job. 31.23 Luke 23.40. Lu. 18.13 Psalm. 51.
Luke 23.40. and every temptation thereunto, makes the very heart to quake.
With these, there is also a vehement desire, Luke 18.13. Ps. 51. of pardon,
which does enforce such an one to ask instantly, to seek constantly, and to
knock incessantly at this Gate: Mat. 7.7.
Mat. 7.7. Yea to crave mercy, with much vehemence, and loud crying with
tears: Heb. 5.7.
Hebr. 5.7. To this is added Zeal, by which the Penitent do now detest sin,
even in others as well as themselves: Lu. 23.40 ^ Pet. 2.7.
Luke 23 40. 2 Pet, 2.7. And lastly Revenge, whereby the penitent do abstain,
even from lawful things, having formally adventured on unlawful: as for
example; having sinned by Gluttony, they now do tame their bodies by fasting:
Psalm. 109.24. Ps. 109.24
being before filthy, now they bridle even marriage desires: having abused
precious Time, they now redeem it, Ephesians. 5.16.
Ephesians. 5.16. from sleep, and such other things that steal it from them. All
these are set down in that of the Apostle, where it is thus written: Behold
this self same thing that ye sorrowed after a godly sort; what carfulness
wrought it in you, yea cleereing your selves, yea indignation, yea fear, yea
vehement desire, yea Zeal, yea Revenge: 2 Cor. 7.11
2 Cor. 7.11.

Now these are as so many infallible tokens of one in the estate of Penitency:
Such an one does indeed knock aloude for mercy, that has such a deep sense of
misery: and he that has not all of these, has never a one of them. These were
easily to be showed in the forementioned examples, of the Publicane, the
Thief upon the Cross, the Men in the Acts, and the Keeper of the Prison. Thus
you now see who do knock, and when men may be said truly to knock at this
Gate, Even when being sick, Mat. 9.12 Hos. 6.1.
they desire the Physician: Mat. 9.12. Being wounded, they desire to be healed:
Hos. 6.1. Being imprisoned, Is. 61.1, 2.
they crave liberty as for life and death: Is. 61.1, 2. Being touched with a
deep sense of their misery, they cry aloude, and with much vehemence to God
for mercy. Such, and none but such do knock at this Gate: they, and none but
they thrust at this Door.

The Door or Gate now known, and who do knock thereat being clearly
discovered: it rests to be showed, Whereby men do enter? That this may
appear plainly unto us, let us consider of that, where it is written: Heb.
4.3.
We which have believed do enter into rest: Heb. 4.3. And again, Except your
righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall
in no case enter into the Kingdom of heaven: Mat. 5.20.
Mat. 5.20. Also, that where it is written, We being justified by faith, have
peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ: By whom also we have access by
Faith into this Grace wherein we stand: Romans 5.1.2.
Romans 5.1, 2. Out of these, and very many more which might be alleged, we may
truly conclude: That by faith men enter into Christ's Kingdom; as it is
written: That such, whose eyes are first opened; and withal, are turned from
darkness to light; and from the power of Satan, to God: such by faith in
Christ do receive forgiveness of their sins, Act. 26.18. Col. 1.12.13.
and inheritance amongst the Saints in light: Act. 26.18. Col. 1.12, 13. So our
blessed Redeemer speaks expressly to him that demanded, What he must do
to enter into life? Mat. 19.17. Mar. 10.17.
His answer to him was, Keep the commandments: Mat. 19.17. Mar. 10.17.

Now we keep them by no other means then by faith in Christ; as it is
written: What shall we do, that we might work the works of God? Jesus
answered, and said unto them: Io. 6.28.29.
This is the work of God; That ye believe on him whom he has sent: Io. 6.28,
29. And in another place it is written, This is his commandment; That ye
should believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ; and love one another, 1 Io.
3.23.
as he gave commandment: 1 Io. 3.23. And in another place it is written: Not
every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven: Mat.
7.21 Revel. 22.14.
but he that does the will of my Father which is in heaven: Mat. 7.21. Revel.
22.14. And you have seen before, that they only do the will of God, that
believe on him whom he has sent So then we may conclude, That Repentance does
ask, Faith does receive: Repenatnce does seek, Faith does find: Repentance
does knock, Faith does open this Gate to those that shall be saved. In a word,
Repentance does open the eyes, to see a miserable condition; and turns such
withal to God, to seek mercy. Faith does receive Christ, and withal,
forgiveness of sin; Io. 1.12.
and the right whereby we do indeed become the Sons of God: Io. 1.12.

The two first principal things being thus dispatched: as, That we must
first, seek, and having found, enter: the third follows: which is, That
those that are entered must walk worthy of such a blessed and glorious estate.
And that this may be also made manifest, we will in this observe two things:
first, the King: secondly, the Subjects: If we respect the King, it offreth us
a threefolde meditation: First, His Presence: Secondly, His Mercy: Thirdly, His
Justice.

For his Presence, he is to be considered of as a God, not a far off only,
but at hand also: Even such a King, as that his Privy Chamber cannot contain
him, as other Kings, much less a little Closset. But he fills heaven and
earth, as his own words do witness, where it is written; Am I a God at hand,
and not a God a far off? Can any hide himself in secret places, Ier. 23.23.
that I shall not see him, says the Lord? Ier. 23.23. And in another place;
All things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to
do: neither is there any creature that is not manifest in his sight: Heb.
4.13. Heb. 4.13.
Therefore his eyes are said to be as a flame of fire; Reu. 1.14.

For his Mercy, the Prophet David offers that to our meditation, where it is
written: But mercy or forgiveness is with thee, that thou may be feared:
Psalm. 130.4. So also his Judgments are to set before our eyes; as the same
blessed Prophet has given us an example; Ps. 119.30
The way of truth, and thy Judgments have I laid before me. Also, My flesh
trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments: Ver. 120.
ver. 120. And it is worthy to be observed, that it is usual with the blessed
Spirit to join these together, when he presses the Saints on to perfection.
They are allured by Mercy, and provoked by Justice: as we will see it cleared
by places for the very same purpose; where it is written: We receiving a
Kingdom which cannot be moved, Heb. 12.28, 29.
let us hold fast the grace received, that we may serve God acceptably with
reverence and godly fear. For our God is a consuming fire: Heb. 12.28.29. Here
is both Mercy and Judgment to be considered: Mercy, in affoording us the
grace to be received into this Kingdom. Justice, in these words: God is a
consuming sire. So where it is written: Be ye ready; for in such an hour as
ye think not, the Son of Man comes: who then is a faithful and wise
Servant, whom his Lord has made Ruler over his Household, to give them meat
in due season? Blessed is that Servant, whom his Lord when he comes shall
find so doing: Verily I say unto you, he shall make him Ruler over all his
Goods: Mat. 24.44, 45, 46, 47.
Matt. 24.44, 45, 46, 47. There you see Mercy to allure. And it follows;
But, and if that Servant shall say in his heart, My Lord delayeth his coming;
and shall begin to smite his fellow Servants, and to eat and drink with the
Drunken. The Lord of that Servant shall come in a day, when he looks not for
him, and in an hour that he is not aware off, and shall cut him asunder, and
appoint him his portion with Hypocrites; Ver. 48, 49, 50, 51
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth: Verses, 48, 49.50, 51. Here is
Justice to provoke. Add to this that, where it is written: Take heed to your
selves, lest at any time your hearts be ouercharged with surfeiting and
drunkenness, and cares of this life; and so that day come upon you unawares:
For as a snare it shall come on all them that dwell on the face of the whole
earth. Watch ye therefore, and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy
to escape all these things that shall come to pass, Luke 21.34, 35.36.
and to stand before the Son of Man: Luke 21.34, 35, 36. Here you also see
Justice and Mercy. All these three are notably expressed and repeated to those
seven Churches to which John wrote: Revel. 2. and 3.
Revel. 2. and 3. Especially to the five that are reproved: as Ephesus,
Pergamus, Thiatira, Sardis and Laodicea. His presence with them all, in these
words, seven times repeated; I know thy works. His Mercy to every of them, in
these words; To him that overcomes I will give: as many times used. His
Justice, plainly to those five, in diverse phrases; and more hiddenly to the
other two, in these words; He shall not be hurt of the second death. Chap.
2.11 the 3.12.
And, He shall go no more out. Chap. 2.11. the 3.12. And so much for the
first help to walk worthy in respect of our King.

The second help to walk worthy is taken from the Communion amongst the
Saints themselves. This principally stands in their mutual prayers one for
another: the exhortations, reprehensions, and instructions, that they use one
to another. Their providing for the necessities one of another; whether
spiritual or bodily. Finally, in using all good means for the building up one
of another. That these things ought to be, or rather cannot but be amongst
those that are indeed Subjects of this Kingdom; let us consider what is written
to this purpose: and first for Prayer. The Apostle having furnished a Christian
with Armor for his great Combat, adds this: Pray always, with all prayer and
supplication in the Spirit, and thereunto with all perseverance, Ephesians. 6.18.
and supplication for all Saints: Ephesians. 6.18. For Exhortations: Exhort one
another daily, while it is called to day, Heb. 3.13
lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin: Heb. 3, 13.
For Reprehension or Reproof: 1 Timothy 5.20.
Them that sin, rebuke before all that others may fear: 1 Timothy 5.20. For
Instruction: Let the Word of Christ dwell in you richly, in all wisdom,
teaching, and admonishing one another, in Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual
songs, Col. 3.16.
singing with grace in your hearts unto the Lord: Col. 3.16. Providing both for
spiritual and bodily estate: For Spiritual: Brethren, if a man be overtaken
in a fault: ye which are spiritual, restore such an one with the spirit of
meekness; Gal. 6.1.
considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted: Call. 6.1 For the Body: Romans
12.13.
Distributing to the necessity of the Saints, given to Hospitality: Romans
12.13. Finally, we are to use all good means for the building up one of
another: 1 These. 5.11.
as it is written; Comfort your selves together, and edify one another. And,
Let us hold fast the Profession of our Faith without wavering, (for he is
faithful that promised.) And let us consider one another, to provoke unto Love,
and to good works: Not forsaking the assembling of our selves together, as the
manner of some is; but exhorting one another, and so much the more, as you see
the day approaching: Heb. 10.23, 24, 25
Heb. 10.23, 24, 25. So also, Keep your selves in the Love of God, looking for
the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, unto eternal life. Building up your selves
on your most holy faith: Jude ver. 20.21.
Praying in the holy Ghost: Jude 20.21. And, Of some have compassion, making a
difference: And others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire: Ver. 22.23
ver. 22, 23. Add to this, those blessed examples of believers, where it is
written: There were added about three thousand souls. And they continued
steadfastly in the apostles doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread,
and in prayers, And fear came upon every soul: And all that believed were
together, and had all things common: Act. 2.41, 42, 43, 44 45.
And sold their possessions and goods, and parted them to all men, as every
man had need: Act. 2.41, 42, 43, 44, 45. Also, in another place: And the
multitude of them that believed were of one heart, and one soul: neither said
any of them that ought that he possessed, was his own, but had all things
common: Act. 4.32.34.
Neither was there any among them that lacked: Act. 4.32.34. Also, Upon the
first day of the week, when the Disciples came together to break bread, Paul
preached unto them, ready to depart on the morrow, and continued his speech
until midnight: Act. 20.7.
Act. 20.7. And thus you see both by Precepts and Examples, what is required of
the Subjects of Christ's Kingdom amongst themselves, or one toward another for
their building and growth; that so they may walk worthy of the high and
excellent calling, to the which they are called. And to conclude, you have now
the brief heads of this great business: namely, the discovery of this
Kingdom of Christ, or the laying opon of the three necessary circumstances,
about this one necessary thing: As, that we must first seek it, and in
seeking that we may find, we now know what it is; where, and when it began.
Having found it, we must enter: and to this end the Gate is made known. Who
are they that knock? and what gives admittance? The penitent only knock; True
believers enter. To this is added the means or helps to walk worthy: and
here we are taught to have an eye to God, and one to another. To God, or
Christ our King; and to remember his Presence, Mercy, and Justice. To the
Subjects; by mutual prayers, exhortations, reprehensions, instructions, and by
using all other means, both public and private, for the good both of souls
and bodies. And thus by Gods mercy we have dispatched this weighty work.
Desiring God to send forth every day more and more Scribes instructed unto
this Kingdom, able to bring forth out of their Treasuries, Met. 13.52.
things new and old: Mat. 13.52. And so to God the Father, that has given
this Kingdom to the Son: and to God the Son, that desired, has received,
and shall deliver up this Kingdom to the Father: and to God the holy Ghost, by
whom, both the Father and the Son do govern this Kingdom: Even to these
Three, Io. 10.30. 1 Io. 5.7.
which are yet but one invisible and only wise God: Io. 10.30. 1 Io. 5.7. Let
us ascribe all Glory and Honor, all Dominion and Majesty, even henceforth,
and for evermore, Amen.

ROMANS 11.33, 34, 35, 36. O The Depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and of
the Knowledge of GOD! How unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways past
finding out! For who has known the mind of the Lord, or who has been his
Counselor? Or who has first given to him, and it shall be recompensed to him
again? For of him, and through him, and to him, are all things: to whom be
glory for ever, Amen.

FINIS.
Faults Escaped in the Printing.
Page 4. line last, God. Page 15. line 24. Laws. Page 36. line 8. confessing
the same truh, by the power of the same spirit, observing the same things,
doing the same duties. Page 54. line 26. formerly. The rest mend with your Pen.


