A brefe apologye or answer to a certain craftye cloynar, or popyshe parasyte,
called Thomas smy^the.
Behold the disceytfull pen of the scrybe, has set forth lies.

Hieremie. 8. SEr, though ye be a smythe Esaie. 9.

And beat upon the stythe
ye cum not to the pythe
Nor have not yet where with
your spyryt is very dry
The scripturs to apply Ezec. 13.

ye rather them deny
Than there trewthe fortyfye
Vvbat measur ye observe
In poesye proterue Eccl. 19.

Axe of lady mynerue
And she will say ye swerue
Full flatterynglye ye foyne
ye clatter and ye cloyne prou. 10

ye mangye matters join
And all to catch the coin
ye cobble and ye clowght
To uphold the romyshe rowght
But ye may have the gowght Hie. 50.

Ere ye bring that abowght
ye maynteyne sodomytes
with other hypocrytes
And play the parasytes Abac. 2

To slay true israelytes
Against aftrawe ye stumble
And at a block ye fumble
Ye fare like him that tumble
For naught ye do but bumble. Math. 7

Soche one ye are ywys
As popyshe prestes may blys
For where all treason is
Ye find nothing amys. Esal. 56,

Your hate ye can not hyde
Nor yet your popyshe pride Luc. 21.

God will for hysprouyde
When ye shall stand aside
Whyls you suppress the right
Here wandering in the night Ioh. 12.

Ye think God has no sight
Which is the very light
The lord will once out spewe
Soche hypocrytes untrue
As byddethhys word adewe
Pylde poperye to renew. Apoc. 3

For cursed is that heart
And worthy to have smart Hie. 48.

Which will with them take part
That scripture does peruart
Thomas smythe.
To trolle away or trolle in / let not trolle spare
If trolle trewlye trolle / trolle needs not to care
An answer.
Trolle in has trolled trewlye, where trolle away trolled amys
If ye will trolle with trollars, Osee. 5.
trolle trewlyar after this
Full like a troblous trollar, ye trolle a tryfelynge trace
Trolle no more with the scripturs, except ye have better grace
Thomas smythe. A little treatise against sedicions persons.
OF late I perused / two purposes several
In thee kinds craftlye handled / the treuthe for to tell
Trolle away / and trolle in, men do them call
Treating upon matter / concerning the late Cromwell
The one utterly minding / the other to repel
Trolle away (the treuthe is) much touched the quycke
And trolle in (some what galled) be ganne for to kycke
An answer to the bolsterar of sedicion.
In your perusinge, ye seem very parciall
Trolle away iugynge, Gene. 8.
of treuth to have the trycke
Concerning Cromwell, trolle in nothing at all
But for hystrollynge, to be an heretycke
Trollynge betwixt them, Romans 7.
ye are a judge to quycke
The worse to allow, the better to condemn
Soche untrue trollars, all veryte contempne.
When Crist was alive, Ioha^. 5.
soche tr yfelinge trollars trolled
Calling him traitor, and herety cke also
Whom for there trollynge, the phary sees extolled
As yet to this day, there true successors do
Did notsoche trollars, against the apostles go? Act. 4.

What there reward is, we need not for to tell
Trollynges truth troblynge, trolleth evermore to hell.
Thomas smythe.
Yet trolle away told truth / yt can not be denied
Declarynge the offenses / wherein Cromwell offended
Trolle in being trobled / when he yt espied
With trollynges to cover it, subtyllye contended
Some trollats there be / I would were amended
For who that craftelye colors / any others offense
Of lykely hode in his own heart / has the same pretense.
An answer.
Trolle away ded lie, Pro. 12.
in many things he told
Though the lord Cromwell, has dyed for his offense
So sone as trolle in, soche trollynges ded behold
He showed him of it, Gala. 6.
with much more grace and science
Betwyne them yetrolle, Gala. 6.
without indifference
your verdyt is naught, your judgment is wurse
Soche untrue trollars, are underneath gods curse
No wreche so wicked, To. 10.
but some will take his part
None so unlearned, but some shall him uphold
As men se profyght, so trolle they in there heart
Some that has knowledge, are neither hot norcolde
And very ass heads, Apoc. 3
auctoryte makes bold
He that with the foot, so cruel parts will play
The head will not spare, he once out of the way.
Thomas smythe.
Trewlye to trolle, it is no manner of shame
And trollynge untrue / is not to be mayntayned
As every thing is / so to give it proppre name
Among all true honest men / should not be dysdayned
The scripture so teaches us / it can not be feigned
Against scripture who stryueth / he is non other like
Than a traitor to his prince / and to God an heretyke
An answer. Ve qui dicitis bonum malum and malu^ bonum Esa. v. Ephesians. 4.

If trewlye to trolle, stand with much honest
And trollynge untrue, requires rebuke and shame
I gretlye maruele, whyls you a trollar be
That in your trollynge, ye will true trollars blame
And for your purpose, Eccl. 3.
trolle scripturs out offrame
Soche treacherous trollars, I think to be no less
Than those lewd persons, whom ye do here express
your scripture ye trolle, Esai. 5.
from Esaye the fyft
There spoken for them, that does gods word blaspheme
But ye can make it, to serve an other dryft
Than God that time showed, Mat. 16.
or Esaye could esteem
Soche trollynge of truth, cause yet some men to deem
The byss hop of Rome, the chief head of the church
Scripturs so trolled, like myster yes can wurche.
Thomas smythe.
I intend not to trolle, to rake any part
Division to mcreace, it needs nothing
But sorowfullye syghynge / I trolle in my heart
With my self in mind / many times reuoluynge
How God to us has ordained / the most noble king
Who (...) connyt us / has trauayled full fore
yet many teyfelynge trollars / care lyttele therefore.
An answer.
A black more will change, Hier. 13.
the color of his skin
As soon as his craft, an hypocryte shall hyde
ye trolle with no part, dyuysion to begin
And yet the people, from Crist ye would dyuyde
Some trollars lament, Joan. 11.
the falling of there pride
Christen kings having, soche trollars at there hand
Are in worse taking, than they do understand
Who makes dyuision? Joan. 7.
who is the peace breakar?
Not Judas but Christ, yet Judas does betraye!
Paul works sedicion, and is no treason speakar
ye do the myschefe, Act. 14.
and yet ye make no fraye
The same fox that lurketh, the same fox take the pray
Oh trollynge gnato, Pro. 11.
ye think ye be not seaue
yet by your trollynges, perceive men what ye mean.
Thomas smythe.
But as trollars troblous / and full of envy
At the laws of God, and of our good king
In there trollynges do trust, that there old heresye
All good orders set a part / shall flory she and spring
There prechars no less comfort / in there sermons do bring
Even latelye exhortinge them, auoydinge all dread
And, persecucion not regarding / throughlye to proceed.
An answer.
Here is a pretense, Math. 4
to turn stones into bread
And a suggestion, to cast our selves down bacwarde
Upon the mountain, for gold ye trolle us lead
Laws with good order, ye would us to regard
And yet true prechars, Nu. 4.
ye mind not to be hard
False fables ye forge, to darken with there name
Trollynge in soche trashe, as will be to your shame
The scrybe on his skyrtes, Mat. 23
does gods commandments set
The dcuyll resembles, the massenger of light
Who destroys laws? who does good order let?
But those pharysees, that christen people spyght
Sendynge soche prophets, Hie. 23.
as the day change to the night
All them that abhor, there old pylde popetrye
For the word of God, they accuse of heresye.
Thomas smythe.
With many words more troblous / than now I will reherce
Not doubting at all / but at length they shall be known
Soche trollynge treacherous, my heart does sore perce
Considering how sedycyouslye / among us they be sown
Of late I well trusted, they has been ouerblowne
But now I will perceive / that neither fauer nor smart,
From the body can expel / that is roted in the heart
An answer.
More woldeye trolle out, Joan. 7.
yfye could more reherce
Ye shall do no more, than God shall you permyt
Which trolleth forth tyrauntes, both terryble and ferce
His flock to correct, Job. 23.
when they trolle out of wit
Among soche trollars, ye are a trollar fyt
And I can ye thank, ye do full well your kind
Trollynge now soche hate, as lay long in your mind.
All is sedicyon, Joan. 21.
that please not popyshe hearts
All insurreccyon, when men from you declyne
Of your sort many, has trolled traiterous parts
And yet against them, no trollynges ye dyffyne
One relygyous zele, Act. 23.
does you and them combyne
All heretyckes frelye, ye may touch in your spyght
But none soche as dyed, for holy churches rycht.
Thomas smythe.
A true trollynge heart / would be loathe to pretend
Any purpose to maintain / against God or hye king
The confession of an heretyck / that latelye ded offend
And among others / suffered for his deseruynge
Sesecrettelye they embrace / as most precious thing
And yet playnelye will I prove / by good law and reason
Contained therein / both he resye and treason. Esai. 23

An answer.
A true trollynge heart, dwells not within your bosom
For all the colors that you show outwardelye
In the confession, which came an heretycke from
Is much lefle treason, 1. Tim. 4
and much less heresye
Than in the trollynges, of your hypocresye
Whyls you shall contend, with reason and with law
Your trolled scripturs, prove you a dottynge dawe.
The heretycke that dyed, as all the people hard
In the faith of Christ, Sapi. 5.
mekelye departed hence
Praynge for our king, and our worthy prince Edward
Long days to endure, inther prehemynence
In his confession, I find none other offense. 1. Tim. 2

But as Christ does say, soch slayghtes are in the sects
As would in manner, deceive the very electes.
Thomas smythe.
In any wife imprynted / they will not yt shall be
The dauugers thereof / in themselves mystrustynge
Wherefore ever ye manne / may well pexceyue and se
What hearts they do bear / to God and our good king
Every of them secretlye / must have yt in writing
But Christ faith verelye / there is nothing conceled
But at length shall be known / and openly reveled. Nihil opertu^ quod non
reuele tur. Mat. 10

An answer.
It is imprynted, wherefore by law and reason
Prove I can right well, Eccl. 7.
that ye alyar be
Very hot ye are, in iu gynge men of treason
The hydden secrets, of all men's hearts ye se
As ye judge ye are, by holy saint Paul's decre
Soche tauntynge trollars, Romans 2.
are tetrici thrasones
And in there trollynges, full naught ye nebulones
A scripture ye trolle, as did the deuyllin desert
To serve your purpofe, Math. 4
trollynge the pythe aside
Hid secrets says Crist, shall now be clear and apert
Meaning soche scripturs, Luc. 12.
as the pharysees ded hyde
With there tradicions, hypocresye and pride
Thus Christ declares it, in the. xij. chapter of Luke
False trollynge of textes, will turn ye to rebuke.
Thomas smythe.
Who against them trolleth / a papyst they him name
They have none other thing, them selves for to defren de
I would that all papystes / had an open shame
And that all heretyckes / themselves would a mende
Than should we have no cause / further to contend
But vniformelye to live / to one with the other
And joy fullye to in habit / as brother with brother. Ecce que bo number and que
10 cundu^, Psa. 132

An answer.
We call them papists, Iudae. i.
that maintain papistrye
Both having there fruits; and scripture for us to lay
If all soche papystes, schuld have shame openly
I think ye could not, befarre out of the way
As Judas with Christ, Ps. 27.
with heretyckes here ye play
No brother is he, that gods wurde does not further
Except he be Cain, which does pore Abel murder.
Still ye trolle scripturs, 2. cor. 6
but nothing in there kind
Couetinge full sore, to have a fles helye concord
Beliall and Christ, were never of one mind
David commended, Ps. 132.
a unite in the Lord
Which with your peltrye wylleth us not to accord
For light with darkness, schall never well agree
Nor popyshe falsehede, with Christis veryte.
Thomas smythe.
Soche schuld be our trollynges / Christ us so tracheth Deus charitas est qui
manet in charitate. 1. Ioa^. 4.

Commandinge ever peace / among us for to be
Hntrewlye he trolleth / that otherwise preaches
Sturrynge to any sedicyon, malice or enmyte
Where bannyshed us dyscorde / and raygneth all charity
That realm in God rests / and God is in yt
Being charity him self / as says the holy wryt
An answer.
Christ never trolled, Esa. 57.
soche peace as ye would have
Neither in Matthew, in Luke, nor yet in Johan
Thowgh in your trollynges, ye falsel ye them deprave
Of old cankred scribes, the armoure ye do on
Not Barrabas but Christ, Ioa^. 18,
accusynge of sedicyon
To the world says Christ, I send no peace but the sword
By the which is meant, the rygour of gods word.
ye trolle forth your textes, Mat. 7.
commixtynge perles with draffe
For Christ said in deed, they should be trodden of swyne
Non est pax impijs, your charity is but chafe
Though ye cry pax pax, as Esaye does dyffyne
ye speak of charity, Joan. 16.
and draw by an other line
Christ said, that with you, we should have trybulacyon
And in him alone, our peace and consolacyon.
Thomas smythe.
Than toward that charity / trolle we on apace Venite ad me omnes qui
laboratis and. Math. 15

Auauncynge our selves / with all conuenyent speed
A more accept able pilgrymage / surely never was
For which God gave to man, any merit or mede
Our labor or great burden / let us nothing dread
Nor regard the wylfulnes / of our body or flesh
For at the iournayes end / Christ will us refreshe
An answer.
If ye trolle to Christ, as ye mind nothing less
With the pharise, Luc. 18
ye may not your self auaunce
For mede or merit, as ye do here express
For non can deserve, Romans 11
the heuyns in herytaunce
But here men may se, your trollynge ignorance
The fruits of our flesche, ye myll us not to regard
So trollynge us Christ, full like a wanton steward.
Than trolle ye scripture, Math. 11
that Christ will you refresbe
At your iournayes end, for your great labor, and pain
Christ there takes the law, for the burden of ourfleshe
Easynge our conscience, of mennys tradicyons pleyne
But in your trollyn ge, ye have an other vein
In your cottacyon, Deu. 13.
for the aleuynt of Mathewe
ye trolle the fystent, to be known a trollar true.
Thomas smythe.
and than as true trollars / together let us remain omnis anima potesta
tibussublimioribus sub. To. 13.

Perfyghtlye fast knyt / in one peace / unity and love
With glory unto God / euerm ore glad and feign
Our noble prince trewlye / to serve as does us behoue
And all others to tender / as duty does us move
Bsynge still among us the self same love and concord
Which is to us commanded / by Christ the eternal lord
An answer.
This trollynge were good, 1. Pe. 2.
yfye could follow yt
And no more couete, to have them ouerblowne
That fauer godde strewthe, as they suppose most fyt
Of Christen people, in this life to beknowne
Reportynge by soche, Hier. 9.
sedycyon to be sown
ye neither trolle peace, nor a christen amyte
But declare your self, an ympe of inyquyte.
We must love in Christ, Ioh. 15.
if we love christenlye
For love out of Christ, is but a paganes love
In gods word therefore, let us love to his glory
And obey our king, Romans 13
as christen men behoue
With mekenes of heart and no sedicion move
And than shall we trolle, in peaceable unity
As God us wylleth, by his heuenlye veryte.
Thomas smythe.
And now in that love / let us all with one voice pray
For the preseruacyon / of henry our most noble king
And Kateryne our queen / that they together may
Prosperouslye contynew / to there hearts desiring
And Edward our prince, that most angelykt thing
That they all together / may long live and rest
And after with him raygne, qui in celis est. Amen.
An answer.
Not only with voice, Math. 6
as did the hypocrytes
But when ye shall pray, pray from the very heart
Expressing the faith, of christen Israelytes
And trolle with your prince, no syckle flattering part
Least after this life, Pro. 27
ye trolle to eternal smart
Better is a strype, of him which is a frynde
Than a kiss of him, that bears a wicked mind.
In faith and in spyryt, Ioha^. 4.
let us of God require
Our King, Queen, and Prince, to live here prosperouslye
Not as you do trolle, unto there hearts desire
But unto gods mind, 1. Tim. 2
and of his name the glory
Thus trolleth saint Paul, with Abacuch and Hieremye
Lord grant them long life, to thy sweet will and pleasure
Thy flock rewlynge here, which is thy most dear treasure
AMEN.

God save the king. And his ofsprynge, Amen.

Thomas smythe.
To trolle away or trolle in / let not trolle spare
If trolle trewlye trolle / trolle needs not to care
An answer.
Betwixt his trolle and trolle, if trolle no better trolle
Trolle may trolle with trollars, that trolle the gossyppes bolle
If trolle will trolle with trollars, let trolle trolle veryte
Or elstrolle with ill trollars, Ioha^. 9.
will trolle dyshoneste
Where trolle has trolled untruely, let trolle trolle back again
For trollinge with ill trollars, trolleth many one to pain
Thomas smythe.
Composed by Thomas smy the / servant to the kings
Royal mageste / And clarke of the Queen's graces, ounsell (though most
unworthy.)
An answer.
The Pharyse in deed
His phylacterye sprede.
His skyrtes he does dylate
To fourny she his estate Mat. 23.

The scrybe set forth his hemme
With perle and with gemme
With many tytles proud
The pore truth to out croude
^^e paynteth him self with pen
(...) or to be seane of men Luc. 11.

Here master smythe must be
To the kings high mageste
A servant scant so simple
As reynarde under a wymple
A clerk, Hier. 8.
a learned manne
Which worldly cauteles can
Yea, clerk of the Queen's counsel
And persecuteth the Gospel
Yet is he most unworthy
And that he speaks trewlye 1. Ioh. 4.

This work he has composed
Wherein he has not glosed
By colors of hypocresye
By falsehede nor by vain glory
No More than reynarde fox
Or fryre with his box
It is good by saint Ione Mat. 7.

That prestes have soche a wone
As can so clerkelye write
and poetelye indyte
Which will not from them waver
and is in so great fauer
Being the kings servant
So wyttye and so pregnaunt
He that shall with him scole
Will find him no small fool. Hest. 3.

None heretycke now shall rowte
Nor dare put forth his snowte
But will pluck in his horns Actu. 4.

as does new ale in corns
The gospellarsnow will shrynke
and not be able to wynke
The knaves shall no more check
Nor against us popystes beck Genesis 39

With him they dare not dallye
For fear of Putiphars vallye
or else for Daniels deane
But now sing in a mean. Dani. 6.

Now may we tithes home trolle
and care but for the bolle
We may let the gospel goo
For he is our mortal foo
We are fortunate this tide
To have smythe on our side. Joan. 7.

Our kingdom would else fall

