A most godly and worthy Treatis of holy Signs Sacrifices, and Sacraments
instituted of God, even since the beginning of the world.

Very necessary for Christian vnderderstanding.

Seen and allowed by authority.

LONDON. Printed for G. H. 1609.

A SVMME OR A brief collection of holy Signs, Sacrifices and Sacraments
instituted of God even since the beginning of the world, And of the true
original of the Sacrifice of the Mass.
IN the time ordained before of God, by his unsearchable and vnco^prehensible
wisdom after he had created man to his own Image and likeness to the end that
he might stir him up to fear and obedience, and give unto him also some
exercise of virtue to acknowledge his God his creator, there were ordained many
signs Sacrifices and Sacraments. First to our first Father Adam and to his
successors being bodily men, were ordained corporal signs of God, the better
to approve and make known his obedience. Trees of life. Gene. 2. 3. Eusebius.
Theodor. and Sever.
To wit: The trees planted in the midst of the Harber and earthly Paradise.
These trees although they were of no other quality then the other plants, yet
they were dedicated and consecrated of God to serve for Sacraments, (that is to
say) for holy signs, their quality then dedicated and hallowed to serve as a
seal for a witness, attestation and approbation of the godly will. For the
infinite goodness of god willing to make known the fellowship, bond, and
alliance, contracted with man his creature, created to his own likeness, has
from time to time ordained outward and corporal signs which man might see
and behold with his corporal eyes, to serve for assurance gage, and pledge, of
the divine covenant, like as to our first and common father were ordained
trees, and corporal fruits, left and given unto him to keep, without wasting,
eating, or consuming, in pain of everlasting death. We must then believe by
faith, that the trees and fruits were not signs or sacraments of vanity, as
a simple picture, but more that upon them did hang both life and death they
containing the sign and the thing signified. Wherein did consist the Proverb.
1. 2. 3.
knowledge and wisdom to fear God, and obey him. This was the cause wherefore
they were called the fruits of knoweledge of good and evil, and the trees of
life. For in keeping these fruits hallowed, in obeing God, everlasting life was
promised, contrariwise in abusing these Sacraments in going against the will
of God, declared by outward tokens everlasting death and damnation was gotten.

For other exercises of man toward Sacrifices before the Law written.
God, to the end that he might reverence, honor, and worship him, many and
diverse sacrifices were celebrated, yea before the law written by Moses. And
although the almighty God creator of heaven and Psalm. 50.
of earth has no need of man's works, neither is nourished with the blood of
beasts, or fruits of the earth: Yet he has always desired to draw man unto
him in fear and outward obedience by Signs, Sacrifices, and Sacraments: In
such sort that the sacrifice of the lambs offered by Abel, was pleasing unto
Gene. 4. H^bre. ^1. Gene. 6. 7. 9.
God. Noe likewise after the great floods passed, in sign of knowledge and
obedience toward God did erect an altar, offered and lifted up sacrifice of
sheep without spotte, and of birds, wherewith he did make sacrifices sound
and pleasing unto God. By these examples it is easy to know that sacrifices
did not begin in the time of Moses: But the innocent and just lamb
represented by the sacrifice of Abel (the figure of Jesus Christ) was slain
and offered up from Apoc. 13.
the beginning of the world.

After the rigor of the flood comen for the punishment of the offenses of the
tyra^ts of the earth in sign of reconciliation and covenant renewed, our good
God did ordeine the sign of the Bow Rain^ bow. Gene. 9.
in heaven, for a gage and assurance of (...) of God were holden in the
wilderness of Arabia to them was ministered food of Manna.
heavenly bread, wherewith they were Exodus 16.
nourished 40. years. This holy sacrament instituted by the power of god was
in such great admiration that every of the people said, Manhu, what is this 1
Co^in. 10. Ioh. 6.
here they did see the heavenly Manna given unto the^ without travel, a sign
of the living bread descended from heaven and giving life to all the faithful.

Also another marvelous sign was ordained Water of the Rock. Exodus 17. Number.
20. 1 Corin. 10, John. 19.
of God by the rock flowing of lively water in Horeb to quench the thirst of
thirsty people a sign and figure of the true rock Jesus christ out of who^ did
issue water and blood to staunch the thirst of all sinners for evermore.

The signs and sacraments aforesaid, Diverse sacrifices ordained of God in the
year of the world. 2455
were not only ordained of God, but also the law of Sacrificers was published
by Moses, as signs figures, and shadows of the Sacrifice performed by Jesus
Christ.

The Sacrifices are either public or particulers, some were heue offerings,
Holocausts.
sacrifices consumed with fire: other were Division of sacrifices drawn out of
Exodus Leui. and Number.
of beasts slain, and offered up to eat, some were of earthly beasts, other
were beasts of the air. Among the earthly beasts were such as were most
obedient as Beafe, and Veale, sheep and Lamb, Beasts for sacrifices.
the Goat and the Kid: Among the birds also the most tame, the Pigion and the
Turtle. Of Sacrifices some were public, other were particular, the public
either were daily, or else seven times Days appointed for sacrifices.
a day, or in the new moons, or in time of abstinence, or else in three feasts
celebrated in a year: To wit, in the days of sweet bread, when the pascall
Lamb was offered and eaten without Exodus 23.
leuened bread, in the time also of harvest of first fruits, and in the feast
of Wine and Olives toward the end of the year. It is commanded every day to
Search the book of Philo the Jew, and Josephus.
offer two Lambs the one in the morning, the other at night after that the
Altar was perfumed with incense and sweet odours. Also some of the sacrifices
were ordained for corporal things which were offered with shedding of blood,
other for incorporal things without Holocaustes Philo the Jew in his treatise
of beasts appointed for sacrifices. Josephus. lib. 3. cap. 10. de antiqui.
iudai.
blood. The sacrifices called Holocaustes did concern only the honor of God,
because all the sacrifice was consumed with fire, for the which sacrifice
Holocaustes, the male and not the female was received that is to say, the Beaf
the Lamb and the Goat of one year. For the sacrifice for health it was
indifferent to take male or female, always three parts of Leui. 1, 2. 3. 4.
the sacrifice was reserved for the Priest. To wit, the fat, the two kidneies
and the kall or the fat of the flanks. Another difference there is also
betwixt the sacrifice Sacrifice for health.
for health, and the sacrifice celebrated for sin, for in the one was ordained
to eat all the sacrifice in two days, and in the other for sin, it was
enjoined to eat all in one day only. By reason Sacrifice for sin.
whereof some sacrifices were called Holocaustes, other for health and other
for sin. The sacrifices for sin, were diverse as well for because of the
persons as for the offerings. For he that sinned Sacrifice for the sin of
ignorance.
by ignorance, was cleansed by offering an Ewe or a she Goat: but the clensing
of sin done wittingly was cleansed with a Ram. The sin of the great Priest
was cleansed by offering of a calf: Sacrifice for the sin of the high Priest,
Prince, Magistrate and particular person. Leuit. 3. 4. 5. 6. Sacrifice for the
man poluted.
of the prince by offering a goat and a bull, that of the magistrate with a
Goat, that of any particular, with the offering of a female. The sacrifice for
clensing of sin done against God was done with a ram. The sacrifice for a man
polluted was with an Ewe or a she goat: for clensing of a woman after her
childbirth was a For the woman delivered. Leuit. 12. Sacrifice for the Leprous.
Leui. 14.
lamb of one year, a young pigion and a turtle. For the clensing of Lepre,
were 2 birds alive, pure and clean, Cedre wood, and Isope, 2 whole lambs and
one Ewe of a year with flower and oil. Another sacrifice also was made for
the person poluted Sacrifice for the poluted menstruall.
by seed shed or me^struous, with 2. turtles, and 2. young pigio^s. If the great
sacrifices did fail, then did they repare to doves, pigions and turtles, the one
for the burnt offering, the other for the food of the Priests* And in all
sacrifices there was pure flower without leven, salt, incense Leven and honey
forbidden in all sacrifices. A sacrifice for the woman suspected of adultery.
Numb. 5
and oil. And it was not lawful to offer any thing with leven or honey upon
the alter. Always in the sacrifice ordained for the purging of women suspected
of adultery, there was no incense nor oil as in other sacrifices, but for her
was offered water mixed with dust or ashes gathered upon the pauement of the
temple. Again there was another Sacrifice of the Nazereus. Numb. 6. Philo the
Jew in the treatise aforesaid.
sacrifice celebrated for them which had made the great vow called Naserius,
when the time of their devotion was done, it was ordained unto them to offer
three sacrifices a Lamb, an Ewe and a Ram. One (to wit) the Lamb for the
burnt offering, the second (being the Ewe) for the salvation, and the third for
health. Moreover the hears of him which made the sacrifice should be cast into
the fire with the burnt offering to be burned.

I have thought good to discourse the diversity of sacrifices, briefly to the
end to make known the great goodness of our God who by the law of Sacrifices
published by Moses, would (as with a bridle) restrain the rude people of
Israel, which could not forget the idolatries of Egypt wherein they had been
nourished 430. years, under the tyrranny of Pharaoh.

But what straight laws, what ceremonies and sacrifices so ever were ordained
for them, ever this people did fall to Idolatry abusing the law of God, and
corrupting the holy sacraments and sacrifices it shall be declared hereafter.

If any man be desirous to know more of the multitude and diversity of
sacrifices let him read the books of Philo the Jew and Josephus of the
Judicial antiquities, following that which Moses has plainly written in his
books of Leuiticus and Numbers.

Another sign and sacrament instituted The Arc of witness. Ex, 25. 27. 28.
of God by the Arc of the covenant described in Exodus, being a holy sign
dedicated to receive the holy and heavenly answers to the end to bring the
people to the remembrance, fear and obedience of God, to honor and accompany
the Arc of the covenant. Many other exterior signs were ordained of God, as
the ornaments and consecration of Priests, specially the ornament Ephod.
called the Ephod, the which and the sacrifices the Israelites did abuse by
their Idolatries.

Another holy sign there was of the Purging water consecrated. Numb. 19.
purging and sprinkling water ordained by God to Moses and Aaron the high
Priest. This sprinkled water was consecrated with ashes gathered by a clean
person of the sacrifice offered in Holocaus^^. To wit, of a Cow all red without any spot, and which had never bin labored. The Wood ordained to make
the fire for the burnt offering was Cedar and Hisope, Purple with Crimsin. With
this water were sprinkled polluted persons for the purging and cleansing of
their corporal defilings.

At the entering of the Temple or Tabernacle Exodus 38.
was a Lauer made of Brass, and forged first with the images of the women of
Israel, in this Lauer was put the sprinkling water wherewith the sacrificers
are sprinkled before the celebrating of their sacrifices, to the end they might
be purified and obtain grace and remission of their sins.

After the death of the great Priest Aaron, the people of Israel unthankful
to God for the goodness sent them of him, murmuring as annoyed with the heavenly
Manna freely given unto them for their noriture, were punished by the biting of
venomous serpe^ts. But the merciful God gave unto them an holy sign whereby
they should be saved and restored to health (to wit) the brazen serpent Brazen
serpent John. 3. 7.
lifted up in the air a figure of Jesus Christ crucified.

These were in sum the most part of the signs sacrifices and sacraments
ordained of God in the first Church of the Israelites figures of the true and
perfect sacrifice performed by Jesus Christ, the true Messiah and everlasting
Priest, sitting at the right hand of God the Father.

Now rests the sum to bring forth, Sacraments broken by Adam Gene. 3.
how man by his own proper fault did fall in obliuio^ and disobedience of God
his creator, abusing Gods favor, and corrupting the holy signs, sacrifices,
and sacraments ordained to him.

What persuaded our first father and his companion to bide themselves at the
hearing of Gods voice, but because they had abused the holy sign, and broken
the law of the fruits to them forbidden. This holy sign which our first and
universal father had abused, was the original of other vices and corruptions
hereafter described, into the which all men are fallen sauouring of the
corrupted lump of Adam.

Leaving the particular corruptions of Corruption of the sacrifice by Aaron.
Exo. 32 Deuteronomy. 9.
the signs, sacrifices and sacraments before the law written by Moses we will
begin to bring forth briefly the most notable error committed by the most great
sacrificers, as Kings, Priests and others having the chief government of the
people.

When Moses was abiding in the mount Synay to receive the commandments of
God, his brother Aaron the high Priest forged a calfe of gold, of the golden
earings given unto him by the people of Israel, he builded an altar offered
incense, and celebrated sacrifice causing the common people to worship the
molten Image.

Was not this an abusing of the Sacrifices ordained of God, and a corrupting of
the true usage of the same, in causing the calfe to be worshipped in place of
the slain and offered sacrifice, as it was appointed in the law: His sons
Corruption of the sacrifice by Nadab. and Abihu. Leui. 10 Numb. 11.
also Nadab and Abihu, were not they consumed with fire, for abusing the use of
sacrifices in taking unhallowed wood and corrupting the law? The people of
Israel unthankful for the goodness done unto them in being delivered from the
Pharao^ical captivity, did they not murmr against the holy sacrament of
heavenly Manna, when they did disdain and contemn this bread of life, and
demanded Joshua. 7
flesh to eat: Achan the son of Charms, did not he violate the law of the
holy signs, when he committed sacrilege, and kept back the spoils of (...)
vowed and consecrated to God for sacrifices: If any more curiously desire to
see the continual abuses and corruptions of the people themselves, let him
read the histories of the Judges of Judge. 2. 3. 6. 8. 9
Israel, and in all times he shall find man never to be content with the true
worshipping ordained of God. But in steed of outward signs ordained of God to
draw the people to fear and obedience, they have forged inventions. And in
place of reuerencing the alters and arc covenant in the name of the only God
being (outward sacred signs:) The Israelites infected with the Idolatries of
Judges. 10
their neighbors, the Syrians, Sidonians, Moabites, Ammonites and Philistines
did erect alters unto their strange Gods, Baal and Astaroth. I^ptha, Judge The
vdgentle (...) Ie(...). Judge. ^^
and Captain of the Isralites, did not he corrupt the law of Sacrifices when
he sacrificed his own proper daughter, Judge 8. 9: Idolatry by the Ephod. Judge.
17. 18.
excusing himself by a vow, which he made, which was not appointed to him of
God: The holy sign ordained of God for the high Priest to celebrate sacrifices
in (called Ephod) the uppermost garment was not it abused by Gedeon, captain
of the Israelites, when as of the spoils of the Madianits and of their earings
he made an Ephoa of gold, whereby the people fell into great idolatry: How
long time was this holy outward sign Ephod abused (an Image being erected by
the mother of Michas in (...), Priests and sacrificers appointed expressly to
sacrifice thereunto, an Altar builded and the true use of sacrifices corrupted:
So long as as the temple continued in Silo, into what wicked manners did the
Priests and sacrificers fall, which were ordained of God for the ministry of
sacrifices and holy sacraments, when they usurped by long possession to have
this privilege of the people, that when 1 Samuel 2.
they did sacrifice, and the flesh of the offered sacrifice was seathing, their
boy or servant having a three grained fleshhooke of iron in his hand had
liberty to catch out of the pot or caldron all that he could carry with his
hook. Further the leuiticall tyranny was such that this servant of the Priest
had liberty to demand of the sacrifice giver, flesh to roste for the
sacrificer, otherwise to take it by force even as he would. Was not this a
great abuse and detestable corruption practiced by the Pristes and chief
sacrificers, under the pretense of sacrifices: What greater corruption can be
declared, then that of the sons of the chief Ophni Phin^es, corrupt^^s of
the sacrifices. 1 Samuel. 4.
Priest Ely, called Ophni and Phinees? Who under the pretense of devotion
committed shameful whoredom with the covered women behind the holy Tabernacle
institued of God for the which wickedness they were miserably slain, and the
Arc of covenant taken away by the Philistines. Which they set in the Temple 1.
Samuel, The arc of the holy covenant.
of their God Dagon but God not suffering this holy sign thus to be
profaned, threw down the Image Dagon, and sent grievous punishments to the
Philistines in such sort that they were constrained to restore the Arc of the
covenant of God. This holy sign was so precious that forasmuch as the
Bethsamits (which were not of the order of the Leuits) had abused it 50000 of
the common people and 70. of the chief rulers were rooted out and slain by
the vengeance of God. This example might make all Against corruption of holy
signs.
those to tremble which enterprise to abuse the holy signs and sacraments
ordained of God.

Vzzah also for that he abused the same 2. Samuel 6. Vzzah.
sacred sign (notwithstanding that he did it of a good intention) for to lift
up the Arc of witness hanging to much on the one side, was he not punished
with death? Of others abuses committed by the Israelits, there is many
examples, Osias Osias.
was punished with leprosy for abusing (...)
the sacrifices, in taking upon him the ministry of encensing appointed to the
priests only. Saul he first elected Saul. 1 Samuel 13. Joseph. lib. 7 cap ^. of
the Jews antiquities.
King of the Israelites was slain and his kingdom given unto another (as was
declared before of Samuel) for abusing the sacrifices, and suffering his people
to commit the like abuses. His successors in the kingdoms of Judah and Israel
have not they always continued in abusing and corrupting the sacrifices and
sacraments ordained of God, when they did offer sacrifices to the Gods,
Astaroth of the Sidonians, to Chanios 1 Kigs, 8. 11.
of the Moabites, and to Melcom or Moloch of the Ammonites, in so much that
they builded temples and oratories, even to offer incense, and to do
sacrifices unto them.

^^roboam king of the Israelites, did not Hieroboam. 1 Kings, 12.
only cause a golden calfe to be erected, as the high Priest Aaron had abused
before, but also did ordain two golden Kine in the two Temples of Bethlel and
Dan, and ordained strange Priests corrupting the law of God, and causing them
to do sacrifice after the fashion of Kings. 14.
Aaron. This Idolatry and corruption of sacrifices did continue among the
Israelites more than 400 years during the reign of their kings, who had
taught them to corrupt the true use of the sacrifices in chapels, and
particular oratories builded on the tops of hills and thick forests
consecrated, in violating the law of sacrifices ordained by God in the holy
temple, within the holy city. For particular examples of 1. Kings, 15.
the abuses committed against the true use of sacrifices, the history of
Maatha mother of king A^a is manifest, wh^ erected an Image of the God Pan, and
did consecrate and dedicate unto him a thick forest, offering sacrifices unto
it. Achah another king of the Israelites Achab. 1. Kings. 16.
did erect an Altar, and made sacrifices to the God Mars otherwise called Baal.
unto whom he dedicated a grove, to satisfy his wicked wife Iesabel.

He caused also another Altar and Temple to be erected to the God of the
Joseph. lib. 8. chap. 10.
Ty^a^s, he ordained Priests Sacrificers, and instituted sour hunded false
Prophets. His son and successor Ochosias Ochosias.
taught of his father to corrupt the use of the sacrifices, did not only offer
2 Kings. 1. Joseph. lib. chap. 1.
to Baal (otherwise called Mars) but went forward in greater abuse, he builded
a Temple unto the God of Accoronites called by Josephus. Myos, and by the
Greeks (...), unto the which God, he did sacrifice.

To be short, what more abominable Purgatory, 2. Cings. 16. 2. Kings. 16. 23.
In the book Alcoran. Asoar. 29. 46. Asoar 5. ignem gehe^nae non nisi numeto
dierum preterminato animas sentire docet Aeo^ liber, and ad diem veriatts omnes
Iccedere ope^um suorum mercedem accepturas A^^ar
corruption can be described, then the invention of the fire Purgatory?
wherewith the Israelites did transgres, causing their children to pass through
the fire in Tophet a valley of the sons of Ennon sacrifizing unto the God
Moloch. This corruption of sacrifices, notwithstanding that it was in the time
of Mo^^es, yet the Idol Moloch in the valley of Ennon, was not cast down till
the reign of King Josias, more then nine hundred years after Moses.
Nevertheless this abuse does continue among the Arabians and Affricans to this
present, so that the Alcoramists and Mahometists have this belief that the
souls of the departed, must pass through the fire to be purged and purified
from their offenses.

By this brief gathering a man may clearly perceive that from the beginning of
the world man by his own fault has fallen into the bottom of error and
corruption of holy signs sacrifices and sacraments ordained to him of God. But
the principal abuse, whereof is Cause of the corruption of sacraments.
sprung the original of all Idolatry, entered by this means, that fleshly and
carnal men did stick more to the visible signs and outward ceremonies, then
to the things signified by the Sacraments: Apo ^3.
for in place of circumcisiing their hearts, and cuting away of the old skin
Deuteronomy. 10, 30.
of sin to be regenerated and purified by the blood of the heavenly sacrifice
offered before all worlds, they have taken circumcision carnally for the
cutting of the carnal skin.

Wherefore did they not follow the interpretation of God, by Moses to
circumcise the foreskin of their hearts? Wherefore did not the children of
Israel give credit to the good prophet Jeremy, Ierem. 4.
which admonished them of the spiritual circumcision, and to circumcise the
forekinne of their hearts, in putting away the foreskinne of their natural
corruption. The like is come to pass of the sacrifices and holy signs
ordained of God, for figures of the sacrifice fulfilled by Jesus Christ: For
the carnal man rests in the corporal blood of earthly beasts, where he
ought to lift up his spirit to heaven to comprehend and conceive that which is
figured and signified by the sacrifices of beasts offered up. For this
therefore the justice of God is declared by the Prophets.

What need have I (says the Lord Esry. 1.
God) of your sacrifices? I am weary of your offerings of sheep. Moreover, I
take no pleasure in the blood of beasts, lambs, and goats offered. Wherefor^
travel you to address Altars unto me* I will none of your offerings and vain
sacrifices, I abhor your incense, I can not suffer your new moons your
Sabbaoths, your assemblies, and your feasts all is but vanity. I hate your
feasts o^ new moons (O Israelites) and your solemn feasts. I am weary in
suffering so much. You have goodly directed your prayers unto me, I will not
hear you any more, for the abuses which you have committed with your hands
embrued with blood. Moreover I will not Psalm. 51. Esaias. 66, Ierem. 7.
receive of the house of Israel any Bull, because your sacrifices are not
pleasing unto me. I am as well pleased with the Eccle. 7.
offering of a beast as with the murdering of a man, and with the offering of
Incense as with the worshipping of an Idol. Wherefore then (says God) do ye
take so much pains to seek Incense unto Sabba, and odours from far
countries, to offer and make sacrifices unto me wherein I delight not? Who
has moved you (O Israelites) to erect images unto the Gods Moloch, and the
star R^mph^m during the time that you were in the Wilderness, where I did
nourish you with my heavenly Manna? Your feasts be odious unto me your
offerings oblations and sacrifices for the Amos. 5.
health, I will reject, your offerings do displease me. After what manner
should Mich. 6.
one prepare himself to God? Shall it be by sacrifices of Bullocks of one
year? Does God take pleasure in a great number of sheep offered unto him? Or
in a great quantity of holy oils? To him says the Prophet shall I offer of
the first borne, for the remission of sins.

Our good God has very clearly Psalm. 51.
declared that service which he comma^deth, follow equity, love mercy, and of
an humble and contrite heart, fall down before him, for obedience is more
worthy then sacrifice, or the fat of offered Rams.

What gave an occasion to God to 1. Samuel. 15.
put away those sacrifices and sacram^ which he himself had ordained, ^ the
abuse and ^orruption which the ^rae^ites had committed, taking over gr^sly the
signs and ceremonies, ordai^ to draw them to fear and obedience*

For in place of conceiving the which was figured by the signs a^ corporal
sacrifices, they did rest in t^^ flesh of the beasts offered. And ^stead of
cutting away the foreskinne^ their hearts, they rested in the carna^
circumcision, and in the mean time tu^ned away from the true worshipping ^ God,
addressing themselves to creature^ As to stars, to the queen of h^auen* and
other strange Gods, offering t^ them incense, building for them temples,
preparing for them priests, chaplains and sacrificers to offer unto them
oblations and sacrifices.

Moreover to accomplish this corruption they did sacrifice with the blood of
^nnocents offering of them and causing them to pass through the fire of
Purgatory in the valley of Tophet Wherefore (for the abuse committed by the
children of Israel against the holy 4 Esdr* ^.
sacraments, sacred signs and sacr^fices ordained of God) it was said unto
them by the Prophets, that God would no more of their feasts, of their new 4
Esdr. ^.
Moons* of their circumcision, nor of their sacrifices, celebrated by people
^dolatrous and full of blood.

When the vnser^ heable wisdom of God did perceive the hardness and infidelity
of the people of Israel, which did ever continue to commit idolatry, by
corrupting the holy signs, sacraments, and sacrifices in place of
acknowledgeing the infinite goodness of God, which had delivered them from the
Pharaonicall tyranny, which had nourished them in the Wilderness, which had
brought them into the fruitful land promised unto them* and which so many
times had succored them in the wars against their neighbors* the Cananites,
Moabites, Mad^an^tes, Philistines, Ammonites, Sy^^^s, S^donians, S^^yo^ans and
other ^^^ous people: Neue^theles this rude people did continue^ their
^dol^tries taught them by the^ P^^estes* Sacrificers, Kings, and Princes,
without turning to the true wo^shipping of one only God

Wherefore after the great mercy an^ long ^arying of the just Judge* which b^
all manner corrections would ha^^ brought again his people by diui^^
vengeance particularly; as by raisin^ up of wars, by captivity and bondage by
dividing of the kingdom parte^ between Roboam and Ierohoam, the suc^essors of
Sal^mon plunged in the depth of idolatry in inward wars among the people
divided, and ^y other scourges accustomed to correct those whom God does
favor* to the end to bring them to his fear and obedience. In the end these
people, to much hardened and waxen old in their Idolatries, were 4 King. 15. 24
taken into miserable bondage, under thy tyranny of Infidels, Assirians, and
idolatrous Babylonians, their Realms quite overthrown.

But within a little while after that this self same people, by the great
mercy of God was delivered from the hands unfaithful tyrants, was set again
at liberty, and was restored to their land of promise: they fell again to
their Idolatries* Joseph. 13. cap. the Jew antiquity.
more then ever before, under the government of their Sacrificers and high
Priests which joined the temporalty and spiritualty so together, that they
were clad with Scepter, Roial and Crown. Then succeeded the heresies of the
Pharisees, of the Saduces Esseens, Galileans, Masbutheens, Hemerobaptistes and
Samaritans, corrupted by Josephus in the book of the antiquities of the Jews.
the diversity of strange nations which had inhabited and subdued the country
of Samaria, near unto Judea.

For the Babylonians did worship for their God So^cobenoth, the Cutheens and
Persia^s having for their God Mergal, or Mergel, the Hemate^ses, called upon
their God Asima, the Ananoys did worship their God Nebahaze and Thartace, the
Sep^a^^ainenses did hold upon the^^ Gods Aaramelech and Aname^ech.

Unto the which Gods they sacrificed their children causing them to passe^
through the fire.

Thus then, when all kind of Idolatry was spread among the Isralites, the
sacrifices were altogether corrupted, the Priests became buyers and sellers,
covetous tyrants and Idolaters, the people pa^ed tribute to the tyrants of Rome
their count^y of Judea made one with the Province joining unto Syria vnde^
Josephus lib. 15. cap. 3. Io^ephus lib. 1^ cap. 3 ^^ ^op. lib. 1. cap. 2.
the power of the Romans. The order also, the law and election of the high
Priests was corrupted, and their d^gnitie abastarded altogether, insomuch that
without regard of the Leuiticall race, the high pt^estes were appointed by
Consuls or Lieutenants of Rome as pleased them* And whereas before they
continued during their ^iues, now they changed ye^ely* And when as the Scepter
Genes. 49.
was taken from the stock of Judah, and her kingdom quite overthrown, as
before it was prophesied: The inco^prehensible greatness of God did manifest it
self by his son begotten before all worlds, which did so humble himself,
that he took humane flesh of the virgins womb to redeem his people, and
restore them to grace before God.

For as in Adam by his breaking and A conferring of Adam with jesus Christ.
abusing of the holy sign given unto him to keep, all the lump of mankind
was corrupted with the leven of sin: Even so by the second Adam Jesus Christ
we are by grace purged from our offenses. To our first and universal father
Adam was given a holy sign to exercise his obedience, and to his successors
was given other holy signs, sacrifices and sacraments instituted of God, as
the tree of life, the fruits of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, the
raine-bowe, circumcision* the lamb without blemish, the bread without leuain,
the cloud* the fiery pillar, the red sea divided, the heavenly Manna, the water
of the rock, the immolation and offering of beasts for sacrifices, the arc of
covenant, the brazen serpent, the purging water, the Temple builded in the
midst of the holy City: All which sacred signs, sacrifices and sacraments,
were figures of that which was accomplished by Jesus Christ.

For first he was the true tree of life, Jesus Christ the tree of life. Apoca.
2. Romans 1^.
planted in the midest of the garden of God, in whom and by whom we which were
bastard trees are grafted and set, to the obtaining of eternal life: he has
given us the keeping of the fruits of the tree of wisdom by his holy
gospel, and commanded us to keep it whole without abusing, without
corrupting, without adding or diminishing, in pain of eternal death.

He has bin as the celestial Bow bended Rainebowe.
in the air to assure us of the band and covenant contracted between God and
us that we should be no more drowned in the flood of sin. He was
circumcised to accomplish the law in himself, that he might cut away the
Circumcision. Gala. 4.
foreskinne of our hearts, to spoil us of our old corrupted skin in Adam.
The burning bushe.
He was the flame in the burning bush, taking flesh in the womb of the virgin
conceived by the grace of the holy Ghost, without the seed of man, the holy
virgin as the bush, remaining nevertheless perfect and vncorrupt. He was
sacrificed as the just and innocent Lamb, Pascall lamb* John. 1. Hebr* 13.
his blood being shed to preserve us from the tyranny of Satan, and to open
unto us the passage into the la^d of promise the kingdom of heaven. He is the
true Bread of life. John. 6.
bread which came down from heaven, without leaven, without corruption, and
spot, whereof we must eat for our spiritual nourishment, to the end we may
celebrate the feast of the Pharaonicall passage in the land of liberty. He
was 1 Cor. 5. The cloud, ^^rie pillar and red sea.
the cloud, the fiery pillour, the red sea divided, which has conducted us,
which has delivered us from the hands of our enemies, out of who^e side
opened, 1 Cor. 10. John. 19.
came blood and water for our salvation and redemption.

He was the heavenly Ma^na sent from The heavenly Manna, the rock flowing water
of life. 1. Corin. 10.
heaven to nourish us for ever, and the true rock from whence flowed water to
quench the thurst of all those for ever, which thurst and believe in him. It
was he that made the sacrifice of health for Sacrifice. Heb. 7. 8. 9* 10.
the defacing of our sins, the sacrificer and sacrifice, the offering and
offerer abiding forever a sacrificer at the right Heb. 9.
hand of God his father. He entered into the heavenly sanctuary, builded not
with the hands of men, but with the hand of God. He was the true Arc of
covenant The arc of witness.
and appoyntme^t, by the which God did manifest and declare his oracles and in
the which he did rest to accomplish his divine and incomprehensible mysteries.
He was as the brazen serpent fastened to Brazen serpent John 3.
the cross, to give health to the sickness of al those which did turn toward
him, and behold him in faith.

He was the true temple of God wherein Temple of God. John ^.
the holy ghost does dwell, in whom and by whom one God in trynity is
worshipped. He was the true and holy The host and holy water.
sacrifice whereof was made the purging water for the cleansing of all spots,
having by his own ashes, that is by his own body offered up, sprinkled John
19.
and watered with water issuing out of his side, all people believing in him.

The ceremonial law being thus accomplished not by figures, but really
executed by the incarnation, death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, our
Savior, our mediator, our everlasting sacrificer, and mercy obtainer, the
infinite goodness of God was yet more manifested Heb. 9.
by the new band, new covenant and new coming of the son of God incarnate: For
by his new testament confirmed Romans 8.
by the death of the testator, he has made us fellow heirs and inheritours of
the kingdom of heaven with God.

For assurance of this heavenly succession gotten to us by grace, after that he
had finished the ceremonial law, and abolished the same (as we have showed) by
the sacrifice perfectly made by the everlasting Sacrificer, there were left ^.
Augustine ^n his 3. book of the christian doctrine. cap. 9.
unto us two sacred signs and holy sacraments* wherein God has used more
favor and more special grace, than ever he did before his incarnation, in
this that he has delivered us from the servile law of circumcision, of
difference of meats, and of diverse sacrifices ordained in the first Church of
the Israelites, and in discharging us of this heavy burden, he has so much
the more comforted us in ordaining unto us for a memory and remembrance of our
regeneration and life everlasting, two holy sacraments, under two holy signs.
To wit* Sacraments of the new Testament.
the water of Baptism, and the bread, and wine, for the partaking of his
body, and that his grace might extend to all nations, God did choose those
tokens and signs which were* most common and easy.

For Circumcision was a special mark for Abraham and his posterity, the
which Circumcision other nations were not accustomed to use, although Herodote
a Greek in the history which he writes of the manners of the Egytians, Herod.
lib. 2.
does attribute unto them the custom to circumcise, especially their Priests.
But it is easy to conjecture, that he had heard speaking of the Jews
dwelling in Egypt for the space of four hundred and thirty years observing
the circumcision. Moreover the Circumcision was ordained for the men only, A
comparing of the circumcision with baptism. Exodus 12.
and not for the women: there was also a day set for Circumcision, the eight
day after the nativity: and the cutting of the skin was paineful and
grievous. But the grace of God having abolished Genes 17.
by his incarnation and perfect sacrifice, the rigor of the ceremonial law,
as well for the difference of meats as of days, has left unto us by his new
will and covenant, the holy sign of water common to all, as well men as women,
without difference of days, and in this holy sacrament Number. 19.
the child baptized feels no grief, as he did feel in cutting of the skin.

This sign of water, to represent unto us the purging and cleansing of our
sins by the blood of Jesus Christ, was common not only to the Jews, which
were wont to use their cleansing water, but also to the Gentiles and all
nations who had in use the cleansing and washing with this water called
Lustrall and Expiatorie, as may appear by reading of ancient histories.

To the end then that the grace of God, by Jesus Christ might extend to all the
world generally, to all nations, countries and provinces, as well circumcised
as uncircumcised, Jews as Gentiles, God did choose the sign of water most
common, so much the more applying it to the comm^ditie of man to draw him Tit.
3. Galath. 3.
to fear and obedience. By the which sign he instituted the holy sacrament
of baptism, for a note and assured mark of our regeneration, and purifying,
represented sacramentally by the virtue of the holy ghost, in the which
sacrament God does assist and assure us to be borne a new and made one with
Christ Jesus, to be renewed and made members, of his members, and that he will
receive us as clad and incorporate into him and by him.

Like reasons might be brought for the other holy Sacrament ordained of
Sacrament of the holy supper of Jesus Christ.
God by his new Testament, to wit, of bread and wine. Which signs, tokens,
figures and notable forms, all nations have been accustomed to use in their
sacrifices, oblations and ceremonies, concerning their religions, as well
circumcised as uncircumcised, as well Jews as Gentiles. Also the two kinds of
foodes for the nourishment of man are co^rained under bread and wine: For these
causes our good God desiring to draw unto him all nations, to nourish and
minister most necessary food unto the, did institute the communion of the body
and blood of our Savior Jesus Christ under the forms, holy signs and
sacraments of bread and wine: For as we are assured by the mark and element
of water in baptism to be regenerate and renewed in the body and blood of Jesus
Christ, represented by the sacrament of holy water, by the virtue of the holy
Ghost: Even so are we nourished by the communion of this body and blood
represented really by the Bread and Wine, consecrated for spiritual food and
nourishment everlasting, and quickening by the power of the holy ghost, wherein
God favored us much in discharging us of bloody sacrifices ordained in the
first Church of the Israelits, which were wont to be charged with many and
diverse sacrifices celebrated with the shedding of the blood of earthly
beasts, after the diversity of offenses, and persons offending. All which
sacrifices were ended, and put away by the shedding of the blood of the just
and innocent Heb. 9.
Lamb, Jesus Christ, which by his perfect sacrifice has utterly abolished all
other sacrifices, reserving unto himself the dignity of the great and
everlasting Sacrificer, sitting at the right hand of God his Father. But he
has favored us so much, that in place of the abolished sacrifices, he has
instituted the two holy sacraments before mentioned to assure us of our
regeneration, our purging, our adoption, our nourishment, and eternal life,
given us by the blood of our Savior Jesus Christ,

But as the Israelites too gross, and carnal, Corruption of the Sacraments.
did rest in the exterior signs, corrupting the true use of the sacraments
and sacrifices given unto them of God: Even so like abuse, yea, greater
corruptions are come unto our two holy Sacraments left unto us by the new
testament of Jesus Christ, for the sacrament of Baptism succeeded in the place
of Circumcision, man (conceived of corrupted clay) would not be contented with
Gods holy institution: But some Sacrament of Baptism corrupted.
have brewed and corrupted the use of the holy sacrament of Baptism with
adiurations and coniurings, iuggling of salt, of oil of tapers, cream,
blowings, hoodes, or biggins, with an infinite number of crosses on the
forehead, on the eyes, on the nose, on the back, on^^ Theodor. in his book of
the fables of heretics.
breast, on the shoulders, on the mout to chase away Devils: For the Massa^ ans
heretics authors of coniuring, a^ crossing, do say that the child borne
accompanied with his Spirit or Deui^ which cannot be chased away but ^ Ca.
sine. Ca. post quam de consecratione d^stinct. 4.
adiuration and coniuring. And for the cause, this holy sacrament of Baptis^
has been corrupted so far, that the have added thereunto strange terms the
Syrian language, with spettell a^ Ephetath. per Satyr. 2.
purging sniuell,

What greater corruptions could there be described then these abho^nable
inventions, as if the blood of Jesus Christ had not been sufficient f^ our
regeneration and purgation: An^ as if God had not been of power sufficient
Gala. 3. Ephe. 4. 1 Cor. 15.
to perfect and regenerate us b^ the holy sign of water representing the blood
of Jesus Christ, if there were no^ spettell coniured sniuell, oiles, salt,
biggins, cream, torches or tapers, or milk or honey invented by other
Heretics.

Other more subtle Magicians, Pithagorians, Tertullian in his book of the
crowned Soldier.
instructed in the Massalian doctrine have added moreover to pronounce twenty
times over the man child presented to Baptism, the name of a Devil (which
they say) does accompany him, by that means to adjure and conjure him away.
And at the Baptism of a wench, to say the same thirty times* Was there ever
such detestable corruption in the sacrament of Circumcision? Wherefore (O
Massalia^s) have you brued your oiles, in the holy Sacrament of Baptism?
Following the heresy Marcu^ and Marcosus, which commanded to Epipha. lib. 1
tom. 3. here is. 34
anoint the children that were to be baptized. The holy sign of water
instituted by the hand of God, was it not sufficient to represent the precious
blood of Jesus Christ for our regeneration and purification, without brewing of
greeses, of oil, of spettel and otherminglings, inverted by the corruptors of
the holy sacraments: The body and blood of Jesus Christ, whrewith we be clad
by the holy water of Baptism was it not suf^cient to preserve us from all
tempest^ without borrowing of Biggins and C^ somes? And for another more great
co^ruption and abuse it was permitted v^ to women to baptize, following the
e^ror Tom. 1. Epipha. lib. ^. here is. 42. and lib. 2. Tom. 1. here is. 49.
of the Marcionistes* Quintilians C^taphriges, Montanists, Pepuzians,
Pricillians and Artotirites. Was it ever pe^mitted unto women by the law of Go
to administer the holy sacraments or s^crifice instituted in the first Church ^
the Israelites* or in the new Testame^ of Jesus Christ? In the History of
Mo^ses it is recited, how that his wife Sepho^ Exodus 4.
moved with a womanly rage, took the stone or knife wherewith she circumcised
her son, but it is not written tha^ she or any other her like, has at any
time been permitted to minister the holy sacraments by such corruptions of the
holy sacrament of Baptism: Many heresies have sprung up by the Catabaptists,
Anabaptists, Antipedobaptists and other heretics, and scismatikes which not
contented with the pure and sincere institution of God, did more rest in the
outward signs, then in that which by them was represented in spirit. He that
desires to know more particularly the abuses and corruptions invented at
diverse times by diverse humors of men, let him read our Ecclesiastical
commentaries. It remains presently to come to the corruptions of the other
holy sacrament of the supper and communion of the body and blood of Jesus
Christ. By this short discourse, a man may clearly know how variable and frail
man is, always having abused the grace of god. For like as from the beginning
of the law and instruction given unto them, the people of Israel did ever
corrupt the true use of sacrifices, holy signs, and sacraments ordained of
God: even so is it come to pass of the law of God by Jesus Christ, having
instituted the manner to communicate his body and blood under the figures and
holy signs of bread and wine. The which holy sacrament was abused in the time
of the Apostles by the Corinthians: Against whom Sacrament of the supper
corrupted. 1 Cor. 13.
the holy Apostle did write epistles, to the end to bring them to the true and
sincere observation of this holy Sacrament. Let no man therefore hereafter
think it strange if the successors of the Apostles, from time to time have
corrupted the true use of this holy Sacrament. And the more they were distant
from the time of the Apostles of Jesus Christ, the more they fell into
corruption: Yea abominable, turning the use of the Sacrament into a depth of
idolatry. First into what contention fell the Church that was next unto the
Apostles, about the determining of the days wherein the holy sacrament
Ecclesiastical history.
should be celebrated? Sabatius the heretic did institute the celebration
Histo. tripart. lib. 9. cap 37. and lib. 11. cap. 5.
of Easter with unleavened bread after the manner of the Jews. Certain of his
sect did ordain the use of the holy Sacrament to be celebrated the 14. Eusebius.
lib. 5. cap. 24. Histo. tripart. lib. 9 cap. 38. and 39.
Moon, as the Jews did. It is said, there were of this sect Policrates bishop
of the Ephesians, Philip Hieropolitan, Policarp, Truseas Melite and Narcissus
Bishop of Jerusalem. Of the contrary opinion were Victor bishop of Rome, and
Eleuther his predecessor, with Theophile Bishop of Palestine This contention
continued more the^ 300. years after the Apostles. Some celebrated the feast
of Easter after the Equino^tial, when the Sun did enter into the sign of
Aries. Other observes the month Xanthisee, called by the Romans April.

Some said (to wit) the Quartodecimans, that it was instituted by S. John, to
celebrate in the 14. Moon. Others advanced themselves to be taught by S.
Peter, whereas yet there was no evident appearance of any thing. The Montanists
Phrygians condemned the Quarto decimans obseruers of the course of the Moon,
and that they ought to order themselves by the course of the Sun, beginning at
the Equinoctial in Primetide: And by this means they celebrated eight Ides of
April, which is the 14. day of the same month; Provided that it ^ell upon the
Sunday.

There was not only contention for the use of the sacraments in what days it
should be celebrated but also there Eu^e. lib. 5. cap 4
was great division among the Christians for ceremonies invented to prepare
themselves to receive the same worthily: For some (as the Romans) did keep the
fast three weeks before Easter: The Illyrians and all Greece with the
Alexandrians did ordeine a bent to fast six weeks Others ordained seven
weeks of fasting, leaving off from five days to five days.

More and more to corrupt the holy sacrament of the supper, there was restored
another Judicial ceremony, by Histo. tripart. cap. 8.
the differences of meats: For some (during the time of fast) forbade eating
of flesh and fish. Other forbade eating of flesh only, permitting to eat
fish and fowls, which they said according to M^ys* did take part of the
substca^e of the water. Some also did ordeine to eat dry bread and water
only. Others fasted till noone without distinction of meats. And to be short
there was in the beginning an infinite number of customs and corruptions in
the use of the holy sacrament of the supper, by ceremonies brought in by the
difference of days and meats, abbrogated and put away, by the grace and law
of Jesus Christ. But was there ever any holy Apostle of Colos. 2. Galath. 4.
Heb. 7.
God, which ever left in writing any law or commandment for the distinction of
days or meats to celebrate the holy supper of Jesus Christ? their intention
was not to institute a religion of feasts and a distinction of days and
meats, but their doctrine did tend only to teach good life, and the true
worship of one God only. Wherefore we must needs conclude that the
ceremony and feast of Easter, to celebrate the supper of our Lord God is
proceeded of mere Histo. Tripart. lib. 9. cap. 38.
custom: For none of the Apostles has left any thing in writing touching the
same.

To moderate such dissentions and corruptions many councels were assembled, one
at Sangaria in Bitine, by the which (to avoid all contentions) it was
permitted to every one to celebrate Easter Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 23.
when he would. Another counsel was holden at Cesaria by Theophile Bishop of
that place, and by Naercissus Bishop of Jerusalem. Another council in Achay.
And another council was holden at Rome by Victor, Bishop of that place.

After these little corruptions, there succeeded greater from time to time,
according In the year of Christ. c 14.
unto the humors and affections of the Bishops of Rome, Alexander Platine.
Sabellieus.
the first of that name, being come to be superintendent of the Roman Church,
the first of the successors, of the Apostles of Jesus Christ, and also the
first of the corrupters of the holy sacrament of the supper ordained to mix
water with the wine before the communion: wherein he meant to reform the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, which had instituted the communion of his body and
blood, to be under two kinds, Bread and Wine, but Alexander added a third kind
(to say) Water. He restored also the Judicial ceremony of unleavened bread
Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 27. and lib. 6. cap. 14.
(called sweet bread) to celebrate the Easter as the Jews did, following
therein the Ebionits, which taught that the ceremonial law of Moses was
necessary for salvation: As also Symmachas an Heretic in Palestine had
taught. If Jesus Christ was circumcised to accomplish the ceremonial law, is
it therefore needful for us to be circumcised? Moreover if it pleased him to
accomplish the ceremonial law) to use in the days of sweet bread, unleavened
bread: It is therefore necessary to turn again unto the rigor of this
ceremony abrogated by the sacrifice perfectly ended by Jesus Christ? In what
place of the holy Gospel could. Alexander ever find to Cel. lib. 39. cap. 21.
mix water with the wine? And for to bind Christians to unleavened bread. Is
it of any more value, then his invention, to chase away Devils with water
salted and coniured? And as touching his coniured water ordained by him, we
will show hereafter that the original thereof came from Numa Pompilius the
great Coniurer and Roman Idolater, But as for the ^ingling of the water with
wine, that should seem to be taught by the religion of the ancient Idolaters,
which were wont in celebrating their sacrifices, in one chalice to consecrate
the water with the bread, specially in the feast dedicated to the Sun, which
the Persians did worship, called of them Mythros. And in the feast also of
Nep^al^es, water was used for the sacrifice According to this comparison, Just
in his apology.
Justin Mar^^r makes relation of the custom observed among the Idolators, and
Christians, for the bread wine, and water consecrated. By the one that is to
say, by the Idolators, in the name of their Idolles and by the Christians in
the name of their true God. Always this first corruption in the usage of the
holy sacrament by the mingling of water with wine beyond the commandment and
ordinance of God did not continue Inno. lib. 4. cap. 5.
without controversy: For the Greeks were of a contrary opinion that it was
not necessary to mix water with wine and that they would not follow the
corruption of Alexander: Amarcanus was of the same advice that Alexander was
saying that it was necessary to mingle it with water.

The subtle Sophist Scot does affirm absolutely that it is not necessary the
water to be mingled with the wine, because says he it cannot be changed and
transubstantiated into blood if first it be not changed into wine.

Other more ingenious would rather interpretate the institution of Alexander,
saying the wine to be converted into blood but as for the water it was
transubstantiated into the water which came out of the side of Jesus Christ.

This first corruption of Alexander did give occasion of many other to succeed:
For some invented greater bruings to S. Augustine in his book of the relikes.
cap. 26. and 64.
mingle it with blood drawn out of young Infants to mixed with the bread of the
holy supper of Jesus Christ, as the Cataphriges which began a kind of
transubstantiation of wine into blood really and corporally. Some other
adjoined thereunto Epipha. lib. 2. Tom. 1. here is. 49.
cheese called Artotirites, that is to say, cheese bread. Others also abusing
this sacrament, in steed of wine took water under pretense of more greater
abstinence. Other ordained to temper the bread with wine, which the Massalians
do yet hold in their missall sacrificers.

For another more detestable corruption of the holy sacrament, some bishops of
Rome have forbidden their Massalian sacrificers to minister unto the Christen
people (which they call lay) the body of Jesus Christ under both kinds, but
only under the holy sign of bread, and not of wine, the which they kept for
the Priests Massalians sacrificers. Is not this corruption directly against
the holy gospel and instition of the supper of Matthew. 29. Mark. 14. Luke 22.
1. Cor. 11.
Jesus Christ, which has ordained and commanded all faithful to ea^^ ^^s
body, and drink his blood. When he took the cup used he not these proper
terms, Drink all of this wine in memory and remembrance of my blood shed.
Has he used any other terms for eating of his body by the figure of bread,
then he has done for the drinking of his blood by the sign of wine? If one
should compare herewith the holy sign ordained of God in the Church of the
Israelites, a figure of the communion of the body of Jesus Christ (which was
the pascall lamb) the flesh whereof was commanded to be eaten of all persons
without exception, for as much as they were circumcised: Was there ever any
difference in the eating of the pascall Lamb, and celebrating of the Passover
of the Jews among the Levites of the stock of the Priests and the other
common people? For another detestable corruption, the Massalians have
instituted by their missall Idolatries, to sacrifice and offer the body and
blood of Jesus Christ, in reiterating (by means) the sacrifice of Jesus Christ
perfectly ended and cannot be done again: for that it was not after the order
of Aaron, but after the 1. Cor. 11.
order of ^^lchisedech, an everlasting sacrificer, who has left no successor.
Also the holy apostle when he admonished the Corinthians reverently to
celebrate the supper of Jesus Christ, did he command them to sacrifice? No, but
to communicate and eat together the body and blood of Jesus Christ. The
beginning of the holy supper was not to kill, offer, and ordain a sacrifice to
offer to God: But only to eat and drink at the holy feast prepared for us by
Jesus Christ the everlasting sacrifice and everlasting sacrificer, which has
reserved unto himself only this eternal priesthood; And yet nevertheless has
left his holy institution a banquet ordained for us of bread and wine,
representing his body and blood.

After the corruptions above said, Satan the diligent Babilonicall builder
employed all his forces and strong^^es, to build an invincible fortress of
Idolatry, to the end to fight against, and utterly to throw down the kingdom
of Jesus Christ, when he did enterpri^e the building of the Mass to be brough^
in, in the place of the holy sacrament of the supper, as we will briefly and so
clearly declare, that the most hard hearted Pharisees (made old in their
ancient ^^olatries) shall acknowledge by the verity of histories their errors
and abh^minable herefies.

Before the painting out of this Maze of error (whereinto the Mes^^lians are
pl^ndged) I thought it necessary, briefly to discover the ancient religion of
the Romans, the reign of the occidentall empire* and of the Emperors which
have exercised both the temporal office, and the dignity of the great bishops
superintendents of the religion and Church Tit. ^ in. lib. 1. Decad. 1.
of Rome. All other (as well as I) shall confess that the Roman religion
altogether for the most part to have been^ Funestell^. his book of magistrates
of Rome.
instituted by Numa Pompilius the second King of the Romans, about 700 years
before the incarnation of Jesus Christ. Then were instituted the Bishops which
afterward were brought to a certain number, unto four, then the number was
augme^ted to eight, and by Sylla to 15. In the college of Bishops there was
one chief Bishop* which was chosen by the other less bishops of the same
order and dignity, like as the little bishops purple Cardinals have practiced
the election of the great Roman Bishop, of their estate, order and dignity.
This Pompilian religion has been so well observed by the Romans, from the
father to the son, that it has been impossible to destroy and pluck up the
same, but has continued to this day, as every one may easily perceive by this
little collection.

To confirm this point there is none that can be ignorant, which lusts to
read the Roman histories, that before the incarnation of Jesus Christ there
was not one King, Consul, Dictator, or Roman Emperor instructed in the law
of God. But all were Idolaters and Infidels, following the religion of Numa
Pompilius the coniurer, And that more is, after the incarnation of Jesus
Christ, for the space of 300. years or thereabouts, there was no Emperor, nor
Roman Eusebius. in his book of the Church history the years of Christ. 34. 68.
94. 112. 113. 167. 202. 238. 254. 257. 276. and 292.
Council which would change his religion to embrace the law of Jesus Christ.
But contrariwise they have labored with tooth and nail to exercise all kind of
cruelltie against the church of Jesus Christ, as the Ecclesiastical histories
do largely declare, painting out great persecutions under the great Roman
Bishops, to wit, Claud. Tiber. Nero, Claud. Domitian Nero, Fla. Domitian,
Traian, Elie Hadrian, Antonian Philosopher, Septime Severe, Iul. Maximus, Mar.
Quin. Traian, Dece, L^cime, Valerian, Valere Aurelian, and Diocletian. All
which were Emperors and governed the Empire and Roman religion for 300.
years after the incarnation of Jesus Christ and in their moneys* sepultures
m^n^ments, tytles and autentique letters, did hold the name of great Bishop^
and high Priests as diligently is gathered in a book of the antiquities of
Rome, wherein be described the Images, moneies, and monuments of the an^ In
the book entitled the discourse of the religion of the ancient Romans by
Wi^h a^ de Choul. bailey of Daulphine.
ancient Emperors of Rome, which were all called great Bishops, by these
titles, Iul. Ces. Pon^if. max* Tiber. Nero Pontif. max* Claud. Nero. Pontif.
max. Vas. p^sianus Ces. p^ntif. max. Traianus Impera. Poatif. max. M^rc. Aurel.
Anton. August. Pontif. H^liog ^balus summas sacerdo^ A^g. Adrianus Imper.
Pontif. max. G^^erius M^ximi^ianus Pontif. max. Tit. Ces. Pontif. max. Commod.
Impe. pontif. max. Flauius Constantius Aug. Pontif. max. Which being then
Emperors and great Bishops would suffer none other head in the religion and
Roman Church then themselves, being always enemies of jesus Christ. For when
the Aposties did preach Christ to be the Sovereign Priest, great and
everlasting sacrificer, without any succeslour after the order of Melchisedech,
the tyrants of Rome and their Lieutenants* did take an occasion to condemn
Jesus Christ* fearing that the authority of the Emperors and great Roman
Bishops should be diminished. With In the Catalog of Emperors* i^ the end of
the history of Nicephore the year of Christ 410.
what fury were they enraged for the space of 300. years against the
christians and Christ's religion, to defend their ancient religion of
Pompilius? what answer was given to Theodose the Emperor by the senate and
senators of Rome, when it was put forth unto them to change their religion,
and to receive the religion of Jesus Christ, They showed that they had
possessed their Pompilian religion more then 1000. years, and that all
changing of religions were the destructions of common wealths.

Wherefore consisting in their old Roman religion, they remained without
receiving of the law of Jesus Christ.

By these histories it is easy to be resolved that for the space of 400.
years and more the bishops of Rome which called themselves Christians could
never obtain of the Senate and Roman (...) to recei^e the holy Gospel, much
less could they con^er^ the Roman Ido^ater causing them to forsake their
in^e^e^a^e Idolatry: For the Bishops of Rome were too much occup^ed in
restoring the Iudaical and Pagan^ ceremonies for the distinction of mea^es,
ordinance no^ to f^st Sunday and Thursday, In the cannon re^^a^ed ^^ C^eme^^
Bishop o^ Rome* 21. 22 62 95.
to^e^ an order for table clothes* ^eales, vessels of gold and silver, sensors
and tapesterie, and other ornament^ of the a^ters which consumed with age, were
ordained to be burned and the ashes to be put in the fount. Other were
meruailously occupied to restore the Judicial ceremonies of sweet bread, and
travailed their spirits greatly to corrupt Alexander the first of that name
Bishop of Rome in the year of Christ 110.
the true usage of the holy sacraments instituted of God, by mingling of water
with wine, bruing of salt with the water to make it purged and coniured to
drive away Devils. Other also Sixtus Bishop of Rome in the year of Christ 121.
did travel to institute Corporasses of fine linen to lay up the
consecrated hosts, and to ordeine also albes and other vestiments of the
Priests for their Siluester Bishop of Rome
sacrifices of white color without spot. Some did torment their brains to
invent the feasts of dedication and consecration, Higinus Bishop of Rome in
the year of Christ 140.
with coniuring, with salt to drive away Devils. And some other to invent oils
and creames to corrupt the holy sacrament of Baptism. Moreover ^abian Bishop
o^ Rome in the year of Christ 240.
(during the reign of these Tirants, Emperors, and great Bishops) the Bishops
of Rome desiring to make their names to continue for ever, did dream in their
Pius Bishop of Rome in the year of Christ 144.
spirits to build Temples, not unto the honor of God, but in the name of
their he and she Saints, canonized by them at their pleasure. Other did
occupy themselves to ordain that the consecrated bread and wine falling upon
the ground, should be left to the sacrificer, and the rest remaining should be
burned with fire: and the ashes should be laid up among the relics. Other
did travel Zeph^rin Bishop of Rome in the year of Christ 200
to set an order among chalises, whether they should be of glass or of wood.
And by other were instituted solemn Cali^tus Bishop o^ Rome in the year of
Christ 220
ceremonies four times a year to bring Christians to the bondage of
distinction of days.

Some were occupied meruailously to Eutich Bishop of Rome in the year of
Christ 282
ordain the offering and consecration of fables, to celebrate funerals in
purple garments after the manner of the vestiment called Trabea, the which the
Idolators did use in triumphs celebrated in the honor of their Gods.

And the like purple garment is used The red robes of Cardinals. Siluester
bishop of Rome in the year of Christ 314.
of the Cardinals to this day. Others were occupied to invent a confirmation
for young children, and that the Bishops only should consecrate the cream: To
honor also the Bishop of Hostiense, by whose hands the bishop of Rome must be
consecrated, with a cloak called Palliu^. And to invent an infinite number of
other unnecessary ceremonies, contrary to the liberty of the Gospel given
unto us by Jesus Christ: How was it then possible that the first Bishops of
Rome should draw the Princes, Senators and Romans unto the law of the
Gospel, during 300. or 400. years after the incarnation of Jesus Christ,
seeing they did not labor but to corrupt the use of the holy sacraments, and
to restore the Judicial ceremonies, and Idolatries of the heathen the ancient
Romans?

But here might one object one Philip which some vaunt to have been converted
to holy Baptism, the manners of whom were so wicked that they gave occasion to
the most credible authors, to describe him unworthy the name of a Christian.
One might bring in Constantine Chronicle of John Baptist.
the great, which caused the Council of Nice to assemble: but his reside^ce
was in Grecia being called the Emperor of the East. And yet would he never
receive the sign of Baptism to Histo. tripart. lib. 3. cap. 12.
be regenerate by the blood of Jesus Christ, until he was 65. years old,
at what time he was baptized by a Bishop of Nicomede Arian, named Eusebe, the
same Constantin^ being at point of death. Siluester then Bishop of Rome, must
not crack that he converted this Emperor to the ^aith: For this same
Siluester would not assist the assembly of the Council holden at Nice in the
year of Jesus Christ. 32^. How so ever it be, it is convenient to have
recourse always to the verity of Histories, wherein is recited the answer of
the Senate and Senators of Rome, to the Emperor Thecdez^ more then 60. years
after the death of the same Constantine the great: Which was, that they would
not receive the law of Jesus Christ, but observe their ancient law
Pompilian, to avoid the ruin of their common wealth, which might come by the
changing of religion, whereby may be well gathered that then the law of God
was not received nor approved at Rome by the Senate and Senators.

It rests that presently we come nearer to the time following. After the
decease of Theodoze, the Roman Empire of the West began so to bow, that in
short time it was quite put out by Wandeloys and Alayns, which were the chief
Paul. Emil. lib. 1. the year of Christ. 412. 154
that sacked Rome, burnt the most part of it, and ravished the proper daughter
of the Emperor Theodore: whom they married to Ataulphe king of the Goths. A
little while after succeeded the Hu^nes. Blond. lib. 2. Decad. 1.
Then Attilia King of the Goths, which usurped Italy.

About this time the Roman Empire Procop lib. 3. of the war of the Vandals
in the year of Christ 486.
of the West was spoiled of all Germany, Asia, Sarmatia, and all the Provinces
tributaries, unto Danube: Spain also, Aquitania, Gascoygne, Bourgoyne and all
the Gauls did revolt from the Roman tyranny. Then succeeded the Ostrogothes
with their King Valemir, The year of Christ, 550. 554
Theodemer, Theodorike and other Heathen and Infidels. The Visigothes also, all
usurpers successively of Italy. Afterward Paul Emil. lib. 1 the year of
Christ, 568.
reigned Totilas, which forced, robbed, and burned Rome, and all Sicile. In the
end the Lombards conducted by their Kings (...) did reign, which usurped
Italy, These barbarous nations, Idolaters and Infidels did serve as whippes
ordained of God to punish the Idolators of Rome committed by them, which had
knowledge of the holy Gospel And yet turned back from the true worshipping of
God, violating and corrupting the holy sacraments by the inventions of men: To
punish also the infidelity and obstinacy of the Emperors and Senators of
Rome, which first of all caused the Lieutenants, and officers appointed in
Judea to crucify Christ and his holy Apostles, to persecute the Christians,
and always to resist the law of the Gospel to maintain their religion
Pompilian.

Thus we may conclude, that during the space of 400. years the Roman church
of Emperors and Senators, has ever been contrary and enemies to the law of
Jesus Christ. Then afterward (the occidentall Empire being overthrown) Rome
and all Italy was ruled and governed 300. years, or there about, by Kings,
Princes and Dukes, Idolators and Infidels. namely by the Va^dales, by the
Goths, by the Hu^nes, by the Astrogothes, by the Visigothes, and by the
Lumbards in such sort, that during the space of 700. years or there about,
after the incarnation of Jesus Christ there was no Emperor, King, nor Prince
of Rome, which would embrace the law of Jesus Christ. The which gladly and
shortly I have declared, to the end that the Reader think not strange, that I
have here showed the sacrifice of the mass, to have taken his beginning of
the ancient religion instituted by Numa Po^pilius more then 700. years before
the incarnation of Christ.

And so afterward also the same sacrifice has been continued by the
Idolatrous Romans inueterate and hardened, so in their Pompilian Religion,
that they would never put away the same.

But to the end that nothing in the Roman Histories be kept close which might
obscure the clearenes of the verity, during the tyranny and usurping of the
nations aforesaid, in Italy was erected a little Lordship at Rauenna, which
continued about 183. years until it was ravished by a Bishop, which invested
himself, and encroched into the chair of S. Peter by the means of a donation
and demission practiced by Pepin in the year 758. in recompense of a tyranny
exercised by Zachary Grec. Bishop of Rome, who spoiled the true inheritors of
the crown of France, namely Chilperic or Childeric, whom he shut up in a
cloister to make the kingdom to fall unto the said Pipin the son of Charles
Martell bastard. This donation of Pipin thus given to the great Roman Bishop,
was the first original of the greatness of the Popes of Rome, who do hold
unto this day the Lordship Blond. lib. 1. P^ul. Emil. 2.
of Rauenna. (800. years being past) with a great number of Towns a long the
Sea Hadriatike, committed unto them by Pepin, contrary to the express
commandementes of Constantine then raigninge Emperor of the East in Grecia.

Whiles this little lordship was continued The year of Christ. 588.
at Rauenna, long time before the donation of Pepin* the Bishop of that place
seeing that there were no more Emperors of Rome (which was governed Sabelli^.
and kept under by barbarous people and Infidels) lift up his horns in such
sort that he preferred himself to be Bishop of Rome, and made himself the
head of the Church, and also himself and his successors Bishops of Rauenna,
so long as the Lordship has continued. This was the first little Antichrist
which would take upon him a tyranny in the Church, to follow the earthly
tyranny of his Lordship.

Afterward there rose up another In the year of Christ. 600. Blond. lib. 1.
greater Antichrist in Constantinople, named John Bishop of that place: Who
seeing the occidentall Empire of Rome overthrown, and the other of
Constantinople highly exalted, he would als^ Greg l^b 4. ^^ his ep^^^es, cap.
^^.
follow the tyranny of the world, and st^^re up a spiritual r^^e in the
Church o^ Jesus Christ He caused himself t^ be declared by a council holden
at hi^ The year of (...) 6^^.
pleasure Bishop E^ume^ious, that is t^ say, general and head of the whole
(...)
Church. But soon after the great Bishops of Rome gave such order that b^
^^eason the Emperor Maurice it Constan^^ople was cr^ely slain, he his wife,
and fami^^e, by wicked Ph^^^^: who to recompense this detestabl^ murder
comm^^^ed by the advice of the Church of Rome, always contrary to Jesus
Christ, he declared Beniface the The ^e^re o^ (...)
third ^f that name, the general head of the church of God* taking upon him
the (...) of Jesus Christ the great and everlasting high Priest, the only
spouse and head of his church* Who can be^^er describe an Antichrist, than he
that does enterprise a tyranny in the church of God, a po^^gamie in the church
the spou^e o^ Jesus Christ attributing Man. ^^6.
to himself that power which Jesus Christ has reserved to himself, to be
perpetual with his church, by the virtue of his holy spirit to conduct and
govern the same? May not he rightly be called Antichrist which does enforce
himself directly to go against the holy gospel of Jesus Christ, who
commanded his Apostles (when he sent them to^ preach his word) that they Math.
23. Luke 11. Mark 2.
should not institute a Monarchy in the church, as the Princes, Kings, and
tyrants of the earth* That none amongst them should enterprise to call himself
the head or greater then other: but all as brethren were humb^e being assured
to have one head, and one heavenly father, which will tarry with them and
assist them for ever; to inspire and conduct them in his holy will. Is not he
of good right Antichrist, which will have himself called the successor of
Jesus Christ in the great Bishopric, and in the high priesthood by him
exercised? The which dignity he has reserved to himself, abiding a high
sovereign Prie^ for evermore: who has left no successor in his dignity as
Aaron did and hi^ successors in the dignities of the hig^ Priests of the
Jews: But is after the order of Melch^sedech a king and high prie^ without any
successor in his dignity Wherefore then (O Antichrists of Rome have you taken
upon you the dignity ^^ the highest Bishops as the heads of the church of God,
and usurped also the authority of Jesus Christ, causing you^ selves to be
called most blessed and most reverend fathers and Popes, having instituted a
college of little purple Bishops to choose the great Bishop, bu^ only to
the end to renew the ancient Roman religion of Numa Pompilius, the first
author of your Pontifical dignities.

About the same time that Ph^^a^ the cruel murderer did erect an Antichrist
in the Roman Church, Mahomet* was risen in the Church of Arabia, instructed by
the Monk Sergius, about the year 620. for this Apostate Heretic, seeing the
law of God altogether corrupted by the traditions of men, and the holy Gospel
contemned, sects and diverse heresies sowed, as well by the Jews. Pharisees,
Esseens Saduces, Masbutheans, Galileans, Hemerobaptists, and Samaritans: as
also by the Christians, Simoniaques, Nicolaits, Cerinthie^s, Menandrie^s, and
Ebionites, Vale^tinians, Cerdonians, Marcionistes, Montanistes, Seek the
Church histories.
Cataphriges, Tatians, Eueratits, Seuerians, A^temonistes, Porpherians,
Helchesaites, Nouatiens, Sabellians, Chiliastes, Paulianistes, Manicheans,
Automousiastes. Arrians, Eunonians, Macedonians, Euuomiotheophroniens,
Euuomioentichiens, Aetians, Donatistes, Luciferiens, Patripassians or
Theophatites, Photiniens, Marcellians, Paulosamosetans, Apolinaristes,
Iouinianistes, Pelagians, Acariens, Olimpiens, Quaternitaries, Monothelites.
And other Heretics having corrupted the true usage of the holy Sacraments
ordained of God* Seeing also specially the Messa^ien sect to prosper in their
ceremonies, taken partly out of the Judicial law, and partly out of the
heathen Idolatry he invented the great Alcoran* decree, wherein he set many
chapters and articles called Azoares, which are as laws and rules of the
Mahomet Religion.

This preface and brief discourse of the Roman history me thought necessary
to recite before I would begin to discribe the original of the sacrifice of
the Mass: Always to bring the Reader to understand the verity of the fact:
How the Emperor of Rome has bin governed until the decay thereof, about the
year of Christ 410* And how the barbarous Idolators did usurp the same: for
the space of 300. years, how also the Antichrists did rise, and in the end
the Emperor of Rome was transferred to the Almaines, which keep it to this
day, 500. years being passed.

Of the Mass.
TO begin this our little treatise of the Mass, first of all it is convenient
to interpret The original of the term of the Mass.
this term Mass, of the ancient Romans called Missa. Some have honored
this Missal sacrifice to have taken his beginning of the Hebrews* bringing in
the place of Daniel speaking of Maozin, as Daniel. 11.
if they would signify the Mass by Maozin. But this term is very strange
from Missa, or Mass. And there are other Hebrew words which are more nearer,
to wit, Messa, which is as much to say as conculcation or treading down,
whereof mention is made in the history 4. Kings. 11. Missa.
of the kings of Israel. Another term also is found, very comfortable unto
this common term Mass, namely Messall, that is to say, hell or grave. But
Joshua. 19. Messall.
I am well assured that the high Priests of Rome will not take the original
of their sacrifice of the Mass from the Hebrews, acknowledging their Mass and
Messall to be a conculcation, grave, or hell. Further to speak the truth the
Author of the Roman Religion Numa Pompilius never thought of the Hebrews, when
he first instituted the Mass Messal. Hell.
much less this term Massa or Mass can have his original of the Greeks,
seeing they have no sacrifice of that name, notwithstanding that some have made
some reason to bring in this term of Greek Miz^in, that is to say in English,
to whisper or hide in secret. As if the Messalian sacrificers had received of
the Greeks Idolatours, to keep secret the chief and principal words of
their / Masses, to the end they should not be understood of the assistance but
have observed to murmr and blow between their teeth the Canons, and other
special words, which neither they understood themselves, nor other, which
beheld them. Nevertheless neither the Hebrew terms, nor Greek vocables in no
wise can be appropriated to the missall sacrifice. Wherefore it behooves to
have recourse to the true original of the term Missa or Mass taken of the
Mass taken of the ancient Latins Romans.
ancient Latins the Romans, which were accustomed to use these terms,
Missus, M^ssa, Missilis, and Missio. As we say in English a Messenger, a
Message, and Messiuenes for letters sent: For when the ancient Idolaters
Romans Apud Graecos Sacerdos functus misterio sic renunciabat Laois aphesis
quasi populum misum faceres
would give leave unto the assistance at their Sacrifices celebrated to go
home, they caused to be pronounced in the end of the sacrifice these words. I,
lieet, Missa est. Depart, it is permitted the assembly has leave to retire or
depart. And in process of time, for that this song did note unto the people a
license to go home, most agreeable and desired as a song and term most
comfortable Apul. lib. 11. de asin. au.
and pleasant it has bin kept and the sacrifice honored with this term Mass
or Missa. to confirm this point there is two thousand years past, and the
same terms be sung yet unto this present day, (...), which does signif^
(...) given to the company or assembly to depart and go home.

In such sort that those which do (...) the temples or churches, as soon as
they do understand this pleasa^ song, (...), a man may see the^ ordinarily to
awake and leap for joy as being assured to have license to go to dinner.

The Arabian (...) instructe^ of long time by the m^nke Sergius, ^^ we have
declared have this term of Mass in great commendation, with In the book of
the description o^ (...) by John Leon (...).
which vocable they have honored ^ towns or cities called Messa situate upon
the mouth of the Ocean, upon the point which does make the beginning of the
(...) Atlas.

Nere unto the same towns in the subu^bes there was a temple much reverenced
(...) the (...).
by the Idolatrous Turks, for that they did be (...) that in Messa should be
borne the just bishop promised and prophesied by Mahomet. They did believe also
that upon the coast of the said place of Messa, Jonas was cast after he Messa
Iamans. In the book of the great Turks Court by sryer Antony Gefferie.
was swallowed up of the whale.

They have also this name Messalamaines in as great honor as we have the name
of Christians. As if the would signify by this vocable Messalanian saved.

Moreover the Mahematists do honor also their priests with the name of In the
book above said. Messen. Messit.
Mass, calling them Messen, and their temples Messi^ or Meschit. Those then
which are enforced to bring to light the Anatomy or description of the Mass,
the pieces, the grounds, the paths, and encreaseme^ts, ought to describe it
with great reverence, having due respect to the ancient religion Pompilian and
Alcoran of Mahomet.

Now after that we have resolved the name of Mass, and of Missa, in the Latin
tongue, to have taken her beginning of the ancient Roman Idolatours, and not
of the Greeks or Hebrews. It behooves us to come to the garments of the
Messalian sacrificers. But in passing by we must not omit that name Bishop, to
have his original also of the Romans as we have declared also in our
commentaries. Also the name Papa or Pope had his beginning of the ancient
Idolatours, who were wont to call upon their God Jupiter calling him Papa
Jupiter, specially the B^thinians and Scithes. The which name Pope is taken of
the Greek word Papus, that is to say great father. And also the very title
written upon all the requests presented unto the great Roman Bishop, is most
blessed father, and to the less purple Bishops most reverend father, and to
the little Bishops reverend father. Holding all this word father or Papa, a
great father, which was wont to be a common name for all Bishops But afterward
the great Roman Bishops did reserve it for themselves only. There is also
another name reserved for the little bishops, called curates, which are
superintendentes in every little parrish, having borrowed this name Curate of
the ancient Curions of Rome. If one will not deduce the etimologie or
signification of the same from the Greek word Cura, Cura. Cario sacerdos C^ur
qui in sua cura, id est in sua parrochia sacris praeerat. Tit. Liu. lib. 1.
Decad. 1^.
that is shauing or polling, for that the ancient Curions and Sacrificers had
their pollings and head shaven after the form of the Babilonians, or of the
Herculians Bishops, called for the same cause Stephanophores, as bearing a
crown upon their heads. Wherefore me thinks that all the members of the
Missall sacrifice had their beginning of the Pompilian Tit. Liu. Fenest. Pompo.
Let.
Religion and that one should do wrong to the ancient Roman Idolators if he
should take from them the original of the names of Mass of Bishop and of
Curate, as it is justified and evident by the ancient Roman histories.
Touching the vestiments of the Mass Sacrificers Numa ordained that it should
be white, called by the Latin word Alba, an aulbe. The which name aulbe has
continued to this day for the vestiment of the Priest celebrating Mass. Above
the aulbe was also ordained for the sacrificerto Aulbe. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 4.
cap. 17. Super tunicam aeneam pectori ^egumen. Tit. lib. Deca. 1.
wear a little iacket painted in colors. And above that an ornament for the
breast of brass or copper, afterward changed into gold or silver, which the
Massalians called a Cheasuble, they used also a veil to cover their head in
Chasuble. Virgil. lib. Ene. 3. purpureo velare comas ad opertus amictu sit
capite ante aras phrygio velamus amictu.
sacrificing, called an amice first instituted by Eneas. These be the principal
vestiments instituted by Numa, more then 700. years before the incarnation of
Jesus Christ. True it is that afterward many inrichments of the Jews were
added thereto, as the Stole, the Ephod, the Zone, or Girdle the Miter or Thear,
and certain other ornaments, the goodlier to garnish the great whore of
Babylon.

But the Massalians willing to disguise Titelman in tracta^de exposi. myniste
missae and Gaber. (...) in lide exposi missae.
the original of their vestaments of the mass have imagined the aulbe to
figure the conversation of Jesus Christ in his flesh, or the purity of his body
incarnate in the womb of the virgin. Other do interpret the white color to
signify chastity and continence. Others playing and mocking the passion of
Jesus Christ do sophistically signify by the aulbe, the white garment
presented by Herod unto Christ when he was sent back (as a fool) to Pilate.
Philo the Jew a more excellent philosopher, in his treatise of dreams, does
subtelly say the aulbe does signify the certainty of the most clear light of
God, which he calls ens: the linen also whereof the aulbe is made, they do
interpret the subt^ltie of the scriptures. And as touching the amice invented
by Enea. they disguise it to be the vale wherewith Christ was covered when the
Jews in the house of Caiphas did mock him in buffeting him. Titelman one of
the most subtel Massalians does sophistically say by the amiae to be signified
the divinity of Christ hid under the humanity. Some other also do confess the
amice to be come in, in place of the Ephed of the Jews. The zone, the
manipule and the stole which be 3. kinds, they figure the 3, cords wherewith
Christ was bound and led before the Priests, and before the Lieutenants of the
Romans in ^ury, Biel another ^ubtel Massalian does interpret by zone the rods
wherewith Christ was whipped, by the stole laid a cross to signify the
gibbet or gallows that Christ carried upon his shoulders. The manipule also
carried upon the left arm to figure the bond of love wherewith Christ was
hol^den. Another mummerie by the zone wherewith the aulbe is trussed to
signify the bond of the charity of God. The stole put upon the ammas in the
neck of the Massalian in form of the cross to figure the obedience of Jesus
Christ unto the death of the cross. The maniple carried upon the left hand to
figure eternal felicity of Jesus Christ. Another sophistry by the ammas to
figure faith, by the stole the humility of obedience, by the manipule, the
watch and hearty devotion of the massing sacrificer. Titelman does surmise
otherwise of the manipule on the left hand, to be figured the force and battle
of Christ against all powers visible and invisible, as a buckler against all
temptation: and the hemmes of the manipule to figure a final perseverance. He
does sophist also by the left hand to be understood the human infirmity of
Christ, the which bound with the manipule, does figure Christ holden as it were
overcome by the divinity. Brunus another Massalian doctor does imagine by the
manipule the care of the massing priest to chase away evil affections, or
otherwise to figure the cord wherewith Christ was bound by the Jews: by the
Stole, to be figured the yoke of the Lord, the which the Massalian ought to
have garnished with arms of righteousness on the left side and on the right.
The other painted orname^t first instituted by Numa the magicia^ they have
disguised it with the name of planet, as a wavering vestiment, otherwise called
a cope of a chasuble, which they do sophist to present the purple robe
presented unto Christ in the judgment hall of P^late, to mock him, calling
him king of the Jews. Another sophistry by such a garment to be figured the
nature of Christ, where the Deity was hid. Philo the Jew platonicing, does
interpret by this vestiment decked with diverse colors, to be figured the
stars and heavenly signs. The^ the Massalia^ sacrificer thus rigged with his
aulbe, Ammas, his zone, manipule stars, and with his chasuble or cope of diverse
colors, must stretch out his arms to play two personages at once, representing
by his chasuble or cope (whereof the part before is less then that behind)
the first Church from Abel to Christ. And by the part behind more large and
also enriched with the sign of the cross to figure the Christian people. This
chasuble must accord with the Amice which was before upon the head to signify
the coniuncti^ of Christ and his church. The aulbe also must be agreeable to
the chasuble to signify Christ to be applied unto our infirmities. Beside the
vestime^ts above said Philo the Jew does ad the mitre to figure the riall
diadem of the Massalians which ought to have their heads anointed with cream
or with holy oil to signify the princelines of the Priests the which Philo
in lib. de profug.
ornament of the mitre is now reserved for great Sacrificers only.

It rests to descend to the description of the parts of the Mass, the
original whereof particularly we desire according to the truth. First to the
Masses called high celebrated on Sundays. The Massalian Sacrificers have taken
of the religion Pompilian to conjure a clensing Apul. lib. 11. Of the golden
Ass. Procl^s in lib. de sacrifi. and Gag Procl. Platonicatu.
water called H^lo Water, consecrate d^o sprinkle the assista^ts at the
sacrifice. The coniuration and enchaunting instituted by Numa was of sea or
salt water, for this cause says he, that the salt was participant of a fyrie
nature, or of fire very apt to purify.

For this cause the ancient Roman Idolators Eius aquae aspersione, peccata
presertim periuri^, mendatiaque dilui credebant, Blond. lib. de Romans trium.
Ovid lib. Fast. 3. In the law of the discourse of the religion by Choul. i.
Holy water, stocks of two sorts.
did sprinkle with this salt water co^iured (as with Mercury water) purging and
clensing the faults of the people, specially of perjured and liers. To co^serue
this water hallowed and co^iured they had two sorts of holy water vessels. The
one great fixed and made fast at the entry of their Temples, where they did
worship their Images, to the end to sprinkle with the same salted water those
which did enter into the said Temples. The other holy water ve^ssel was
cariable to transport of the same water through their Temples or houses, to the
end to water the^ for their clensings and purifyings.

They which ought to celebrate the Dijs superis sacra facturus corporis
ablutione purgabatur cum vero inferis litandum erat sola aspertio sufficiebat.
Blon. lib. 2. de Romans trium Macro. lib 3. Satu. cap. 1. In delii. Apolonis
templo praecipua erat aqua sacrificantum vsui accommoda qua^ ad alios vsus hau
sisse magni crimiminis instar erat Alex. ab Alex. lib. 4. cap. 17. Platina. Si
sinis vitula aspersus populum iudeoru^ mundebat multo magis aquasale conspersa
populu^ sanctificat and insidias diaboli a^^rtit ca. aquam
Mass, if it were to the inferior Gods, i^ was sufficient that the sacrificing
Priest^ did sprinkle himself with the same purging water. But if the
sacrificer did celebrate Mass to the superior Gods, he must bathe his whole
body, and wash all his members. It was also defended to apply this purging
water to any other use, save for clensinges and purgings. Alexander the first
of that name, next successor of the Apostles of Jesus Christ, and one of the
first corrupters of the holy sacraments ordained of God, following the same
institution of Pompilius continuing this Idolatry of coniuring and consecrating
of holy water, to chase away Devils. But the better to color of this Pompilian
witchcraft he invented this comparison. If it be so (says Alexander) that the
ashes of a red Cow, offered up in sacrifice mingled with water of the
fountain purified the people of the Jews: By much greater reason the water
coniured with salt should purify Christians and chase away Devils. Is not this
a breaking and corrupting of the law of God, to accord with de consecra*
distinct. 1. Law of God. corrupted.
the Romans, taught in the ancient doctrine and religion of Numa Pompilius the
coniurer. If Alexander had not bin so much given to the use of salt, instituted
by the ancient Idolators for their clensing water, he would rather have Number.
19.
followed the Judicial ceremony, and have ordained ashes to consecrate the
purging water. And where he would think to vyser his doing by the miracle of
Elizeus which did purify the water 4. King. 2.
with salt. Moses also did the like with the wood showed unto him, when the
people of Israel were in such necessity of sweet water to drink. But by
Exodus 15.
these miracles it is not recited that Elizeus nor Moses had instituted a
purging water to purify the people of the Jews. And it shall not be found
that there was at any time amongs the Judicial Number. 19.
ceremonies any other purging water but with the ashes of the beast offered up
for burnt sacrifice. Wherefo^ Number. 19.
Alexander and his like must freely a^ knowledge the invention of their Sal^
and coniured water for the purging ^ sins, to have taken his original ^ Numa
Pompilius, more then seven hundred years before the incarnation ^ Jesus Christ.

This purging water was so well obse^ued Histo. tripart. lib. 6. cap. 35.
of the Roman Idolatours, the more than 360. years after the incarnation of
Jesus Christ, it is recited ho^ the Emperor Valentinian entering in Valentinian
the Emperor against holy water sprinkled
to the Temple of the goddess Fortune a sacrificer watching the said Temple
did sprinkle him with this blessed pu^ging salted water, which he had take out
of the holy water stock being a the entrance of the said Temple, where with
the Emperor being chafed, smote the Priest holding the holy water-sticke,
saying he was rather defiled then purified. By these true Histories the
Massalians may vaunt themselves, the first part of their Mass sacrifice to be
very ancient. And that their holywater Holy water very ancient.
water stocks and salted cleansing and purging water, are of the ancient
doctrine of Numa Pompilius and not of the Evangelical doctrine of Jesus
Christ, which they call new doctrine, and new Testament, as differing from the
ancient Ceremonies of the Jews and Painyms Idolatours. But again I cannot
marvel Against salt holy water of Alexander Pope of Rome.
enough, wherefore Alexander did enterprise the restoring of the Pompilian
Idolatry, seeing he had a mean to reinstitute the ceremonial water after the
fashion of the Jews. And this doing to follow rather the law of God then Numa
Pompilius, for he had easy means to recover ashes to make a purging water
after the manner of the Jews: namely of holy and precious ashes, to say of the
ashes kept in their shrines, and coming of courtaines, towels and vessels
consecrated, Ca. Omnes de consecrat. distinct. 4. and ca. Altaria and ca.
Vestimenta. distinct. 1.
which the Bishop Clement predecessor of Alexander had forbidden to be applied
to any profane use, But being worn with oldnes, to be burnt in the fire* And
the ashes to be put into the Fount. Were not these holy ashes, to have moved
Alexander to restore the ashie and purging water after the manner of the Jews,
if he had not been s^ dainty of salt and found a better taste, t^ continue the
ancient Roman religion* Other ashes might have been found b^ the successors
of Alexander: To wit Ca. Altaris de consecrat. distinct.
of the round hosts unleavened and consecrated, which the great Bishop Higinus
ordained to be burned (which falling upon the earth might not be left for the
massing sacrificer) and the ashes of the same hosts to be put into the shrines.
Other ashes also might have been gotten of the rattes, myce, and other beasts
devouring the said consecrated hosts, and ordained to be burned, and the ashes
to be put into the shrines.

Seeing then that Alexander would not In lib. caucel. Miss.
follow the ceremonial law of God, to ordain a water blessed, salted,
consecrated and coniured: Why did he not at the least put his salt into the
host of the Massalian Sacrificer, which they say is offered to God as a health
sacrifice? In Leuit. 2. 5. 6.
doing whereof he should have followed the ceremony of Moses, by the which he
commanded the salt should be offered in all sacrifices, and therewith to
sprinkle the sacrifice offered for health. But if Alexander and his successors
would have followed the law of God, they would have inverted nothing of their
own brains, they would never have made themselves so renowned to have left
the memory of their institutions: The occasion of inuenting new idolatries.
For this occasion they would in nothing follow the law of God, but
cont^ariwise have forbidden to put salt into the round hosts consecrated to
celebrate the Missall Sacrifices. They have forbidden also to put ashes into
their holy water, to the end that in all their institutions, men should know
they borrow nothing of the law of God nor of the law of Moses, much les^e of
the Euangellicall law of Jesus Christ, but only to have taken thought to
bring in inventions, notwithstandin^ that they were invented by the ancie^
Painims and Roman Idolators, 70 years before the incarnation of Ies^ Christ.
To finish this first part of the Mass: It had been more expedien (o
Massalians) that in place of your sacrifices, and coniured salt water, where
with you sprinkle the people, to hau^ The true holy water of all Christians.
clearly declared the holy Gospel, causing the people to understand, that the
purifying and washing of their sins did hang only on the blood of Jesus
Christ, who is strong enough to driu^ away Devils to bring us from hell, t^
preserve us from death everlasting, and Hebr. 9.
to deface in us all spots of sin, without using of adiuration and coniuring
with salt, to drive away Devils, according to the witchcraft of Pompilius, and
Epipha. lib. 1. tom 1. sec. 9. and 17. conte. hec.
the heresy of the Samaritans, which did believe to be purified by washing
themselves every day with holy water.

After the Asperges song, and the holy ^ part of the Mass.
coniured water sprinkled upon all the Aulters, Images and assistance at the
missall sacrifice, followed the Procession which some would attribut to Agapet
Bishop of Rome. But it was instituted Procession. Platina Tit. Liuius. in his
decades.
more then a thousand years before him, which the ancient Roman Idolators did
call Supplication.

The manner instituted by Numa to go in procession to appease the wrath of their
Gods, or to obtain peace, or to pray to God for the ^ruites of the earth,
Supplicationes quas nos processiones vocamus fibant circa delubra fanaque and
puluinaria in quibus bonos diis dabatur, precedentibus pueris ^ngenuis a^
sac^rdotibus coronatis ac laureant tenemibus manu voce modulata canentibus
carmen subsequente maximo pontifi^e ve^ curione deinde sequentibus patriciis ac
senatoribus cum coniugibus and liberis pleru^que coronatis Apul. lib. 11. de
Asin aur. Blond. lib. 2. de Romans trium. Alex. ab Alex. lib 5. cap. 27. In the
book of the discourse of the ancient religion of the Romans. Apul. lib. 11.
Of the golden Ass Alex. ab Alex. lib. 50 cap. 27.
the order was in this sort. First before the Processio^ went young childeren.
then the Priests clad in white surplisles, singing Himnes Praises, and Songs
to the honor of their Gods, after marched the high Bishop or Curate, then the
ancient Senators of Rome, with their wives and children, and sometime the
common people did assist the same also. In this Procession was carried commonly
the Pagent or Shrine of the God ^upiter, or Anubis, by some of the Priests clad
in white Su^plisles (their heads being shaven) and having a crown upon their
heads. This crown was in such reputation, that the Emperor Commondus
Anto^ius himself the high Bishop caused his head to be shaven and shorn
round, expressly to bear the Pagent of the God Anubis. Before the pagent or
Shrine went a Torch-bearer carrying a taper light in his hand. When the
Processio^ did pass through the streets, there were resting places prepared,
to serve for stations for the Priests Page^tporters to breath themselves.
During the Procession the temples were opened, the Aulters and Images perfumed
with incense and the Relics of the Gods visited. In the days appointed for
Procession it was kept holy, the shoppes being shut, the Halles of Justice
closed, and the Prisoners unchained. Who could better paint forth the order of
the Processions observed unto this day by the Massalians, instructed from the
Father Herodote in his history. Ierem. in epist. ad Iudeos in Babylonem ab
ducendos. Ne verticem deraditote neue barbam vellitote.
to the Son by the Religion of Pompilius? What other author can there be
alleged for the ceremonies observed in the Processions but Numa Pompilius? If
the Massalians will not run further for their shaven crowned heads their
vestiments and white Surplices, which the ancient Idolatrous Egyptians were
accustomed to use, or to the Priests the Goddess Isis, or to the Babylonians
Sacrificers, which had their heads and beardes shaven: For as touching the
Leuit. 19. nec in gyrum a^ rotu^ dum attondebitis omam vestr nec radetis
barbam. Ezech. 44.
law of God the contrary was observed and the Priests were forbidden to clip
round their heads and hairs, and that they should not have shaven beardes.
And as for the law of the Gospel, there is no like ceremony commanded by
Jesus Christ, nor by the Apostles. They must then take their course unto the
ancient Religion of Pompilius. Moreover in the Banner of Procession.
Procession there is added a cross and a banner. This Banner was called by the
ancient Roman Idolatours Labarum, which was a sign reputed holy and reverend
Ex libris messal^ ad Octauianum Augustum.
as well by the Dictators and Emperors, as by the Soldiers, going on Warfare,
In this banner first Antenor caused this Italian word Truye or Troy (after the
name of Tro^^) to be painted, Apul. lib. 11. de asin. aur.
which signifies in english a Sow. The which banner A^tenor vowed and
dedicated to the temple of Juno Queen In the book of the dis^ourse of the
ancient religion of the Romans.
of the Heavens, for that, that the Sow was the sacrifice consecrated unto the
same Goddess Afterward the ancient Romans caused to be painted in their
banner Mercuries Mace. In the which was painted the Portrature of two Dragons
or Serpents enterlaced. Then after was painted an Eagle, for the arms of the
Emperor of Rome But Constantine the great, Emperor in Grecia, caused to be
graven a figure in Greek lettters of an X interlaced with an^, and at the two
sides a and o in this sign, me^ning to signify this word (...), Christ. This
banner was carried upon a pole of wood in corssewise, the banner being four
square after the fashion of an ensign of crimson or violet Say, the borders
enriched with fringe of gold or of silver and precious stones. After this
manner have our Maslalians enriched their Pompilious Processio^s, in the which
were carried banners as they should go to war.

But in place of painting there the name of Jesus Christ they have painted the
Images and likenesses of diverse Gods and Goddesses, he Saints and she Saints
patrons of every parish. This in some is the beginning of the Mis^all
Processio^ for the second part of the Mass. Was there ever so great Idolatry
amongst the Israelites, when they would celebrate their feasts of sweet bread,
to eat the Pascall Lamb a figure of the holy sacrament of the supper, which
the Massalians have disguised by their sacrifices of the Mass? Did they ever
cause to be carried in Procession the flesh and blood of the unspotted Lamb?
Did they ever lay it up in shrine to be carried in Procession throughout the
streets? The brazen serpent (notwithstanding they abused it) did they ever
cause it to be borne in a shrine upon the shoulders of the Priests, which had
their heads and beardes shaven. As the great bishop Vrbain did ordeine to carry
in procession the consecrated host by the Massalians: And instituted a solemn
feast a In the year of Christ. 1264.
thursday every year, to the end to turn the use of the sacrament into a more
detestable idolatry, then al his predecessors had done before him; After the
sprinkling of holy water, and the processio^ done Numa ordained that the
Massing sacrificer to celebrate the sacrifice, being clothed with his aulbe,
and chasual or tunicle 3. part of the mass, are the Altar, taper, and light.
painted, the head crowned, and beard shaven should approach to the Altar, to
the end to make all things ready for the sacrifice furnished with a Lamp or
Taper light which commonly was of Tede Quid* lib. 4. de fast. Apul. lib. 11. de
asin. aur. Plutar. in Numa
or pinaple tree. For without an Altar or fire no sacrifice could be
celebrated. He ordained also that the Massing priest should turn himself to
the Altar toward the East. Porphier the heretic did not only continue this
Pompilius witchcraft but also did ordain the porches and the images to be
turned toward the East, to the end that those that entered into the Temples in
bowing themselves before them should address their prayers toward Alex ab
Alex. lib. 4. cap. 17.
the East, like as the Persians do worship the Sun in the East. Be not
these institutions Massalians and Pompilions contrary to the ancient
ceremonial law of the Jews, in the which it was forbidden to address prayers
toward the East, for a difference from the ancient Idolaters.

Acknowledge then (O Messalians) that the erection of your Altars toward the
East* your lamps and tapers light, Exodus 20. Leuit. 26. Deuteronomy. 5. Esaias. 40.
your pictures and Images reverenced in your missal sacrifices to have taken
their beginning of the ancient Roman religion appointed by you from one to
another For the pictures and Images wherewith your Altars be decked and
adorned to celebrate your missall sacrifices, can not take their original of
the law of God, the which does not forbid only the suffering of any Images in
the Churches, but also to make them, and reverence them Unto whom can God be
made like? What Image, picture or what portrature can be invented for him?
Nevertheless, by a most detestable and abominable heresy, you (o Abominable
Idolatry.
Massalians) have caused the Image and likeness of the Trinity one God and 3.
persons to be prynted in your round hosts which you cause to be worshipped.

Nevertheless the two doctors Massalians Titelman and Biell enterprete the
Altar otherwise, when the m^ssiag Priest does approach lade^ with his chalice of
gold to figure Christ carrying the cross unto the mountain of Caluery, then
the Priest kissing the Altar to figure the marriage and wedding sign of Christ
with his Church. The right hand of the Altar to figure the people of the Jews,
and the left hand the people of the Gentiles. For this cause Durand a subtle
Massalian has written, that the missall me^orie ought to begin at the Durand.
lib. 4. rubr. de mutat.
right hand of the Altar, and on the same part to end. And yet notwithstanding
the principal aperies are celebrated at the left hand of the Altar. Touching
the fire and lighted t^per, they figure Christ: as being the fire that
consumes the rust of our sins, or otherwise the fire of charity compassing
about the christian people, and the burning ^aper to signify the light of
faith, the ^oyes to come, and the incarnation of Christ.

Be not these detestable sophistries, the which Numa the Sorcerer never thought
of, when he inst^tutea the Altar, the fire, and the burning ^aper to sacrifice.

To continue the order of the missall 4. part o the Mass.
sacrifice* the Massalian Priest approaching to the Altar, the ^aper burning and
clad and adorned with his aulbe and chasual tourning his face toward the East,
beholding the Images guilt and carved, before all things must say his Conf^e^r,
and confess himself in acknowledging his offenses, and ask pardon of the
Gods and goddesses, of the he Saints an^ ^em dininam facturus ad sua^ leuandam
culpam se in primis rerum dicere debebat and nouae paenitere ac ^ate^i admissum
v^it^mque submittere. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 4. ap. 17. Blond. l: b. 1 de Romans
trium.
she Saints, requiring just and reasonab^^ things: As Pithagoras does say in
h^^ golden verses, and Orpheus in his hymns for Numa the Sorcerer esteemed the
conscience of the Priest Massalian to b^ well purged by his confession* And
tha^ without Confiteor the sacrifice could no^ be well celebrated.

Behold then, neither Damaze nor Pontiam Bishops of Rome, cannot give the glory
to themselves that they first instituted the Confiteor, for the Massalian
sacrificer: for more then a thousand years before them, it was forged by the
ancient Roman Idolatours; And yet is continued unto this present day, that
the Priests celebrating their missall sacrifice shall pronounce or murmr a
Confiteor, in a language neither understood of them, nor of the assistants,
addressing their prayers and requests unto the Gods and Goddesses, to the he
Saints and she Saints, in place of reuerencing, honoring, praying, and
worshipping the true, only, and almighty God, creator of all goodness.

Nevertheless, the Al^oran of Titelman does interpret the Co^fiteor of the
Massalian Cap. 9.
to signify the confession of Christ for the sins of the people.

After the Confiteor murmured to observe the religion and ceremonies of 5. part
of the mass.
Pomp^l^us, the massing Priest ought to toss and retosse, turn and return,
along Turnings and beckings, H^su^t ^ertigines in sa^res a Num^ institutae
dexteram ad oseulum far and se in orbem circumage* re. Blond. lib. de Romans
tri^m* Man cro. in Sa^urnali.
the Altar: lifting up his hands, than letting them down, with prayers and
meditations toward the East. For Numa the sorcerer, had an opinion of great
holiness to be in these turnings, bowings, and conuersions of the Priests
body. This is the occasion (as a man may conjecture) of the adding to, of this
pleasant song at the entrance of the Mass, when the sacrificer begins to
make his nods, and turns, I will enter (says he) unto the Altar of God which
makes my The entrance of the Mass.
youth to rejoice. He has not just cause of reiovcing seeing the ^able-cloth
la^ed, the Table furnished, the b^quet pr^pared the m^sicke of orgaines, and
other in^trum^nts sounding, the odours an^ en^ensing, the up full of w^^e the
coll^cion ready, the pot and offering to fi^ his pursse? Be not all these
means to rejoice the youth of the sacrificer entrin^ unto the Altar, to mass
turn, and danc^ after the manner prescribed unto him b^ the Magician Numa
Pom^^lius? And no^ Plin. lib. 28.
only the Romans, but also the other Idolatours in celebrating their
sacrifices were wont to turn and return li^ting up the right hand unto their
mouth then turning all their body, the which turnings and noddings were
accounted holy.

Titelman in his alcoran does vecite that the Massing sacrificer in making his
traversing along the Altar, does make 7. courtesies or salutations unto the
assistance in his sacrifice, to the end to chas^ away the 7. deadly sins by
the seuenfold grace of the holy Ghost. But in making his 7. courtesies in his
Mass dance, he ought to turn himself toward the assistance (except before
the preface, and kissing the Pax) what time is occupied in the ^reaking of the
host, to tra^su^stantiate him into an accidence without a substance.

These beckings, bowings, turnings, Six part of the mass. Organes*
and towings finished by the Massalian sacrificer, Numa ordained the sound of
Orgaines. Fluites and Violles, to singe hymns, praises, and songs, to the
honor of their Gods in the name of whom, the Missall sacrifice was celebrated.

This part of the Mass has been enriched with diverse songs, by diverse
Bishops of Rome. Some as Flaman and Diodore did institute Anthemes,
Thelesphore, Antiphones.
the Collects: Leon or Gelase the Graduels, Collects.
Gregory or Gelease. the Traictes, Gothgere abbot of Sa^dal, the Sequences.
Graduels. Sequences.
Which are diverse songs of music serving to adorn and enrich the missall
sacrifice. But if the commentaries of the ancient Roman Bishops instituted by
Num^ were discovered, much great Hymnorum plures species erant, hypingos
Dianae, Apollini pean and prosoedia Dionysio dithir^nibus, Ceteri iulus: Veneri
erotichus: praeter quos fuere prosoedion, hy porchema* and stafimon Alex. ab
Alex. lib. ac* 4. 17
diversity of songs, ballets hymns, ode and canticles, should be found
dedicated and consecrated to diverse Gods and Goddesses, even like as the
diversity odiuers songs of music has increased according to the diversity
of diue^ Missall sacrifices ordained to diverse Gods and Goddesses, he Saints
and she Saints. For like as the ancient Idolatour did celebrate their
sacrifices to diuer* Gods and Goddesses: So the Massalians continued the
celebration of their Masses to diverse he and she Saints, One in the name of our
Lady, another in the name of Saint Sebastian, other of the holy Diverse Masses.
Ghost, and other of Requiem, insomuch that they made a difference between Dry
Masses.
dry Masses and other common Masses, wherein they made the soppe steeped in
wine. In such sort that thereof came an infinite number of Missall sacrifices
unto diverse he and she Saints. Unto the which were sung diverse songs and
sequences. Be not these horrible and abominable corruptions of the holy
sacrament of the supper of Jesus Christ, thereof having made an Idolatry after
the fashion of the ancient sacrifices instituted by the coniurer Numa? Wherefore
the Bishop Vitalian ought not to glorify himself that he enriched the
sacrifice of the mass with the sound of Organs. For more then 1200. years
before him this institution was published by the Magician Numa.

But to stuff this Babylonical sacrifice, the Massalian Alcoranists have
interpreted the diuer sitie of their musical songs, by a Pythagoricall
phylosophie. Touching the collects, that is to say, the patched prayers they
have commanded, that they shall be sung in number odd, to wit, 3. 5. or 7. the
3. to figure the trinity, the 5. to represent the five wounds of Christ, the
7. to figure the 7. words of Christ upon the cross, or else the 7. gifts of
the holy Ghost. Moreover for a more subtle Pythagoricall divinity, the Mass
sayer ought not to pass the number of 7. by the ordinance of Pope Innocent the
third of that name: the sophist Biel in his alcoran of the interpretation of
the Mass, does add that the number of the collects should be equal to the
prayers of the secrets, that is to say, prayers of the Massemunger murmured in
secret to the end they be not contemned of the people. After the collects is
the song of the graduall more sharp and grave, a figure of the confession of
the publicans having heard the preaching of John Baptist. Notwithstanding the
song of graduall was not sung in the Missall sacrifices from Easter unto the
feast of pentecost, to figure the blessed estate of the world to come.

Further beside the sound of Organes, 7. part of the Mass.
and songs of Music the ancient Roman Idolatours were wont to use in their
sacrifices perfume of incens which they caused to be kept in a little vessel
Perfume of incense.
called Acerra a censour. In this little Frankensence coffer were put the
odours which the sacrificer did take to incense the Altar, the Images, the
hosts Blond. lib. 1. de Romans trium. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 4. ca. 17. Iliacis
tempori^ bus veteres non thure, sed cedri, and citri, fumo deus adoleb^nt.
Platina.
or sacrifices specially in the Masses celebrated unto the God Ianus, and unto
the Goddess Vesta, which took pleasure in incense and wine offered unto them.
For in the time of the Troian^s, instead of incense, cedre and Citron were used
for perfume. It was not then Leo bishop of Rome that first instituted the use
of the incense and incensing in the Missall sacrifice. For more then 700.
years before the incarnation of Jesus Christ the ancient Roman Idolatours
did use incense in their sacrifices. And also the Tit. Liui. lib. 3. Decades. 3.
Romans did retain the word in Latin Thus, which signifies incense, of the
ancient word Thyo, that is to say, I sacrifice, because the Idolatours did use
in all their sacrifices incense, they had also a Tit. Liui. lib. 9. Decad. 3.
portable incensor to incense withal. Nevertheless, some write that the
ancient Roman Idolaters celebrating their sacrifices unto the Goddess Ceres
used Ovid de fast. l^. 3
the gum of Pyne called Tede, instead of ince^se, for which cause Ceres was
called of the Poets Tedifere.

By the Alcoran of Titelman, the incense is interpreted the prayer of the
Massalian, for that it does mount up into heaven in a sanour of sweetness,
even as the smoke of incense does rise up on high. He does sophist also with
Biel his companion the censour, to figure the grace of the holy Ghost. These
subtle Alcoranists allege the place of Toby, who chased away the devil by the
perfume of the broyled liver. The same Biel interprets otherwise the incense,
to figure Mary Magdalens anointing of Christ, and because Christ was twice
anointed, the incense must be also offered twice in the missall sacrifice.

For another part of the missall sacrifice 8. part of the mass. Plin. lib. 1.
cap. 3. Offertorie.
celebrated by the ancient Idolators, was the Offertory, of the first fruits
offered, to the honor of the Gods in the name of whom the sacrifice was
celebrated. This Offertorie was for the massing sacrificer, which he might
freely carry into his own house, for the nourishment of himself and his
family: notwithstanding there were other offerings distributed to those that
were needful. After by the covetousness of the Massalians, this usage was
changed into an offertorie or offering of silver or gold to enrich the coffer,
which some would Platina.
have attributed to Leo Bishop of Rome, notwithstanding that the Offertorie was
practiced more then a thousand years before him. And to the end to justify
this by the Roman histories: When Numa had instituted the ministers of the
Religion, as Bishops, Augures, Blond. lib. 2. de Romans trium.
Sauliens, Feciaux, Curions and others, he ordained also the means how to
nourish and intertaine them, he commanded to make of the common revenues
foundations, for the nourishment and maintenance of the religions Vestales.
Following his example many particular Sacerdotiorum sieve beneficiorum duo erant
genera ^num quorum collatio ad re^p* aut principem aut ad pontificu^ collegium
specta^at: Alterum quorum coliatio, a^ aliqua^ familiam e^usque successores
pertinebat quae beneficia viris patronatus censebantur. Blond. lib. 2. de Rom*
trium.
persons did the like. So that benefices became rich by foundations. The same
benefices were of two sorts. The one at the presentation and bestowing of the
Prince, or of the commonwealth, or of the college of Bishops. The other were
at the presentation of some particular patrons of the said benefices, by whom
they were founded and endowed with great riches. Of the which benefices the
great Bishops of Rome have usurped authority to give dispensation to have
two at once, even as it is recited in the history of Liuie, of Fabius Maximus,
who had by dispense two benefices then when he was created Bishop, more then
two hundred years before the incarnation of Jesus Christ. This was their first
reuenew of the Massalian A dispense for many benefices. Tit. Liuius lib. 30.
The founding of benefices. Vacations and setting over. Offertorie.
sacrificers to have benefices richly founded. The second reuenew was the
Offertorie, or offering, the Offectorie and oblations. The third reuenew was
the vocations of the first fruits, which the Idolatrous Roman Bishops were
accustomed to take, for the vacation of the benefices which they gave, sold, or
dispensed with*

The fourth reuenew was deaths annuals, Tertia sacerdotaorum opulenta, saluti
omnibus inueniebat. quas inferiores superioribus pontificibus impendebant quale
apud nos est cum pontifici roman^ fructus primos antistites and his minores
sacerdo^es ad obtinenda beneficia pecuniam dissoluunt. Biond. lib. 2. de Romans
trium. Cicero in oratione pro domo sua ad pontifices. Blond. lib. 3. de Romans
trium.
legacies, and bequests given, to pray unto their Gods for the souls of the
departed. The which is verified this day by the monuments and tombs of the
ancient Idolatours.

The first reuenew was amerciaments, condemnations and confications levied by
the bishops of Rome: as the place and house of Cicero (when he was banished)
were confiscate to the College of the priests, and dedicated specially to the
sacrifices celebrated in the temple consecrated to the goddess Liberty.
Passing by I thought good to recite this sum of the ancient Roman
sacrificers, to the end that unto all it may be known, that all the abuses
and Idolatris succeeded in the Church of Jesus Christ are not new: but had
their original restored and taken of the ancient Romain Idolators: As the
fou^dations of Masses, Obites: Monethminds, the dispensing of many benefices,
annuals, vacantes, translations, offerings, and Mass box, amercements and
confiscations, adjudged by the sentence of the bishop of Rome as are also other
ordinances restored by the new Roman Bishops and continued from the one to
the other. To this The year of our Lord. 383. Blond lib. 2. de Romans trium.
purpose it is recited in the Roman histories that since the reign of the
Emperor Valentinia^ the xii. of that name, great sedition happened at Rome
between the Christians, and the Idolatrous priests, which striued amongst
themselves, whether had more enriched the Church by foundations* legacies,
bequests, offerings, and other inventions: in such sort that the heathen
Idolatours and infidels which did usurp again the temple, presently called
the Church of Saint Peter at Lians, did fight against the Christians of Rome
which would have dedicated the same to their devotion.

After the offertorie the Ale^ran of Titelman does hold that the M^sse-mo^ger
must cap. 35.
for a time keep silence to figure the flying of Christ or fear of the
Discip^es to confess him before the Jews. Then after the sacrificer does
singe on high Per omnia secula seculorum for this that Christ after that he
was in secret did show himself openl^e in the house of Lazarus. Then he
sings sanctus sanctus, sanctus, to signify the song of the Jews when
Christ entered into Jerusalem. This music ended the sacrificer must secretly
murmr between his teeth, counterfaiting sadness without any turnings, but
yet he must play a dumb mo^merie by signs of crosses drawn hear awaies and
there awaies, as we shall hereafter declare.

After the offertorie we must come 9. part of the Mass the round host of
flower.
to the 9. part of the Mass, the most rich and most daitie for the Massalians*
That ^s, the host or sacrifice. Wherein does consist the principal end or
mark of the Mass sacrifice. In the time of the Plotar. in Numa ^ollux in
^nom. lib. 6. Misier^s peractis, qui sacris intererant r^tundis pa^^bus quo^ in
honore^ deorum adhibebant stantes vescebantur nec nisi sacrificio perfecto
vesci licebat Alex. ab. Alex. lib. 4. cap. 17.
coniurer Numa the Romans had not yet in use to kill and offer up the blood of
beasts. But about the end of the Mass sacrifice, it was ordained to eat and
communicate together within the temple little round Cakes consecrated to the
honor of the Gods in whose name the Mass was celebrated. The little round
hosts of fine flower were eaten by the sacrificer and the assistants standing
and not sitting. The flower whereof they were made was called Mola, whereof
comes this word immolare to offer.

There were diverse hosts, that is to say, diverse little round cakes,
dedicated unto diverse Gods like as they had diverse sacrifices of the Mass.
With the same round hosts was offered (the altars serving in place of tables.)
And whiles the sacrificer and assistants at the sacrifice did eat and
communicate together the foresaid little round cakes, consecrated to the honor
of their Gods, there was sung Hymns, and pleasant songs. Some playing upon
Orgaines and Cymbals.

Before the devouring of this round host printed with pictures, the Massalian
Do^tors have ordained that the sacrificer shall ^se adiurations and coniuring
by signs of the Cross. First he ought to make three crosses upon the round
host to figure the threefold doctrine of Christ. To wit by the father, by
himself, and by the holy Ghost, in pronouncing these words: Haec dona, haec
munera, haec sancta sacrificia illibata* Other Doctors Alcoranists and
Massalians interpret the third cross to signify the treason of Judas who
delivered his master into the hands of the Jews. Beside the afore^ said
three crosses, does follow five more to figure the five days of respit from
Palm Sunday to Goodfriday, or otherwise to represent the five wounds of
Christ, two in his hands, two in his feet, and one in his right side. Of the
which five crosses, the three first must be made on the chalice and upon the
round hosts to figure the delivering of Christ unto the Priests, Scribes and
Pharisees, or to figure the price that Christ was sold for, to wit, three times
ten which is 30. pence. The two other crosses are seperatlie made, the one
(being the fourth) upon the host, the other upon the chalice alone, to pla^ the
two persons of Christ and Judas, which the Massalian sacrificer does continuin^
still his mockes and mummeries, stretchin^ out his arms to figure Christ
stretched o^ the cross. Then he lifts up his round hos^ printed full of
pictures to cause it to be worshipped. And that he begins again to make
three other crosses. One upon the host, another upon the cup, and the third
upon himself, to play the personages of three estates of those that be in
Heaven, in Purgat^rie, and in Earth.

He smites afterward upon his breast, to play the personage of the thief
hanging upon the cross which repented himself.

But in smiting of the stomach must be with the 3 hinder most fingers of the
hand, for the thombe and the next finger be reserved to consecrate and
transubstantiate the round host. Moreover he must smite his breast three times
to figure the threefold offense of the heart, mouth and deed,. In lifting up
his voice to represent the thief or the centurion which confessed God in the
passion. Six other crosses are made once again, three upon the Chalice
covered, to figure the three hours that Christ hanged on the cross on live,
and the three other crosses are made upon the chalice discovered (with the
round host lifted up again) to figure the 3. hours that christ hanged upon
the cross dead. The^ after the Massalian has kissed his chalice there are yet
2. crosses more, to figure the mystery of the blood and water ^ssuing out of
Christ's side. Beside the dumb mu^meries abouesaid, the Priest must take the
covering cloth from the chalice, and cover it with the plantyn to figure the
breaking of the veil of the temple in the midst at the death of Christ. This
done the round host is put from above the chalice, and is couched under the
corpor as to figure the burying of Christ. The Priest thus having played the
person of the hanged thief of the traitor Judas, of Christ and of the
Publicans, plaieth afterward the personage of the Centurion in singing the
Pater noster. But the Alcoran of Durand expounds by the seven Petitions of
the Pater noster, the seven weepings of the virgin Marie, or the seven
virtues, or the seven gifts of the holy ghost, or the seven Beatitudes, or
the seven deadly sins. This song finished, the Massalian a little while
keeps silence, to figure the silence or rest of Christ in the tomb. Another
aperie or mummerie does the Messalian play with his round host, the which he
lays upon the paten to figure the unity of the divinity with the humanity,
but when he plaieth the secret mystery, then the host is hid out of sight.

The sacrifice thus finished and the little Re d^uina and ceremoniis celebratis
sacerdos tunc. I, licet su^^lamabat. qu^ voce illos qui interfuerant* missos
faciebat. Alex. ab. Alex. lib. 4. cap. 17. Parts of the Mass ordained by Numa
700. years before the incarnation of Jesus Christ.
round hosts eaten, Numa ordained to sing these words, I, licet (vel) Ite
missa est, that is to say, go it is granted, the assembly is suffered to go
home. Be not all these parts of the Mass sacrifice ordained by Numa the
coniurer more then 700. years before the incarnation of Jesus Christ, to wit,
the Vestiments, the Aulbe, the Casual, the holy purging water coniured with
salt to chase away Devils, the Altar, the Taper-light, the turnings and
trauersings along the Altar, with prayers and meditations, toward the East, the
Processions with Shrines and Relikes, carried upon the shoulders of the
Priests, clothed in white surplesses and crowns upon their heads: the
Confiteor made to the he Saints and she Saints, the playing on the Organes, the
Canticles, Peans, Hymns and Odes, the Censor and the Incense, the communion of
little round bread consecrated in the name of their Gods, and in the end this
song Ite missa est, do ye not acknowledge (O ye Massalians) that ye have
borrowed all these parts and members of your Mass of Pompilians Religion? Why
do you hold this word Mass, seeing Jesus Christ did name it a supper or the
partaking of his body? Why have Matthew. 27. Luke 20. Mark. 14. 1 Cor. 11.
ye taken these Vestiments, the Aulbe, and painted Chasual proper to the
ancient Roman Idolators, of the which garments Christ ordained nothing? Why
have ye given more credit unto the witchcraft of Pompilius to chase away
Devils with salt water coniured, and called holy water, the^ unto the holy
gospel of Jesus Christ, the which does assure you in his name to drive away
Devils, Mark. 16.
and not with witchcraft and salt. Who but the spirit of Vuma, did inspire you
to shave your crown round, and to deck your selves with white Surplesses, to
bear the Shrines and Banners in Procession? When Jesus Christ celebrated his
holy supper, and instructed his Apostles of the communion of his body and
blood, did he command the^ to follow the religion of the ancient Roman
Idolators, to have their Altars enriched with Images, to use turnings and
trauersings along the altar, to be shorn round, to have aulbes and chasuals,
adressing their prayers and confession to he and she Saints, to pipe with
Organes, to perfume their altars and Images with Ince^se, to go to the
offerings, to carry money to the Priests box, to eat little round hosts
consecrated, and last of all to sing Ite missa est?

But I well perceive (O Massalians) your Mass subtelties, whereby you shall
confess to me, that the body and chief parts of the Mass took their
beginning and creation of Numa Pompilius.

Nevertheless the deckings and enrichings were inverted by other Bishops of
Rome: specially by a Monk called Gregory the first of that name, that came to
the Popedom: Who was instructed in the Magic and Philosophy of Pythagoras,
and had also studied the laws of Tullius Hostilius, King and successor of
Numa, to the end to make his name everlasting by adding some new thing to the
missall sacrifice he ordained to Platind. Volateran
singe nine times these words in Greek, Kvrie eleyson: For Gregory did
greatly esteem this number nine, even as the Kyrie eleyson. Quoties prodigi^m
nunciebabatur sacrum nouendiale per nouem dies agebatur.
ancient Roman Idolators had recourse to the nouendiall sacrifice or signs,
and monstrous wonders. He did also ordeine that in the Mass sacrifice should be
sung two words of Hebrew, to accompany the two words in Greek. And that at
certain times men should singe these Tit. Liui lib. 1 Decad. 1.
two words Allelu ya: and certain times they should not.

In place of which Allelu ya, is song another song called the Tract, with
sharpness of voice prolixitie of song, and heaviness of notes of music, to
figure the miseries of this world, and he that sings Allelu ya must be
higher then he that holds the graduell, as the Alcoran of Titelman does
recite.

Is there not witchcraft enough in your sacrifice (O Massalians) unless ye
put thereunto Hebrew and Greek words? and mingle together Pythagoricall
numbers, and nouendiall songs, and institute a difference of days, to sing
and not to sing Hebrew words, and invent crosses and dumb mu^meries? Be not
these corruptions of the holy sacrament of the supper Glotia patri. Agnus dei
kissing the paten.
ordained of God? Some other have enriched the missall sacrifice as Damase
bishop of Rome with a Gloria patri. Sergius with an Agnus Dei, song three times
(which Titelman expounds to figure the assention of Christ. Innocent the
kissing of the priests Paten.

The which Paten of gold by the doctrine of the Alcoran does signify the
divinity of cap. 14.
Christ. The Gloria in excelsis by Symmachus, the which song pronounced in a
voice Cap. 56. 57.
sweet and base, does signify as holds the Alcoran of Titelman the warlike
and childish voice of Christ, being yet in the Cradle. O Blasphemy and
detestable mummerie of the son of God. Leo the second instituted the kissing
of the Pax, which the Alcoran of Titelman says, does signify the union of
Pax kissing.
Christians. And that the kissinge of the Paxe came in, in the place of the
holy communion, observed in the first Church next the Apostles.

This kissing of the Paxe was song of the Massalian saying these words Pax
domini, and making three crosses upon the chalice when the third part of the
host is castinto the wine, to figure the incarnation of Christ, or for the
threefold peace, of the time, of the spirit, and of the euerlastingnesse to
come. Moreover the forging of the Canon of the Mass is attributed to
Alexander, Gelase, Syricie, Leo and Pelage. These be pieces The Cannon of the
Mass.
patched too, according to the humors of the Bishops of Rome, the authors and
restorers, the founders and augmentors of the Mass sacrifice.

The best enriching instituted in the Platina. Sabellicus.
Mass sacrifice must not be forgotten to wit, certain places of the old and
new Testament called the Epistles and Gospels. The Epistles and Gospels cut in
the Mass.
The which the Massalians have cut and mingled with the Pompilian Idolatry, and
therein have profaned the law of God, even as did the Apostate Sergius,
Doctor of the Mahomet, the the which decked the Alcoran with many places of the
holy Bible, and patched a hotch potch of fables and heresies, with the holy
law of God.

The Massalians have ordained two persons to sing the Epistles and Gospels to
the end to enrich their M^sse^daunce, to wit, the subdeacon, who marches
before to play the person of the first law of the Jews, and the deacon which
comes after with more great dignity, to represent the law of the Gospel,
the which deacon carries upon his breast a cushon to figure the humbleness of
heart. The subdeacon receives not the blessing of the Massing Sacrificer as
the deacon does, for this cause (say the Massalian Doctors) that God sent his
Prophets invisibly.

But the deacon playing the personage of the law of the gospel, he receives
blessing as being sent among Wolves, because Christ sent his Apostles as men
visiblie. It is ordained that the deacon shall we are a stoale cros^wise
hanging upon his shoulders one end over the other, to figure force and
continence joined together in the Masse-monger. The Deacon playing his pagen
and singing some piece of the Gospel in a language understood neither of him
nor of the assista^ts must turn himself toward the north standing upright,
Because (says Titelman) the north part is cold and malicious. And therefore he
must make a cross to chase away the Devils of the north. Be not these
sorceries and confl^ctes more horrible then all the commentaries of the ancient
Roman Bishops Idolators?

Does not this approve the Alcoran Against the long possession and prescription
of Idolators
of Mahomet, the long possession whereof Turks presently have had for these
900. years past, having conquered Countries, Realms, and Empires, Against
Turks
prospered in all their enterprises, and still observing the abominable law
set out Against the people of Israel offering to Moloch.
in the Alcoran: Where the people of Israel excused before God (when they did
sacrifice in the valley of Tophet to Moloch with innocents blood) by alleging
the long possession, and accustomed 4 King. 16. 23. Against the idolatry of the
brazen serpent.
usage for the space of 1200. years before this Idolatry was altogether
destroyed by the good king Josias? Did the Israelites murmr against the
virtuous King Ezechias when he destroyed the brazen serpent, which was made by
the express commandment of God, 900. years before. Where the same people
excused of their Idolatries committed in Dan and Bethel, wherein are the Images
of 2. heiffers of gold instituted by their King Jeroboam, under pretense of
long possession, and that they had continued this Idolatry for the space of
300. or 400 years. The Jews, now vacabonds, Against the image set up in
Jeroboam. 3 King. 12. Against the infidelity of the Jews.
shall they be excused before the majesty of God, by showing the long
possession of this ceremonial law instituted of God himself three thousand
years ago?

Also you (O Massalians) can you allege against God the continuance and long
possession of celebrating your Po^pilian Masses long time, and that you and
your predecessors have used, sold, and put to usury, your Missall sacrifices.
Is this reason sufficient to ground upon long possession, as your
predecessors, Senators of Rome did allege unto Theodose the Emperor, their
Pompilian religion to have been observed more then a 1000. years. This is not
an excuse sufficient to bring in long possession and usage of long time
observed, for the confirmation of your Idolatries: For if God of his mercy and
wonderful patience did suffer the Jews in their unfaithfulness, the Turks
in their Alcoran law and the Christians in their Mass Idolatries. It is not
for us to dispute of the incomprehensible secrets of God, but with all humility
to take again the way of truth, when it shall please him to give it us, after
long and deep darkness, whereunto the people in all ages have fallen and turned
from the true worshipping and ordinance of God: even so as briefly before we
have declared of the Israelits the chosen people of God, the which
notwithstanding that they had Moses and the Prophets which did admonish them
by many miracles and threatenings how they should honor God and keep the law,
nevertheless they never ceased by men's inventions to commit Idolatries. So
that during the reign of the Princes Judges of Israel, when the people were
governed as in Aristocratia, then after submitted under the yoke of Kings, as
in a Monarchy, and last of all brought under the government of the Pristes
having gotten both the temporaltie and spirituality, the law of God has been
corrupted, the sacrifices and sacraments defaced and defiled, and Idolatry
continued more then 1600. years, from the law written by Moses, unto the
incarnation of Jesus Christ. What may one hope for, then of the people of Rome,
instructed in all Idolatry as a dry tree, a Heathenish and bastard people? But
these Massalian heretics cannot vaunt themselves of very long possession of
their Mass sacrifices except of the 9. pieces, before described, restored and
borrowed of Numa Pempilius for the other parts of the Mass were invented at
diverse times by diverse antichrists corruptors of the holy sacraments ordained
of God. And to understand the times and years of the chief builders, Agapet
Pope of Rome, reigned in the year of Christ 533. and brought in the procession
after the order prescribed by Numa. The Confiteor was restored by Damase
reigning the year 577. The Kyrie eleyson and the Letanies, by Gregory reigning
in the y. 593. The Graduell the Collects and the Traict, by Gelase, reigning in
the year 493. The Sequences by Gothere Abbot of Sandale. The Gloria in
excelsis by Symachus reigning in the year 508. The Incens and the Offertorie
restored from the ancient doctrine Pompilian by Leo the third of that name, in
the year 800. The kissing of the Paxe by Innocent the first of that name in
the year 408. Agnus Dei, instituted by Sergius, in the year 697. The
Commemoration of the dead invented by Pelagius in the year 558. The Cannon
forged by Gelase, Siricie, Leo, and Pelagi reigning in the year 800. The
transubstantiation instituted by the bishops of Rome about the year of Christ
162. Wherefore of what impudency are these Alcoranists Mass Doctors to be
condemned, the which falsely do affirm that the holy Apostles of Jesus Christ
did celebrate their missall sacrifice. Seeing that this sacrifice was not
restored to his integrity after Numa Pompilius but after Christ 800. years? In
what approved histories is there mention made that such Idolatry was committed
by the holy Apostles of God? How is it possible to believe or think it, when
as this great whore of Babylon has not been restored with her deceit and
mask of holiness till long time after the incarnation of Jesus Christ.

But it behooves to return to our history Continuing Histories.
of Rome, more and more to discover the true original of the Mass. We have
declared in discovering the parts and chief members of the Mass sacrifice,
how the ancient Romans before they were accustomed to sacrifice with the blood
of beasts did use little round cakes consecrated in the honor of their Gods,
the which standing they did eat within the Temple about the end of the
sacrifice. These little round hosts of wheat flower were taken up of the
Massalian Sacrificers, but they have enriched the witchcraft and Idolatry of
Numa Pompilius insomuch as they have decked the little round hosts with Images
and pictures, printed within Abominable idolatry.
the round circle of the said hosts to the end to make them more holy, even to
Against the idolatry of the round Hosts.
be worshipped, by the invention of Honorius Antichrist of Rome, in the year
1226, the which Numa the Coniurer never practiced, nor yet came to this
abominable idolatry. What more detestable heresy can be discovered then to
paint the majesty of God in form and likeness of a man, as the Antropomorphits
imagine. Who taught you (o Massalians) to corrupt the holy Sacrament of our
Lord Jesus Christ's Supper in making little round hosts, if not Numa the
Coniurer? When Jesus Christ celebrated his holy supper with his Apostles, did
he ordeine to have little round hosts, and to print them full of pictures and
the likenesses of men, to adjure and conjure with crossings and blessings odd
or even, and to make them to be worshipped? Acknowledge then (O Massalians)
your principal part of the Mass to wit, your little round hosts to have taken
their beginning of Numa more then 700 years before the incarnation of Jesus
Christ, who never commanded you this roundnes of hosts, nor that they should be
rather round then square, three cornered or eight cornered. But so far was he
from choosing the figure of roundnes after the fashion of Numa, that
contrariwise when he instituted the holy sacrament of the communion of his
body, he used breaking of the bread in morsels, which he distributed to his
Disciples, for a simbol, sign, and fihure, signifying really and sacramentally
his body by the virtue of the holy Ghost, and the Massalians have not only
chosen the fashion round in their little consecrated hosts, printed full of
pictures, to caus^ them to be worshipped after the mane of the ancient Romans
but further they have exceeded all Idolators: For in the the time of Numa
Pompilius, those the assisted at the sacrifice of the Mass d^^ eat together
standing in the little roun^ hosts consecrated. But since the Massalians have
reserved for themselves, the communion of the said little round host^
consecrated, using no charity toward those that stood by at their missall
sacrifice. Is this to follow the ordinance o^ Jesus Christ, who brake the
bread an^ gave it to his Apostles? Jesus Christ the everlasting sacrificer,
was he alone at the Altar, eating one little round host graue^ full of Images,
when he celebrated the holy communion of his body? Can you (O Massalians) too
too abominable, and much less charitable Idolators then all the ancient
Romans, so much play the subtle Sophisters that you will make men to
understand that your Mass sacrifice wherein the sacrificer alone deuoureth all
the little round host printed full of pictures, without giving part to any other
is a communion, and by a marvelous wicthcraft to cause the assistance at the
sacrifice to believe that they have communicated together with the Priest,
notwithstanding that they neither received nor did eat any portion of the
round host.

And beside this for a more extreme idolatry the Massalian doctors expounders
do declare the round host to be divided in 3. parts, one for those which are in
paradise another for those which are in Purgatory, to have remission of their
sins, and the third drenched in wine, for those which are living in this
world. But the Alcoran of Durand declares the three parts of the host broken,
to present the three fashioned body of Christ in the sepulcher sleeping, in the
earth lying, and after rising again. The other subtle doctor Biell, because
he would not confess the body of Christ in the round host to be bruised and
broken does subtelly define the breaking of the host to be done in an accide^ce
without a substance. Be not these horrible heresies to make the souls to
communicate which are in Heaven, or in Purgatory, instituted by Sergius Doctor
of the Mahomet, by the means of one round host devoured by the Massalian.

But you (O Massalians, may here object unto me the use of the primitive Church
observed in the communion of the holy supper, whereas every one of the assembly
in the temple did take a portion of the broken bread consecrated to eat and
communicate together. The which use has been kept unto this day in your
missall sacrifices celebrated upon Sundaies, the which* you cause to be
distributed by morsels of holy A communion of holy bread.
bread unto the assista^ts within the temple. But in this ancient communion
does abide nothing but an Image only; Because the Massalians abusing the holy
sacrament, have preserved for themselves only the litte round host consecrated
to be devoured, without giving any portion unto the assistants: unto who^ they
leave the bits of holy bread, which Notable differences between the round host
and the holy bread.
are four square for the most part. The round host without leaven, and the
holy bread is with leaven. The round host is without salt, and the holy bread
with salt. The round host is printed full of pictures, and the holy bread is
without print or picture. The round host is worshipped, and the holy bread is
received with thanksgiving. The round host is devoured of the Priest, and the
holy bread is divided among the assembly to communicate and eat together. The
round host is steeped in wine, the holy bread is eaten without wine. To be
short there is as great difference between these two kinds of communion as
there is between the ancient Law of the Idolators, and the law of the
Gospel* Provided always that they agree in one point that is, that both in
the one and the other there is a corruption of the holy sacrament of the supper
ordained of God. It rests to come down Transubstantiation.
to the deep Maze of Idolatry. We have recited the history of the people of
Israel, which did not content themselves with the heavenly bread Manna given
unto them of God, during the time that they were in the Wilderness, but did
murmr against God and Moses their leader, requiring to eat fiesh. The
people also of Rome being heathen and Infidels were not contented with the
institution of Pompilian touching the communion Blond lib. 1, de Romans trium.
of the little round Cakes.

But the Bishops of Rome, Idolators, did institute the killing and offering up
of beasts, to the end to eat and communicate the flesh of the offeringes in
their Sacrifices, specially the sheep the Sow, the Goat, and the Beef,
which first were ordained by Euander King of Arcadie. To the end therefore that
the Massalian should not go out of kind from the Idolatries of their
predecessors, they have followed this communion of flesh, and are not contented
with the little round, unleavened hosts consecrated and printed full of
pictures, but Hosts of meal are changed into flesh, and wine into blood.
have in time invented a new witchcraft to change their little hosts of flower
into flesh and bone the bread being no more bread, but an accidence without
substance: and by this means to change their round host of meal into an host
of flesh and blood. The wine also offered in their Mass chalices to be changed
into blood: the wine being no more wine, but an accident without substance. Was
there ever any witchcraft more abominable and heresy, more detestable then
this transubstatiation of the Mass? When the children of Israel were wearied
with the eating of Manna and the heavenly bread demanding flesh, was the M^uno
turned into flesh, bones and blood.

When the Romans the ancient Idolatours did change their round hosts of
meal, and demanded to eat of the flesh in their sacrifices, did they use this
wichcraft of transubstantiation?

Wherefore I do freely affirm that the Massalians have lately instituted this
addition of the Mass, yea more then 1000 years after the incarnation of Jesus
Christ. This heresy began to spread In the year of Christ 1062. Chronolog.
Fon. Volater.
abroad greatly in the time of Antichrist Nicolaite, crept into the Roman
bishopprick by the conspiracy of Hildebrand, having chased away by force, the
other chosen Bishop, namely Benedict the 12. Lanfranc. de sacr.
of that name in the year of Jesus Christ 1062. Afterward it advanced it self
by a conspiracy holden in the Lateran at Rome during the ecclesiastical
tyranny of Innocent the third of the name: about 200. years after the solemn
recantation of Berengarius deane of S. Maurice of Against transubstantiation.
Angiers. Against the which abominable wichcraft and heresy, we must briefly
bring in by the way of recapitulation the institutions of the sacraments
ordained of God.

First the fruits of the knowledge of good and evil, forbidden to our first
father Trees of life.
Adam, as holy signs and Sacraments of fear and obedience, whereupon did hang
life and death, were they changed and converted into knowledge or death,
leaving the nature of trees and fruits, and reduced into an accidence without
substance? the Manna from heaven, Heavenly Manna, and the rock flowing water.
and the rock flowing with water of life sacraments agreeing with the holy
sacrament of the supper, were they changed into an accident without substance?
the lambs without spot offered Lambs offered by Abell.
by Abel in sacrifice well pleasing to God, were they changed into another
nature? The little skin cut off for a Circumcision.
note and mark of the covenant unto the good patriarch Abraham, and his
posterity, was it changed into an accident without substance? The blood of the
Pascal lamb.
Paschal lamb for the assurance of the health of Israel, was it changed into
another substance? The flesh of the unspotted lamb, ordained to be eaten in
the day of the Passover, a true figure of the holy Sacrament of the Supper,
was it changed into an accide^t without substance?

The brazen Serpent, by the only Brazen serpent.
sight whereof health was given unto diseases, left it to be a serpent of
brass, was it changed in being ordained a sacrament and holy sign unto the
people of Israel? The oblations offered in sacrifices, The offered sacrifices.
as well of earthly beasts as unleavened bread, and other holy signs ordained
of God for sacraments and holy signs, to cleanse the people of Israel: Were
they changed into an accidence without substance* All the holy signs ordained
of God in the Church of Israel, notwithstanding that they did represent really
and sacramentally, that which they did figure, and not as a simple sign
without effect, yet so it is that there was never none so horrible an heretic
that did invent this wichcraft of transubstantiation.

Yet must you confess (O Massalians) that the good and holy fathers of
Israel were adopted, grafted and regenerated by faith in Jesus Christ,
begotten before all worlds: and that A conference of the faith of the ancient
fathers of Israel with ours.
they were nourished and got everlasting life by Jesus Christ, and that they
and we have but one only God, and one only Jesus Christ our mediator and
redeemour.

And that they through faith did sacramentally communicate, and spiritually
partake the blood of Jesus Christ for their salvation and everlasting life. And
there is no difference (as touching God) between them that were before the
incarnation of Jesus Christ, and we that are after the incarnation But they and
we are the Church of God bought with the blood of the just and unspotted lamb
Jesus Christ.

Furthermore that they had faith in the promise to come: and observed the
sacraments and holy signs of the sacrifice which ought to be finished by Jesus
Christ. And that we by the new law do celebrate the memory and remembrance of
the sacrifice already finishede by Jesus Christ, having the fruition of his 1.
Cor. 10. August. in Psalm.
promise accomplished. If then the Israelites did eat of the same heavenly
bread, and drink of the same water of life (by faith) that we do in one
only Jesus Christ: if they had holy signs to represent actually and really
the death of Jesus Christ to come, even as we have had holy signs of his death
present or past: they for the time to come, and we for the time past:
Wherefore is it then that the Massalians have invented this new witchcraft of
tourning one holy sacrament ordained of God into a wichcraft of
transubstantiation, and an accident without a substance? If God (to make known
his power, and to declare the hardiness and stiffeneckednesse of Pharao)
pleased to do merueilous things by Against the mi^^cles alleged by the
maslalians. Exodus 7. 8 14.
Moses and Aaron, in changing a rod into a serpent, the water of the river
into blood, and into frogs, the dust of the earth into lice, and further to
make the saileable sea dry, and to do many other miracles: Is this to bring
in a transubstantiation of little round hosts, unleavened, printed full of
pictures, into an accide^ce without substance? In what place of the holy
scripture (when there is mention made of holy Signs, Sacraments, or
Sacrifices, ordained of God) is it said the sign or sacrament is changed?

Contrariwise (God willing to acco^modate himself to the infirmities of man)
has ordained unto him from time to time common signs, for notes and marks of
the assurance of the thing signified; Wherein the might of God is more renowned
and magnified by giving unto us with the holy sign the thing represented, by
the power of faith and the holy Ghost, then if the self sign were really
changed by some visible miracle.

For the Sacraments do contain in them more spiritualnesse the fleshlines,
for which cause God did always blame his people Israel by his Prophets, for
taking his Sacraments over fleshly, as we have before briefly declared. But
tell The exposition of Jesus Christ of the communion of his body.
me (O Massalians) when Jesus Christ would expound, that he was the true bread
of life which came down from heaven, to give everlasting life, and how these
sacramental words ought to be understood, to eat his flesh and drink his
blood, when the Capharnaites your predecessors were offended, did he teach by
his interpretation, that to eat his flesh ought to be understood by a little
round host transubstantiated? The round host of flower and the wine to be no
more bread and wine but an accide^ce without substance? Is this your
abominable Witchcraft the doctrine of Jesus Christ?

Nothing less: but Jesus Christ as a John. 6.
true law giver, unto whom the interpretation of his law appertained, answered
unto the Doctors Capharnaites, that they were to gross and carnal, and that
they did abide in the flesh as ye do (O Massayers:) Notwithstanding that the
flesh alone proffiteth nothing: saying that these sacramental words were
spiritual. The flesh (says he) profits nothing, John. 5.
it is the spirit that quickneth. Moreover (O Massayers) how can you safely
make to agree your transubstantiation with the doctrine of Jesus Christ, which
does promise and assure to give everlasting life to those which eat his fieshe
and drink his blood, if yea take these words carnally? For you cannot be
ignorant that your bodies (notwithstanding that they have devoured the little
round hosts transubstantiated into flesh and bone, and supt and licked the
wine changed into blood) do die and are mortal, by the necessity of the
law. Wherefore life everlasting promised by this communion, may not be
understood of the body nor of the mortal flesh You must then of necessity
acknowledge, for a sure interpretation, that to eat the body and drink the
blood of Jesus Christ ought to be referred unto the life spiritual and
heavenly, and that the flesh profits nothing, but the spiritual word and
communion of John. 6.
the body and blood of Jesus Christ by faith and in spirit giving everlasting
life. This interpretation is often recited by the holy Apostle John in many
places when he uses these terms, he that comes unto me, shall never hunger,
he that believes in me shall never thirst, but shall have everlasting life.
Are not these terms sufficient plain to interpret this holy sacrament of
the body and blood of Jesus Christ, without running unto your witchcraft of
tran* substantiation.

Another like interpretation of the doctor Conference of baptism unto the
sacrament of the supper.
and author of the sacramental law is discribed, when Jesus Christ was asked
of Nicodeme the mean how a man could be regenerate and borne again. Is it
possible (says Nicodeme) that a man should enter into his mothers womb and be
borne again? Did Jesus Christ answer unto this demand, that in the holy
sacrament of Baptism the water was turned into the body, into flesh, and
into blood, and transubstantiate into a carnal womb to be thereby again
engendered and borne? Is there not as great reason after your witchcraft here to
use this answer as in the holy Sacrament of the supper? for by the one of
these two holy sacraments we be regenerate, and by the other nourished. And
the regeneration is as marvelous unto man's wisdom, as the nourishment. For
after man's carnal judgment it seems impossible, twice to be engendered. But
our good God has used like interpretation for the regeneration as he did for
the communion of his flesh and his blood, namely that these sacramental
terms must be spiritually understood, and not carnally: for the flesh
profits John. 3.
nothing, but the spirit quickneth. That which is of the flesh, is fleshly,
that which is of the spirit, is spiritual.

The holy Apostle giving unto the Corinthians that which he received at the
hand of God, did admonish them of the second coming of Jesus Christ, in
looking for the which he commanded to communicate the body and blood of Jesus
Christ by breaking of bread, and the Cup of blessing called the new Testament
and the new Covenant contracted by the blood of Jesus Christ, For as much then
as we are assured of the second coming of Jesus Christ. Being gone up into
heaven, and sits on the right hand of God his Father, until the day
appointed that he must come again to judge the quick and the dead. How do ye
(O Massalians) with this issue, when as by your Magic you say that every day
you cause to come down, and make return the body of Jesus Christ in flesh and
bone, before the time appointed of his second coming be come. Tit. Liuius. 1.
Decad 1.


This witchraft was restored by you from the first author of your Mass
sacrifice Numa pompilius, who by his witchcraft Valerius. Max. lib. 1. cap. 3
gave to understand that he caused his Nyphe and Goddess Aege^ie and also his
Jupiter Eticius to descend from heaven, by whose means the heavenly secrets
and mysteries were revealed unto him. Even so by our witchcraft the round host
consecrated, is transubstantiated into the true and real body of Jesus John.
19. Exodus 12. Numb. 9.
Christ: The bread being no more bread. How have you learned this boldness to
bruise and break in pieces the Corruption of the holy sacraments.
body of Jesus Christ, according to the invention of Sergius the second of that
name, your predecessor Bishop of Rome? Are not you more detestable hangmen,
then your predecessors Lieutenants of the Church of Rome, which Against
tra^substantiation.
crucified Jesus Christ, but without bruising and breaking his body in pieces,
as it was propheceied before. And that more is, you are not content to break
it in 3 pieces, but in your Mass sacrifice ye have enterprised to drown or
steep one portion of it in the wine changed into blood to devour it. To
confirm your witchcraft of transubstantiation, have ye not ordained to
preserve your little round printed hosts, the which you do keep and lay up so
curiously in boxes and shrines after they be changed Harman. contr.
into flesh and bone, and into the real body of Jesus Christ. Is not this a
detestable heresy to believe that the body of Jesus Christ can receive
corruption? Blond. Platina.
Yea, and often it is eaten of worms, mites, rattes and mise. Can you
interpret, that this is an accidence without a substance, seeing that your
hosts become often stinking, and corrupt within your boxes: Many times also
devoured of earthly brute beasts, the which you cause to be burned and their
ashes to be put into the place for Relikes. When the Bishop of Rome Victor the
third of that name, received poison by your transubstantiated wine was it an
accidence without a substance? Or when the Emperor Henry the seventh of that
name, was poisoned in eating a little round host consecrated, was it an
accidence without a substance, seeing it gave him his deaths wound? There is a
more manifest appearance in the heavenly Manna given unto the people of
Israel, the which notwithstanding Neem. 1. Psalm. 78. 104. John. 6. Sapi. 16
that it became corrupt (if it were kept) yet being put in the secret place of
the Arc of the Covenant, it was preserved without corruption, was it therefore
transubstanciated into flesh and bone, to be called the heavenly bread, the
bread which came down from heaven, the bread of life, and the bread of Angels.

Now it remains to bring into judgment the subtell reasons of the Massayers,,
which for the whole foundation of The exposition of the sacramental words.
their witchcraft do carnally in this word Est, saying these words are
expressly written. This is my body, this is my blood, when Jesus Christ, did
institute the communion of his body and of his blood under the signs of bread
and wine. But I beseech all that are zealous of the honor of God, diligently
to consider the holy institution of the sacrament, by the which God would
declare and signify the communion of his body by the bread, and the drinking
of his blood by the wine, and the cup. All will confess that the true and
principal nourishment of the body of man is contained under the kinds of bread
and wine, so the true bread is often taken in the holy scriptures for the
nourishment and life of Man. But let us begin to bring in the places of the
Bible. To the first man Genes. 3.
created to the likeness of God, for punishment of his offense, was it not said
Genes. 28.
unto him before, that he must eat his bread in the sweat of his body? Is
there any man so ignorant that he will not confess all the food and life of
man, to be understood by the bread? When Jacob prayed unto God to give him
bread and clothing, did not he understand by Exodus 16. Neem. 9. Psalm. 78.
Sapi. 15. John. 6. Genes. 14.
the bread all that was necessary for his nourishment,? When it is recited that
God made it to rain bread upon the people of Israel in the wilderness, and
that with this heavenly bread the children of Israel were filled, was not this
term bread understood of the heavenly Manna sent of God for the nourishment of
the people of Israel?

This Manna is not called the bread of heaven, and the bread of Angels given
unto the people without travel. Genes. 41. Genes. 47. Numb. 21. Leuit. 26.
When Melchisedech would relieve the host of the good Father Abraham, did he
not present unto him bread and wine? When Abraham would gratify and refresh
the three Angels appearing to him, did he not offer to them cakes baked in the
ashes? Gave hen ot to Agar bread for her nourishment. The mother of Isaac
favoring her well-beloved son, gave him bread. Joseph in Egypt offered bread
unto his brethren for their nourishment. When one will John. 4. Psalm. 104.
Matthew. 4. Luk, 4. John. 6. Matthew. 4.
describe a famine and dearth, does he not say, there lacks bread? When God
promises any favor unto people keeping his commandments, does he not give
them assurance of sufficient bread? when he commanded the poor; as his
members, did he not command to give them bread? It is then the bread that
nourishes and maintains the heart and life of men. When Satan Luke 9. Matt.
15.
took upon him to tempt Jesus Christ, to declare unto us that he was very man,
did he not chose bread, to entice him to change stones into bread? When Jesus
Christ, did celebrate his feasts, to give food one time unto 5000. men, the
other time unto 4000. persons, did he not show his might under the sign of
bread? When he taught us to make our prayers unto God, did he not ordeine
Matthew. 6. Luke 11.
the Lords prayer, to beseech God to give us our daily bread? And not only in
the holy Bible is there mention made of bread for corporal and common food: But
also the sacrificers celebrated by the Priests of the Hebrews, there was a law
prescribed of the bread ordained of God, namely, sweat bread without leaven,
Exodus-21. Leui. 4. 21. Matthew. 11. 1 King. 21. Esaias. 30. Proverbs. 20. Ezec. 4.
other bread there was called show bread which the priests did renew every
week and eat which David used, being presented unto him by Achemelech the
high Priest, cotrariwise this term bread is applied unto bread of
wickedness, Malac. 1. Psalm. 23. Ezech. 12. Oze. 7. Deuteronomy. 8. Matthew. 4. Luke 4
unto bread of lying, unto bread of sorrow, unto unclean bread of idolatry,
unto unclean bread offered at the Altar, unto the bread of trembling and unto
the bread of tears. The Ephraimites also are called the bread of ashes not
turned, that is to say, in part baked and part not, circumcised Idolators. Math
25.
Wherefore, O Massesaiers Capharnaits, ye must not be so hardened and rooted in
your fleshlinesse, that you regard not the phrases of the holy scriptures in
that which the term of bread is sometime taken for the earthly and bodily
bread as when it is said that man lives not by Math. 15. Mark. 7.
bread only, but also by all that proceeds out of the mouth of God. Sometime
also bread is taken for the word of God and for doctrine, when Jesus Christ
commanded his Apostles to take heed for eating of the leauened bread of the
Scribes and Pharisees, are not these terms of bread, and leaven taken and
interpreted for the doctrine of the Pharisees, heretics? When the woman of
Canaan did demand grace and mercy for the health of her daughter, holden with
a sore disease. Did not Jesus Christ answer, that it was not lawful to take
the bread of the children and give it unto dogs? In this answer is not the
bread taken for life and health, and not only for the corporal nourishment:
Seeing then that bread is taken for the life of man, the which hangs chiefly
of bread and wine, and that the goodness of God willing to apply it self unto
our infirmities would choose those two signs, notes and marks notable, to
signify his body and blood, namely, bread and wine, being two substances
common to all nations, is that an occasion to imagine a carnal
transubstantiation, as if without the same God were not able enough to figure
and represent really and sacramentally life to be given unto us, yea
everlasting life by the communion of the holy bread and wine consecrated,
figures and signs of his body and blood. Jesus Christ spoke Matthew. 6. Mark.
14. John. ^.
these words: That the bread was his body and the wine his blood, he said also,
That he is the living bread, that he is the bread of life, that he is the
living bread which came down from heaven, he says also, that he that eats
of this bread shall live for ever. Is this to bring in that by this word ( is)
Jesus Christ is turned and transubstantiated into bread, and is no more Christ,
but an accident without substance. O detestable heresy: O Massalians have ye
no more reason to interpret carnally these words, ( this is my body) to change
the bread into his body, then when he affirms that he is the bread, to change
him into bread, considering that it is written, that the partaking of this
bread gives life everlasting, Jesus Christ said, Hoc est John. 6. Matthew. 26.
John. 6.
corpus meum. He says also: Hic est panis qui de coelo descendit. In both
these places is there not this word ( is) bestowed? Must we therefore bring in
a witchcraft of tra^substantiatio^, in place of sound interpreting of the
scriptures, by a likeness or familiar comparison of bread with Jesus Christ,
causing us to understand that by him life everlasting is given unto us? And by
him our spiritual nourishment is given us like as by the bread we have our
bodily food. How so ever it be, we must always have recourse unto the true
inierpretation of Jesus Christ, the true Lawgiuer, and author of the holy
sacrament, who putting forth his institution said in the first place that he
was the bread of life, then after that this bread is his flesh and his body,
which must be given for the health of the world. He said that his flesh is true
food and his blood the true drink, he says, that he that eats his flesh
and drinks his blood, shall abide in him. How does he interpret this eating?
Jesus Christ does interpret it himself by these words: He that comes unto
me John. 6
stall never hunger, he that believes in me shall never thirst, Is not this
the true eating and the true drinking never to have hunger, and never to have
thirst. Behooves it to get faith, which consists in spirit: behooves it to
address ourselves unto Jesus Christ our heavenly bread, our spiritual drink,
to fill us for ever, to quench everlastingly our thirst of sin, to run into
a witchcraft of transubstantiation, and to forge an accidence without a
substance. Wherefore (O Massalians) have ye invented another interpretation,
then that of Jesus Christ, who witnesses that the flesh profits uothing, but
the spirit quickneth, and that his words are not carnal but spiritual, giving
spirit and life by faith and hope that he is the savior of the world,
incarnat, dead and crucified to give us eternal life, and after rose again,
ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God his Father, abiding
an everlasting Priest propiciator, mediator and redeemer.

Let us return again to this term ( is) which tormenteth the brains of the
Mass sayers so sore, to imagine a transubstantiation. John. 15.
If Jesus Christ has said that he is the true vine, that God his John. 14
Father is a husbandman, and we are the branches. Is this to bring in this
term ( is) a witchcraft of changing God into a Husbandman, Jesus Christ into a
vine and us into vine branches? If Jesus Christ is said to be the unspotted
lamb that blotteth out the sins of the world: is this to bring in a
transubstantiation? If Jesus Christ has said that he is the door of the
sheepe-folde, by the which we must enter to salvation, and that he is the
Shepherd and we the sheep, must we therefore ratch these places of the holy
scripture so far, that necessarily we must believe a transubstantiation: for
as much as this term ( is) is there? When Jesus Christ admonished his
Disciples, saying to them, that Matthew. 5.
they were the salt of the earth, did he change and transubstantiate them into
Genes. 28.
pillors of salt as he did the wife of Lot? If Jesus Christ has said by his
Apostles that we are the temple of God wherein the holy Ghost does dwell: Is
this to imagine that we are transubstantiated into a piece of stone? If the
Apostle have said that Christ is the rock 1. Cor. 3. 2. Cor. 6.
out of the which did come the living water to wash us clean from our sins: 1.
Cor. 10.
is this craftily to devise a changing of Jesus Christ into a rock or
material 1. Cor. 12.
stone? If the Apostles have witnessed that we are the body of Christ: Is this
to bring in that we are vanished away, and are no more men, but changed into an
accidence without a substance?

I foresee well (O Massesayers) more than hardened, that you will object that in
all these places before alleged wherein this word ( is) is found, that no
mention is made of sacraments, which must be deeply considered, for as much, as
they be holy mysteries ordained of God, which also is true. And also this word
( is) is not only found in the holy scriptures before noted, but also Genes.
17. Exodus 12. 13.
when there was speaking of the holy ordained before of God, unto the people of
Israel, was it not written that circumcision is the band and covenant of God.
In the other holy Genes. 17. N^mb. 10. Psalm. 68. 94. Mattfl. 21. John. 2.
sacrament of the communion of the Paschall lamb, is it not said that the
Lamb is the Passover or passage? Is this to bring in a witchcraft of
transubstantiation. Will you not confess (O Massalians and changers of
substances) that in these places of holy scriptures, speaking of the
sacraments, this word ( is) cannot otherwise be expounded but to signify: and
that circumcision was the sign and mark of the band and covenant contracted
between God and Abraham, that the Pascall lamb was also the sign of the holy
passage: for remembrance of their deliverance from Egypt. The Arc of the
covenant for another sacrament, whereof it is written that it is the true power
of the Lord. Is this to say that it was transubstantiated into the majesty of
God. It behooves to interpret the holy scripture with dicression and humility,
without sophistry and witchcraft to understand soundly the true meaning of
words, and not to abide in the letter that kills: but to receive the word of
God in spirit that puickneth. If then the holy Arc be named the Lord, and
called God, for that in it he exercised his might, and showed his wonders and
mysteries, to draw the people of Israel by an outward sign to remember God,
and to fear and obey him, Also if Jesus Christ is called the bread that came
from heaven, the bread of life, that the bread broken is his body, and the wine
is his blood, that the cup is the new Testament, that by these outward signs
of bread and wine, he might cause us to understand our life and nourishment of
salvation to stay only upon Jesus Christ, and that by his death and
bloudshedding we are so assured of everlasting life, as the bread and wine are
nourishment for the body, and that it pleased him to ordeine these holy signs
to serve us for sacraments for the trial and confirmation of our faith: is
this an occasion to play the Capharnaits or the Nicodemianes to doubt of the
power of God, how is it possible to eat the body and drink the blood of Jesus
Christ? How is it possible to be regenerate and borne again? Then seeing we
have a promise given unto us by the word of God, wherefore (O Massalians) have
ye imagined a carnal transubstantiation, mistrusting the incomprehensible
power of God, ought it not to suffice you to believe simply that the body and
blood of Jesus Christ is offered unto us really and sacrame^tally to communicate
for our nourishment, and to give us everlasting life by the bread and wine
consecrated with giving of thanks, the bread being truly his body: and the
wine his blood, which ought to be received worthily by faith, and in pureness of
conscience, as holy signs and marks of the godly badge, without enquiring
ever subtly the means, otherwise then Jesus Christ has interpreted (saying)
the flesh profits nothing, it is the spirit that quickneth, and that his
words were spirit and life, Ought we to doubt that God has not the power to
make us partakers of the body and blood of Jesus Christ, by the holy signs of
bread and wine consecrated, the bread nevertheless remaining bread, and the
wine, wine. If it were otherwise, this should not be called a sacrament but a
miracle, as when Jesus Christ, turned the water into wine, that he used a
miracle of transubstantiation, changing water into wine. But he did not then
ordeine a sacrament as he did of the communion of his body and blood by the
holy figures of bread and wine. Was it not as easy for God to make the wine to
be changed into blood, or the bread into flesh, as for Moses and Aaron to
change the water of the river into blood to approve the hardness of Pharaoh, or
when the clouds were turned into the flesh of Qailes, which rained upon the
people of Israel, always God did not ordeine these miracles to serve for
ordinary sacraments, but would apply himself to our infirmity, giving unto
us signs, holy and not transubstantiated, which are neither vain nor
fantasies, but are outward signs, which we can see, touch, eat and taste,
abiding in their substance, and nevertheless representing sacramentally, that
which is comprised and signified by them, wherein our trial of faith does
stand, to declare us by a sacramental work to be of the number of them that
are regenerated and nourished by the holy sacraments of baptism and of the
supper. If it be lawful tomake comparisons of the 2. holy sacraments of
Baptism and of the Supper, notwithstanding that there is difference A
comparison of the two holy Sacraments.
between regeneration, which does not reiterate (for it suffices once to be
regenerate and borne again.) But the nourishment must be often done again,
according to to the order of nature, and other differences largely discribed by
the holy Apostles and ministers of the word of God. Yet the same end, the same
God, the same Jesus Christ is showed and declared as well in baptism, as in
the supper. By the blood of Jesus Christ we be regenerate and by the same blood
nourished. By the blood of Jesus Christ we are renewed, set, and graffed, and by
the same blood we are kept and preserved from hunger and thirst for evermore.
By the blood of Jesus Christ we are spoiled from the old corrupt skin, and
clad with his body, of the self same also we have our nourishment and
everlasting life. By the blood of Jesus Christ we have access into the
kingdom of heaven. And by the same blood we have the fruition of the kingdom,
for unto the same purpose the holy Apostle witnesses, we are all baptized by
the virtue of one holy spirit, and we have all drunk of one spiritual drink
given unto us by Jesus Christ. Be not these comparisons taken out of the holy
scripture, to justify that Jesus Christ is the only end, unto the which
tends as well Baptism as the holy Supper. It follows then that the signs
of the sacramental water for baptism, and bread and wine for the supper of
Jesus Christ, are holy signs, ernest, gages, paunes, marks, seals and
sacraments, instituted of God for proof and assurance of our faith. Well then
(O Massalians) seeing ye have invented a witchcraft of transubstanttiaion for
Against the Massalians.
the sacrament of the Supper, why have ye not also subtelly devised the same
witchcraft in the sacrament of baptism? why have ye not ordained the
sacramental water after that it is by you coniured and bewitched with salt to
drive away Devils, to be changed into the blood of Jesus Christ, the water to
be no more water, but accidence without substance, as ye have imagined of the
bread and wine? What difference can you show, but Sophistries, Sophismes, and
Mass subtelties. If ye continue your heresy by this word ( is) it is also
found in the water of Baptism, which is called renewing and regeneration, the
same is also named the holy Ghost and the garment with which, and by which, we
are clothed, renewed and borne again in the blood of Jesus Christ. Then seeing
(O Massalians) that you confess that ye cannot find a second Berengarie to
make a decree of recantation to the end to enlarge your witchcraft of
transubstantiation, unto the holy water of Baptism, and by the same mean to
change your spettell and salt water, your oil, your creames, your salt water
and other drugs, wherewith you have corrupted the holy sacrament of Baptism.
Wherefore then are ye so hardened and waxt old in your Pompilian Religion,
that you would pluck Jesus Christ from the right hand of God, to make him to
descend in body and blood by your whispering witchcraft, Luke 1. Malach. 4. A
comparison of the Sun with Jesus Christ.
(as Jupiter Elicius did) before the day appointed of his second coming? I can
bring you in the similitude of the Sun, called by some Apostles the Sun of
Righteousness Jesus Christ, because The which S. Iustine the Martyr vled in
his treatise of the exposition of faith. cap. 2.
that light comes from heaven by the great and bright star. And even so the
spiritual light is given unto us by Jesus Christ, who has restored us to
light, out of the night and darkness of sin.

Well then (O ye Capharnaites, carnal and gross) understand now a comparison
sufficient enough to show you the infinite power of God to be much more
perfect then your abominable invention of transubstantiation? Do ye not
acknowledge if you have not your eyes blinded and holden in depth of the
darkness of frowardness, that the Sun does give unto us his light, his
beams, his force, his heat and strength, And yet the body it self of the
Sun does rest and abide in heaven? Do not ye say ordinarily in your common
language, when the window of the house toward the sun is open, that the
sun comes into the house? Yet the sun remains always in heaven?
Behooves it to snatch and catch the body of the sun, causing it to come down
and to transubstantiate in this earthly place before it can give his heat, his
beams, his light, and nourishment to plants, herbs, trees, and earthly
creatures? Are ye so brutish (O Capharnaites) that ye will not confess the
true son of righteousness Jesus Christ, to have much more power then this
star of the sun, create and mortal? If then the mortal creature, have
this power to give us the vertue^ and strength of his body, by his beams, by
his light, and by his heat sent down into the earth really, and effectuously,
the body notwithstanding abiding in heaven. It behooves to believe that God the
everlasting creator has much more power to give us the true son of
righteousness Jesus Christ, to give us his force and virtue of his body and
blood, shed for us, by the beams, light and heat of his holy spirit, without
co^straining him by your witchcraft to be plucked from the right hand of God,
and to be drawn out of heaven by your transubstantiation into earth. Wherefore
has not Jesus Christ this power to give us his light, and to offer to us his
body and his blood, to enter within us, if by faith and pure conscience we will
receive him by the virtue of his holy spirit, even as well and better then the
son enters into our houses by his might and power, without drawing it out of
heaven to change the substance thereof? The son is one only body created
abiding in heaven, the cause of the growing of plants, trees and herbs, which
gives nourishment by force and heat unto all things living upon the earth and
in one and the same moment has power to quicken, heat and nourish an infinite
number of plants, trees, herbs and earthly creatures, without seperating,
dividing or plucking his body from heaven to transubsta^tiate it. The body also
of Jesus Christ which he has carried into heaven, and set at the right hand of
God, has it not more force, more virtue, and more strength to regenerate us,
to feed and nourish us, to give his virtue, his light and his beams, to
inspire, quicke^, sustain, lighten, and in a moment make us through faith
partakers of his body and blood: to make us members of his members, knit
together in him, and by him, by his true promise contained under the bages and
holy signs, left unto us till that the second coming of his humanity be
seen upon the earth* Wherefore (O Massesa yers) have ye invented this
witchcraft of transubstantiation, to blaspheme against God, to lesson his power
and less to esteem his power and virtue, then the virtue of the sun his
creature? wherefore will ye pluck the body of Jesus Christ from heaven before
the time appointed, to change his substance into your little round hosts,
unleavened and printed Jesus Christ as God aideth all.
full of pictures which you cause to be worshipped* se^ing that Christ as God,
does aid his church everlastingly, and has power to regenerate feed and
nourish us, yea with everlasting life and food, by his promise witnessed and
assured by his holy sacraments of Baptism, and of his holy supper. For other
comparisons (O Massesayers, familiar and homely) consider how the earthly and
mortal princes are esteemed, reverenced and honored for the sacred signs
ordained by them. I will only set forth unto you two, that is to say, Wax and
Metalles, of the one is made the seal of the prince, wherewith is sealed
graces, pardons and forgiuenesses, the letters and privileges, granted by the
prince He that counterfeiteth this seal, is he not punished for treason, even
as if he had hurt the very person of the prince? Does not this seal represent
the very person of the prince, as if he himself were there present? yet the
wax notwithstanding that it is called the seal of the prince, is not
therefore transubstantiate, but remains still wax, yet after that it has
received the reverend print of the Prince it is no more called wax but the
princes seal.

The metalles of gold and silver marked for the coin of the prince to serve
for money, although they be no more gold nor silver, but have changed their
names at the will of the prince, be it into the name of ducate, crown,
shillings, pence or other names, do they leave to be metalles, and the same
substance they were before? this only difference there is, they are appointed
and stamped with the print of the prince, which does really represent him, in
such sort, that he that clippeth and counterfaiteth this money, 1. Cor. 11.
is punished as for the crime of treason, and as he had hurt the proper person
of the prince: By much better reason the bread and wine consecrated and marked
to be sacraments of the body and blood of Jesus Christ, do really represent
him, and not in painting. Wherefore he that uses it unworthily shall have
everlasting damnation as a traitor to the majesty of God. If ye (O Massalians)
Nicolaitains and transubsta^tiators, are not sufficiently satisfied with the
interpretation of Jesus Christ and his Apostles, ne yet with similitudes and
familier comparisons to bring you to the true way and certain form ordained
of God for the celebration of his holy sacraments in abolishing of your Mass
Pompilian Idolatries casting away also your abominable witchcraft of
tra^substantiation, at the least, yet will ye give no credit unto the
interpretation of the ancient doctors of the church. Hear then that which S.
Augustine does recite against Adamantine, even as the blood in August. cap. 12.
authorities of the ancient doctors. The exposition of saint Augustine.
many places of the holy scriptures is called the water and the rock Christ. So
is the bread called the body of Jesus Christ, the which three places must be
expounded to be figures and signs. When that says the same doctor, Jesus
Christ spoke these words, Hoc est corpus meum. This L^b. de doctri. christi.
and in prefati. Psalm. 3.
is my body, and gave them bread. He gave them the sign of his body, for he
thought otherwise that it was a thing unlawful, and too discourteous, to devour
the flesh and body of Jesus Christ if there lib. 10. de candes cap. 5.
sacrifici^m de consecr. distinct, 2.
were not a figure there, namely, the bread to put us in mind of the flesh and
body of Jesus Christ to have been offered up, for our life, and everlasting
food. Moreover the same doctor uses this interpretation, the visible
sacrament is the Testament, that is to say, the holy sign of the invisible
sacrifice. The like interpretations are described by Tertullia^ against Marcion
Tertul. lib. 1. and 3. 4.
the heretic: wherefore then O Massalians have ye not followed the holy
doctors of the Church, which would not blaspheme against God by a witchcraft of
transubstantiation? but have freely acknowledged the sacrament Vt quid paras
de^tem and ventrem creed and manducasti. ca. Vt quid de con. secratione.
distinct. 2. August. in li. de remedi.
to be a sign or holy visible figure signifying in spirit and by faith the
which is invisible? wherefore prepare ye the mouth and the belly to devour
the flesh of Christ corporally? why do ye not offer your souls by lively
faith worthily to eat Jesus Christ? why did you not interpret the eating of
the body of poeniten. and in John. tract. 25. cap. 6. S. Hieron. in epist. ad
Ephesians.
Jesus Christ by the notable distinction of the holy Doctor Ierom, saying the
flesh of Jesus Christ is understood fleshly when there is mention made of the
shedding of blood, and crucifying Ca. dupliciter eadem distinct.
of the body of Jesus Christ for our salvation: But spiritually when it is
said, that the flesh is the true meat which must be eaten. For another holy
doctor I will allege Gelase Bishop of Rome, who disputing against the
heretics Saint. Gelase. against Eutychius and Nestorius
Eutichians and Nestoriens, does affirm that the bread and wine consecrated
and made sacraments, do not leave in substance still to be bread and wine, but
are figures and signs of the body and blood of Jesus Christ by the mystery of
the sacrament. S. Ambrose in his book of sacraments. cap. 11.
Will ye have more large witnesses of S. Ambrose who upon the Epistle to the
Corinthians has expounded eating and drinking the bread and Origin. in Leui.
homil. 7.
the wine, to signify the flesh and the blood of Jesus Christ, offered for
us? Origin also in his homilies has expounded the sacraments to be figures,
which must be examined spiritually and not S. Chrysostom. in homil 31. cap. 15. com.
1 Psalm, 22.
carnally, for this faith says he that the letter kills, if it be not
understood spiritually when it is written to eat the flesh of Christ.
Wherefore Saint Chysostome warns to honor this sacrament in offering the
soul unto God, for which Christ was crucified and that by this holy sacrament
of bread and wine, is signified unto us the likeness of the body and blood of
Jesus Christ. To make an end, it behooves to be ruled by the holy
interpretation of our doctor Jesus Christ and of his Apostles, to honor and
reverence his holy sacraments ordained of him for outward signs, to lift up
our minds to heaven, to take that which is represented by the signs, not to
esteem them as vain paintings, or fantasies, but worthily to receive them in
lively faith by the virtue of the holy Ghost, to the end to be fed and
nourished with heavenly bread in the health of our souls, to come to life
everlasting. Let us then be assured in Jesus Christ as members of his body: Let
us all come into unity to communicate one only bread, and to drink one only
wine, made of many grains knit together, to the end that we may say with the
holy Apostle, all we the faithful are the body of Jesus Christ, saved and
redeemed by his body crucified and blood shed for us. Thus dwelling and abiding
by faith in Jesus Christ, eating him, and drinking his blood. Let us believe
surely that he was crucified, dead, and risen again, and his body ascended
into heaven, sitting on the right hand of God in a certain place until that
he return with his humanity as he went up: Nevertheless his power and
divinity are distributed unto us and spread over all the earth in all places,
specially in the holy sacraments, which he has left unto us for gages, and
outward trial of our faith, for a remembrance of the death and passion of our
Savior Jesus Christ. (...)

true nature of his humane flesh, until his coming again to judgment,
saying: And he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you,
whom the heavens must contain, until the time that all things be restored
which God had spoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophets since the world
began. So that in his humane real natural flesh, he is not nor shall not be
on earth naturally or supernaturally, until his said coming to judgment which
doctrine notwithstanding it is assured and most true according to the
instruction of holy scripture, that his divinity is inseperable from his
humanity, and his humanity from his divinity, his divinity extending it
self to all places both in heaven and earth, being everlasting, infinite, in
comprehensible, comprehending and containing all things by his divine power and
majesty, and his humanity being contained, seated and resting locally in the
heavens, the fulness of the Godhead dwells in the same, not being so
contained of it, but that it fills the same and all other places also; The
incomprehensiblenesse of which inseperable conjunction, of the divinity and
humanity of our Savior: Being perfect God and perfect man, of a reasonable
soul and humane flesh subsisting: no earthly similitude may fitlier serve to
express then the most shining and glorious body of the Sun, the body whereof
God has locally set in the firmament, to give light unto the world, and to
cherish, comfort and nourish all things therein, with his heat; for as the
light and heat remain by the divine ordinance of God unseparably joined to
the body of the Sun, which by the true power of God is placed and fixed in the
firmament, and yet with his light and heat fills all the world; so remains
the divinity of the Son of God unseparably joined to to the humanity,
locally placed and seated in the heavens, by which coniunctio^ he is not let
from spreading, extending and filling all other places also, who in his divine
essence, power and great majesty, fills and works all in all things,
according to the true and plain doctrine of holy scripture, and yet the
huma^ity according to the proper and unchangeable nature of the same, remains
undoubtedly seated, and being but in one place at once, being circumscriptible,
local and dwelling in heaven, from whence be shall come in most triumphant and
glorious manner, to judge both the quick and the dead: retaining and keeping
still the essential properties of his true, real, natural body, hloding and
occupying but one place at once, his divinity ouerspreading and enlarging it
self, to all places, according to the excellent power, majesty and essential
properties of the same. Which sweet and comfortable doctrine, and undoubted
article of our faith, the doctrine and opinion of transubstantiation and
consubstantiation, do flatly and plainly impugn and overthrow, as before has
been showed, by which doctrine also of transubstantiation, the truth of the
blessed Sacrament, is in plain truth denied, what colors, pretenses, shifts
or shows so ever be made to the contrary: for how can there be a sacrament of
Christ's precious body and blood, when as by the doctrine of the church of Rome
the elements of bread and wine (which by the power of the word of God are made
a holy sacrament (are taken away and changed into the real natural flesh and
blood of Christ, and after which change nothing but the very substance of
Christ remains, and he is really, carnally and corporally present? which if
it be so true as they would have it, and as they with fire and sword would
force every one to believe, then must Christ's real, natural carnal body be a
sacrament of his body, and not the elements, which by their doctrine have no
essence or being at all, but by the power of the word are transubstantiated
into the carnal body of Christ, or else there remains no Sacrament at all,
which for shame I think they will not affirm for the undoubted truth is, that
the substance it self of Christ's body and the Sacrament of the substance,
which are the elements being distinct several things, cannot so be changed
or give place the one to the other, that one self same thing should be both
seeing the true nature and property of a Sacrament is according to the doctrine
of holy scripture, to declare, offer and give to all the faithful and true
believers, that receive the same with a lively faith, another thing then that
it self is both in show and substance, or else it should nor cannot be
properly a Sacrament: for a Sacrament, as the divines do term it: Is a visible
sign, substance and pledge What a Sacrament is.
of invisible grace given to all the^ that receive the substance of the
elements by which they are and shall be made partakers of the invisible grace,
offered and given to al the^ that through the working of the holy Gghost have a
true faith to receive the same invisible grace by the elements, as the
sacrament of circumcision, and the passover in time of the law did declare,
give, testify and assure unto all the children of Abraham the believing Jews
the merciful promise of God, that God was, is, and would be their God, their
redeeme^ and deliverer, from sin and Satan's power for ever: of which their
captivity under sin and Satan, their thraldom in Egypt, from whence they
were diliuered, was a figure. The Sacrament also of Baptism and the Lords
Supper, do declare, give, testify, seal up and assure through the
unspeakable working of the holy Ghost, unto all the true believers, in Christ,
their full and perfect deliverance from sin and Satan's power, their
participation, and fruition of perfect holiness in Jesus Christ, and in the
end the reward of everlasting life, purchased, given and bestowed by his means
and for his sake, who paid the price of their redemption: of all which the
true believers are made partakers in the instance of receiving the outward
elements in Baptism and the Lords Supper, through the wor^king of the holy
Ghost in them, and unfeigned, steadfast and true faith. It belongs not therefore
to any sacrament, or to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, by the doctrine of
Gods word, that the elements should be changed into the very and natural
substance of that whereof it is a sacrament, either by transubstantiation or
consubstantiatio^, for that were to fetch Christ again from above, and give
him a real, natural or supernatural corporal presence here upon earth, and
so to make him be in all places at once, contrary to the true nature of his
true humane body, and contrary to the doctrine of holy scripture, which
teaches not any presence of Christ on earth again in his humane flesh, until
the time appointed before remembered, but plainly shows the contrary:
declaring further, that as many as come to this sacrament and communion of the
precious body and blood of Christ with a true and lively faith, fruitful in
true repentance and in a virtuous and godly life, the holy Ghost works in
them a lifting up of their hearts and minds into heaven, where Christ sits
at the right hand of God* and there through the operation of the same Spirit in
the instance of receiving the sacrament, they receive, apprehend and feed
upon, in a true, unfeigned and lively faith, the true real and natural body of
Jesus Christ the son of God, whereby their bodies and souls are preserved,
nourished and strengthened, to the attainment of everlasting life by his
changing and purging all their corruptions and uncleanness, and by his
distributing and uniting unto every of them the true properties and excellent
graces of his natural holy body, as his wisdom. righteousness,
sanctification and redemption, all which is as truly made theirs by and
through his gracious imputation, as if they and every of them had in their own
proper nature, attained unto, and fulfilled the same, of which excellent
graces* the fruit and reward shall follow of glorification and life eternal.

Of all which benefits this sacrament The use of the Sacramen^
and the sacrament of Baptism are appointed unto the faithful to be as tables
and glasses, wherein they may plainly see and behold all the great mercies of
God toward wretched and miserable sinners plainly drawn and figured, that
whereas the word does as a lively trumpet sound out his gracious goodness to
the ears of the faithful, these sacraments do serve as instruments and
conduits to convey it to the eyes, taste, feeling and comfort of all the
senses: so that when their bodies are made partakers of the sacrament and
outward elements, their souls in the same instant (through the mighty working
of the holy Ghost) are sed by the instrument of true and lively faith, with the
most holy, real, natural body and blood of Christ: through the lively power
also of which holy spirit they are moved and stirred up to give continual
praise, honor and thanks for these his bountiful mercies, and rich treasures
bestowed upon them: For in this sacrament and communion of the body and blood
of Christ there is showed, declared and given unto all and every of the
faithful, the death and sufferings of Christ, the participation they have with
him, and all the benefits which they receive by his passion, whereof they are
put in mind in this sacrament by four Similitudes. First, by breaking and
receiving of the bread. Secondly, by pouring forth and drinking of the wine.
Thirdly, by the nourishment which their bodies receive by these elements, by
the unity of many corns whereof the substance of the bread, and the unity of
many grapes whereof the substance of the wine is made. Fourthly, by the
conversion that these elements have into the substance of the receivers.

By the breaking and receiving of the bread, and by the pouring forth, and
drinking of the wine* the faithful are put in mind of the death, passion and
sufferings of Christ, whose body was broken both before and on the Cross, and
his blood drawn forth and shed, not for any cause of his own, but for
remission of their sins, which is given and they receive by his passion, for;
by the nourishment which the bodies of the faithful have, of these elements
they are put in mind, that as these elements do in the using and receiving of
them nourish their bodies* and comfort and sustain their natural flesh and
blood, being the outward man, so the body and blood of Christ apprehended and
received through the working of the holy ghost by the instrument of the true
and lively faith of the receivers, who through the operation of the same
spirit, do by their faith apprehend and feed upon the true, real and natural
body of Jesus Christ, the son of God, which feeds and nourishes their
bodies and souls, unto life everlasting, by his distributing unto every of
them according to his gracious imputation, the true, real and natural
properties of his undefiled body and blood, as his wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption, his holiness, innocence, his perfect and full
satisfaction of the law of God, his incorruption both in will and nature, his
suffering and satisfaction of the wrath and justice of God, due unto us
miserable sinners, his victory against sin, death* the devil and hell, his
glorification and eternal happiness, of all which every of the faithful are*
and shall be as verily made partakers by receiving this heavenly food the
bread of life, the body and blou^ of Christ* as if they in their own persons
had wrought, suffered and fulfilled whatsoever Christ suffered for them, and
were in ^ull possession of the reward, whereof Christ is in possession, and
has prepared and purchased it also for them: the certainty and assuredness
whereof is approved unto every of their hearts and souls by the steadfast, sure
and undoubted promises of the word of God, delivered by Christ's own mouth in
the 6. of John, I am the John. 6.
living bread which came down from heaven, if any man eat of this bread he
shall live for ever, and the bread which I give, is my flesh, which I will give
for the life of the world: verily, verily, I say unto you, except you eat
the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, you have no life in you;
whosoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life and I will
raise him up at the last day: For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is
drink indeed. I am the bread of life; this is the bread which comes down
from heaven, that he that e^teth of it should not die; he that eats of this
bread shall l^ue for ever, and he that eats me, even h^ shall live by me, he
that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me and I ^^ him: I am
the bread of life, he that comes unto me shall not hunger, and he that
believes in me shall not thirst: and this is the will of him that sent me,
that every one which sees the son and believes in him should have
everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the last day: Verily verily, say
unto you, he that believes in me has everlasting life, he that believes in
me though he were dead, yet shall he live, and whosoever lives and believes
in me, shall never die.

By this and many other sweet and comfortable promises of our Savior in his
word it appears plainly, that life is promised to all the faithful and true
believers: And seeing by our Saviors own words* none can be partakers of this
life but such as truly eat his flesh and drink his blood, it must needs
follow that truly to believe in Christ, is truly to eat his flesh and drink
his blood, and that without true faith it is impossible to be partaker of the
true, real and natural flesh and blood of Christ. To be partaker also of the
flesh of Christ, is not carnally to apprehend and feed upon his material,
natural substance, for in that sense our Savior says, his flesh profits
nothing: But to be partaker of the spiritual graces of his true natural flesh
in receiving his precious body and blood, by a true faith, as before, which is
the very precious food whereby the soul lives, and is sustained to life
everlasting, and is apprehended only by faith, whereby also Christ is said
truly to dwell in us, and we in him: and therefore all the wicked and
unbelievers which come unto the communion of the body and blood of Christ, are
refusers, mockers and despisers of his body and blood, and by receiving the
sacrament unworthily, do most worthily eat and drink their own damnation,
seeing by their lack of true faith and belief, they refuse, mock and
despise, yea and violently thrust away from them so precious a treasure as the
body and blood of Christ's is, and come not with reverence to receive and feed
upon the same by a true and lively faith, as all the believers do, who without
great reverence and dread, with acknowledgment of their own unworthiness,
dare not presume to come to this holy table of the Lord, and communion of the
body and blood of Christ; having also a true faith working by charity,
fruitful in true repentance and in a virtuous godly life, which they have
received and do acknowledge to be of the free gift of God through the
unspeakable working of the holy Ghost, the same true faith in every of their
hearts; by which every of them does in their mind and soul partake and feed
upon the true, real and natural body and blood of Christ seated in the
heavens at the right hand of God, whither through the work of the holy Ghost,
and by their true faith they are lifted up in the very insta^ce of receuing
these sacramental elements* according to Christ our Saviors own institution
in remembrance of his death and passion: For which cause every one is commanded
to try and examine himself whether he have this gift of true faith; which is
required to be the instrument and mean to be made a true partaker of this
precious body and blood: and by the body and blood of the spiritual graces of
the same whether he be in true charity and in the way of true repentance, and
of a virtuous and godly life, before he eat of this bread, and drink of this
cup, lest eating and drinking of this holy sacrament unworthily because he
comes without true faith, fruitful in the effects aforesaid, he put from
himse^fe, and be a mocker, also a despiser of the precious treasure of Christ's,
real natural flesh and blood offered by these sacramental elements of bread
and wine* and so worthily pluck upon himself his own just damnation in as
much as by lack of true faith he has not received but refused and despised
the rich jewel that was offered whereby Christ would have dwelt in him and he
should have dwelt in Christ for ever, according to his most merciful promise
made in his word.

By the similitude of union of many corns and many grapes in these sacramental
elements, the faithful are put in mind, that as the bread which they receive
and eat in the sacrament was made of many corns, and by the liquor of water
kneaden into dowe, and yet is but one bread: and as the wine was made of the
juice of many grapes, and yet is but one wine: so they that receive and eat
Christ's body and drink his blood by a true and lively faith, watered with the
liquor of godly and true charity are made one body and one flesh with him, as
lively members, and fruitful branches of his mystical body the Church, which
is the whole company of Gods children which are in heaven and in earth; of
which fellowship and mystical body these elements are a sacrament as well as
of his natural body, declaring the perfect conjunction which all the faithful
of the church militant here on earth, have with their fellow members the
church triumphant, together with their head Jesus Christ. who all make but one
body of Christ, being compact and knit together to him as to their head,
according as the Apostle Saint Paul affirms in the 1* to the Corinthians,
cap* 10. The cup of bl^ssing which we bless is ^^ not the ^o^mun^on of the
blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the bo^y
^f Christ? For we that are many are one br^^d and one body, because we all
ar^ partakers of one bread. In the 12. chapter of the same epistle he says*
For as the body is one, and has many members, and all the members of the
body which is one, though they be many, yet are but one body, even so is
Christ: for by one spirit we be all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews
or Grecians, bond or free, and have been all made to dr^nke into one spirit.
Therefore if one member suffer all suffer with it, if one member be had in
honor all the members rejoice with it. Now you are the body of Christ and
members for your part.

By which words the Apostle shows that all the faithful both in heaven and
in earth make but one mystical body of Christ, and that the whole Church
together make but one Christ, being all in particular the several members of
his said mystical body, whereof ^e himself is the head: of which fi^me and
steadfast conjunction, Baptism and the Lords supper are an effectual
declaration and resemblance, and perfect seals of assurance to all the
faithful: for by Baptism is declared their new birth into one spirit, and by
their participation of the body and blood of Christ is manifestly, showed,
opened, sealed and assured unto them their new planting and incorporating into
Christ's body, who being made lively members of the same, they are guided,
governed and ruled by one self same spirit of Christ, according as the Apostle
affirms in the 4. chapter of the epistle to the Eph^sians, There is one body
and one spirit, even a^ you are called in one hope of your vocation. There is
one Lord, one faith, one Baptism, one God and father of all, which is above
all, through all, and in you all. That we be henceforth no more children,
wavering and carried about with every wind of doctrine by the deceit of men and
craftines, whereby they lie in wait to deceive; but let us follow the truth in
love, and in all things grow up unto him which is the head, that is, Christ, by
whom all the body being coupled and knit together by every joint for the
furniture thereof, according to the effectual power which is in the measure of
every part receives increase of the body unto the edifying of it self in
love, till we all meet together in the unity of faith and knowledge of the
Son of God, unto a perfect man, and unto the measure of the age of the fulness
of Christ: And in Gal. 3. it is thus said: For ye are all the Sons of God by
faith in Christ Jesus for all ye that are Baptized into Christ have put on
Christ. By which words the Apostle notes, that all the whole church are but as
one man in Christ Jesus, making but one mystical body of Christ, whereof the
sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper, are a declaration, resemblance,
testimony and perfect seal of assurance; so that Christ being nowhead of his
church, and the Church, which is the company of the faithful, being made one
body with him, he nourishes and feedeeth all and every member of the same and
through the work and grace of his holy spirit, joins them together by their
particularioints so that every part has his just proportion of food, that at
length through the virtue received and extended from him, as from their head,
every part may grow up to perfection: in which communion and fellowship of the
members of Christ together with their head, great comfort is laid up to a true
Christian soul: For as the Apostle says, if one member suffer, all suffer
with it, and if one member be had in honor, all the members rejoice with it;
because that which is comfort and honor to one, is comfort and honor unto
all, in as much as all be made partakers thereof through Christ their head, who
by the lace of love has united and fast joined them one with another, and
coupled them all to himself, through his exceeding charity, spreading it
self and ouershadowing them all, that in all good things, as also in their
evil afflictions and sorrows Christ himself with all his members do partake
and common together, according as by himself is affirmed in his word, that
whatsoever is done to the least and lowest of his members in his said mystical
body, be it good or evil, it is done unto him, he being the head of that body
from whence every member draws his life and feeling: for how can a man offend
the least part of the body, being a lively and quick member, and the whole
body and head not feel it: and what suffers the furthest part of the foot,
that the whole body and head suffers not, seeing that it is the head that
gives motion sense and perfect feeling to all the body and every member of the
same? and what suffers the furthest, lowest and least part of the foot that
the whole body and head suffers not: and what benefit also can be done unto
any little part of the foot, in which all the body, and specially the head,
takes not comfort and rejoices? So then if any one member be feeble and weak
in faith, yet the churches faith, which is the company of all the faithful,
joined to and with their head is stable, and assured strong: and if the
repentance of some one member be sudden, small and short, yet the repentance
and sorrows of the church joined with her head, is plentiful, deep, large
and sufficient, whereof this short and sudden repentant, this poor and
little, but yet truly grieved member has communion: if the love and charity
of any one member be languishing and faint, but yet true and unfeigned, yet the
love of the church, and spouse and head of the church, whereunto that member
with all the rest is laced and lincked, is infinite, exceeding fervent and
strong, of whose infinite love, the weakest and feeblest has as full partaking
and communion as the strongest lastly, if any one member be spotted and
stained, and defiled with the filthiness of sin, yet the head and rest of the
members to which it is joined, by a true though never so little and weak
faith, and in whom it rejoices through the bond of true and unfeigned love,
though never so languishing, faint and cold love, springing of that weak, and
yet true faith; this head, I say, Jesus Christ, through whom it has communion
with the rest of the members, and partaketh of all that the head and the rest
of the members have from the head, are fair and beautiful: by which faith and
love, flowing of the same, through the special and alone working of the holy
Ghost, whatsoever the head or any of the members have had, have, or shall have
by distributio^ of grace, from the head, is made common to the beautifying of
the weakest, feeblest, the most defiled and fowlest member: for so the head
has distributed to all the members to help one another, that the most honest
parts do cover, keep, and honor the less honest, according as the Apostle
affirms. To all the true believers then that have true faith, true charity,
and true honesty without hypocrisy, though never so weak, cold, and small in
comparison of others, the faith, the charity, the prayers, the fastings, the
alms deeds, the virtue; the tempera^ce, the patience, the chastity, the
clea^nes, the weakness, the brotherly kindness, the love, and whatsoever else
may be named of the benefits and graces of the head our Savior Jesus Christ,
or distributed by him, by any special grace, to the beautifying of any the
members, redoundeth to the comfort, benefitting, and honesting of the least,
and lowest of the faithful in the mystical body of Christ. For what grace or
benefit can be in the head, whereof all the members receive not comfort, seeing
they are made partakers thereof? To conclude, such is the comfort of the least
and lowest of the faithful in this mystical body of Christ, that no pen nor
tongue in this life, can serve to express it, neither any heart able fully to
conceive it; the full knowledge and feeling whereof, is laid up for the life to
come, forasmuch as no heart is strong nor large enough to conceive or bear the
joy thereof in this mortal life. Out of which mystical body, being the holy
church of God, the spouse and body of Christ, flesh of his flesh and bone of
his bones, there is no salvation, forgiveness of sin, or souls health to be
found, hoped or looked for; and in this body whereof Christ is the head, there
is no condemnation to any the faithful and true believers, how grievous soever
their sins seem unto them: so that if S^tan do summon any of them, to
answer for their debts and sins in that the wife is no person to be sued,
but the husband, every of the faithful may well bid him enter his action
against their husband Christ, and he will make him a sufficient answer: for
being once knit by a true and lively faith unto this head, and body of Christ,
there shall no sin so far prevail, as to have full dominion over them, and
be able ever to separate them from the love, favor, grace, benefits and
mercies of God, which are in Christ Jesus, both for that they have communion,
partaking and fellowship of Christ himself, and of all the benefits of his
suffering and passion, being made partakers also of all his virtues and graces,
and through him, of all the good, virtues, and holiness distributed or to be
distributed by him, to all or any member that ever has been, is, or shall be of
his said mystical body the church; so that the whole church does still pray
for them by Christ's commandment, Forgive us our sins, lead us not into
temptation, deliver us from evil; yea Christ himself being their head their
redeemer, their Savior, their only stay, and cause of all this comfort, does
pray for them, and whatsoever is evil in them, that he takes away, and
whatsoever is good in them, that he takes and distributeth amongst them, and
through his own virtue and power purges and cleanses them from all their
uncleanness, and filthiness both of body and soul. being true members of his
said mystical body, as all and every one is indeed, and without all doubt,
having never so little of true says, which faith is not as a cause, but as a
certificate or instrument given them of God, whereby the faithful themselves
may be certain of their good husband Christ, and therefore when their
conscience feels it self disquieted for fear of Gods judgment against
sin, they may in no wise look upon the worthiness and sufficiency of their
own faith, because they never believe so fully and sufficiently as they should
and ought to believe; but only let them look on Gods grace, eternal mercy,
and peace in Christ, so shall they be at quiet when they look for their
salvation, altogether out of themselves, in Gods mercy, in Christ Jesus; in
whose lap if they rest their head, then are they happy and shall find quietness
indeed. The other part of the communion which the members of Christ's mystical
body have, and ought to have one with another, is touching the temporal
blessings of this present life, who being all laced and knit together by the
bond of true charity, they do, and are at all times ready to communicate, for
the mutual help and comfort one of an other, all such temporal blessings as
God has bestowed upon them for the use and necessity of their life, as to
pray one for another, to help, comfort, and counsel one another, in all
things needful, either for soul or body, to minister to the necessities one
of another, in a frank and liberal distribution of alms deeds, according to
such measure as God has dealt to every one: a power and ability to help and
relieve such as are in need, misery, or want either by poverty, sickness,
imprisonment, or banishment: by which outward deeds of charity, their faith
and love to God is witnessed and declared; as on the contrary, by their
covetousness, hardness of heart, and unmercifulness to the poor, they give
plain witness and testimony, they neither love nor believe in God, what
flourish or boasting soever they make to the contrary, according as Saint John
affirms in his first epistle, and 3. chap. saying, My little children, let us
not love in word, neither in tongue only, but in deed, and in truth: and
whosoever has this worlds goods and sees his brother have need, and shuts
up his compassion from him, how dweleth the love of God in him? beloved let us
love one another, for love comes of God, and every one that loves i^ borne
of God, and knows God; he^ that loves not, knows not God, for God is love.
In this appears the love of God toward us, because God sent his only
begotten son into the world, that we might live through him: herein is love,
not that we loved God but that he loved us first, and sent his son to be a
reconciliation for our sins: beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to
love one another; no man has seen God at any time if we love one another,
God dwells in us, and his love is perfect in us: God is love, and he that
dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him; we love him, because he
loved us first: if any man say he love God, and hate his brother, he is a lier,
for how can he that loves not his brother whom he has seen, love God whom
he has not seen? and this commandment have we of him, he that loves God,
should love his brother also. By this instruction of the Apostle in this
epistle it appears that it is a false, lying, and vain boasting of any man,
to say he loves and believes in God truly, when he shuteth up all his
compassion from the help of mankind, which bear the image of God in the
person of our Savior Christ, which was both God and man, who presents
himself to us to be beloved in them which bear the image of his ma^hood. For
no man can truly say he heartily loves the father, but he must also love the
son; and although the son be naughty, and unthrifty, yet for his fathers
sake he must help to better him, and even lament and be sorry for the sons
wickedness, even so much the rather, seeing God has appointed, and by his holy
ordinance commanded that whatsoever any true Christian man is, or whatsoever
he has, he should thankfully receive it as of the free bounty and gift of
God, who himself is the fountain and full treasure of all good things, the
only author and giver of every good and perfect gift, giving and distributing
to every one of the abundance of his riches and treasures; to this end and
purpose, that ^ach should communicate to other, of the goods they have
received, for the supply of each others want and necessity: For which cause
every true Christian man must love good me^ in Christ, and evil men for
Christ's sake, who so loved us when we were his enemies, that he gave up of
his own life for our redemption; let him embrace the one because they are good,
the other nevertheless to make them good, let him forgive and pray for his
enemies, persecutors and slanderers, that God would turn their hearts, open
their blind eyes, and give them true knowledge of himself his word and
commandments: in whose nature let him see and behold, as in a glass, the
image of his own crookednes and corruption; for there is no man so mad, cruel,
furious, or hard hearted, but all other as of themselves are as far wide from
God as he; so that every man which escapes the filthiness and corruption of
the wicked and ungodly, may thank God that keeps him by his grace from that
or the like impiety, as for example, thou see a man that is a thief, a
whoromonger, and an heretic, or idolator, there thou see even thine own
image and picture, for if God keep thee not of his merciful grace and
goodness, out of such vices, thou would be even as evil and bad as he, and
seeing thou art not such a one, glory in God, and not in thy self, hate not,
nor be not angry with those which are diseased in sin, no more than a
faithful physician hates a sick man, but rather lament and be sorry for
their evils, be thou an enemy only unto sin and vice; the greater the
disease is, the more care will true charity have to remove it is he an
adulterer, or has he committed sacrilege, or is he a Jew, Turk, Heretic, or
Infidel? hate the adultery, sacrilege, heresy, idolatry, and infidelity of
the man, and seek to remove, purge, and cleanse these vices, wherewith the man
is defiled, and wherein he is wrapped and entangled through his own fault; so
that the man may be saved which God made, let every true Christian will well,
wish well, and do well unto all men ^^^fainedly, not hurting them which have
diserued it, but doing good to them which have not diserued it, according to
the instruction of the Apostle, Gal, 6. and To. 12. Whilst we have time let us
do good unto all men, especially unto those which are of the household of
faith. Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him, if he thirst, give him
drink, for in so doing, thou shall heap coals of fire upon his head. Be not
overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good. For a true Christian man must
be glad and rejoice for all men's commodities as for his own, and so to take
to heart and be sorry for an other man's harms, as if they had fallen upon
himself, and to weep with them that weep, and to joy in all manner good
things with them that rejoice, as the same Apostle also teaches. He must not
think with himself after the fashion of the worldlings, and wicked men, what
have I to do with this fellow? he is a man unknown to me, he is a stranger,
he never did ought for me, he has hurt me some times, but he never did me
good: he must, I say, think none of these things, but remember only what
Christ has done for thee, who wills his kindness showed toward thee, should
be requited, not in himself, which thou can not, nor shall not be able to
do; but to show such kindness for his sake toward all men, as he requires of
thee, distributing of such bodily or ghostly goods as he has given thee to the
relief of others necessities, even to the uttermost of thine ability. For so
does the holy scripture teach every christian man, in many places of the same,
as Luke 3. v. 11. Let him that has two coats part with him that has none,
and he that has ^eate let him do likewise: by which two examples of food and
raiment, the faithful are warned by a common care and endeavor, and by a
particular special care in every one to provide, that the necessities and
wants of the poor be helped, and supplied, according as God shall have dealt to
them a portion of ability to do it, for so is it commanded in other places
of the scripture, as in the I. of Tim. the 6. chap. Charge them which are rich
in the world, that they be ready to give, and glad to distribute, laying up in
store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may
attain eternal life and Math. 6. Lay not up for your selves treasures the
upon earth, where the rust and moth does corrupt, and where thieves break
through and steal, but lay up for your selves treasures in heaven, where
neither rust nor moth does corrupt, and where thieves do not break through
and steal. and Math. 7. Whatsoever you would that men should do to you, even
so do you unto them, for this is the law and the Prophets. and Luke. 12. Sell
that you have, and give alme^, make you bags which wax not old, a treasure
that never can fail in heaven, where no thief comes, nor moth corrupts:
and according as God had commanded in his law, that a merciful respect, and
diligent care should be had of the poor, so holy Toby in his 8. chapter
gives this instruction to his son, Give alms of thy goods, and turn never
thy face from the poor, and then the face of the Lord shall never be turned
away from thee: be merciful after thy power, if thou have much, give
plentiouslie, and if thou have little, do thy diligence, gladly to give of
that little, for so gatherest thou thy self a good reward against the day of
necessity, and in the second to the Corinth. the 9. chap. it is thus written:
He that sows sparingly, shall reap also sparingly, and he that sows
liberally, shall reap also liberally; as every man wishes in his heart, so let
him give, not grudgingly or of necessity, for God loves a cheerful giver
and: in 13. to the Hebrews, the 16. verse, it is said, to do good and to
distribute, forget not; for with such sacrifices God is pleased: and Pro. 20.
he that has mercy upon the poor lends unto the Lord, and the Lord will
recompense him that which he has given. By all which places and many other in
holy scripture it appears what love, tender care and compassion by the
ordinance and commandment of God is appointed to be had and showed upon such
as are in misery and want. By which kind of Communion and bond of charity,
all mankind without exception are united and knit together; but of the first
none can or may be partakers but only the faithful, which are the elect and
chosen children of God, the true members of the Church, joined to their head
Jesus Christ, among which company all the members are so compact, united and
knit together, that all make but one body of Christ, and therefore ought thus
to think one of another; he is my brother and coheire in Christ, a member of
the same body, redeemed with one blood, a fellow in the common faith, called
to the very same grace and felicity of the life to come: how can any then that
is a true member of Christ, of which body thou professest thy self also a
member, be a stranger unto thee, to whom thou art coupled with so many bonds of
unity? And as concerning the outward goods of this life, the godly and true
members of christ, in whose hearts alone this true charity is rooted by and
through the working of the holy ghost do and ought to be ready at all times to
make partakers not only their friends and such as be of the household of faith,
but even the wicked and unbelievers, their enemies persecutors and slanderers,
distributing of the outward goods of this life unto all men in general, as
their prayers, their counsel, help and comfort, their relief, charity and
alms, whose prayer for the ungodly concerning the outward and temporal
blessings of this world, God has showed by many examples in his word, that
he has both heard and granted, as at the prayers of Moises and Aaron, he
removed the plagues from Pharao, at the prayers of the Prophet of God, the
dried hand of Jeroboam was restored to his former strength; and so will GOD
still hear the prayers of his children for the ungodly, so far as it
stands with his good pleasure and advancement of his own glory; commanding
his children not to be like the wicked and ungodly to do good only in
respect of reward, or for some special bond of alliance or friendship, as our
Savior affirms that the Publicans and unbelievers do. Mat. 5. For if you
love them which love you what reward have you, do not the Publicans even the
same? and if you be friendly to your brethren only, what singular thing do
you, do not even the Publicans like wise? but I say unto you, love your
enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray
for the^ that hurt you and persecute you, give to him that asks, and from him
that would borrowe of thee turn not away thy face, that you may be the
children of your father which is in heaven, for he makes his sun to shine
upon the evil and upon the good, and sends rain on the the just and on the
unjust, ye shall therefore be perfect as your heavenly father is perfect: and
thus our savior has showed by this his commandment what the true rule of
charity is, by which his children are united and knit together, even in all
things both bodily and ghostly to communicate and participate one with another,
seeing from the outward bodily participation he has not separated the wicked
and unbelievers, but has first lincked and tied them also to his own children
in the outward participation of the goods of this life. By which doctrine all
the children of God are put in mind that they must suffer nothing to let or
hinder their charity in any the outward things and temporal blessings before
mentioned, but even to be liberal, pitiful and compassionate unto all, for
that they are of the same kind and flesh with them: and yet nevertheless to
have their minds and eyes of their souls lifted up higher to that communion
and participation which they have of all things with their brethren, the true
members of the holy and undefiled body of Christ, who is their head: so that
whatsoever is bestowed upon any one member, it redoundeth to the whole body,
and from thence unto the head, and the head of Christ is God; whereof it
follows that the good which is done to any one member, it is done to Christ,
it is done to GOD. Which lively work of true charity, the head, who is our
savior Jesus Christ, works by the grace of his holy spirit in all and
every true member of his body, the Church, the body and every part thereof
drawing all their life and feeling, the power and strength also of every good
and virtuous work and of every godly act from the head, to whom all the
honor, glory and praise is due for all the good that is done or can be don
either in this life or in the life to come: only let all the faithful be
quickened in their charity when they feel it to begin to wax cold and faint, by
this spur, that albeit to their fleshly eyes and judgment, which is always
during this life corrupt and blind, there appears no kindness, goodness,
virtue or any good quality in some one or diverse men, whereby they may be
stirred to love him or them, but rather causes stirring and provoking them to a
hatred, loathing and detestation of their persons, for the filthy corrupt vices
which they see and behold rooted in them; yet according to the rule, ordinance
and commandment of God, their own blind judgment forsaken, they must show
themselves enemies only unto sin and vice, not hating their persons for the
faults, but hate the faults for love of the persons, seeking by counsel,
correction and chastisement how to purge and cleanse them from their
filthiness, wherein by wallowing themselves they are defiled, and wherein as
with fetters, bands and cords, they are wrapped, holden and entangled: let the
faithful for the love which God has showed them, be stirred and provoked to
succor, help, counsel, and comfort all men in general, not so much for any
thing they can see or discern in the^, as for the love of God and his mercies
sake which he has showed them in Jesus Christ, let them help to bear up
their infirmities, and when they fall let them help to lift them up by
admonishment, by counsel, by prayer and good example; and where there is
power and need also require it by correction and chastisement to draw them
from their evils. Further for their bodily necessities, let them be liberal
and bountiful in distributing their alms, and thus by this which has been
showed, it appears first, that true faith does certify and assure us of all
the sweet promises and mercies of God in our conjunction together with the
rest of the members unto Christ our head, and of the communion and
participation that we ought to have and shall have in all things both bodily
and ghostly, together with our head: our obedience to the word and
commandments of God, our true and unfeigned love and charity does certify
and assure us, and does give witness also and testimony thereof unto others,
that our faith is true, lively, and unfeigned, our tender compassion and mercy
our franck hearted and liberal distribution of alms does declare and manifest
unto all that our charity is true, unfeigned, seruent, pleasing and acceptable
unto God, and of the right kind which it ought to be. To conclude, this is
that which is meant by the mystery of unity in the Sacrament, that all the
faithful are united together, with their head Jesus Christ, by and through his
power and grace, to be partakers and communicate one with another in all
things both bodily and ghostly, heavenly and earthly: the faithful likewise,
through the bond of the same charity, drawn from their head, must make
partakers and communicate unto the unfaithful and unbelievers all the outward
temporal blessings of this present life; in all which outward temporal things,
they must be as one with them to communicate, help, and relieve them,
according to the true rule of charity, and mystery of unity in this
Sacrament; in which last kind of unity all mankind without exception are and
ought to be according to the holy ordinance of God in his word, united, and
knit together. By the similitude of conversion, the faithful are put in mind,
certified and assured, that as the bread and wine being taken and received, is
turned into the substance of their bodies: so every of the faithful
apprehending and receiving Christ's real natural body and blood in the
instance of receiving the sacrament, by their true and lively faith are through
the operation of the holy ghost, turned into the true nature of his precious
body and blood, that is, they are every one changed and renewed, and made bone
of his bones and flesh of his flesh, so that from the^ceforth Christ abides in
them and they in him, and they be made one flesh and one blood with Christ,
and Christ is made one flesh and one blood with them, not by transubstatiation
or co^substantiation, which cannot be without the overthrow of his true
humanity: neither does holy Scripture teach us so; but thus does holy
scripture teach, that the faithful are made flesh of Christ's flesh by his
disposing, and distributing unto them according to his gracious imputation, the
true nature essential properties and qualities of his flesh and blood, that
is, every of them are by his imputation as truly made partakers of the perfect
holiness and wisdom of his bodily person, of his incorruption both in will
and nature, of his obedience and satisfaction of the law of God, of his
passion and sufferings of the curse and wrath of God due to sinners, of his
victory against sin, death, the Devil and hell, and shall be also made
partakers of that immortality and everlasting happy life, whereunto he is
entered, and which he has purchased for them that truly believe in him, even
as verily as if every of the^ were one self same bodily person, flesh and
blood in real and natural substance with him; so that now all and every of
the faithful may say and comfort themselves after this manner: In thee our
most gracious God and merciful Lord Jesus Christ, each of us has a portion
both of blood and flesh, therefore where that flesh whereof I am a part does
reign, there I believe I do and shall reign; where my blood has dominion,
there I trust I have and shall have dominion; where my flesh is glorious: there
I know I am and shall be gloririous, and although I am yet a sinner, yet I
doubt no whit of this participation of grace; although my sins do hinder me,
yet my substance does require it, and although mine own offenses do exclude
me, yet the communion of nature which by his gracious imputation he has given
me, has brought me again to this grace and favor. For the Lord is not so
unkind that he can hate his own flesh, his own members, his own bowels,
whereof I am a part, seeing Christ himself has vouchsafed to be made one flesh
and one blood with me and all the rest of his members, the faithful and true
believers that is, Christ has taken the nature and quality of our flesh and
blood, having caused all our sins to he imputed and laid to his charge, as
bearing the person and body of us all, having in his true natural body and
flesh suffered the wrath and curse of GOD for our sins, as if himself had
been guilty of them, and had committed and done them in his own body and
flesh; so that the sins of every of the faithful are fully satisfied for,
condemned and punished in the real natural flesh and blood of Christ, even as
verily as if he were the self same bodily person, sinful flesh and blood,
and substance of all and every of the faithful. And this is the conversion
and change of the faithful into Christ, and of Christ into them, truly
represented, declared and assured in and by this sacrament and communion of his
precious body and blood, as it evidently appears by that which the Apostle
speaks in the 8. to the Romans and 3. verse. and 5. of the 2. to the Corinth.
and 21. verse. God sending his own son in the similitude of sinful flesh,
and for sin condemned sin in the flesh. For he made him to be sin for us
which knew no sin, that we should be made the righteousness of GOD in him.
By which words the Apostle means not, that the holy body of Christ was
defiled with any the sins of mankind, but that he was the true sacrifice
propitiatory unto God for the sins of mankind, having borne away and taken
upon himself all their sins in his own real natural body, flesh and
blood, as if he himself were the particular person of every of them, and had
committed their several sins, and as though he himself were the self same
bodily person, flesh and blood in essence and substance, nature and quality of
every of the faithful being sinners and transgressers of the Law of God,
guilty of the wrath, judgment eternal damnation and curse of God; from which
punishments our Savior Christ has acquitted every of them by his death,
passion and suffering, and all that have or shall hereafter truly believe in
him. By which their faith through the working of the holy ghost as Christ is
apprehended and converted into them, and has borne a way their sins upon
himself, and the punishment due for the same; so are they also and every of
them converted into Christ, and are made partakers of the righteousness of God
in him, according as before has been remembered: wherein the infinite justice
and mercy of God most lively appears to the eyes, understanding, taste and
feeling of all the faithful: infinite in justice; for that no satisfaction
could or can satisfy the justice of God for the recompense or redemption of
the least sin in mankind, but that the same must be fully punished for the
satisfaction of Gods infinite justice, in the true, real and natural flesh of
man; which satisfaction our Savior Christ made for mankind, who came down
from heaven and was made man of the substance of his mother, that in the frail
flesh of mankind he might take upon himself and suffer all the punishment
due unto sinners, that as many as believed or should to the end of the world
believe in him, might not perish but have everlasting life. For christ in the
power of his divine nature to which he joined our flesh, suffered the wrath,
curse and punishment of God due for sin, which no mortal creature being
only man, was or could be able to bear or overcome, for which cause the son
of God made himself flesh, to the end that according to gods infinite justice
the sins of the faithful might be borne away and fully punished in his
flesh: wherein his infinite Justice did most brightly shine and apeare. His
infinite mercy herein appears, that where the sins of the faithful be
fully punished through the sufferings of Jesus Christ for the satisfaction of
Gods justice, it appears plainly unto them that they are freely forgiven and
pardoned, because in them, as in their own persons, their sins are not nor
shall ever be punished, nor any satisfaction made or to be made unto GOD by
themselves, Christ having borne the wrath and full punishment of God due unto
them for sin, and quite freed and discharged them, so that neither their
sins shall be laid to their charge, nor any punishment nor purgation due for
the same, required at their hands. Which plainly sets forth and declares
unto all the faithful Gods infinite and unspeakable mercy, whereof this
sacrament and communion of his precious body and blood, is a plain
declaration, rese^blance and perfect seal of assurance unto all the faithful.
But the Church of Rome with her followers, as by the Doctrine of
transubstantiation they do deny the truth of the manhood of the son of God;
so by the same doctrine they deny also and abolish the truth of the Sacrament,
and the end of the institution of the same, which was to put the faithful in
mind of the great love of God, and sufferings of Christ for the^: for so, says
the Apostle, You shall show the Lords death till he come. It serves also to
put them in mind of all the benifits received by his precious body and blood,
who gave his body to be broken, and his blood to be shed for their sins;
and by this holy sacrament, gives to all true believers his real natural
flesh and blood, to be their spiritual meat and drink, to preserve and
nourish their bodies and souls unto life everlasting; and to declare,
testify, and assure unto them their union that they have with him, as members
making one body, distributing unto all and every member, the spiritual graces
and virtues of his most excellent real, natural, holy body; which spiritual
and immortal food of their bodies and souls, is received from their head
Jesus Christ, who distributeth and sends it down, to the nourishment of all
his members, even as the food of this mortal life is received by means of
the head, and sent down to the nourishment of all our earthly members; whereof
these outward elements are a full declaration, and a perfect seal of assurance
to all the faithful, being by the institution of God, made a holy sacrament,
to represent the same unto them, and by his holy ordinance appointed to carry
the very name of his body; which is signified by these elements, offered unto
all, and given to the true believers: wherein God of his infinite goodness and
mercy applies himself to the dulnes of the capacities of his children, who
without these outward pledges (being signs, tokens, and remembrances of his
great mercy) would never have conceived, and would have been ready also to
forget the infinite benefits and mercies of God, purchased for them by the
death and passion of his beloved son; which God in his excellent wisdom
has so lively declared and set forth in these Sacramental elements, because
the real natural bodily presence of Christ did not so plainly make the same
known and and open to the understanding of his disciples, and the Church. For
which cause our Savior did institute, command, and celebrate this holy
Sacrament, whiles he was yet bodily present amongst his disciples, both for
that his bodily presence was not long to continue, but to depart away from
them, whereof this Sacrament was to keep a remembrance amongst them; as also
of all the benefits received, and to be received by all, and every of the
faithful, by his most precious body and blood, given up to be crucified,
broken, and shed for their sins; whereof these sacramental elements did and
would make a more lively declaration to the senses and understanding of his
Disciples, and the Church, through the grace of his holy spirit, working in
every of their hearts, then by his bodily presence they were able to conceive.
For which cause it pleased our Savior to give to this Sacrament, the name of
his body, because in this Sacrament, the true, real and natural holy body of
Christ is offered to all given to the true beleuers, received of them by a true
and lively faith, with praise and thanksgiving, as before has been remembered.
Of which true, real, natural, holy body, the wicked and unbelievers are not,
nor cannot be partakers, either worthily, or unworthily, as the church of Rome
imagines by their doctrine of Transubstantiation, or as the Lutherans imagine
by their doctrine of Co^substantiation, but coming to this holy Sacrament
without true faith, they receive the same sacrament unworthily, whereby they
eat and drink their own damnation, as the Apostle says in the 11. to the
Corin. ver. 29. He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his
own damnation, because he discerns not the Lords body, but rejects and
despises the same by receiving the holy Sacrament unworthily and without true
faith. For when they presume to receive the holy Sacrament without a true
faith, to be thereby made partakers of the true, natural, holy body and blood
of Christ, they receive, as Augustine says, by their unworthy receiving the
holy Sacrament without true faith, the bread of the Lord, but not together by
and with the same, the bread the Lord; that is, they receive the Sacrament, but
not that which is signified, declared, offered unto all, and given through the
work of the holy Ghost, by and with the Sacrament, unto all the true
believers; and seeing the wicked and unbelievers have wilfully put from them,
rejected and despised that, which they might have received (if they had come
with true faith) they do worthily eat and drink judgment to themselves, as
the Apostle says, for not discerning the body of the Lord. Whereby it does also
most evidently appear, that there is neither consubstantiation, nor
transubstantiation in the Sacrament; for seeing the wicked eat and drink
judgment to themselves, by their unworthy receiving the holy Sacrament, it
must therefore needs follow, that they are thereby no partakers of the true
natural body and blood of Christ, of which, whosoever eats or drinks,
receive life, and not death; for the true natural body of Christ is not
judgment to any, but life unto all that receive it; therefore that which the
wicked eat and drink, is not the body of Christ, neither by
transubstantiation nor consubstantiation, but the Sacrament of his body, as
Augustine says; by receiving whereof unworthily, they eat and drink
judgment, for the reasons and causes before remembered. For the avoiding of
which fearful and intolerable punishment, it is necessary to show somewhat
of the preparation requisite to be made by every Christian man, both before,
and at his presenting himself to this holy table of the Lord. Before the
receiving then of the blessed Sacrament, every true Christian man ought thus to
consider with himself: First, by a sound knowledge, and good discretion, to
meditate and imprint deeply in his heart* what he does either refuse or
receive, when he presents himself at the Communion and holy table of the
Lord; and what he himself is that does receive. The thing he does refuse, or
receive, in, by, and with this holy Sacrament, if he come with a true and
right faith, or refuse if he come not so, is Jesus Christ perfect God, that
made all things of naught, and perfect man, that died for mankind on the
Cross. He that receives must remember and know himself to be a man, and not
a beast, and therefore must present himself to this Sacrament like a man, in
whom the image of God is renewed, through the work and grace of the holy Ghost,
all malice and beastlines of sin being subdued. and not suffered to reign; and
in stead thereof, true faith and godliness, though not perfect, which is
reserved to the life to come, being firmly grounded and planted; lest if he
come like a beast, in unfaithfulness and vnholines, he be found an unworthy
partaker of this blessed Sacrament, by which means he does not receive, but
refuse and put from him the precious body and blood of the son of God, to his
own just and eternal damnation. Secondly, he must not presume to come but
with great devotion, dread, and reverence of heart: for seeing Jesus Christ, who
offers himself to be received is holy and all holiness, he must labor
diligenly to receive him, in as much devotion and holiness as he may, earnestly
confessing and bewailing his former sins and wickedness, and making earnest
and hearty prayers unto God for pardon and forgiveness of the same. It behooves
him therefore in all humblenes and lowlines of heart, before he receive this
blessed Sacrament, to examine and search diligently his own heart and
conscience, confessing before God in the secret of his heart, the miseries of
all his sins and offenses, having displeasure and grief at himself, with
deep sighings and sorrowings for all the uncleanness of his body and soul,
lamenting and bewailing that he is yet so carnal, so worldly, so wilful, and
unmortified in all his passions, so full of motions, of concupiscences* of his
sinful flesh, so unwary and ill ordered, in all his words and deeds, and so
encumbred with vain fancies, so much inclined to outward worldly things; so
negligent and careless to the attainement of spiritual and heavenly things; so
ready to laughing and wantounesse; so busy in things easy and pleasing to
the flesh, so slow and hardly drawn to hearty sorrow* and earnest repentance
for his sins and offenses, or to any care of his souls health, being so
quick and curious to hear and see the vanities and pleasures of this world, so
niggardly and scarce to give, so greedy and covetous to scrape together, hold,
and keep; so rude and vnmannured, so prodigal, rio^ous and g^^ttenous in
^aiment, meat, and drink without all hunger, desire, or thirst to the word of
God, the precious clothing and food of the soul, so attentive to toys and
fables, so sleepie to all holy exercise, so lightly displeased and rigorous to
reprove other men's faults, so deaf, blind, and froward, to hear, see, or
amend his own faults, so glad in prosperity, so feeble in adversity* so often
purposing many good things, so seldom bringing any of the^ to effect; all
which defaults, and many other which he sees and beholds in himself, when
he has with great sorrow and displeasure at himself for his own frailenes
in his secret heart confessed and bewailed unto God* let him the^ in a full
purpose through the grace of God set himself to amend his sinful life past
and to profit always from better to better; and with great reverence of heart,
let him be afraid as of himself, knowing his own wretchedness and unworthiness
to approach and come near so worthy a Lord as Christ is. For if a man defiled
with filthiness and stink, be unworthy to stand in the presence of a king, how
much more unworthy is any man, as of himself to receive Christ in the
precious Sacrament? For why, all our good deeds are but as uncleanness in his
sight; what are our sins then? nevertheless his goodness and his pity is more
then al our wretchedness; and therefore with all humblenes and lowlines* and
with a reverent dread in a full trust and confidence of his great mercy let him
go unto him, for his worthiness shall make him worthy: let him offer himself
in humble and hearty prayer unto God committing unto him both his body and
soul, to be made by his grace, and through the working of the holy Ghost in
his heart, a worthy partaker of this holy Sacrament, that together in, by and
with the same he may receive and be partaker of the real, natural, holy
flesh and blood of Christ, through which he may be purged of all his sins,
and receive grace of good life. For why, for that cause amongst other was this
holy Sacrament ordained* that a man through offering of his prayers to God, and
partaking of this Sacrament should ask pardon and forgiveness of all his
sins, and grace of good life, and should obtain it. If time therefore do
suffer before the receiving of the blessed sacrament, let him meditate or say
on this manner. Lord all things be thine that are in heaven and in earth, I
desire to offer my self unto thee in a free and perpetual offering; so that I
may be perpetually with thee in singlenes and simplicity of heart, I offer me
this day to be thy servant, in thy service: and although I am unworthy to serve
thee, yet art not thou unworthy to have my service; make me therefore worthy
of that which thou art worthy of, so shall I be worthy of that which now I am
unworthy of: make me as thy will is, to cease from sin, that as my duty
binds me, I may serve thee. I offer also unto thee O Lord all my sins and
offenses that I have committed before thee, from the day that I might first
offend unto this day, that thou vouchsafe through thy great goodness, to put
away all my sins out of thy sight and remembrance, and to cleanse my
conscience of all mine offenses, restoring me again to that grace, that I
through sin have lost; and that thou forgive me al things past, receiving me,
merciful Lord, into the blessed kissings of peace and of forgiveness: for what
may I do, but meekly confess and bewail my manifold sins, continually
craving mercy of thee for the same; forgive me, merciful Lord, now I beseech
thee; for all my sins disp^ease me much, and by the help of thy grace I will
never commit them again, but sorrow for them, and be ready to dopenance and
satisfaction before thy congregation and Church, to the uttermost of my power
and ability for all the injuries that I have done, to the offense of thy
Church, or to the hinderance and hurt of any my Christian brethren or sisters,
by any the offenses I have committed. Forgive me Lord, forgive me my sins,
and for thy holy name, save my soul, that thou have redeemed with thy precious
blood: I commit my self wholly to thy mercy* I resign me into thy hands,
do with me after thy goodness, and not after my wicked deseruings. I offer also
unto thee all the good works which through thy grace have been wrought or done
by me; which because they are few and very imperfect, through my frailty and
great wretchedness, I beseech thee to amend them, and sanctify them, and make
them liking and acceptable unto thee; and always make them better and better,
and bring me though I be a slow and unprofitable servant, to a blessed and
happy end. I offer also unto thee, my prayer and peaceable offering, for all
them that have hindered me, grieved me, and wrought me sorrow; and also for all
them whom I have at any time made heavy, troubled, grieved, or injured in
thought, word, or deed, wittingly, or ignorantly, that thou forgive us
altogether our sins and offenses against thee, and of each of us against
other; and that thou Lord take from our hearts all envy, suspicion, wrath,
variance, pride, indignation, and contention, and whatsoever may let charity,
or diminish fraternall love that each of us should have to other. Have mercy
Lord, have mercy on all them that ask thee mercy: and give us grace that we
may receive thy precious body and blood, which thou really and truly offerest
unto all, and give unto all thy children the true believers in this blessed
Sacrament, that through the lively power of this thy holy body, received by us
in a true steadfast and unfeigned faith, by and through the operation of the holy
Ghost, we and all thy whole Church may receive remission of sin and obtain
everlasting life. And after this meditation, let him vow and promise, and
purpose also with himself through the grace of God, and by the working of the
holy Ghost, ^uer after, more diligently to serve God, for seeing a man is busy
to serve an earthly Lord with all his diligence, much more should we be
diligent to serve our Lord God, and to lift up our hearts unto him; and to
consider the g^eatnes of God, and the wretchedness of our selves how great and
how worthy God is, how little, and how unworthy our selves are: consider also
the great love of God* that would take to himself, that is so worthy, the
frail and weak estate of mankind, not for any cause of his own, but for the
great love he bare unto us: consider also his unspeakable and rich mercy
toward miserable and wretched sinners, who not only offered himself to death
for us on the cross, but also gives himself to us in the Sacrament, to be
our spiritual meat ann drink, and to be fully with us, and in us. Wherefore
let every Christian man if he have time, before the receiving of the blessed
Sacrament, say thus in his heart. Lord I know well that al works and deserts
of men, be they never so holy, are not worthy to receive thee, how much more am
I unworthy, that each day sin, and as a man incorrigible dwell still therein
O Lord, why do I such de pite unto thee, for to cast thee my precious Lord into
the foul pit of my conscience? for surely there is no d^^g more stinking then
my soul is, O Lord what shall I do? shall I lay thee in that foul place?
surely Lord I durst not, but in hope of thy mercies; but I believe and am
assured that thy mercies are endlesly more then all my sin, and therefore in
full trust of thy goodness, I offer my self to receive thee, as a sick man
receives a medicine thou art the most sovereign salve and I am sore sick:
therefore I take thee to be made whole through thee, and the sicker that my
soul is, the more desire I have to be healed, and the more need I have of
thee, for why, in healing of my deadly sickness, shall well be showed and
commended the greatness of thy goodness, that will help and heal so
wretched a creature, and bring me to the possession of everlasting life,
through the merits of thy percious death and passion. And thus must we that
are sick in sin, receive this healthful medicine of the holy Sacrament, the
body and blood of Christ: and when we feel through it any comfort to our
souls, let us ascribe that comfort not to our selves, but to the goodness of
God, which so comfort and refreshes our souls, by feeding us with his own
flesh and blood, of his own great mercy and grace. and let us thus think with
our selves, lo thus does our Lord unto us, to show us our wretchedness and
miseries, wherein we lie inta^gled, unless we be loosed by him; and to overcome
our wickedness with the plenty of his goodness; for he makes us that are dead
in sin, to feel life, and being rotten and stinking worms to taste heavenly
sweetness. O Lord God since thou art so merciful to us, that now live in sin,
as to feed us with the heavenly bread of thy own flesh and blood in this holy
sacrament, by which food through the working of the holy Ghost, we are
nourished and cherished in body and soul, unto life everlasting; let our
hearts from henceforth in this most cherefully rejoice, that our God, our
spouse, and our love, is made unto us our spiritual meat and drink, to
strengthen our bodies and souls, that we may grow up to life everlasting: the
blisle of Saints, the joy of Angels, the son of the highest father, makes
himself our spiritual nourishing, the light of the world, the son of
righteousness, the wisdom of God is made the food of our soul, the redeemer
of man, the brightness of heaven, the matter of all mirth, and the Lord of joy,
vouchsafes for to feed us with himself: what kindness, what courtesy, what
toke^ of love might be more. Wherefore since we have him let us not from
henceforth suffer our hearts to delight in any creature, for it were a great
unkindness, and vile wretchedness of us, after the receiving of so worthy a
meat, so precious and sweet as it is, to s^ttle our selves to the liking and
just again of the world and of the flesh. Keep us therefore sweet Jesus from
such wretchedness and unkindness, and be thou our meat and our food, our lust
and our liking, and make us continually to hunger after thee, and to feed on
thee with greedy desire, for thy sweetness suffices unto all the world: and
why vouchsafest thou, merciful Lord to feed us with this heavenly bread, and
with this so precious food of thine own flesh and blood? what see thou in
us? or what find thou in us? or what profit shall thou have of us? surely
none; but thy great love constrains thee to do thus unto us: since therefore
thou which art the sovereign goodness, the whiteness of endless light, and
mirror without spot, vouchsafest thus lovingly to come to us, to dwell in us,
and to feed us; how is it that we stinking wretches desire not most
earnestly to welcome thee, and devoutly to receive thee? it is great shame to
us; but Lord we beseech thee to take away our shame, and to make us to amend.
Give us daily this heavenly bread, and make us daily to receive the precious
body and blood of thy son our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, either ghostly, or
both ghostly and sacramentally through a true, lively, and unfeigned faith so
that thou may continually be with us, and we with thee, for thou have so
limed us with thy love, and so glewed us with thy grace, that we may not depart
from thee: grant therefore thy grace, that Christ in us, and we in Christ, may
dwell perpetually, and that we may worthily bear this name, since of Christ we
are called Christen. By this which has been showed, it appears how Christ's
real, natural, holy flesh and blood is received, in, by, and with the
Sacrament, wherein, as has been also showed, there is not any
consubstantiation, nor transubstantiation. It has been showed also what
preparation must be used, that we receive not this holy Sacrament unworthily,
whereby Christ is refused and clean shut out from us, and we refused and
clean shut out from him, to the eternal damnation of our own souls. From
which danger God of his great mercy deliver us, and give us grace that we may
at all times be made thankful and worthy receivers, to the praise of his name,
and the attainement of everlasting life, through his only son our Lord Jesus
Christ: to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost be all honor, glory and
praise, now and for ever.

Amen.
LAMENTATIONS, mournings and woes, pronounced by the Prophet Isaiah against
impenitent sinners.
Hear O heavens, and harken Esaias against impenitent sinners. cap. 1.
O earth, for the Lord has said, I have nourished and brought up children, but
they have rebelled against me: A sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity,
a seed of the wicked, corrupt children. They have forsaken the Lord, and
provoked the holy one of Israel to anger. They are gone backward, for they fall
away more and more. The whole head is sick, and the whole heart is heavy;
from the soul of the foot, unto the head, there is nothing sound therein, but
wounds and swellings, and sores full of corruption. When you come to appear
before the Lord, who requires this at your hands, to tread in my Courts, and
when you shall stretch out your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you; and
though you make many prayers I will not hear, for your hands are full of
blood. Wash you, make you clean, take away the evil of your works from
before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well, seek judgment,
relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherles, defend the widow. If you consent
and obey, you shall eat the good things of the land: but if you refuse and be
rebellious, you shall be devoured with the sword; for the mouth of the Lord
has spoken it. How is the faithful city become an ha^lot? it was full of
judgment, and justice lodged therein: but now they are murderers; thy Princes
are rebellious and companions with thieves, every one loves gifts, and
follows after rewards; they judge not the fatherles, neither does the
widows cause come before them. Therefore says the Lord God of hosts, the
mighty one of Israel; ah I will case me of mine adversaries, and avenge me of
mine enemies, and the strong shall be as tow, and the maker thereof as a
spark, and they shall both burn together, and none shall quench them. Enter
into the rocks, and hide thee in the dust, from before the fear of the Lord,
and from the glory of his majesty. The high look of a man shall be humbled, and
the loftines of men shall be abased, and the Lord only shall be exalted in
that day. For the day of the Lord of hosts is upon all the proud and haughty,
and upon all that is exalted, and it shall be made low. The people shall be
oppressed one of another, and every one by his neighbor. The children shall
presume against the ancient, and the vile against the honorable. The trial of
their countenance testifies against them, yea they declare their sins as
Sodom, they hide them not. Woe be unto their souls, for they have rewarded
evil unto themselves. Woe be unto the wicked, it shall be evil with him, for
the reward of his hands shall be given him. Woe be unto them that join house
to house, and lay field to field, till there be no place, that ye may be placed
by your selves in the midst of the earth. This is in mine ears, says the
Lord of hosts: surely many houses shall be desolate, even great and fair
without inahbitants; woe be unto them that rise up early to follow drunkenness
and to them that continue until night, till the wine do inflame them, woe
unto them that are mighty to drink wine, and to them that are strong to power
in strong drink; and the harp and violl, timbrel, and pipe* and wine are in
their feasts: b^^ they regard not the work of the Lord, nor consider the
work of his hands. Woe unto them that speak good of evil, and evil of
good, which put darkness for light, and light for darkness, that put bitter for
sweet, and sweet for sower. Woe unto them that draw iniquity with the cords
of vanity, and sin as with cart* ropes. Therefore hell has enlarged it
self, and opened his mouth without measure, and their glory, and their
multitude, and their pomp, and he that rejoices amongst them, shall descend
into it. Make the heart of this people fat, make their ears heavy, and shut
their eyes, lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
understand with their hearts, and convert, and he heal them. Then said I,
Lord, how long, and he answered, until the cities be wasted without
inhabitants, and the houses without man, and the land be utterly desolate, for
the people turns not unto him that smites them, neither do they seek the
Lord of hosts. Therefore will the Lord cut off both head and tail in one day.
The ancient and the honorable man he is the head, and the Prophet that
teaches lies he is the tail. For the leaders of the people cause them to
err, and they that are led by them are devoured. Therefore shall the Lord have
no pleasure in their young men, neither will he have compassion of their
fatherles, and of their widows. For every one is an hypocrite and wicked, and
every mouth speaks folly. Therefore by the wrath of the Lord of hosts shall
the land be darkened, and the people shall be as the meat of the fire. No man
shall spare his brother, for wickedness burns as a fire, it deuoureth the
briars and the thorns, and will kindle in the thick places of the forest, and
they shall mount up like the lifting up of smoke: and when he shall look to
the earth, behold troble, and darkness, vexation, and anguish: yet for all
this his wrath is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still. Woe unto
them that decree wicked decrees, and write grievous things to keep back the
poor from judgment, and to take away the judgment of the poor, that widows
may be their pray, and that they may spoil the fatherles. What will you do
in the day of visitation and destruction, which shall come from far? to whom
will you fly for help, and where will you leave your glory? without me every
one shall fall amongst them that are bound, and they shall fall down amongst
the slain: yet for all this his wrath is not turned away, but his hand is
stretched out still. And in that day did the Lord of host call unto weeping and
mourning, and to baldnes, and girding with sackcloth; and behold, joy and
gladness, slaying oxen, and killing sheep; eating flesh, and drinking wine,
eating and drinking, for to morrow we shall die. And it was declared in the
ears of the Lord of hosts: surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you,
till you die, says the Lord God of hosts. Behold, the Lord makes the earth
empty* and he makes it wast, he turns it vpside down, and scatters
abroad the inhabitants thereof, and there shall be like people, like priest,
like servant, like master, like maid like mistress, like buier, like seller,
like ^ender, like borrower, like giver, like taker, to usury. The Earth shall
be clean emptied, and utterly spoiled, for the Lord has spoken this word. The
earth lamenteth and fades away, the world is feebled and decayed, the proud
people of the earth are weakened. The earth also decaieth because of the
inhabitants thereof. For they transgress the laws, they changed the
ordinances, and brake the everlasting covenant. Therefore has the curse
devoured the earth, and the inhabitants thereof are desolate, the inhabitants
of the land are burned up, and few men are left; and he that flies from the
noise; of the fear shall fall into the pit; and he that comes out of the pit
shall be taken in the snare, for the windows from an high are open, and the
foundations of the earth do shake, the earth is utterly broken down. The
earth is clean dissolved, the earth is moved exceedingly, the earth shall reele
to and fro like a drunken man, and shall be removed like a tent, and the
iniquity thereof shall be heavy upon it, so that it shall fall and rise no
more. No man calls for i^stice, no man contendeth for the truth, they trust
in vanity, and speak vain things, they conceive mischief, and bring forth
iniquity, for their hands are defiled with blood, and their fingers with
iniquity: their lips have spoken lies, and their tongue has murmured
iniquity: they run to evil* and they make haste to shed innoe^ct blood:
their thoughts are wicked thoughts; desolation and destruction is in their
paths, the way of peace they know not, and there is no equity in their goings:
they have made them crooked paths, whosoever goes therein shall not know
peace: therefore judgment turns backward, and justice stands far off,
for truth is fallen in the streets, and equity cannot enter, yea truth
fails, and he that refraineth from evil, makes himself a pray. And when
the Lord saw it, it displeased him that there was no judgment. Therefore will
he tread down the people in his wrath, and make them drunk in his
indignation, and will bring down their strength to the earth, and they shall
go forth and look upon the carkases of the men that have transgressed: for
their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched, and they
shall be an abhorring to all flesh.

O yea heavens be astonished at this be afraid, and utterly confounded, says the
Ier. against impenitent sinners. chap.
Lord, for my people have committed two evils; they have forsaken me the
fountain of living waters to dig them pits; even broken pits that can hold no
water. The Priests said not, where is the Lord? and they that should minister
the law knew me not: the Pastors also offended against me and went after things
that did not profit. Thine own wickedness shall correct thee, and thy turning
back shall reprove thee, know therefore, and behold it is an evil thing and
bitter that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my fear is not in
thee, says the Lord God of Hosts: though thou wash thee with ^^tre, and take
thee much soap; yet thine iniquity is marked before me says the Lord, thou
disobedient Israel, return says the lord, and I will not let my wrath fall
upon you, for I am merciful, says the Lord, and I will not alwaie keep mine
anger. O yea disobedient children, turn again, says the Lord: for I am your
Lord, and I will give you pastors according to my heart, which shall feed you
with knowledge and understanding. Thou shall call me, saying, my father, and
shall not turn from me; and thenceforth they shall follow no more the hardness
of their wicked hearts. A voice was heard upon the high places, weepings, and
supplications of the children of Israel, for they have perverted their way and
forgotten the Lord their God. O ye disobedient children, return, and I will
heal your rebellions. Behold we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our
GGD. O Jerusalem wash thy heart from wickedness that thou may be saved, how
long shall thy wicked thoughts remain within thee? and in that day, says the
Lord, the heart of the King shall perish, and the heart of the Princes and of
the Priests shall be astonished, and the prophets shall wonder; destruction
upon destruction is cried, for the whole land is wasted. Wherefore gird you
with sackcloth, lament and houle* for the fierce wrath of the Lord is not
turned back from us. I beheld, and lo the fruitful place was as a wilderness,
and all the cities thereof were broken down at the presence of the Lord, and
by his fierce wrath. For thus has the lord said, the whole land shall be
desolate: yet will I not make a full end; and when thou shall be destroyed,
what will thou do? Thy ways and thine inventions have procured thee these
things, such is thy wickedness. Therefore it shall be bitter, therefore it shall
pierce unto thine heart: for my people is foolish, they have not known me,
they are foolish children, and have no understanding, they are wise to do
evil, but to do well they have no knowledge. Then said I, ah Lord GOD, surely
thou have deceived this people, saying ye shall have peace, and the sword
pierces unto the heart. They have denied the Lord, and said it is not he,
neither shall the plague come upon us, neither shall we see, sword nor
famine. O Lord are not thy eyes upon the truth? Thou have stricken them, but
they have not sorrowed. thou have consumed them, but they have refused to
receive correction. They have made their faces harder then a stone, and have
refused to return. How should I spare thee for this? Thy children have
forsaken me, and sworn by them that are no gods: though I fed them to the
full, yet they committed adultery, and assembled themselves by companies in
the harlots houses. They rose up in the morning like fed horses, for every man
neighed after his neighbors wife; shall I not visit for these things, says
the Lord? Lo I will bring a nation upon you from far, O house of Israel,
says the lord, which is a mighty nation, and an ancient nation, a nation
whose language thou know not, neither understand what they say; whose
quiver is an open sepulcher, they are all very strong, and they shall eat
thine harvest; and thy bread they shall devour thy sons and thy daughters,
they shall eat up thy sheep, and thy bullocks, they shall eat thy vines and
thy fig trees; they shall destroy with the sword thy fenced cities wherein thou
did trust. For amongst my people are sound wicked persons that lays wait
as he that sets snares, they have made a pit to catch men. As a cage is
full of birds: so are their houses full of deceit, thereby they are become
great and waxen rich, they are waxen fat and shining, they do ouerpasse the
deeds of the wicked, they execute no judgment, no not the judgment of the
fatherles, yet they prosper, though they execute no judgment for the poor. An
horrible and filthy thing is committed in the land the Prophets prophecy lies,
and the Priests receive gifts in their hands, and my people delight therein.
Shall not I visit, for these things, says the Lord? or shall not my soul be
avenged on such a nation as this? Trust not in lying words, saying, the temple
of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, this is the temple of the Lord: behold you
trust in lying words that cannot profit. But this thing commanded I them, obey
my voice, and I will be your God, and ye shall be my people, and walk you in
all my ways which I have commanded you, that it may be well unto you. But
they would not obey nor incline their ear, but went after the counsels and
stubbornness of their wicked heart, and went backward and not forward.
Therefore shall thou speak all these words unto them, but they will not hear
thee. Thou shall also cry unto them, but they will not answer thee: but thou
shall say unto them, this is a nation that hears not the voice of the Lord
their GOD, nor receives discipline, truth is perished and clean gone out of
their mouth. Therefore thus says the Lord, behold mine anger and my wrath shall
be powered out upon this place, upon man and upon beast, and upon the tree of
the field, and upon the fruit of the ground, and it shall burn and not be
quenched, and the carkases of this people shall be meat for the fowls of the
heaven and for the beasts of the earth, and none shall fray them away, and
death shall be desired rather then life of all the residue that remains of
this wicked family, which remain in all the places where I have scattered
them, says the lord of Hosts. How do you say we are wise, and the law of
the lord is with us? lo, certainly in vain made he it, the pen of the
scribes is in vain, the wise men are ashamed, they are afraid and taken: lo
they have rejected the word of the lord, and what wisdom is in them?
Therefore will I give their wives unto others, and their fields unto the^ that
shall possess them: for every one from the least to the greatest is given
unto covetousness, and from the Prophet even to the Priest, every one deals
falslly, for they have healed the hurt of the daughter of my people with sweet
words, saying, peace, peace, whe^there is no peace, for behold I will send
serpents and cockatrices amongst you which will not be charmed, and they shall
sting you, says the lord. Oh that my head were full of water, and mine eyes a
fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for the stain of the
daughter of my people. Oh that I had in the wilderness a cottage of wayfaring
men, that I might leave my people, and go from them, for they be all
adulterers, and an assembly of rebels, and they bend their tongues like their
bows for lies; but they have no courage for the truth upon the earth, for they
proceed from evil to worse, and they have not known me, says the lord. Let
every one take heed of his neighbor, and trust you not in any brother, for
every brother will use deceit, and every friend will deal deceitfully, and
every one will deceive his friend and will not speak the truth, for they have
taught their tongues to speak lies, and take great pains to do wickedly.
Thine habitation is in the midst of deceivers, because of their deceit they
refuse to know me, says the lord. Therefore thus says the lord of hosts,
behold, I will melt them, and try them, for what shall I else do for the
daughter of my people? their tongue is an arrowe shot out, and speaks
deceit; one speaks peaceably to his neighbor with his mouth, but his heart
he lays wait for him. Shall I not visit them for these things says the
lord? or shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this? Therefore thus
says the Lord God of Hosts, the God of Israel, behold, I will feed this
people with wormwood, and give them waters of gall to drink, for death is
come up into our windows, and is entered into our palaces, to destroy the
children without and the young men in the streets. Speak, thus says the lord,
the carkases of men shall lie even as the dung upon the field, and as the
handful after the mower, and none shall gather them. Thus says the Lord, let
not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man glory in his
strength, nether the rich man glory in his riches, but let him that glories
glory in this, that he understands and knows me; for I am the Lord which
show mercy, judgment and righteousness in the earth, for in these things I
delight, says the Lord. Thus says the Lord, learn not the way of the
heathen, and be not afraid for the signs of heaven, though the heathen be
afraid of such. Every man is a beast by his own knowledge: for the pastors are
become beasts, and have not sought the lord, therefore have they no
understanding, and all the flocks of their pastures are scattered. O Lord, I
know that the way of man is not in him self, neither is it in man to walk,
and to direct his steps. O Lord, correct me, but with judgment, not in thine
anger, lest thou bring me to nothing, power out thy wrath upon the heathen that
know thee not and upon the families that call not upon thy name: let me see thy
vengeance on them, for unto thee have I opened my cause. O lord, if I dispute
with thee thou art righteous, yet let me talk with thee of thy judgments;
wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper? why are all they in wealth that
rebelliously transgress? Thou have planted them, and they have taken root,
they grow and bring forth fruit, thou art near in their mouth, and far from
their reins: O lord thou have ordained them for judgment, and O GOD thou have
established them for correction. Give glory to the lord your God before he
bring draknes, and or ever your feet stumble in the dark mountains, and
whiles you look for light he turns it into the shadow of death and make it
as darkness. But if you will not hear, this my soul shall weep in secret for
your pride, and mine eye shall weep and drop down tears, for the crown of
your glory shall come down from your heads. O lord though our iniquities
testify against us, deal with us according to thy name for our rebellions are
many, we have sinned against the. O the hope of Israel, the savior thereof in
the time of trouble, why art thou as a stranger in the land, as one that
passes by to tarry for a night? why art thou as a man astonished, and as a
strong man that cannot help? yet art thou, O lord in the midst of us, and
thy name is called upon us; O forsake us not. Thus says the lord unto this
people, thus have they delighted to wander, they have not refrained their
feet. Therefore has the lord no delight in them, but he will now remember
their iniquity, and visit their sins: when they fast I will not hear their
cries, I will not accept them, but I will consume them by the sword, and by the
famine and by the pestilence. We acknowledge, O lord, our wickedness, and the
iniquity of our fathers, for we have sinned against thee, do not abhor us
for thy names sake, cast not down the throne of thy glory, remember and break
not thy covenant with us. Are there any among the vanities of the gentiles that
can give rain, or can the heavens give showers? is it not thou O lord our God?
Therefore will we wait upon thee, for thou have made all these things. Then
said the lord unto me, though Moises and Samuel stood before me, yet mine
affection could not be toward this people. Cast them out of my sight, and let
them depart: and if they say unto thee, whither shall we depart? then tell
them, thus says the lord, such as are appointed to death, unto death; and such
as are for the sword, to the sword; and such as are for famine, to the famine;
and such as are for the captivity, to the captivity: and I will appoint over
them four kinds, says the Lord; the sword to slay, and the dogs to tear in
pieces, and the fowls of the heaven, and the beasts of the earth to devour,
and to destroy. Thou have forsaken me, says the lord, and gone backward;
therefore will I stretch out my hand against thee, and destroy thee, for I am
weary with repenting. Thy substance and thy treasures will I give to be
spoiled without gain, and that for all thy sins, even in all thy borders.
Behold, says the lord, I will send out many fishers, and they shall fish them;
and after I will send out many hunters, and they shall hunt them from every
mountain, and from every hill, and out of the caves of the rocks: for mine
eyes are upon all their ways, they are not hid from my face, neither is their
iniquity hid from mine eyes. And first I will recompense their iniquity and
their sin double, because they have defiled my land, and have filled my
inheritance with their fil^hy carrions and their abominations. Thus says the
lord cursed be the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and
withd^aweth his heart from the lord, for he shall be like the heath in the
wilderness, and shall not see when any good comes: but shall inhabit the
parched places in the wilderness in a salt land, and not inhabited. Blessed is
the man that trusts in the lord, and whose hope the lord is, for he shall be
as a tree that is planted by the water which spreads out her roots by the
river, and shall not feel when the heat comes, but her leaf shall be
green and shall not care for the year of drouth, neither shall cease from
yielding fruit. The heart is deceitful and wicked above all things, who can
know it? I the lord search the heart, and try the reins even to give every man
according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his works. As the
partrich gathers the young which she has not brought forth: so he that
gathers riches, and not by right, shall leave them in the midst of his
days, and at his end shall be a fool. O Lord the hope of Israel, all that
forsake thee shall be confounded, they that depart from thee shall be written in
the earth, because they have forsaken the Lord the fountain of living waters.
Heal me, O Lord, and I shall be whole, save me, and I shall be saved, for thou
art my praise. Then the word of the Lord came unto me saying, I will speak
suddenly against a nation, or against a kingdom to pluck it up, and to root
it out and to destroy it, but if this nation, against whom I have pronounced*
turn from their wickedness, I will repent of the plague that I thought to bring
upon them. And I will speak suddenly concerning a nation and concerning a
kingdom to build it, and to plant it: but if it do evil in my sight, and
hear not my voice, I will repent of the good that I thought to do for them
Thus says the Lord God of Hosts, the God of Israel, behold I will bring upon
this city and upon all her towns, all the plagues that I have pronounced
against it, because they have hardened their necks and would not hear my words;
but they said desperately, surely we will walk after our own imaginations,
and do every man after the stubbornnes of his wicked heart. Behold, I will
bring a plague upon this place, the which whosoever hears it, his ears shall
tingle, and I will cause them to fall by the sword before their enemies, and by
the hand of them that seek their lives, and their carkases will I give to be
meat for the fowls of heaven, and to the beasts of the field, and I will
feed them with the flesh of their sons, and with the flesh of their
daughters, and every one shall eat the flesh of his friend, in the siege and
straitness wherewith their enemies that seek their lives shall hold them
strait. Woe be unto the pastors that destroy and scatter the sheep of my
pasture, says the Lord. Therefore thus says the Lord God of Israel unto the
pastors that feed my people, ye have scattered my flock, and thrust them out,
and have not visited them. Behold I will visit you for the wickedness of your
works, says the Lord: for both the Prophet and the Priest do wickedly, and
their wickedness have I found in my house, says the Lord: wherefore their way
shall be unto them as slippery ways in the darkness, they shall be driven
forth, and fall therein: for I will bring a plague upon them, even the year of
their visitation, says the Lord. Therefore thus says the Lord concerning the
Prophets, behold, I will feed them with wormwood, and make them drink the
water of gall: for from the Prophets is wickedness, gone forth into all the land
of Jerusalem, they strengthen also the hands of the wicked, that none can
return from their wickedness: they are all unto me as Sodom and the
inhabitants thereof as Gamorah. They say still unto the^ that despise me, the
Lord has said, ye shall have peace, and they say unto every one that walks
after the stubbornnes of his own heart, there shall no evil come upon you.
Therefore behold, I even I will utterly forget you, and I will forsake you and
bring an everlasting reproach upon you, and a perpetual shame which shall never
be forgotten. I have not sent these Prophets; says the Lord, yet they ^^n; I
have not spoken unto them, and yet they prophesied. But if they had stood in my
counsel, and had declared my words unto my people, then they should have
turned them from their evil way and from the wickedness of their inventions. How
long doet^e Prophets delight to prophecy lies, even prophesying the deceit of
their own heart. Is not my word like a fire, says the Lord, and like a hammer
that breaks the stone? Therefore behold, I will come against the Prophets
says the Lord, which have sweet tongues, and say, he says, behold I will
come against Prophets says, the Lord, that steal my word, every one from his
neighbor: behold I will come against them that prophecy false dreams* says
the Lord, and do tell them, and cause my people to err by their lies and by
their flatteries, and I sent them not* nor commanded them: therefore they bring
no profit unto this people, says the Lord. For thus has the Lord God of
Israel spoken unto me, take the cup of wine of this my indignation at my
hands, and cause all the nations to whom I send, to drink it, and they shall
drink and be moved, and be mad, because of the sword that I will send amongst
them. Therefore say thou unto them, thus says the lord of hosts the God of
Israel, drink and be drunk, and spew, and fall and rise no more, because of
the sword which I will send amongst them: but if they refuse to take the cup at
thine hand to drink, then tell them, thus says the lord of hosts, you shall
certainly drink; for Ioe, I begin to plague the city where my name is called
upon, and should you go free? you shall not go quit. For I will call for a
sword upon all the inhabitants of the earth, says the lord of hosts. The Lord
shall roar from above, and thrustout his voice from his holy habitation, he
shall roar upon his habitation, and cry aloud, the sound shall be to the ends
of the earth, for Lord has a controversy with the nations, and will enter
into judgment with all flesh, and he will give them that are wicked to the
sword, says the lord. Thus says the lord of hosts, behold, a plague shall go
forth from nation to nation, and a great whirle. wind shall be raised up from
the costs of the earth, and the slain of the lord shall be at that day, from
one end of the earth to the other end of the earth: they shall not be mourned,
neither gathered, nor buried; but shall be as the dung upon the ground. Thus my
soul was far off from peace, I forgot prosperity, remembering mine
affliction, and my mourning, the wormwood, and the gall, my soul has them in
remembrance, and is humbled in me. It is the Lords mercies that we are not
consumed, because his compassions fail not. The Lord is my portion* says my
soul, therefore will I hope in him. The Lord is good unto them that trust in
him, and to the soul that seeks him. It is good both to trust, and to wait
for the salvation of the Lord. It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in
his youth, for the Lord will not forsake for ever, but though he send
affliction, yet will he have compassion, according to the multitude of his
mercies: for he does not punish willingly, nor afflict the children of men in
stamping under his feet all the prisoners of the earth* Wherefore then is the
living man sorrowful? man suffers for sin. Let search and try our ways,
and turn again to the lord. Let us lift up our hear^ with our hands unto God
in the he^uens. We have sinned and have rebe^led, therefore thou have not
^pared: tho^ have covered us with wrath and perse^cuted us thou have slain,
and not spare^ Thou have covered thy self with cloud, that our prayer should
not pas^^ through: thou have made us as the of scouring and refuse in the
midst o^ the people; al our enemies have opene^ their mouth against us. Fear
and snare is come upon us, with desolatio^ and destruction; the joy of our hear
is gone, our dance is turned to mourning: therefore our heart is heavy; for
these things our eyes are dim. The crown of our head is fallen; woe now unto
us that we have sinned.

O thou son of man, behold they shall put bands upon thee, and shall bind
thee with them, and thou shall not go out amongst them, and I will make thy
tongue cleave to the roof of thy mouth, that thou shall be dumb, and shall
not be to them as a man that rebukes, for they are a rebellious house: but
when I shall have spoken unto thee, I will open thy mouth, and thou shall say
unto them: Thus says the Cap. 5.
Lord God, he that hears, let him hear, and he that leaves off, let him
leave off, for they are a rebellious house. Therefore thus says the Lord God
because your multitude is greater then the nations that are round about you,
and ye have not walked in my statutes, neither have you kept my judgments:
behold, I, even I come against thee, and will execute judgment in the midest
of thee, even in the sight of the nations. For in the midst of thee the
fathers shall eat their sons, and the sons shall eat their fathers, and I
will execute judgment in thee, and the whole remnant of thee will I scatter
into all the winds: the third part of thee shall die with the pestilence, and
with famine shall they be consumed in the midst of thee, and another third
part thereof shall fall by the sword round about thee, and I will scatter the
last third part into all winds. And I will draw out a sword after them,
neither shall mine eye spare thee, neither will I have any pity. Thus shall
mine anger be accomplished, and I will cause my wrath to cease in them, and I
will be comforted; and they shall know that I the lord have spokenit in my
zeal, when I have accomplished my wrath in them. Moreover I will make thee
wast, and abhorred amongst the nations that are round about thee, and in the
sight of all that pass by, so shall thou be a reproach and shame, a
chastisement, and an astonishment unto the nations that are round obout thee,
when I shall execute judgment in anger, and in wrath, and in sharp rebukes. I
the Lord have spoken it, and they shall know that I am the Lord, and that I
have not said in vain, that I will do this evil unto them. He that is far
off shall die of the pestilence, and he that is near shall fall by the sword,
and he that remains and is besieged, shall Cap. 7.
die by the famine. Thus will I accomplish my wrath upon them, so will I
stretch my hand upon them, and make the land wast and desolate in all their
habitations, and they shall know that I am the Lord. Cruelty is risen up into
a rod of wickedness, none of them shall remain, nor of their riches, nor of any
of theirs, neither shall there be lamentation for them. An end is come, the
end is come, it watches for thee, behold, it is come now, I will shortly power
out my wrath upon thee, and fulfill mine anger upon thee, I will judge thee
acording to thy ways, and I will lay upon thee all thine abominations. The
sword is without, and the pestilence and famine within, he that is in the field
shall die with the sword, and he that is in the city, famine and pestilence
shall devour him, all hands shall be weak, and all knees shall fall away as
water. They shall cast their silver in the streets, and their gold cannot
deliver them in the day of the wrath of the Lord; they shall not satisfy their
souls, neither fill their bowels, for this ruin is for their iniquity: when
destruction comes they shall seek peace, but shall not have it. Calamity
shall come upon calamity, and rumor shall be upon rumor: then shall they seek
the vision of the Prophet, but the law shall perish from the Priest, and
counsel from the ancient. The king shall mourn, and the Princes shall be clothed
with desolation, and the hands of the people in the land shall be troubled. I will
do unto them according to their ways, and according to their judgments will I
judge them, and they shall know that I am the Lord. Thus says the Lord God, Woe
unto the foolish prophets that follow their own spirit, and have seen nothing,
because with your lies you have made the heart of the righteous sad, whom I
have not made sad, and strengthened the hands of the wicked, that he should not
return from his wicked way, by promising him life. Therefore thus says the
Lord God, because you have spoken vanities and seen lies, therefore behold, I
am against you, says the Lord God, and my hand shall be upon the Prophets that
see vanities, and divine lies, they shall not be in the assembly of my people,
neither shall they be written in the writings of the house of Israel, neither
shall they enter into the land of Israel; for I will deliver my people out of
your hand, and you shall know that I am the Lord. And the word of the Lord came
unto me Cap. 22.
saying, son of man say unto her, thou art the land that is unclean, thou
have offended in thy blood that thou have shed, thou have caused thy days to
draw near, and art come unto thy term, In thee have they despised father and
mother, in the midst of thee have they oppressed the stranger, in thee have
they vexed the fatherless, and widow, in thee are men that carry tales to
shed blood. Thou have despised mine holy things, and have polluted my sabbaths:
in thee have they taken gifts to shed blood, thou have taken usury, and the
increase, and thou have defrauded thy neighbor by extortion, and have
forgotten me, says the Lord God. There is a conspiracy of her Prophets in
the midst thereof, like a roaring lion, ravening the pray, they have devoured
souls, they have taken the riches and precious things, they have made her many
widows, in the midst thereof her priests have broken my law, and have defiled
my holy things, they have put no difference between the holy and profane,
neither discerned between the unclean and the clean, and have hid their eyes
from my sabbaths, and I am profaned amongst them her Princes in the midst
thereof are like wolves ravening the pray to shed blood, and to destroy souls
for their own covetous lucre. The people of the land have violently oppressed
by spoiling, and robbing, and have vexed the poor and the needy, yea they have
oppressed the stranger Ezechiel.
against right: and I sought for a man amongst them, that should make up the
hedge and stand in the gap before me for the land that I should not destroy it;
but I found none. Behold therefore I have smitten my hand upon the covetousness
that thou have used and upon the blood which has been shed in the midst of
thee. Can their heart endure, or can their hands be strong in the days that I
shall have to do with thee? I the Lord have spoken it and I will do it; as
they gather silver, and brass, and iron, and lead, and tin, into the midst
of the furnace, to blow the fire upon it, and to melt it; so will I gather you
in mine anger, and in my wrath, and will put you there, and melt you, and you
shall know that I the Lord have powered out my wrath upon you. Say unto them, as
I live, says the Lord God, I desire not the death of the wicked, but that the
wicked turn from his way and live. Turn you, turn you from your evil ways,
for why will you die? When the righteous turns from his righteousness, and
commits Cap. 33.
iniquity, he shall even die thereby. But if the wicked return from his
wickedness, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall live thereby. Ye
lean upon your swords, ye work abomination, and ye defile every one his
neighbors wife, should ye then possess the land? Also thou son of man, the
children of thy people, that talk of thee by the walls, and in the doors of
houses, and speak one to another, every one to his brother, saying, Come I
pray you and hear what is the word that comes from the Lord, for they come
unto thee, as the people uses to come, and my people sit before thee, and
hear thy words, but they will not do them: for with their mouths they make
iestes, and their heart goes after their covetousness, and lo, thou art unto
them as a jesting song of one that has a pleasant voice, and cansing well, for
they hear thy words, but do them not. Say thus unto them, thus says the
LORD GOD, as I live, so surely they that are in the desolate places shall fall
by the sword, and him that is in the open field will I give unto the beasts to
be devoured; and they that be in the courts, and in the caves shall die of the
pestilence; the^ shall they know that I am the Lord, when I have laid the land
desolate, and waste because of their abominations which they have committed. Woe
unto the shepherds of Israel that feed Cap. 34.
themselves, should not the shepherds feed the flocks? ye eat the fat,
and ye cloth you with the wool, ye kill them that are fed, but you feed
not the sheep. The weak have you not strengthened, and the sick have you not
healed, neither have you bound up the broken, nor brought again that which was
driven away, neither have you sought that which was lost, but with cruelty and
with rigor have you ruled them, and they were scattred without a shepherd;
and when they were dispersed they were devoured of all the beasts of the field.
Therefore ye shepherds hear the word of the Lord: As I live says the lord
God, surely because my flock was spoiled and my sheep were devoured of all the
beasts of the field, having no shepherd, neither did my shepherds seek my
sheep: but my shepherds fed themselves, and fed not my sheep. Behold, I
come against the shepherds, and will require my sheep at their hands, and
cause the^ to cease from feeding the sheep, neither shall the shepherds feed
themselves any more, for I will deliver my sheep from their mouths, and they
shall no more devour them. For thus says the lord God, behold I will search
my sheep, and seek them out, I will seek that which was lost, and bring
again that which was driven away, and will bind up that which was broken, and
will strengthen the weak: but I will destroy the fat, and the strong, and
feed the^ with judgment, because ye have thrust with side and with shoulder,
and pusht all the weak with your horns, till ye have scattered them abroad,
therefore will I help my sheep, and they shall no more be spoiled, and I will
judge between sheep and sheep. And ye my sheep, the sheep of my pasture,
are mine, and I am your GOD, says the Lord God. A new heart also will I give
you, and a new spirit will I put within you, and I will take away the stony
heart out of your body, and will give you an heart of flesh, and I will put my
spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my
judgments, and do them, and ye shall dwell in the land that I gave to your
fathers, and ye shall be my people, and I will be your God. I will also deliver
you from al your filthiness. The^ shall you remember your own wicked ways, and
your deeds that were not good, and shall judge your selves worthy to have been
destroyed for your iniquities, and for your abominations. Be it known unto
you, that I do not this for your sakes, but for my holy names sake; says the
Lord God. Therefore be ashamed, and confounded, O house of Israel, for your
own ways.

We have sinned, and committed Daniel against impenitent sinners. cap. 9.
iniquity, and have done wickedly, yea we have rebelled, and have departed
from thy precepts and from thy judgments, for we have not obeyed the voice of
the Lord our God, to walk in his ways which he has laid before us by the
ministry of his servants the Prophets. Therefore has the Lord made ready the
plague and brought it upon us, for the Lord our God is righteous in all his
works which he does: for we would not hear his voice. Many shall be purified,
made white, and tried; but the wicked shall do wickedly, and none of the wicked
shall have understanding, but the wise shall understand.

Hear the word of the Lord ye children Osea against ^ impenitent sinners. Cap.
4.
of Israel, for the Lord has a controversy with the inhabitants of the land,
because there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land. By
swearing, and lying, and killing and stealing, and whoring they break out, and
blood touches blood: yet let none rebuke nor reprove another; for thy people
are as they that rebuke the priests, my people are destroyed for ^ack of
knowledge: because thou have refused knowledge I will also refuse thee, that
thou shall be no Priest to me; and seeing thou have forgotten the law of thy
God, I will also forget thy children: as they were increased, so they sinned
against me, they eat up the sins of my people, and lift up their minds in
their iniquity. And as thieves wait for a man: so the company of the Priests
murder in the way by consent, for they work mischief. Therefore will I change
their glory into shame, and there shall be like people like Priest, for I will
visit their ways upon them, and reward them their deeds. Their drunkenness
stincketh they have committed whordome, their rulers love to say with shame,
bring ye: whordome, and wine, and new wine take away their hearts, Therefore
shall the Land mourn, and every one that dwells therein shall be cut off.
The Prophet shall fall with thee in the night, and I will destroy thy mother.
They will not give their minds to turn unto their God, for the spirit of
fornication is in the midst of them, and they have not known the Lord. The
Princes of Judah were like them that remove their bounds: therefore will I
power out my wrath upon them like water, I, even I will spoil and go away, I
will take away and none shall rescue it. Woe unto them, for they fled away from
me, destruction shall be unto them, because they have transgressed against me,
though I have redeemed them, yet have they spoken lies against me. I have
written to them the great things of my law, but they were counted as a strange
thing, and they consider not in their heart that I remember all their
wickedness. Now their own inventions have beset them about, they are in my
sight, for the wickedness of their inventions I will cast them out of mine house,
I will love them no more, all their Princes are rebels, my GOD will cast them
away, because they did not obey, and they shall wander amongst the nations.

They turn judgment to woormewood, Amo^ against impenite^t sinners. cap. 5.
and leave off righteousness in the earth: they have hated him that rebuked in
the gate, and they abhorred him that speaks uprightly; therefore the prudent
shall keep silence in that time, for it is an evil time, for I know your
manifold transgressions, and your mighty sins, they afflict the just, they
take rewards, and they oppress the poor in the gate. Therefore the Lord God
of Hosts, the Lord says thus, mourning shall be in all the streets, and they
shall say in all the high ways, alas, alas, and they shall call the husbandmen
to lamentation, and such as can mourn to mourning. Behold the days come, says
Cap. 8.
the Lord God, that I will send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor
a thirst for water: but of hearing the word of the Lord, and they shall wander
from sea to sea, and from the north even to the east shall they run to and
fro to seek the word of the Lord* and shall not find it. Behold the eyes of
the lord Gap. 9.
are upon the sinful kingdom, and I will destroy it clean out of the earth,
and I will slay the last of them with the sword; he that flies of them shall
not fly away, and he that escapes of them shall not be delivered: though they
dig into hell, thence shall mine hand take them; though they climb up to
heaven thence will I bring them down, and though they hide themselves in the
top of Carmell, I will search and take them out thence; and though they be hid
from my sight in the bottom of the Sea, there will I command the serpent, and
he shall bite them; and though they go into captivity before their enemies,
thence will I command the sword, and it shall slay them, and I will set mine
eyes upon them for evil and not for good.

For behold the Lord comes out of his place, and will come down, and Micheas
against impenitent sinners. cap. 1.
tread upon the high places of the earth, and the mountains shall melt under
him. So shall the valleies cleave as wax before the fire, and as the waters
that are powered downward. Woe unto the^ Cap. 2.
that imagine iniquity, and work wickedness upon their beds, when the morning
is light they practice it, because their hand has power, and they covet
fields, and take them by violence, and houses, and take them away, so they
oppress a man and his house, even man and his heritage; the women of my people
have you cast out from their pleasant houses, and from their children have you
taken away my glory continually. They that prophesied, prophecy you not, they
shall not prophecy unto the^, neither shall they take shame; if a man walk in
the spirit, and would lie falsely, saying, I will prophecy unto thee of wine
and strong drink, he shall even be the Prophet of this people. Therefore thus
says the Lord, behold against this family have I devised a plague, whereout ye
shall not pluck your necks, and ye shall not go so proudly: for this time is
evil. Thus says the Lord concerning the Prophets that deceive my people, and
bite them with their teeth, and cry peace; if a man put not in their mouths,
they prepare war against him, the heads thereof judge for rewards, and the
Priests thereof teach for hire, and the Prophets thereof prophecy for money;
yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say, is not the LORD amongst us? no
evil can can come upon us. They hate the good and love the evil, they pluck
the skins from them, and their flesh from their bones, and they eat also the
flesh of my people, and fley off the skin from them, and they break their
bones, and chop them in pieces as for the pot, and as the flesh within the
caldron. For the Cap. 6.
rich men thereof are full of cruelty, and the inhabitants thereof have spokn
lies, and their tongue is deceitful in their mouths. Shall I justify the
wicked balances and the bag of deceitful waights: therefore also will I make
thee sick in in smiting thee, and in making thee desolate because of thy
sins: thou shall eat, and not be satisfied, and thy casting down shall be in
the midst of thee, and thou shall take hold, but shall not deliver; and that
which thou deliuerest will I give up unto the sword. Will the Lord be pleased
with thousands of rams, or with ten thousand rivers of oil? shall I give my
first borne for my transgression, even the fruit of my body for the sin of
my soul. He has showed thee O man what is good, and what the Lord requires
of thee, surely to do justly, and love mercy, and to humble thy self to
walk with thy God. Are ye the treasures of wickedness in the house of the
wicked, and the skant measure that is abominable? The good man is perished out
of the Cap. 7.
earth, and there is none righteous amongst men, they all lie in wait for
blood, every man hunteth his brother with a net, to make good for the evil of
their hands, the Prince asked, and the Judge judges for reward, so they wrap
it up. The best of them is a bryar, and the most righteous of the^ is sharper
then a thorny hedge: the day of thy watchmen, and of thy visitation comes,
then shall be their confusion. Trust you not in a friend, neither put your
confidence in a Counsailor; keep the doors of thy mouth from her that lies in
thy bosom, for the son reuileth the father, the daughter rises up against the
mother, the daughter in law against her mother in law, and a man's enemies are
the men of his own house: therefore will I look unto the Lord, I will wait
for God my savior, my God will hear me, I will bear the wrath of the Lord, for
I have sinned against him, until he plead my cause, and execute judgment for
me, then will he bring me forth to the light, and I shall see his righteousness.
Who is a God like unto thee? that takes away iniquity, and passes by the
transgression of the remnant of his heritage, he retains not his wrath for
ever, because mercy pleases him; he will turn again, and have compassion
upon us; he will subdue our iniquities, and cast all our sins into the bottom
of the sea: thou will perform thy truth to Jacob, and mercy to Abraham, as
thou have sworn to our fathers in old time.

The Lord is slow to anger, but he is Naham against impenitent sinners. cap 1.
great in power and will not surely clear the wicked, the Lord has his way an
the whirlewinde and in the storm, and the clouds are the dust of his feet.
The Lord is good and as a strong hold in the day of trouble, and he knows
the^ that trust in him. God is jealous, and the Lord reuengeth, the Lord
reuengeth, even the Lord of anger, the Lord will take vengeance on his
adversaries, and he reserueth wrath for his enemies: who can stand before his
wrath, or who can abide in the fiercenes of his wrath? his wrath is powered out
like fire, and the rocks are broken by him.

O Lord how long shall I cry, and Habacuck against impenitent sinners. Cap. 1.
thou will not hear? even cry out unto thee for violence, and thou will not
help: why do thou show me iniquity, and cause me to behold sorrow? for
spoiling and violence are before me, and there are that raise up strife and
contention: therefore the law is dissolved, and judgment does never go forth,
for the wicked does compass about the righteous, therefore wrong judgment
proceeds. Then shall they take courage; and transgress, and do wickedly,
imputing this their power unto their god. Thou art of pure eyes, and can not
see evil, thou can not behold wickedness: wherefore do thou look upon the
transgressors, and hold thy tongue when the wicked deuoureth the man that is
more righteous then he? O Lord thou have ordained them for judgment, and O God
thou have established them for correction. Art not thou of old, O Lord my God,
my holy one? I shall not die, but I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the
God of my salvation. The Lord is my strength, he will make my feet like Hindes
feet, and he will make me to walk upon mine high places. The Lord is in his
holy Temple, let all the earth keep silence before him.

The great day of the Lord is near, it Zephaniah. against impenitent sinners.
Cap. 1.
is near, and hastes greatly, even the voice of the day of the Lord: the
strong man shall cry there bitterly, that day is a day of wrath, a day of
trouble and heaviness, a day of destruction and desolation, a day of obscurity
and darkness, a day of clouds and blackness, a day of the trumpet and alarm
against the strong cities* and against the high towers* in the same day also
will I visit all those that dance upon the threshold so proudly, which fill
their masters houses by cruelty and deceit, and I will bring distress upon
men that they shall walk like blind men, because they have sinned against the
lord, and their blood shall be powered out as dust, and their flesh as dung,
neither their silver nor their gold shall be able to deliver them, in the day of
the lords wrath, but the whole land shall be devoured by the fire of his
iealousy, for he shall make even a speedy riddance of all the^ that dwell in the
land. Gather your selves, eue^ gather you O nation not worthy to be loved
before the decree come forth, and ye be as chafe that passes in a day, and
before the fierce wrath of the Lord come upon you, and before the day of the
Lords anger come upon you: seek you the lord all the meek of the earth, which
have wrought his judgment, seek righteousness, seek holiness, if so be that ye
may be hid in the day of the lords wrath. I said surely thou will fear me, thou will receive instruction, so their dwelling should not be destroyed, howsoever
I visited them: but they rose early, and corrupted all their works, she heard
not the voice, she received not correction, she trusted not in the lord she
drew not near unto her God: her Princes within her are as roaring lions, her
Judges are as wolves in the evening, which leave not the bones till the morrow,
her Prophets are light and wicked persons, her Priests have polluted the
sanctuary, they have wrested the law. The just lord is in the midst thereof
he will do none iniquity, every morning does he bring his judgment to light,
he fails not; but the wicked will not learn to be ashamed: therefore wait
upon me, says the lord, until the day that I rise up to the pray, for I am
determined to gather the nations, and that I will assemble the kingdoms, to
power upon them mine indignation, even all my fierce wrath: for all the earth
shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy. Sure then will I turn to the
people a pure language, that they may call upon the name of the lord to serve
him with one consent. In that day shall thou not be ashamed for all thy works
wherein thou have transgressed against me. For then will I take away out of the
midst of thee them that rejoice of thy pride, and thou shall no more be
proud of my holy mountain: the^ will I leave in the midst of thee an humble,
and a poor people, and they shall trust in the name of the lord: the remna^t
of Israel shall do none iniquity, nor speak lies, neither shall a deceitful
tongue be found in their mouth: for they shall be feed, and lie down, and none
shall make them afraid.

Now therefore, says the Lord of Haggai against impenitent sinners. cap. 1.
hosts, consider your own ways in your hearts: ye have sown much, and bring
in little; you eat, but you have not enough; you drink, but you are not
filled; you claoth you, but you are not warm; and he that earneth wages,
puts the wages into a broken bag; you looked for much, and lo it came to
little; and when you brought it home, I did blow upon it, and I called for a
drought upon the land, and upon the mountains, and upon the corn, and upon
the wine, and upon the oil, upon all that the ground brings forth, both upon
men, and upon cattle, and upon all the labor of the hands: I smote you with
blasting, with mildew, and with hail, in all the labors of your hands: yet
you turned not to me, says the Lord.

Thus speaks the Lord of hosts, Zachary against impenitent sinners. Cap. 7.
8.
saying, these are the things that ye shall do, speak every man the truth
unto his neighbor, execute true judgment, and show mercy and compassion every
man to his brother, and oppress not the widow, nor the fatherles, the
stranger, nor the poor, and let none of you imagine evil against his brother
in your heart, and love no false oath, for all these things are the things that
I hate, says the Lord: but they refused to hearken, and puled away the
shoulder, and stopped their ears, that they should not hear, yea they made
their hearts as an adamant stone, lest they should hear the law, and the
words of the Lord of hosts sent in his spirit by the ministry of the former
Prophets: therefore came a great wrath from the Lord of hosts.

I have loved you, says the Lord, yet Malac. against impenitent sinners. Cap.
1.
you say wherein have thou loved us? A son honoreth his father, and a servant
his master; if then I be a father, where is mine honor? and if be a master,
where is my fear? says the Lord of hosts unto you, O ye Priests that despise
my name; and ye say, wherein have we despised thy name? my covenant was with
Levy of life and peace, and I gave him fear, and he feared me, and was afraid
before my name; the law of truth was in his mouth, and there was no iniquity
found in his lips; he walked with me in peace, and equity, and did turn
many away from iniquity. For the Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and
they should seek the law at his mouth, for he is the messenger of the Lord of
hosts: but ye are gone out of the way, ye have caused many to fall by the
law, ye have broken the covenant of Leuy, says the Lord of hosts; therefore
have I made you also to be despised and vile before all the people, because you
kept not my ways, but have been partial in the law, from the days of your
fathers have you gone away from mine ordinances, and have not kept them:
return unto me, and I will return unto you, says the Lord of hosts; but ye
said wherein shall we return? your words have been stout against me, says
the Lord; yet ye say what have we spoken against thee? ye have said, it is in
vain to serve God, and what profit is it that we have kept his commandments,
and that we have walked humbly before the Lord of hosts. Therefore we count the
proud blessed, even they that work wickedness are set up, and they that tempt
God, yea, they are delivered. Then spoke they that feared the lord, every one
to his neighbor, and the lord hearkened, and heard it, and a book of
remembrance was written before him, for them that feared the lord, and thought
upon his name, and they shall be to me, says the lord of hosts, in that day,
that I shall do this, for a flock, and will I spare them, as a man that
spares his own son that serves him. Then shall you return, and discern
between the righteous and the wicked* between him that serves God, and him
that serves him not. For behold, the day comes that shall burn as an oven,
and all the proud, yea and all that do wickedly shall be stubble, and the day that
comes shall burn them up, says the lord of hosts, and shall leave the^
neither root nor bra^ch. But unto you that fear my name shall the sun of
righteousness arise, and health shall be under his wings, and you shall go
forth, and grow up as fat calves, and ye shall tread down the wicked, for they
shall be dust under the souls of your feet, in the day that I shall do this,
says the lord.

Cum fueris felix, quae suut aduersa caueto,
Rursus in aduersis melius sperare memento.
Prospice qui veniunt hos casus esse ferendos,
Nam leuius laedit quicquid pr^uideris ante,
Nec multum time as venturi tempora fati,
Non timet is morte, qui scit conte^nere vita^.
Passibus ambiguis fortuna volubilis errat,
Et mane^ in nullo certa tenaxque loco:
Sed modo laeta manet, vultus modo sumit accrbos,
Et tantum constans in leuitate sua est.
Omnia sunt homini tenni pendentia filo,
Et subito casu quae valuere ruunt.
Tutior in terris locus est quam sedibus altis.
Nam fortuna leuat infima, summa premit.
Et quodqunque libet tibi dat fortuna rapitque,
Irus and est subito, qui modo Croesus erat.
Singula quid repetam? nil non mortale tenemus,
Pectoris exceptis ingen^que bonis.
Ludit in humanis diuina potentia rebus,
Et certam praesens non habet hora fidem,
Vt probet, vt purget, vt puniat, vt mereatur
Vt manifestetur gloria poena datur.
Itaque fac timeas et quae tibi laeta videntur,
Dum loqueris fieri tristia posse puta.
De optimo correctionis modo carmina composita ex diuersis auctoribus.
Moribus ingenuis cultus si charus amicus
Esse nolit, perfer, post modo mitis erit:
Cumque mones aliquem, nec se velit ipse moneri,
Si tibi sit charus nol^ desistere coeptis.
Ferreus assiduo consumitur annulus vsu,
Interit assidua vomer aduncus humo.
Quid magis est aurum saxo, quid mollius vnda?
Dura tamen molli saxa cauantur aqua.
Gutta cauat lapidem non vi sed saepe cadendo;
Corripe sic charos non vi sed saepe monendo.
Flectitur obsequio curuatus ab arbore ramus,
Franges si vires experiere tuas.
Obsequio tranantur aquae, nec vincere postis
Flumina si contra qua rapit vnda nates.
Obsequium tigresque domat, tumidosque leones,
Rustica paulatim taurus aratra sumit.
Tempore difficiles veniunt ad aratra iuuencae,
Tempore lenta pati fraena docentur equi.
Itaque ne cesses monitis sapientia crescit:
Rara datur longo prudentia temporis vsu.
Solasalus seruire Deo, sunt caetera frauds: Declaratur in his versibus ex
libello venerabilis Richardi Barclei militis.
Dluitias mundi fragiles qui cord sequetur,
Perdidit aeterni certissima gaudia coeli.
Si tibi pulchra domus, si splendida mensa; quid inde?
Si tibi sponsa decens, si sit generosa; quid inde?
Si tibi sint nati, si praedia magna; quid inde?
Si fueris pulcher fortis diuesque; quid inde?
Si doceas alios in qualibet art; quid inde?
Si faueat mundus, si prospera cuncta; quid inde?
Si rota fortunae te tollat ad astra; quid inde?
Annos si regnes foelix per mill; quid inde?
Tam cito praetereunt, vt vanitas, vt nihill inde:
Sola manet virtus qua glorific abimur inde.
Ergo Deo serui, quia tot tibi prouenit inde:
Quodque fecisse voles in tempore quo morieris,
Hoc facias inuenis dum corpore sanus haberis,
Et quocunque Die nil sancti egisse videbis,
Hunc tibi vel penitus deper^sse puta.
Ex eodem libello de eadem materia haec carmina componuntur.
SIut tibi diuitiae, sit honos, sit larga supellex
Esse tamen vel sic bestia magna potes:
Deni^ quicquid eris, nisi sit iustitia tecum,
Magna quidem dico, bestia semper eris.
The Conclusion.
A prudent man sees the plague, and hides himself; but the foolish go on
still, and are punished.

Blessed is the man that fears always: but he that hardens his heart shall
fall into evil.

The fear of the Lord leads to life, and he that is filled therewith shall
continue, and shall not be visited with evil.

A short exhortation and dialogue, showing that Christ is to all true
Christians life and joy, and that death is their advantage.
IT is good that we have sometimes griefs, sickness and adversities; for they
drive a man to behold himself, and to see that he is here but as an exile in
imprisonment and banishment, wanting heavenly light, in a world and valley of
misery, covered with darkness and shadow of death, where a man is often times
defouled with sin, encumbred with passions, disquieted with dreads, bounden
with charges, busied with vanities, blinded with errors, ouercharged with
labors, vexed with temptations, overcome with delights and pleasures of the
world and of the flesh, and grievously tormented, sometimes with sickness,
penury and need: in which world there are also diverse kinds of Devils, which
do nothing day and night, but range up and down, seeking whom they may
devour, whose continual care and only desire is to devour the souls whom
God has created, who whether we sleep or wake, eat or drink, or whatsoever
we do else, lie in wait for us night and day, by all means, by all subtilty
and craft, now openly, now covertly, aiming at us with their poisoned arrows
to destroy our souls. Behold they have laid infinite traps to take and
entangle our feet, and all our ways have they filled with snares to catch our
souls; they have laid snares in riches, snares in poverty, snares in meat,
snares in drink; in pleasures snares, in sleep snares, in watching, snares:
they have laid snares in our words, snares in our works, and snares in all our
ways; and yet such is our extreme madness, that albeit we do continually
behold these Dragons before our eyes, with open mouth, prepared to devour us;
yet nevertheless we snort and sport in our security and carelesnes as though
we were safe before them, who desire nothing but our destruction: Our enemies
to murder us watch always and sleep not, and we sleep and watch not for our
salvation, as one temptation goes, another comes, and the cause is, for we
have lost our innocence. It is marvel therefore that any man can be merry in
this life, if he consider well how far he is banished out of his heavenly
country, and in how great peril to perish everlastingly his soul stands:
but through lightness of heart, and negligence of our defaults we feel not,
nay we will not feel the sorrows of our own soul, but oft-times we laugh,
when we ought rather to weep, and mourn: for there is no perfect liberty, nor
true joy, but in the fear of God, and in a good conscience: never give thy
self to any manner indiscreet mirth, for no manner of thing, as nigh as thou
may have done, sorrow for thy sin, and meditate continually on thy
mortality and death, according to the counsel of Salamon in his book of
Eccles. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil
days come not, nor the years approach wherein thou shall say, I have no
pleasure in them, whiles the sun is not dark, nor the light, nor the moon,
nor the stars, nor the clouds return after the rain: when the keepers of
the house shall tremble, and the strong men shall bow themselves and the
grinders shall cease because they are few, and they wax dark that look out
by the windows, and the doors shall be shut without, by the base sound of the
grinding, and thou shall rise up at the voice of the bird, and the daughters of
singing shall be abased: and thou shall be afraid of the high thing, and fear
shall be in the way, and the Almond tree shall flourish, and the Grasshopper shall
be a burden, and concupiscence shall be driven away: while the silver cord
is not lengthned, nor the golden ewre broken, nor the pitcher broken at the
well, nor the wheel broken at the cisterne, and dust return to the earth, as
it was, and the spirit return unto God that gave it; For man shall go to the
house of his age, he shall lie down and be quiet, he shall sleep and be at
rest, the eye that has seen him, shall see him no more, and his eye shall
return to see no more pleasure: for as the cloud vanishes and goes away, so
he that goes down to the grave, shall come up no more, he shall return no
more to his house, neither shall his place know him any more: for he shall go
and shall not return, even to the land of darkness and shadow of death shall he
go, into a land, I say, dark as darkness it self, and into the shadow of
death, where there is no order, but the light is there as darkness, and the just
and the wicked shall sleep together in the dust, and the worms shall cover
them, they shall be brought unto the grave, and they shall remain in the heap,
the grave shall be their house, and they shall make their bed in the dark,
they shall say unto corruption, thou art our father, and to the worm, thou art
our mother, and our sister, and the sl^my valley shall be sweet unto them, and
the worm shall feel their sweetness. There shall the wicked cease from their
tyranny, and they that have labored valiantly shall be at rest, there shall the
prisoners rest together, and hear no more the voice of the oppressor, there
shall be small and great, and the servant shall be free from his master, and every
man living, shall draw after them, as before there were innumerable: we shall
be brought all unto death, and to the house appointed for all the living; For
in the hand of the Almighty is the soul of every living thing, and the breath
of all mankind: the days of man are determined, and the number of his
months are with him, he has appointed him as bounds, which he cannot pass,
and man knows not the hour of his death: for when his flesh is upon him, he
shall be sorrowful, and while his soul is in him it shall mourn but when death
shall come, then he sleeps, and rises not: for he shall not wake again, nor
be raised from his sleep, until the heavens be no more. For all shall go to
one place, all was of the dust, and all shall return to the dust. But though
after our skins, worms destroy this body, yet shall we see God in our flesh,
whom we our selves shall see, and our eyes shall behold and none other for us,
though our reins be consumed within us, for our redeemer lives, and he shall
stand the last on the earth, and he shall bring every work to judgment, with
every secret thought whether it be good or evil. Therefore take away grief,
anger and envy out of the heart, and cause evil to depart from thy flesh, and
think often on the saying of the Apostle, in the 9. to the Hebrews. It is
appointed unto all men that they shall all once die, and after that comes the
judgment. So Christ was once offered to take away the sins of many, and unto
them that look for him, he shall appear the second time unto salvation; for
we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every man may
receive the things that he has done in his body, according to that he has
done in his body; according to that he has done, whether it be good or evil.
This death the^ unto which all flesh shall come, is either an entrance or gate
to perpetual liberty and pleasure, or to perpetual prison and pain: the death
which makes entrance to everlasting pain is termed Ghostly, and the sickness
which warns of the same is also Ghostly: which Ghostly sickness and infection
proceeds of the malice of Satan, and corruption of our own wicked nature,
driving all of whom it takes hold either to error in religion, error in
life, or error in both. Of error in life, the book of Wisdom speaks,
saying, Seek not death in the error of your life, destroy not your selves
through the works of your own hands. And of error in religion it is spoken
in the 106. Psalm, and 39. verse. Thus were they steined with their own
works, and went a whooring with their own inventions. The like whereof is
affirmed in the 2. Epistle of S. John, where it is said, He that transgresses
and abides not in the doctrine of Christ, has not God, he that continues and
abides in the doctrine of Christ, he has both the Father and the Son; which
commandment and lesson our Savior had taught before in the Gospel of S.
Matthew. the 15. chapter, and the 9. verse. And in vain do they worship me,
teaching doctrines and commandments of men: as do all the heathenish
idolaters* Jews, Infidels, Turks, Heretics and Miscrea^ts* which do worship
false gods or honor and serve the true God after a false manner, according to
the inventions and commandments of men, embracing doctrines and traditions for
the worship and service of God, more then are delivered in the holy scriptures,
the word of God, and some also contrary to the same, according as does the
Court or Church of Rome, and all the company of Catholic Papists, disciples
and followers of the Court and Church of Rome, which ghostly sickness, infectio^
of error in religion, error in life, or error in both, brings with it
everlasting death both of body and soul, if the infected truly penitent,
renouncing and detesting all his former errors, both of religion and life, be
not washed, purged, and cleansed in the precious blood of Jesus Christ the son
of God; and so through Gods merciful grace and goodness granted in his
beloved son be forgiven, and fully pardoned of the same, according as S.
Paul affirms, That without blood nothing can be made clean, and the blood of
Christ shall cleanse our conscience from all sin, It is then necessary for you
and all others that look and hope for salvation, to believe and hold
steadfastly unto your lives end, the true holy Catholic and Christian says,
contained su^marily in the articles of our belief, according as the same has
bin of ancient time gathered and drawn out of the scriptures of the old and
new testament, the holy written word of God, and is more amply and large
declared in those holy books, with all other things taught in those books
necessary for a Christian man to instruct him fully, perfectly, and
sufficiently in the way to everlasting life.

Quest. Do you then truly and unfeignedly believe that all things pertaining to
the true worship and service of God, and for the instruction and guiding of
your soul in the right knowledge of the way to everlasting life and salvation,
are sufficiently and fully contained and taught in the holy written word of
God, of the old and new Testament, and will you heartily and unfeignedly
renounce al other faiths, worship and service of God, not being most truly
contained and taught in those holy books?

Answ. I believe and embrace that faith, worship and service of God, contained
and taught in the holy books aforsaid, as only and fully sufficient through
the grace of Gods spirit, to instruct and teach my soul in the way to
everlasting life: and I do heartily and unfeignedly renounce all faithes,
worship and service of God, more then that, or contrary to that which is most
truly and sufficiently taught and delivered in those holy books of the old
and new Testament.

Rejoice then and be of good comfort that god does give you grace to believe
and hold steadfastly the true ancient Catholic Christian faith of our Lord
Jesus Christ, contained and fully taught in the holy books oforesaid.

Qu. Do you as all true believers and christians, confess according as you are
taught in gods holy word, that you have not spent the time of your life past so
holy and uprightly as you ought to have done, having in thought, word, and deed
many times and ways transgressed the most holy co^mandeme^ts of god, deserving
thereby the sentence and comdemnation, of eternal punishment and he^ fire?

Answ. I confess it.

Quest. Are you truly and unfeignedly heartily sorry for it?

Answ. ^ am, and I beseech God by his grace to make me truly penitent of all
my offenses and trespasses.

Quest. Have you an earnest desire, and steadfast purpose through the power of
Gods grace to amend your sinful life past, and to lead a new life according to
Gods holy will and commandments, all the rest of your days, that God shall
grant you life?

Ans. I do earnestly desire it, and I beseech God who is the giver of all
goodness to direct me by his grace so to do.

Qu. Do you truly, unfeignedly and steadfastly believe that Christ the Son of
God, and savior of the world has died and sh^d his blood for you, and has by
his death and the shedding of his most pre^^ons blood washed and cleansed your
soul from sin, and given unto the same by his gracious imputation, perfect
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption through himself, that
your body and soul may be delivered through the merits of his death from
everlasting damnation, and obtain everlasting life?

Ans I believe, and I beseech God of his mercy to help mine unbelief, and to
increase and strengthen this faith in me unto my lives end.

Quest. Do you steadfastly believe that there is no help, comfort nor salvation
for your soul or body* but through the precious death and passion of Jesus
Christ the son of God, who knowing no sin was made to be sin for us, that
we might be made the righteousness of God in him, according as the Apostle
declares in the 5. of the 2. to the Corinths and last verse: For he made him
to be sin for us which knew no sin, that we should be made the righteousness
of God in him? he alone being, as the same Apostle affirms, our wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption.

An. I do steadfastly believe it.

Q. Are you heartily glad, and thankful for this great mercy bestowed upon you?

An. I am, and I pra^e God give me grace so to be.

Be of good comfort then* and while your soul is in you, be thankful unto God
for this his great mercy bestowed upon you, and in the precious death and
passion of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, put your whole trust, commit your
self unto him, and with his precious body and blood, cover your soul, and
infold and wrap your self wholly in it, and say unto him after this manner: O
my sweet Savior, for this thy names sake be it unto me, according to this thy
name look upon me a sinful wretch calling upon thy holy name, and O savior,
be unto me a savior for thy names sake: For surely there is no man just in
the earth that does good, and sins not, neither any that can say I have
made my heart clean, I am clean from my sin. Thou only art the holy of all
holiest, and I am the filth of all sinners: but Lord if thou will, thou can
make me clean, say thou also unto my soul, I will, be thou clean. Who can
tell how often he offends? O cleanse thou me from my secret sins. Thou Lord
have said also in the gospel that the whole need not the Physician, but they
that are sick, and have also most graciously bidden us to come unto thee when
we feel our selves travailed* and heavy laden, saying in most sweet and
comfortable words, Come unto me all ye that travail and are heavy laden,
and I w^ll refresh you. I come therefore unto thee because of thy sweet
bidding, sore travailed and laden with the burden of my sins which are so
heavy upon me, that I am not able to look up* yea they are more in number
then the hairs of my head, and my heart has failed me, but Lord let it be
thy pleasure to deliver me, make have O Lord to help me, for I am sore charged,
and cumbred with many evil temptations, my heart is also entangled and
oppressed with many evil passions which come of my flesh, of the world, and of
the devil, and there is none that can help me or deliver me, nor that can
make me free and safe, but only thou my Lord God, my onley savior, to whom, I
commit me. Refresh me which am so travailed, lighten me which am so burdened;
thou art the most sovereign physician, and my soul is also sore sick in
sin, heal me which come to be made whole through thee, the sicker that my
soul is, the more desire it has to be healed, and the more need has it of
thee. Turn not thy face away therefore from me, neither cast thy servant away
in displeasure, leave me not, neither forsake me O God of my salvation: for
why? in healing the deadly sickness of my soul shall well be showed and
commended the greatness of thy goodness that wilt help and heal so wretched a
creature: if thou receive me into the large bosom of thy mercy, the place will
not be the more straightened, or lessened by me. It is true Lord that I have
sinned, and in the whole course of my life have multiplied many offenses, and
no repentance or punishment of my self may suffice to satisfy thy justice.
But I humbly beseech thee to forgive me O Lord, forgive me, and destroy me not
with my transgressions, be not angry with me for ever by reserving evil for
me, neither condemn me into the everlasting damnation of hell darkness, and
pains prepared for the Devil and his angels, for thou art the God, even the
God of them that repent, and in me thou will show all thy goodness, for sure it
is that thy mercies are endlesly more then mine offenses, and though my
transgressions are infinite, yet more infinite are thy mercies. Therefore if
thou shall enter into judgment with me thy poor and unworthy servant, I will
lay before thee the rich righteousness of thy beloved son Jesus Christ my
savior, which he has purchased and given unto me by his precious death: I
will lay his righteousness given unto me between my soul and thy judgment,
otherwise Lord I may not, nay I dare not contend with thee, for thine angry
threatenings toward sinners are importable, but thy merciful promises are
unmeasurable and unsearchable, for thou art the most high Lord of great
compassion, long suffering, and most merciful. Thou Lord according to thy
great goodness have promised repentance, and forgiveness to them that sin
against thee, and for thine infinite mercies have appointed repentance unto
sinners that they may be saved; I therefore a most wretched sinner bewail my
manifold sins, and earnestly repent me of my former wickedness and ungodly
behavior toward thee, and all my christian brothers and sisters gone before
me, or remaining still in this present world, for I have sinned against heaven
and against thee, and I am no more worthy to be called thy son; and though
for min^ unworthiness I am not able of my self to purchase thy pardon having
been thy prodigal and wastful child which have wasted all the substance of my
life in sin, and am fallen to great wretchedness, yet I beseech thee blessed
Lord to look upon me with the eyes of thy pity, and receive me in the
reioicings of peace, and grant me the blessings of forgiveness, and do away the
wickedness that I have done, that I may appear clean unto thee, as thou
made me, and receive me again into favor; and if thou answer unto my
Soul, thou have deserved damnation, Lord I confess that I have sinned above
the number of the sand of the sea, and my transgressions are exceeding many. I
did not thy will, neither kept I thy commandments, and ^ am not worthy to
behold and see the height of the heavens for the multitude of mine
unrighteousness, but I lay before thee between mine evil deserts, and thine
unsearchable and terrible judgment, the death and sufferings of my savior and
redeemer, which has given his most precious body to be broken* and his blessed
blood to be shed as a just recompense for all mine offenses, in whom only thou
art pleased, and through whom thou can not be offended with me: receive O
Lord, the merits of his precious death and passion, for those merits which I
ought to have had, and alas have not; and now Lord I say again, I put the most
clear shining and glorious body of thy beloved Son my Lord and savior
between me and thy wrath, between my sinful soul and thy fearful and
terrible judgments and in the triumphant and victorious merits of his most
precious death and passion, I commend my soul LORD into thine hands, for in
that, that I live now in the flesh, I live by the faith in the son of God,
who has loved me, and given himself for me, through whom, and for whose sake
I am assured that thou will save me that am unworthy, according to thy great
mercy. Therefore will I praise thee for ever all the days of my life, for all
the powers of the heavens praise thee, and thine is the glory for ever and
ever, Amen.

Finis.
Oration pro salute Christianorum. Laus Deo.
Pro salute omnium Christianorum in hac vita* peregrinantium breuis hymnus and
oration.
REx tremendae maiestatis
Qui saluandos saluas gratis,
Salua nos fons pietatis.
Circum Christ nos agnosce
Libro vitae nos deposce
Cum electis inseri:
Vt consortes tuae sortis
Et a poenis, and a portis,
Er^amur inferi.
Tuspes certa miserorum,
Verus pater orphanorum,
Te leuamen oppressorum,
Medicamen infirmorum,
Solus semper Christus es.
Te la^damus voce pari,
Lan^e dignus singulari.
Vt errantes in hoc mari,
Nos in portu salutari,
Sista^ tua gratia.
Supplicamus nos emenda,
Emendatos nos commenda
Tuo patri, ad habenda
Sempiterna gaudia.
Amen.
De salutifera mortis memoria, carmina composita ex diuersis authoribus.
TEmpora longa tihi noli promittere vitae,
Quocuuque ingrederis sequitur mors corpus vt vmbra
Vita quid ^st hominis nisi vallis plena malorum,
Principio, medio fine dolenda suo?
Curalabor morbus tui mentem membra dolorem,
Multa frequens varians occupat, angit alit.
Nunquam bellaborus, nunquam discrimina desunt,
Et cum quo certet men's pia semper habet.
Cum been pugnaris, and cuncta subacta putaris,
Quae magis in testat vincen^a superbia restat.
Vnde super bit homo cuius conceptio culta,
Vita labor nasci poena necesse mori.
Vitalabor nostra est, releuas (...) Christ laborem,
In te fit noster, vita beata labor.
Expectanda dies homini est, dicique beatus,
Ante obitum nemo supremaque funera debet.
Dulce mori miseris, sed mors optata recedit,
Et cum tristis erit praecipitata venit.
Vermis adhuc spiras moriturus forte sub horam,
Mors etenim certa est, funeris hora later.
Qui modo sanus erat, nunc lecto aegrotus adharet,
Estque cinis subito qui modo ciuis erat.
V^na sa^us hominis, vanus decor, omnia vana,
Inter vana nihil vaniu^ est homine.
Post hominem vermis, post vermem foetor, and horror,
Sic in non hominem vertitur omnis homo.
Omnia terrena per vices sunt aliena,
Nunc mea nunc huius, post mortem nescio cuius,
Omnia mors tollit quam nulla potentia mollit:
Et redit ad nihilum quod fuit ante nihil.
Omnia peribunt, sic ibimus, ibit is, ibunt.
Omnia mors delet, omnia morte cadunt,
Quod potes instanter operare bonum, quiae mundus
Transit and inca^tos mors inopina rapit.
Tendimus huc omnes, haec est domus vltima cunctis,
Panditur ad nullus ianua nigra preces.
Nudus vt in mundum veni sic nudus abibo,
Ereptis opibus, spes mea Christus erit.
Qui moritur Christo vinit, qui viuus in illo est
Non moritur, non est mors vbi Christus adest.
Mors tua Christ mihi vita est, victoria regnum,
Labe mea morior, sanguine viuo tuo.
Vt viuas morior, nulla est dilectio mayor,
Mortem morte demo ne moriariis homo.
Itaque peruigili cura meditare futura,
Semper habens memorimente necesse mori.
De dulcissimo nomine Jesus hymnus Dulcissimus Sancti Bernardi.
Jesus dulcis memoria,
Dans vera cordis gaudia^
Sed super mel and omnia,
Dulcis eius praesentia.
Nil canitur suauius
Auditur nil iucundius,
Nil cogitatur dulcius
Quam Jesus Dei filius.
Jesus spes poenitentibus,
Quam pius es petentihus.
Quam bonus te quaerentibus,
Sed quid inuenientibus.
Jesus dulcedo cordium,
Fons vitae, lumen mentium,
Excedit omne gaudium,
Et omne desiderium.
Nec lingua potest dicere,
Nec lingua exprimere,
Expertus nouit tenere
Quid sit Iesum diliger^.
Iesum quaeram diluculo,
Clause cordis cubiculo,
Priuatim and in populo,
Quaeram amore sedulo.
Jesus rex amabilis,
Triumphator nobilis,
Dulcedo ineffabilis
Et totus defiderabilis.
Mane nobiscum domine,
Nos replens tuo lumine,
Mentis pulsa caligine,
Tuapasce dulcedine.
Cum cor nostrum visit as,
Tunc lucet ei veritas,
Mundi vilescit vanitas,
Et intus feruet charitas.
Amor Jesus dulcissimus,
Est vere su^uissimus,
Plus millies gra^issimus,
Quam dicere sufficimus.
Hoc probat eius passio,
Hoc sanguinis effusio
Per quam nobis redemptio
Datur and Dei visio.
Sic amantem diligite,
Amoris vicem reddite:
In hoc amore currite
Et vota votis addite.
Ista saepe reuoluite,
Amor^m pium pascite,
Iesum ardenter quaeri^e,
Quaerendo inardescite.
Jesus auctor clementiae,
Totius spes laetitiae,
Dulcoris fons and gratiae,
Et verae cordis dilitiae.
Jesus benign sentiam,
Dulcoris tui copiam,
Tr^he me, fac vt sitiam
Tuam videre gloriam.
Cum digne loqui nequeam,
De te tamen non sileam,
Amor facit vt audeam,
Cum solum de te gaeude^m.
Tu^ Jesus dilectio,
Grata mentis refectio,
Replet si^e fastidio,
Dans famem desiderio.
Quite gustant esuriunt,
Qui bibunt ad huc sitiunt,
Desiderare nesciunt
Nisi Iesum quem sentiunt.
Quem tuus ^mor implica^,
N^u^ quid Jesus sapiar,
Felix gustus qu^m satiat,
Nil est quod vltracupia^.
Jesus decus Angelicum,
In aure dulce canticum,
in ore mel mirificum
in cord nectar caelicum.
Desidero te millies,
Mi Jesus quando venies,
Me laetum quando facies,
Vultuque tuo sacies?
Quamdiu differs doleo,
Morasaegresustin^o,
Quod vultum nondum video,
Quem me visurum ga^de^.
Jesus summa benignitas,
Miracordis iocunditas
Incomprehensa bonitas,
Tua me stringit charitas.
Bonum mihi diligere,
Iesum nil vl^ra quaerere,
Mihi prorsus deficere,
Et illi sols viuere.
Jesus mi delectissime,
Spes suspirantis animae,
Te qu^runt p^aelachrimae,
Et clam^r mentis in timae.
He^ carnis victus vitio,
Intent clamare nescio,
In meque deficio,
Adte Jesus respicio.
Quocunque loco fuere,
Meum Iesum desider^,
Qua^ laetus cum inuener^
Quam felix cum tenur^.
Hunc affectum cum senti^,
Nulla fit mundi mentio
Summis vacat intentio
Sic Semper esse cupio.
Hic amor ardet dulciter,
Dulcescit mi^ abiliter,
Sapit delectabiliter,
Delectat and foe liciter.
Hic amor missus coelitus,
Haeret mihi medullitus,
Mentem incendit penitus,
Hoc delectatur spiritus.
O beatum incendium,
O ardens desiderium,
O dulce refrigerium,
Amare dei filium.
Jesus cum sic diligitur,
Hic amor non extinguitur
Nec tepescit nec moritur,
Plus crescit, and accenditur.
Jesus sole serenior,
Est balsamo suauior,
Omni dulcore dulcior
Pr^ cunctis amabilior.
Cuius amor sic afficit,
Cuius odor sit reficit,
Jesus in quem men's deficit
Solus amanti sufficit.
Tu mentis delectatio,
Amoris consummatio,
Tu mea gloriatio,
Jesus mundi saluatio.
Tu moestorum solatium,
Tu reorum refugium,
Tues iustorum gaudium
Et cuntorum auxilium.
Sequar te quocunque ieris
Mihi tolli non poteris,
Cum meum cor abstuleris,
Jesus laus nostri generis.
Rex virtutum, rex gloriae,
Rex insignis victoriae,
Jesus largitor gratiae,
Honor caelestis curiae.
Te coeli chorus praedicat,
Et tuas lauds replicat,
Jesus orbem laetificat
Et nos Deo pacificat.
Jesus in pace imperat,
Qui omnem sensum superat,
Hunc semper men's desiderat
Et illo frui properat.
Jesus ad patrem redijt
Regnum coeleste subijt,
Cor meum a me transijt,
Post Iesum simul abijt.
Iam prosequamur laudibus
Iesum hymnis and precibus,
V^ nos donec coelestibus
Cum ipso frui sedibus.
Finis hymni Sancti Bernardi.
Augustinus in libro decorrectione and gratia Dicit.
PRima libertas voluntatis erat posse non peccare, in renatis nouissima erit
multo magis non posse pecca^e, in non renatis multo minus posse nihil sed
peccare, prima immortalitas erat posse non more, in renatis nouissima erit,
multo mag^s non posse mori; in non renatis, multo minus non posse viuere: prima
perseuerantiae potestas erat, posse bonum no^ disserer in renatis, nouissma
erit perseuerantiae foelicitas non posse bonum deserer^; in non renatis
maledictionis in foelicitas non posse malum relinquere.

A Preparatiue necessary to prayer, which ought to be faithful and frequent,
fervent and patient.
Whosoever desires to be most conversant with God, must apply himself often
to his devout prayers, and to the reading of holy scriptures: for in his
prayers, he talks with God, and in his reading of holy scriptures, God
talks with him. In which scripture he shall find noted, that prayer is
sometime taken for every good work, as upon that saying of the Apostle, Pray
continually, the learned do interpret, that he only may be said to pray
continually, that discharges his duty well in every good work continually, so
that a just and righteous man never cease to pray until he cease to be
righteous: for no man can pray or praise God continually with his lips, neither
is such a prayer or praise of God without the desire or consent of the heart,
pleasing or acceptable unto God, but he that prays unto God, or praises God
by his good works and conversation, he does and may continually pray and
praise God most affectionatly glorifying him by his works. True prayer also is
thus defined: Prayer is a most godly affection of the mind directed unto God,
and this affection is a godly and Christian desire: and every godly and
Christian desire may be termed a prayer. When our affection therefore and desire
is directed unto God, it goes as a messenger sent from man to God, and it
enters into the sanctuary of God, unto which place our flesh cannot be
admitted: our prayer is also a kind of petition preferred unto God for all
things necessary and convenient; nether does it beseem any child of God to
ask of God such things as are not meet but such things are to be asked which
are necessary for the souls health; neither ca^ any thing be said to be asked
in the name of our Savior, which is not asked for salvation sake. To pray also
aright, is to send forth the sorrowful sighings of our souls: and not many
eloque^t and glorious words. And to commend this duty the more unto us, these
godly sayings are of great force, which we find in Eccles. 18. and Ierem 33.
Be not let to pray often, but cry unto God and he will hear thee. To the
commendatio^s also of prayer, the examples of all the saints of God are of
great force who while they lived in the world perseueted in prayer, with one
heart together with the women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, as it is said in
the Acts. Our Lord and Savior Christ also was accustomed often to pray, as in
many places of the Gospel it apeareth, not that he needed prayer when of
himself he had power of all things; but to give us an example of diligent
prayer he being unwilling that we should slothfully and negligently practice
that which he so diligently by his example had taught: It is a shame therefore
for any Christian disciple to be ignorant of that which their Lord and master
Christ did so diligently teach, and as great shame it is* seldom to do that
which their master Christ did so often, especially seeing prayer is a matter so
profitable and gainful unto us: for more may one Saint of God prevail by his
prayer, then many miserable sinners can do by their force: more does one godly
man get from heaven in an hour by his prayer, then many thousand of armed
Soldiers can get upon earth by their force and arms. Prayer also will make us
to triumph over our spiritual enemies, as Saint Isidore declares, saying:
This is the remedy by which we consume all the temptations of our vices, that
so often as we feel our selves pricked with sin, so often we should turn
our selves to seek help by ou^ prayers: for diligent prayer does weaken the
force of all vice. If therefore you will patiently bear all adversity, be a
man of prayer: if you will overcome all temptations and tribulations of this
world, be a man of prayer: if you will resist all the crafts of the Devil, and
avoid his deceits, be a man of prayer: if you desire to conquer your own
affections, be a man of prayer: if you desire joyfully to live in the work of
God, and safely to pass through the labors and affections of this life, be a
man of prayer* if you desire to lead a spiritual life and to conquer the
works of the flesh, be a man of prayer: if you desire to establish your heart,
according to the good will and pleasure of God, and to root out all the vices
of your soul, and to adorn it with all virtues, be a man of prayer: if you
desire to avoid all vain thoughts, and to feed your soul with holy thoghts
and desires, and with ^eruent devotions, be a man of prayer: if you desire in a
holy contemplation to enjoy the imbracings of Christ your spouse, and to taste
of the heavenly sweetness, bountifulnes and goodness of God, which in some sort
may be felt, but cannot possibly be uttered, be a man of prayer, by which work
of prayer only the heavenly contemplation and sweetness may be tasted.

We must further know, that prayer may be divided into three degrees, viz.
Requests, Beseechings and Thankesgiuings. Our requests, as S. Bernard says,
are most commonly applied about the ob^eining of temporal things, and the
necessities of this life, which requests God approving of the mind of the
asker, does notwithstanding that which seems best to himself. Let none of
the faithful therefore think that their prayers or requests are little
esteemed: for GOD who hears their prayers, does not lightly esteem of them,
but before their prayers go out of their mouths* he causes a remembrance to
be kept of them, and one of these two, all the faithful may undoubtedly hope
for, that either God will give that which they ask, or that which he knows
to be more profitable for them, for we know not what to ask as we should,
but GOD pardoning our ignorances, mercifully receives our prayers, denying to
give us that which he knows to be unprofitable for us, or deferreth to give
it until he knows the fittest time to bestow it: our prayer therefore shall
never be idle or unprofitable, so that we always do that in our prayer,
whereof we are admonished in the 37. Psalm, saying, Delight thy self in the
Lord, and he shall give thee thine hearts desire: and give unto God Almighty
most ha^tie thanks for his most gracious and loving care which he has always
on thee, that thou do ignorantly desire that which he knows to be
unprofitable for thee, he hearing thy requests, grants not that which thou
desire* but gives thee for it a better gift, even as a most loving father
which to his child that asks bread gives it most willingly, but if he ask a
knife he will not give it him, but rather breaks or cutteth the bread which
he before had given him. Pray therefore in an assured hope both faithfully and
lovingly, pray instantly and patiently, but in these requests which pertain to
temporal blessings, as if you ask continuance of peace, health of body,
plenty of temporal things, temperance of air, or such like, in these things
after your requests have been faithfully showed forth unto GOD, wait
patiently what his pleasure shall be to do in these things, not importunately
striving for them, because we know not, but our Father which is in heaven
knows best what is needful to be given unto us in these things, which he
will assuredly give unto us: but in the begging of spiritual blessings we must
instantly, patiently and importunatly seek for them, never giving over till we
have obtained our requests, as when we do beg the remission of our sins,
the grace of amendment of life, or any other virtues, pertaining to our souls
health, and everlasting happiness, where both in body and soul we shall
receive full and perfect blessedness: In these, I say, and in such like
requests, in all humility, trusting only to Gods merciful love, ask in faith,
striving against all wavering and doubting: for he is unworthy of any
spiritual blessing from God, who strives not to overcome all wavering
doubtfulnesse of Gods merciful love toward him and when he prays unto God,
he seems to te^pt God, when he doubts that the spiritual things which he
desires to obtain, and which he has prayed for, shall not be given unto him,
Therefore when thou praiest for that which God both commends and commands,
ask without doubting, and thou shall assuredly obtain, as in the examples
before showed, when you ask the remission of sins, true repentance, the
grace of Gods holy spirit, true Christian virtue, wisdom, faith,
righteousness, humility, patience, charity, mercifulness and such like
spiritual graces, for God has promised all these, commanding us to pray for
them, saying, ask and you shall have: be not faint hearted therefore in thy
prayers, for God will surely grant thy desire, howsoever he deferreth to give,
he will not take his mercy and grace from thee, but trust in the Lord, and he
will give thee thy hearts desire; and though thou receive not these blessings
presently of his spiritual grace, yet thou shall surely receive them, for God,
who is truth it self, neither can nor will deceive the^ that put their trust in
him, hold fast therefore thy faith, and God will never fail to perform his
promise, he will not presently give thee that which thou ask, that thou
may learn with great desire to beg that which is great, thy prayers are
not presently heard that according to the time that they are deferred, the
greater blessings may be heaped upon thee; when therefore the spiritual graces
are great which are promised unto thee. Let no^ thy desires be small unto them,
bu^ (...) what wars, what earthquakes, what ouerthrowings of all things,
what destructions of Cities and countries, what multitudes of poysonings,
murders, and other mischiefs compass us about in our lives? By which rich and
poor, prince and subject, masters and servants, and all sorts of people, of
what age or degree soever, being come of Adams loins, are all subject unto.
Let all therefore fly unto this healthful remedy of prayer, both princes and
people. But because the most part are unskillful what or how to pray, our
heavenly Lord and master Jesus Christ has given us a special form, short and
most perfect, and such as no Christian how rude soever, can or ought to be
ignorant of, serving as a rule that is given unto all, short, that it may soon
be learned, and not forgotten of children, of old men, of sick men, of women,
of tradesmen, of the unlearned, and of all sorts: and yet so perfect as nothing
can be asked, or ought to be required of God, which in these few words are not
contained. Wherefore I counsel whosoever thou art that read this place, and
enioine thee straightly, as much as lies in me, that always if it be possible,
thou do pray; and when thy worldly business will not suffer thee so to do,
yet let prayer go before all thy worldly business, and let it be mingled with
them: And in the beginning of every work power forth thy prayers unto God: and
pray for me a miserable and wretched sinner, the translator of this preface,
that GOD may bless me and us all, and forgive us all our sins, and bring us to
everlasting life, Amen. To whose protection I commend all devout and good
Christians, that diligently exercise themselves in prayer, and thanksgiving.

THE PRACTICE OF Christianity, containing a brief of Christian instructions
gathered out of holy scripture, in Perkins and other learned writers,
necessary for every good Christian.
1 Be nothing careful, but in all things let you requests be showed unto God
in prayer and supplication, with giving of thanks: and the peace of God which
passes all understanding, shall preserve your hearts and minds in Christ
Jesus. Phil. the 4. chapter. verse 7.

2 Do all things without murmurings and reasonings, that ye may be blameles and
pure, and the children of God without rebuke, in the midst of a naughty and
crooked nation, amongst whom ye shine as lights in the world. Phil. 2. 14. 15.

3 Furthermore brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are
honest, whatsoever things are just, what soever things are pure, whatsoever
things are worthy love, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any
virtue, or if there be any praise, think on these things which ye have both
learned and received, and heard and seen in me, those things do, and the God
of peace shall be with you. Phil. 4. 8. 9.

4 In what place soever thou art, whether at home or abroad, by day or by
night, and whatsoever thou art doing, set thy self in the presence of God, let
this persuasion always take place in thy heart, that thou art before the living
God, and do thy endeavor that this persuasion may strike thy heart with awe and
reverence, and make thee afraid to sin. This counsel the Lord gave Abraham,
Genesis 17.
walk before me and be upright. This thing was also practiced by Enoch who
for this cause is said, to walk before God.

5 Thrust not thy self into offices and dignities, for God does not give grace
but to those whom he has elected and chosen to pre-eminence.

6 If original sin do make a man subject to the devil, and an enemy to
God, what will actual sin do? fly it therefore more then death.

7 If thou acknowledge what good soever thou have to come from God, besides
that the same shall be always blessed and more perfected in thee by him, thou
shall receive much more.

8 If thou through sin shall become blind, and through passions feeble in the
eyes of thy understanding, thou shall without due repentance be deprived of the
savor and of the grace of Christ.

9 Thou may also be the reposing place of God, if neither sin nor vanity
of the world reign in thee, which both be odious unto God.

10 Not to satisfy a lawful vow made, or to defer the same, without some
lawful cause, the one and the other does displease God.

11 Have great respect unto such things as be dedicated unto God, because he
esteems the honor and contempt done to them, as done to himself.

12 Thou shall always live discomforted, if thou separate not thy self in
thine affection from the transitory things of the world.

13 If thou will in all things observe thy self, procure to be always in Gods
presence.

14 To be loved and esteemed for any thing but for godliness and virtue, is a
thing that dureth little and is less worth; good speech accompanied with
examples edifieth, but with evil examples it destroys.

15 If thou do not honor thy elders thou will displease God, and dishonor thy
self.

16 Temporal exercises must be accommated, and as much as is possible to those
that be spiritual, so that these be not hindered nor disturbed by the other.

17 If thou will be exalted of God, procure that thy humility come indeed
from thy heart.

18 Seeing God is a most wise Lord, if thou be not more then proud thou must
approve and execute whatsoever he does ordain.

19 Do not thou seek nor rejoice to be praised of men, by the example of the
blessed virgin Marie, who was troubled when she was praised of an Angel.

20 If thou desire that thy soul be precious and beautiful in the eyes of
the Lord, adorn the same with chastity and humility.

21 How much more thou art exalted of God, so much more thou ought to humble
thy self for the love of him to thy neighbor.

22 Do thou desire to enrich thy soul, seek to converse with them that be
holy and acceptable unto God.

23 To glory in such things as be spoken in thy praise, and not to acknowledge
the good that thou have received to come from God, is naught else but to steal
from God that which is his.

24 Learn rather to suffer, then to defame thy neighbor.

25 It is better to conceal the favors of God which make for our praise, then
to diuulge them easily.

26 How much less thou art culpable and worthy of blame, so much the more
willingly accept of tribulations, which if they be not to purge thy fault, will
serve for to increase thy glory.

27 Murmr not at the Princes order, nor complain of those that do thee
wrong, when for the observing of the commandments of GOD thou must suffer.

28 Do thou desire to do many good works without wearines and pains, then
do them willingly, and for the love of Christ.

29 Then will Christ become thine, when thou shall use him with humility and
love.

30 Woe unto him that is, and will not seem to be a sinner.

31 Put all thy hope in God, and so shall neither prosperity lift thee up
overmuch, nor adversity too much debase thee.

32 If tribulation were not a thing profitable, God would not have laid it on
his son, the blessed virgin Mary, and other his servants whom he loved so
dearly.

33 If thou will suffer nothing in this life, and yet do think to have joy,
in the other, thou do deceive thy self.

34 If in adversity thou do lament and mourn, thou errest, showing hereby to
be displeased with that which pleases God, and he sends for thy good.

35. If thou will live quiet in whatsoever place, be it never so incommodious,
thou must make small account of thy self, and be content with a little.

36 Have whatsoever thou can desire, yet thou shall never be contented
unless thou give thy self to the study of virtue.

37 The most dear friends of God live sparingly: and so beware thou of
superfluity, for it displeases God.

38. If to live without Jesus, be most painful death, what shall it be to
live in mortal sin, which is to live against Jesus?

39 In time of thy death or sickness, procure to have always some spiritual
persons near unto thee.

40 Cease not to lead a virtuous life, and Christ will not fail to assist thee
at thy death.

41 Give thy self to God with all thy heart, and serve him with true humility;
if thou do think to live and die content.

42 Thou are foully deceived, if being alive thou care not for heaven, and yet
do think that dying thy soul shall fly thither.

43 They shall be praised of Angels in heaven, which have eschewed the praise
of men here upon earth.

44. The more thou shall abase thy self here upon earth for the love of God,
the more thou shall be exalted in heaven.

45 Make bills of remembrance of thine own sins, especially of those sins
by which thou have most dishonored God, and wounded thine own conscience, set
them before thee often, especially then when thou have particular occasion to
renew thy repentance, that thy heart by this doleful sight may be the more
humble. This was David's practice when he considered his ways, and turned his
feet to Gods commandment, as in the 119. Psalm is expressed: This was Jobs
practice, who said he was not able to answer one of a thousand of his sins
unto God. Job 9.

46 When thou first openest thine eyes in a morning, pray unto God, and give
him thanks heartily: God then shall have his honor, and thy heart shall be
the better for it the whole day following: and when thou lie down, let that
be lastly done also: for thou know not whether falling asleep, thou shall
ever rise again to life in this world. It is good therefore that thou give up
thy self into the hands of God whilst thou ar^ waking.

47. Labor to see and feel thy spiritual poverty, that is, to see and feel
the want of thy grace in thy self, by having the inward corruptions of
unbelief, pride and self love: for which labor to be displeased with thy
self, and to see that thou need to be healed and cleansed by Christ's blood,
and to know thine own wants to be such, that if thou be demanded what in thy
estimation is the vilest creature upon earth, thy heart and conscience may
answer, I, even I, by reason of my great sins: and again, if thou be
demanded what is the most precious thing in the world for thee, thy heart and
conscience may likewise answer, one drop of the blood of Christ, to wash away
my sins.

48 Show thy self to be a member of Christ, and a servant of God, not only in
the general calling of a Christian, but also in thy particular calling and
state of life: for note, every one that diligently hears the word and
receives the sacraments is not therefore a good Christian, unless his
conversation and all his actions be suitable.

49 Search the scriptures to see what is sin, and what is not sin in every
action: this done, carry in thy heart a constant and a resolute purpose not to
sin in any thing: for true faith and the purpose of sinning can never stand
together.

50 Let thy endeavor be suitable to thy purpose, and therefore exercise thy self
to eschew eueric sin, and to obey God in every one of his commandments.
Thus did good Josiah, who turned unto God with all his heart, according to all
the law of Moses, 1. King 25. 25. And thus did Zachary and Elizabeth, who
walked in all the commandments of God without reproof. Luke 1. 16.

51 If at any time against thy purpose and resolution thou be overtaken with
any sin, lie not in it, but spedily recover thy self by true repentance,
humble thy self, confess thy sins, entreating the Lord to pardon the same,
pray earnestly until thou find thy conscience pacified, and thy care to avoid
all sinneincreased.

52 Consider often of the right and proper end of thy life in this world*
which is, not to seek profit, honor or pleasure, but that in serving of men
we might serve God in some calling: God could if it pleased him preserve man
without the service of man* but his will and pleasure is, that in the faithful
service one of another according to our several callings, we should all
faithfully serve our Lord Jesus Christ, of (...) actual sins, both in words
and deeds.

58 When any good motion or affection arises in your heart, suffer it not to
pass away, but feed it by reading, thinking upon it and by prayer.

59 Whatsoever good thing thou go about, whether it be in word or deed do it
not in a conceit of thy self, or in the pride of thy heart, but in humility,
ascribing the power whereby thou do the work and the praise thereof to God,
otherwise thou shall find by experience God will curse thy best doings.

60 Despise not civil honesty; good conscience and good manners must go
together, therefore remember to make conscience of lying and customable
swearing: in common talk contend not either in word or deed with any man: be
courteous and gentle to all good and bad, bear with men's wants and frailties,
as hastines, frowardnes, selfeliking* curiousnes, passing by the^ as being not
perceived: requite not evil for evil, but rather good for evil, use meat,
drink and apparel, in that manner measure that they may further godline
strive not to go before any, unless ^^ be in good things: go before thy equa^
in giving of honor, rather the^ in takin^ of it: make conscience of thy word,
an^ let it be as a bond: profess not mo^ outwardly then thou have inwardly i^
heart: oppress or defraud no man in an^ dealing: in all companies either do
goo^ or take good.

61 Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with goodness.

FINIS.

