CHRISTIAN PVRPOSES AND RESOLVTIONS.

ROMANS 7.18.25. To will is present with me; but I find no means to perform
that which is good; so that in my mind I serve the Law of God, but in my flesh
the law of Sin.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Macham, and are to be sold at the Bul-head in
Paul's Churchyard. 1611.

To the right Worshipful SIR HENRY MOVNTAGV, Knight, Recorder of London, and
one of his Majesty's learned Counsel, etc.
SIR,
MAny of the good and bad affections of the mind, are easily dissembled, only
Love with her Neighbour-Vertues, Duty and Gratitude are no Hypocrites. The
Ancients feigned the three Graces to be naked, that their beauties or
deformities might not deceive Opinion; and painted their Gemini Amores,
Children also destitute of apparel: showing us, that true desire is simple,
open, and vehement. I speak partly out of speculation, but more by experience.
The many favors by which I stand obliged unto you, are grown to so great a
sum, that I being bankrupt in conceit, do in the vehemence of my dutious good
will, sincerely profess the debt, and wanting other means of satisfaction, I
tender this poor pittance my acknowledgment. Qui grate beneficium accipit,
Sen. lib. 2. de Ben.
primam esus pensionem soluit, says the woorthiest of the Stoikes: Other
payment your generous mind cannot expect, nor my meanness offer. I should
entreat pardon, if I seem somewhat ambitious, thus publicly to profess my
thankful Passions; but the general approbation which attends your merit, in
the frequent employments of your profession, and judicial executions of your
place, is known to all: Hence I am confident, that so fair a mind cannot want
Candor and Humanity, without which Goodness (if it can be without them) is
rather awful the^ amiable. I might to confirm my self (if I did doubt) tell
to my self those many your more private and domestical Virtues, which attract
the love and affection of your friends and followers; but of these I will
rather meditate, the^ discourse, knowing that you affect no other Theater for
your worth, then your own conscience. My chiefest intent in publishing these
Papers, is the good of others; And it may be, that these imperfect Resolutions
and Meditations in the practice whereof my own soul has profited, may be
available to some. For we see, that an Empirike has now and then, that hap
in curing a disease, which a learned Artist wants. But howsoever my weakness
may deprive me of this fruit, yet shall these leaves remain as a proof and
testimony (which are my second aims) of your kindness, and my thankfulness.

E. Lucan: ad Pisonem. -- Accipe nostri
Certus, and hoc vere complectere pignus amoris,
Quod si digna tuo minus est haec nomine charta,
At voluisse sat est, animum non verbula jacto.
Ah! take in gree, trusting my kind intent,
This, (ah! small this) my true loves monument;
And if this worthless page be now too base,
That in these blots your name should have a place.
Yet well to will is all, and that is in me,
In that my vaunts, not in these papers be.
Accept my heart; and here at idle hours
Read me, as you have made me, wholly YOVRS.
D. T.

To the Reader.
THE cause of making these Purposes and Resolutions common, is not common: It
is my known weakness, not conceit of their worthiness. There are some, that
think the virtues of learned and famous men to be admirable, not imitable; but
if works of Grace appear in a meaner person, by not dispairing to overtake
him, they begin to follow him. S. Augustine before his perfect conversion,
thought a christian life too difficult for his then wavering mind, but when he
perceived many unlearned women, and ruder Artisans to be great proficients in
the School of Christ, he then in holy emulation emboldned himself, and his
conscience preached, Tu non poteris, Confess. lib. 8 cap. 11.
quod isti, and istae? Can not thou do as much as these, and these? and in
another place; Surgunt indocti and Caelum rapiu^t, etc. Ibid. cap. 8.
An quia praecesserunt pudet sequi, and non pudet nec saltem sequi? The
ignorant rise up, and lay violent hands upon the Kingdom of Heaven. Because
they went before, art thou ashamed to follow; or rather, art thou not ashamed
not to do so much as follow? The firm resolution of them, which were most
likely to faint, added such vigor, and constancy to this Saints endeavors,
that though he came the latest, yet he went the furthest in Christianity. I
know, I feel my own frailty and imperfection, and yet trusting to the power,
and mercy of my God, I have set my rest to practice these published purposes
and Resolutions. It is my hope that my boldness will encourage others not to
think the way hard, or the journey troublesome, being vndertake^ by so
mipotent a trauailer. I have not in the prescribing of my intended course
affected curiosity, but proceeded in a natural and free strain, as the
matter which then came into my mind, did seem to lead me. I expect not, I
desire not popular applause. If I find in perusing my work the infirmities of
holy Job, that I handle a good matter ill, I rejoice in it, not because I
handle it ill, but because the matter is good: and I had rather with that godly
Father betray my ignorance, in imperfectly discoursing upon a good subject,
then show wit and learning with his three noble friends, in maintaining any
argument of a differing Mold.

CHRISTIAN Purposes and Resolutions.
I.
IT is easier for a man to propounde unto himself those things which are
seemlie to be don, then to do those, Romans 7.23.
which were seemly to be propounded. There is a Law in our members, says
that mortified Apostle Paul, rebelling against the law of our minds, and
leading us Captives to the Law of sin; so that we can no sooner incline to
what is good, but evil is ready to seduce us. The Lamb of God, Christ Jesus,
is no sooner come into the world, but Herod like a bloody Wolf does eagerly
pursue him. A thought of Piety cannot be conceived, but Satan seeks to
destroy it He would crush it in the womb for fear it should escape him in the
Cradle. I will labor therefore by fervent prayers, and godly Meditations for a
daily supplye from the Spirit, and never cease to continue my suite, till a
good inclination become a perfect will.

II.
THe soul of man, the more it desires the fruition of any temporal and
changeable good, the more it differs from that incorporeall, eternal, and
unchangeable God, in whose service is perfect freedom, and the knowledge of
whom is life everlasting. I will no longer therefore doat upon the specious
outside of this deceitful world: I will divorce my self wholly from the
vanities thereof, and espouse my best affections to none but him: I will affect
similitude with him in his operations, and that I may the safelier fly from
him, I will fly unto him, borne thither on the wings of Contemplation, and
Action; of Faith and Charity.

III.
IT is not enough for us to forbear that which is bad, we must give our selves
withal to do that which is good. Cease to do evil, learn to do well; Isaih
1.17.
seek judgment; relieve him that is oppressed, revenge the fatherless, and
defend the Widdowe; then will I reason with you, says the Lord, and were your
sins redder then the Vermillion, I will make them whiter then snow; Mar.
7.21.
were they redder then Scarlet, I will make them whiter then wool. Not every
one that cries Lord, Psalm. 15.2.
Lord, but he that walks uprightly, and works righteousness, it is he
that shall dwell in the Tabernacles of the highest, it is he that shall rest in
his holy Mountain, and be never moved. It suffices not that we have Lamps in
our hands; for unless they flame out in love toward God, and Charity toward
our Neighbor, we shall never be suffered to follow the Bridegroom into his
nuptial Chamber. Mat. 12.13.
Many are invited to the feast, but he that presumes to come, not having on
his wedding garment, shall be bound in Chains, and cast into utter darkness,
where there is nothing but wailing and gnashing of teeth. I will not only
therefore shun the blindness of Egypt, but I will seek for the light that
shines in the land of Goshen: and howsoever it shall please the lord to bestow
upon me but a mean Talent, I will husband it so well, that when he shall call me
to give up an account of my Stewardship, I may return it back with good
increase.

IIII.
THe Soul dies when it is forsaken of God; the bod^ when it is forsaken of the
Soul; the whole Man, when the Soul which is forsaken of God, does likewise
forsake the Body; for then neither does the soul live by GOD, nor the body
by the soul. For how can that body properly be said to live, which has a
Soul annexed to it, not to give it life, but to make it sensible of pain.
Whilst I soiourne therefore here on earth, I will order my actions in such
manner, that as my body receives being from my soul, so may my soul from
her Creator. I will labor always to live unto righteousness, that I may
never die but unto sin.

V.
Whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap. If he sow to the flesh, he
shall reap corruption; if to the spirit, life everlasting. Let us therefore not
be weary, says the Apostle, Gal. 6, 9.
of doing well, for in due season shall we reap, if we do not faint. He that
strives for a Maistry, unless he strive as he ought to do, 2. Tim. 2.5.
shall never be crowned. I am the true Vine, says our Savior, and my Father
is the husband man, John. 15.4.
every branch that bears not fruit in me, he takes away: and every one
that bears, he purges that it may bring forth more. But as the branch
cannot bear of it self, except it abide in the Vine; no more can we, except we
abide in him. Whosoever puts his hand to the Plough, Mat. 24.13
and looks back, shall never enter into the ioies of heaven; but he that
indureth to the end, he shall be saved. Christ Jesus would not descend from the
cross, when he was willed unto it by the Jews, be cause he would not leave
the work of our Redemption imperfect: and when the Prince of his Apostles
Peter, upon the relation which he made them, of those particular troubles he
was to suffer upon his arriual at Jerusalem, out of the abundance of his love,
desired him to have some pity and compassion on himself, and not to go; Get
thee behind me Satan, said he, Mar. 8.33.
thou art a scandal and a stumbling block to my proceedings; Thou
understand not the things that are of GOD, but only the things that are of
Men; such was his perseuera^ce in accomplishing the fullness of our salvation.
In my journey therefore to the Land of Canaan, Number 11.5.
how tedious, and how wearisome soever it may seem, I will not long after the
Fleshpots of Egypt: I will be mindful always of the Wife of Lot, Genesis 19.17.
and in my passage unto Zoar, I will follow the directions of my blessed guide,
and neither linger on the plains, nor look once back upon the ruins of
sinful Sodom, for fear I displease the Author of my safety, and that my
punishment be made the monument of my disobedience; I will forget that which is
behind, and endeavor my self to that which is before; Philip. 3.13
I will follow hard toward the mark, for the price of that high calling of
God in Christ Jesus, and never cease to run, till I have finished my course.

VI.
GOds wrath, though it come softly, yet if comes surely, and in the end, what
it wanted in swiftness, it brings with it in seuerenesse. I will not
therefore abuse his gentleness, nor presume too much upon his patience. He is
beautiful as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem; Cant 6.3.
but terrible with all, as an Army with banners. He is like those Cherubins in
Ezechiell, Ezech. 41.19.
he has the face of a Lion, as well as of a man. He will send his tempest
abroad with fury, and like a Whirle-winde shall it light upon the head of the
ungodly: Ier. 30.23.
Aram shall come before, the Philistims shall come behind, and devour the
rebellious Israel with open mouth. I will seek unto him therefore in the
morning, and at noonday; yea in the evening will I call upon him: I will
make my prayer unto him in an acceptable time, Psalm. 69.13.
and he shall hear me in the multitude of his mercy, and in the truth of his
salvation: The Lord shall teach me his way, and I will walk in his
Commandments; he shall knit my heart unto him, and I will fear his name.

VII.
GOD has not any need of the blood of Bullocks, or of the fat of Beasts, or
of any other corruptible and earthly thing, no not so much as of the very
righteousness of man. If we worship him according to the rules prescribed us
by his word, in Spirit and in Truth, the profit hereof redoundeth not to
him, but to our selves. For who so senseless as to think he benefits the
Sun, when he beholdes his beams, or that he pleasureth the Spring, when he
drinks of the water. Whatsoever therefore my deeds are, I will desire but
acceptance, and that which follows after, I will attribute to his mercy, not
to my own merit.

VIII.
THe omnipotency of the word, appears in nothing more, then in that it makes
all those omnipotent that do hope in it. Joshua commands the Sun to stand,
2. King. 20.10.
and it obeys him: King Ezechias desires that the shaddowe of it may retire,
and Isaiah grants it. Yea Christ himself assures us, that were our Faith
but as a grain of Mustard-seede, Mat. 17, 20.
we should no sooner say unto a Mountain, Remove; but it should presently be
removed, and nothing at all should be impossible unto us. I will not therefore
with the Scribes and Pharisees, require a sign for the reforming of my
incredulity; Mat. 12.38.
but without putting my fingers with Didymus into the printes of his Nails,
Ioh. 20.25.
or my hands into his wounded side; I will believe without inductions or
demonstrations, the sacred mysteries of the Incarnation, Passion, Resurrection,
and Ascension of my most holy and blessed Savior; humbly beseeching him, Luke
17.5.
with his Apostles, that he would vouchsafe to strengthen and increase my
Faith, Col. 1.23.
that I may continue grounded and established therein, and not be moved away
from the hope of that glorious Gospel, which has been preached by his chosen
Ministers to every creature that is under heaven.

IX.
MAN'S intention without Gods assistance, avails nothing. Peter was but a
while forsaken, Mat. 26.27
and howsoever he did abound with love and zeal, yet was he notwithstanding
suppla^ted by the Enemy: his faith was overwhelmed with fear; he forsook him
for whom he swore to dye. Gods assistaunce without man's intention profits as
little; For what action, circumstaunce, or exhortation could be thought
requisite for the reclayming of Judas, which Christ omitted; but al was to no
purpose he was a Devil, and so he dyed. And hereupon the Lord himself
complains in the 23. of Matthew, Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Mat. 23.37.
which killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee; how
often would I have gathered thy Children together as the Hen gathers her
Chickens under her Wings, and ye would not? GOD points us to the springs of
heavenly grace, but unless we stoop to the Well, we cannot be refreshed with
the water. We lie wallowing here in the mire of earthly cogitations, and in
vain shall he assay to raise us if we be not willing to rise; If he lend us
his hand, we must give him our heart, or rot and putrify in our own
infirmities. In all humility therefore, and singleness of spirit, I will desire
the Author of my salvation that he would vouchsafe to second my holy
Resolutions, and so quicken me according to his loving kindness, that
whenever it shall please him to call unto me, I may be instantly ready to
run unto him, applying my self without delay, to keep his Statutes and
commandments.

X.
1. Sam. 18 22.
OBedience is more acceptable to the Lord then sacrifice, and to hearken then
the fat of Rams. To what purpose, says he, bring thou incense unto me from
Sheba, Iere. 6.20.
and sweet Calamus from a far Country? He desires not the blood of Bullocks,
neither is he delighted with the multitude of burnt offeringes; 2. Cor. 12.14.
so he may have us, he cares not for what is ours. When I sacrifice to my
Creator therefore, I will not offer up the Calves of my lips, without the
treasures of my heart; I will not give part to him, and keep the choicest for my
self. All the Fat is the Lords, Leuit. 3.16.
and he that eats it shall be cut off from his people.

XI.
THE Covetous man is like a Christmasse Box; whatsoever is put into it,
nothing can be taken out of it, till it be broken: He soaketh up the waters
like a Spung, and till death do come and squeeze him with his Iron Graspe, he
will not yield one drop: his hand is sound and nimble to receive, but when he
should use it to relieve the wantes of his distressed Brother, it lies withered
in his bosom, and can by no means possible be stretched out. He wears out
himself in laboring for that whereof he has no use. He knows no God of
Sabbath, but his Gold: his restless purchase of it is his rest, and with
religious admiration do his thoughts adore it: he thinks it Sacrilege to
diminish the least heap, but the time will come, when he shall go as naked
out of the world, as ever he came into it, and then those Angels in which he
gloried here, shall be so many Devils to torment him there. Whereas he that
deals his Bread unto the hungry, Mat. 25.34
and brings the poor unto his House; his light shall break forth as the
morning, and his health shall grow with speed: his righteousness shall go
before him, and the glory of the Lord shall embrace him. Esaias 58.7.
He shall be like a Garden that is watered, and like a Spring, that can never
fail; his very bones shall fatten, and his Soul be satisfied in the midst of
drought. I will continually therefore cast my Bread upon the waters, and
according to that portion which the Lord has lent me, be always ready to
relieve the needy.

XII.
I Will not mortify my self in part, nor in co^flicting with those spiritual
Amalekites that seek the ruin of my Soul, will I make Saul my precedent; but
according to the mandate of my God, Demoliar vniuersa, 1 Samuel 15.3
I will bring down all; I will not spare Man, woman, nor Child. For here are
those three sins to which we are all subject: First, the sin of frailty, behold
the Woman. Secondly, the sin of Malice, behold the Man: Last of all the sin
of Ignorance, behold the Child. Nay I will labor as much as in me lies, to
destroy the very heardes, with every other thing, and not leave so much as the
least circumstance, that may either aggrauate or extenuate my offenses; So
shall I fight the good fight, and in the end receive that inestimable price
which is laid up for me in the Kingdom of glory.

XIII.
GOD is not an Italienated Courtier; nor does he ever entertain us with
Lippe-courtesie. When he inuiteth us, Hos. 11.
we must in no wise say him nay; He will pull us to him with the Cords of a
Man, and draw us on eeuen with the bands of love; And when he seeeth, that
this is not sufficient, he will send his Chasticementes and his Corrections
for us, who like faithful Messengers, will not be satisfied with any vain
excuses, Luke 14.23
but will compel us by violence to come unto him. It is not the purchase of a
Farm; the buying of an Ox, nor the marrying of a wife, that will serve our
turn. The Master of the Feast has sent for us, and we must go. His Dinner
is prepared; he has killed his Fatlinges, Mat. 22.4.
and all things now are in a readiness. If he see that his Table be not
thoroughly furnished with Guests, he will instantly grow exceeding wroth, and
woe be to us, if once he send his Warriors forth. Esaias 41.2.
For then shall we be given as Dust unto their Swords, and as scattered
Stubble unto their Bows. I will not therefore slightly regard his inuitatio^s.
He shall no sooner call but I will free my self from all encumbrances and come:
Luke 14 15
Blessed, I know is he that eats Bread in the Kingdom Revel. 19, 9
of God, and sits at Supper with the holy Lamb.

XIIII.
IN this World there is a threefold road. The one is, that of Christ from ill
to good, from sin to Grace, which begins at the Valley of Hinnon, and
reaches to the Mount of Olives, and thorough this have all the holy Patriarchs,
Prophets, and Apostles iournyed from time to time to their eternal happiness.
The other is that of ADAM, from good to ill, from life to death, and goes
down from Jerusalem to Ierico: Luke 10.30
It is a way that is exceeding dangerous, and beset on every side with Thieves
and Murderers, that will rob us of those virtues wherewith we are arrayed, and
having wounded us will go their way, leaving us there alone to languish in our
misery. The third and last, is that of satan, which is round and Circular. He
compasses the earth, and like a roaring Lion he walks about, Job. 1.7.
seeking whom he may devour. 1. Pet. 5.8.
To go right forward is no pace for him; he must continually be turning, and
the reason hereof is this; he would not rest himself when time did serve in
the lord his God, who as he is to all Creatures, the first efficient of their
being, so is he the last final cause of their working, and as it were the
breathing stop and period of their operations. But his motion has no center,
and therefore must be always wheeling. From amongst them all then I will
select the first. It is straight and ready, and will quickly bring a man to his
expected harbor: Luke 10.4.
Being entered once into it, whomsoever I meet, I will let him pass according
to the precept of my blessed Savior, 1 King 4.29.
and not salute him; If he salute me, I will not answer him. He treads a
path directly contrary to mine, and I will not seem by complementing to affect
his company.

XV.
THE wicked man is a great Linguist. Every desire in him has his peculiar
speech, and every passion his proper dialect. His bosom is the very Babell of
al confusion: Wisdom may notwithstanding cry till she be hoarse, there is not
one that understands her accent. The toongs they speak withal are forked, but
not fiery, Acts 2.3.
and cannot therefore serve for union, but division. They are such as will
sooner bring a punnishment upon the speaker, then cause astonishment in the
hearer. I will leave them therefore to him that likes them; and not suffer a
Thought within my breast, Esaias 19.18
that speaks any language but that of Canaan.

XVI.
THe Lord is liberal, James 1.5.
and reproacheth no man. There is not the least, and meanest of those
benefits, which every moment we receive from him, but is far more then we
could deserve, far more then we durst desire. He never values that which he
gives, yet gives he always that which is pure and perfect. He will not
flatter our hopes with verbal Complements, Ioh. 16.24.
nor torture them with vain delays. Ask, and you shall receive (says our
Savior Christ) that your joy may be fulfilled. Luke 12.19
The world does otherwise: Fair promises, but slow performance: and in the
end, Insteade of bread it offers us a stone; instead of fish it feeds us
with a Serpent: we looked for a substance, and behold a shadow. My Soul (said
the rich man in the Gospel) thou have much goods laid up for many years;
live at ease, eat, drink, and take thy pastime; when lo that very night it
was taken from him; and the goods, which he had gathered were he knew not
whose. Iere. 4.23.
The earth is desolate and void (says the GOD of Israel) by the mouth of his
holy Prophet: it can afforde no pleasure, which is not counterfaite and
Adulterate; the best things in it are sophisticated. The Wine thereof is mingled
with water; Esaias 1.22.
and the Silver of it is turned into dross. I will take no thought therefore
for my life, Psalm. 55, 22.
what I shall eat; nor for my body, what I shall put on; but cast my burden on
the Lord, 1 Timothy 6, 19
and he shall nourish me; I will labor to be rich in good works, laying up
in store for my self a sure foundation against the time to come, that I may
obtain a blessed and everlasting life: still craving somewhat at the hands of
God, that he may still have occasion to give.

XVII.
BEtter it is (says Solomon) to be of humble mind with the lowly, Prou. 19, 9.
then to divide the spoils with the proud. Wrath and confusion shall follow
these; but grace and glory shall be given unto those. Ephraim shall be
preferred before Manasses; and Ishais little one before the rest of his
brethren: Adonijah may pretend his eldershippe, Gen: 48, 20 1. Sam. 16, 11. 1
King 1.30.
but Solomon shall enjoy the Kingdom. It is Humility that makes us
acceptable to God and Man, whereas the contrary makes us hated and abhorred
of both. While Saul was little in his own sight, GOD made him head over the
tribes of Israel. 1. Sam. 15.16.17. Let us but look upon the life of our
blessed Savior, and we shall see that he drew more people unto him in his
Eclipsed and obscure estate, then he did in the transcendent of his glory.
Only three were present at his transfiguration in the Mount; Mat. 17.12.
but lying in a Manger there came kings to worship him, Luke 9.28.
and Sheepheardes to adore him. Math. 2.2.
And when he humbled himself so far, as to become obedient unto death, Ioh.
12.32.
yea to the death of the Cross, then was his exaltation; for then he drew all
things unto him. Learn therefore of me (says he) for I am meek and lowly of
heart. Mat. 11, 29.
And indeed where shall we find a more glorious precedent, then is the Patron
of all glory, Phil. 2.67.
who being in the form of God, did clean annihilate himself, and took on him
the shape of a Servant. The pride of Heaven became the scorn of Earth: The son
of God, the slave of man. He left his fathers court, (such was the love he
bare us) to come and cure the Vlcerous Inflammations of our infected Souls.
Phil. 2.5.
He did abase himself that he might honor us; and was careless of his own
dignity to purchase ours. I will labor therefore that the same mind which was
in him toward me, may likewise be in me toward others. I will not boast
my self against the Publican, nor as one that had tasted of the Leaven Luke
18.11
of the Pharisees, think better of my self then I am, or worse of others then
they are, but desire God that he would deck me inwardly with lowliness of
Spirit, 1. Pet. 5, 5, 6
that I may be exalted of him in due time.

XVIII.
OUR Savior is not of that outward appearance, that worldly Princes are: his
train is small, himself not chargable; He does not look for sumptuous
preparation. The Holy Ghost is his Harbinger, who (so the heart be clean)
respects no Ceremonies. Luke 11.40.41.
Martha busied her self about his service, but Christ reproved her: he told
her she was troubled with many things, but one alone was needful; and that
her Sister Mary, who sat at his feet, and heard his preaching, had chosen the
better part, which should never be taken from her. For indeed it is not the
stateliness of the house, nor the sumptuousness of the Table, that he
delights in. He visits the Son of Alpheus at the receite of Custom; Mar.
2.14.
he goes in with Zacheus; Luke. 19 5
and sits at board with Publicans and Sinners. There is no man so mean, but
may find means to content him: He that hears and believes his word, does
feast him royally. Let any Man, Ioh. 14.23.
(says he) harbor in his bosom a loving affection toward me, Revel. 3, 20
and behold, I and my Father will come and dwell with him for ever. I will
endeavor therefore to cleanse my Soul from all impurity. I will cast out of it
those many vices and imperfections, wherewith even from my Cradle it was
tapistred. It shall no longer be a Den of Theeus and Murderers. It shall no
longer be a Rendez-vous for Sin and Satan; I will make it a House of Prayer,
a Tabernacle for the living GOD. I will adorn it with Faith and hope, but
above al, 1. Cor. 13, 1.
with Love and Charity, Mat. 21, 14.
without which the very voice of Angels is but as sounding brass or a
tinckling Cymball: and there will I present unto him my halting Thoughts, and
blinded understanding, that he may heal them.

XIX.
IT were better never to have known the way of Righteousness, 2. Pet. 2.21
Heb. 6, 4.
then having known it, to forsake the holy Commandment which was given unto
us. It is impossible, that such as have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were
made partakers of the Holy Ghost, if once they fall away, should be renewed by
repentance: They crucify again unto themselves the Son of God, and count the
blood of the Testament as an unholy thing. Mat. 12.43
The Spirit of uncleanness is retired unto his former home, and with him
seven others worse then himself are come, so that the latter end of these, is
more disastrous far then their beginning. They are returned like the Dog to
their own vomit; Prou. 26.11
and like the Sow that was washed to the wallowing in the Mire: Ephraim is
gone back to Egypt, Hos. 9.3.
and eats things that are unclean in ASHVR. They had the victory of
sinful flesh, but they knew not how to use it. It Is snatched again (as it
were) out of their Jaws; and lo; Of Conquerours, they become Captives. Their
actions have a fair beginning, but the end is faulty: They resemble
Nebucadnezzars Image; Dan. 2, 32.
their head is of fine gold, but the feet of them are Clay. They hold forth a
Rod with Aaron, and behold it flourishes, Number. 17, 8 Exodus 14, 3.
but by and by it falls to the ground and becomes a Serpent. Last of al,
they are like him, that offers a Lamb for his Oblation to the Lord, Leuit.
3, 9.
but the tail of it is wanting; which God himself commanded the Priest so
strictly and precisely, to take even altogether to the very Chine, and burn
upon his Altar. I will endeavor therefore to be constant in my undertakings;
and like the Be till I have sucked the sweetness which I look for out of one
flower, not range unto an other: being well assured, that the Apostls
themselves, had they not continued in Prayer, and Thanksgiving to the Lord,
could never have received the holy Comforter.

XX.
THE Foxes have holes, Math. 8.20
the Birds of the Heaven have nestes; but the Son of man complayneth, that
he has nothing whereon to rest his head. It Is compassed about with Thorns,
and few there are that dare suffer him to approach them. The Covetous man will
not endure him: Whosoever he be, Luke 14.33
that forsakes not all he has, can never be my Disciple, would pierce him
to the quick. The proud cannot away with him: Mat. 11, 29.
Learn of me, for I am meek and humble, would much disquiet him. The carnal
and voluptuous liver will by no means entertain him: for should he but look
upon the austerenesse of his life, and consider with himself, that, Math. 5.8.
Blessed only are the pure of heart, it would so goar his conscience, that he
should not possibly rest. In a word, all men in a manner utterly forsake him
He comes into the Country of the Gadarenes, Mark 5, 17
and ere he enter their City, they beseech him to depart their Coasts. He
repaireth unto Jerusalem, and there they seek to stone him. Some of the meaner
ra^ would willingly recei^ him, but the Pharisees (...) terre them from i^ (...)
bid them look i^ (...) the Rulers did (...) He fin^ (...) in the breast of
Pilate to shade him from, ^^nas 4.6.
that canicular and scorching heat, wherewith his adversaries did pursue him:
But alas! It sprung up in one night, and perished in another: Priuate-Respect
came as a Worm, and wasted it. And now behold the burning Sun and the blasting
Wind begin to beat upon (...) head; he brings him (...), and delivers him,
(...) ^sse! It is to be (...). The Heir (...) ^ineyarde, accor^ (...) is
Fathers a^ (...) comes (...) (...) ^ites t^ but the husbandmen are agreede to
cast him out of it, and slay him. So that his complaint is not without just
cause. For want of harbor, he seeks the desert places, and is forced in the
night to rest his weary Limbs even in a Garden, where he has no Bed, but the
cold Earth; no sheet, but the moist Air; no Canopy, but the wide Heaven. I
will run th^^^fore and meet him (...) Lot and Abra^ (...) Angels.) I (...)
him to wit^ (...) self vnd^ (...) my roof, and when his Enemies shall come
and ask for him, I will not part with him. I will bring forth my Daughters, my
beloved Sins, that they may glut their malice upon them: He shall rest in my
bosom: I will make for him a little Chamber (as did the Shunamite for Elisha)
and set therein a Bed, a stool, (...) Table, and a Candle^^^e, that he may
dwell (...) ^e for ever. Let his (...) never so sharp, (...) ^ll bolster it.
(...) ^hinke that (...) ^ge has took impression there, unless I see it like
himself, all bloody and full of wounds.

XXI.
THE Prince of darkness is exceeding politic, and much abounds with craft in
his proceedinges. He knows th^^ things which were o^ (...) bruised, may be
(...) broken; He kno^ (...) Wood whi^ (...) times kind^ (...) ^ly burn (...)
he st^ (...) commit such sins as in former times they were accustomed unto.
He is withal a cunning Rhetoritian, and does use much Sophistry. Judge. 19.5.
He never comes to the point but by insinuatio^: He vsurps upon them by
degrees, and deals with them as the father of the Levites did with him; by
little and little he procures their ^^nsent unto that, which ^e it summarily
pro^ ^ed, would perad^ (...) ^tterly reiec^ (...) are twoe (...) oftentimes
(...) captiuate the Soul of Man. The one is Pleasure; which when he saw that
Christ resisted, he did assault him with the other, which was Grief, the
surer Engine as he thought for battry of the twain. And lo he stirred al men up
against him; his Disciples he caused to deny their Master; the Soldiers to
deride their ca^taine; the passengers (...) blaspheme their Gu^ and in a word,
the (...) to crucify their (...) that he forc^ (...) out; Beh (...) (...) see
if ever there were any grief that may be thought to parallel this of mine.
Lam. 2, 12.
But notwithstanding this he finds him still invincible. The cruel dolours
of his torments cannot make him forget to pray for his Tormentours. I will
always therefore strive to fortify the weaker place; and where the Foe shall
have made a breach, I ^^ll erect a Bulwark. (...) the persuasions of (...)
^baddon, of that Bad (...) ever so enticing. (...) ^te my Master (...) ^eeke
t^ (...) them with a Seriptum est. When God has given me a precept, I will
endeavor to perform it. The Spirit of Untruth, 2 King 13.18.
though in the mouth of a Prophet, shall not be strong enough to divert me
from it. The Lord will send a Lion to devour the disobedient, and his Carkase
shall be denied the Sepulcher of his Fathers.

XXII.
THere is a league of amity between God and the good; nay, there is an inward
familiarity; a very near affinity. They are his friends; they are his
followers; they are his true borne Sons. But notwithstanding this the Lord of
might, the strict exactor of all virtues, is no way fond of them; he carries
a sharp hand over them, and does invre them to hard-meate even from their
Cradle. He loves not to make a wanton of the least. He does try them; he
does train them; and makes them fit for his own purpose. There is not any
thing wherein he more delights, then in seeing the^ encounter stoutly with
adversity. Thrice only were the Heavens opened: First, Ezech. 1, 1.
to Ezechiell, when at the River Chebar he did addict himself unto diuiner
contemplation: Secondly to Christ, Mar. 3.16.
when on the banks of Jordan he was Baptized of John; And last of all to
Stephen, Acts 7, 56
when in honor of his deceased Master, he played his prize with Death, and
wrastled with the Devil and the damned; and the^ were they opened wide, that
both himself and his whole Court might behold the brave performance of the
Combattant. The Earth is as his Theater, whereon he stageth such as are his,
and makes them a spectacle (as the Apostle says) for the World, 1. Cor. 4, 9.
for Angels, and for Men. Sloth shall not consume their Mettle; nor ease
effeminate their minds. He will make them sweat even upon Holy Days. One
accident or other shall provoke their valor, Gen: 32, 28
and keep it from growing sluggish thorough want of exercise. An Angel if all
should fail, must come down from above and wrestle with them till the
breaking of the day, to keep them continually in breath, and to prevent their
Sinnewes from waxing numbe for lack of motion: And they themselves are well
contented with it. They count affliction but a recreation; and are in pain but
when they are employed. They know not what it is to yield: when they can stand
no longer on their feet, they will fight upon their knees. Their death shall
be the Trophy of their victory, their patience the monument that must adorn
their grave. Though there be cries and lamentations throughout the Land of
Egypt, yet rest and quietness is found in Goshen. Aug. de Ciu. Dei. 1, cap. 8.
The fire may consume the wood, but it makes bright the gold; the Flaile may
bruise the Husk, but it cleanses the Corn: Pharaoh and his Host are
overwhelmed in the Sea, but Moses and the Israelites do march with safety
thorough the midst of it. The wicked shrink under the burden of temptation,
but the courage of the righteous is no more altered therewith; then is the
saltness of the Sea with the violent and impetuous flux of those many waters
which continually do fall into it. Let affliction therefore come, I will meet
it patiently as Job did; I will desire it for the love of Christ, as the
Martyrs did; yea, I will rejoice in it as the Apostles did, Acts 5.41.
who after they had been beaten by the appointment of the Sadduces, departed
from the Counsel, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer rebuke for
his Name, James 2.2.
I will not think my joy accomplished, but when I see my self hedged in on
every side with crosses, hindrances, and tribulations. The thought of the price
shall make me delighted with the pain. 1. Cor. 5, 5.
I will not care for the loss of my flesh, so my Spirit may be saved in the
day of the Lord.

XXIII.
THere are some vices of that Nature, 1. Cor. 6, 8.
they cannot be vanquished but by avoiding. Fly Fornication; says the
Apostle Paul: Trust not to thine own strength; presume not upon thine own
sufficiency: Her faction is exceeding strong; there are those in thee, and
about thee, which unless thou ouerlooke them with as many eyes, as had those
mystical Creatures of Ezechiell, will treacherously betray thee. The Flesh is
an alluring Dalilah: Cant. 3, 7.
Not Sampson with his strength; nor Solomon with his Wisdom are able any way
to prevent her Stratagems. The sixty strong men of the valiant of Israel that
were about his bed could not protect him. If she get within thee, she is sure
to foil thee. When I see her therefore make toward me, I will think it no
disparagement to turn my back. There is valor even in retreat. Our Savior
flees, and Herod follows; yet in the end the Tetrach becomes his Captive;
and notwithstanding the advantage which he had, must grace the triumphall
Charret of Christ the Conqueror. But whether I be forced to fly from Herod,
or from Egypt; from Sin, or from Satan, I will desire the Lord I may be still
accompanied with Mary, Math 2.13
Joseph, and the little Babe; the first is the bitterness of Repentance; the
last is the pureness of Conscience; and the other an augmentation or supply of
Grace, with which every where even in the mouth of Hell: without which no
where, not in the Gates of Heaven, can we rest securely. We may cry out unto
him with the foolish virgins, Lord, Mat. 25, 11.
Lord, open unto us; but if these be away, his answer will be, I do not know
you.

XXIIII.
THere was not any thing in the world after the fall of Adam, which did not in
some measure bear a part of his punnishment. All things did degenerate from
their creation; and from that time became obnoxious to corruption. The Elements
themselves did wax impure. The earth brought nothing forth but Thorns and
Thistles: It had in it that mighty Behemoth to molest it; Genesis 3, 18. Job. 40,
10.
and the Water that monstrous Liviathan to infect it. But Christ the holy one
of holy ones, came down from Heaven, and sanctified the one by walking too and
fro upon it; and the other, by causing himself to be Baptized with it: He
purified the Air by suffering in it; and the Fire by sending his holy Spirit
in the likeness of it. Man who was indeed that sower Leaven, which corrupted
the whole lump, was to be cleansed from his impurity, not with the fat of Bulls
and goats, nor with the Ashes of an Heyfer, Heb. 9, 14.
but with the precious blood of that immaculate and spotles Lamb, who thorough
the eternal Spirit offered himself without blot or blemish to the Lord, that
he might purge the Conscience from dead works, and make it fit to serve the
living God. As the Child of obedience therefore I will no longer fashion my
self to the former lusts of an unbridled Affection; 1. Pet. 1.13.
I will be sober, and rely wholly on the grace which is brought unto me by
the revelation of my blessed Savior. The Meditation of his wounds shall be the
Jordan wherein I will always wash my loathsome, leaprous, and exulcerated
Soul. I will endeavor, that as he which has called me, is holy, so may I
likewise be holy in all manner of conversation, that both of me, and of others
he may be glorified in the day of the visitation. 1. Pet. 2.12.


XXV.
Profaneness is the badge of baseness, but a religious and upright heart is the
ensign of true gentry. Such as are the Children of Abraham will do the works
of Abraham. John. 8.39.
They will bring forth nothing to disgrace their birth, to prejudice their
breeding. 1 Ioh. 3, 10
Their Actions shall have always written in their fronts the lively Characters
of their Progenitors. Others may boast of their descent, but they are no better
then the spurious Issue of an Heroike Father. Gen: 16, 12.
They are a wild and savage generation: The Bondwoman is their Mother. They
have nothing in them that is truly generous: Genesis 21, 10
and shall therefore be cast out with Ishmael, from being partners of the
promise with the lawful Heir. The father of Canaan for his impiety shall be
made a Slave; and the King of Babell for his pride shall become a Beast. The
Wealth and and glory of the World, with those hydropicall and puffed up
Titles, which are the food and Fodder of Ambition. what are they else but
imaginary and fantastic graces, of slender substance, of short continuance?
The fear of the Lord is the height of Honor, and he that is virtuous is only
Noble. I will labor always therefore to do righteously; and teach my heart the
way of Gods Commandments. Acts 17.11
The Men of Berea were preferred by the holy Ghost before those of
Thessalonica, because they searched the Scriptures with more diligence, and
received the word which was taught them with morewillingnesse. I will do as
they did, and obtain the same style which they had. I will delight in the
Statutes of my God, and with his precepts will I solace my Soul.

XXVI.
THE Lord is a good God, slow to anger, and of great kindness. He desires
not the overthrow of a Sinner; ( Why will ye dye, says he, O House of
Israel? Eze. 33, 11
) But rather that he should return from his wicked ways and live. Though in
the heat of his wrath and indignation, he pronounce the fearful sentence of
Death against him; yet notwithstanding, if he fall from his former courses, and
subject himself unto his ordinance, he will reuerse his judgments, he will
annihilate his doombe. He knows of what Moule we be made; he remembers
that we are but Dust; Psalm. 103, 14
that our days are but Grass; and that as the flower of the field, so
flourish we. He excuses our manifold transgressions upon our weakness, that
he may not punish them as proceeding from wilfulness. I know (says he) ye
did it of ignorance. Acts 2, 17
There is in his bosom a loving and kind affection toward us. He pleads
our cause himself; and seeks to remove the guilt, that he may spare the
guilty. He forgets the place of a Judge, to perform the part of a father.
He inuiteth them that are thirsty to the Fountains of living Water; and
wills such such as are heavy laden to come unto him, that he may ease them;
And when thorough vile and obstinate contempt of this his kindness, they fall
into a bottomless and immeasurable Gulf of misery, his heart is overcome with
pity and compassion, and out of the commiseration which he has of the
wretchedness of their estate, he cries out by the mouth of his holy Prophet;
Oh! That thou had hearkened to my Commandments, Esaias 48.18 Iere. 48.31
then had thy prosperity been as the Flood, and thy righteousness as the
Waves of the Sea. He is in all things GOD omnipotent; yet there are three
things which lie without the compass of his power: He cannot deny his pardon
to him that seeks with inward sorrow and deiection for it, nor with draw his
grace from him that is unwilling to part with it. Cadant amici, dummodo inimici
intercidant.
Farewell Friends so Foes may perrish, is no principle in his Politiks, no
precept of his propounding; He cannot punish the wicked, where there is danger
of offending the godly, hereupon, when he intended the ruin and subversion of
Sodom and Gomorrah: Genesis 19, 22.
Have thee (said he to Lot) from hence and save thy self, for I can do
nothing til thou be gone. And in the Gospel, he would not suffer the Servants
of the household to pluck up the Tares, for fear they should offend the
Wheat, Matthew 13, 29. Hence-forward therefore I will forsake my wicked ways;
Psalm. 123, 2.
I will abandon mine own imaginations, and with speed return unto the Lord.
As the eyes of a Servant look unto the hands of his Master: or the eyes of a
Maid to the hands of her Mistress, even so shall mine without ceasing or
interruption wait upon my GOD, till he do crown me with mercy, till he
receive me to his glory.

XXVIII.
THe Majesty of christ is wondrous great; his Empire is exceeding large. There
is nothing in all this spacious Universe which lies not within the compass of
his jurisdiction. The heavens are his by birth, as he is the only Son of his
Father, begotten before all Worlds; And here are those selected troops of
Saints and Martyrs, those triumphall Conquerors, that have given the
overthrow to Sin and Satan, and do now wait upon the Throne of the
Lamb, having their bodies clothed with white array, and their Temples crowned
with wreathes of victory. The Earth is his by donation. I will give thee the
Heathen for thine inheritance, Psalm. 2, 8.
and the ends of the World for the possessions; and here had he planted those
renowned Colonies of Warlike Combattants, 1. These. 5, 8 Ephe. 6, 14.
that have their loins continually girded about with Verity, and upon their
head the Helmet of Salvation; that hold the Shield of Faith in one hand, the
Sword of the Spirit in the other, and are ready at the least alarm to rescue
both their own honor and their Masters from the fierce invasions and
assaults of the adversary. The lower parts are his by Conquest. Colos. 2, 15.
He has spoiled the principalities, and powers; he has made a show of them
openly, and has triumphed over them in the Cross: And here is as it were the
Jail, which himself appointed and prepared for those faint and crauen
Spirits, that make a glorious flourish in the time of peace, but abandon their
Captain, and forsake his colors in the day of trial, yielding themselves
basely before the conflict prisoners of Temptation. Legions to Angels are at
his command. The winds are obedient to his voice, and the Waves are (...) at
his rebuke. God himself has mightily exalted him, and proclaimed by the sound
of his trumpet: That at the Name o^ Jesus every knee should bo^, Ph l. 2.10.
both of things in Heaven, and things in Earth, an^ things under the Earth
and That every tongue shall confess him to be the Lord unto the glory of the
F^ther. Yet there are some that out of the p^ofanenesse of their minds, an^
hardness of their he^^^ deny his power, and w^^ at no hands acknowled^ him for
their Superior, They cry out with the Jews, Ioh. 19.15.
We have no K. but Caesar: But these are reserved for the black of darkness, and
shall for ever be disabled from being fellow-heirs with him in his everlasting
Kingdom. I will always therefore do homage to him as my Lord; I will take
heed how I fall from so great a GOD; I will fight as I ought to do, that I may
be crowned when I have done: He that is the righteous Judge shall reward me
at the latter day, and not me only, but likewise all those that love his
appearing*

XXVIII.
THere is no fellowship between light and darkness; 2. Cor. 6, 15
between Christ, 1. Sam. 5, 4
and Belial. The Arc, and Dagon cannot lodge under one roof. The Rod of Aaron
will devour those of the Soothsaiers and Inchanters; and the Walls of Jericho
fall down, Josh. 6, 20.
before the Tabernacle of the Lord. He that will follow GOD, and retain him,
must have no dependency at all on wicked Mammon. Psalm. 104, 5
The Holy-one of Israel is exceeding great. It is he that set the Earth on her
Foundations, and covered it with the deep as with a Garment. He will not brook
a partner in his Dignity, nor yet resign his glory to a third. Man's heart is
that which he demands; and he will have it all, or none. He that thinks to
shift him of with part, may peradventure perish in his own Hypocrisy, Acts
5, 5.
as Ananias and Sapphi^a did. I will not therefore put new Wine into an Math
9.16
old Vessel, nor piece out an old Garment with new Cloth; I will cast away
all the works of darkness, Romans 13.12
and put on the complete armor of light, I will worship the Lord my God, and
him only will I serve.

XXIX.
THe Sunshine of the wicked lasts but a while: Job. 20.6.
It is quickly ouercast; and the joy of Hypocrites does vanish in a moment:
though his excellency mount up to Heaven, and his head do reach unto the
Clouds, yet shall he perish forever like his Dung, and they which have seen
him shall say, Where is he? The worldly pleasures whereon he feeds with such a
ravening and insatiable Appetite, shall fr^t asunder his entrails. His meat
shall turn within his Bowels into the Gall of Aspes; and how sweet soever it
seem in his mouth, it shall be most unsavory in his Maw. Nor shall his State
and condition be so wretched in this World, but it shall be more in the
World to come. Such fear and horror shall hedge him in on every side in that
dreadful day, that he shall not know which way to run, nor whether to retire.
Revel. 1, 16
Above him shall he see an angry Judge, out of whose mouth comes a sharp
two-edged Sword; Ibid. 6, 16.
and well may he then entreat the Mountains to fall down upon him, and the
Hills to cover him from the presence of him that sits on the Throne, and from
the wrath of the Lamb, but it shall little avail him. At his right hand he
shall discover the hideous and distorted brood of his transgressions, which
challenge him for their patron, and will by no means be induced to forsake
him. At his left, will stand the Devil his Accuser, who then unfolds his
Ephemerides, and leaves not the least of all his sinful actions vnatomiz'd.
He quotes them like a cunning Register, with every particular circumstance,
both of time and place. He brings forth to his reproach and disadvantage
those filthy and polluted Garments in which he took him, and as Joseph's
Brethren to their Father, so says he unto the lord. Behold, this have I
found, see now whether it be the Coat of any of thy Sons, Gen: 37, 32
or no. If he turn back his eyes into himself, he shall meet there with the
Worm of Conscience, Esaias 66.24
that does never dye; If he reflect them on the World; he shall perceive it to
be nothing round about him but a burning flame. If he cast them downewardes he
shall there descry to his perpetual terror and affrightment, that unquenchable
Lake of Fire and Brimstone, which is prepared for him; The plentiful years are
past; the years of dearth and scarsitie are come, and now not so much as one
drop of water shall ever be granted him, Luke 16.24
to quallifie the heat of his inflamed tongue. The Moth-eaten. Robe shall
exclaim against the proud, and the cankered Gold against the Covetous: The
stone shall cry out of the walagainst the Usurer, James 5.3.
Hab. 2.11,
that buildes his nest upon the ruins of the oppressed, and the Beam out of
the Timber shall answer it. The whole world and whatsoever is therein
contained, shall stand up in judgment, and witness against the Reprobate.
Then shall they confess, that it had been better that they had never been
borne, or that a Millstone being tied about their Neck, they had been taken
from out their Cradle, and cast into the sea. While I have time therefore, Mat.
18.6.
I will wash my heart from all uncleanness, I will take my leave of all
iniquity, and bid farewell for ever to al profanesse and impiety. 1. Tim. 4.7.
I will altogether exercise my self to godliness, which has annexed unto it
the promise of the life present, and of that that is to come. Psalm. 71, 14.
The Lord is my helper and deliverer in the time of trouble, he is my Rock,
and my defense, I will continually wait upon him, and will praise him more and
more. My mouth shall rehearse his righteousness, and my tongue shall speak of
his salvation.

XXX.
IT is not good for a man to be confident in his own strength: It is a broken
staff and will deceive his trust. He that is in heart a Christian, must work
out his salvation with fear and trembling. Mat. 26.35
Who before hand so bold in vaunts and protestations to follow Christ as
Peter, and yet alas! John. 11.16
who at the point more timorous? Who so ready to dye with him as Thomas, yet in
the end who more incredulous? Unless he might see in his hands the printes
of the Nails, Ioh. 20, 25.
he would not believe his resurrection. Let him that stands, therefore look
well unto his footing that he do not fall. Let him not think upon Security
while he is here; It is not a Creature of this world. The Angels are not sure
of it in Heaven; There Lucifer did fall even in the presence of the Godhead.
Poor Adam found by woeful experience, that it was not amongst the Trees of
Eden, for there fell he from that estate of blessedness in which he was
created; Much less ought we to hope for it in this Vale of misery, 1. Pet. 5.8.
where our adversary like a roaring Lion walks about, and seeks whom he
may devour. I will always therefore stand upon my guard, Mat. 26.41
I will continually keep Sentinel over my heart, and without ceasing will I
pray, that I enter not into Tentation. The GOD of Abraham; the Shield of
Isaac; and the strength of Jacob shall protect me. The watchman of Israel, that
neither sleeps nor slumbereth, shall still preserve me as the Apple of his
Eye.

XXXI.
HE that walks in the Sun, shall be tanned; and he that medleth with
Pitch, shall be defiled. A Man can hardly converse with such as are infected,
and yet rest free from all contagion. Joseph was but a while in Egypt, Exodus
34, 5
when he learned to swear by the life of Pharaoh. And hence it was, that the
Children of Israel were commanded by the Lord, to make no Covenant with the
Inhabitants of Canaan, nor to take their Daughters either for themselves, or
for their Sons, least when they went a whoring after their Gods, and did
sacrifice unto the^, they likewise might be induced by them to do the like.
Judge. 16, 18
But notwithstanding the strictness of this Mandate, Sampson would have his
Dalilah; and she indeed did dally with him, till she had destroyed him.
David would entertain a league of amity with Hanun for the courtesies he had
received from his Father Nahash, 2 Samuel 10.4
but the event of it was this: His kindness was suspected, his Messengers
disgraced. There were not women enough in Israel for King Solomon, 1 King 11.1.
but he must take unto him the Daughter of Pharaoh: and he must have with him
them of Moab, Ammon, Edom, Zidon and Heth. 1 Kings 11.11.
But the lord grew angry with him for it. He rent his Kingdom from him, and
gave it to his Servant. For these had weaned him from God unto Idolatry, and
had enticed him to build high places unto Chemosh, Genesis 24, 3.
and unto Molech. The holy Patriarks were more obedient: Abraham would none of
them for Isaac; Ibid. 27.2.
Isaac would none of them for Jacob; nor Jacob for himself: He went
according to his Fathers will to Padan-Aram, to the House of Bethuel for a wife,
when wicked Esau, of purpose as it were to spite both God and his Parents, did
go to Ishmael, and took unto the wives he had already, of the same stock
Mahalath, his Daughter; but for this his disobedience, the promise was
confirmed unto his Brother, and he himself was made a Servant unto him.
Though I soiourne therefore here on earth, my conversation shall be in Heaven,
from whence I look for my Redeemer, the Lord Jesus Christ, Ph^l. 3.20.
who shall change my vile body, and fashion it in glory like unto his own,
according to the working, whereby he is able, even to subdue all things unto
himself Let the Daughters of men be never so fair, Genesis 6.2.
I will avoid their company. I know the World had net been drowned, if the
Sons of GOD would have forborne them. Our heavenly leader is exceeding
jealous, If he see us familiar with his Enemies, he misdoubtes our hearts, and
thinks that either we are already of the party, or may in time be easily
made so. The destruction of Ahaziah, the Son o^ Iehoram King of Judah, came of
God, in that he went down to see Iehoram the Son of Ahab, who lay diseased
at Izreel. 2. Cron. 22.
If mine eye do therefore cause me to offend, I will pluck it out; if my hand,
I will cut it off, and cast it from me. Math. 18, 6.
Better it is that I should want a member, then my whole body should be cast
into Hell. There is not any one, either in blood or otherwise, so near unto
me, but if he fall from God, I will fall from him. Our Savior Christ has
taught me, both by precept and example, that I should acknowledge non^ for my
Brother, my Sister, or my Mother, bu^ such as do the will of my Father, Mat.
12, 50.
which is in Heaven.

XXXII.
MY Son, says Solomon, Prou. 3, 11.
despise not the chastening of the Lord, nor faint with grief at his rebuke.
He corrects him whom he loves best, even as the parent does the Child in
which he delights most. He will see how patiently he can endure his wrath,
and with what constancy abide the smarting of his rod. For there are some that
are only followers of his Table, and not of him; let never so little evil
come upon them, they will presently put in practice the counsel of that
foolish Woman, and like unnatural and disobedient children, Job. 2, 9.
Blaspheme the name of God, and dye. Let not the Shuhite then vpbraid the
afflicted Job, Ibid. 3.8.
nor allege his punnishment as an argument of his unrighteousness. Those
eighteen persons who^ the fall of the Towers Siloam slew, were not assuredly
greater Sins the^ all the rest that dwell in Jerusalem. Luke 13.2.
Let no^ him therefore, that hat^ not so much as tasted the bitterness of his
indignation, say in his vants* My holiness has preserved me. For howsoever he
co^ceiteth of himself, surely the Lord accounts him but a bastard and cares
not (it should seem) what does beco^ of him; Heb. 12, 8.
Did he esteem him as a Son, he shol^ not want his portion; He would look
more nearly to his bringing up. With all humility therefore and lowliness of
heart, I will submit my understanding and my will, with all the powers and
faculties of my Soul to the sharpness of his Censure. The Fathers of our
bodies corrected us, and we gave them reverence, how much the rather should
we subject our selves to the Father of Spirits, that we may live. They verily
for a few days chastened us after their own pleasure; but tha^ which he
does, is for ou^ profit, that we may for ever be partakers of his holiness.
The Flesh w^ think it peradventure grievous for the present, but the Spirit
will rejoice in the quiet fruit of righteousness, which afterward it
brings unto them, that are exercised thereby. It is a bit wherewith he Curbs
the head-strongnesse o^ our affections; and a bridie, wherewith he reins them
up, from running headlong with us into everlasting damnation. Shall David in
the meekness of his mind, Psalm. 141, 5
account the smiting of the righteous as a benefit; and his reproves a
precious Oil, that shall not break his head? And shall I think hardly of the
Rod of the Lord? No, no: Let him beat me, let him bruise me, let him hew
me, let him hacke me here in this World, so he save me in the World to come.
Let him strike me here with the Hasel-wand, so he cast me not there into the
boiling Cauldron. He makes the wound and binds it up; Job. 5.18.
he smites and his hands make whole.

XXXIII.
THIS World was once a Garden, which abounded with delights, but Man which was
the Gardener of it, neglecting both himself and it, suffered the Plants
thereof to riot, and the fruits thereof to be choked up with weeds, so that
now alas! It produces nothing which is either pure or perfect. The Comforts of
it are defective; and the joys thereof are not without their mixture. There is
no Wheat in it without Darnell; no Silver in it without dross. Every Rose
therein has his Thorn; and every conueniency his discommodity. Health and
Sickness are near Neighbors; Pleasure and Pain, things differing in Nature,
if they be not confounded in it, they are surely coupled: Mirth and Melancholy
here, if we mark them well, resemble one the other very nearly; The same
folds and motions of the countenance that serve for weeping, do likewise serve
for laughter, and indeed the extreme of this does continually mix it self
with tears. Virtue and Vice are utter opposites, yet stand they always in
each others view, and there is nothing to be found so absolute here below,
but howsoever it have the constitution of that, it will some way show the
complexion of this; If it be fair as Rachell, Genesis 29, 17
it will be tender-eyed as Leah; If it have the voice of Jacob, Ibid. 27, 22.
it will have the hands of Esau: Something is always absent from the full
perfection. The Lord of Hoasts delivered the Children of Israel by a strong
and mighty hand from the slavery of the Egyptians, Exodus 15, 25
but yet he forced them to drink the Waters of Marah; In the Desert of Zin
they wanted food, and he supplied them with the Bread of Angels; he fed them
with Quails from his own Table; yet at Rephidim, Ibid. 16, 1.13.
both they, their Children, and their Cattle were well-nigh killed with thirst;
and howsoever the Rock in Horeb did afterward afford them drink, Ibid. 17.1.
yet still was there somewhat to dash the fullness of their contentment. Ibid.
12.8.
He would not suffer the^ to eat the Passover but with sower Herbs; In a
word, it was not at the birth of Isaac, Genesis 21, 8.
but at his weaning, that Abraham made a Feast, to signify unto us, that while
we suck the breasts of the church our Mother, our joy is but in part, and
cannot be accomplished till the time of our admission to the Table of our
heavenly Father. God has in his hand three cups, the one is full of pure Wine,
Psalm. 75, 9.
whereof the Saints that are already glorified do only taste; the other is full
of nothing else but Dregs; a draught reserved only for the damned; the third
is mingled, and is for us that soiourne here in Houses of Clay, the weakness
of whose condition is such, as nothing in his own simplicity, and native
pureness can fall within the compass of our use. The elements which we enjoy
are altered and disguised. The Gold of Ophir, must of necessity be empaired
with some baser stuff, to fit it for our turn. Heb. 5, 12.
Virtue it self unless it be compounded, is beyond our strength. As long as
we live in the Flesh, we have need of Milk, and not of strong meat. Let us
take our selves even at the best, and alas! what are we more then brittle
Earth, then frailty it self. Our sight cannot endure the brightness of Gods
Majesty, no not by reflection. Exo. 34, 33
Moses must put a veil upon his face, when he comes down from Mount Sinai,
or the glory of his countenance will daunt the eye of the Beholder. I will
follow therefore after love, and covet spiritual guiftes; 1. Cor. 13, 12.
I will attend with patience the coming of that which is perfect. I see now
but darkly through a Glass, but then shall I see face to face; I know now but
in part, but the^ shall I know, even as I am known.

XXXIIII.
THE Eyes of a Christian soul, are Faith and Charity. If the right Eye be out,
the left Eye serves but for little use. For without faith, good works are not
available. Heb. 11, 6.
This alone is the ground of all things, which are hoped for, and the evidence
of things that are not seen; and without this it is impossible to please the
Lord. The Devil, when he fights with us, never aymeth but at this. He
knows, if once he hit it, we must needs give over. Nahash the Ammonite
will have this, 1. King 11.2.
or he will make no covenant with the^ of Iabesh Gilead; but let him know that
grauntes it him, he disableth himself for ever from making War but to his
own exceeding disadua^tage against his Adversary. For either he must fight
unarmed for his own defense, or he shall neither see how to put by the blows
of his Antagonist, nor how to follow his own. The Eye of Faith is out, and
that of Works is shaddowed with his Shield. I will always therefore have a
care that my Beauer be strong enough on that side, to rebound his fiery Darts
upon himself, or at the least, to quench them utterly as fast as they come.
If I perceive it to wax dull and dim through the fierceness of his
encounter, I will have me to the Lord, and buy of him a Salve to anoint it
with, Revel. 3, 18
that I may see: he alone is my Physician, and he alone shall clear it by that
enlightening power of his holy Spirit, by which he opens the Eyes of them
that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of Death. Then shall I be able with
blessed Stephen, Acts 7, 55.
even in the heat and fury of the skirmish, to behold through all the heavens
the glory of the Lord, for which I do contend, and my Redeemer Jesus standing
at his right hand, ready to succor me if need require; and then with an
undaunted courage will I abide the fight, and die upon the place, ere I give
ground in any fainting manner to the raging of his might. Christ is my second,
who I know will witness my valor, and revenge my quarrel. Why should I fear
the powers and principalities of Hell? When God is with us, who shall stand
against us?

XXXV.
BEhold (says the Prophet) the day comes rhat shall flame like an Oven, Mal.
4.1.
and they that swear by the sin of Samaria, and say; Amos 8.14
Thy God O Dan lives, and the manner of Beer-Sheba lives; yea the proud, with
all such as do wickedly shall be Stubble; the day that comes shall clean
consume them; it shall leave them neither root nor branch. The Lord will have
him from Teman, Hab. 3.3:
and the holy one from Mount Paran: His Majesty shall cover the Heavens, and
the Earth shall be full of his glory: Consuming fire shall march before him,
and burning coals shall compass him about. He will summon all the Nations of
the Earth to make their appearaunce before his Tribunal seat and give to every
one according to what he has don, 1. Pet. 4.17
whether it be good or evil. To put the wicked out of al comfort, he will
begin his judgments in his own house, and call even the righteous according to
that of Job, unto a strict account of every idle word. Thou writest bitter
things (says he) against me, Job. 13, 26.
and make me possess the iniquity of my youth; Thou put my feet into
the Stocks, and look narrowly unto my paths: The printes thereof are in
the heels of my feet. Now if the Caedar of Lebanon be shaken thus, Luke 23.31
what shall become of the bramble in the Wilderness? If this be done to the
green Spring, what is remaining for the dry Stumpe? If the just man be so
hardly saved, where is the hope of the ungodly? I will high me therefore to the
lord my God, with all the speed I can: I will not defer my going to him by
repentance till the seting of the Sun; Ibid. 24.25.
O fools, and slow of heart, says he to such, and will not stay with them but
with great constraint. Nor will I put it of until the evening, Ibid. 24, 37.
least having found him I should be doubtful, and think I see a Spirit when I
look on him. No, no, I will rise betimes with Mary Magdalen, Math. 28.1.
and with the Mother of James, will I seek for Jesus of Nazareth before the
dawning of the day: Prou. 8, 17.
He loves those that love him; and they that seek him early shall sind him.

XXXVI.
GOD is no respecter of persons. Ephe. 6, 9. John. 4.47.
The Ruler entreated him to come unto his Son, and he would not: Luke 7.2.
The Centurion did but send unto him for his Servant, and immediately he went.
It is not the beauty of outward obiectes that attractes his Eye, nor the
quality of ambitious Titles that stirs up his respect. When he past thorough
Jericho, Ibid. 17, 5.
there were many that came forth to see him, mo^^ specious to the view of
weaker sense, and of hig^er place and rank in the City then Zacheus was yet
he alone was grace by him above the re^^. Ibid. 7.25.
The Baptist was not cl^thed in soft raiment, Math. 3.4.
no^ fed with delicates. H^^ meat was Locustes with wild Honey, and his ga^ment
of Camels Hair yet did he make him greater then a Prophet Peter was not
arrayed it Purple, Ibid. 16.18.
nor did he live deliciously in Courts of Kings, and yet he made him Prince
of his Apostles. So the body be sound, he cares not for the bark. If the
living be good, let the outside be as ragged as it will. I will not therefore
greatly eye my present condition: Though I be rich, I will not presume upon
my wealth; though I be poor, I will not despair for my want. He that called
unto the Fishermen that were in their Ship, Mat. 4.21.
mending their Nets, not minding him, and said unto them; Come follow me:
will out of question give kind and courteous entertainment unto him, who out of
love, and of his own accord, do^ humbly sue unto him f^^ his Livery. Again I
know, that Dives was (...) torments, Luke 16, 23
when Laz^r^ was in Abraham's boson

XXXVII.
Esaias 21.28
Justice is a work when with the Lord is scare acquainted; It is a stranger,
and an alien to him he knows not how, no which way to begin i^ In Sodom there
was no^ righteous, but only ^a or he would never have wasted it with fire; none
in the whole world, save only Noah, or he would never have destroyed it with
the flood. Till the Tree be past hope, he applies not his Axe. No, nor then
but with much unwillingness and great commiseration. He looks at Jerusalem,
Luke 19.41
and weeps to think on the destruction that should come upon it. He houles
for Moab, he cries out for it; his heart does mourn for them of Kirhareseth;
Iere. 40.31.
He weepeth for the vine of Sibmah, as he wept for Iazer; he waters Hes^bon
with his tears, Esaias 16.9.
are Elaleh is drunk with the showers of his co^plain, because of the destroy
which is to fall upon their Summer fruits, and upon their Vintage. H^^ wrath
and indignation has many Motives t^ incite it; Job. 64 6.
but his mercy none. For all our righteousness is as a filthy Cloute; we fade
like a leaf, and our iniquities like the winds do carry us away; yet
notwithstanding he looks down upon us from the throne of his heavenly grace
with the eye of Pity and compassion; he remembers that we are the
workemanshippe of his hands, and in the end, out of the zeal of his
affection toward us, he cries out; Ose, 13.9.
Thy iniquities O Israel, have destroyed thee; but thy help is in me. He does
not only tolerate our imperfections, but oftentims he dissembleth the
knowledge he has of them; he turns away his face, and will not see the
sin because he would not punish the Sinner. There is no day wherein to
favor the transgressour he does not break the Tables of the Law. Our GOD is
a jealous God; Exodus 20, 5.
he visits the sins of the Father, upon the Children unto the third and
fourth generation of them that hate him; but shows mercy unto thousands of
them that love him, and keep his Commandments. The Kingly Prophet therefore
speaking of them both, says of the one; Thy mercy, o Lord, Psalm. 103, 11
is in the Heavens; and of the other; Thy Justice, o God, is like the hills, to
signify unto us, that his mercy does as much exceed his justice; as the high
Heavens do surmount the Hills. The holy one is mild and full of gentleness;
free from anger, and of long patience. Esaias 27.4.
We have seen the Lord, said the Disciples, but Thomas believes the^ not; yet
Christ forbeareth to reprove him, and comes not till eight days after to
rebuke his incredulity, and even then, the uttermost of his wrath, is only
this: Put thy Fingers into my wounds, Ioh. 20.26.
and thy hand into my side, and be no longer faithless. When sinful Adam
after his fall, had stolen as he imagined out of the sight of his Creator, idly
conceiting peradventure, that himself being hid, his fault would not be seen,
Genesis 3, 8.
God came not to correct him with a furious and hasty pace; he did but walk,
and that against the wind, desirous (as it were) to be detained in his
proceedinges by that gentle blast: He walked against the wind says the Text,
not in the Morning, nor at Noonday, but toward the Evening, at the very
setting of the Sun; so slow, so slack, and so remiss is this dear Father of
ours in the execution of his judgments. He dealt otherwise with the
Prodigal; he saw him no sooner coming, but his heart was ouer-ioyed, he
ran unto him, and having entertained him with kisses and kind embracements, he
calls unto his Servants: Go quickly, bring me forth for him the purest Robe,
Luke 15.22
kill me instantly the fattest Calfe, that we may eat it, and be merry, my
Son was dead, and is alive again, lost he was, but he^ is found. Eze. 36, 25
So that his favors are powered ou^ upon us with some violence, but his
chasticementes and his corrections are distilled drop b^ drop. Cant. 5, 5.
My heart (says he) shall not drop down upon Jerusalem by the hand of Shishak.
2. Cron. 12.7.
He is patient, and would have no man perish, but willingly draw all men to
repentance. I will not therefore despise the riches of his bounty, Romans 2.4.
and long sufferance; he seeks to lead me by it to salvation, nor as one
that is contentions, will I disobey the truth, and obey unrighteousness; but I
will labor by continuance in well doing for honor, glory, and eternal life. I
look for new Heavens, and a new Earth according to his promise, Esaias 65, 17.
and will be therefore diligent, that I may be found of him in peace, without
spot, and blameless. 2. Pet. 3.11.


XXXVIII.
PRayer is the Minds Ambassador to God. It is the only Agent for the Soul;
but if it have not Faith and Humility for Assistants, it will never be
admitted to his presence. The one is so much interested in him, That whatsoever
we desire when we pray, Mar. 11.24
let us believe that we shall have it, and it shall be done unto us. The
Woman that had so long bin tro^bled with the flux, did but touch the Hem of
his Garment, and withour further entreatie, he turned him about, and said unto
her: Daughter, be of good comfort, Math. 9.22.
thy faith has made thee whole. His graces are proportioned by this. Math. 9,
28.
According to your Faith, be it unto you: said he unto the blind, that came
and besought him for their sight: And to the Captain: Math. 8, 13.
As thou have believed, be it unto thee. The other is of that excellency,
might, and power, that it makes way for our Requests, even thorough the
regions of the Air, and commands their passage through the thickest clouds. It
vshereth them into the Privy Chamber of his imperial Majesty, and obtaines
both hearing and dispatch for them without stop or stay. The Prayer of the
Centurion, sent forth in the behalf of his diseased Servant, was well
accompanied with both. I have not found (says our Savior of the first) such
faith, Luke 7.9.
no not in Israel; and for the last, it was not to be parallelled: I am
unworthy, (said he, o humbleness of mind) that thou should enter under my
roof: and by so saying, he showed himself worthy, not into whose house, but
into whose heart the Lord might enter. By making himself unworthy (says S.
Chrysostom) to receive Christ into his Gates, he was made worthy to be
received of Christ into his Kingdom. But beside these, it had with it the
encouragement of Charity, that with the more assuredness and better confidence
it might appear before him. To pray for our selves, proceeds from Nature, but
to pray for others is the work of Grace: Necessity enforces us to that; but
brotherly love exhorts us to this; And it is indeed a far sweeter savor in
the Nostrils of the Lord, the^ that which arises from the sensitive
apprehensio^ of our own misery: I advise you therefore (says Saint Paul to
Timothy) that first of all Supplications, 1. Tim. 2, 1.
Prayers, Intercessions, and Thankesgiuings be made for all men. The word which
we profess, instructs us by precepts and examples, that the conservation of
duty to the public, should be much more unto us, then the conservation of
either life or being, and that whatsoever good is Co^municatiue should be
preferred before that, which is but private and particular. Romans 9.3.
S. Paul desired to be anathemized for his Brethren; and Moses to be razed
out of the Book of life for the Children of Israel, Exo 32, 32.
such was their zeal unto the Church, and such their feeling of Communion. I
will continually therefore labor to lift up pure hands to Heaven without
doubting. Luke 18.13
I will imitate the lowliness of the Publican; and in my bosom will I cherish
his mean conceit. When I pray I will not stand in the Synagogues, Math. 6, 6.
nor kneel in the corners of the streets that I may be seen of men; but I
will enter into my Chamber, and having shut my door, I will call upon my
heavenly Father. He sees in secret, and shall reward me openly. In my Prayers I
will be mindful of my afflicted Brethren, that so the lord may be more
mindful of me. God is exceedingly in love with Charity; Cant. 1.1.
the very name thereof to him is as an ointment powered out. She is his only
darling; he does kiss her with the Kisses of his mouth; when she comes to
him, he lodges her between his breasts, and never sendes her from him but
with lade^ hands. The G^oler washed Paul and Silas from their stripes, Acts 16,
33
and by so doing, himself was washed from his sins.

XXXIX.
Godliness is not a thing hereditarye, nor can true Piety be bequeathed by
Legacy; an upright heart requires much manurance; and is not gotten but by
great Husbandry. Esaias 5.7.
I had a Vineya^d (says the Lord) in a most fruitful Hill, what could be
done, which I did not to it? Yet in the end it brought forth nothing but sower
Grapes; in stead of judgment, it gave oppression; in stead of righteousness it
affoorded crying. The Nettle grows, where the Rose was looked for, and out of
the Egg a Chicken is expected, but behold a Cockatrice. The stock is often
good, but without continual pruning, the Plants degenerate. Out of the lodge
of ADAM came murderous Caine; out of the Arc of Noah, impious Cham; out of the
House of reverend Eli, Ophni, and Phinees the Sons of Belial; out of the
Court of David came traiterous Absalon; out of the School of Jesus, perfideous
Judas; and out of the company of the Deacons, Nicholas the Heretic. So that
Virtues are not maintained by propagation; nor is a virtuous habit purchased
but with much sweat; It will cost us the breathing, ere we can actually
possess it as our own Freehold. There is not an Elijah now to grant so hard
and difficult a suite at the redoubling of his Spirit; 2. King 2.9
nor is there an Elisha residing here, that is worthy to obtain it. I will
not therefore brag that I have Abraham for my Father, but I will labor to do
the works of Abraham; and when I glory, Iere. 9.24.
I will glory in this alone, that I understand and know the Lord to be the
only very God, who shows mercy, judgment, and righteousness in the Earth, and
Jesus Christ, whom he has sent to be his only Son, Luke 11.28
begot before all worlds, which who so does, shall remain for ever. For indeed
it is not the womb that bare him; nor the Paps that gave him suck which are
blessed; but rather they that hear the word of his Father and do thereafter.
Little had it auailed the Virgin to have conceived him in her Womb, or Simeon
to have received him in his Arms, if by the Eye of Faith, they had not both
perceived, that he was sent from heaven to redeem the world.

XL.
Satan is a bold Intruder. He resides not always in the Graves, nor is he
still abiding in the Deserts. You shall find him sometimes in the company of
Gods elect and chosen Children: On a day, when they came and stood before the
Lord, Job. 1.6.
he likewise came and stood among the^. Sometimes among his Ministers; Iehoshua,
Zacha. 3.1.
the High Priest stands before the Angel, and lo, the Deceiuer is at his
right hand to resist him. Sometimes again with his Apostles; Have I not chosen
twelve, John. 6.70.
(says Christ) and one of you is a devil. He is a guest that will come without
great bidding: the least cast of our eye does serve him for an inuitation, and
the slightest compleme^t will embolden him to be insolent. If we make him our
Companion, he will be presently our Master. If he get but a foot within our
doors, he will cast us out, and like a merciles disseisour put us by our
right; nor shall it ought avail us to plead our Title, when he is in
possession. I will be always therefore very careful how I suffer him to
approach me. If I cannot bar him my presence, I will deny him my countenance,
and make him known by my looks, that he shall not lodge in my heart.

XLI.
Unhallowed thoghts are the Scouts of Satan. He sildome suffers them to lie
idle in their Tents, but sendes them always forth upon discovery: He
fashioneth his attempts by their aduertisements, and as he understands their
passage, he restes assured of his own. Themselves delight in pillage, and are
therefore glad of their employment. They leave not a corner about the heart
unsearched, to find out an entrance. If the doors be barred; they will assay
to climb the Walls, and get in at the Windows. They do with cunning manage
their Captains business, and husband the least occasions to his best advantage.
It falls out sometimes, that these straggling Aramites happen upon some little
Maid o^ the land of Israel, 2 Kings 5.2
to wit, some simple and vntutored Soul, that strayeth from the way of Truth,
and is altogether destitute of that heavenly Conuoy of spiritual graces, which
should protect it from the craft and fury of the Adversary, and having
suddenly surprised it, lead it away Captive to their leprous General.
Sometimes again these sons of Remmon, 2 Samuel 4, 6
these wicked Berothites, finding the mind unfurnished of a Gaurd, and
snoaring even at Noone with honest Ishbosheth in her own security, do enter
stealingly upon it, and in an instant cut the throat of it. I will not therefore
with the reprobate put far away the evil day, nor promise safety to my self,
where nothing can be looked for but Death and Danger. Man's life is a continual
Warfare. The Prince of darkness is his Enemy, who if need require, has
wherewithal to piece out the Lions skin; and when he cannot prevail by open
battery, will never stick to compass his designs by hidden treachery. I will
endeavor therefore always, Mat. 24, 43
as much as in me lies, to be well provided for the coming of the Thief:
Let it be at what hour in the night he will, he shall find me wakefull, if
not watching; never sleeping, though sometimes peradventure slumbring. I will
bruise the Serpent in the head, I will break it in the shell. I will not suffer
a sinful cogitation to come to perfect groth: It shall die in the conception,
and ere it need the Cradle, possess the Toombe. The Soul in cases criminal
(says, ^sidore) has the precedence of weaker flesh; I will drive it therefore
from thence, that this may no^ offend. Cant. 2.15.
I will strive to catch the Foxes, the little Foxes that destroy the Vines.
Blessed (I know assuredly) is he, Psalm. 137, 9.
that takes and dasheth these against the stones.

XLII.
THE life of the just is a continual day. It is not troubled at any time with
storms, nor ouercast with Clouds, bu^ is altogether calm and clear. The
Morning o^ it is, when Christ the Sun of righteousness does shine out upon
the heart of one regenerate, and by the influence of his beams does scatter
and dispierce those mistie vapors and exhalations of ignorance and stinking
error, which Satan himself had belched forth to hinder the soul from
finding out the way of truth: the noon thereof is that hourly progress and
ascent of spiritual grace, which brings them to the Zenith of all true
perfection. The way of the godly shines as the light (says Solomon) behold
the Morn: Prou. 4, 18.
It increases more and more unto the perfect day, behold the Noone. After the
justification of wretched Sinners by the Law of Faith, there is a continued
augmentation and supply of gifts, whereby their minds are by degrees made
fitter for the knowledge and understanding of the love of GOD, and by which
afterward they are entitled Children of the light, and Children of the day.
1. These. 5.3
They are gone out of Egypt, and dwell now in the Land of Goshen: they need
no Torch-light to direct their steps: there is a pillar of celestial fire in
their bosom, which like a Taper gives light unto their feet, and makes them
tread aright the paths of Gods commandments. But alas! With the wicked it is
nothing so. Their ways are as the darkness, nor do they know into what
dangerous places they may fall. Job. 5.14.
They meet with blindness in the Morn, and grope at noone as in the night:
they feel for the wall, Esaias 59.10
as men that had no Eyes; and in the day their feet do stumble as in the
twilight. The greater Luminaries to them are always in Eclipse, and the lesser
so obscured as help them little or not at all. I will study therefore
continually, for holiness, for pureness, and sobriety. The night is past, the
day is come, Romans 13.12
and now will I cast away the works of darkness, and put on the Armor of
light. I will cloth my self with the Lord Jesus Christ, and take no thought at
all to satisfy the lustful desires of the Flesh.

XLIII.
THe true Soldier of Christ is known by nothing better then this valor. He
that is faint and of a fearful Spirit, is but a false usurper of that name.
Deuteronomy. 20.8.
The Lord of hoasts will none of so soft an edge, of such an yiedling temper
under his pay. Cant. 3, 8.
Those of his band are strong and ^aliant; they all handle the Sword, and are
expert in war; every one has his Fauchion on his Thigh for the fear by
night. They see the heavenly Jerusalem, for which they fight before them, and
had rather die one foot forwards, then add many years to their life by one
foot of retraite. They had rather fail in good and virtuous ends for the
public, then obtain all that can be wished and desired for themselves in
their own proper Fortune. The mouth of Wisdom has taught them, that A good
heart is a continual Feast; Pro. 15.15.
and that the Conscience of good intentions in themselves, let their success
be what it will, is a more continual joy to Nature, then all the politic
provision a man can make, for still security and peaceable repose. Such as have
wedded their affections to their own particular; or any way betrothed them to
the things of this world, and are backwardes either for that, or other like
respects in the hazzarding of their life and living, he utterly cashiereth.
Gideon before he does encounter with the Midianites, Judge. 7, 3.
discardes the Cowards at Mount Gilead, and clears his camp of al such cracked
and broken courages as fall to pieces before the presence of their enemy. So
likewise Judas Maccabeus, 1. Macca. 3.56.
before he meet the forces of Antiochus at Emmaus, proclaims a general
discharge to every pale and milky liver thoroughout his Army and with all
willingness does license their departure. I will at no time therefore give place
to any timorous conceit, but fortify my heart with such a settled and unshaken
confidence, that Affliction, come she never so hideously disguised, shall not
appale me. The Lord Jesus is my General, and the hire of my valor a Crown of
immortal glory. Base were the resolution, that would not wish to dye under the
conduct of so brave a Prince, for the purchase of so great a price. He makes
himself my precedent, and marketh out the way that I must march with the
precious blood, that gusheth out of his own wounds. He calls me after him,
and I will surely follow. No Death, nor Hell, sha^ drive me to a stand: I w^
suffer with him in th conflict, that I may sha^ with him in the Conquest.

XLIIII.
TO murmr again God argues a w^ of Grace; and to re^ Affliction, shows
a^fect of heavenly conso^tion. Eccl. 10, 26
He that has kno^ledge and is well instru^ted, will undergo (...) cross with
patience, a^ neither stamp nor storm to see himself reformed. The Lord (he
knows) when he shootes his Darts, does leauell higher then at the downfall
of a wretched Sinner; and that howsoever he bruise him, it is not with a Rod
of Iron; Psalm. 2, 9.
howsoever he break him, it is not like a Potters vessel, but as the
Goldsmiths does his Plate, to melt and fashion it anewe. The Fast is as
delightful to him as the Feast, and the Vigile as welcome as the Holyday it
self. He does esteem no otherwise of this World, then of an outward place,
1. King. 6.7
in which the hard and stony minds of such as God affects, must be hammered
and polished by the hands of Adversity and Tribulation, before they can be fit
to set in the Temple of that new Jerusalem, which is erected by one of
greater power and Majesty then Solomon. But alas! The heart of the foolish
cannot conceive of this. It Is like the Wheel of a Cart; the vaue thereof is
not moistened with the Oil of the Spirit, Eccles. 33, 6
and does nothing therefore, but creak under the burden. It is a vessel,
which indeed is void of all good virtues and abilities: It runs only on the
lees, let God but strike it with his hand, and the sound it gives, will be
the signal of his emptiness. In a word, it is an Earthen Pipkin, which
wanting liquor in it, Wis. 1.11.
is ready to crack in pieces when it feels the flame. I will beware therefore
of murmuring, which avails nothing. The ear of jealousy hears all things,
and the noise of him that Number. 11, 1.
muttereth and repineth shall not be hid. The Children of Israel were
consumed with the Fi^^ of the Lord, Ibid. 14, 30.
for their unjust complaints: He would suffer none of the to enter into the
Land of Promise, save onel^ Caleb the Son of Ieph^nah, and Joshua the sonn^ of
Nun. Whatsoeue^ therefore it shall plea^ his will to lay upon me my will shall
not refu^ to bear it. I cannot (...) conscience but suff^ somewhat for his
sa^^ that endured so much f^mine. Let him deal wit^ me therefore as he thinks
good, I will hold my tongue with the Prophet David, and keep silence, because
it is his doing.

XLV.
Virtue is great in grace and estimation with the king of heaven: they that
embrace it are his only favorites. He does affect them wonderfully, and
uses them at all times with great familiarity. Five hundereth sixty five
years did Henoch walk with him upon the earth, Genesis 5, 24.
and so delighted him with the softness of his carriage, and the sweetness of
his conversation, that he took him wholly to himself, and of a Pensioner,
made him one of his Chamber. He sent a Charret of Fire from above, to fetch
Elijah to him, 2. Kin. 2.11
and appointed a Guard of glorious Angels to attend it: he did so long to
enjoy his company, that Death he thought would be to slow a Messenger to give
his desires a speedy satisfaction and contentment, and did therefore send a
Whirlewinde forth to hasten his arrival: The Lord is exceeding tender over
the godly: he will preserve his body as the Apple of his eye; he will shield his
soul from the power of the grave. The wickedness of Man in former times was
grown to such a height, and his mind so deeply rooted in all evil, that GOD
grew sorry he had ever made him, and was resolved to destroy both him and all
things else from of the Earth; but when he thought upon upright Noah, great
was the care he took for the safety and preservation both of him and his. He
does impart his secrets to the just, Esaias 41, 8.
and takes the righteous for his bosom friends. He would not hide from
Abraham, that which he meant to do to Sodom and Gomo^ah. Genesis 18, 17.
And when the Patriarch had begun to intercede for them, could but ten
persons have been found untainted with that foul corruption, wherewith the
inhabitants of those two places were so generally infected, he would have
spared them all at his entreaty for their sakes alone: as he did Zoar at poor
Lots request: Genesis 19.21.
so easily does he subscribe to the petitions and supplications of them that
are sound and pure in heart. Let who so lists therefore ambitiously affect
the countenance of worldly Greatness, I and my Thoughts will serve the Lord.
One day within his Courts is better then a thousand other where; Psalm. 84.10.
and I would sooner choose to be a doorkeeper in the House of my God, then to
dwell in the tabernacles of profaine Impiety. Hos. 14, 7.
They tha^ rest under his shaddowe shall revive as the Corn and flourish as the
Vine: their beauty shall be as the Oliue-Tree, and their smell as Lebanon: But
they that rely upon the breath of man, their glory shall vanish as the morning
Dew, and as the smoke that goes out o^ the Chimney. I will abandon therefore
with Moses, the delicates of Pharaohs Table, to be a Partner in all disastrous
accidents with the Children of Israel, and desire rather to lie at the gates
of Mordecai, and be a sharer in the afflictions of my distressed Brethren,
then stand with Hamon at the Kings elbow. Here now is Grace, and by and by a
grave: but love and honor comes there in the riere-warde of all trouble.

XLVI.
Man's heart is like a House; the closer he keeps it, the worse it is: The
doors and windows of it, must by a true confession of his sins be set wide
open to the Lord, that by the beams of his enlightening Spirit, the rooms
thereof may be well ayred, and every corner of it sweetened, against the coming
of his Savior and Redeemer. Open to me, my Sister, my Love, Cant. 5, 2.
my Dove, (said Christ unto his Spouse, and in the Revelation, I stand at the
door and knock if any Man open, Revel. 3, 20
I will com^ in unto him, and will s^^ with him, and he with me. He carries a
good opinion and conceit, of those that are ready at the gate to give him
entertainment, or that at the least no sooner hear him, but with the greatest
speed they let him in; he will minister comfort and consolation unto them,
that by repentance make known unto him their cares and grieuaunces. But such
as will not acknowledge his voice, nor make him entrance when he calls at the
first, do but awaken his iealousy, and give him cause to doubt, that all is not
well within; They have assuredly some Vnder-sitters, that dare not abide the
presence of authority, and either for that, or some such like consideration are
slack in his admission. I will confess therefore against my self, Psalm. 32.5.
my wickedness unto the Lord, and he shall forgive the forfeiture of my
misdeedes; Pro. 28.13.
I will discover to him mine iniquities, and he shall cleanse me from all
unrighteousness: who so hides his transgressions shall never prosper; but he
that confesses and forsakes them, shall be sure of mercy. The Thief before
the Judge approach, does convey out of his own custody, even every trifling
thing, the possession whereof he cannot justify to be lawful, I will imitate
him in this, and before such time as death shall come to apprehend me, I will
clear my heart of whatsoever may be any way suspected; Eccl. 17, 27
Whilst I live, and am in health, I will disclose my faults and imperfections
to the Lord; I will give him an inuentarie of my works and weaknesses, Prou.
16, 3.
that by so doing, my thoughts may be established. If I perceive at any time
that my conscience has surfeited upon the seeming sweetes and pleasures of
this World, Eccl. 13, 21
I will according to the Wise-mans counsel, arise, go out, and vomit, that
then I may take my rest, and keep my Soul from sickness and distemperature.
The guilt of Sin is an Impostume in the mind; If I feel it in my bosom, I
will apply that to it, which may draw the corruption to the outward parts; If
it break within, it endaungereth the life, but if the rupture of it chance
without, there may be hope of recovery. I will unwrap the Ulcers of my soul,
and expose them to the view of Christ, that he may heal them. Unless I do
acquaint him with my burden, how can I hope to be refreshed by him?

XLVII.
THE heart of the foolish is a broken Vessel; Eccl. 21, 14.
Charity will none of it; It is not a Potshard that will serve her turn. Thou
shall love the Lord thy God (says she) Luke 10, 27
with all thy Soul, and withal thy Thought, and withal thy Might. Such as
underhand have sworn allegiance to Hypocrisy, and are in mind the servants of
Imposture, cannot endure to hear of this. They will divide themselves into
several portions, Hos. 10, 2.
and what the world does leave, they will bequeath to God, makes no scruple if
need require, to hold a Candle for their own advantage, both to Michaell and
the Serpent. Mat. 17.15.
They are like that Lunatik in the Gospel; one while they fall into the Fire,
another while they slip into the Water: And hence it is, that they be neither
hot nor cold; by reason whereof the Lord so utterly distasteth the^, that he
will spue them out of his mouth, Revel. 3, 16
and suffer the^ to slide continually from bad to worse, till in the end, as
men not sensible of their estate, they dye impenitent, and not so much as
touched with any detestation or dislike of their fore-past enormities. They
stand in a degree of warmth, which does embolden Satan to assail them; he
never fears to be midling with them in this meddling state: but were they
thoroughly heated with the flames of a sincere and vndisguised zeal, as they
ought to be, he would not dare once to come near them. He resembles the
Fly, which never setleth it self upon the seething pot, but is always
exceeding busy, where there is an indifferency of heat. He that contents
himself with the Water of John, Luke 3, 16.
and does not seek to be baptized of Christ with fire and the Holy Ghost, is
made the only But and scope of his attempts. It is not therefore a superficial
ayring that shall satisfy my cold desires; I will so heat them in the
well-kindeled flames of true Devotion, that like a searing-Iron, he shall no
sooner stretch out his hand to touch me, but I will brand him for his bold
presumption, and for ever after make him so fearful of me, that when he
sees me, though at never so great a distance, he shall come creeping toward
me like a Spaniell with his belley on the ground, he shall cry out to me with
an extended voice, and say; Ma^ke 5.7
What (...) to do with thee, thou Servant of the mos^ ^igh GOD? I charge thee
by thy Lord and master, that thou torment me not.

XLVIII.
THe Cross of Christ is that Rod of Moses, by which the Devil, that spiritual
Pharaoh is struck with such diversity of plagues, that at the last he is
enforced to drive from him, those which er^ while he ^old have draw^e vn^^ ^^m.
It is a glorious and immortal monument, erected as a Trophy by the hand of
Victory, to the dishonor and confusion of that oppressor and insulting Tyrant.
He stands aloof, and stares upon it with an envious eye, but is afraid to
draw near unto it, least he and his temptations might chance to be devoured
by it, as were by that the Serpents of the Enchanters. It is that blessed Tree,
with the boughs whereof the waters of Marah were made sweet: It alters the
bitterness of Tribulations, and makes the Cup of the Lord, which of it self
is exceeding sharp, delightful to the taste: 2. Cor. 12.10.
I take pleasure (says Saint Paul) in all repreaches and persecutions for his
sake; and the Apostles, after they had been beaten by the appointment of the
Counsel at Jerusalem, Acts 5, 41.
departed thence with cheerful countenances, rejoicing that they were reputed
worthy to suffer rebuke for his Name. It is that princely Scepter of
Ahashuerosh, which being stretched out, does license our approach unto the
Throne of his Celestial Grace. It is that key of the Kingly Prophet, which has
opened unto us the greatest mysteries, and the profoundest secrets that were
ever heard of. It is that ladder of the Patriark, by which our passage inro
heaven is easier now, then ever it was before. In a word, it is that golden
Candlestick, in which the life and light of men was set, John 1, 4.
whose brightness was so great, that the Centurion by means thereof, even
through the Aegyption darkness of those times, was able to discover his
Divinity, when oppressed with fear, he cried out and said; Truly this was the
Son of the living God. Mat. 27.52
I will not therefore rejoice in any thing, Gal. 6.14.
but in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by which the World is crucified
unto me, and I unto the world. Night and day will I make it the subject of my
Meditation; and so I may attain to the knowledge of this, 1. Cor. 2.2
I will not esteem of any other wisdom whatsoever. What doctrine is it,
which is not here comprised? His passion is the Epilogue of all. There is not
any thing, either in Heaven or in Earth, but as the Apostle says, is
recapitulated to the full in Christ. Ephe. 1, 10.
Mount Caluary shall therefore be my School, and the Book which I will
read, shall be the lanched side, and bloody bosom of my blessed Savior. I
will think upon his wounds; I will consider his skars; and the prints of the
nails, shall be as breathing-stops to help my Contemplation.

XLIX.
AS Silver dross ouerlaid upon a Potshard, so are burning lips, Pro. 26.23.
and an evil heart. He tha^ dwells in the Heaven does abhor it, and will
for ever have it in derision. It is not complement that pleases him. The
Kings Daughter was al glorious within, Psalm. 45, 13.
or little would the Lord have esteemed her sumptuous clothing of Broidered
Gold. If the inside of the Vessel be not clean, let the outside be as
glorious as it will, our GOD will none of it. The Fig Tree was delightful to
the Eye, but yet it could not escape the curse. He would have nothing seem that
which it is not. Either make the Tree good, Mat. 12.33.
and his fruit good (says he) or the Tree evil, and his fruit evil;
worship either God or Belial, and halt no longer between two opinions. For one
to have the Voice of Jacob, and the hands of Esau, is a degree of Hypocrisy
beyond his knowledge, apprehension, and conceit. The thought of it doot^
clean amaze him; Ho^ can you o ye viperous bro^ when your selves are i^wardly
nothing else b^ filth and putrefaction, Luke 6.6.
vtt^ things that are of a differing constitution? For (...) of the abundance
of the heart, the mouth speaket^. So that in vain it is to (...) him, Master,
Master, unless withal we do the things which he propounds. Our
righteousness must exceed that of the Scribes and Pharisees, Math. 5, 20.
or we shall never ente^ into the Kingdom of Heaven. I will not therefore be
like the blind and lame, that sit begging at the entrance of a City, and show
the way to them that pass along, but set no foot in it themselves; I will
accompany them my self unto the place; and always as near as I can,
countenance a godly precept with a good precedent. The word of the Lord is
called a Sword; Take the Sword of the Spirit, Ephe. 6, 16.
which is the word o^ God; It cannot be employed but by the hand And hence it
is, that i^ sundry places of the Scriptures we read in the original, that it
was i^ the hands of his Prophets; as namely, in the hand of Isaiah, Esaias 20, 2.
in the hand of Haggai, in the hand of Malachi, Mal. 1.1.
etc. t^ signify unto us, that the instructions which we give our brethren,
should not consist so much i^ words, as in works an^ good examples. He tha^
can do that, which he says, he alone is that Salt of the Earth, Math. 5,
13.
which shall never loose his savor; he alone is that City on a Hell, which
cannot be hid; in a word, he alone is that Candle in the Candlestick, which
gives light to all that are about it, and shines out so clearly and so
brightly, that they which see it cannot but glorifye the Lord which is in
heaven. I will continually therefore so speak, and so do, James 2.12
as one that looks to be judged by the Law of Liberty. Christ Jesus has left
me an example, Ioh 13 15.
that I should do, even as he that has done, and surely I will strive to
follow it in all things, as Moses did that pattern, which was showed him in
the Mount. Exo. 25, 40.


L.
THe World abounds with men of corrupted and depraved minds; It is the harbor
of headstrong Rebels, which have sworn the downfall and destruction of
true Piety; and much ado she has to find one angle out in all this spacious
Round, in which she may rest secure from their assassinous and murdering
hands. A virtuous deed cannot escape the forked tongue of venomous
Detraction, nor a good intention find passage for it self, but with exceeding
opposition. 2. Tim. 3, 8
Moses and Aaron shall no sooner go about to discharge their duties, but Iannes
and Iambres will be ready to resist them: 1. King. 22 11.
the Baalites will continually be busy with Elijah: and plain Micheas shall no
sooner stir abroad, Nehe. 2.19
but Zidkijah will be butting at him with his Iron horns. Where Christ is,
there are the Pharisees; where Simon Peter is, there likewise is Simon Magus;
and where Saint Paul is, there are the false Apostles, that what the right
hand of the Lord does raise, the left hand of the Devil may destroy. Whilst
our abiding place is here, we shall always meet with many rubs and lets to
i^terrupt the smoothness of our course in just proceedinges: but this shall
not abate my resolution: I will strive to franchise and surmount al
difficulties: Nor Sin, nor Satan shall so strongly barricado up my passage,
but by the assistaunce of the holy Spirit I will make thorough them to my
aims. Phil. 2, 13.
He that wrought in me the Will, shall likewise work in me the Deed; and as
he gave me the grace to begin, so shall he grant me the power to go on. I am
freede from the yoke of bondage, and now, Romans 8.38.
nor death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers; nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature
shall be able to separate me from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus
our Lord.

LI.
Wisdom is a princess of extraordinary State and Dignity, Prou. 9, 3.
many honorable Virgins do continually attend het. She has hew^ out her
house of seven pillars, and has sent out her Maids to call men to the walls
and Towers of her City; but there are some that will not endure to have their
passage made by them: they are they say, inspired from above, and as Elijah was
fed by Crows, so are they by Angels, not with meat nor bread, but with a
hidden kind of celestial Manna. They scorn those grosser introductions of
school Philosophy, and think they cannot admire Gods power and authority as
they ought, if in things Divine they should attribute any force to human reason.
1 Cor. 2.14
Their usual discourses are, The natural man, not the things that are of God,
for they are foolishness to him: he cannot comprehend them, because they are
spiritually discerned; and That the Lord has threatened to destroy the Wisdom
of the wise, Cor. 1, 19
and to cast away the understanding of the prudent. Again, the word and
preaching of S. Paul say they, stood not in the enticing speech of man, 1. Cor.
2, 4.
but in plain evidence of the Spirit, and of power. What should we therefore
do but utterly abandon those needless Arts and Sciences, Colos. 2, 8
which are (as the Apostle says) the rudiments of the world, and not after
Christ? As if the way to be ripe in faith, were to be raw in wit and
judgment, as if reason were an enemy to Religion, Childish simplicity, the
Mother of divine sufficiency. The name of the Light of Nature, is grown
hateful to them, the Star of Learning is no better thought of, then if it were
a disastrous and unlucky Comet; or as if God had so accursed it, that it should
never shine out in things concerning our duty any way toward him, but be
esteemed as the Star of Remphan, or as that in the Revelation called
Worme-wood, which being fallen from Heaven, makes Rivers and fountains of
Waters, Revel. 8, 10
into which it falls so bitter that men in tasting them do dye thereof. The
word of GOD (say they) is a two edged Sword, as for the Weapon of natural
Reason, it is as the Armor of Saul, rather cumbersome about the Soldier of
Christ, then needful, whereas indeed it is, as that which slew Goliath, if they
be as David was, that use it. Poison may com from out a Rose, and out of
Hemlocke Honey may be drawn; but then a Spyder must not suck the one, nor a
Be the other. I will not therefore be affrayde to imitate the Hebrews, who at
their going out from amongst the Egyptians, took from them all the Gold and
Silver that they could, and afterward made a Tabernacle of it to God in the
desert; nor Solomon, who refused not to accept both Wood and Workmen, Caedar,
and Fur from the hands of Hiram king of Tire, for the erecting of a house
unto the Name of the Lord his God. There is in the world no kind of
knowledge, whereby any part of truth is seen, but we justly account it
precious; and that principal truth in comparison whereof all other knowledge
is vile, may receive from it some kind of light. So that whether it be that
Mathematical Wisdom of the Egyptians and Caldeans, wherewith Moses and
Daniel were so richly furnished: or that Natural, Moral, and Civil wisdom
of the Graecians, which the Apostle Saint Paul did bring from Tarsus: or that
Judicial, which he learned sitting at the feet of Gamaliell, I will by no
means detract from the dignity thereof, least by so doing, I should iniure even
God himself who being that light, which none can aproach, has sent out these
lights whereof we are capable, even as many sparckles resembling the bright
Fountain from which they rise. That the lawful use and application of
profane authority, can be no prejudice to sacred Writ; howsoever therefore I
drink of the Waters of life with Christ, yet will I not let as occasion
serves, to draw at the Well with the Samaritan.

LII.
THe Pride of a man shall bring him low, but the humble in Spirit shall enjoy
glory, He that delights himself in the contemplation of his own greatness,
and when he vieweth the stateliness of his high-built Palaces, does vaunt out
of a swelling Spirit with Nebuchadnezar; Dan, 4, 27
Is not this great Babel that I have built for the house of the Kingdom, by
the might of my power, and for the glory of my majesty? A voice from Heaven
shall tell him presently, that he shall be utterly deprived of the society
and commerce of men, and be enforced to take up his dwelling with the Beasts
of the field. He that shall say in his heart, I will ascend up into Heaven,
Esaias 14.13,
and exalt my Throne above beside the stars. I will sit upon the mount of
the congregation in the sides of the North; I will climb above the height of
the clouds, and I will be like the most High; He shall be thrown with Lucifer
the son of the Morning, down into the lowest pit. And to him that presumes
on the multitud^ of his merits, it shall be said, Revel. 3, 17
Thou say I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing:
and know not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind,
and naked. The Publican did never boaste of his uprightness, nor did he brag
of his tything Mint and Cumin, yet he was justified, when the Pharise,
notwithstanding his former purity, was clean rejected. He that is proud, is
like a Glow-worme, he carries an outward show of pomp and glory in the
darkness of this world, but in the day of judgment, when Christ the Sun of
Justice shall appear, he shall loose his luster, and his light shall seem as
if it were extinct. The eye of Ignorance may highly value him, but the touch
will show him to be counterfeit and base. Let who so lists therefore go
settle his ambition in the Plains of Sennaar; Genesis 11, 2
let him depart with wicked and voluptuous Worldlinges from the East, and seek
to purchase a name unto himself elsewhere; there is a Star, which calls me
thither ward, and I will follow it, till I come unto the Maunger, where the
meannesse of my Saviors birth shall make me call to mind the baseness of mine
own. I will observe the lowlynesse of that blessed Lamb, and with the thought
of his humility give life to mine. There is nothing in me that is ought, which
I have not received. When I shall therefore offer up my heart unto the Lord,
I will bury all presumption in the apprehension of humane weakness, and high
conceits shall languish in the consideration of my own unworthiness. It is a
Turtle* the Feathers of it must be plucked off, Leuit. 1.16
and the maw thereof pulled out, and cast upon the East side of the Altar, in
the place of the ashes, or god will not accept it for a Sacrifice.

LIII.
Sin is a great burden, the weight thereof did crack in sunder the very
heavens, and through the bowels of the earth did force a passage to the lowest
he^ It broke the back of all the creatures, and made as I may say, Nature her
self to hault. There was no part in all this universal Frame, but was
thoroughly bruised, if not broken. All things were utterly disioynted with the
fall. The Spears were put beside their purer influence, and the Elements so
confounded with the violence of the shocke, that contrary to their natural and
inbred motion the Fire came down and burnt Pentapolis; Genesis 7, 17
the water rose up, and drowned the World. There was not any thing could be
found so stiff or strong which did not yield. The everlasting Mountains were
shiuered, Hab. 3.6.
and the ancient hills did bow. Yea, God himself, who sat til then
immovable upon the square base of his Mercy, Genesis 3, 8
and took no care but how to pleasure us, did then arise out of his seat, and
with the foot of Justice measured the walks of Paradise. The Earth did sink
under the sin of Dathan and Abir^^ as too weak a prop for such an
unsupportable load: Number. 16, 32
And so indeed it does even under us. For what are our Graves and Sepulchers,
but so many proofs and witnesses of the heaviness thereof: but for which, the
very waters would have been able to have sustained us as they did Christ our
Savior. But this alas! is now; In the day of Judgment it shall be utterly
broken, it shall be clean dissolved; sa. 24, 20
it shall reel too and fro like a drunken man, and shall be removed like a tent,
the iniquity thereof shall be heavy upon it, so that it shall fall, and rise
no more.

To him therefore that came into the World t^ help the Lame, will I become while
the time does serve, an humble supplyant, Mat. 11.5.
and beseech him earnestly, that he would vouchsafe to cure my Cripple
spirit, and withal, ease it of that grievous fardle under which it groaneth,
that so I may be able to walk upright in the path of Gods commandments. The
way to Heaven is exceeding steep, I must be free from all encumbraunce, or I
can make no expedition.

LIIII.
WOrldly pleasure is the bane of heavenly contemplatio^; and a mind distracted
with many things, cannot mind as it ought that one thing which is necessary.
The blessed virgin during the time of her painful flight, did never want the
company of her beloved Son; he was continually with her, whilst she lived as
an exile in the Land of Egypt, but when she went up to Jerusalem to the feast,
Luke 2.42.
she lost him presently. As long as the Thesbite remained in the solitary
Wilderness, he was deliciously fed by the Lords own hand, but when he made
his repair to populous and frequented places, his wantes grew such, that a
poor Widdowe was feign to relieve him with a piece of bread Our God is the GOD
of peace; he will not abide in a tumultuous breast. His Tabernacle is in Shalem,
Psalm. 76.2.
and his dwelling in Zio^. He would not set foot upon the earth, til all the
Nations of the same had linked themselves together in love and amity, and that
a friendly composition was made the period of all hostile difference. His Image
can no more be seen in an unsettled heart, then the shaddowe of a man in
troubled water. We must calm the blustrig motions and distemperatures of our
affections, or we shall never enjoy the sweetness of ghostly consolation. The
Children of Israel did receive no Manna, till they had past the raging Sea,
Acts 2.2
and were come into the quiet desert. The Apostles were sitting in a Chamber
privately, when they received the Comforter; 1 King. 19, 12.
and Elijah stood alone in the entering of a Cave, when the Lord not in a
tempestuous whirlewind, nor in a violent Earthquke, nor in a storm of fire,
but in a soft and gentle sound appeared unto him, who thereuppon covered his
face immediately with his Cloak, that nothing might withdraw his sight from the
full beholding of such inestimable glory. I will retire my self wholly therefore
from the world; I will Cloister up my senses from the delights and vanities
thereof; they shall no longer frequent the meeting places of profaner minds;
My heart shall be a Cell, wherein my Thoughts being thoroughly weaned from the
desire of all tra^sitory pleasures, shall sing continually with a sincere and
mortified affection, Halleluiah, Halleluiah to the King of Kings. Luke 19.3.
Zacheus could not possibly see Christ Jesus in the crowd, but when he had him
in his House alone, his eyes were satisfied with the view of that celestial
object. The short-liued recreation that Iniquity brings with it, shall not lodge
within the circuit of my bosom, I know that the laughter of a mad man, is a
grief to his friends; and the mirth of a Sinner does make an Angel mourn; I
will from hence-foorth therefore furnish my self with a religious and godly
sorrow, and being so provided, I will run and seek for my blessed Savior. His
Mother found him not till she had grieved exceedingly; nor Marie Magdalene,
Luke 2.48.
till she had wept excessiuely; they both lamented and mourned bitterly, John
20.11
as for the loss of an only Son, Iere. 6.26.
or they could never else have heard of him. I will not hope for better hap,
but encourage my self by their example.

LV.
THe blewnesse of the wound serves to purge the evil, Pro. 20, 30
and the stripes within the bowels of the belly. For it is indeed the
after-wisdome, and Epimethean had I wist of mortal men, never to look up unto
Heaven for help, but in the midst of their affliction. And then, Come say they,
let us return to the Lord, for he has spoiled us, Hos. 6.1.
and he will heal us; he has wounded us, and he will bind us up. In their
prosperity they grow forgetful of him that made them, and never think upon
the Cross of Christ, til they be crossed themselves. Till Paul was struck with
blidnesse, he never asked Jesus of Nazareth what was to be done; nor did the
Prodigal acknowledge his fault, til hunger forced him to return. Manasseh
remembered not 2 Cron. 33.12.
to pray unto the Lord, til he was in tribulation, and then he humbled himself
greatly before the GOD of his fathers. The carnal man will quickly riot in his
groth; if he be not, either by infirmities, reproaches, necessities,
persecutions, or anguish suppressed and kept down. When I am weak (says the
Apostle) then am I strong. 2. Cor. 12, 10.
And hereupon the kingly Prophet desiring the conversion of sinfulmen, Fill
their faces, O Lord, (says he) with shume, Psalm. 83.16.
that they may seek thy Name; and in another place. Let thy chasticementes and
thy corrections be multiplied upon them, and they will hasten to thee out of
hand. They may be likened to a servant that obeys not his Master, but when
his Sword is drawn; or unto Swine, that till the coming of the storm, will
not leave their wallowing in the mire. Nay some of them there are, so
desperately enamoured with that painted Iezabell (Iniquity) that no indifferent
means can weane them from her allurements: 1. Cor. 5, 5.
they must of necessity be delivered unto Satan, for the destruction of the
flesh, or their Spirit will be hardly saved in the day of the lord; And such
were Hymenaeus and Alexander, 1 Timothy 1.20
whom Paul surrendered up unto him, that they might learn not to blaspheme. A
thing exceeding strange, and like to Sampsons Riddle; Judge. 14.14
That out of the deuourer should come meat, and sweetness out of the strong;
yet so it is. Vice shows it self under his Roof, even in the height of her
bestiality; the nakedness thereof is quite discovered: no part of her
deformity but here is stalled out to the full show, and thrice thrice,
wretched is that man, whom this cannot distaste. With all submission therefore,
both of heart and mind, will I drink the Cup which my heavenly Father shall
put into my hand; the bitterness thereof shall not affright me; it is for the
strengthening and recovering of my crazy soul, and I will not grudge to take
it. I will repair unto the Lord for help while my hurt is green, if once it
putrify, there is no use of Linitiues; it cannot possibly be cured but by
Cautere or Incision. I will obey the summons of his glorious ministers, and not
stay til I be called by him: His voice is terrible as thunder; it breaks the
Caedars, and makes Lebanon and Shirion leap like the younger Unicorns; Psalm.
29.6.
it divides the flames of Fire, and makes the Wilderness of Kadesh to
tremble: at the sound thereof, the Hindes do Calue, and the Forests are
discovered. Let Moses therefore talk with Exo. 20.19.
me, and I will hear him; but let not God talk with me, least I dye.

LVI.
Sloth is an enemy to Christian Venues, and he that serves under the Lord of
hoastes, must labor to avoid it. His Soldiers must be still in action, and
upon their march. To make a stand in the way of righteousness, is as
distasteful to the King of heaven, as to retire. The man of God that came up
from Judah, to prophecy to Jeroboam the destruction of the altar, King 13.24
though seduced by the Spirit of Untruth, did pay the same forfeiture for hi^
lingering, which the Wife of Lot did for her looking b^cke. And it is avouched
by the Oracle of heaven, That he which is sloathfull in his work, Prou. 18, 9.
is even the Brother of him that is a great waster. I will awaken therefore my
slugg^sh thoughts, and with the precepts of my blessed Savior, will I
quicken their dull motion. Standing waters do quic^lie putrify, and without
exercise, the healthiest constitution waxes faint and feeble. The Canker does
consume the Brass, and rust the Iron, if they be not used; yea, the luster of
the purest Gold abateth by being long imprisoned in the Coffers of the
Covetous. The Lord therefore shall enlarge my heart, Psalm. 119.32
and I will run the way of his Commandments. In vain has he received the
grace of God, that does not show some sign of his proficiency. I will imitate
those Kine, that carried the Arc from Ekro^; 1. Sam. 6.12
who lowed as they went, and always kept one path, not turning till they came
unto Bethshemesh, either to the right hand or the left; I have already charged
my shoulders with the yoke of my Redeemer, and am entered into the straight and
ready way; no worldly consideration or respect shall make me slack my pace; I
will onwards still, and not cease to sigh under the burden of it for my
sins, till I come unto the glorious habitation of my blessed Savior Christ
Jesus, the Son of everlasting righteousness.

LVII.
GOD is the Wellspring of true knowledge and eternal wisdom, from whence
those Fountains of living Waters flow, which who so tastes of, shall never
thirst. It is he that searches the heart and reins; it is he, that declares
unto man what is his thought. He knows all things intuitiuely, and nothing
can be hid from his discerning Eye. But yet such is the love he bears us,
that willingly and wittingly he suffers himself to be deceived by us. He
proffereth us the Kingdom of Heaven at a low rate, as if he knew not justly
the worth thereof. The Apostles bought it of him for a leaking Fish-Boate, and
some few broken Nets to boot: Zacheus had it for half his goods: the Widow
for her mite: and some (O happiness beyond all hap!) for a Cup of cold Water
only: Nay the good will alone, and sincere affection of many toward it, has
been accepted, and thought sufficient for the purchase. Whatsoever we have of
him is undervalued; but he has nothing from us, which is not ouer-bought. Our
earthly bodies cost him the shedding of his most precious blood; our cankered
souls the laying down of his immaculate and spotless life; and what alas! is
there in us (poor sinful wretches that we are) which may deserve such an
inestimable price. Mat. 19.29.
He gives us a hundredth fold more then he takes, and suffers himself to
be beguild even with unequal shares. For many times we give our youth to
Satan, and our age to him, who notwithstanding he should have both does take
it quietly, and like a gentle Creditor is content with any thing from a bad
Debtor. But this conniuence, and kind forbearance of his, shall not embolden
me in any careless course. All that I have will I give unto him, yet think
that al too little for so great and glorious an inheritance. Whatsoever I pay,
nothing can equal it in estimation. The whole world, in comparison hereof,
Luke 15, 8.
is not to be valued, no not at the lost groate. I will consider how dearly my
redeemer bought me, and endeavor to render up my self in that regard, into his
hands, as pure and perfect both in mind and body as I can: I will consecrate my
self unto the Lord in the strength and vigor of my years, and in my
flourishing and able days will I deuote my self to the service, and
invocation of his most holy name. He that divides ill, though he offer well,
cannot but offend.

LVIII.
THe ways of the Lord are in the Whirlwind and the storm; the clouds are
the dust of his feet. Bashan and Carmel wast at his rebuke, and the flower of
Lebanon does wither. The Mountains retire from before him, and the hills do
me^. His Majesty is great, his power wonderful; yet many ways there are, and
many means to vanquish and subdue him. At the sight of our dejection. Hos. 11,
8.
His heart is turned within him, and his repertings are rouled together. He
must of force reuerse his judgments, and stay to execute the fierceness of
his intended wrath. But when with a zealous and fervent spirit we do encounter
him in prayer, then do we bind him (as it were) hand and foot, that he
cannot stir. Let me alone (said he to Moses) and give my fury leave to wax
hot against this people. Exo. 32, 10.
But the Prophet continued his charitable intercession, and would not suffer
him to go, till he had changed his mind. Esaias 38, 1.
He had determined the death of Hezikiah, and by the mouth of Isaiah willed
him to put his house in order, for he should not live, but the King having
notice of this firm arrest, turned his face unto the wall, and by the virtue
of his prayers and tears preuaild so far, that in the end, Mat. 15, 22.
Vixit and vicit, he both lived and overcame. By this the woman of Canaan did
surmount that settled hardness, whereof our Savior did make show unto her.
Genesis 32, 28
In a word, this is that wrestling of the Patriarch, in which he behaved
himself so valiantly, that he bore away the glorious title, and renowned name
of Israel, in token of his victorious and triumphall Conquest. But this does
master but his person only. The Saints and Martyrs by their pains and
sufferances, do break into his territories, and make their station even
within his Confines. Himself beholds it, and cries out, Mat. 11, 12.
The Kingdom of heaven suffers violence; and the violent take it away by
force. I will humble my self therefore before the Lord my God, and unto him
will I ingenuously confess, how sin and Satan have utterly spoiled me of
all spiritual graces and endowmentes, and that my conscience only has escapt
their fury, to bring me tidings of the loss. With my misery will I excite his
mercy, and awake his compassion with the vehemence of my own passions. I will
fasten on him by devout and earnest supplications, and not let him go, except
he bless me. With patience will I arm my self against all hardness and
slight, both Death and Danger, to make my passage to the top of Sion, and
through the streets of his imperial City, the New Jerusalem.

FINIS.

