THE VVONDRVS FLITTINGE OF THE KIRK OF OUR B. LEDY OF LORETO. depiction of the
Church of Loreto
THE Kirk of Laureto was a caumber of the house of the blessed Virgin neir
Jerusalem in the town of Nazaret, in vvhilk she was borne and teende up, and
greeted by the Angel, and thairin also conceived and nourisht har son JESUS
vvhill he was tvvalle ear avvd. This caumber, after the Ascensione of our B.
Seuiour, was by the Apostles hallowed and made a Kirk in honor of our B.
Ledy, and S. Lvke framed a pictur to har vary lyknes their it to be seine. It
was haunted with muccle deuotione by the folk of the land vvhar it stud, als
lang as they were Catholics; Bot when they forseckte the Christen feth, and
went after the error of Mahomet, the Angels tooket, and set it in Sclauonia
by a town nemmed Flumen; VVhar net being honored as it sold, they transported
it over sea to a vvood in the bounds of Recanati, belanginge to a neble dame
called Laureta, frae vvhem it tuke it nem of our B. Ledy of Laureto; And thence
again, for cause of many theifries, to a hill of tvva brothers, in the same
bounds; And lastly, for there striving for the gifts and oblations, to the
high-roade neir-by, vvhar it it stands meruellous for mirakels, and above
ground without foundatione; VVharat the indvvellers of the town of Recanati,
wha came aft to sie it, meikle wondering; bigged a great wall about it; it
caude ne man tell vvherefrae it came first vvhill in the eir M.CC.XC.VI. the B.
V. in sleipe reuelled it to a helly deuote man, and he telled it to diverse of
athority in this place, vvhe presently resolving to try the treuth of the
vizione, decried to find out saxteine parsons of credit, vvhem they sent
altogather, to that end, to the town of Nazaret, garring them to bear with
them the mesur of this Kirk, and to met it their with the foundatione vvhilk
was et to the fore; They fand them both alike, and in a wall thairby
ingraune, that it head stud their, and head forgaune the place, and than, cuming
back again, declared the forseide vizione to be true, and frae that tim fourth,
it hes beine surly kend that this Kirk was the caumber of the B. V. vvharto
Christens begun than, and hes ever after head muccle deuotione, for that in it
daily she hes dun, and dus, many and many mirakel. Anefrier Paul de Silua an
Eremit of muccle godliness, wha vvoned in a cell neir-by this Kirk vvhare daily
he went to mattins, said, that for ten eirs, one the eight of September,
tvveye hours before day, he savve a light descend frem heaven upon it, vvhlik
he said was the B. V. wha their shavved har self one the feast of har birth.
In proof of all vvhilk, tvva verteous men of the said town of Recanati, many
times auovved to me, Ruler of Terreman, and Governor of the forseyd Kirk, as
follovveth: Ane of them, nemmed Paul Renalduci, affermed that his grandsyres
grandsyre savve when the Angels brought it over sea, setting it in the forseyd
vvood, and head aft frequented it their; The other, nemmed Francis Prior,
sicklik said that his grandsyre, being a hunder and tvvantie eirs avvd, head
also meikle haunted it in the same place; and for a mere sur testimony that it
head beine their, he reported, that his grandsyres grandsyre head a house beside
it vvharin he dvvelled, and that in his deyes it was beared by the Angels frae
thence to the hill of the tvveye brothers, vvhar they set it, as said is.

To the glory of the mest pure Virgin.
IN LORETO Per Francesco Serafini. M.DC.XXXV.

Con licenza de Superiori.


