A FUNERAL ELEGY, In Memory of the Rare, Famous, and Admired Poet, Mr.
BENJAMIN IONSON deceased.

Who dyed the sixteenth day of August last, 1637, and lies interred in the
Cathedral Church of Saint Peter at Westminster.

SPES ADDIT ALAS. printer's or publisher's device

London Printed by E. P. for Henry Gosson, and are to be sold at his Shop on
London Bridge. 1637.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, WORSHIPFUL AND Others, that are understanding
Readers and Impartial Censurers.
RIght Honored, Worshipful and knowing men,
I do not here confine my Dedication,
To any one man, but my toyling pen
Writes to great Britain, and the Irish Nation,
Know that the subject of My verse is Ben,
And what he was, his works do make relation.
Alive his lines abroad by Fame were spread,
For which he is beloved now he is dead.
Dead, no, he lives, he will, and shall survive,
For Death has taken but his shell or Rhyn'de,
His better parts are still with us alive,
His Pith or Kernel he has left behind,
The Epistle Dedicatory.
As Ovid says, Sword, fire, cannot deprive,
Age, Death or Time, can put him out of mind,
He was beloved, and for his love I crave,
His Elegy may your acceptance have
You that are men of worth, I speak to you,
Not to the partial and prejudicate:
Nor to the ribble rabble senseless crew,
The Hydra monster inconsiderate,
Who scarce know P from G, or black from blew,
I neither do respect, their love or hate,
For him deceased, and for your loves I pend it,
And to your good protections I commend it.
To my Friend JOHN TAILOR, the Author of this following Elegy.
John, though (in verse) I do but seldom write,
Yet love provokes me that I must requite
Thy honest gratitude thou have expressed,
Although in Ben I had no interest;
He was to me, nor I of him scarce known,
Yet for the love (kind Friend) thou here have shown,
This Paradox of IONSON may be read,
He is not living, nor he is not dead.
EDWARD BRIAN.

O living dead man if man may be so,
Death could but take thy body, thy works show,
What slender wounds the Fates to virtue give,
When they conspire her death, alas she will live
Beyond the reach of Fate, Ben Ionson's dead,
Yet lives with him, by whom his works are read;
How many would desire thy Fate to have,
If they might live as thou do in the grave,
I that durst never Poetize before,
Dare write these of thee though I write no more.
WILLIAM YEO.

A Funeral Elegy.
BEn is deceased, and (by his loss) I fear
A dearth will follow, good wit will be dear,
What, is the Muses treasury exhausted?
Is Tempe's well, or Aganippe wasted,
Or has the Thespian springs no liquor left,
Is Helicon of moisture quite bereft?
Has Phoebus (this hot Summer) drawn all dry,
Is it so low an ebb in poetry?
That all the wit that is professed by men,
(Unfit to bear the Inkhorne after Ben)
Are Barren now, now are their muses dumb,
Or what stupidity does them benumb,
That no one has the wit, the Art, the Skill,
The opportunity, or the good will
To write his Elegy, who once was such,
That of his worth they cannot write too much?
But sure there is many wits of high account,
That able are, but have no mind to mount
So high a pitch as his high worth requires,
Whose lofty strains were of immortal fires.
Their good wits may (ill) under-doe his fame,
Their best wits cannot over-do the same.
Then since the Muses, and Thessalian mountains
Are barren, and the poor Pegasean fountains
Are dry, yet noble Thames so far excels
Those Mounts, and Founts, and rare supposed Wels,
That I her Poet, am emboldned here,
To be Ben Ionsons artlesse Chauntecleere.
But as the purest gold unto the eye,
Shines brightest, when course metal stands nigh,
So he (by me that am his foil or shade)
Is more illustrated and brighter made.
Miner vae's statue did most fair appear,
When foul Medusaes Image, did stand near.
He was our Homer, Maro, and our Naso,
Our Persius, Lucan, Petrarch, and our Tasso,
He was to us for state or recreation,
As those, or any Poet to his nation.
His plays were labors, of Herculean peril,
Which every wit applauded (but the Sterill)
His works were plays to please a learned ear,
And intricate to understand and Bear:
His Masks expressed his Judgment was not weak,
In making Hills, rocks, stones and rivers speak,
And like old Orpheus, risen from his trance,
He oftentimes made Trees and Beasts to dance.
His works were Art, his art was Sense and brain,
His brain was his revenue, and his gain
Was as a Poets should be, words and wind,
Some good, some bad, as Censure was inclined.
Many have read him, praised him and disprais'd him,
And (in their humors) cast him down or raised him,
When some that in their Judgments were too hot,
Although they read him, understood him not,
And sure it was more than he was bound to do,
To find them wit and understanding too,
Yet was he not selfe-will'd, opinionate,
Nor did he wisemens censures under-rate,
But always with discretion would submit
To better Judgments, but when Monsieur Wit,
(Shallow in Brain, more shallow in conceit)
Arts Zany, and a Poets counterfeit,
When such as those did screw their Jaws awry,
And mangle his inventions Scurvily,
His scorn and slight contempt, was all their shares,
Disdaining still to set his wit to theirs,
Esteeming Sottish ignorance and pride
Not worth his anger, he would such deride.
Indeed his writings were so far exceeding,
That they were not for every common reading,
Yet he wrote English, but 'twas far refind,
Beyond the apprehension of each Hind,
He could not be (by ignorance) discerned,
For whosoever read Ben Ionson, must be learned:
His Cynthia's Revels, and his Poetaster
(Pieces of Art) declares him his Arts Master:
His Roman Catilines conspiracy
Describes much Learning Wit, and Industry.
Romes great Sejanus shows the pomp and Port
Of Rome, the Senate, and Tiberius Court.
His Fox, his Alchymist, his Silent-Woman,
Are things uncapeable to wit that is common:
His plays of men's strange humors out, and in,
Approved good applaudity did win,
His Beggars bush was written so acute,
It angered envy, and struck Malice mute;
These (in despite of mischievous detraction)
Were his, and bravely were explained in action,
By such experienced practiced knowing men,
Whose parallels will never act again.
(For action is the body of good wit,
And good invention is the Soul of it.
His play of Barthol. Fair gave much delight
To all, but such as understood not right,
His Loadstone or Magnetique Lady failed him,
For which detraction round about assayl'd him,
Forgetting all he had wrote well before,
Spreading abroad his errors much the more.
Had each one in his own particular
Known themselves men, and to be apt to err;
They in their wits possession, or reversion,
Had never cast on him a bad Aspersion.
But such men's muses have the Laske, I think,
And must be casting Gall, or squirting Ink,
Till Woodcocks have no Bills, nor Gudgeons gils,
These hot Pendragonists will dart their quils
As sharp as Bristles, shot from Porcupines,
They shoot their venomous invective lines.
These lines are intricate perhaps to some.
But best of Judgment know from whence they come.
His Epigrams were witty, quick and quaint,
Which Vice or Virtue did in Colors paint,
Wherein the bad were nip'd, the good were praised;
The Gull described, the fool and wise imblaz'd.
A lying rumor up and down does run,
Reporting that he was a Bricklayers Son,
Which if 'twere true were no disgrace or soorne,
For famous Virgil in a ditch was borne,
And many men of mean obscure degree,
Have risen to the height of Sovereignty.
But leaving those to prove report a liar,
A reverend Preacher was Ben Ionsons Sire,
Who finding his innated inclination
To learned studies, gave him education,
Being well initiated with his father,
That he the rules of grammar began to gather,
He (in paternall love) most carefully,
Sent him up to the university,
Where nature mixed with art so fluent wroght
That he learned faster than his tutor taught,
And by his own industry he did gain
More then his study ever could attain,
For why, it is nature only makes a Poet,
And he is a natural that will not know it.
His Father left this mortal pilgrimage,
And died when Ben was 17 years of age,
And then it was noted, though his years were green,
His wit was grave, like one of twice seventeene.
His ingenuity was solid, Steady,
Not rash, or flash, Dogmaticall or heady.
Thus in his Prime time, when his wit was prime,
His mother chanced to match the second time,
She changed her copy with more haste than speed,
And married with a Bricklayer indeed.
Then did his Father in law, (as most men) deem
Of Learning in a beggarly esteem,
That Arts, and Sciences were poor and bare,
That Greek and Latin were despised ware.
He therefore did command his Stepson Ben,
From learned studies to come home again,
Whom he would straight instruct in such a way,
To work and live and thrive another day.
Then was he forced to leave the Academ,
And lay by Learning (that unvalued Iem)
Behold a Metamorphosis most strange,
His Books were turned to Bricks, a sudden change,
The like was never seen since the creation,
Papers transformed to Stones, (a hard translation)
He from his decent Scholars suit Nonsuited,
His habit all with lime and sand polluted,
His writing pen a Trowel, and his reading
Was joining Brickbatts close, and mortar spreading.
Thus was he made a Bricklayer against his will,
And was exact in Geometrick skill.
Whereby he well knew Architectures grounds,
In pedestals, in Angles, Squares, or Roundes,
In Altitude, in Longitude, in Latitude,
In Pulchritude, in Amplitude, and Magnitude,
Yet though he to that trade was hard confined,
He had more lofty study in his mind,
Urania, Clio, sweet Terpsichore,
Thalia, Calliope, Melpomene,
Euterpe, and Erate, Polyhymnie,
The thought of these o're-top'd the highest Chimney,
That e're was built of Lime, or Brick, or Stone,
These were the Sacred Nine he built upon;
And they embraced his love, infused his brains,
With heavenly raptures and transcendent strayns,
That by their influences, learned Ben,
Laid by the Trowel, Bricks turned Books again.
Since to the glory of great Britains I Will,
He those forenamed works did well compile,
In mitable, pithy, so profound,
That through all Christendom he is renowned.
I may compare him to a candle right,
That wastes himself in giving others light,
The world blame not to dote, the cause of it
Is, when she lost him, then she lost her wit.
But though his corpse within his grave be pent,
His works are his immortal Monument,
They shall out wear Tombs made of Brass or Marble
Till time shall end, his Muse shall sweetly warble.
Alive, he was Arts Master in discourse,
And Dead, his Writings are as much in force.
There Is some will prate, and talk more than they know,
That the producements of his brain was slow.
Such men of we^ghty writings do misdeeme,
It Is only number, highly they esteem,
But let those know his lines were so compacted,
Of much maturity of Wit extracted,
So full of lofty and deep sounding sense,
(Th'extraction of Apolloes quintessence)
So grave, so learned, so acute, so pure,
That though they termed him slow, he still was sure.
He served two Kings, with good integrity,
From whose free grace and liberality,
He had a Royal pension, and true pay,
Which still he spent before the quarter day.
For he was no elose fisted usurer,
No Mammons man, no base extortioner,
He loved not gold and silver, and almost,
It loved him so, that still no love was lost,
A Cup of Sack he loved, (or Aristippus)
Which was to him as good as Aganippus,
He had a Poets kingdom in his mind,
But in that Kingdom he could never find,
One after that could yield him any crop,
(For all his land was on Parnasus Top.)
And sure that mountain is so barren now,
That scarce a Bunch of Turnips there does grow,
Mecaenas dyed, and few heirs behind,
And Poets (like Camelions) live by wind.
And noble Ben, whilst thou on earth did live,
Thou my poor muse encouragement did give,
For which in humble duty to express,
The manifesting of my thankfulness,
In love to thee and to thy memory,
I consecrate this poor penned Elegy,
If ought be well writ here, it is not my muse,
But it is thy Genius, that did me infuse,
Whereby blind ignorance may know and see,
He cannot want a Muse that writes of thee,
Thou liv'dst here sixty five years ((...))
Beloved, and well approved, in good men's praise,
And at thy death, thy Faith such hold did lay,
Upon thy Savior which shall nere decay.
Thy life was laudable, thy death was fair,
Thy dust to dust, with honor did repair,
To Westminsters Cathedral, where it lies,
Till (wakened by the dreadful Trump) it rise,
And repossesse thy blessed immortal spirit,
Where both (united) glory may inherit.
Till then shall thy Effigies (carved in stone)
Stand with learned Camden, and with Causabon,
Where Chaucer (Englands Homer) is interred,
Where Spencer (our Arch-Poet) is preferred,
And where the far famed Draytons bones do rest,
There thy memorial has a place possessed.
Postscript.
SOme few years since I made a foolish vow,
That whilst Ben Ionson I v'd I would not row.
Which Idle oath, I slothfully did keep,
But now old Ben is in a lasting sleep,
My vow is quit, and if I live once more,
I Will dash and dabble with my scull or Care.
For though it be a work, I Will boldly say,
That (for the most part) it is a game or play,
And whosoever plays, is sure to win
More certain, than Gleek, Maw, or Inn and Inn.
More gainefull sweat, than can be won at Tennice,
Or by a painted Courtezan of Venice.
'Twill keep me pot-free, or I surely think,
I more shall mind my meat, and less my drink.
Thus when the weather's fair, I (now and then)
Am well disposed to fall to work again.
JOHN TAILOR.


