THE TREASVRE OF TRVE LOVE.

OR A lively description of the love of Christ unto his Spouse, whom in love he
has cleansed in his blood from sin, and made a Royal Priesthood unto his
Father.

By Thomas Tuke, Preacher of the word.

Psalm, 116. 12. 17. What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits
toward me? I will offer a sacrifice of praise, and will call upon the Name of
the Lord. Psalm. 145. 2. I will bless thee daily, and praise thy Name for ever
and ever. LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed, and are to be sold by Thomas
Archer. 1608.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, Master Edward Barrett, Esquire.
SIR, the sacred scriptures, to which we must give credit, (being the
Adaequatum obiectum, Romans 10. 17.
perfect object of our faith, and the Ep^stle of that grand Creator of the
World unto us his Creatures) ascribes the work of Man's Redemption soly and
wholly to the Romans 3. 24. ^5. 1. Cor. 1. 30. 2. Cor. 5. 19 1. Pet. 1. 18. 19.
Grace of God in Jesus Christ. Therefore they, that contradict and impugn this
divine, this inviolable and invincible truth, and seek to father their own
phantastique and base-begotten inventions upon the Scriptures, do (so much as
in them lies) extenuate the all-sufficient and inualuable mediation of Christ,
they obscure the splendour of Gods grace, they diminish his mercy, they corrupt
his word, they pervert his sentence in it, and (as Lib. 1. aduersus Haereses,
cap. 1
Irenaus says in the like case) Transiliunt ordine^ and serie^ Scripturaru^,
ac (quantu^ in ipsis est) dissoluunt membra veritatis; as will appear by the
discussion of those places, Dan. 4. Math. 25. Luke 7. etc.
that are usually objected, ^o fortify that v^^n op^nion of ^umane merits.

And that the grace of God may have all the glor^ f^^m the crea^ure, that he,
which ^i^y^eth, may Ier. (...). 24 2. Cor. 10. 17.
rejoice in him; if we be^in with Christ our 1. Ioh. 2. 1.
Advocate, Ephesians. 1. 4.
in whom we were elected to ^t ^^all life, and (...). Tim. 2. 6. Gal. 3. 13.
Ephesians. 1 7. Heb. 9 1. 2.
b^ whom we were redeemed from eternal ^eath; ^t is evident that as he was
sent by God of his 1. Ioh. 4 10.
undeserved Ioh. 3. 16.
love unto he w^r^^ to ^aue us, even so his Humanity, (that he ^ight be fit
to save us,) as assumed into the Luke 1. 35. Ioh. 1. 1. 14. Math. 1. 23.
unity of his person without d^^^sion, and united Romans 5. 8.
to his Divinity (mediate person^) wi^^ out confusion, his humane nature
p^e-deseruing no such a^^ancement, as Inlib. 1. de Praed. Sa^ct. cap. 15.
Austen teaches. ^^nde (enim ^hoc meruit? Quod eius bonum qualecunque
praecessit? Quid egit ante, quid cred^dit, quid petiuit, vt ad hanc ineffabil^m
excell^ntiam perueniret? And that the same nature was also produced into nature
without that hoer^ditarie disease of corrupted nature, it was from grace and
grace alone. Ang. ibid.
Neque ^n^m Retributa ^st Christo illa generatio, s^d Tributa, vt alienus ab
omni obligatione peccati, de spiri^^ and virg^^nas^eretur.

And as ^o ou^s^lues; we know that he was through the Act. 2. 23
determine recou^sel, and Heb. 2. 9.
grace of God Ro^. 4 25.
delivered to death for ^ur sins, and rose ag^^^ for o^r justification. For G^d
2. Cor 5. 21.
m^de him ^^n for us, that knew Christi duplex est consider^t ^o, v^a c^^dem
dec^^du^ se altera e^un ^u^ r^^s, quorum per^onam insti^u^t. Re^p^ctu prior^s,
Ch^^stus dicitur iustus, sanctus, etc. Respec. ^n posterio^is dicitur factus
pec^a^um, ^rel^. li. 2. Instit.
not (...) (i^ him self) that we might be made the righteousness of God in him,
which were unrighteous in ourselves: For, be^^u^e he did represent our persons,
as o^r Suer^ie therefore all our unrighteousness, (original and actual) was
impu^ed unto him and hi^ right^ousnes both habitual and actual was imputed
unto us. L^^, the adm^rable mixture of justice and mercy; of justice, in that
the Father would have his Son to satisfy for us, rat^er then our sins
should escap^ v^punished: and of mercy, because it p^^sed him to impute the
satisfaction of his So^^e unto us, rather then we should perish ^n our sins.
Ips^ Aug. in ^nc^^. cap. 41.
peccatum, and nos ^ust^tia, n^^ nostra, sed D^^^e^ in nob^s, sed ho^est, in
Ch^^sto^.
^^ipso: sicr^t ipse peccatu^, non s^^^, s^d nostru^: nec in se, sed in nobis:
s^c ergo ^^n^^s i^stitia Dei in ipso, vt^lle est peccat^m in nobis; re^pe
^ximputatione. Finally, for our eternal life in the Luke 16. 22. Io^. 14. 3. 2.
Cor. 5. 1.
heavens, where we shall obtain Re^. 14. 13. and 21. 4.
perfect and perpetual redemption from all sinful and earth Ps. 16. 12. Luke
16. 25 Reu. 22. 5.
miseries, together with a full and final possession o^y immortal joys; Humana
hic Aug. in a ca^e something different, yet true in this, Lib. 1. de prae.
deit. cap. 15
merita conticescant, quae perierunt per Adam: and regnet, quae regnat Dei
gratia per Iesum Christum Dominum nostrum. For everlasting life (as Paul
affirms) is Charisma Dei: the gracious gift Romans 6. 23.
of God, in Jesus Christ our Lord.

The patient bearing of afflictions, and the performance of the works of piety
toward God, and of char^ty toward our Neighbor, without doubt are necessary,
Necessitate presentiae, non efficientiae: being (as we must needs confess)
Bernard.
Via regni, non causa regnandi. For we are Ephesians. 2. 8. Act. 15. 11.
saved by grace, and not by the T^t. 3 5.
works of righteousness, which we have wrought, Quae Aug^^^. ad Simph^. Res^. ad
2. quae^t.
gratiam non pariunt, sed quae gratia Gal. 5. 22. Ephesians. 2. 10. Phil 2 13.
pariuntur. For as f^re does not heat, that it may be hot, but because it is
hot: and as a wheel does not run well that it may be round: but because it is
round: Sic nemo propterea been operatur, vt accipiat gratiam, sed quia accepit.
And though salvation be Ephesians. 2. 8. Fides salua^ non efficiendo, sed afficiend^
si^e applicando. Officium fidei, non meritum praepos. per notat. h Aug. ib.
Through faith Organice, ^et it is not For faith Energetice; seei^g it is an
instrument only, and no principal agent, or meritorious efficient. Ille h
quippe nos fecit credere in Christu^, qui nobis fecit in que^ credimus
Christum: ille facit in hominibus principium fidei and perfectione^ in Jesus,
qui fecit hominem Heb. 12. 2.
principem fidei and perfectorem Iesum. Now it is absurd to think that faith
can merit an^e thing for us with God, being Ioh. 6. 29. Romans 12. 3. 1. Cor. 4.
7.
given us freely without our merit by God. For the will of God id over all,
subject to no cause, to no command, to no constraint. S^ habet Aug. li. 1. de
Genesi contra Manich. cap. 2.
causam voluntas Dei, est aliquid, quod antecedat voluntatem Dei, quod nefas
est credere. By which it is apparent that the grace of God in Christ is all in
all in that glorious and renowmned work of ma^s redemption.

By 1. Ioh. 4 9.
grace we have a Redeemer: by grace we have our Phil. 1. 29
faith in the Redeemer: by Ro^. 3. 24. Tit. 7. 3.
grace we are justified before the throne of divine justice: and by Luke 12.
32. Ioh. 6. 40. 1. Ioh. 5. 11.
grace we attain to the 1. Pet. 1. 9
end of our faith, and the mark, we shoot at, which is the salvation of our
souls in heaven: where all our sobs shall be turned into songs, our grie^es,
into glory, our fights into triumphs, our crown^ of thorns ^n^o a crown of
glory, and all o^^mourning into c^le ^^all mel^die, singing Alloluiah unto the
Lord ^or ever.

A f^rthe^ view of this heavenly doctrine, you may t^k^ in this Tractate
following, if you please to peruse it.

Which i^ you shall accept of, and not account vn^orthy of you, whom I have
acc^^nted worthy of it, I have my full desire, and as much as it does deserve.

That God which 1 wet Gideons fleece with his dew, water it with a shewer of
Judge. 6. 38.
his grace, and preserve you both in soul and body, to the full fruition of
his glory.

Your worships, in Christ Jesus. Thomas Tuke.
Ian. 23. 1607.
THE TREASVRE of true Love.
The first Part.
Revel. 1. 5. 6. Unto him that has loved us, and washed us from our sins in
his blood, and made us Kings and Priests unto God, even his Father, to him be
glory and dominion for evermore, Amen.
CHAP. I.
The coherence of these words, with the former, and their contents, are here
set down.

IN the fourth verse of this Chapter, the Apostle sets down his
Apostolical salutatio^ to the seven Churches, unto whom he dedicateth and
writes this present book, containing a very large, and yet a very short
discourse, and revelation, unmasking the secret enemies of the Church, and
declaring the state thereof unto the end of the world.

In this sal^tation four things are considerable. First, the person saluting
John. Secondly, the persons saluted, the seven Churches which are in Asia.

Thirdly, a wish of grace and peace, of welfare both spiritual and temporal
unto them; that is, of divine favor, and of all benefits, that flow from it.
Fourthly, the persons of whom they are desired, to wit, the Father, the holy
Spirit, and the Son. The Father is delivered by the immutabilitie and
eternity of his nature: the Holy Ghost is pointed at, and painted out by the
diversity of his gifts, the multiplicitie of his works, and al-sufficiencie
and most absolute perfection of his operations. The Son is described many
ways, in very fit press and pithie speeches, wherein the Apostle is very
plentiful and liberal, as if he were amazed with his greatness, and ravished
with his love, and not able to bridle himself, but was (as it were) enforced
for the satisfaction of his affection, and demonstration of his love, to
commend him at large, and to make an ample and exact description of him. A part
whereof is contained in the words of this text, but set forth in form of a
Thanksgiving. For it seems the Apostle being smitten with the consideration
of the singular benefits, which ^e with the rest of Gods people received by
Christ, could not but express that entertainment, which they had found in his
heart, by a serious thanksgiving in his writing.

These words therefore contain in them a Praising of Christ, or a
Thank^sgiuing made unto him: or they are a Testification of a thankful
receiver of his benefits, and of a kind and courteous entertainer of his love.
And in them three things are especially to be considered. First, a description
of Christ continued by John: Secondly, the substance and the matter of the
thanksgiving: Thirdly, the testification of faith, or the doubling of his
desire, in the word, Amen.

Christ is here described, first by his love: secondly, by the works and
tokens of his love. The consideration and remembrance of which things, no doubt
caused this holy man to break out into this praising of him. His love is
expressed in these words; That has loved us. I will first explicate the
words, and then apply them for our use.

CHAP. II.
Some of the words are explained, and here (...) showed: 1. the ways whereby
Christ testifies love: 2. how Christ may truly be said to love: 3. how he is
our wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption: 4. who are
partakers of (...) love.

TO him that is, to Jesus Christ. That (...).] The Love of Christ unto the
creature, is general or special. His general love, is either that whereby he
loves all his creatures, as they are his creatures, and declares it by
continuing their kinds, by preserving their natures, and by saving them from
many dangers; and according to this kind of love, God is said to be ^ood to
all* to be merciful to the unjust as to the just, and to be the Savior of Ps.
145. 9. Math. 5. 1. (...). 4. 10.
all men: or else that whereby he loved Mankind in generally, by taking upon
him the nature and name of man, and not the nature of Angels, no^ of any other
creature whatsoever. His Heb. 2. 16.
special love (understood in this place) is that whereby he loves the elect
and faithful people of God, and is so well affected people of God, and is so
well affected toward them, as that he is wanting in nothing to them, which is
convenient for them. And in this respect he is called the Savior of his
(mystical) body, and is said to love the Ephesians. 5. 2^. 25
Church.

Q. But it may be demanded how Christ (who is true God, Rom 9. (...).) can ^ee
truly said to love, seeing ^oue is properly a passion or affection of the
heart. master to teach us true wisdom, and to instruct us to rule our lives
by the Line of his word, and to cease governing them by the Light of corrupt
reason, or humane directions. And Righteousness; to make us reputed righteous,
through the invaluable merit of his righteousness. For he has made him 2. Cor.
5. 21
to be sin for us, which knew no sin, that we should be made the righteousness
of God in him. And as by one man's disobedience men Romans 5. 12.
were made sinne^^, so by the obedience of that one (man ch^i^^ Jesus imputed
to us by grace, and (...)ued of us by faith) shall many also be made righteous
in Gods account.

Thirdly, he is made unto us Sanctification, not only because he does
mortify the ^le^^ by the virtue of his death, and qui^^en v^ to holiness by the
virtue of his res^rrection, but also because his sanctification or holiness is
imputed to us, and serves as a veil to cover the (...)ption of our natures.
And lastly Redemption, to redeem and deliver us by his most meritorious
passions, by the effusion of his sacred blood, and by the dignity of his death
Ephe. 1. 7.
from all our sins, and from all punishments due unto us for them. Therefore the
Apostle may well and truly say that Christ loved them.

Has loued] Saint John uses the time past (has) to show that the love of
Christ is not new, and that it was the ^ountaine and foundation of those two
benefits, which are set down in the words immediately ensuing. Neither would it
have been seemly to express the effects in words of the time past, and to set
forth their cause in a word of the time present, especially in one continued
sentence, wherein also it has prioritie of place as well as of nature. Wherefore
we may not from hence imagi^e that Christ does not now, or will not herafter
love his Church, because the Apostle says, he has loved. For the l^^^ of
Christ is ^^nstant and eternal unto all his member^, in which respect he is
called an everlasting Father. His Isa. 9. 6.
a hole life was love: and his death was an infallible token of his love. For
by h^s death we are delivered from eternal death. And as by his death he has
sanctified our death, so by the virtue of his death he does slay our sin within
us, the cause of death unto us. In his resurrection he has given us a
sufficient testimony of his love. For as he was delivered to death for our
sins, so he rose again for our justification, that is, that we Romans 4. 25.
might be assured and assuredly persuaded that he did overcome our sins by his
death, and made us acceptable unto his father. And finally, since his ascension
into heaven his love was never wanting. But as he entered into heaven to appear
now in the sight of God (his Heb. 5. 24.
father) for us, so also he ever lives to make intercession for us. And as by
his grace Heb. 7. 25.
he has called us out of the world, and made us partakers of his grace, and
heirs apparent of his glory: so by grace he conserueth us in the state of
grace, that, albeit we live in the world, yet we are now no longer of the
world, but his, who has redeemed us out of the world. As in his love he has
founded us upon himself, as upon a firm Math. 16. 18.
and stable rock: so de does and will in love, confirm and keep us, that the
gates of hell, the strength of the Devil, and the kingdom of darkness shall
never prevail against us. They may batter us, but they shall not beat us
down: they may come against us, but they shall not conquer us: they may war,
Bellare, non debellare.
but they shall not win. For Christ (who is both strength and wisdom it self)
will defend and guard us: he will not fail us, nor forsake us, but will give
all his sheep, all his servants eternal life, mangre the malice and malicious
Ioh. 10. 28.
attempts and wily stratagems of all their enemies; how powerful, politic,
or pestiferous soever they may be. It follows.

Loved Vs] that is, you seven Churches, and me his Apostle and Ambassador. He
loved them; yet so as he loved all those also besides them, that did believe in
his name, and do in all Ephesians. 5. 25.
humility of heart wait for his salvation. Therefore Paul says, that Christ
Loves the Church, and gave himself for it, even the whole Church, and all the
faithful and true members of it: and her alone (with this special love) John.
17. 9.
for he would not vouchsafe to pray for the Reprobates. It is good therefore for
men to labor ere it be too late, to be assuerd that their names are written in
the book of life, and that they are (in albo si^orum Dei,) in the rank and
register of Gods children. This shall suffice for the opening of the words: the
instructions are now to be propounded.

CHAP. III.
Christ's love (...) anatomized, and our du^^ to him for it, is described.

FIrst, seeing Christ has loved us, we may see how deep we are in his debt.
For if he had not loved us, we should have been but abu^^s and forlorn
Cast-awaies: and had he hated us, we should have perished in our sins. H^s
love is our life, and his mercy is the medicine of our maladies. Christ (as
God) with his Father and his Holy Spirit did in love elect us unto life. And in
Christ (as G^d-man, and Mediator Ephesians. 1. 4.
betwixt God and Man) we were by God elected unto glory. His pity procures
our pardon: and his grace our glory. For had not he lived like a man (even a
true man) we which are mere men, had all died, and perished eternally. And had
not he died for us, we should never have lived with him: and but that he did
entierly love us, he would have neither lived nor died for us. Yea finally; his
grace is our goodness: for his love, and loving ^^ndnes to us, made him make
us to be accounted good and glorious in the sight of God. And as we are now
justified by him, preserved, and in part sa^^^ified: so we shall be hereafter
also honored of him, and adorned with perfect Holiness, and perpetual
happiness. Lo then (Beloved) as in a mirror, the wonderful love of Christ
unto us: bebehold the infinite riches of his grace, and the inestimable tokens
of his love. What will thou render unto him for his love? How can thou
requite his kindness, and recompense him for his goodness? All that thou can
do (which indeed thou should do) is to believe in his name, to commend his
love, to acknowledge his grace, to la^d his benignity, to repent of thy
sins, to love him again, and to demonstrate thy love by Angelical, that is,
by sincere, voluntary, constant, alacrious and diligent obedience performed in
all humility, and integ^itie of faith and love, unto all his precepts. For
Christ himself says; If ye love me, keep my commandments. He that has my
commandments, John. 14. 15 21,
and keeps them, is he that loves me: and he that loves me, shall be loved
of my father: and I will love him, and will show my self unto him. If any man
23. 24.
love me, he will keep my word: he that loves me not, keeps not my words.
By which it plainly appears, that those only love Christ, that are careful
to keep his commandments. Those therefore do not love him, but show
themselves disloyal Rebels, that pluck up the quick-set of his laws, that
break down the pales of his precepts, and trample under their feet his
commandments, following the swinge of their own fancies, and going a whoring
after their own lusts; living in Atheism, and Epicurisme, profanenes^e,
sensuality, ha^ing even the outward appearance of true piety, and over
whelmed in the floods of wickedness. But we (Beloved) must practice better
things. Let us never Lord Luke. 6. 4, 6.
him, nor say we love him, unless we labor seriously to obey him. For his
sheep hear his voice and follow him: John. 10.
and those which are his faithful and loving friends are obedient to him, and
strive to please him. Therefore he says; Ye are my friends, if ye do
whatsoever I command you. Moreover, love does John. 15. 14.
not only make a man in heart affect the thing loved, and labor in all things
to please it, and to avoid the doing of those things at all times, which do
displease and offend it: but it does also make a man to desire presence and
fellowship with it, and to rest and content himself with it. That we may
therefore declare our love effectu^^^ to him, and gather infallible assuran^^
^n our souls, that we do indeed affect him, we must not only endeavor to
obey him, and fear by sinning to displease him, but we must also coue^ his
presence, desire his communion, ^ffect his company, expect hi^ coming,
content our selves with his merits, and rest in his love; not ^elling our
souls, not betroathing our selves, not wedding our wills, not applying our
hearts, nor lending our affections to any other whatsoever besides him. His
love to us is worthy of our whole love, to be returned to him, and does deserve
that all creatures in heaven and in earth whatsoever, should come so far behind
him in our affections, as that they should scarce come to be named with him.

Undoubtedly, unless we do very singularly love Christ, who has and yet does
so singularly love v^, and has declared his love unto us, when we were the
slaves of Satan, the servants of sin, and the enemies of God, having nothing
in us, which might move him to affect us, we should show our selves exceeding
unkind and thankles^e.

Seeing therefore he loved, and loves us, let us love him also, and remonstrate
our love unto him through the whole course of our lives, by thinking, speaking
and doing all things, which may Miserum est ngratu^ esse hominem. Plaut.
Ingrato homine terra peius nil creat. Auson.
express our love, and set forth his praise and our thankfulness. For the tree
must show it self by the fruits. I^gratitude is a misery, and an unthankful
person is the worst weed, that the earth does bear, a very hog, that
swalloweth up the m^st, but looks not to the tree from whence it falls.

CHAP. IIII.
An eleven reasons are used to move men to brotherly love.

SEcondly, seeing Christ has loved us, we are taught by his ensample Omnis
Christii actio est nostra instructio. 1. Pet. 2. 27.
to love one anot^er. His pattern must be our practice, his actions must be our
instructions. As Peter says concerning patience: so it may be as truly said
of love, that Christ has left us an example, that we should follow his steps:
and therefore Paul exhorting us to lead our lives in love, says; Walk in love,
even as Christ has loved us. Imitation Ephesians. 5. 2.
is one of the diseases of the English nation; wherefore seeing we will needs
imitate, let us imitate the best. Now we can follow none better then Christ.
His pattern is most perfect, and his footsteps are most even; therefore let
us re(...)ble the one, and walk in the other. When Saint John would win the
faithful to mutual amity, he reasons after this sort; Beloved, 2. John. 4.
11
if God (the Father) so loved us (as that he gave his only son for us) we
ought also to love one another. So I say, seeing Christ has loved us, and that
exceedingly, we ought also to love one another. If he loved us, who was not
bound to love us, then ought we to love one another, being bound to do so by
the virtue of many bonds. There are many reasons to move and persuade Ioh. 15.
12.
us. First, besides that example which Christ has given us, we have his
express Ioh. 10. 27.
commandment. This is my commandment, that ye love one an other, as I have
loved you. Now they, that are hi^ s^^epe, do hea^e (and obey) his voice, and
follow him. Therefore to disting^ish our selves from Goats, from Rebels, we
must give care unto his voice; that is, love one another, as he Ioh. 13. 34.
has loved us.

Secondly, his Apostles and Ambassadors do command and exhort us to perform
this duty. Paul says; Be affectioned to love one another with brotherly love.
Peter says; Love one another Romans 12. 10
with a pure heart seru^tly. And John inculcateth nothing more, then that all
1. Pet. 2. 22.
the godly should love one another. But 1. Ihon. 4. 7. and 3. Ih^n. v. 5.
these were the Lords Penmen: their pens were ruled by the L^rds own singer.
Therefore it were a point of disloyalty to God, and ^n a^gument of rebellious,
and perue^se disposition, to reject or resist them, and to withstand the
Spirit, which speaks by them.

Thirdly, we have the example of holy men. David speaking of Jonathan says;
Thy love to me was wonderful, passing 2. Sam. 1. 26 Ephesians. 1. 15. Coll. 1. 4.
the love of women. The Ephesians and Colossians are noted for their love to
all the Saints. And Paul in praying that the Philippians love might abound,
does Phil. 1. 9.
plainly show that they were not void of love. The Thessalonians are said to
have diligent love, and to testify the 1. These. 1. 3. And. 4. 10.
same toward all the brethren throughout all Macedonia. Philemon was a lover
Phil. 5.
of all the Saints. Yea Paul was so possessed with the spirit of love, as that
he could even wish himself to be Romans 9. 3.
severed from Christ for his brethren, that are his kinsmen, according to the
flesh. Now as that cloud directed the Israelites in their journey to Canaan: so
the ensamples of these holy men, should further us in our way to celestial
Number. 9.
Canaan, to heavenly Jerusalem. They have traced the way before us by love, let
us follow their footing, that we may obtain their joys. As evil examples do
open a window to wickedness, and occasion the wicked to commit iniquity: so let
the good ensamples of the godly, yea of God himself, provoke and excite us to
the works of holiness, and so we following the light of their lamps, shall in
the end be partakers of the brightness of their glory.

Fourthly, we were all elected by one, we were all created by one, to the
glory of one, according to the image of that one: we are all effectually called
by one: we are all redeemed by one blood, and sanctified by one Spirit: we are
all the children of one father and one mother, and we have all one elder
brother, one iustifier, one judge: we are all ordained to one kingdom, to one
family, and are ruled by the same laws: we are all the subjects of one king,
the servants of one Lord, the sheep of one shepherd, the disciples of one
Master, and the people of one God: we have all one hope of our calling, one
faith, one baptism, and one body to feed vpen: we are all the Patients of one
physician, the building of one architect, the vessels of one potter, the temple
of one Spirit, the field of one husbandman, and the hearers of one gospel: we
are all the members of one body, the stones of one building, the branches of
one vine, and travelers in one way to one city, from Egypt through the wide
wilderness of this wicked world unto new Jerusalem, celestial Canaan, a
paradise of perpetual pleasures. Finally, we are all in grafted into one
stock, incorporated into one body, we receive sap from one root, sense from
one head, light from one lamp, and water from one fountain; therefore good
r^ason is there, that we should love and like, affect, favor, and embrace one
another.

Fifthly, it is fearful and grievous to hate, or not to love our brother. For
first, it is a breach of Gods commandment, who forbids us to hate our
brother, Leu^t. 19. 17 Luke. 22. 39
and commands us to love him as our selves. Now he, that keeps his
commandments, dwells in him, and he in 1. Ioh. 3. 24.
him: but horrible calamity shall befall those, that do without timely
repentance transgress and break them: for their worm shall not die, neither
shall their fire be quenched, and they shall be an abhorring Isay. 66. 24.
unto all flesh. Secondly, he that hates his brother is in darkness, and
walks in darkness, and knows not whether he 1 Ioh. 2. 11.
g^eth, because that darkness has blinded his eyes: he is an unregenerate
person, and is not illumined with the light of Gods Spirit, but walks like a
blind Bayard, being possessed with the spirit of ignorance, and blinded with
the darkness of Egypt, out of the kingdom of light, of grace, of Christ, and
in the kingdom of darkness, of sin, and Satan. Thirdly, Whosoever hates
his brother is a manslayer, and ye know that 1. Ioh. 3. 1^.
no manslayer has eternal life abiding in him, but is is obnoxious to
eternal death and destruction. Fourthly, he that loves not (his neighbor,)
knows not God. Undoubtedly, if a man did know 1. Ioh. 4. 8.
God truly, that is, if he did acknowledge him, and knew him as he has
revealed himself unto us in the covenant of grace: if he knew him to be his
God, his Savior, and loving friend and father in his son Christ Jesus, he
would not, he could not but love him, and those also, that are his sons and
servants elected, created, called, justified, adopted, santifyed and preserved
by him, as well as he himself. Fifthly, he that loves not his neighbor, is
not the child of God. For in this are the 1. Ioh. 3. 10
children of God known, and the children of the Devil: whosoever does not
righteousness is not of God, neither he, that Loves Not his brother. Sixthly, he
that loves not his brother, does evidently declare that he loves not God
himself. For how can he, that loves not his brother, whom he has seen,
love God, whom he has not seen? And whosoever 1. John. 3. 14
has this worlds good. and sees his brother have need, and shuts up his
compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him? Seauenthly, he which
loves not his neighbor, does show that his Romans 6. 23.
heart is hard and ^lintie, that it was never mollified with the oil of grace,
that he has not a good conscience, and faith unfeigned, and that he never
truly tasted of Gods love, nor of the sweetness of Christ's blood, neither
that he did ever seriously consider and meditate of those bitter pangs, and
painful passions, which he sustained (whiles he lived, and when he died) as
well for his neighbor, as for himself. To conclude this first argument; He
that 1. Ioh. 3. 4
loves not his brother, abides in death. As he abides in the death of his
soul, being dead in sin, so he remains subject to the death of his soul
and body, which is the wages of sin.

Sixthly, if we would but consider the Romans 6. 23.
excellency, and the excellent use and commodities, which come by this godly
love, it would make us all to be in love with it, and not only to like it in
it self, or in others, but in our selves also, ^ea and to show it in our lives
and dealings.

First, true love comes of God, who is love it self, and the very fountain
of all 2. Ioh. 4. 78. Galat. 5. 22
true love. For every good giving, and every perfect gift is from above, and
comes down from the father of lights. And Iam. 1. 17. 1. Cor. 4. 7
in truth, what have we, that we have not received? Now the glory of the giver
makes the gift more godly. And who can be more glorious then God the Psalm. 2.
4. 10. Math. 6. 13.
king of glory, to whom all glory does of due belong?

Secondly, love is an inseparable companion of true ^aith. For, as Paul
shows, 1. Tim. 1. 5.
love comes out of a pure heart, a good conscience, and faith unsained. And as
Gregory says; Iuantum credimus, tantum diligimus, As we believe, so we love.
Even as light does accompany the Sun, so does love attend upon faith. And as
there is no fire without heat, so there can be no true faith without love. Here
also is love again commended, because it flows from that faith, whereby our
hearts are purified, Act. 15. 9. Heb. 11. 6.
and without which it is impossible to please God, and comes not but from a
conscience, which is at peace and rest, and does excuse a man. So then
whosoever does love truly whom he ought, and as he ought, may assure
himself that he does believe truly, and that his conscience is good before
God, and his heart purged by faith, in the blood of Christ.

Thirdly, such a love of our brethren, is asure sign of our election,
vocation, regeneration and adoption. For every 2. Ioh. 4. 7.
one that loves is borne (...) God, and knows God. And Peter exhorting us to
give diligence to make our calling and election 2. Pet. 1. 7. 10.
sure, shows us, that if among other virtues we have also brotherly kindness
and love, we shall never fall, and therefore may assure our selves that we are
elected and effectually called.

Fourthly, the love of our brethren is in Christ's account accepted and reputed
of, as love showed unto himself, as appears plainly by that speech, which
he will use to his sheep, when he shall come to judge them, Math. 25. 40. In
as much as ye have done it (given ^^ate, drink, lodging, clothing,) unto (...)
of the leaft of th^se my brethren, ye have done it unto me.

Fifthly, the love of men, is an argument of our love toward God himself. 1.
John. 5. 1
For every one, that loves him that did beg^t, loves him also, which is
begotten of ^im. Therefore if we do not love the child of God, who is begotten
of God, it argues that we do not indeed love God, that did beget him. He
that hates the child does not love the father: and he that respects the
master, will not neglect the servant. Sixthly, the love of our brethren is a
sign that we are the temples of the holy Ghost, and that God does inhabit in
us. If we love one another (says 1. John. 4. 12. 16.
John) God dwells in us, and his love is perfest in us. God is love, and he
that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him. Now what an honor is
it, and what a singular comfort should it be to us poor worms, to have the
God Job. 25. 6.
of heaven and earth to dwell within us, and to make his mansion in our sinful
souls, in these loamie houses, and dustie cottages? We cannot set forth his
praise enough, we cannot rceompence his love.

Seventhly, our love, which we bear to the children of God, is an undoubted
token that we are out of the way of 1. Ioh. 3. 14
death, and in the state of life. Therefore the Apostle says; We know that we
are translated from death to life, because we love the brethren. Love is not
the cause of life, nor of the change from Romans 6, 23.
death to life; for everlasting life is the free gift of God: but it is a sign
thereof. And as fire does discover it self by his light, so may this change be
discerned Lumine qui se^per proditur ipse suo. Ovid.
by love.

Eighthly, Love is the end of the commandment. Love is the fulfilling of the
Law, and the bond of perfection. The 1. Tim. 1. 5.
more perfect our love is, the more Romans 13. 10
perfect is our obedience. Yea love is the only debt, which we ought to owe
Col. 3. 14.
to our neighbor. It is a debt, which we must always be in paying off, and
must never have done paying. Therefore Paul says; Owe nothing to any man, but
to love one another: for he that loves Romans 13. 8.
another, has fulfilled the law.

Ninthly, knowledge, learning, the faith of miracles, yea and those works, that
glister outwardly never so gloriously, and are commended never so much of men,
yet are they worth nothing, if they be not accompanied with true love. This
the Apostle teaches when he says; Though I speak 1, Cor. 13. 1
with the toongs of men and Angels, and have not Love* I am as sounding brass,
or a tinkling cimball. And though I had the gift of prophecy, and knew all
secrets, and all knowledge, yea if I had all faith, so that I could remove
moun(...)s, and had not love, I were nothing. And though I feed the poor with
all my goods, and though I give my body that I be bur^^d, and have not Love,
i^ pros^^^th nothing.

Tenthly, Love is the (...), which lets out to the benefit of our brethren,
the waters of Gods graces, which are in the cisterne of our own hearts. It is
a knife, whereby faith carueth out those duties, which we owe to God and Man.
It is a much to give fire to our hearts, and to kindle them to all good works.
It is a fountain, yea and a pipe also, from which, and in which, many sweet
and wholesome waters do slow and run to water and refresh many. It is the
very hand of faith, whereby it works; Which thing Paul plainly testifies,
when he says, that in Christ, neither Circumcision a^^^l^th any thng, nor
uncircumcision, but says which works by love. Gal. 5. 6.


Eleauenthly, Love (says Chrysostom) is the Chara^^er and badge of
Christianity. What can better beseem them then love, that profess that God,
who is Love, that Spirit which works 1. Ioh. 4. 16. Gal. 5. 22.
love, and that Christ who in love ^ide down his life, that they might attain
to life? Yea, it is an infallible taken of a true disciple of Christ, and of
one of his best proficients; therefore he says; by this shall all men know,
that Ioh. 13. 35.
ye are my disciples, if ye love one another.

Twelfly, love is more excellent and commodious in some respect, then either
says by which we are iust^fied, or (...) by which we are s^^ed. This the Gal.
(...). 16* Romans 8. 24
Apostle teaches, when he says; now a^^^deth Faith, Hope, and Love: but the
(...). Cor. 13. 31.
(...)st of these, ^s love; to wit, as concerning use toward o^r neighbor. As
love is the best liuerie, that a Christian man can wear (for it does express
his profession lively, and makes it lively: it sets forth the nature, and
commends the name) so it is the best affection, that he can harbor in his
heart, and entertain within him: for it makes him spend himself like a ^ampe
in Gods house, and to power out and put forth himself to the practice and
performance of those things, which concern Gods glory, his own happiness,
and his neighbors welfare.

Moreover, Love is very powerful and plentiful in rare and admirable effects.
Paul reckeneth sixteen. (...). It suffers long: being void of that
hastiness, 1. Cor. 13. 4
that is easily offended and ready to revenge: and also of that disposition,
which though it have no great inclination to revenge, yet being displeased, is
ready to let fall the former affection, ceasing any longer indeed to declare
the same. But love leapeth over a wall of offenses, and bursteth through a
hedge of impediments, to testify good will to the person loved. 2. Love is
bountiful; ready to pleasure and benefit the party loved, having (as it
were) a grace and facility therein, and therefore plentiful and abounding in
loue-tokens. 3. Love enuieth not; for the man that loves, takes himself to
be (as it were) one and the same with the party loved, and therefore after a
manner entit^led to praises. So that he does wish his estate to be better then
it is; so far is he from envying of the same.

4. Love does not boast it self. 5. It is not puffed up. 6. It does no
uncomely 1. Cor. 13. 5.
thing; For love conceiueth so highly of the thing loved, that it thinks no
service to be humble and dutiful enough to such deserts. And therefore it
cannot deal proudly, nor peruersly, with the party loved, neither yet
unseemly, but so as the state thereof requires, that is, tenderly and seemly,
with the afflicted condition, not disdaining him in it, though never so perplex
ed and miserable, neither dealing so roughly and carelessly, as does little be
seem so pitiful an estate to be dealt withal. 7. Love seeks not her own;
but is so employed about the thing loved, that a man may easily discern in it
a neglect of private profit and pleasure, oftentimes in respect of the regard
to the thing loved. 8. Love is not provoked to anger; for being so surely knit
unto the thing loved as indeed it is, it cannot but suffer many wrongs, before
it can be provoked against that, which is so dear and near unto it. 9. Love
thinks no evil; but either will not take knowledge at al of the ill dealing
of him, whom he loves: or else will blame some other thing for it, as the
cause, that moved him to do it. Love will not be injurious in her thoughts. 10.
Love does not evil unto his Romans 13. 10.
neighbor; for it is taken up with the thing loved, and so ravished with
delight in it, that it makes a man as back-ward in wronging it, as in hurting
himself.

11. Love rejoices not in iniquity. 1. Cor. 13. 6


12. But it rejoices in the truth. It rejoices neither in the doings of him,
that is loved, which be not sincere, sound and holy: neither yet in the
dealings of himself or of others, which are not righteous and good: but on the
contrary it delights in the just and true dealing of himself, and of others
also with the party loved.

1^. Love suffers all things. 14. It believes 1. Cor. 13. 7.
all things. 15. It hops all things. 16. It endures all things. Love
covers a multitude of sins. Love is ready to forgive and to forget. It
patiently bears aburthen of wants and infirmities in the person loved,
believing and hoping the best, trusting and expecting to see them redressed.
Love will pocket up a world of wrongs, a multitude, a mountain of defects and
of weaknesses, it will swallowe them up, and bury them in the grave of
oblivion. It is not quarrellous, but patient: it is not diffident and
incredulous, it dispaireth no^, but hops and believes so long as there is
any the least reason to move thereunto.

Finally, that I may shut up this sixth argument, the excellency of love
appears in the perpetuity and constancy thereof. For (as Paul teaches) true
1. Cor. 13. 8.
love does never fall away. It may fall, but not fall away: it may be weakened,
but not wasted: it may be crazed, but not conquered: lessened, but not lost:
yea both left and lost as touching the might and measure of it in some degrees
(and therefore the church of Ephesus is charged Reu. 2. 4.
to have left her First Love,) but it cannot be lost, as touching the sap and
substance of it altogether. Life and juice may be in a tree, when the top
thereof is naked, and all the leaves fallen of. And so love will live, when some
signs of life are lost. It will fly with Dedalus, when the love of hypocrites
and worldlings shall fall down with Icarus. It is like death, which deuoureth
all: and the grave, which swalloweth Cant. 8. 6. 7.
up all. The waters of sorrow, and the floods of affliction, cannot ouerwhelme
and drown it. It will swim beneath like a fish, and flote aloft, like a ship;
yea like N^ahs Arc it shall keep up, when the glorious love and all the
glistering moralities of Pagans, Atheists, and Earthworms, shall sink down
and perish. For the gifts of God Romans (...). 29.
(among which love is not the least) are given without repentance. When God
has once in mercy planted it in the garden of a Christians heart, it shall
there abide: no worm shall eat it, no Boar shall ever root it up, no sithe
mow it down, and no Moule shall turn it up: for God by grace will preserve
and keep it. And as Zerubbabel laid the foundation of the temple, Zach. 4. 9.
and did also finish it: so God having once begun this good work of Love
within us, having once cast it in the mould of our hearts, having once riuited
and rooted it in us, he will not leave it till he have brought it to
perfection, and what it wants in this world he will supply in the world to
come. The Sun did once stand still, and once Josh. 10. 13. Is. 38. 8.
go backward ten degrees: it has suffered many Eclipses, and makes many
Settings: but it still remains in the heaven, and falls not down to the
earth, nor vanishes like a comet or blazing star. Even so true Love may stand
and move not, it may retire and run back sometimes, but yet it continues firmly
fixed, (though now and then eclipsed) in the sphaere of the heart: her light is
never wholly lost, her heat is not quite extinct: and though it set, yet it
shall rise again and appear. And (as David speaks in effect concerning the
Sun, Ps. 19. 5.
so say I concerning love) It shall come forth as a Bridegroom out of his
chamber, and shall rejoice like a mighty man to run his race. Though hel-gates
should open themselves against it, yet it shall continue. Though the Devil
like a ramping and roaring Lion run with open mouth against it, yet it shall
not perish. Though he plant all his infernal ordinance against it, yet shall
he not supplant, nor beat it down. He may shake it, but he shall not shiuer
it. Though he work against it like a Moule in the earth, and seek by
undermining to subvert it, yet he shall not prevail. Though he show himself
in his colors, laboring to blast it with the stormy winds of his violent
temptations, and with the scorching blasts of his breath, and to destroy it by
all means possible, whcih he can devise and practice, yet all is in vain, he
shall but loose his labor. For God will defend and succor it. He will not
suffer this fire to die, he will not let this lamp go out, but will relieve
it with new matter, and with the fresh oil of his Spirit. This flower shall
never fall off: this tree shall never be stubbed up. God will so hedge it in
with the thick and thornie quick-set of his grace, and so compass it with the
walls of his love, that it shall be preserved from wind and weather, and from
all the enemies thereof; so, as that they shall never be able to destroy it.
Christ has said, that his Sheep shall never perish, and Ioh. 10. 28
that none shall pluck them out of his hand. But whosoever does pluck this
holy affection of Love, out of the heart of a true Christian, and does destroy
it, he does even destroy one of Christ's sheep, and pulls him from Christ. For
true love is an inseperable companion of one of Christ's true sheep, and it is
an infallible argument of true faih, which is as it were the quintessence and
the very soul of a true Christian; and without Love, there is no Faith. For
without water there is no fountain: and without light, there is no Sun. And
therefore there can be no sheep, no Christian without love. So then, destroy
love, and destroy a sheep of Christ: but his sheep cannot be destroyed;
therefore their love shall always last. It cannot be lost, it cannot be
destroyed. This shall suffice for the sixth motive, that should move us to
entertain and practice this virtue love, drawn from the consideration of the
excellency thereof, and from the manifold commodities, which it does afford.

Seauenthly, if a man love that, which he ought to love, he is happy Si quis
amat quod amare iuuat, feliciter ardet: Gaudeat, and Vento nauiget ille suo.
Ovid.
in his love, he may joy therein, and ride along in it without striking sail,
or fear of foul weather. But he that loves his brethren (as they are the
members of Christ) does effect that, which he should affect, and which it is
comfortable, commodious, and delightful to affect. Therefore his love is good,
he is happy in his love, and may continue therein without repentance.

Eighthly, true love is an enemy to vice, and as it links many together, and
makes them have (as it were) one soul in many bodies, so it also does oppose
it self to those things, which engender ^atred and discord, and are the very
breake-necks of societies. For in true love there is no loss, no iarres, no
woe, no pain: faith, and no falsehood: truth, and no treachery: kindness,
but no craft: salues, but no sores. It is as water to quench the fi^e of
discension. It is as fire to eat out the rust of rancour, and the dross of
spleen and envy. It is as the Sun to dispel the coldness of the affections,
to dissolve the frosts of hatred and uncharitableness, and to melt the y^e of
churlishnes and malice. It is as a South Wind to drive away all hard weather,
to make us leave all hard, cruel, and unconscionable dealing. It is as
bellows to blow up and increase courtesy, good will, familiarity, modesty,
and moderation. It is as a Castle, to bear out and endure all adverse
battery, and to arm a man against all the boults and bullets of discord: and
it is also an Engine to disturb and overthrow the bulwarks of debate, and the
muniments of malice: and as a Sword to cut off the head of hatred. Being
therefore the pillar of true fellowship, the prop of grace and good will, an
enemy to pride, a chain of gold to tie men fast together, yea and an eloquent
and goldenmouthed Orator, to plead for peace, and to persuade to justice; it
should inamour al men with it. Al men ought to price it highly, and to pursue
it eagerly.

Ninthly, he that loved his brother truly, that is, for the sake of Christ,
does plainly show that his love is greater unto Christ. For he that loves the
servant for his Masters sake, does much more love the Master. For the rule is,
that that thing, for which any thing does exist, does it self much more exist.
Therefore if I love my brother because I love Christ, it follows that my love
to Christ is greater then my love to him.

Tenthly, we ought to love our brethren, though we had no other reason to move
us so to do, but that we know that Christ does love them as well as us, and
that the Devil does hate them, as he does our selves.

Lastly, we are commanded to do all things in love; therefore we must love,
and have love. A Goldsmith cannot try his gold by a touchstone, except he have
a touchstone. A Founder cannot cast his mettell in a mould, unless he both
have and use his mould: neither can we cast our works in the mould of love,
unless we both have and use it. Again, We ought to rejoice Romans 12, 15. 16.
with them that rejoice, to weep with them that weep, and to be of like
affection one to another. Which we can never do, unless we be possessed with
the spirit of Romans 12. 21
love. Moreover, we must not be overcome of evil, but must overcome evil with
goodness: And we are exhorted to give Romans 23. 7
all men their due. Which things we can never well perform without love.
Furthermore, all bitterness, wrath and Ephesians. 4. 31. 32.
malice must be abandoned: and we must be courteous and tenderhearted, freely
forgiving one another, even as God for Christ his sake did freely forgive us.
Therefore we must of necessity be charitably minded and loving. We must Ephesians.
5. 10.
approve that, which is pleasing to the Lord; Therefore we must approve and
esteem of love, and ratify our approbation by our practice answerable unto
it. We ought to have no fellowship Ephesians. 5. 11.
with the unfruitful works of darkness, but even to reprove them rather. But
want of charity, hatred, and enmity, are works of darkness, yea and of the
Prince of darkness, and are not only unfruitful, but hurtful. Therefore we
must not follow, but fly the^: and if we must reprove the^, we must in no wise
practice the^, but rather give ourselves to the contrary virtues. To conclude
this point; we are bidden to do, and to think on those things, that are
honest, pure, virtuous, of good report, Col. 4. 8.
and worthy praise. Therefore we ought to exercise our selves in love. Love
must take up our thoughts in wishing well, and our tongues in speaking and
counselling well, and our hands in doing well. Let us therefore (Beloved)
embrace one another in the arms of amity. Behold (says David) Psalm. 133. 1.
how good and comely a thing it is, brethren to dwell together. And let us
demo^strate Consule, castiga, solare, remitte, fe^, ora: visito, poto, cibo,
redimo, tego, colligo, ^o^do.
the inward affection of the heart, by the visible and apparent tokens thereof
in our lives: instructing the ignorant, comforting the afflicted, pardoning the
offender, bearing with the weak, visiting the sick, feeding the hung^ie,
clothing the naked, and in doing all those duties which may confirm and
testify our love, wherewith we do affect our brethren. And because God does
not only require that our works be good, but also that they be well performed;
I will briefly show the manner how we ought to love.

First, we must love in faith: that is, we must believe that God will accep^ of
our love, and forgive the weakness of it, for the merits of Christ.

Secondly, we must love even with a mind to perform obedience to Gods
commandment, who bids us love.

Thirdly, we must love truly and indeed, and not in show only. Therefore Paul
says: let love be without hypocrisy. Romans 12. 9. 1. Ioh. 3. 18.
And John says: Let us not love in word, nor in tongue only, but in deed and
truth. Fourthly, we must be ^arnest and vehement in our love. Therefore Peter
says; Love one another with 1. Pet. 1. 22. 1. Pet. 4. 8.
a pure heart ferue^tly. And again; Above all things have fervent love among
you.

Fifthly, we must love constantly, without weariness. For true love will not
end, while the object li^eth and Necmodus and requies, nisi mors, reperitur
amoris. Ovid.
the subject is not dead. Therefore their love is not sound, which flicker
about men like flies in the summer of prosperity, and fly from them like
Swallows in the winter of adversity. True Verus amornullum nouit habere
modum, Propert.
love is constant: it knows neither end nor measure. This shall suffice for
the second instruction drawn from the example of Christ's love, which all the
members of Christ ought to imitate.

CHAP. V.
The love of Christ to us is the ground and Mint-house of our comfort in him.

THirdly, has Christ loved us? The consideration of his love, must needs
minister exceeding comfort unto us. For his love is the fountain, from whence
we derive our life, our love, our liberty. It is the Sun, which warmeth our
frozen hearts, and frost-bitten affections, and causes the light of saving
knowledge to shine within us. It is a Looking-glass, wherein we may behold his
lovely nature. And by it we may discern the sweet consent and harmony of both
his wills, of both his natures, how they did with one consent conspire to
destroy our enemies, and to save us, who are by nature very slaves and
wretches, Ephesians. 2. 1. 3. 12.
dead in sins, children of wrath, atheists and alients from the commonwealth of
Izrael. It is no small joy for a poor person to enjoy the love of a potent
Prince. What are we, but poor, base, and dispiceable catiues, less then the
least of Gods mercies. Therefore utterly unworthy the love of so glorious a
Monarch. Seeing the^ Christ that migh* God Isay. 9. 6.
and Prince of all the Princes in the world, has made us partakers of his
love, we have great cause to rejoice and to solace our souls. For as his love
is the very life of our souls, and the wel-spring of our happiness: so it is in
it self permanent, and not transient: constant and eternal; like the
Izraelites clothes, which waxed not old all the while they were in in the
wilderness: and not unlike the Moon, which though sometimes it seems very
small, or is not seen at all, yet in her self she is always of one size.

Those, whom he loved ever, he loves for ever. Honey shall sooner become Ioh.
13. 1. Dulcia amara prius fie^t, and mollia dura. Virgil. Romans 8. 35.
gaull, and the Diamond wax, then his love shall either turn to hatred, or
cease to be. Therefore Paul says; Who can separate us from the love of Christ,
wherewith he loves us? Now then (beloved) seeing Christ has loved us, and
does yet continue steadfast in his love unto us, we must arm our selves with
the remembrance of his love, as with armor of proo^e against all the disgraces
of the World. Though the wicked detest and deride thee, though they persecut^
and envy thee, though they do maliciously traduce thee, yet comfort thy self
with this, that Christ, who is greater then all, does love thee, Ioh. 10. 2. 8.
and will let none to take thee out of his hands. If the fear of damnation do
s^ize upon thee, if Satan seem to challenge thee for his; make thine answer,
comfort thy soul, with Christ has loved me. Whom he once does love, he will
not leave. His love is like the tree (...)life: those that have tasted of it
shall Genes. 3. 22.
never die. And though he chasten thine iniquity with ^ods, and thy sin with
scourges, yet he will not withdraw Ps. 89. 32. 33
his loving kindness from thee. His love shall last, though thou may think it
lost, because he withholdeth the tokens of it from thee. The frowning father,
the chiding father, yea the ^ighting father, does love his son entierly. Joseph
loved his brethren then, when he spoke roughly to them. A shepherd will
soubbe his sheep, and apply sharp and smarting medicines to them. And whom
Christ does affect, he will be sure to correct. Direction without correction,
is not sufficient Reu. 3. 19.
to make good scholars, or good children. That is not always the best meat,
which the sick person does most desire: nor that the worst physic, which the
Patience does least affect. Christ is wise, and knows what is fittest for us,
that we might not be unfit for him. Aloes is sometimes more wholesome then
hunnie. Therefore we must not think that Christ does hate us, or leave off to
love us, when he does severely chasten and afflict us.

Fourthly, seeing it has pleased our Lord to love us, we may without doubting
assure our selves that he will not deny us earthly things (the silliest signs
of his grace) if he see them convenient for us. If he vouchsafe to impart the
greatest, he will not deny the least. If he suffer us, or rather if he make us
drink of the fountain, surely he will not restrain us from the least of
those many streams, which flow from it, if he see them as wholesome to the
heart, as they are toothsome to the taste. He that gives pearls, will not
stick at pebles. But as fervent and true love will force the lover to manifest
his secret affection by all outward actions he can, which may express it: so
the love of Christ unto us (being faithful without feigning, constant without
change, and infinite without end) does make and move him to do all things, that
may declare it, and will not permit him to fail in any thing, which serves
either to advance the glory of his grace, or to further the felicity of our
souls.

CHAP. VI.
A believer may be faith be certainly assured of the love of Christ unto him.

Fifthly, in that our Apostle says; He has loved us: he shows by this
peremptory and certain speech, that he was assured that as Christ loved all the
faithful, so himself also. By which we are not only taught that it is
possible for a man to be persuaded of the love of Christ unto himself in
particular, (for a certain persuasion thereof is the life or soul of true
faith, and doubting is the daughter of unbelief) Romans 4 20.
but that we ought every one of us also to endeavor, that we may be able to
say of our selves that Christ has loved us: Christ has loved Me. This John
was able to do, and in effect did so: and Gal. 2. 20.
so did Paul; Christ has loved me, and given himself for me. And (beloved)
this assurance is worthy having. For first, it is a comfort that follows a
man even to his grave. Secondly, the longer a man has it, the larger it
waxes, if we be not in the fault; it is not like a bullet, which is no sooner
in the mould, but it is made: it grows by degrees like a plant, and gathers
strength by continuance. Thirdly, it makes a man more circumspect over his
ways, mo^e desirous to love him again, and very loath to do that, which may
deserve that his love should be changed into hatred, and his favor into
enmity. Fourthly, it affoordeth singular comfort. For what greater good can a
man desire or enjoy, then to possess his love, who is goodness it self, and
to be persuaded of his grace, that is the fountain of grace, and the author of
al true glory. Fifthly, this assurance is an undoubted token of true faith, yea
indeed the very form and sap thereof. For what else is saving faith, but a
particular and certain persuasion and assurance of Christ his love, and of
those benefits which are derived from it? Now he that has true faith, may
assure himself that he is a faithful man, a Gal. 3. 26. Ioh. 10. 26.
child of God, a sheep of Christ, possessed with the kingdom of grace, and
entitled to the kingdom of glory. Sixthly, this assurance is the more to be
respected, because it is appropriated to the Elect. For it is not possible that
any of the Reprobates (who are forsaken of God, and not beloved of Christ)
should in their consciences be truly assured of the love of Christ. Indeed, as
he that is in a dream, may think he has clothes on his back and money in
his purse, though he have not any, so the Reprobate may be so held with a
dream or possessed with a spiritual phrenzie, that he may imagine himself to
be in the favor of God, and to partake of Christ's love, albeit indeed he be
not so, but is a very vas^all of Satan, and a vessel of wrath, ordained to
eternal damnation.

Q. How then (may some man say) shall I come to this assurance?

A. I answer: he that loves Christ, as Christ has taught him, may know for
certain that Christ loves him. And a man shall never truly love Christ, till he
be persuaded, in some measure, that Christ does love him. We love him, because
he loved us. Secondly, he that is careful to serve and honor him, may assure
himself that he is beloved of him. For Christ himself says, that both he
and his Father, do love those Ioh. 14. 21.
that keep his commandments. Therefore be thou sure that thou do obey him,
and then thou may assure thy self of his love. Thirdly, a man may know that
Christ loved him, of he find in him self the fruits of the Spirit, which are
found in none, but in those whom Christ does love. These fruits are peace of
conscience, joy, long suffering, Gal. 5. 22.
gentleness, goodness, meeknes, temperancy, and brotherly love. And albeit the
Reprobate may have these fruits in show, yet he has them not indeed, as the
Godly have. All is not the Sun, which shines: neither is all that Gold, which
glisters. For if they should be tried by the touchstone of the word, it would
appear that their metal were not good gold, but gilded copper: and that
their virtues were Laruae a^ simulacra virtutum, Na^ (vt Hieron. ait) ^ine
Christo omnis virtus vi tium est.
but masked vices, covered only with the veil of sanctity; like many apples,
which have red cheeks, but rotten cores. For they come not from Christ, they
are not framed upon the stithy of an honest heart, with the hammer of Gods
word, by the finger of his holy Spirit, Et August: Virtutes nisi ad Deum
referantur, non sunt virtutes.
neither are they used in that manner and to that end, which God commands,
which God likes. They be rather natures gifts, then Gods graces: natural
moralities, and not moral graces. Finally, if thou would yet know further
how thou may attain to this assurance, then observe diligently Gods dealing
with thee from time to time: and fly unto Christ in heaven, with the wings of
thy soul, by earnest and incessant supplication: bow down the knees of thy
soul before him, and desire him of his love to send his holy Spirit into thee,
that may teach thee to cry Abba father, and may assure thee of his love unto
thee. Whatsoever thing we ask of him, with confidence to be heard for his
names sake (if it like him) he will without fail bestow it on us.

CHAP. VII.
The sins of the faithful do not put out the eye of Christ's love, and
extinguish the fire of his grace.

Sixthly, seeing that the Apostle says, that Christ loved those Churches, in
which notwithstanding there were sundry defects, many wrinkles, many moles,
many diseases; we may see, that those are too blind and too uncharitable, who
censure all those as quite ^alle^ from grace, and utterly out of Gods favor,
who do fall into any grievous sin, or have the plauge-sores of sin (as it were)
running upon them. A man may have the Leprosy, and yet live the life of nature:
so a man may through natural ^ra^ltie have the leprosy of sin in his soul,
and yet live the life of grace. A man may be a live, yea and live, though he
have the plague in his body: so may he live, though he be sick of the plague of
sin; for no sin shall quite put out the life of grace in him, that is
regenerate, Noah, Lot, David, and Peter, fell gree^ously, but yet their falls
were not unto death, though in themselves they were deadly. Paul was not afraid
to call the backsliding Galathians Brethren, Gal. 1. 4. 11
and to say (according to his judgment of charity) that Christ did give
himself for their sins. A man may fall, though he fall not quite away. And
(as Augustine says) The righteousness Iustitia sanctoru^ in hoc mundo, magis
peccatorum remissione co^stat, quam per^ectione virtutum.
of saints in this world, consists rather in the remission of sins, then in
the perfection of virtues. Our best perfection is to confess and labor to
correct our imperfection. A Father may suffer his child to stumble and fall in
his presence and yet love him dearly: and so Christ (whose children and s^ed we
are) may Heb. 2. 13. Is. 53. 10.
suffer us to fall into sin, and yet continue firm in love. For he does it to
make us to distaste our pride, to despair These uses men should make of their
falls.
of our own strength, to depend upon him, to ascribe our standing unto him, to
cling the closer about him, to seek and sue unto him for his aid, to blush at
our selves, to think more charitably of other men that fall, to renounce
Satan, and their native corruptions, to wax wise and wary of falling, and to
teach other men to look the better to there feet, and to show his grace by
helping of them up again. Yet nevertheless we must be very vigilant, and
take heed that we give not the reigns to sin. For though Christ may love a
man, that sins, so it be of weakness: yet he hates his sin, and perhaps
he will correct him sharply for it, and carry himself for a time like an
enemy. But as for him, that walks in sin, and weltereth in his wickedness,
sinning with full consent of will without remorse of conscience; Christ does
either actually have him (as if he be a Reprobate) or at the least he does not
actually reveal his love unto him, though he be one of Gods Elect: neither can
this sinner, whiles he so continues without repentance, distinguish himself
from a Reprobate. For when Christ declares his love actually and effectually
to any man, the^ he smites his heart with the sword of his S^irit, and works
such an alteration in his soul, that thence-forward he shall die to sin,
and live to righteousness.

When Euilmerodach disclosed his Ier. 52. 31. 33.
love to Iehoiakim, he brought him out of prison, and changed his prison
garments: so when Christ does actually reveal his love unto a man, then he
brings him out of the prison of the devil, he vnlooseth the bolts of sin, he
changes his rayments of wickedness, and does apparel him with the rich robes
of his own righteousness. And as that penitent ^aylour to manifest his good
will to Paul and Silas, did not Act. 16. 33.
only fetch them out of the prison, ut also washed their s^^ipes: so Christ,
when he reuealeth his special love unto any, then does he wash the wounds of
their souls with his blood, and batheth them in the waters of his holy Spirit.
He casts them (as it were) into a furnace, and consumes the dross of ^in
with the fire of his grace. Therefore Paul says, that those, who Gal. 5. 24.
are Christ's, h^^e crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts. And
saint John says, that whosoever is borne of God, sin^eth 1. Ioh. 3. 9.
not: meaning, with full consent of heart: he sins not unto death: he lives
not without repentance in his sins: he drinks not iniquity, as fishes do
water: he sells not himself to work wickedness, as Ahab did, 1. King. 21
25.
Wherefore as we must not account a man forsaken of Christ, because he is
overtaken with some enormitie: so again, we must take heed that we do not
wilfully give our selves unto any manner of sin, because we hear that his
love is constant, and that sin cannot make a divorce betwixt him and us, and
an utter separation, if once we were in his favor, and were united to him.
This were transcendent impiety, and very horrible ingratitude.

CHAP. VIII.
Christ's Love is the fountain and Primum Mobile, (indeed immobile) of all
good things that come to us. His love is not merited by us.

Seauenthly, in that the Apostle gives the priority of place to Christ's love,
seating it before the benefits, which we receive by him; I gather that his Love
is the scaturidge, and foundation of all those works, which he wrought for us.
His love was the Anuill, whereupon they were all forged: it was the Spring, from
whence they sprang, and the Pipe or Channel through which they ran to us, who
are as Cisternes to receive them. Therefore we must renounce and abiu^e all
opinion of our own merits, or fore^eene preparations. O^^ best merit, which
yet is no merit, is to confess freely that we can merit nothing, nothing at
all that good is. For unto us belongs nothing but op^^ ^^ame, and confusion
of face for ever. Dan. 9, 8.
It is Gods mere mercy, and his pity, not our merits or piety, that we
perish not in our sins. And if we either w^^ well, or work well, we must
ascribe it solie to Gods good will, who works in us the will and the deed of
his good pleasure. Phil. 2. 13. Hi^vell^ no^ (...) substa^tia volu^tatis, sed
Why did God honor the World with his only Son? Was it not because he loved
the World? So Christ de (...) qualitate accipitu^r. Ioh. 3. 16.
says: for God so loved the world, that he has given his only S^nne to all
that lay hold upon him with the hand of a lively faith. Yea, but was not his
love procured by our love? Did not our love of him draw his love to us, as the
Lodestone does iron? Verily no: for herein (says John) is that love, not 1.
Ioh. 4. 10. 19.
that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his son (in love) to be a
reconciliation for our sins. We love him, because he loved us first.

Why has God raised us from the grave of sin, and quickened us in his son,
and saved us? Was it not because he loved us? Paul teaches us to think so,
and no otherwise, and therefor says, But God who is rich in mercy, through
(...) great love, wherewith he loved Ephesians. 2. 4. 5.
(...) when we were dead by sins, has quickened us together in Christ, by
who^^ grace ye are saved. What moved Christ besides his love, to give himself
to death for us? Just nothing in us: therefore 1. Ioh. 3. 16.
John says, hereby we have perceived love, that he laid down his life for
us. By whom (says Paul) we have redemption Ephesians. 1. 7.
through his blood, according to his rich Grace. Nothing at all but pure love
made him bestow himself. upon the Church: it was his grace, and not her
goodness: not because she was fair and w^rthie, but because he was fanourable
and gracious.

Therefore the Apostle says; Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for
E^h. 5. 25. 26.
her* that he might sanctify (or make her (...)e and holy) and cleanse her by
the washing of water through the word. By which we plainly see, that his love
is the forge and fountain, from whence our holiness, our happiness, and all
spiritual, celestial and eternal benefits whatsoever do proceed and come.

Thus much concerning the love of Christ. The works or tokens of his love come
now to be considered in the next words.

Here ends the first part.
THE SECOND PART.
REV. 1. 5. And has washed us from our sins, in (or by) his blood.
CHAP. I.
The sense is given: diverse doubts are removed: remission of sins consents
with regeneration in three things: and differs from it in seven other.

THe Apostle having affirmed that Christ did love us, he does immediately
confirm his affirmation, by setting down two notable works, performed by him
for us, being undoubted tokens and fruits of his love unto us. The former
whereof is expressed in the words recited: [His Blood,] that is, the merit and
validity of his blood. And by blood we must understand his whole passion, the
which was accomplished at the effusion of his blood upon the cross.

For albeit, as touching the divine n^^ure, he cannot properly be said to have
blood; in that the Deity is a most pure, simple, perfect, and incomprehensible
Essence, void of composition and alteration;) yet as concerning his humanity,
he has blood, he shed his blood, and died. And for that the humane nature is
not a person subsisting by it self, but is received into the vni^^e of his
person, as he is the eternal Son of the Father, and a true distinct person
existing from al eternity; therefore by a figure that, which is proper to one
of his natures, is attributed to his whole person. Whence it is that Paul
says, that God has purchased the Act. 20. 28.
Church by his own blood; that is, God incarnate, or that person, who is true
God. And thus Marie, contrary to the opinion of Nestorius, may be said to be
the mother of God, to wit, of that person, or of that man, who is God. So we
must use to say that a man has eyes, hands, and legs, and that truly; yet
the soul, which is the more excellent part of man, has not any such. For it
is an incorporall and spiritual substance.

If it be demanded from whence the blood of Christ does derive such dignity
and desert, as that it procures the pardon of sin, or the clensing of our
souls from all corruption; I answer, that it proceeds from his God head or
person; because it was the blood of God, the blood of that innocent and just
man, that is also truly God, therefore it was of admirable excellency, and of
inexplicable vigor and value, sufficient for merit to have cle^sed a thousand
thousand worlds of sins.

If further it be demanded, how they, that were before Christ, and we, that do
live since his death, can be truly said to be washed from our sins by his
blood, which is not now shed, nor then could be, seeing that he was not borne.

I answer: Christ is the Lamb of God, Reu. 13. 8.
that was slain from the beginning of the World: to wit, in respect of faith,
and of Gods eternal decree and gracious acceptance, so that his blood is not,
nor ever was dry in regard of merit and efficacy: but whosoever did receive
and apply it to his heart by faith, was purged from his sins, which is
signified, when it is said, that He has washed us: that is, he has cleansed,
purified, absolved, or procured the remission or absolution of sins for all
the elect and faithful people of God, wheresoever or whatsoever. Therefore
John says, 1. Ioh. 2. 2.
that he is a Reconcilation for the sins of the whole world of the Elect. And
the author to the Hebr^wes says, that he Heb. 2. 9.
tasted death for all men: that is, for the Elect of all sorts and sexes, and
for them only. And therefore he says, that his Math. 26. 28.
blood was shed for many, and not for all without exception of any. God
commanded the Arc and the Mercy-seat Ex. 25. 10. 17.
to be made of one length and breadth; thereby showing, that his Mercy in
Christ should be extended no farther then the Church. If Christ would not Ioh.
17. 9.
safe the reprobate a pra^er, we may not think that he would give the^ his
blood.

From sinnes] Si^^^ (says John) is the^ transgression of the Law, even every
aberration from the Law of God, 1. Ioh. 3. 4.
which is the Rule of our obedience, the Touchstone of all our Actions, and (as
it were) the Epistle of the Creator, to his creatures. Sin^^ is either
original or actual. Original sin consists in the gui^^ of Adams first
transgression, and in the want of that puri^^e, wherein we were a^ first
created, and in an inc^ination and propensiue to all manner of wickedness.
Actual ^inn^ is any pre^^rication and breach of the law^^r will of God, in
thought, word, or work, whether by commission of evil, or omission of good.
Now by sins in this place, we must understand all, both original and
actual, even all transgressions of Gods commandments, whether legal or
e^angelicall, and the punishments due unto us for them; where observe, that he
calls Sins, our Sins; for Sin is our own, and not Christ's. For he 2.
Cor. 5. 21.
knew no sin. Neither are they Gods. For he is not the author of that,
whereof Non est auctor, eius, cuius est vltor. Fulgent.
he is the revenger. And David says; Thou art not a God, that love
wickedness: neither shall evil dwell with thee: Psalm. 5. 4. So then, the
meaning of the words is this; Christ has purchased the p^rd^^ of all our
sins and has delivered us from the guilt and punishment of them all by the
merit of his Sacred blood, whereby he has appeased his Father, and covered
us from his wrathful indignation, as with a ^^yle. But yet that we may
attain to the perfect understanding of these words, two questions had need to
be answered.

First, it may be demanded, how Christ can be said to have washed us from our
sins, seeing that sin remains in us unto death.

For our satisfaction herein, we must know, that Christ is ^^^de to wash our
sins away in his blood, because he has thereby procured their pardon so, as
that they shall never be imputed to us unto condemnation. For sin is washed
away two ways. First, when God forgiues it, and lays it not to our charge;
and this he does in the justification of a sinner. Secondly, when he mortifieth
it, and repaireth his ruinated image within us; and this is called the washing
of sanctification.

Now the washing of sanctification is properly understood in the text.

Secondly, it may be demanded wherein the absolution and washing away of sin in
Justification by the blood of Christ differs from the ablution and purging of
it in sanctification by the water and fire of the Holy Ghost, Or, wherein
remission of sins differs from regeneration, and wherein they iump.

They agree in three respects. First in their efficient cause. For God is the
author of both, through the merit of Christ.

Secondly, they have one commune isntrumental cause, which is faith.

Thirdly, they have one general end: to wit, the glory of God, and the
salvation of our souls. But yet they differ very much in other respects.

First, in their form or nature. For remission of sins is an action of God,
whereby he does cover our sins in the blood of Christ, not imputing them to us,
but to Christ. Regeneration is a work of God, whereby through the effectual
operation of his Spirit, he does alter and change the heart, mortifying the
flesh, illuminating the mind, refining the affections, and sanctifying all the
parts of the body, and all the powers of the soul.

Secondly, they differ in their subject. For the mind, the will, and the
affections, are the subjects of sanctification, but not of the remission of
sins. The obedience of Christ is imputed to us, and is not inhoerent in us, as
are the graces of regeneration, Remission of sin is an action of God out of a
man: but mortification is within a man.

Thirdly, their object is diverse. For the law is the object of sanctification:
but remission of sin respects the obedience of Christ.

Fourthly, they differ in their effects. For remission of sins makes us to be
accounted no sinner: but so does not regeneration. The ablu^ion of sin in
justification, is our absolution: but the ablution of sin by sanctification, is
not our absolution, but a conseque^t and sign thereof. Remission of sin
keeps ^^n from condemning us: but regeneration keeps sin onel^ from
tyr^nnizing and do^^ering over us.

Fi^^ly, Remissi^n of sins is p^rfect in this life, and acted at one instant by
Romans 8. 1.
God, though we come not to the perfect assurance of it, but by degrees. P^^
Sanctification is imperfect in this life, and not accomplished (...) the li^^
t(...)me. Holiness dot^ not grow up like Io^^ Ioh. 4.
his gourd in one night A ves^^li with a narrow necke^s not filled all at once.
The C(...) of God is not at his ^ull growth the first day of his birth. God
(...) not (...)ne stark dead ^^th or (...) did G(...), (...)wou^d, ^s the 1.
(...) 1. (...) ^e. 34.
^o^ (...) king (...). The Mo^^^ (we see i(...) at the (...) first day of (...)
increase, (...) wax^th by little and (...) is wrought in us by deg^^^s: no man
is fully perfect. For Who can say I am clean? So long as we Pro. 20. 9.
Quamdiu ^^uis, necesse est peccatum e^^e in m^br^^ tuis. August.
^^^e, sin shall not die, though it shall not damn us, because it is forgiven
us.

Sixthly, remission o^ sins is a part of iust^fication: but sanctification is no
part thereof, but rather an effect, fruit, (...) argument thereof.

Lastly, the washing away of sin in Justification, goes in nature before the
^^olution of sanctification, and does next (...) nature succeed effectual
vocation. For who^ God calls, them he does in Romans 8. 30.
(...) next place justify, and then sanctify. And I say in nature: not (...)
time, if we respect the first degree of sa^ctification. F^r when God does
actually (...) a man his sins, when Christ does actually b^^h a man in his
blood, and pro^^^e the remission of his sins, when God does apply the merit of
Christ's blood unto a man, then does he also begin to refine and melt him: then
does he cast him into a new mould, and gives him a new heart. And as that
woman with a piece of a m^^sto^e did br^ak the braine-pan of that usurping
tyrant Judge. 9. 53.
Abimelech: even so, when God remits sin, he does also (as it were) crack the
brain-pan thereof, with the millstone of his power, and the strength of his
Spirit, and so in one article of time he does dismount that usurping Tyranness
from her Throne, he takes the crown from her head, and her scepter out of her
hand, and does so disarme and weaken her, that she can neither damn us, nor
domine^e within us. And this being the sense, let us see what doctrines follow
hereeof.

CHAP. II.
The Man-head of Christ is proved: Five reasons rendered why he was to be man.

FIrst, in that the Apostle does attribute blood unto Christ, I conclude, that
Christ was true man, like other men, sin only excepted. This the Hebr. 2.
16. 17.
holy scriptures do very plentifully manifest. For he is that Seed of the
woman, which should break the Serpents Genesis 3. 15.
head. And he is that Son, which a virgin Is. 7. 14.
should conceive and bring forth. He is said to be borne, and circumcised, to
hunger, thirst, die, and rise again: all which do sufficiently prove the truth
of his humanity. Now it was requisite that Christ should be a man. First that
the prophecies, that went long before of his humane nature, might be truly
fulfilled. Secondly, the justice of God required, that that nature should be
punished, which had offended. Thirdly, it seemed most equal in Gods eye, that
satisfaction for the sin of man should be made, in the nature of man.
Fourthly, that he might be a merciful Heb. 1. 17.
high Priest, able to be touched with the feeling of our infirmities. Lastly,
that he might be able to suffer and die for us. For the God head cannot
possibly suffer; being an impassible, pure, absolute, 1. Tim. 6. 16.
immortal, and unchangeable nature. Now, as it was fi^ that he should Iam. 1.
17.
be a man, so it was also necessary that he should be sinlesse and holy.
First, that his thoughts, words, and works, might be holy. Secondly, that he
might make us holy, and cover the impurity of our nature, with the perfect
purity of his. Thirdly, that he might offer up a pure and spotless sacrifice.
Fourthly, he was to be a preacher of holiness, and a taxer of iniquity; therefore
it was fittest that he should be holy, lest his practice should cross his
preaching, and so mar his Ministry. Lastly, that his humane nature might be
a^^omed into the unity of the person of the Son of God, who is most holy,
even Holiness it self.

If it be damanded why the Son should rather become man, then either the
Father or the Holy Ghost; I answer: it was most beseeming that the world
should be redeemed, and that all things should be restored by him, by Ioh. 1.
(...). Col. (...). 16. H^b. 1, 2.
whom all things were created. It was most fi^ting that he should save man
from death, and procure him life, who did at first vouch safe him life; that as
by him we received being, so we might also by him rece^^e our welbeing. Of this
doctrine, th^se uses may be made.

First, we may behold the love of Christ unto us, who being the image of Col.
1, 15. 16.
God, and the grand Creator of all things in heaven and earth, did
nevertheless for our good assume, unto himself the nature of man, and not the
nature of ^he Angels, which notwithstanding is far more excellent, far more
divine and Heb. 2. 16.
noble.

Secondly, seeing Christ (who is e(...)ll Phil. 2. 6. Re^. 1. 5.
to God, and Prince of all the kings of the earth,) did so far debase
himself for us base wretches; as voluntarily to take upon him the form of a
Phil. 2. 7.
servant, the shape and nature of man; let us arm our selves with the same
mind, never thinking any thing too base for us to bear or do, which may serve
for his glory, and the good of his Church. I^ the Son of God did so humble
himself, why should we be proud and hautie? If God thought not skorne to be
made man for us, why should we think much to perform any service unto him for
the honor of his name, how base or vile soever it man seem in the eve of man?

Thirdly, seeing Christ is truly man, made of the seed of the woe(...); hence is
confuted and overthrown, the error of Gal. 44.
the Ma^tch^^s, wh^ held that Christ's body was but imagina^ie. A s^igned
body, has blood no more, then a painted fire has heat. But Christ had true
blood, or else our redemption by his blood is a forged fiction, and untrue.

The error of Macedonius and Valentinus, who taught that Christ brought with
him a celesticall body out of heaven. But the Lord promised Abraham, that in
his seed all nations should be blessed. Genesis 22. 18


The error of Apelles, who said that Christ's body was of the air, and that it
passed through the virgin Mary, as water through the pipe or channel. Whereas
notwithstanding David had a promise made him that his son should 2. Sam. 7. 12.
14.
sit upon his throne and reign for ever. And the language of the scriptures
is, that he was conceived and borne, not that he passed or ran through her.
Rather Act. 2. 30. Math. 1. 20. 23. Luke 2, 7.
therefore. Ap^lles was the pipe, through which this vain conceit came into
the world, from Satan the fountain thereof, who is a liar, and the Ioh. 8. 44.
Ioh. 14. 6.
father of lies, as he, that is truth it self affirms.

The error of Apollinaris, who held that Christ had not a reasonable so^le,
but that his Deity is in stead thereof. But this opinion Christ himself
directly Math. 26. 38.
crosses, when he says: My soul [(...)] is very heavy unto death: and the
scripture says: H^ yielded up the Ghost: [(...).] It is as impossible for a
true man to have no soul, as a living tree to have no sap, or for the sun to
have no light: or to speak more fitly, a^ it is impossible for a thing to be
this or that, without the form or formal cause, which makes it so to be. As
there can be no perfect body without the head, so there can be no perfect man
without a soul.

The error of Iodochus Harchius a Libertine: who imagined that Christ had a
double flesh: one natural from the virgin Mary, now glorious in the heavens:
the other spiritual, intelligible, and made by the power of God, of bread and
wine But we read but of one body, one flesh, and one blood, which ^e ^ad.

The error of (...), who taught that the humane nature of Christ was after the
union endowed with the properties of the Diui^tie. Indeed Dama^cene and Gregory
say, that the flesh Greg. N^s^.
of Christ was d^ified: but they mean it in respect of the comunction thereof
to the divine nature in one pers^n, and in regard of those admirable gifts, by
when his humane nature is not abolished, but become more excellent then all
cr^atures.

The error of the V(...)ries, who attribute to Christ's huma^^^, the essential
properties of the D^ui^^^e, as to be present every where. Which overthrows
the nature of a true body, which is finite and circumscrip^ble. T^ll^^
prop^^^tate^, tol it naturam.
For take away the properties of a thing, and thou shall destroy the nature of
it. And albeit his Deity is in all places without exception, yet it does not
follow that his Humanity should be so too, because it is personall^ v^^ted to
it; no more then that the pearl in the ring should-extend ^^s^^se as far as
the ring, because it is i^yned to it, or fastened in it. Indeed, (...) things
are so united together, as that one of them reaches no further then the other,
then one of them can be no where, but the other will be there also. But if one
of them extend bey^nd the other, then wheresoever the le^^er is, there the
greater is also, but not so on the contrary. The body of the s^nne, and the
light thereof are c^nioyned, and yet the suns body does not really reach as
far as the ^^ght does. The eye and the sight are nearely co^^oyned, and yet
the sight reaches to many things, unto which the eye does not extend it self.
Because therefore Christ's manhead is far^e exceeded of his Godhead, it can be
no where but his Godhead will be Psalm. 139. 7. 8. 9. Non sequitur, vt quod in
Deo est, sit vbique vt Deu^.
there also, (being infinite so well for place, as it is for time and power)
and it cannot be in every place, where his Godhead is. It does not follow
(says Augustine) that that, which is in God, should be every where as God. And
though Christ sit at the right hand of God, yet it does no more ^ollow thereof,
that he should be in all places, then that (as man) he should be really before
all time. And whereas the Apostle says, that he ascended to fill all things;
his meaning is not that he Ephesians. 4. 10. Immortalitate^ ei ^edit, natural non
abstulit. August.
went up to fill all thing, with his humanity (which is indeed become
immortal, but is no^ deprived of the natural properties thereof) but by the
distribution of the gifts of his Spirit into the hearts of the elect, in what
place soever they live. Or (as Bernard pleases to turn and understand it)
that he might (...) (vt adimpleret* (...)) all things which were foretold, and
which were required to our salvation. And so the Greek word signifies (Math.
15. 17.) where Christ says; I came not to destroy, but to fulfill ((...)) the
Law.

Lastly, seeing Christ was a true man, and therefore has a true body, as other
men, all infirmities being now land aside; it overthrows the op^nion of the
R^mi^h Synagogue, (...) teaches, that his body is cor(...)ly, and ^^^st
(...)lly in the Sa(...)nt. We believe that his body (...)ade of the purified
substance of (...) Vi^gin, and no^ of Bakers bread: (...) that a^ has the
essential properties of a true body, as length, latitude, ^^^cknesse, and
circumscription: and ^^^t it is no^ both visible in heaven, and invisible upon
earth. And although he promised to be present Math. 28. 20
^^th his Disciples to the end of the world, yet we must not thence conclude,
that his body was to continue among men upon earth after his a^con^ion. For
those words are to be understood only of the presence of Ier. 23. Enter.
prae^enter. Deus hi^ and vbique potenter.
his power, grace, spirit, or godhead, which fills heaven and earth. Indeed
it is true, that as he has taken his body with him up, so he has left his
body behind him, that is, his Church, unto whom also he has given leave to
consecrate certain outward elements, to be signs and seals of his body and
blood, and which is Ephesians. 5. Col. 1.
by a kind of figure termed his body and blood. For the body of Christ is
threefold, Natural, Mystical, Sacramental. But we speak in this place of
his natural body, to which the soul is united to make a true humane nature.

CHAP. III.
Christ's Godhead is proved by four arguments.

A Second doctrine hence arises, in that the Apostle says, that Christ

Besides this collection; we have evident testomonies out of holy writ, and
invincible arguments to confirm this truth. For the first, Isa^ah says, that
Christ shall be called the Mighty God: Is. 9. 6.
and I^r^my says, that his name shall be I^houah, our righteousness. Ioh: says,
In the Ier. 23. 6.
beginning was the Word, and the word was God. By the word, we are to
understand Ioh. 1. 1.
Christ, who is the substa^tiall word of his Father, so called, because he is
the Interpreter and Image of his father, eue^ as our Romans 9. 3.
speec^ is the interpreter and image of the mind. In like manner Paul calls
Tit. 2. 13.
Christ, God over all: and the Great God. And Thomas speaking unto Christ Ioh.
20. 28.
says, My Lord, and my God. Secondly, it is also manifest by reasons grounded
upon the word, that Christ was true God, and not man only. I will propound
two. First, he is true God, to whom the proper works of God are ^ightly
attributed: but those works ^re ascribed rightly unto Christ, which none can
do, but God: as to ^reate, redeem, quicken, judge, to ^earch the heart, and to
put away iniquities: all which the sacred scriptures attribute to Christ:
therefore he must needs be God. Secondly, di^^^e worship, is performed and
ought to be given Ps. 72. 11. Romans 15. 12
unto Christ: therefore ^e is (...) God and not me^e man. David (...): Blessed
(...)y the th(...) in (...). Christ Ps. 2. 1^. Ioh. 14. 1.
himself says: ^e bel^^ue G^^, (...)leeue in me al^o.

And Saint S(...)n praying says; Lord Jesus rece^^e my spirit. By which it
Act. 7. 59.
appears, that d^^^ne honor belongs to him, and consequently that he is
more then a (...).

And it was requ^site that Christ should be not only man but God. First, that
he might remove those e^ills, wherewith Mankind was oppressed; to wit^ the
guilt and punis^ of ^^nne, the ^y(...) of the D(...), the infinite and
intol^^^^le burden of Gods wrath, which things no^^ could remove but God. Man
man s^s^^r, but none by suffering was able to overcome them, but God alone. It
is God (as Paul teaches us) that has purchased Act. 20. 28.
the Church with his blood. Secondly. Christ must be God, that he might make us
accounted as righteous in the sight of God, and that defacing sin, ^e might
likewise restore the image of God, consisting in true righteousness Ephesians. 4. 24.
and holiness, which we lost by our fall in Adam. Thirdly, that he might be a
(...) Mediator betwixt God and Man, to reconcile and make them one by reason of
his cognation, affinity and ^^militude to them both. For in reason he is most
meet to reconcile God to man, and to bring man to God, who is himself both God
and man.

Now although the truth does both Veritas est index sui, (...) obliqu^.
declare it self and show the contrary, yet because it has bin so much
opposed (even in this article of our says) and for that the weakness of many is
very great, and this point not void of all obscurity, I will briefly ^ake away
those cauill^ that are made against it, ^ha^ so our ^ayth might be further
strengthened when the knottiest doubts shall be d^solued, and the blocks removed.
It may be thus objected against the Godhead of Christ.

First, that which has a beginning is not God, for God is Alpha and ^mega, as
well Eternal as Omnipotent. But Christ has a beginning, therefore Christ is
not God. Ans. There is a thre^fold beginning; of nature, time, and order. Now
that, which has a beginning of nature, substance, and time, is not God in that
respect. But if we consider Christ as he is the Word or Wisdom of the Father
(laying aside his humane nature) he has no beginning of Essence or Time,
having one divine nature with the Father, existing from all Eternity: but only
a beginning in regard of order, or the manner of sub^^sting. This he testifies
of himself, where he says; I was ^et up Pro. 8. 23. 24. 25,
from everlasting, from the beginning, and before the ^arth, when there were no
d^p^^^ was I begotten: before the mountains were settled, and before the ^^ls
was I begotten.

Secondly, God is of himself, Christ is not of himself, therefore Christ is
not God.

Ans. Christ is God of himself, though he be not the Son of himself. ^erson
begets, and is begotten: but the Essence neither begets, no^ is begotten,
but is communicated.

Ob. 3. Thirdly, One and the same thing cannot be said to have a beginning, and
not a beginning: but if Christ be not only man but God, he shall both have a
beginning and no beginning.

Ans. One and the same thing cannot both have a beginning, and yet be without a
beginning in one and the same respect: but this may be, if the respect be
diverse. A man may be said to be mortal and immortal; mortal in respect of
his body, immortal in regard of the soul: dead* because he is dissolved, and
alive, because his same does last, or because his soul does live. So Christ
may be said to be without beginning, in respect of his Godhead, and to have a
be^inning in regard of his m^n head. Thus also he may be said to be before and
after (...): and to be without Father and Mother; without father as man,
without mother as God.

Ob. 4. Fourthly, The Mediator Proposition.
betwixt God and Man, is not God, but Christ is Mediator betwixt God and Man,
therefore Christ is not God.

Ans. The proposition is apparently false: for by the same reason it may be
proved, that he is not a man. But the proposition may be thus confirmed. God
cannot be less then himself, or in^eriour to himself, but the Assumption.
Mediator with God is inferior unto God: therefore he is not God.

Ans. The assumption is true only in respect of the Mediatourship, in regard
whereof Christ is (minor patre) inferior unto God, and nothing as concerning
his Divinity. For the inequality of office does not prove any inferioritie,
or inequality of nature.

Ob. 5. Fifthly, No man is God, but Christ is a man, therefore Christ is not God.

Ans. No m^^e man (or no man as man) is God: now Christ is not merely a man,
but Ma^^ god, or Godman. Neither do we say that the (...)hood of Christ is
God, but that Christ, o^ the man Christ, is God.

Ob. 6. Sixthly, Paul makes a ^lat distinction betwixt God (...) Christ, wh^^ 1.
Tim. 5. 21.
(...) ^ait^ (...) charge thee (...)re God, and the Lord Ie^us Christ.
Therefore C^r(...) not God.

A^s. By God, the Apostle understands the father: as in (...). Cor. 1^. 1^.
For the word God is used sometime essentially, and sometimes also p^rsonally:
and so it is taken in that place. Sec^ndly, if this reas^n were good, the^ the
Holy Ghost should not be Romans 9. 5.
God. Thirdly, Paul elsewhere affirms that Christ is God. But Paul being
directed by the special and immediate assistance of the Spirit, could not
possibly contradict himself.

Ob. 7. Seventhly, I^ Christ be God, (...) there are m^^ Gods the^^ ^ne. For
Christ's is not the same with the ^^ther.

A^s. Christ (...) di^ not the same person with his father: but he is the Ioh.
10. 30. 1. Ioh. 5. 7.
sam^ God. The distinction betwixt them is not in r^spect of nature ess^ce or
time, for so they are one: but in respect of their manner of subsisting in that
one nat^re.

Ob. 8. Eighthly, Christ is man, and if h^ be God also* ^f he have the nature
both of God and Man* then he is two distinct persons: but this Gods word will
not admit, therefore he must needs want one of them.

Ans. Indeed Cerinthus makes Christ and Jesus two distinct persons: and
Nestorius taught, that there are two persons in Christ; but without warrant
from the word. For although Ephesians. 4. 10.
Christ have two distinct natures, the D^itie and the Humanity, yet is he but
one person. For the person of the Son of God, existing a true person from all
eternity, did assume the humane nature being no person of it self, into the
unity of his person, and did appropriate it unto himself, without co^founding
or defacing the properties of either of the two natures: so that albeit there
be two distinct natures, the divine and humane, ^et there is but one person, as
a man is but one true person, though two distinct natures concur in him, one
of the soul, and the other of the body. It is true (I grant) that the Word is
a person: but I deny that the soul and body of Christ being united to make a
perfect man, do make a distinct and perfect person. For a person must not only
be some particular and singular thing, but it must also subsist and consist by
it self, and must not be sustained of any other. But Christ's humane nature
from the first beginning thereof, was sustained by the person of the Word. For
it was at once both formed and assumed of the Word, into the unity of his
person, and made proper to the Word: and without this assumption or personal
union, it neither was, nor had been, nor should be. Plin. Histo* not. lib. 16.
c. 44.
A resemblance whereof we find in the plant called Misselto, which grows not
but in a tree of another kind, and thence receives his sap. Neither is this
any disgrace, but rather an honor to his humanity, because it does subsist by
the person of the Word. And albeit all the faithful be united to the Word, yet
it is only in a lower degree, to wit, by communication of grace, and not by
communication of personal subsistence. So the^ we see, that though there be
two distinct natures in our Lord, yet it does not follow that he is two
distinct persons: because his manhood is not a person (as other men are) but
John is a person, but so is not Christ, as he is man. Use. 1.
a na^ur^. Thus much for the Doctrine: the uses ^ollow.

First, the consideration o^ Christ's Godhead, teaches us to respect and honor
him with all divine worship, in humility and sincerity of heart. He is God,
therefore we must honor him as God, and being God, he is omniscient and
all-seeing: his ^ies are a flame of fi^e, not more terrible then peircing. All
things are n^^ed before him, and no th^^g^^ is hid from his understanding. It
is not fig-leaues, that can cover us, nor the hills, that can hide us from his
eye sight.

Secondly, it should terrify the wicked, that dishonor him, that reject his
Is. (...). 6. Math. 28. 18
shall regine, till he has put all his ene^^^^ under h^^ feet. T^ose that will
not that he reign over the^, shall be brought and (...) before him. N^^preces,
(...) (...)m neither price nor praying will persuade him, if once he take in
hand to judge them, to condemn them. It is good for them therefore to take the
^^^e, and to repent before it be too late

Thirdly, this doct^i^e makes much I will not fea^^ what m^^ (...) what man
can do unto me. For he (...) is our friend and f^uourer is God omnipotent, and
he will not leave us, n^r forsake us Art thou ass^ulted by Satan? f^ie to
Christ thy God: he can as easily ^mite him to the ground as D^^^d did Gol^ah.
Art thou vexed with sin? then go to him, for he is able to save thee from it.
He can drown thy sins in his blood, as he drowned the Eg^pti^^s in the sea.
Do the terrors of death arrest thee? Do the pangs of hell seize upon thee? Be
not dismayed; thy Suertie is God, he can take away sin, which is the sting of
death, and can ref^e^h t^y soul with the joys of 1. Cor. 15. 56.
heaven. Art thou poor, or afflicted with sickness? Comfort thy self, and
faint not. For thy Lord is God, he can either release thee from thine
affliction, or relieve thee in it, as he did Daniel in the de^^e of Lions, and
the three children in the fiery furnace, that thou shall rather receive good
then sustain harm. If he please not to deliver thee, yet he can, and will (if
thou will not ^linch, but depend upon him) vouch safe to give thee fortitude
and patience to endure it. And for the thorny crown in this world, he is able
to honor thee with a crown of gold, of golden glory, and glorious eternity
in the world to come. Finally, do thine enemies pres^e thee, and seek to
de^oure thee? Fear not. For thy king is God and therefore able to convert, or
sub^e^t them. He can either destroy them himself, or make them to slay one an
other, as the enemies of good 2. Chro* 20. 23.
^ehoshaphat sometim^s did.

Fourthly, this doctrine serves to Eunomius, who held that Christ was a mere
man: also the error of the Monothelites, who thought that Christ had one will
only: but seeing that he is not only man bu^ God, it follows, that he has
both an ^umane and a divine will, according to his two distinct natures, which
are not confounded in that one person by reason of the personal union, but do
truly, ^^separably, and indiuisibly continue without confusion, conversion, or
transmutation. So much for this second doctrine.

CHAP. IIII.
The true members of Christ cannot be cut off and perish: this conclusion is
proved*

THirdly, in that the Apostle here in his Blood, we see how little reason there
is for any to think that any of his true members can be cut off from him and
vt^erly tall away and perish. To omit many inuinc^b^e arguments there is no
li^^lihood that Christ would sh^d his blood for him, that shall perish^n his
s^ns. It is not probable that he will part from those willingly, for w^^me he
paid so dearly. Therefore Qui nos ta^to p^ t^o emit no^ vult per^^e quos emit,
Aug. Setm. 109.
Augustine says; He which bought us for so great a price, will not have those
to perish, whom he has bought. And Christ himself says, that he gives
eternal life to those, for whom he lays down his life, ^^h. 10. 15. 28.
Indeed they, that seem to be washed in his blood, but are not, may fall and
perish. A f^antique man may think himself to be as rich as Cr^sus, though he
be indeed as poor as Codrus, as Irus. Bedlams whoop, sing, shout and laugh, as
if they were the only happy men, in a^ the world, when (ala^) their case is
most pitiful: and so many men may think themselves c^e^sed in the blood of
Christ* and clad with his right^ousnes, and so ca^^y themselves a^ if they were
out of a^^ danger of damnation, when as in truth their state is damnable: they
ne^^: truly felt the heat of that blood, t^^y never came in that bath. But he
tha^ is once actually and effectually bathed in it, shall not d^e eternally.
Christ died, that we might not die: and who can make his death of none effect?
What can let or take away the ve^tue of his death, and the invaluable merit of
his blood? I am persuaded Romans 8 38.
(says Paul) that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor
Powers, nor things present, nor things to (...), nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature shall be able to separate us from (...) love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus ^ur Lord. And I am verily persuaded also that Christ's death cannot
be nullified, nor the price of his blood diminished. Now, if Gods love, by
which we ^iue do continue constant to us: and if the blood of Christ, by which
our sins are cleansed and covered in the sight of God, remain in full force and
value, nothing lessened or abated, it cannot be that any of us who are his
chosen, should perish and be damned.

The use of this doctrine is manifold. First, we see a plain difference Sheep
of Christ, and the Goats of Satan, between Gods servants, and the Devils
slaves. These may, these must perish: but those shall not, they cannot perish.
For they are Math. 25. 41 Ioh. 10. 28. 1. Pet. 1. 5.
kept by the power of God, through faith, unto eternal salvation.

Secondly, we see the state of man by Christ the second Adam, to be better
Adam. For the righteousness, which we received in him was mutable: but the
righteousness, which we receive in Christ, is immutable. The righteousness, which
we did receive in him, we did also through him, loose in him: but the
righteousness, which through Gods imputation we receive for and from Christ,
continues ours for ever: so as that Peccata semel remissa nunqua^ redeant, et
semel iusti, semper iusti habeamur, our sins being once remitted shall never
after come to a reckoning, and being once accounted righteous, we shall so
remain for ever. And for inherent righteousness; when grace is once engraven
upon the tables of our hearts by the finger of God, it shall never wholly be
rased out. For we have now potentia et actum perseuerandi both the power and
(his grace thereto inspiring us) a will to persevere, and the very act of
perseverance. Adam indeed could have continued righteous, if he had would, but
he had not the grace to continue constant, the will to persevere for ever.

Thirdly, we see manifest manifest distinction betwixt those that are redeemed
None shall take Ioh. 10. 28.
them out of his hand: neither shall they revolt from him. For he will put his
fear in their hearts, that they shall Ier. 32. 40.
not depart from him. Neither can they by death be cut off from him, or vanish
out of his service. For after death they shall serve him more perfectly in
their souls, and after their resurrection they shall perform absolute honor
for ever to him. But they, that are redeemed or delivered out of captivity by
Princes, may of subjects become desperate enemies, per^ic^ous tra^tours,
irreconciliable and incorrigible Rebels. Or if they continue loyal, yet at
death their service is expired, and in the life to come, he, that was once the
subject and inferior, may be promoted above him, that was the Lord.

Fourthl^, we ought to be thankful for this benefit. We would think our those
things which do any ways displease him.

Fifthly, this doctrine ministers exceeding

Sixthly, the consideration of this one the death of soul and body. If thou
be^st but assured that Christ has cleansed thee in his blood from thy sin,
which is the cause of death, the^ may Romans 6. 23
thou be per^ua^ed also that thou shall no^ d^^. O(...) how may thou know
that Christ has cleansed thee? Surely, if thou can but truly ^ay that thou
art a She^p of Christ, then m^st t^ou also say that Christ has washed th^e
from Ioh. 10. 15
thy s^ns. For he has laid down hi^ life and shed his blood for his sheep,
Ephesians. 1. 7.
that they might be redeemed from the^^ sins, and might be shrouded from the
wrath of God. Now if thou know and acknowledge Christ and his voice in the
sacred scriptures, and in the ministry of his Messengers: if thou believe in
his name: if thou do hear^ his voice and subject thy self unto it: if tho^
strive to resemble him, and do labor ^o follow ^im* walking in h^s wa^^s,
and treading in ^^s footsteps, which h^ h^th printed for he to come after in
them, then may thou assure thy self in truth, that thou art the Ioh. 10. 4.
14. 26. 27.
Sheep of Christ. For Christ himsel^^ does brand all his sheep with these very
marks. And Paul further affirms (Gal. (...). 24.) that they which are
Christ's, have crucified the flesh. So that if thou dyest to sin, and do
mortify the lusts of thy flesh, and labourest to live to God in newn^sse of
l^fe, thou may safely conclude, that thou do actually belong to Christ and
his fold, and that thou art actually washed from thy sins in his blood; and
consequently, that thou art in the state of grace, and in the number of the
faithful.

Lastly, t^is doctrine serves to overthrow There is no condemnation Romans 8. 1.
to them that are in Christ Jesus. Their sins may ware with them, but
Bellate. non debellare. quater^, non decutere. Math. 16. 18
they shall not vanquish them. The devil may shake them, but he shall not
shake them down. Hel*g^tes may open themselves against them, but they Math.
16. 18.
shall not p^euayl: against them. The castle of their consciences may be
besieged, but it shall not be sacked, it cannot be ransack^. For God will not
give them over wholly unto their enemies, he will de^end their cause, maintain
their quarrel, dispell their enemies, preserve his work, and confirm 1. Cer.
1. 8.
them unto the end. Thus much for this third doctrine; a fourth follows.

CHAP. V.
A looking-glass, to behold the love of Christ in. The consideration of it,
affords us three instructions.

Fourthly, in that the Apostle says, Christ has washed us in his blood fr^
our sins, his love is cleared and greatly commended to us. For what is nearer
to a man then his life? And what is dearer to him then his blood, his heart
blood? Christ has laid down his life that we might live: Christ has parted
with his blood, his heart blood, to do us good, to purchase our pardon, to
purge Omnes humanes san^t medicina dolores, Propert*
us from our sins. The diseases of the body are cured by natural medicines:
but our sins, which are the diseases of the soul, are cleansed only by the
blood of Christ. And that this might be done, he did freely forgo his life,
and loose h^s blood: which argues is exceeding love unto us. Greater love then
this (says Ioh. 15. 13.
Christ) has no man, that a man should (...) d^wne his life for his friend. It
is not possible for a man to manifest his love more effectually then by giving
his life for another; and therefore our Apostle 1. Ioh. 3. 16
^a^th, Hereby have we perceived love, that he laid down his life for us. If
Luk 7. 38.
the woman declares her love by washing Christ feet with her tears then great
is the love of Christ, that has washed us in his blood. And his love appear^th
^et more plainly, insomuch Act. 3. 15. Act. 20. 28.
as he, who is the Lord of life, and God of heaven and earth, did lay down his
life for us wretches, and has washed us in his blood, who by nature are his
enemies. If thou had a most pestilent and strong adversary, and had also a
friend, that did freely lay down his life to preserve th^e from him, were it
not ^n argumen^ of his inward and h^^^e lo^^ unto thee? Sin is thy mortal
and implacable enemy, too hard for th^e ^o co^quer by thy self, and it is
imposs^ble for ^hee to save thy self from that intolerable calamity, which
it brings. Christ thy souls friend has overcome it: He^ has smote down
great Goliath the Prince of darkness, the friend and father of thy sins: He is
thy Sampson, that by his death has slain the Philistines, even all thy sins.
He has overwhelmed Pharaoh and the Egyptians, Satan and all thy sins in the
red sea of his b^^ud. His blood has su^kt out the ^eart* blood of thine
enemies, and hi^ death h^th been the death of them all; therefore ^hou cans^
no^ choose but see his adm^^able l^ue unto thee, seeing he shunned not death,
but sp^lt his blood, and has embrued thee in it to do thee good. I^ thou
had committed some offense against a king, for which without his special
pardon thou should be condemned to death and executed: and if by all the
means thou could make thou art not able to procure it: if the kings only
son and heir, whom also thou have dishonored, should voluntarily without
thy suite and against thy desert lay down his life and loose his blood for
thy pardon and absolution, did he not show unspeakable grace, and give an
undoubted testimony of his pity toward thee. Thou can not but confess it?
Thou ^ast committed many capital and grievous offenses against the Kings of
Kings: his own and only Son Christ Jesus, whom thou have often disgraced, often
abused, has f^eely without thy desert, and when thou had no grace of thy
self to desire him, has given his life for thy life, he has dyed to preserve
thee from eternal death, which is the wages of thy Romans 6. 23
sin: he has purged and rinsed thee in his blood, that thy soul might not
bleed, his blood has bought thy pardon; can thou then deny that he loves
thee? Has he not abundantly testified and confirmed his pity toward thee?
Thou can not but acknowledge it. The consideration of this doctrine David
says; Ps. 126. 1.
I love the Lord, because he has heard my voice: even so should we love the
Lord Jesus, because he has bathed us in his blood: yea let us extol his love
from our hearts, and celebrate his name in word and work.

Secondly, it teaches us to be beneficial and bountiful in benefits to our
Sun, and rain of the clouds: it so returns much kindness unto others, as sap
to the plants, grass to the beasts, meat to the Serpent, and many kind and
timely fruits unto men; yea it is kind to many, that are unkind unto it. They
which receive all courtesies, and p^rte with none, are like to Cerberus in the
fable, that let in all, but would suffer none to return. But let us love one
another ferue^tly, as Christ has loved us, and declare the inward affection of
our hearts, by the signs thereof in our lives. For this tr^^e may be
discerned by her fruits: this grace may be known by her works. Some man might
say (says James) thou have faith; show me thy faith by thy works. Even so,
thou say Iam. 2. 18.
thou have love, show me thy love by thy works. Can there be life without
breath, or fire without heat? so there can be no true love without some
louetokens* Christ has demonstrated his love unto us, by giving us his blood:
so do thou declare thy love to thy neighbor, by giving or doing those things
that argue charity. Hereby (says John) (...) perc^iued love, because he laid
down 1 Ioh. 3. 16
(...) life for us, wherefore we ought to lay down our lives also for the
brethren. Take heed therefore that thou do not despise, calaumni^te,
persecute and oppress them. For this were to show thy self a very Dunghill,
which receives wholesome air, sweet shewers* and the pleasant sunbeams,
(which will do a garden good) and sends nothing out of it self, but stinking
smells, and filthy vapors.

Thirdly, seeing that Christ did so love us, as that he gave us his blood, his
heir and Lord of all things, and being God, does know Heb. 12.
when they will do us good, and when harm. This kind of reasoning the Apostle
uses to the Romans, saying; If God spared not his own Son, but gave him for
us all to death; how shall he not with Romans 8. 32.
him give us all things also? Even so say I: If Christ, the ^te^n^l son of God,
has not spared his blood, but h^t^ washed us in it, and has gi^en h^mselfe to
death freely for us, what reason have we to think, but ^ha^ he will give us al
other things that are c^nue^ient for us. If he give the dearer, he will never
d^ny the cheaper, if we be fit for to receive them. So much of the fourth
Doctrine.

CHAP. VI.
By nature we are unclean: Sin makes us unclean and ugly: Wherefore we ought
to take out ^oure lessons.

Fifthly, for so much as John says; Christ has washed us from our sins; I us,
seeing we have in us the spawne of wickedness, and the seeds of all sins, and
are by nature dead in trespasses and children of wrath, having all our
imaginations Ephesians. 2. 1. 3.
evil from our youth continually, being borne in iniquity, and conceived in
Genesis 6. 5. 8. 27.
sin, as David does ingenously confess. And the Apostle Paul says, that Ps.
51. 5. Romans 8. 7.
the Wisdom of the flesh is Enmity against God: thereby showing that the
best desires, the purest inclinations, and the sweetest affections in natural
men are evil, corrupt and filthy; and therefore also th^^^ very hearts, which
are the fountains of them, and the forge from whence they come. For if the
fruit be naught, the tr(...) be good: if the bran(...)es be by nature rotten,
the root cannot be sound: and if the streams be naturally bitter, the spring
cannot besweet.

But what is that, which makes us filthy? Surely sin, and therefore If 59. 3.
Christ is said to have washed us from our sins. Thou have (says God)
defiled Ez. 28. 18.
thy sanctification by the multitude of thine iniquities, therefore iniquity
does defile. The Israelites are said to have Ez. 36. 17.
defiled their land by their own ways, and by their deeds: and the Lord
says, that their way was before him as the filthiness of the menstruous. There
is no cloth so white, but the Dyer can make it black: so there is no man so
pure, but sin can pollute him. It is pestilent as the plague, and as filthy
as the plague sore. Jobs botches did not more defile his body, then sin does
defile our souls. It is as mire in our ways, as rottennes in our bones, as a
canker in our bodies, and as worms in our maw. Our sins are the biles and
botches of our souls, the weeds that choke us, the moaths that fret us, and
the lees that corrupt the vessels of our hearts. What should this teach us?
What good may we reap by this doctrine? Surely much. For first, by with
actual sins innumerable, and over whelmed with original corruption, which
(like a leprosy running from the crown of the head to the sole of the foot)
has polluted all the powers of our souls.

Secondly, we are taught to detest and abhor sin. A dead carrion does
Eccle. 10. 1.
do putrify the ointment of the Apothecarie. It is not only filthy in it
self, but it makes the sinner also foul (until he be washed fro^^t) and
filthy, like a man full of running sores, or leprous spots.

Thirdly, it shows the madness of many men, that welter in wickedness
Aegipt, or else a swinish disposition and deadnes of spirit, whereby they
delight in tumbling in the mire, being beso^ted and in^atuated with their own
lusts, and drunken with their own sins? It is strange to see how fear full
men are of the plague of the body, and yet fear not the plague of the soul,
which is sin. It is a wonder to see, how carefully men will a^oide a
pesthouse, or a place infected, and yet care not to run unto the harboures
of beastly drunkenness, and filthy lust, the very schools of the devil, and
stews of uncleanness, infected with the plague of ungodliness, as dangerous to
his soul that with delight freque^ts them, as is a house infected with the
pestience to the body. As we are careful to shun the dirt in our ways, and to
keep our apparel clean, and our bodies free from diseases: so we ought
(unless like madmen we fear no danger) to labor that our souls may be
free from the loathsome and mortal disease of sin, and that we be not
defiled with the d^^t of iniquity, nor bemyred in the puddle of wickedness, but
that we may be clean and pure.

Lastly, therefore we are taught to pray with David, Wash me thoroughly Psalm.
5. 12.
from mine iniquity and cleanse me from my sin. And indeed we shall not be
clean, unless the Lord do purge us thoroughly; our sin does hang so fast
about us and inui^on us. It does not only besmeare and grime us on the
outside, but it tainteth the inside also. It does not only cleave (as it
were) to the skin, as Iuy to the rind of an oak: but it lies in the bones, it
is got into the pyth, and lurketh in the heart, as a Fox in his hole, a Lion in
his den, or as the plague does in the body. Let us therefore labor to be
delivered of it: Desire God to bathe thee in his Ez. 36. 25.
sons blood, and to power clean water, even the clensing water of his spirit
upon thee. If our clothes be spotted we are careful to rub out the spots, and
shall we neglect to get out the filthy spots of sin out of our souls? If a
man were weather-beaten upon the Sea, he would wish that he were upon the
shore: or if he were in some loathsome and stinking dungeon, he would gladly be
out of it. Beloved, there is no sea so dangerous, no dungeon so foul and
stinking, as our sins: let us therefore labor to be delivered from them, let
us desire God to lay the tempest, and with the prosperous gale of his grace, to
bring us safe to the shore, and by his hand to draw us out of this dungeon. And
as David prays; Bring my Psalm. 142. 7
soul out of prison, that I may praise thy name. So let us pray him to bring
us out of the prison of sin, and to take from us the bolts of wickedness, and
to cleanse and dress us, and to strip us of our prison garments, that being
set at liberty we may serve him freely, and glorify his name, for his
kindness to us.

CHAP. VII.
Remission of sins is through the blood of Christ. Though Christ did merit
our pardon, yet God the Father may be said to forgive us freely in two respects.

Sixthly, seeing the Apostle says, that Heb. 9. 11. 12.
only High Priest, who by his own blood has purchased the pardon of our
sins, and satisfied the justice of God for them, and so removed their guilt and
punishment from us. He has washed us, therefore now we are clean. He Is. 53.
4. ^5.
was wounded for our transgressions, the (...)meant of our peace was upon him,
and by his s^rip^^ we are healed. Surely he has (...), and carried our so(...).
And Paul expressly says, that Ephesians. 1. 7.
by (...) two have redemption, to wit, the remissi^ of ^ins. By his own blood
(says the Holy Ghost) he entered in once into the holy place, and obtained
eternal redemption for us. And to deliver us from the Gal. 3.
curse of the Law, he was made a curse. All which testimonies of holy writ, do
serve fulficiently to prove remission of sins by his blood. Now, when we hear
that sin is forgotten, we must also know t^a the punishment is taken away. For
common reason shows (eius, quod (...) est, nullam esse poenam) that there is
no punishment d^e for that, which is not. But sin is not, whe^^t is once
forgiven: For the Lamb of God has taken it away. And indeed there is ^o great
affi(...) between sin and the punishment thereof, that the Hebrews were
wont to call them by one name: by Genesis 4. 7. Leuit. 20. 17. 19.
which the Scriptures signify, that sins are then punished, and never but
then, when the fault is not forgiven. And i^ t^^s be true that God retains
the punishment, when he does not remit the fault: then by the law of contraries
it follows, that God does not retain the punishment, when he does remit the
fault. But by the merit of Christ's blood, (...) fault is forgiven, therefore
the punishment also, which follows the fault in respect of desert (vt
vmbrasequit^r corpus) as the shadow does the body, and as light the Sun.
Furthermore, seeing those, that looked upon the brazen serpent, were cured both
of their stingings, and of the pains that ensued; why may we not say that
they, which look upon Christ with the eye of says, are not only delivered of
their sins, and biting of the serpent Satan, but also of al pains and
punishments, which by desert at least do follow them. 2. Augustine says:
That Christ De Ver. Dei Ier. 37.
took away both the fault and the punishment. And Tertullian says (Exempto
reatu, eximitur et poena) that, when the De Bapt.
guilt is taken away, the punishment is removed. By which it is evident, that
both fault and punishment are forgiven us through the blood of Christ.

Qu. It may be the^ demanded how god can be said to forgive sin freely,
seeing Christ has merited the pardon of it by his blood.

An. I answer, in two respects. First, because we by our selves have not
procured the pardon, but Christ for us of his mere good will. Secondly, because
God did freely of his own benignity send his son to be our ransom, as
Christ himself does witness; God so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Ioh. 3. 16.
son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting
life. By which we see plainly, that gods love is the primary cause of our
redemption by Christ. Neither must the justice of God be called into question
for laying our sins upon him, that knew no sin, and for punishing the innocent
for the offenders. For the righteous may suffer for the unrighteous, Christ may
without the breach of Justice bleed for us, and purchase pardon by his blood,
if these five conditions do concur^e in his passion. First, his bloodshed must
be voluntary without compulsion.

Secondly, it must be perfectly propitiatory, able to satisfy him to the full,
that is offended.

Thirdly, he must be of the same nature, for whom he suffers.

Fourthly, he must be able to preserve himself from perishing in his pains,
and (eluctari) to wrestle out of them, and surpass them.

Fifthly, he must be able to sanctify the offender, and so to keep him, as
that he shall not after his ablution and conversion offend This word notes not
the matter of the sin, but the manner of sinning.
as he did before. All which conditions are kept in Christ, and therefore the
splendour of Gods justice is not eclipsed.

Neither may we think it strange, that the shedding of Christ's blood, which
continued not very long, should be able to procure the pardon of so many
sins, and of everlasting punishments due unto us for them. For his blood was
the blood of that person, who is true God, and therefore his blood is more
meritorious then the blood of all creatures, and his moment^nie passions were
of greater price and virtue, then eternal sufferings of all creatures in the
world whatsoever can be. The validity and merit of his blood arises from the
dignity of his person, and not from it own nature, nor from the time of his
passion. The doctrine then remains firm and sure, to wit, that Christ has
purchased the pardon of our sins by his blood, and has satisfied the justice
of God for them to the full.

But it may be thus objected to the contrary.

Ob. First, that sentence of Solomon seems to ascribe the pardon of sins to
other things besides the blood of the Messiah; for he says, that by mercy and
Pro. 16. 6.
and truth sins shall be forgiven.

Ans. His meaning is, that mercy and Sol.
truth are infallible signs thereof. He that is merciful and just shall
never have his sins laid unto his charge. Seeing one Spirit ruled all the
spirits of the holy writers, we must not make 2. Pet. 1. 27 2. Tim. 3, 16
one of them to contradict an other. But the Scriptures elsewhere ascribe the
remission of sins to the blood of E^h. 1. 7. Col. 1. 14 Ephesians. 2. 8. Tim. 3. 5.
Christ, and exclude the works of righteousness, and such as are wrought after
we are regenerated. Shall we say that any of our good works or virtues can
merit any thing at the hands of God? Are they not all imperfect? Perfect indeed
they are, as they proceed from the Holy Spirit their proper fountain: but
imperfect and polluted, insomuch as they pass through the corrupt
conduit-pipes, and dirty channels of our wills and hearts. And are they not all
the gifts of God, so far forth as there is any goodness in them? For what 1.
Cor. 4. 7.
have thou, that thou have not received of him? Now shall we think that those
things can merit pardon, which by reason of their imperfection had need be
pardoned themselves? And shall we stop Gods mouth with his own gifts, and
hope to pacify his wrath with his own works, which his own finger has
wrought within us? Or should we not rather confess (as Christ advises) when we
have done all things that are commanded us, that we are unprofitable servants:
for we have done but our d^t^e, which we are bound to do Luke 17. 10.
by virtue of many b^ndes.

Secondly, the speech of the Prophet Deu 4, 24.
to Nebuchadnezzar is objected: Break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine
iniquities by mercy toward the poor.

Ans. The Prophet speaks not of satisfaction for sin, but only of the
manifestation of repentance by the Non causa venioe, sed modus conuersionis
illic descripbitur.
fruits thereof; as if he should say: surcease from thy tyranny, leave thy
cruel^ie, abandon thy sins, and manifest thy repentance of them by the works of
justice, and by showing mercy to the poor, whom thou have oppressed.

Ob. 3. Yea but Christ says; Give ^lmes, and all things are clean unto you;
therefore (it seems) Alms-deeds make Luk 11. 4. 8.
men clean, and satisfy for offenses.

Ans. This place speaks not one syllable of satisfaction for sins, but
shows that to them, which give alms aright (to wit, in says, love, and
singleness of heart) all thing; are clean without any such superstitious
ceremony of washing, as the Pharisees had invented for the purification and
clensing of Gods creatures.

Ob. 4. Yea but love, which lincketh Col. 3. 14.
the soul to the thing loved, and locketh up the heart fast therein, and is Pet
4 8.
the bond of perfection, Love shall prevayle, it shall procure the pardon. It
shall cover a multitude of sins. And Christ says; Many sins are forgiven her,
because Luke 7. 47.
she loved much. Therefore our love deserves a pardon.

Ans. No pardon: it had rather need to be pardoned: it is so cold, so weak.
Indeed if our love were perfect, we need no pardon at all. For he, that loves
perfectly, fulfils the law perfectly. For perfect love is the perfect
fulfilling of Gods will, who requires nothing of us, but that we should love
him with all our heart, mind, and soul, and our Neighbor as our selves. And
dare we say that the weak performance of a duty, whereunto God does bind us, is
^able to merit a pa^^on for us. of those things, which we are not bound Romans
13. 10 Math. 22. 28
to do, but under a curse for bidden? And as for that place of Peter, it is
plane by his exhortation to mu^uall love, tha^ his meaning is, that true love
is a presentmedicine against malice, and our (Mnesi-cakian) reuengeful memory
of bypast iniu^ies, and makes us ready to forget and forgive the wrongs that
are done unto us. And this Solomon plainly reaches, when he says; Hatred
^^reth up contentions, but love couer^th Pro. 10. 12.
(...)spasses. Here is not a word of any satisfaction for si^ne in the sight
of God, but only a commendation of brotherly love, drawn from a notable
effect, which it has among men, to make them for bear to revenge and to bear
with one an others infirmities. And as for that speech of Christ, we must know
that it makes not her love an impulsive cause to move God to pardon her sins,
but only a sign that God had already forgiven them, and (...) she had tasted
deeply of his love for the forgiveness of many sins: (...) our Lord had
said; Many sins are (...) her, therefore she has loved (...). For the
particle (because) is not Particula (hoti) no^ est causalis, sed illatiua vel
^ationalis: and argume^tum est ab effecta ad causam
(...) but ^llatiue, reasoning from the effect to the caus^, as the words
ensuing in that text do show. To whom (...) is forgiven, he loves a little.
The like spee(...) used in John. 8. 44. where our Savior says, that the
devil abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. So we use to
say, that a tree is Luke. 7. 47.
good, because the fruit is good: and yet the tree makes the fruit good, and
not the fruit the (...).

Ob. 2. Fifthly, we are justified by Faith, therefore our sins are forgiven
Gal. 2. 16.
by faith: For pardon of sin is a part of justification. Therefore our sins
are not washed away by the blood of Christ.

Ans. In that Justification is ascribed Per non propter.
to faith, it is because faith is an instrument receiving it, and not because
it does deserve it.

Therefore the Scripture says, that we are justified by faith, and not for
faith. For the blood of Christ and his obedience does only justify: and
therefore Ephesians. 1, 7. 1. coa. 1. 30.
Paul says, that we have remissio of sins by his blood, and that he is made
unto us of God, righteousness and redemption. The meaning therefore of the
Apostle is, that we are justified by the righteousness and blood of Christ,
apprehended Fides no^ vt virtus in praedicame^to qualitatis, sed in
praedicamanto relationis co^siderata iustificat propter Christum. Si formaliter
and proprie loquamur, nec fide, nec charitate nostra iustificamur, sed vna Dei
in Christo iustitia, vna Christo nobis communicata iustitia.
and applied by faith. For faith does not justify, as it is a virtue, or
quality, but as it has respect to Christ her object, for whom our sins are
pardoned, and we are accounted righteous. And therefore Pighius says; If we
speak formally and properly, we are justified neither by our faith nor
charity, but by the only justice of God in Christ, by the only
righteousness of Christ communicated (or imputed) to us. By all which it does
clearly appear, that the pardon of sin is procured by the blood of Christ
alone. And least any man should imagine (as many do) that Christ has merited
that our works should be meritorious, and satifactory with the Lord, let him
know that his imagination has no footing in the word of God, but comes from
the forge of his own brain, and is coined upon the Anuill of corrupted
reason. For first, if Christ did merit that man might satisfy, then he makes
every believer to be his own Savior in part, and so makes him a Jesus and a
Redeemer with him, which no one syllable of holy writ will approve. For Christ's
Priesthood is incommunicable, and looked up in his own person: and therefore
Peter says, 1. Pet. 2. 24.
that he himself bare our sins in his 1. Pet. 2. 24.
body upon the cross. With whom agrees the Author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews, when he says, that Christ has purged our sins by himself.
Secondly, if that conceit be true, then Heb. 1. 3.
Christ merited, that polluted and imperfect works should merit: for such are
ours, as they come from us. Pure wine cannot come forth of inustie vessels, no^
clean water from a muddie fountain. Thirdly, at Christ has merited that our
works should make any kind of satisfaction, then God was not only in Christ,
but in Us also, reconciling the world unto himself, and that he was not only
made sin for us, but also in us. But Paul knew none of this learning, as
himself does show. 2. Cor. 5. 18. 19. 21.
Lastly, if Christ by the merit of his blood give man power to satisfy, then
as man does in his own person satisfy by Christ, so Christ besides his own
satisfaction upon the cross, does daily satisfy in men to the end of the
world. In membris suis patitur non placat.
But this cannot be. For Christ upon the cross, when death seized upon him,
said: It is finished: that is, I have fully satisfied for the sins of all my
people. For his resurrection served not to sati^fie, but to confirm and
declare it, and to show his conquest over death and all our deadly enemies.

Finally, that I may conclude this doctrine, ^t may be imagined (as many have)
that Christ has by his blood removed the e^ernall punishment of our sins,
but ye^ w^ must satisfy for their temporal. I answer^: though this conceit
may as easily be denied, as ^is conceived, yet that all scruple may be taken
away, and that the weakness thereof may be discerned, it will not be am^sse
to discuss it briefly, and by the word of God to detect and quell^t.

First, Saint Paul says, that we are Romans 3. 24. 28.
justified freely by Grace. Now free justification is flat contrary to
personal satisfaction: and (as Bernard says) Nou erat quo gratia i^tte, vbi
meritu^ occupa(...). Ser. 67. in cant. Math. 6. 11. 12.
there is no room for graee, where merit does occupy the place. Man's merit and
Gods grace cannot harbor under one roof.

Secondly, Christ teaches us to pray for our bread, and for the forgiveness of
our sins. Now shall we, that cannot merit a morsel of bread, think that we
can satisfy the infinite justice of God for any sin, or for the smallest
punishment of the smallest sin? Are we, that are less then the least of all
Gods mercies, able to merit any mercy of him, that is Justice itself, though
it be but freedom from the meanest misery? And what need we to beg pardon
upon the knees of our souls, what need we to trouble the Lord with our suites,
if we can satisfy his justice by our selves? To ask forgiveness, and to make
satisfaction in our own persons by our selves, can not stand together.
Thirdly, the satisfaction of Christ is perfect and absolute, and to say the
contrary, is intolerable blasphemy. But personal satisfaction, do derogate
from the perfection of his satisfaction, and the invaluable value of his
sacrifice, by which Gods justice is fully satisfied, and his wrath appeased.

Lastly, if Christ have satisfied for the greater, for the greatest of all,
what reason have we to think, that he meant to leave the smaller to be
satisfied for of us, whom he knew to be unfit, unfurnished, weak, and
unworthy to attempt so great a work, much more to effect it, howsoever we might
perhaps affect it? And if without him we can do nothing, as he himself does
tell us, Ioh. 15. 5.
undoubtedly, without him we can make no satisfaction for our sins to God.
And it has been already proved, that he does not enable us to satisfy, or
make us merit. Therefore we must ascribe the remission of sins, and of their
temporal and eternal punnishments to the merit of Christ's blood, and to the
inestimable price of his death. And so much for this sixth doctrine.

CHAP. VIII.
The blood of Christ is the purgation of all sins. Afflictions are crosses, but
not curses: chastisements, and not punishments of vengeance.

Seventhly, seeing the Apostle says, that Christ has washed us from our
sins in his blood, and not from some of them only; I gather, that Christ by
the merit of his blood, has procured the pardon of them All, of what nature,
name, time, or kind soever: whether they be original or actual, of omission
or commission, of ignorance or knowledge, whether committed before conversion,
or admitted afterward, wheresoever, or howsoever. He bare (says Esaias) the
sin of many: by using a wo^d of the singular number, the Prophet would show
that Christ ^s. 53. 12.
was punished for all our sins. And John says, that his blood cleanses us
from All sin, not from a part. And 1. Ioh. 1. 7.
indeed how could God so make him to be sin for us, that we might be 2. Cor.
5. 21.
made the righteousness of God in him, except he took away all our sins,
whereby we were (...)? Therefore Haimo says a right, that Christ In cap. 5. ad
Romans Christus non solum peccatum originale, sed etiam omnia actu^^a ab (...).
has taken away not only original corruption, but all actual transgressions
also in (...) that are elected. The speech which Paul uses (in Romans ^. ^^) is
not exclusive: but by it ^e^l^e with that God has not only pardoned, and that
Christ has not only satisfied for th^se sins, which we admit of infirmity
after that we (...) called, but even for those (...), which we did with full
consent of will commit before, then when we were the enemies of God; and (...)
teaches Titus, that Christ has gi^en Tit. 2. 24.
h^mselfe (...) us, that he (...) us from All^^^^^^tis. (...) demanded, (...)
Christ (...) all our sins, (...) corporal and spiri^^^^^ (...) and eternal,
(...) that men die, (...) afflictions in this (...)?

Ans. Their crosses are (...) and their afflictions (if they be regenerated)
are not punishments inflicted of God as a dreadful Judge, but his fatherly
corrections and trials, wherewith he visits his children, to humble,
exercise, instruct, admonish, refine, and try them. When we are judged, we are
chastened of the Lord (says Paul) because we should not be condemned with the
1. Cor. 11, 32
world. And (as Chryso. says) when we are corrected or rebuked of the lord, it
is rather for our admonition then condemnation: it is Hom. 28. in 1. Cor.
rather to heal us, then torment us, and to mend us, rather then to punish us.
For as the Scripture speaks; He chasteneth quum corripimur a Domino, magis
est admonitionis, quam damnationis: medicinae, quam supplicii: correctionis,
quam poena Heb. 12. 10, 11. Aug. de Poenae. et confess.
us for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness: and his
chastening brings with it the quiet fruit of righteousness, to them which are
exercised thereby. And of this opinion was Augustine, as appears when he
says, that Crosses and sorrows before the pardon of sin, are (Supplicia
peccatorum) the punishments of sins, but after pardon (Certamina
exercitationesque iustorum) the exercises of the righteous.

And as for death, we do not die to satisfy the justice of God for any sin,
or for any penalty deserved duly by sin, for Christ has performed all this
himself, Who appeared to take away 1. Ioh. 3. 5.
our sins, has carried all our sorrows, and by his death has altered the
condition Is. 53. 4.
of our death. But we die for other causes. As first, that we may learn to
detest our sin, which was the originarie cause of our dissolution. Secondly,
that we may learn to be out of love with the world, and to look after that
city, which remains for eeuer.

Thirdly, to teach us true lowlines of mind, and neither to insult over
others, nor to pranke and plume up our selves like Peacocks. He is a very
strange man, that being a Tenant at his Landlords pleasure, will bestow more
cost then needs upon a rotten house, which cannot stand long before it fall,
and out of which he may be turned this night before to morrow. Fourthly, that
we should seriously consider of that great downfall, which we took in Adam.
Fifthly, that we might not feel or see those arrows of vengance, which the
Lord draws out of 2. King. 22. 20. Is. 57. 1.
the quiver of his justice, and shoots them out of his bow of wrath, and does
oftentimes sheath them in the sides of the wicked, among whom we live. Sixthly,
that we might be delivered wholly from the body of sin. For Death ends the
battle between the flesh and the spirit, and strikes off that Tyrants head.
And here we see the admirable providence of God, and his vnrecompensable
kindness to us, in ordaining the daughter to devour and eat up the mother.
For Sin engendered Death, and Death by divine dispensation is now become the
death of sin; like a worm that eats the fruit whereof it was bred, being the
death of that which gave life to it. Seauenthly, we must die, that we may feel
the power of Christ, for the raising up of our dead bodies, and for the
reuniting of our souls unto them. Eighthly, God does sometime^ call us unto
death, that we might in special manner glorify his Name by dying, and that by
martyrdom we might remonstrate our love to Christ, who refused not to die,
that we might live, and not die. Lastly, we die, that we might be translated
out of a World of wickedness, and out of the vale of misery into the habitacle
of perfect holiness, and unspeakable happiness: and that being dead in our
body, we might be transported as concerning our souls, into the haven of
eternal peace and true tranquillity, over and out of the raging and rustling
seas of all worldly troubles. For (as Cyprian says) death unto the godly is
Ianua vitae, the door of life: and our Egressus departure forth of the world,
is our Ingressus, entrance into the heavens. We go from men to God, from earth
to heaven, out of the Wilderness into Canaan, celestial Canaan, heavenly
Jerusalem, the land of righteousness, the paradise of God, and the temple of
his holiness.

The last doctrine now follows.

CHAP. IX.
The blood of Christ is the ransom of all Believers. Remission of sins is
excellent in nine respects.

IN that the Apostle says, Christ has Us (and not some of us;) whence I
conclude, that his blood has cleansed all the faithful whatsoever, noble and
ignoble, lea^ned and unlearned, rich and poor, of what sex or sort, of what
condition or country soever. For John thus speaks of himself, and of all
the faithful in those seven Churches, and wheresoever, both Pastors and
people, male and female, young and old, high and low, married and single. The
Lord (says Esaias) has laid upon him the iniquity of us All. He spared not
his own Son (says Paul) but gave him for us All to death. Therefore in his
epistle to Is. 53. 6.
the Ephesians he is bold to call him the Romans 8. 32.
Savior of his body, that is, of the catholic Church, and not of a part
only. And Saint John says, that the blood of Christ does appease his father
for the sins of the Whole World of the 1. Ioh. 2. 2.
Elect. And therefore the name of Jesus was given him: because he was by God
ordained to save his people (even Math. 1. 21
all his people) from all their sins. And this has been the doctrine of the
Church in former ages. Gregory says; The author of life laid down his life,
Pro electorum vita, vsq. ad mortem se tradidit author 2. Number. in Ez. li. 1. In
Leuit. lib 17. c. 2.
that they might live, which are elected unto life. Eusebius says, that Christ
suffered for the salvation (Mundi Saluandorum) of all those that should be
saved. Hist. l. 4. c. 15. And Radulphus peremptorily affirms, that the blood
of our High Priest Christ, was the expia^ion (Omnium credentium) or atonement
of All believers. And no marvel, for being the blood of God, it must needs be
of more worth with God then the blood of all men, the life of all Angels, and
the being of all creatures, though they were as many more as they are, have
been, or shall be ever, yea then if all men and Angels should have suffered
eternally.

Thus we have seen that remission of All the sins of All the Elect, and of
All punishments d^e unto the^ for their sins, is procured only by the blood
(...) Christ, who in his own person by himself has fully satisfied the
justice of his Father for us, and as (Augustine says) has made our sins his
sins, that he might Nostra del^cta sua delicta fecit vt suam (...) nostra^
just nam fac^^et Genesis 27. 15. 27.
make his righteousness our righteousness, wherewith we being (...), as Jacob was
with his brother (...) garments, we do receive the blessing of God, as he
received (...).

Now that we may not prize the pardon of our sins at too (...) a price, (...)
Christ (...) (...) not be (...) to (...) seriously the woo^th and comfort of
it. As first, (...) was not procured, as pardons use to be, by wordly (...),
but by the blood of God. Therefore Peter says, Dei, non Deitatis, of God, not
of the God. head.
that we were not redeemed with corruptible things, as with silver and gold,
but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb undefiled and without
spot. And therefore Paul may truly say, that 1. Pet. 1. 13. 19. 1. Cor. 6. 20.
(...), 23.
we are bought for a price, even for the (...) price, that any one could pay.
For what can be more costly then blood, or what more dear then life? Now a
pardon so dearly paid for, should not (...) regarded.

Secondly, remission of sins, is an irreuocable act of God. Sins being once
nailed to the cross of Christ, shall never be taken down alive: and being once
buried in his grave, they shall never rise again to condemn us.

Riches remain not always, nor the crown from generation to generation. Favor
Pro. 27. 24.
is deceiptfull, and beauty is vanity. Pro. 31. 30.
Strength will decay, and pleasures will pass away. And what is your life? It
is even a vapor, that appears for a time, Iam. 4. 14.
and afterward vanishes out of his sight? For all flesh is grass, and all
the glory of 1. Pet. 1. 24.
man is as the flower of grass: the grass withers, and the flower falls
away. But the pardon of sin endures for ever: and this is the pardon, which
is preached among you, and is by Christ procured for you.

Thirdly, when Christ does actually wash us from our sins, then he does also
begin to reform and sine us. And as by meriting the remission of sin, he
keeps it from condemning us, so by sanctifying of us, he stays it from ruling
in us. So that when Christ has once washed us in his blood, sin may be
truly said to be in part consumed in us, and we no sinners at all in Gods
account.

Fourthly, the prayers of the wicked, are abominable to the Lord: but when God
has pardoned our sins, we may boldly pray with assurance to be heard. For
it is iniquity which makes the separation betwixt us and God. Your sins
(says Isaiah) have hid his face from you, that he will not hear. Therefore
his ears are opened, when sins Is. 59 2.
are pardoned, (...) satisfied, and his wrath appeased.

Fifthly, when men's sins are remitted then their minde^ are settled, their Romans
5. 1.
(...) consciences are (...). For sin, which is the firebrand of contention,
and a makeb^te, betwixt us and God, is taken from us so, as that it shall not
be impu^^d to us. When the Seamen had cast Jonah from the^ into the sea, the
sea ceased from Ion. 1. 15.
her aging: so when God shall cast our sins from us behind his back, and
shall diue them and us into the blood of that (...) Lamb Christ Jesus, the
fire of his wrath shall be quenched, all the winds and waves of our souls
shall be calmed, and our troubled consciences shall be pacified, as that without
danger of drowning, we may flo^t with (...) sail with the pleasant gale of
his grace, upon the troublesome (...) as of this world, in true tranquillity,
(...) our Pilot Christ do bring us safely to the Haven of our Hope, and land
us where we shall (...). On the contrary, wicked and ungodly wretches have no
true peace at all: but are either without sense, like stocks: or else feel
the flas^^ngs of (...)-fire with^^ their souls, being gnawed with the worm of
an accusing conscience and are like the raging sea that cannot rest, Is. 57. 10.
whose waters cast up mire and dirt.

Sixthly, The thoughts of the wicked are an abomination to the Lord: Yea his
very Pro. 15. ^6. Pr^. 21. 27.
sacrifice is abominable. But when our sins are forgiven, the defectes in all
our good works are covered. Yea then, and not till then, do we work any
thing well, and pleasing in the sight of God. Therefore Solomon says; The
sacrifice of the wicked (who has not been washed in the blood of Christ) is
abomination to the Lord, but the prayer Pro. 15. 8.
of the righteous, (which no man can be said to be before his sins be
forgiven) is acceptable unto him. And Augustine truly says, that good works
do not go before justification, but follow Bona opera sequu^ter iustificatum,
non praecedunt iustificandum.
after. There must first be a spring, before there can be a River: First,
there must be a fire, before there can be burning. Indeed good works may be
seen sooner then the pardon of sin, as light is usually seen before the Sun
appears: and a man does often see the light of a candle before he see the
candle it self, though in nature they do not go before, but follow. And so
good works in nature follow the pardon of our sin.

Seau^uthly, those whose sins are forgiven, are invested likewise in the
righteousness of Christ, and shall die the death of the righteous, which (...)
wished. Peace shall come, they shall Number. 23. 10
rest in their beds. Their end is peace. Their death is as life: they die to
li^e. Is. 57. 2.
For whom God does justify, that is, whose sins he does remit, and whose
P^al. 37. 37.
persons he does account as righteou^, Romans 8. 30.
those he does glorify, that is, adorn with grace in this world, and enrich
with glory, in the world to come. Gratia est (...) gloria, and gloria est
consummata gratia.


For grace is the beginning of glory: and glory, is the consummation of grace.

Eighthly, when we are cleansed from our sins in the blood of Christ, we may
lawfully use the creatures of God. For unto the pure, all things are pure: but
unto them, that are defiled and unbelieving, Tit. 1. 15.
as all men are till Christ have washed them) is nothing pure, but even their
minds and consciences are defiled.

Lastly, the remission of sins by the blood of Christ is the more excellent,
because it is one of the Royalties and royal Prerogatives of Gods Elect. For
howsoever his blood was sufficient in (...) self for all, without exception of
any, (...) as Innocentius (...) (pro solis praedestinatis effusus est quantum
ad efficientiam) Lib. 4. de Mist. Mis. cap 4.
it was effectual only for those, who are praedesti^ated unto life Therefore
Ambrose says; If thou do not believe, then Christ did not descend for thee,
he did not suffer for thee. But faith Si^o^ credi^, non desce^dit (...)
Christus, (...) passus (...) De side ad Gratianum. 2. These. 3 2 Tit. (...).
is not common to all: and therefore Paul (...) it the Faith of the Elect. And
this the Scripture clears (...). For Christ gave himself to purge unto
himself a Peculiar people, and therefore surely he did not die for all, for
Judas as for Peter. And what reason have we to think that Christ would wash
those Tit. 2. 14.
in his blood, which he never did acknowledge for his own? But there are Mat.
7. 23.
some whom Christ did never know for his. Paul and Augustine were of this
opinion: and therefore (...) in his episll to the Romans, that God gave his
Romans 8. 32.
son for us. Pro quibus Nobis, for what (...) (says Augustine) Pro
prescitis, prae^estinatis, iustificatis, glorificatis, Even In Ioh Tract. 45.
for us that are foreknowen, predestined, justified, and glorified. For
undoubtedly if we respect either Gods ordination, or Christ's (...), his blood
was Math. 26. 28.
(...) for Many, for the remission of sins: and Esaias says, he bore the sin
of Many: many, not All. For he was to be the Sauio^r of his own people only;
and therefore Lumbard says truly that he Lib. 3. Did. 22.
wrought salvation Only for those that were predestined. And Augustine
having made a distinction of Worlds says, that this World, which God does
reconcile unto himself in Christ, and which is saved by Christ, (Et cui per In
John. Lib. 3. c. 3.
Christum peccatum omne condonatur De Mundo Electus est inimico, damnato,
contaminato) and unto which every sin through Christ is pardoned, is Elected
out of the Maligning, damned, and defiled World. By all which it plainly
appears, that those only have their sins forgiven, which are elected unto
life. And thus we see the excellency of this benefit. Which notwithstanding we
shall never respect as we ought to do, unless first we do seriously set
before our eyes the infinite majesty and justice of God, before which nothing
can stand, but that, which is perfectly pure And secondly, unless we consider
duly how imperfect and poor our own perfection is, and how grievous and
innumerable our faults and fraylties are. And so being cast down and humbled
with the sense of our own sins, and the serious consideration of our
misery, we shall be fitted to look abroad for a Savior, and when we have once
tasted of his goodness, and felt the sweetness of his blood, we shall them
remembrace and like (...), and the more highly prize his benefits.

And so much for these three last doctrines. It remains now to propound their
uses, which I have referred to this place, because the grounds, whereon they be
founded, be rather three branches of one doctrine, one of them nearely joined
to the other, then three distinct doctrines without any likeness and affinity.

CHAP. X.
Believers are blessed. Christ is no respecter of persons. Mutual love is with
right and reason claimed. Gods justice is proved. The vileness of sin is
showed. Repentance is required.

FIrst, we may hence plainly see, that the condition of the Godly (how
miserable soever in the Worl^^ account) is very comfortable and happy. For
Blessed are they whose iniquity is forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Romans
4. 7. Ps. 32. 2.
Blessed is the man, unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity. But the blood
of Christ has covered the sins of the faithful, and has obtained of God
that they shall never be imputed to them: therefore their state is blessed. The
malefactor thinks himself a happiman, when the King has given him the
pardon of his fault: and the child is glad when the father has forgiven his
offense; and may nor we rejoice and account our selves as happy, seeing God
the king of kings, and our heavenly father has granted us the pardon of all
our sins for the blood of his son, and has reconciled us unto himself?
And that we may indeed rejoice, we ought every one to labor that we may be
persuaded of it in our hearts. For shall men strive to be assured of those
earthly things, which are supposed and said to be theirs? And would an Offender
be for his further comfort, out of doubt persuaded that his offense is
pardoned, as the report does go? And shall not we seek by all means possible
to be assured that we are cleansed from our sins, as we are said to be, and
that we are partakers of the blood of Christ? If we walk in the light (says
John) the blood of Jesus 1. Ioh. 1. 7.
Christ does cleanse us from all sin. And S. Paul says, that there is no
condemnation Romans 8. 1.
to those, that walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit: and therefore
their sins are pardoned, which are the causes of damnation. So then, if we
repent of our sins, if we follow not the command of our flesh, if we walk
in the ways of God, and sub^^ our selves to the regiment of his Spirit, we may
assuredly conclude in our souls, that as our bodies are bespri^ked with water
in Baptism, so we are washed by the blo^d of Christ from all our sins, the
fi^thines of our souls, and (...) from all punishments temporal and eternal
(...) by them.

Secondly, seeing Christ has washed Act. 16. 31.
ages. Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be loved. Return from All thy
sins, and do that which is right, and thou shall surely live and not die; how
Ez. 18. 21.
poor, base or vile so ever thou may be. Yea further, though thou be
wicked, and by thy sins an enemy to God, yet despair not, but believe and
repent. For Christ does not die for us, because we are holy: he does not wash
us, because we are clean: out by washing us he makes us clean. Christ did not
die for the righteous, but for the Ungodly, and for the Unjust: and therefore
Paul says; God sets out his love Romans 5. 6. 1. Pet. 3. 18.
toward us, seeing that while we were yet Sinners, Christ dyed for us. Be^^eue
therefore and repent, leave sin and live uprightly, and assure thy self of
the blood Romans 5. 8.
of Christ for the remission of thy sins. His merit ^s greater then thy
misery: Romans 4. 5. Romans 3. 22.
and a salu^ made of his blood is able to cure all the sores of thy soul.

Thirdly, seeing the blood of that one man Christ Jesus has cleansed us all
rest in the blood of another, but we are all washed in the blood of one, and
one has washed us al: and therefore we ought al, as if we were but one, to love
and agree one with an other. This kind of argument is used by the prophet
Malachy, Mal. 2. 10.
when he says; Have we not all one father? Has not one God made us? Why do
we transgress every one against his brother? And the Apostle exhorting the
Ephesians Ephesians. 4. 3. 4.
to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, uses this as a reason
to persuade them too it; because there is one body, one spirit, one Lord, one
faith, one baptism, one God and Father of all. Even so say I: Forasmuch as one
man, one God Christ Jesus, who is both God and man, has washed us all from our
sins, by the merit of his most precious blood, why should we transgress one
against another, as we use to do? And why do we not rather affect and
embrace on an other? Do we not all come out of his loins? Ephesians. 5. 30.
Are we not all flesh of his flesh, and bones of his bones? Has not be washed
us all for himself? Do we not all spring from that water, from that blood,
which sprang (...) him, when he hanged on the cross^? I no^^e that bread of
life, which we all eat off, that well, that water of life, which we all drink
off, that mean, or that wish to live? Do we all breath by him? ^aue we all
the^ emission of all our sinne^ by his blood? Has he communicated his blood
to us all? And shall we disgrace, abuse, contemn, and oppress one an other?
We should rather be kind, courteous, and loving, following (...) things which
concern peace and amity, and Romans 14. 19.
wherewith one may edify an other.

Fourthly, seeing our sin^ cost Christ his blood, we may as in a glass behold

By which, we see, that he is not altogether mercy, as many foolish and
presumptuous Totus Deus est misery ordia, non to taliter.
persons d^e imagine. It is true indeed, that God is merciful, and so ^iche
in mercy, as that he sent his Son to save us: but yet with ^ll he is so
just, that rather then sin should escape unpunished, he has made his Son to
be^re the punishment of it. And as for those tha^ will not by faith receive h^s
son, and will not reform their lives, but go on in sin without
repentance, he has for the manifestation of his justice, reserved to eternal
^orments. And therefore Job says; The Job. 21. 30.
wicked is kept unto the day of destruction, and they shall be brought forth to
the day of wrath. And the Psalmist says accordingly; In the hand of the Lord
there is a cup, and the wine is red: it is sul Psalm. 75. 8.
mixed: and he powers out of the same: surely all the wicked of the earth shall
wring out, and drink the dregs thereof. We see therefore that his mercy does
not shoulder out his justice. Let no man therefore sin in hope of pardon. For
our God is even a consuming fire, to consume up all impenitent sinners: and it
Heb. 12. 29. Deuteronomy. 4. 24. Heb. 10. 31.
is a fearful thing to fall into his hands.

Fifthly, we may see the heynousnes of sin. For we must not think that sins,
and account the^ grievous and not small. They displease God, they deserve his
judgments, they provoke his anger, they hinder his bles^ings, they trouble our
peace, and procure our death. Like the Ier. 5. 25.
worm they eat the wood, wherein it was bred: they destroy the soul, wherein
they we eingendred. Pliny wri^eth that the Vipers kill their damme at their
coming f^or^h. Even so the by^th of sin is in desert Hist. not. lib. (...)
cap. 62.
the death of the sinner. Our sins crucified the Lord of life: they were the
nails that pierced him, the thorns that pricked him, and the spear that was
thrust through him. He for our sins laid down his life, and spilt his blood.
They made him groan and sigh: they made him sweat water and blood: they
tormented his soul, and made it heavy unto death: yea they made him cry out,
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? The consideration of these things
Math. 27. 46
should move us, unless like mountains we wll not be moved, to relinquish and
abhor our sins. When Peter had told the Jews, that they had crucified the
Lord, they were stricken as with a thu^der-bolt from heaven, and being pricked
in heart, they cried (...) Men and brethren, what shall we do? Thy sins
Act. 2. 37.
have crucified the Lord of glory, they nailed him fast unto the cross, they
would not die till he was dead, he was feign to make a Bath of his blood, of
his best blood, his Heart-bloud, to cleanse and wash thee from them. Repent
therefore and relent, condemn and accurse them, forsake and hate them. Will thou live in the^, that made Christ to die? will thou delight in them, that
made Christ to mourn? Can not thou mourn for them, that made him to bleed?
Indeed Pro. 14. 9.
the Fool makes but a mock of sin. But will thou needs be that fool? Is
Pro. 26. 3.
not a rod prepared for the fools back? Do thou not know that the foolish
Ps. 5. 5.
shall not stand in Gods sight, and that he hates all them that work
iniquity? Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire, Ps. 11. 6.
and brimstone, and stormy tempest, this is the portion of their cup. But Life
is in the way of righteousness, and in that path there Pro. 12. 28.
is no death. What shall we then think of those, that delight in wickedness,
and that draw iniquity with cords of vanity, Is. 5. 18.
and sin as it were with cartropes? What shall we say of those, that make a
trade of usury, a life of drunkenness, an occupation of swearing, swaggering,
lying, deceiving, oppressing, which eue^ plow upon the faces of pore me^, and
come their money upon their skins; which notwithstanding al admonitions and
instructions to the contrary, go forward in their irregular, unnatural, and
irrelgious courses, with out (...); like Pharoahs ill favored and
leane-fleshed kine, which thought (...) had eaten up Genesis 41. 21.
seven fat kine, (...) yet as ill-fauoured as they were before. Surely it
argues that as yet they are not washed from their sins. For they, that are
washed from sin, make conscience of sin. A dying unto sin is begun in
them, to whom the death of Christ is actually applied, which he sustained for
them. It argues that sin is not only in them, but that they also are in
sin; like an house, that has not only fire in it, but which is also in the
fire, ready to be consumed in it. It argues that they are as yet in the power
of the Devil, who leads them captive, like Bears by the lips, to do his
will. Finally, it argues horrible security, in that they neither regard the
justice of God, and his severity against sin, nor weigh that sacred blood,
which was shed for sin. For questionless if men did seriously consider those
manifold and inextricable dangers, in which they were by sin, and that
nothing would satisfy God for sin, but the blood of his own and only
Son, it would daunt them much, and make them to hate and leave them, though
there were but one spark of saving grace within them. A man (we see) cannot
endure the sight of that sword, wherewith his father was put to death. Christ
is our Father: and we are his Seed and Children. His soul was powered Is. 9. 6.
Heb. 2, 13. Is. 53. 10. Is. 53. 12.
out unto death for our sins. He was both wounded and slain for them. They
were (as I may say) the sword that slew him. Let us therefore loath and leave
them. Let not them be our joy, which were the causes of his sorrows. Make not
that thy mirth which was the cause of his mourning, and had made thee mourn,
had not he mourned for thee. Is it seemly for thee, that art washed from
sin, like a So^ to pollute thy self with sins? Did not Christ die, that we
should live to him, 2. Cor. 5. 15.
that dyed for us? And did he not give himself for a people, that should be
Tit. 2. 14.
zealous of good works? He bare our sins (says Peter) in his body on the tree,
that (...) being dead to sin, should live in 1. Pet. 2. 24.
righteousness. Let us therefore renounce our sins, forsake our enormities
(which are indeed our chiefest deformities) and let us give our selves to the
works of holiness. Ye are not your own. For ye 1. Cor. 6. 19. (...).
are brought for a price. Christ has given his blood for you. Therefore
glorify God in your body, and in your spirit. They be Gods, they be Christ's:
he has bought the^ dearly. Be not the servants of men: be not the servants of
sin. Turn unto me, (says the Lord) for I have redeemed 1. Cor. 7. 23
thee: so I say, turn unto Christ: for he has redeemed thee, he has washed
Is. 44. 22.
thee from all thy sins in his blood. And being made free from sin, ye are
Romans 6. 18.
made the servants of righteousness. Therefore as ye have given your members
servants to uncleanness and iniquity, to commit iniquity, so now give your
members Romans 6, 19.
servants unto righeousnes in holiness. For (as Peter says) it is sufficient
for us, that 1. Pet. 4. 3.
we have spent the time past of the life after the lust of the Gentiles,
walking in wantonness, lusts, drunkenness, gluttony, drinkings: and in abominable
idolatries.

Sixthly, seeing Christ is said to have z. Tim. 1. 10
we are not only washed in his blood, but also washed by him. And thus we see,
first that Christ shed his blood freely. For he washed us (as it were) with his
own hands, and besides we know that his Godhead, which gives dignity to his
blood, is free from all constraint. Secondly, we see that we are not only
washed by the father and by the Holy Ghost, but by the Son also. For those
works of the Trinity, Opera Trinitatis ad extra sunt indiuisa.
which are wrought upon the creature, are common to all the persons, differing
only in their manner of working. The Father washes us from sin: because he
has of his grace sent his Son to take away our sin, and for that he forgiueth
sin for the sacrifice of his Son. The Son is said to wash us from sin,
because he does in his own person pay the price of sin, and by the merit of
his blood, which he shed, procure the pardon of it. And the holy Ghost, also
may be said to wash us; because he works faith in our hearts, whereby we do
apprehend the blood of Christ, and apply it to our selves in special and
because he seals the pardon to our souls, and gives us the assurance thereof
in our Consciences.

Seventhly, seeing that we have the remission of our sins for the blood of
It is impossible, (says the Apostle) that the blood of bulls and goats
should take away sins. They were Heb. 10. 4.
only ^ipes or figures shadowing out that absolute, and all-sufficient
sacrifice of Christ, even the sacrifice of his soul and body, which he being
our High Priest as God incarnate, did offer unto his father upon the altar of
his Godhead, for the expiation of our sins. And therefore a I such
ceremonies are to be adjudged dead, seeing Christ the substance of them has
performed that, which they did shadow forth.

Eighthly, seeing our sins are purged (Sanguis Martyrum sit semen Ecclesiae)
God so bless the death of his Martyrs, and make their blood so fertile, that
(like seed cast into the ground) it may seem to revive, and send forth many
more to profess that truth, for which it was split upon the ground, yet it is
in it self but the blood of those, which are no more then men, though more
holy then most men: and it is not shed for the pardon of sin, but for the
testimony of the truth, the manifestation of a good conscience, the
declaration of a strong faith, and for the remonstrance of their love of
Christ. On the contrary, the blood of Christ is his blood, who is essentially
God, and it is also the ransom of our sins. And therefore it is no wonder that
some of the Martyrs have suffered their blood to be shed more quietly in
appearance, then he did his. For they suffer not for sin, but feel God
reconciled to them. But he suffered for the sins of all the Elect: their
whole burden lay upon his back. And he did not only suffer a bodily
dissolution, but even the very pangues of hell also. (...) sorrows of death
did compass ^im about, and the torments of hell did seize upon him. He felt
the wrath of God, in his soul and body, and (as (...) speaks) the word
(...) quiet, and assisted not, nor delivered Lib. 3. aduers. Hoer.
the (...) manhood, until a sufficient (...) as finished and fulfilled. Now
many Martirs feel the favor of God exceedingly, and sometimes also (when they
suffer) in an unusual and extraordinary manner. For their passions are not
(as his was) punishments for sins, but corrections and trials, appointed by
God, for the confusion of his enemies, the confirmation of his truth, and the
testification of those noble virtues, wherewith he did adorn them. And to
dispatch this point; Christ spilt his blood, so as that nevertheless he was to
rise again to life, in a short time after. But when Martyrs shed their blood,
and lay down their lives, they continue dead till they be raised up by Christ
their head at the last resurrection.

Ninthly, seeing our sins are purged by the blood of Christ, we see the Peter
teaches) in his body upon the cross. Considering also that he 1. Pet. 2. 24.
suffered in his soul, most grievous tortures, whiles he lived, as appeared by
his bloody sweat, and terrible outcry, My God my God, why have thou forsaken
Luke 22. 44. Mat. 27. 46. Mat. 26. 38. 39. Use. 10.
me? To draw to an end. Seeing Christ has procured the pardon of our sins by
his blood, we are taught to renounce all opinion of humane satisfactions.
Some think to pacify God by pattering over the Paternoster, the Creed, and
the ten commandments. Some think to stop the mouth of his justice with their
good works, and lamentable outcries. But the truth is, we are justified and
saved by Christ alone. He is our only Mediator and Advocate. His blood is
our only Purgatory. His mercy is our only merit. His death is our life. His
sacrifice is our satisfaction. For (as Paul shows) we are al justified
freely by grace, through Romans 3. 24.
the redemption, that is in Christ. And (as Basil says) there is (vna
expiatio) one In cap. 1. Is.
satisfactorie sacrifice, or expiation of sin, to wit, that blood, which was
shed for the salvation of the world; Therefore Augustine says; All my hope is
in the death of my Lord. Shall we think to satisfy Manual. cap. 32.
our sins by prayer? Then may a beggar by craning his alms deserve them, and
a debtour by requesting the pardon of his debt, may be said to discharge it. Or
shall we think to procure the pardon of our sins by good deeds: Then a man
by paying of one debt may discharge an other. For we are bound to do good
deeds. W^e were created in Christ to good works, which Ephesians. 2. 10.
God has ordained for us to walk in. And we were borne to do good, and not
to live to our selves, or to follow the desires of our flesh. Yea (says
Augustine) Nihil boni fe^isti, thou have Praesatin Psalm. 31.
done nothing, that good is, and yet remission of sins is given thee. And
Paul says, that God justifies the ungodly, therefore all our good deeds, do
follow the remission Romans 4. 5.
of our sins, which is a part of our justification, and therefore can be no
causes meriting it. Let us then lay the foundation of our redemption in the
blood of Christ. It is a sound foundation, and not sa^die, firm and not false.
Whatsoever is founded rightly upon it, shall never be confounded. Let us
therefore beware of the Church of Rome, concerning humane satisfactions, by
praying, fasting, Martyrdom, contrition, etc.

Touch not the fringe of her garment, least thou receive of her poison. Say
with John, that Christ has washed us from our sins in his blood.

Conclude with Augustine, that there is one mundation, one purgation of the
unrighteous, to wit, the purging blood Iniquorum vna mundatio est, sanguis
Iusti, De Trin. li. 4. c. 2.
of Christ that just one. For as Plinic says of the herb (...) that it
drives away all poison of serpents: even so the blood of Christ does chase
away our sins, which are the po^son of the Serpent Satan, and does fully
reconcile Hist. na. lib. 22. cap. 20.
us unto God.

CHAP. XI.
The admirable virtue, and inestimable price of Christ's blood, is proved and
declared. Sundry motives are used to move us to seek it, and to labor to be
possessed and assured of it.

LAstly, seeing Christ has washed us all from All our sins in his blood, we
plainly see that it is full of strength and virtue, most meritorious and
excellent. It is a strong medicine, that ouermaisters sin, the bane, the pest
and poison of the soul. A small shewer will not lay a mighty wind: and a small
matter cannot satisfy a king for a thousand traitors. So if the blood of
Christ were not exceeding virtuous and meritorious, it could not possible calm
the raging wind of Gods wrath for sin, it could not possible satisfy his
Majesty for our sins, which are innumerable, and procure his royal pardon for
us, that are so many. God showed no small power in bringing the Israelites out
of the land of Egypt, the house of bondage, and in confounding Pharaoh and the
rest of the Egyptians their enemies, which pursued them. So Christ has showed
great power to be in his blood and bloody death, seeing by it he has delivered
all true Israelites from thraldom under sin and Satan, and has cut the
throat of all their enemies. He must needs be a very mighty prince, that is
able to preserve al his subjects from al their enemies, so as that there shall
not any of them perish. So the blood of Christ, which saves all his ^oyall
Subjects from all their mortal enemies, cannot but be full of might and
ver^ue. It is a good blade, which will cut asunder a bar of iron; therefore
surely the blood of Christ is powerful, seeing it has c^ackt in s^nder the
iron ba^res of our sins, and has consumed them to powder. That water must
needs be very virtuous for qual^tie (if it be but of small quantity) which is
able to quench a mountain of fire: Christ's blood for measure was not much,
therefore we m^st needs confess it to be full of merit, full of virtue, seeing
it both quenched the fiery mountain of gods wrath, and dissolved the mountanie
mass of man's sin. Death considered, as it is an effect and punishment of
sin, is as it were Hells mouth, and like the man, that turns the ladder,
whereon the Malefactor ready to be executed stands. Now the blood of Christ
has not only taken away the second death, but has also changed the nature of
that first. It has made it a Key to open the door and let us loose from al
our sins: it has made it an Axe to strike off the head of our flesh: it has
made it an Ariadnes thread, to bring us out of the labyrinch of all earthly
miseries: and as a Boat to transport us unto the haven of ^ternall happiness;
and therefore we m^st needs co^lesse it is of ^nclesse merit, and of admirable
ver^ue. Let us therefore (Beloved) not with Thomas put our hands in^o his side,
but let us plunge our selves wholly both Ioh. 20. 27
soul and body into his blood.

For he is that Pelican, that feeds us to eternal life by his blood. His blood
is that Hyssope, by which we are cleansed, and the Balm of Gilead, whereby Ps.
51. 7. Leuit 24. 7.
our souls are cured. When Elisha went about to restore to life the Shunamites
son, he lay upon him; and put his 2. King 4. 34.
mouth upon the childs mouth, his own hands, upon his hands, his eyes upon his
eyes, and stretched himself upon him. Even, so if thou desire to be received
to everlasting life, set thy self by faith upon the cross of Christ, apply
thy hands to his hands, thy feet to his feet, thy mouth to his mouth, thine
eyes to his eyes, thy sinful heart, to his bleeding heart, and bath thy self by
faith in his blood. For even as the Israelites, which were stung to death by
the fiery Serpents, Number. 22. 9.
were cured, if they looked up to the brazen Serpent: so if we, which are stung
to death of that old Serpent by sin, which is his poy soned tooth and
venomous sting, will look up to Christ our brazen Serpent, hanging upon the
cross with the eye of faith, Ioh. 3. 14. 15
we shall be delivered from all our sins: his blood is a counterpoyson,
effectual against them all. The (...) (...) Pliny writes) has a property
to frustrate Hist. not. lib 37. c. 4.
the malicious effects of poison, and to expel vain feare^t at posse^^e the
mind. So the blood of Christ is able to preserve us from the mortal effects of
sin, which is more deadly then the deadliest poison, and being applied to the
heart by the hand of faith, it will expel the fear of damnation, and fill the
soul with joy. When the corpse of the dead soldier being tumbled into
Elishaes grave had touched his bones, he presently reuined: 2. King 13. 21.
even so shall we by a spiritual touching of Christ dead and buried, be
delivered from finne the life of death, and shall be quickened to eternal life.
And as the woman, which had the bloody Math. 9. 20.
issue was cured by touching the hem of his garment: so shall we (though we did
exceed in number the Stars of heaven, and the sands on the Seashore) we (I
say) should have all the bleeding wounds of our souls healed, if we will touch
his blood with the finger of a Act. 10. 43.
true faith. For unto him give all the Prophets witness, that through his Name
All that believe in him shall receive remission of sins. His Name has made
us noble: his death is our deliverance: his humiliation is our exaltation: his
shame is our glory, and his blood the price of our pardon. Which things
notwithstand^ng we possess by faith, and by faith (...) do receive, and not
without it. For as the branch or science receives no sap from the root,
unless it be joined to it: and as the parts of the body have neither sense,
nor motion, except they cohere with the head and be conjoined to it: so we,
that are branches of that noble Vine Christ Jesus, and the members of his
body, have neither life nor motion, we receive not the Ioh. 15.
pardon of our sins, nor partake of any of his benefits, unless we be united
to him, and be knit up together with him. Now we are not united, if we have not
faith. For us the vnio^ is made by the Spirit in respect of God, so it is made
by faith in respect of us.

But that I may press this point a a little further: If thou had a mortal
and inexo^able enemy, and knew a safe course, whereby thou might be
delivered from him: thou were thine own enemy, if thou did refuse to take
it; especially if there were no other way, but that. Satan is thine
irreconciliable enemy: Sin, which is his M^nion, is thy deadly foe. For as
Pliny records of the Flower-de-lis, that it Hist. not. l. 11. c. 2.
provoke sleep, but consumes nature: so though sin may seem to satisfy
a carnal and corrupt affection by giving it a kind of contentment and rest,
yet in truth it is an utter enemy to the spirit, and (like Iuy) it sucke^h out
the very sap of the soul. Now the blood of Christ is only able to quell
these thine enemies, and to redeem thee from that cursed condition, to which
thou art obnoxious by them. Labor therefore to be partaker of it: thou art
thine own enemy, if thou do^st neglect it. Plinic says, that men were wont
to carry Polium about them to chase away Lib. 21. cap. 20.
Serpe^ts. But the most sovereign amulet or preservative, which men can have
against Satan and their sins, is the blood of Christ applied by faith unto
their hearts. The sick do seek unto the Physician, that their bodies
Admedicam dubious co^fugit aeger opem, Old.
might be preferned from temporary death; and shall not we seek to Christ
that great Physician of the soul, that washing us in his blood we might be
preserved from that eternal death of soul and body? So soon as he had
touched the Leaper, he took away his leprosy: even so if he please to touch
us with his virtuous touch, the touch Luke 5. 13
us with his virtuous touch, the touch of his wounds, we shall be delivered from
our sins. His blood is as well able to take away our sins, and to make them
vanish out of Gods eye like smoke as that great inundation of water; was to
drown the world, or as the fire was to burn up Sodom. Do thou think that
thou have no need of him? Thou art as well able to discharge thee of thy sins,
as to remove a mountain, or to draine the sea. If the body be out of temper,
there is use of the Physician. Thou art distempered both in soul and body by
reason of thy sins, in which thou art by nature not only sick, but dead: and
Christ can only cure thee, therefore she unto him. And say thy sins be small,
yet are they many, and mortal all. Many little flintstones will (...) ship, as
well a few mil-stones. But thou art by thy (...) a Rebel, thou have committed
high ^reason against God, and without (...) pardon, which cannot be proc^^ed
but by the mediation of Christ, (...) is not possible for thee to escape
damnation; Therefore make have to Christ, before the degree come forth, and
before the fierce wrath of the Lord do come upon thee, and thou be as chasse
before the wind. When Christ lived upon the earth, the people pe^ceiuing his
admirable power, and willingness also to cure the diseases of the body, they
brought their diseased to him from every place and he healed them. Beloved, he
is a^able to cure the diseases of the soul: therefore seek unto him: seek
with faith from the bottom of (...) and he will not ^epell the. To him, that
thirsts he Reu^ 21.
will be-sprinkle him in his blood frankely. They were careful for the body,
and shall we be careless both of soul and body? They were careful for
others, let not us then be careless of our selves. They went to him, when he
lived in disgrace, and in the shape of a servant, plagued and not regarded,
humbled of God, rejected of men, Is. 53. 3^.
known of many, but acknowledged of few: mournful and not merry, seen to
weep, but never said to laugh. But now he is in great glory and majesty, far
exceeding all earthly Monarchs, and therefore we need not be ashamed to seek
unto him. Wherefore let nothing hinder thee, but as they, that brought Luke 5.
19.
the palsy man unto him, let him down to him through the tyles of the house,
when they could not come near him for the prease of the people: even so do
thou break through all impediments: (...) not thy purpose, but prove every
way, leave no stone vnrolled, proceed constantly, and test not till thou be
come unto him. Leave him not, till Nullam no^ move lapidem.
with Jacob thou have obtained a blessing, till he have washed thy soul in his
blood, as he did his Disciples feet in Ioh. 13. 5. Math. 15 28.
the water. The Cananitish woman would not leave him, till she had gotten him
to drive the Devil out of her daughter, so do thou never give him over, til he
have cast him out of the hold of thy heart, and released thee of thy sins,
which do possess thee, which will destroy thee without his hand of grace. And
as Esaias exhorts those that are mindful of the Lord, to give him no Is. 62. 7.
rest, till he repair, and set up Jerusalem the praise of the world: even so
give Christ thy Lord no rest, leave him not, take no nay, till he have redeemed
thee from thy sins, till he have restored thee into grace with God, and have
set thee up as high, as thou wast fallen low before. Shall the allurements of
the world, or the pleasures of sin, restrain or inueigle thee? Know ye not
(says James) that the amity of the World Iam. 4. 4.
is the Enmity of God? Whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world,
makes himself the enemy of God. Did not Moses that man of Gods own
moulding, (...) us therefore be his Patients, and put our selves into his hands.
There is noone natural medicine able to heal all kinds of Et quoniam variant
mor by, variamus and arts. Mill mali species, mill salutis erunt, Ovid.
^ore; and sicknesses. And therefore diverse sores have diverse salues: and
several maladies have several medicines ofte^tims. But the blood of Christ is a
present remedy against all the maladies of our souls: the merit thereof being
once appyed to us, remoues them all. They are all to it as dust before a
Whirlwind, or as flax before a flame of fire. The leprosy is a fearful
disease, but the leprosy of the soul is more fearful. Now as Naamans
leprosy was 2. King. 5. 14.
cleansed in the river Iordon: so is original sin the leprosy of our souls,
and all other sins, that spring thereof, washed clean away from us in the
blood of Christ. Though our sins were as crimsin, though they had double died
our souls, and had taken never to deep root in our ha^ts: though they were
red as scarlet, never so bloody never so grievous; yet his blood can (...) them
out, it can vncolour us, and make us white as snow. Behold a crow, which is
black, through a red glass, and she will seem red, like the glass. The
blood of Christ is beautiful and precious, sweet and lovely in the sight of
God: and therefore if God behold us through it, we shall (notwithstanding all
the blackness of our sins) appear bright and beautiful, fair and amiable
in his eyes. Albeit by our sins we deserve nothing but wrath, yet even as the
propitiatory covered the Ark and Decalogue, and as the clouds do Ez. 25. 21.
shroud us from the scorching heat of the Sun, so does Christ cover our
sins with his blood, and preserve us from the fire of his fathers wrath, and
wrathful indignation. If it were so that a man had a medicine to preserve men
from the bodily death, all the world would flock after him, so sweet a thing is
life and shall we take no pains to come to Christ, to possess Christ, who by
his blood can make the grave a bed, and death a sleep, a pleasant sleep, a
welcome sleep, a joy full night of ease, and also save the soul, both soul
and body from endless death and doleful desolation? For even as those which
besprinkled Ex. 12. 7. 13
the posts of their doors with the blood of the Paschall Lamb, escaped the
destroyer: so those shall never be destroyed, whose hearts are washed, who are
besprinkled with the blood of Christ, that true Paschall Lamb, which Ioh. 1. 29.
takes away the sins of the world, and has abolished death, and brought
life and immortality 2. Tim. 1. 10.
unto light, through the Gospel. For what can hinder life, and procure death
but sin? But sin, yea all the bands and bolts of sins are no more with
Christ, then those green cords were in the hands of Sampson, which he brake
as a thread of Towe, when it feels Judge. 16. 9.
fire. He can as easily remove the gates of hell with their hinges, and carry
them away, as Sampson did the gates Iud. 16. 3.
of Azzah, which he took away, posts and all, and laid them upon his
shoulders, Non est in Medico semper releuetur vt aeger: Interdum docta plus
valet art malum. Ovid.
and carried them up to the top of a mountane. Indeed there are some bodily
diseases, which no natural medicine can remove, if they be permitted to
continue long without looking to them. In some cases the best Physicians are at
a stand, and altogether unable to cure their distressed pat^ents. But the blood
of Christ is irresistable: it is of such infinite virtue and validity, that
the long continuance and growthe of our soule-sicknesse^ cannot hinder our
recovery and redemption from them, if he please to (...) in it. Let us therefore
admyre the wonderful vigor of it, and thirst after it as Sampson did for
water. Iud. 15. 18 Ioh. 5. 2.
And as many came to the poole Bethesda, to be healed of their diseases: so let
us with speed betake our selves to Christ, that being washed in his blood, we
may be cleansed of our sins. Delays are dangerous: there is not so warm a
Su^mer, but there is as cold a winter. The It is good to make hay^, vvhiles the
Sun shines and the vveather is fair.
Tide ^arryeth for no^ man. Therefore now seeing we have wind and Tide with
us, let us way a^^ker, hoyse up our sails and away. We are by nature unworthy
enough thereof, though we should not make our selves more unworthy by
neglecting or deferring to seek to be partakers of it. And when we have once
begun to seek it: as the Church never left looking him, till she Cant. 3.
found him; so let us never cease seeking, till we enjoy it, till we feel the
sweetness of it. For without it there is no life, but death: no weal, but woe:
no light, but night: no fel^city, but extreme misery. It is truly said of
Baptism, that not the want thereof, but the contempt does damn a man: but for
the blood of Christ, a man that wants it shall be damned, though he never did
contemn it. For there is no salvation Act. 4. 12.
but by Christ. Let us therefore without delay, labor to be partakers of him:
let us never be a^ rest, til we be persuaded in our hearts that our sins are
forgiven, and covered in his blood from the sight of God. But do men thus? Nay
do they not the contrary? Behold the multitude, consider the studies, and
the practices of the most.

Many seek after fame and honor. Many ^unt after pleasures and vain delights,
which the Devil uses as a Glass and a Feather, to draw men within the
reach of his net. Many search after riches, and seek for every green thing,
Job. 39. 11.
like the wild Ass, as if all religion were pinned upon the sl^eue of Mammon.
But few seek after the blood of Christ, as their lives do testify to their
faces. And yet it does as far surpass those other, as the richest gemme does
the poorest peble. The tallest Cedar does not so much ouertop the poorest
shrubbe: the highest Oak does not so much outreach the shortest herb: the
heavens are not so far above the earth, as that Sacred Blood is above all
earthly things. If thou were as old as Methusalem, as wise as Solomon, as
strong as Samson, as rich as Croesus, and as renowned as Alexander, yet all
were nothing, if thou want but this one thing.

For without Christ, without his blood, they would not, they could not stand
before the throne of God. Thy wisdom without Christ is folly. Thy gorgeous
and brave attire without his righteousness is filthy nakedness. Thy birth is
baseness unless he begat thee. And thy blood is tainted, unless thou have
been bathed in his blood. In a word, without it, thou art loathsome and ugly,
a firebrand of hell, and a vassal of the Devil. Stir up thy self
therefore, shake off thy drowsines, awake, and arise, get thee to Christ, call
for his blood, sue for it, mourn for it. Knock at the gates of grace, leave
not till thou have obtained thy suit, cease not until thou feel the virtue of
it. It is full of influence, full of vigor, full of health, full of salvation;
therefore labor to possess it, strive to enjoy it. Shall one with Haman hunt
after honor? Shall an other with Foelix gape for a bribe? Shall some with
Balak and Saul run after wizzards? Shall many with Naaman seek after bodily
health? And shall not we make haste to Christ, and seek for his Blood, which
is the fountain of health, the foundation of honor, a Castle of comfort, a
bath for thy soul, a shield of defense, the poison of sin, the bane of
iniquity, and as a canopie to cover us from the wrath of God? As we therefore
either respect that, or desire our own peace and welfare, let us make
conscience of this duty.

And thus much for the first work or benefit, whereby Christ does demonstrate
and confirm his love unto us. The second comes now to be discussed, set down
in the words ensuing.

Here ends the second part.
To the right virtuous Gentlewoman, Mistress Elizabeth Leueson.
GReat is the Lord, and great is his power: his wisdom is infinite, and his
greatness is incomprehensible. The Lord delights in them, that fear him, and
attend upon his mercy. He has exalted the Horn of his Saints, and takes
pleasure in them. For his Love is everlasting, and his mercy endures for
ever. The Lord is gracious and merciful, he is righteous in all his ways, and
his mercies are over all his works. He is rich in grace, and abounds in
goodness. He spared not his own and only Son, (even that Sun of
Righteousness, which shines in us with the beams of his grace, and does
enlighte^ us with the light of his Spirit) but gave him for us all to death,
and has by him cleansed us from all uncleanness, and made us unto himself a
royal and holy Priesthood, that we should offer up unto him spiritual
sacrifices, and show forth his virtues, who has called us out of darkness
into his marvelous light.

O the wonderful love of God unto us! His mercy is great above the heavens.
For he has trodden down our sins. His loving kindenes is exceeding great
toward us. For he has made us his Priests: he has clothed us with
righteousness, and has anointed us with the oil of gladness. He has made
us his Kings: he has set us in the Throne of grace: he has put a Scepter of
righteousness into our hands, and will one day crown us with the Crown of
glory. This hohour is, and shall be to all his Saints. What shall we now render
to him for these his benefits toward us? I will offer (says David,) a
sacrifice of Psalm. 11. 6. 17. Psalm. 146. 2.
praise unto thee (for thy favors) and will call upon the name of the Lord. I
will praise the Lord during my life: as long as I have any being, I will sing
unto my God. This we should all perform, but you rather then many others,
because the Lord does draw you to it with moecords of love then he does the
most. Some furtherance thereunto you may receive by diligent reading and
examining this third part of our Tractate concerning the love of Christ unto
us; which I dedicate unto you, for no sinister or base respect, but to testify
my desire of the constant growth of those Christian virtues, which have begun
to shine and show themselves in these your younger years, that growing in
grace, and in the knowledge of Jesus Christ, you may be partaker of his glory.
Thus assuring my self of your kind acceptance of these our labors, I cease
to deteine you longer, and leave you to him, that never leaves his, but
guardeth them by his grace for ever.

Yours in Christ Jesus, to be commanded, Thomas Tuke.

THE THIRD Part.
Romans 1. 6. And has made us Kings and Priests to God, even his Father.
CHAP. I.
Christ is the Auhour of our Royalty, and Priestly dignity. Six uses are
made of that doctrine.

IN these words is contained the second sign and action, whereby Christ (...)
has declared his love unto us: and in them five things are worthy observation.

First, the Agent, Christ. Secondly, the Subject, upon whom the work is
wrought, We. Thirdly, the Act it self, he has made us kings and priests.
Fourthly, the Time when, he has made. Fifthly, for whose or glory, or ^o whom
we are made, even to God his Father.

First for the Agent.

For so much as Christ has thus advanced us, we are taught to be thankful to
him. If a man did freely procure his neighbor a farm or lord-ship, it deserved
a thankful accepta^ce; But if he did also give him true title to a kingdom,
and made him heir to a crown, his obligation should be of a far higher nature.
Beloved, Christ has made us kings and heirs to a crown, not of rusting gold,
but of eternal glory, not won by tyranny, but got by righteousness, 1. Pet. 5.
7.
even by that perfect obedience, which he performed for us, and is imputed 2.
Tim. 4. 5.
to us. Let us therefore be thankful to him, and seek to please him. And
because it is he that has made us Priests, let us (like Priests) present him
with the Calves of our lips, let us offer up unto him the sacrifice of a
thankful heart testified in a thankeful tongue, and expressed by our religious,
righteous and sober conuersations. Unthankfulness is a poisoned ro^te of
wickedness, and a fruitful mother of mischief: whereof we cannot but be
deeply guilty, if we shall either wilfully dishonor, or not care to honor
him, who has so royally honored us.

Secondly, seeing it was Christ, that ^ath brought us to this honor, we see
that we come not to it by our birth or blood, by nature or inheritance from our
parents, and therefore we must not ascribe it to our selves: but when like
kings we get the conquest in any conflict over any ^inne, and as Priests do
of^er up unto God any sacrifice, which is accepted, we must attribute al to the
grace of God in Christ, that of his mere good will and merit has made us both
kings and Priests. It is God, that works in us both the will and the Phil. 2.
13. Certum est nos velle, cum v^lumus; sed ille facit vt ve limus, qui operatur
i^ nobis velle, Aug lib. de lib. A^b. c. 2.
deed. Indeed we will, but it is by him. And if he did not make us work, as
he makes us will to work, the work could not be wrought. We may as well say
that death can create life, and that darkness may make light, as that we can
of our selves either make or truly show our selves to be spiritual kings and
priests.

Thirdly, in that Christ has made us kings and priests, it argues that he is
not without power and authority. For to create a king, and to make a priest,
are works of authority and power. Esaias calls him the mighty God, Is. 9. 6.
and the Scriptures show that we were all redeemed by him, and that the whole
Is. 53. 5. 6. Ephesians. 1. 7. Ioh. 13.
World was created by him; and therefore he must needs befull of strength and
majesty. The consideration whereof should strike a terror into the wicked,
which are his enemies, and move them to forsake their rebellions, least he
cr^sh the^ with his iron scepter, and break them in pieces like a Potters
vessel. And it ought to move all the kings and potentates of the world to
veil their bonnets, to bend their scept^rs, and to cast down their crowns
before him. For he is the Prince of the Kings of the earth, and is as able to
dismount a king as to make a king. And Reu. 15.
secondly, it should teach us to seek unto him for his grace, and to depend
upon him in a^o^r troubles. Blessed are all (says David) that trust in him.
Ps. 2. 12.


Fourthly, seeing it is Christ, that has thus promoted us, we are taught to
esteem highly of this work and benefit. The excellency of the workman does
often commend the work and make it more regarded; The dignity of the giver
does move the receiver to account more dearly of the gift. He that wrought
this work for us, is the Lord of life, the father of eter^ie, the Is. 9. 6.
King of glory, the Son of God, and Judge of the world He that bestowed this
benefit upon us, is Jesus Christ that Reu. 1. 5.
faithful witness, and the firstborn of the dead. If thy King, or thy
faithful and t^^st^e friend, did gi^e thee a costly jewel, thou would like
it somewhat better, and would not easily be draw^n to part from it. Christ
our King, and friend, so faithful as that he spent his blood to save us, has
given us this ((...)) r^yall gift, he has advanced us to this kingly
condi^^on: let us therefore highly p^iz^ i^, and by no means hazard the
p^r^ing from it.

Fifthly, seeing Christ has (...) honored his servants, let all men fear to
dishonor them. Thou dare not disgrace him, whom thy king does grace; and
durst thou dishonor him, whom Christ thy king, that mighty God, does grace
and honor? Shall ^e escape the wrath of a king, that scorns a man, because he
has honored him? And shall we think, that Christ that heavenly Monarch and
Lion of the tribe of Judah, will put up those scornful wrongs, that are offered
by many wicked wretches unto his Servants, because he does grace them, and by
his grace does make them fly those sins, which they wrth a brazen face and
brows of marble commit, and blush not at? Verily, he that dishonours a man
because Christ does honor him, does dishonor Christ himself, and carries a
curse about him under seal, and without serious and timely repentance (which
is not usual in such obdured hearts) he shall not escape it.

Sixthly, seeing Christ does make men kings and priests, we that are desirous of
this dignity, are taught to sue to him. Would thou b^aking to subdue the
rebellious corruptions, which lurk like t^aytours in thy heart? Would thou
be a priest to offer up unto God the sacrifices of righteousness? then fly to
Christ: he is the Spring, from whence these benefits do flow: it is he that
makes us kings and priests.

Yet here withal remember, that neither the Father nor the Holy Ghost must be
excluded from this work. For they have all their hands in working of it. The
Father makes us by his Son and by ^is Spirit. It was his love that Christ was
sent unto us, and that the Holy Ghost does come into us. The Son makes us by
his merit and virtue. And the Holy Ghost makes us, by working faith in our
hearts, whereby we lay hold upon Christ (who has procured this dignity for
us,) and does apply unto us his obedience, whereby we become acceptable to God,
and his blood, whereby all our sins are washed; and the virtue of his death
and resurrection, whereby we die to sin and rise to righteousness. For all
the works of God wrought upon the creature are common to the three persons,
which in every operation do cooperate, how be it in a distinct manner, as
Basil shows, when he says; The Father begins the work: the Lib. de spir.
san. c. 16.
Son works it in his own person: and the Holy Ghost does finish it.

CHAP. II.
Christ has bestowed that foresaid honor upon All Believers. This Doctrine is
applied to six purposes.

ANd so from the Agent we come unto the Subject, upon whom this (...) work is
wrought; to wit, all the children of God, all that Christ has loved, all that
he has washed in his blood from their sins, of what sex or sort, of what
race or rank soever, and they alone.

So that first we may herby learn to know whether our sins are actually
cle^sed from us or no. For if Christ has washed thee from them, he has also
made thee a king and a priest. Therefore if thou war with sin like a prince
of spirit, and d^est conquer the corruption of thine heart, and offer up unto
God such oblations, as are pleasing unto him, then may thou conclu^e that
Christ has purged thee. For, whom he washes, them he thus honoreth with this
grace: to them he conferres this dignity.

Secondly, seeing he has made us kings and priests, who are mo^^all and
m^serable, and by nature the servants of sin, the children of wrath, and his
ver^e enemies: We may behold as in a mirror; First, his admirable love in
scatte^ing the bright beams of his grace upon such a loathsome Dunghill, as we
are all by reason of the rotte^nes of our natures. Secondly, we may behold his
exceeding commiseration in showing so great mercy to such despicable and vile
wretches. Thirdly, we man see his wonderful power in quickening us, that are by
nature stark dead in sin, and making us to live like spiritual kings,
masl^cring the enemies of our souls within us, and as holy priests sacrificing
our selves unto God. Fourthly, we see that pou^rtie, penury, crosses,
calamities, and such like, do not restrain him from bestowing his preferments.
Fifthly, we see his integri^e; expr^essing his words by works, and his p^eaching
by his practice. For he commands us to love our enemies: and we see Math. 5.
44.
how well he has affected us, in promoting us so high, that were his enemies.
And by this we see that in conferring his benefits he is far from the fashion
of the world. Many men do never show any tokens of love to the^ that have
offended them or reuoulted from them: but usually they seek to be revenged of
them, either openly or underhand. But Christ has carried no such spleen to
us, but has highly honored us, who have iniustly dishonored him, and many
wa^es displeased both him and his father.

The consideration of his love should persuade us to reloue him. His mercy
should keep us from despair. His power teaches us to confess his divinity.
His practice should move us to do our selves as we exhort others to do, as also
to break the common custom of the world, and to show the fruits of love to
those, that show nothing less to us. For in so doing we shall heap coals of
fire upon their heads.

Thirdly, we are all taught to reverence one another. Let not the rich
contemn the poor: let not the young despise the old: let not the noble
disdain the simple: let not the learned politician vilipend the man of meaner
understanding. For if we be Christ's, we are All of us spiritually Kings and
Priests, one as truly as another: we are all the Lords anointed. He, that
advanced one, has advanced the rest; the poor as well as the rich, the mean
man, as well as the mighty Monarch.

And though here in this world God himself has made us subjects, and commands
our obedience to his Lieutena^ts here on earth, whom to disobey, is to rebel
against God himself, yet when we come to take possession of our heavenly
kingdom, in the day of our spituall Coronation, all outward circumstances
shall be laid down: and if in this world the poor man have exceeded the rich
in the growth of grace, be shall in the world ^o come excel him ^n the
greatness of glory. For as we have husbanded the talents of Gods graces
committed to us in this life, so God in mercy will reward us with his glory in
the life to come.

Fourthly, seeing Christ does make those kings and priests, whom he washes in
his blood, it should stir us up to labor by all means to be partakers of
it. As we desire this true nobility, and to possess this great advancement,
so let us be careful of the other, that in all assurance we may enjoy it. For
these benefits are inseparable. He that enioyes not that Blood, has not this
honor.

Fi^^ly, seeing all the faithful of all callings and conditions are thus
advanced, we are taught not to judge of a man's final estate, or of the
quality of (...) ^nward condition by his outward success. For the dearest
children of God in this world (as Job, David, Paul) are usually afflicted, and
sometimes so crossed, as that to ca^nall men which spend their days in wealth,
and their Job. 27. 13.
years in pleasures) they seem accursed, and to be the only miserable men,
that live upon the earth: and yet (...) thelesse their inward estate before God
is very glorious: wherefore the Psalmist says, The kings daughter is all Psalm.
45. 13.
glorious within: her clothing is of broydred gold. Christ does love her,
Christ has washed her, Christ has clad her, with the golden garment of his
righteousness, and has made her a royal priesthood. Now as the Church our
mother is, so are all those that are her faithful and true children, according
as God has measured out his grace unto us. For Christ has made us all kings
and priests, yea and prophets also, and has adorned the temple of our hearts
with the manifold graces of his Spirit. Our case in this world is not unlike
the curtains of the Tabernacle, which were course without, but finely wrought
within. Therefore they, which deem men forsaken of God, because the world does
frown upon them, are much deceived. They may as well conclude that a
weather-beaten ship has no riches in her, or that a homely coat can have no
learning. For (as Salomoa reaches,) no man's inward estate Ec. 9. 1.
can be discerned by outward events, seeing they be common to both just and
unjust. I have seen (says David the Ps. 37. 35.
wicked strong, and spreading himself like a green Baye tree: and yet for all
that they Ver. 20.
shall perish and be consumed as the fat of Lambs. They are f^d for the
slaughter: God has mad^ them for the day of evil. Pro. 16. 4.
And though they seem to have the world at command, yet the Lord Pro. 15. 29.
Pro. 15, 26.
is far from them, and their very thoughts are an abomination unto him. And
what though a man enjoy the world, if he enjoy ^ot God that made the world?

As it is therefore fol^y to judge a man happy for his worldly prosperity, so
is it want of charity to judge one mis^rable for his outward adversity. For
spiritual misery stands not in outward adversity: neither does true felicity
consist in worldly prosperity. Job was much afflicted, insomuch that he says,
that God did beat him, and set him as a mark to shoot at. And Hezekiah in
Job. 16. 12.
h^s affliction said, that God brake all his bones like a Lion, and that he
chatteed Is. 37. 13. 14.
like a Crane, and mourned as a Dove: and no doubt his affliction was greeu^^s,
and yet we know that they were both the children of God, and dear unto him.
Therefore no certain sensence can be pronounced, no judgment must be given by
the outward estate of any man. The thatched ba^^e is full of corn, and the fay
rest outside of the body, has not always the fairest inside of the soul,
neither are the richest men always the mostreligious. Therefore Paul says;
You see your calling, how that not many wise men after the 1. Cor. 1. 26 27.
28. 29.
flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called. But God has chosen the
foolish things of the world, to confound the wise, and the weak things to
confound the mighty: and vile things of the world, and things, which are
despised has God chosen: and things, which are not, to bring to naught things,
which are, that no flesh should rejoice in his presence, and that it might be
seen that God does not respect those things, which men so much affect, and so
m^^hadmire.

Lastly, we see how ^arre wide the world is from Christ in fixing her
affections. For Christ (we see) ^oueth and aduanceth us: but the world ha^eth
and contem^eth us. Paul and his companions were beloved of Christ, and highly
graced, and yet they were accounted (as it is the lot of the godly in many
place^ in this doting age of the world) even as fil^h and offskowring. The 1.
Cor. 4. 13 Pro. 29. 27. Ps. 37. 12.
upright man (says Solomon) is an Abomination to the wicked: they lord him
with reproaches, they practice against him, and wonder at him, as bi^des do at
an Owl. And yet God delights in him, Christ does honor him. And what is the
reason why the world does thus? Surely one reason is, because she is ignorant
of God and his ways ^and therefore Christ says; All these things (hate,
persecute, etc.) will they do unto you for my Names sake, because they have not
Ioh. 15. 27.
known him that sent me. Secondly, it is so likewise, because they are not of
the world, but redeemed and called out of the world: which thing Christ also
shows also in his speech to his Disciples, saying; If y^ were of the world,
the Ioh. 15. 19
world would love his own: but because ye are not of the world, but I have
chosen you out of the world: therefore the world hates you. Thirdly, the wo^ld
thus deals, because she is strongly managed and ruled by Satan the God of
the world, 2. Cor. 4. 4.
who is their mortal and irreconciliable adversary, and takes delight in
their disgrace and ign^miny. Lastly, because their virtues do cross the
worlds vices; therefore as John says, that Cain 1. Ioh. 3. 12
slew his brother because his own works were evil, and his brothers good:
even so the wicked abhorte the godly (though loved and advanced of Christ)
because they live religiously (showing themselves Vid. Wisd. 2. 12.
to be kings and priests to God) and love not such vices, as they do foster and
will not part from. Therefore beware of the world: take ^eede of her steps:
trust not to her judgment. For the world is blind, her eyes are out, her
iudg^me^t is corrupt: and if thou will be led by her, thou art likely with her
to fall into the ditch.

And thus much for the Subject.

CHAP. III.
Of the Prince-hood and Priesthood of the Faithful.

THe third thing to be considered is the Act or Benefit. He has made (...) us
Kings and Priests. Moses was commanded to te(...) people of Israel, that, if
they would hear the voice of God indeed, and keep his covenant, they should
^e unto him a kingdom of ^x. 19. 5. 6.
Priests, an holy nation, and his chie^e treasure above all people, though all
the earth be his. But Peter expressly 1. Pet. 2. 9.
tells us, that we are a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, and an holy
nation. And saint John says, that Christ has made us kings and priests. So
the^ we are as a kingly Priesthood, and a priestly Kingdom, kingly Priests,
and priestlike Kings, and a peculiar people selected and consecrated unto him
for his glory, and by him to receive glory. And that I may here also dispatch
the fourth point, which is the Time when; the Apostle directly shows, that we
are thus dignified even in this life. For he says: he has made us. He does
not say that he will make us. As in the entrance into an earthly kingdom,
first title is given unto it, and after wards possession: even so we in this
life, have title given us to the kingdom of heaven: we are heirs apparent to
it: and we have possession of it also in part. For whosoever believes in the
Son of God, has everlasting Ioh. 3. 36.
life. But we come not to the ^ull fruition thereof till the life to come. And
so likewise we are Priests in this world, but our sacrifices are ^ot spotless
and absolute until the world to come.

But here by the way we must remember two things.

First, that we do not take the Sword out of the hands of Princes, nor deny
obedience unto Magistrates, nor imagine civil Authority to be needless or
unlawful among Christians, for that they are made Kings and set at liberty by
Christ their King. For this were to cons^ire with the Anabaptists, Donatists
an^ Libertines, against the ordinance of God; considering that there is no
Powerbut Romans 13. 1
of God: and the Powers, that are, are ordained of God. Therefore we are
commanded to fear the King, and to be P^o 24. 21. Romans 13. 1. (...). Tim. 2. 2.
subject to the higher Powers, yea and to Pray for kings, and for All, that are
in authority. Our liberty procured by Christ consists not in an anarchy,
not in lawlesnesse, nor in freedom from the authority of Magistrates, who are
the Lords Leiu-tenants upon earth (for Christ himself inioynes us to Give unto
Math. 22. 21
Caesar the things which are Caesar's,) but in deliverance from the tyranny and
terror of Sin and Satan, as also from the rigor and curse of the Law, and
from those legal rites and ceremonies, which did not die till ^e was dead. And
the Princehood or Regalitie spoken of in this place, is not external, temporal
or terrestrial, but internal, spiritual, celestial and eternal, and
overthrows not the calling or office of secular Princes, nor of any inferior
Magistrates or Governors in Church or Commonwealth; to whom subjection,
honor, Ro^. 13. 1. 7 1. Tim. 5. 17 Heb ^3. 17. 1. Pet 8. 2. 13. 17.
obedience, fear, fealty, and whatsoever else is due unto them, must of Every
Soul within their realms and regiments, and under their power and authority,
be performed of conscience, and for the Lord.

Secondly, we may not from hence dispute, that there are now Priests among us,
that offer up to God any reconciliatorie, redemptorie, or exp^atorie sacrifice,
whereby his pardon may be procured, his justice satisfied, and his anger
pacified. For the Scriptures acknowledge no such Priest, but Christ 1. Pet. 2.
25.
our High Priest, the Sheep-heard and Heb 9. 28.
Bishop of our souls, who was once offered to take away the sins of many,
and Heb. 10. 14.
with one offering has made perfect for ever Sacerdotem si requiras, super
caelos est, v^i interpe^^at pro te qui in terra mortuus est ^ro te.
them, that were sanctified. Therefore Augustine truly affirm^th, that i^ we
require a Priest, he is above the heavens, where he makes intercession for for
us, having died for us before upon the earth. And Ambrose says, that in Christ
was once offered a sacrifice powerful unto eternal salvation, In Epist, ad
Hebr. cap. 10. Neither may we hence conclude, that any Christian man may upon
his own private motion without ecclesiastical ordination, or the testimony
of a lawful vocation (which is a fond and false conceit of the Anabaptists)
presume to teach in the church, as if he were ordained Minister. No man may
thrust his sickle i^ to his neighbors corn, nor labor in his house or
vineyard without his leave. No man may execute a priestly function, or office
Heb. 5. 4.
of a Minister, without a sufficient calling. For no man takes this honor
upon him, but he that is called of God, as Aaron was. And al are not called.
Christ appointed some to be Pastors, and not All. Titus was left in Crete to
ordain Ephesians. 4. 11. T^t 1. 5. Romans 10. 14
Elders. And how shall they preach, unless they be sent? The office of
teaching is double, ecclesiastical or public, and domestical or private.
The former pertaines to them only, that have a warrantable calling in the
Church: which no man has without special license and authority, either
immediately from God, (which is not usual) or mediately from the Church. And
this text in hand speaks not of any corporal or external Priesthood, nor yet
of any ecclesiastical order or function in the Church, but only of the
spiritual Priesthood of all Believers, who for their spiritual sacrifices are
termed Priests; of which we shall more largely treat heareafter. And this we
have ^aied by the way.

Now that we may more clearly perceive the excellency of this benefit, it
will not be a miss to consider it yet a little more. And for our Princehood
first. We may be said to be Kings in three respects. First, because Christ
has inthro^ized us into the kingdom of grace, and has made us Conquerours of
S^tan, sin, death, bell, and the World. Secondly, because be has purchased
for us the kingdom of glory, unto which in this li^e we are through him
in^ituled: the which by our faith we apprehend, and by hope we wait for. For
Christ is that hand, whereby the Dei^^^ reaches us all good things: and
through him a through a pipe or conduit they run all unto us. His justice
imputed to us has made us accounted just, and accepted to eternal life. He
was fastened to the cross without law, that we might be loosed from the curse
deserved by law. He ware a crown of thorns, that we might we are a crown of
glory. He held a reed in his hand, and wore a scarlet robe in mockery, that we
might be clad with robes of glory, and that like kings we might have scepters
indeed, but not of gold (for that is too base) for such a kingdom, but of
eternal glory. And as the Sun went back ten degrees that Hazekiah might
receive assurance Is. 38. 5. 7. 8.
of longer life: so Christ the Sun of righteousness (under who^e Mal. 4. 2,
wings is health) ^ath gone back many degrees, and abased himself to the
dust, that we might be lifted up, and set like Princes in th^ones of majesty,
and might receive assurance of eternal life.

Thirdly, we may be said to be kings, because by Christ we are made Lords of
all the creatures of God, excepting good Angels and Gods church which has no
head but Christ.

For in Adam, we lost our Lordship, and Ephesians. 5. 23.
it is not restored to us, but by the second Adam Christ Jesus, in whom we do
receive it, in part in this world, and shall perfectly possess it in the
world to come, when as the devil and all the reprobate shall be as dust under
the soles of our feet, being turned out of al their possessions, which they
were but plain usurpers of in the sight of god, and shall be fearfully
tormented in endless, ea^elesse, and remedy less tortures.

But that we may yet be better acquainted with the condition of our kingdom,
we must know first, that our kingdom is constant, and shall endure for ever,
and what it wants on earth, it shall be supplied in heaven, where God shall
be all in all, in all his Elect. 1. Cor. 15. 2^.
Whereas all worldly kingdoms shall be dissolved with the world. And in the mean
time they are subject to many changes: and therefore Solomon says; the Crown
continues not from generation to generation. Pro. 27. 24.


This we see verified by the fall of the four mighty Monarchies of the world,
and by continual alterations in States to this day.

Secondly, in earthly kingdoms there is one the King, and the rest are his
subjects: but in this kingdom all are Kings, and God alone is King of all.
Neither does this any wh^t diminish our glory; For even his service is
perfect liberty, yea the more perfect our service is to him, the farther we
are from bondage, and the more absolute is our spiritual reg^l^tie.

Thirdly, the affairs of earthly Princes are ^^iefly bodi^y and outward: but
ours are spiritual and inward.

Fourthly, kings of this world (if they should prove worldly minded, as the
most are, and use to be,) may become Tyrants, and irreconciliable enemies one
unto another, laboring with all their powers to deturbe and over throw each
other: But so i^ falls not out with those whom Christ has made kings: For
he so rules them by his Spirit, and with the Scepter of his word, that they
shall never clime to that height of wickendesse, as of despite and purpose to
seek the destruction of one another soul, and to deprive them of their
crowns.

Fifthly, earthly kings may be plagued of God to the loss of their souls, and
therefore Esaias says, that Tophet (or hell) Is. 30. 33.
is prepared for the King, even for all wicked Princes whatsoever, which rebel
against the King of Kings. But these kings shall never perish: For Christ
gives them eternal life: and it is their Ioh. 10. 28. Luke 12. 32.
Fathers pleasure to give them the kingdom of heaven.

Lastly, earthly Kings come to their kingdoms, either by conquest, or by their
blood, or else by voices, and election. But we obtain this kingdom, neither
by the conquest of our own works, nor by the suffrages and election of other
men, neither come we by it through the commendation or dignity of flesh or
blood, but by the alone propitious grace of God, and propitiatory merits of
Jesus Christ, who by suffering death, and fulfilling the law for us, has
redeemed us from hell, and procured heaven, and this our heavenly honor.
Therefore the Apostle says: The wages of sin is death, but the 1. Pet. 2. 5.
free gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. So much for
our Prince-hood.

Now as concerning our Priesthood, Saint Peter who tells us that we are an
Romans 12. 1.
holy Priesthood, tells us also the end of this our Priesthood even to offer
up spiritual Sacrifices acceptable unto God, by Jesus Christ.

Wherein then do we differ from the Priestsvnder the law, and from Christ the
High Priest of all his people? I answer: we differ from the priests of the old
Testament; First, because their sacrifices were types of Christ, but so are not
ours. Secondly, they offe^ed the bodies of other things: we offer our own.
Thirdly, their offerings were merely corporal: ours properly are spiritual.

Fourthly, they offered up ^^aine sacrifices and dead: but we are commanded to
offer up our bodies a living sacrifice: Rom 12. 1.
and we offer up our selves alive. Fifthly, they were Priests for others: but we
are Priests for no men properly, as they were.

Sixthly, their Altar was material and earthly: but ours is alive, and heavenly:
to wit, Christ Jesus. Seventhly, their priesthood had an end, but ours is
eternal. Eighthly, theirs went from one to another by succession, but so does
not ours. Ninthly, amongst them some were seperiours: but there is no such
diversity of degrees among us being simply considered as we are Priests.
Indeed there is diversity of graces, and there shall be inequality of glory,
though there shall be no want, but fullness in all. Tenthly, many of them were
wicked, and some professed enemies of Christ and his religion: But they which
Christ has made Priests, are holy, chosen, and a 1. Pet. z. 9.
people set at liberty, and such as shall not die, but live. Lastly, they were
all of them males of one nation, and of one kindred of that nation, and they to
be without any bodily defect or blemish: but amongst Eeuit. 21. 18
us there are both men and women, of all tribes and nations, and though many of
them want not outward defects, either by nature or by accident, yet Christ
respects not the outward estate of any man in working for us this honor.

Now as concerning Christ and his Priesthood; he was the Substance or Truth of
all those Sacrifices and shadows: at his death their date went out, whereas
contrariwise our Priesthood then began; So that we are but vassalls to that
great ^igh Priest.

Secondly, he is an external Priest of the New Testament, but we are
spiritual Priests, and not outward.

Thirdly, his principal sacrifice was himself: but we have other sacrifices
Heb. 9. 11.
to offer besides our selves, and our selves no way acceptable in our selves,
but in him. Fourthly, his sacrifice was of reconciliation, to satisfy the
justice of God for us; But ours is of thanksgiving to God: not satisfactory,
but declaratory: to show our selves mindful of that expiatory sacrifice which
Christ offered, and to testify our love unto him for it, and how gratefully we
do receive it.

Fifthly, his was offered once for all, but ours must be offered daily upon all
occasions. Sixthly, he as Priest, was God and Man: but we are mere men, simple
and silly creatures.

Seauenthly, his Altar was his Godhead, but our Altar is his Godhead and
Manhead, also united in one person.

Eighthly, his Sacrifice was voluntary; he did not owe it to us: but ours are
debts, which are for many causes to be performed duly of us.

Ninthly, if we had not sinned, his sacrifice had been spared: but some of
ours should have bin performed of us, though we had not sinned.

Tenthly, the goodness of his sacrifice came from himself: but if ours have
any goodness, so far sorth as they be good, it is from his holy Spirit,
which works in us.

Lastly, Christ's sacrifice was perfect of it self, being his, who is perfect
man, and perfect God: but ours are in this life maimed and imperfect: and their
imperfection is covered by the perfection of his. And thus we see the glorious
estate of all the faithful, that even as Christ their Head is a king and
Priest, so are all they kings and priests also, yea a kingdom of priests, a
regal and holy priesthood; although it be with great difference. For they
receive this honor by him, and not he through them. He is a king by nature,
but they by grace. He is an absolute Prince over all creatures whatsoever, and
over the very conscience: but so are not they. He is now in the full possession
of his kingdom: so are not we: but we wayt in our mortal bodies of this
earthly thraldom, for the hope of that mortal and regal liberty of the
sons of God in the heavens.

CHAP. IIII.
Four instructions arising from the co^sidederation of our Princehood.

Having now declared the nature of this benefit, it remains for me to gather
the Instructions: which may from hence be reaped. And these are of two sorts.
Of the first kind are they that arise from the consideration of these two
states together: and they are in number four.

First, we are taught to take heed of all stain of sin. For though it be
dishonorable in all, yet in those specially Omne animi vitium, tanto
conspectius in se crimen habet, quanto mayor, qui peccat, habetur, Iuuen.
Fecisse principis, quasi praecipisse est.
which are in any eminency above others. Every vice of the mind has in it
self a fault more apparent, and so much more pernicious and discommendable, by
how much more he is accounted greater, which offends. Black spots are
soonest seen in the whitest cloth. And the falls of Gods children are most
observed and soonest espied. The bare practice of a King, is as a precept to
the people: and wicked priests are by their very examples occasions of much
evil.

And if we, that would persuade the world by our outward profession that we
are as kings and priests unto God, shall break forth into open enormities, we
shall not only disgrace our calling, but we shall cause many other to stumble
and fall by our example. Men are by nature like Towe: and leaude ensamples are
as Matches to set them on fire, and to make them rage in sinning like wildfire.

Secondly, seeing we are so highly graced by Christ, we should arm our selves
with comfort against all our enemies, and against the bitterness of all
afflictions. What though man dishonor thee, yet Christ does honor thee? What
if thou be poor, yet thou shall be rich, yea thou art rich; For (as the
Apostle shows) all things are 1. Cor. 3. 21. 22.
yours. Whether it be Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or
death: whether they be things present, or things to come, even all are yours.
And shall we think that he, which has thus highly promoted us, will suffer us
to want those things, which in his wisdom he knows to be fit for us? There
is no reason for us thus to think. Therefore David says; Fear the Lord: for
nothing Ps. 34. 9. 10.
is wanting to them, that fear him. The Lions do lack, and suffer hunger, but
they, which seek the Lord, shall want nothing that is good. And he says in
his own experience; I have been young and now Ps. 37. 25.
am old: yet I never saw the righteous for saken, nor his seed begging bread.
For the Lord forsakes not his Saints (his kings and priests) they shall be
preserved for ever. Yea but the world does disgrace and deride thee. It is no
marvel. For she did as much for Christ before thee. And shall the servant
think to fare better then his master? Can thou bear no disgrace for him,
that suffered so much for thee, and has brought thee into grace with God, and
highly honored ^hee? And though the world repute basely of thee, yet are thou
accounted of God a king, and priest, even one of his Anointed. For all, that
Christ has thus dignified are anointed with the oil of gladness, the Ps.
45. 7.
oil of grace. The oil, which was powered on Arons head, ran down upon 1.
Ioh. 2. 20 Ps. 133. 2.
his beard, and to the border of his garments. Even so the oil of our Aron was
not shut up wholly in himself, but (as the Holy Ghost says) of his fulness
have we received, and grace for grace. Of Ioh. 1. 16.
his blazing Torch have we light al our candles. Now do thou not think that
God will defend his anointed? Do thou think that Christ will forsake those,
whom he has so graced? Yea, God will defend them: Christ will not leave them.
They, which touch them, Zach. 2. 8.
touch the apple of his eye. And though the wicked have drawn their sword, and
Ps. 37. 14.
have bent their bow to cast down (those whom Christ has exalted) the poor
and needy, and to slay such, as be of upright conversation, as they are, whom
he has made kings and priests: yet is it bootlesse to them. For the Lord shall
laugh them to skorne: their sword shall enter 13. 15.
into their own heart (God will sheath it in their own bowels) and their bows
shall be broken, though they were of 37.
steel. But mark the upright man, and behold the just. For the end of that
man is peace. Finally, does death a^rest thee? Or does the fear thereof
oppress thee? Be not dismayed: for peace shall Is. 57. 2.
come: they shall rest in their beds, every one that walks before him. Thou
art a Priest: thou art cla^ with righteousness, and thou shall be clothed with
salvation. Thou art a King, and thou shall enjoy thy kingdom, and shall be set
in a chair of state: and the s^oner thou do die, the sooner thou shall come
to thy crown.

Thirdly, seeing our calling is so great, and our place so high, it behooves us
to be careful of our companions. It beseemes not the majesty of a king, nor
the gravity of a priest, to converse with eueryrif-raffe person. We are
spiritual kings and priests: wicked and profane persons are very Naballs,
that is, base and vile, even the Gally-slaues of Pro. 10. 23. 1. Pet. 2. 9.
the devil, which row in the full sea of ini quit^e, and make it a pastime to do
wickedly.

Therefore we ought to shun their company. We are a royal Priesthood and an
holy nation to show forth the virtues of him, that has called us out of
darkness into his marvelous light, and not to defile our selves with
wickedness, nor to disgrace our selves or him by frequenting the company of the
ungodly, and filthy enemies of goodness. Is it seemly for a kings son, to be
a companion with rebels, traitors, and those, which are enemies to his father?
Are not we the sons of God, the king of kings, nay are we not kings our
selves? And are not profane and wicked persons our fathers enemies, and enemies
to his crown and dignity? Shall we then delight in their fellowship? Can a
man take fire in his Pro. 6. 27. 28.
bosom, and his clothes not be burnt? Can a man go upon coals and his feet
not be burnt? Can a man be in the water, and not be wet? And is it possible for
a man to converse with Athists, and to delight in the company of the wicked,
and yet not be corrupted? Birds of one feather will fly together: and if thy
companions be wicked, it is very like that thy heart is not right, whatsoever
thy profession is. Tainted barrels cor^upt good wine: and evil company
corrupts good manners. But kings and priests of all others should be most
mannarly, that their ensamples might be as paterns for the people to resemble.
They be good books for laymen, for all men to look upon, and good glasses
for the^ to see how to dress their souls withal. Let us therefore abandon the
company of all evil livers. Keep not Pro. 23. 20.
company with drunkards nor with gluttons. Make no friendship with an angry
Pro. 22. 24. 25.
man, neither go with the furious man, least thou learn his ways, and receive
destruction to thy soul. Follow the practice of David, who was both a
temporal and a spiritual King likewise. He haunted not with vain persons,
neither kept company Ps. 26. 4. 5.
with dissemblers. I have (quoth he) hated the assembly of the evil, and have
not companied with the wicked. I am a Ps. 119. 16.
companion of all them that fear thee, and keep thy precepts. It cannot but
be an encouragement to the wicked, a disgrace to our calling, a reproach to our
persons, a scandal to the weak, an offense to God, a dishonor to Christ, a
grief to the godly, and a breach of our own peace, when we that are thus
dignified by Christ, and so severed from the multitude of the world by our holy
profession, shall delight in their fellowship, that live in all sensuality and
profanesse. Let us therefore be circumspect, and make special choice of our
company.

And lastly, prudence and providence do well beseem Priests and Princes. We
should therefore be wise, not only to prevent and avoid dangers and evils,
but also to forecast for, and procure those things that become our Priesthood
and Royalty, and concern the wealth and welfare of the Soul, which is as
much to be preferred before the body, as the sword before the scabberd, or as
the hand before the Pen, wherewith it writes, or the knife, with which it cuts.
And so much for the common instructions.

CHAP. V.
Five instructions are gathered out of the consideration of our princehood.

THose of the second sort, be such as arise out of the consideration of these
two titles or callings, apart by themselves, one of them being distinctly
considered by it self from the other. And for the former first.

First, for so much as we are kings, we ought to acquainte our selves with our
own Kingdoms, and not to be good Statesmen abroad, and (foris sapere) to be
wise in other men's affairs, and to be ignorant of, and inconsiderate, or
rechlesse of our own. It is not the least Principis est virtus maxima, nosse
suos, Martial.
praise of a Prince to know his subjects. And for as much as the kingdom of
our hearts has no small number of traitors and enemies to our Crown,
lurcking in secret corners, ready like Wolves at the least advantage to work a
mischief, to make an uproar, or an open rebellion in us: it is requisite that
we labor to know that faithful Ionathans, and what faithless Iudasses, we
have within us; For as there is no earthly kingdom, but has some enemies to
it: even so there is no spiritual king among us, which has not enemies to his
crown and kingdom. Yea we have within our own courts many, that would (if
they could) pull the crown from our heads, and thrust us from our thrones.

Secondly, seeing we are Kings, we ought to keep ccontinuall watch and ward,
contending by all good means to defend our selves and states. For wise kings
have their guardes, and are diligent to prevent all mischiefs that may befall
them. Nehemiah faith (chap. 7.) that after the walls of the City were built,
he appointed wards: eue^ so, seeing God has given us a kingdom, and has in
part repaired the ruins of his image in us, let us ward, that we be not
deprived of our crown, and frustrated of our hopes: and that not without our
weapons to defend our selves, and offend our enemies, which are for number
many, and for power mighty. And that we may prove good watchmen, and not be
surprised before we be aware, let us first commend our selves and estates unto
God. For except the Ps. 127. 2.
Lord do keep the City, the keeper watches but in vain. Unless the Lord
do watch for us: unless the Lord do protect us with the shield of his grace,
and cover us with the wings of his mercy, we lie exposed to our enemies, easy
to be taken of them. Secondly, let us have a watch-full eye to the Philistines
abroad, to the tentations of the Devil, and the allurements of the world. For
Satan is subtle. When he cannot oppress us with violence like a Lion, then
he begins to play the Fox, transforming himself into an Angel of light, and
so seeking (like a Wolf in a sheep skin,) to seduce and kill us. And what
are the sweet intisements of the world, but pleasant enchantments to be witch
us, and as the Fishermans bayte, which has an hook enclosed in it to catch
the fish by the jaws? Thirdly, look narrowly to the Cananite within door,
that is, to the corruption of thine heart, that cruel Abimelech, that
false-hearted Delilah, and ambitious Absalom, which being but a bramble, would
feign be king, and ouertop the vine of Gods graces in us, seeking by fraud and
force to depose us from our kingdoms. Remember the counsel of the holy ^host,
who says; keep thine Pro. 4. 23.
heart with all diligence: for thereout comes life. To this end do these
three things. First, let Gods word dwell plenteously in thee, and meditate upon
good things: turn thine eyes from beholding vanities, and inure thy feet to
right paths. David says; I kept thy Ps. 119. 89.
word in mine heart, that I might not sin against thee. Secondly, have warrant
from the word of God for all thy thoughts and actions, and let it be the key to
lock up and to open the door of thy lips. Solomon says: establish thy Pro.
20. 18.
thoughts by counsel. And David says; thy testimonies are my delight and
counselors. Ps. 119, 24.


Thirdly, be sure to use all those things, which may cherish the spirit, and
weaken the flesh. Hear the word: be frequent in prayer: foster good motions:
meditate of the death of Christ: apply the virtue of his resurrection unto thee
by thy faith: and grieve not Ephesians. 4. 30.
the holy Spirit of God by whom ye are sealed unto the day of redemption.

Thirdly, seeing we are kings, we ought to be valorous, constant, and
courageous. An effeminate and timorous disposition is a disgrace to a Prince.
But it is the royalty and greatest commendation of a king to be heroical and
valiant, and to bear all things, that may betide him, with a Regiu^ hoc ipsum
reor, aduersa capere, Sen.
magnanimious, noble, and undaunted spirit. Kings ought to be Eagles for their
wisdom: Doves for their innocence, but yet withal, Lions for their
fortitude: and so should we be also, that are things in Christ.

Fourthly, let us beware of illiberall and base minds, that we solder not our
affections to the earth.

An abject and vassall-like minded king is a very skoffe among men, and a very
Monster in nature. It would amaze thee to see a king neglect his robes, and
embase himself in begg^rs wo^des. When we give our selves to the world, we lay
down our crowns (as it were) and strip our selves of our p^i^cely ^obes. For
as Christ said of his kingdom, so should al^ Christians say and think of their
Ioh. 18. 39.
kingdom, that it is not of this world; a d^h^refore let us so use this world,
as that it may app^^re that w^ are but t^auello^^s ^e^e, and way-f^ring men,
and that we make no account of abiding here, but look daily to be sent for
home into our own (...)rey; whereon (in this time of our (^journing,) our
heart must be so fixed, as if we esteemed all things but loss in compar^son
of the crown prepared for us in the heavens, where our kingdom is. If ye be
risen Col. 3. 1. 2.
with Christ, (as all spiritual kings are) seek those things which are above,
where Christ sits at the right hand of God. Set your affections on things
which are above, and not on things, which are on the earth. The Sun scatters
his beams down to the earth: but we should send the beams of our thoughts
upward to the heaven. A stool is an ease to a weary man to sit on: but if it
be set upon his head, it will offend him. And water is a great help to the
sailing of a ship, but if it leake much into her, it will go near to sinck
her.

Even so the world being rightly used, may further us in the race of godliness,
and ease us in our travel: but if the love thereof do leake into us, if the
world, which should be under our feet, be set upon our heads, and take up all
our thoughts, she will hinder our course, endanger our souls, and be so
great a burden to us, that we shall not be able to clime up Jacobs ladder to
heaven, and to go up that mountain, which is so steep: and so we shall be kept
from that Crown, which we seem to coue^, and from that goodly Kingdom,
which, if we could discern it with our eyes, would make us cry out with
Peter, It Math. 17. 4.
is good being here.

Lastly, seeing that we are all of us Kings, let us like valiant Princes wage
war with Satan and all our sins, which are our enemies, and labor our
eternal overthrow.

For if we be kings in the kingdom of light, we ought to be enemies to those
that belong to the kingdom of darkness. They are enemies of our graces, and to
our glory; therefore let us pu^sue them with irreco^ciliable hatred. Let us
make no leag^e, no peace, ^o truce, no^ covenant with them, but fight against
them to the end, with all the forces of our souls. A wise King scatters
Pro. 20. 26.
the wicked, and causes the wheel to turn over them. So if we would show our
selves wise princes, we ought to scatter and put to death our sins. Mortify
therefore (like good Princes,) your Col. 3. 5.
members, which are on earth, fornication, uncleanness, the inordinate
affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness, which is Pro 16. 32.
idolatry. For he that rules his own mind, is better then he that wins a
City. A King is not worthy of his name, unless he be able to rule himself.

Though a man were king of all the earth, yet were he but a weak and miserable
king, if he gave the reigns to his flesh, and did not govern himself. But
though a man were as poor as Job Tun commaiure tenebis, cum poteris rex esse
tui, Claud. Nec regna ^oci^m far, nec te dae sci unt, Sen.
in his greatest misery, and had not one foot of ground, yet if he rule
himself and bridle his appetite, he were a rich king, and a mighty Prince.
Lordship and Love, can brook no fellows. We are kings (here then is
Lordship) let not sin reign together with us, but labor to suppress it,
least it tyrannize over us. The Scripture says that when Asa had 2. Chro. 14. 5
taken away the high places, and the images, his kingdom was quiet before him:
even so shall we enjoy the true peace of conscience, and shall have much
quietness in our minds if we subdue our lusts, and cast away our corrupt
affections. And although we cannot fully do it, yet let us do our endeavor. A
will is commendable to affect Vt desiat vires, tamen est laudanda voluntas,
Ovid.
it, though there want power to effect it. And (Si quod vis, non potes, Deus
factum computat, Aug.) if thou can not do that which thou have a desire to
do (from thy heart) God does account it as done. A courageous and wise king will
use all means to suppress rebels and traitors, though he cannot utterly
perform his purpose: even so labor by all means possible to suppress and
root out thy sins, which take up arms against thee, and do not only
strive to ^^ot out Gods graces, which he has planted in thee, but will if
they be permitted, destroy ^hee quite, and deprive thee of thy kingdom.

He is a worthy Soldier that fights fiercely against his sins.

It is an holy ambition to strive to win the scepter from sin and Satan, the
king and queen of the kindome of darkness, and to labor to cast them quite o^t
of their th^o^es. It is a religious fast to abstain from fleshly lusts, which
fight, 2. Pet. 2. 11.
against the soul; and to loose the bonds of wickedness. It is a lawful
covetousness Is. 58. 6.
to get, what may be got, from the Devil. It is no superstitious pilgrimage
nor idle traveling, to take our journey from the Devil, and to travel from
our own corruptions to God, to Christ, to the land of promise, celestial
Canaan. It is a lawful rebellion to take up arms against the prince of
darkness. that rebellious Tyrant. It is an holy war, and honorable to fight
against the Devil And it is no fra^d at al to deceive this fraudulent and
perfidious ad ^uersarie, but wisdom to discern and defeat hi^sleights and
stratagems. It Indice me, fraus est co^cessa repellere fraude^: Armaque, in
armatos sumere iura sinunt. Ovid.
stands with right and reason that kings should wisely frustrate the purposes
of their wi^y enemies, and a^me themselves against them, that arm themselves
to work their ruin. Let us therefore sight against our sins, and resist
Satan who walks about like a 1. Pet. 5. 8. 9.
roaring lion (strong and hung^ie) seeking whom he may devour.

It is no tyranny to tyrannize over them: but it is a prudent and godly
cruelty to kill them all, head and tail, damme and cubb, and to smite them
hip and thigh with a mighty destruction, as Samson did the Philistines. For
Judge. 15. 8. Ps. 137. 9.
(as the Psalmist says concerning Babel) blessed shall he be that takes and
dasheth her children against the stones: even so blessed is that man that
puts his sins to the sword, and that mortifieth his corruptions, dashing
them as it were to the ground. Is it posible that any men should be so sauadge
as to Amos 1. 23
rip up women with child, to enlarge their borders: and shall not we seek the
death of our sins, that would ^ip up our souls and utterly consume us, if
Gods mercy did not hinder. The wicked watches ^s. 37. 32.
the righteous, and seeks to slay him: and shall not we mark our unrighteous
affections, and labor to kill them? Shall they practice against the godly, and
shall we do nothing against ungodliness? Ps. 37. 12.
kings cannot endure to be thwarted and over topt in their own kingdoms. We
are kings, wherefore then should we suffer our sins to brave us, and to vaunt
themselves within us? Here we may lawfully resemble Diotrephes 3. Ioh. 9. Math.
23. 6.
and the Pharisees, who hunted after preeminence and the highest rooms; We may
lawfully challenge the primacy over sin, and it is wisdom, and worthy our
labor to seek for a seat above sin. It is neither majesty nor modesty
(but sordide and servile humility, or negligence) for a king to suffer a slave
or object to sit about him. And thus far also we may be like Caesar, who could
brook no superior, and Agamemnon and Pompey, Nec quenquam iam far potest,
Cesarue priorem, Pompeius ve parem, Lucan.
who could endure neither superior, nor equal. Yea we ought to stand upon our
dignity against sin, and to tread it down. When Pharaoh saw the Israelites
increase, and fearing least they should grow too mighty for him, he said unto
his people; Come, let us work Ex. 1. 10. 11.
wisely with them, least they multiply: and thereupon they set task masters
over them, to keep them under with burde^s: so should we deal wisely with our
sins, that they multiply not in us, nor wax too mighty: we should beat
down our bodies, and labor to subdue them to us. Neither must we only
repress and keep them under, but labor also to subvert and kill them
utterly. And to this end we ought to put on the whole armor of God, that we
may be able to resist and conquer them. Stand therefore, with your loins
girded Ephesians. (...). 14. 5.
about with verity, and having on the brestplate of righteousness, and your
^eet shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace. And above all, take the
Shield of faith, wherewith ye may quench All the fiery darts of the wicked:
and take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the
word of God, (where with ye may strike of the head of sin) and pray always. When
tidings were brought that the Ammonites and Moabites were coming against
I^hoshaphat to battle; that 2. Chro. 20. 2. 3. 6.
good king set himself to seek the Lord, and prayed unto him for his
assistance. And as he confessed that he and his people were not able to
encounter with so great a multitude, so also he showed h^s confidence and hope
in God: Our eyes (says he) are toward thee. And the Lord gave him an
admirable victory. So when S^tan and our own corruptions conspire together to
work our overthrow, we ought to fly to God by prayer for his grace that our
faith may not fail, but that we may abide the brunt, and obtain a victory
over them. And as David prayed; Ps. 145. 1.
Hide not thy face from me. Deliver me ^o Lord) from mine enemies. And for thy
mercy slay mine enemies, and destroy all the^ that oppress my soul. Cast
forth the Ps. 144. 6.
lightning, and scatter the^. So do thou desire him, to shi^ld thee with the
buckler of his grace, to dispell thine ignorance with the light of his Spirit,
to confound the Devil, and al thy sins, which oppres^e thy soul, and to
defend and deliver thee from all thy spiritual enemies, which are too mighty
(...) he. For it is God, that gives deliverance to Ps. 144. 10.
kings (both temporal and spiritual.) He is able to destroy the mightiest,
and to relieve the weakest. For great is Ps. 147. 5.
our Lord, and great is his power: his wisdom is infinite. His greatness (if
he show it) is able to daunt the greatest. His power and his wisdom (if he
list to use it) is able to frustrate the devises of the wisest, and r^t^rt them
v^ on their own heads. Let us therefore in a^l our conflicts with sin, and
in all our combats with the devil, commit our selves unto him. No victory can
be look^ for without him. And thus much for our Prince-hood.

CHAP. VI.
Five uses made of our Priesthood. Nine sorts of spiritual sacrifices. Christ
is the Altar whereon they must be laid. Of the time when thy must be offered.
Preparation consisting in two things, must be made before they be offered. The
manner which we must observe in offering, stands in five duties. The end of
offering them is of two kinds. And of the latter there are eight set down.

IT remains now to deliver those instructions, which may be gathered from
the consideration of our priesthood.

First, for so much as we are Priests, it is our duty to labor for true
spiritual knowledge, that we may execute our our office faithfully and
discreetly.

The legal Priests were to be men of Mal. 2. 7.
knowledge: (for the Priests lips says the Lord, shall preserve knowledge:)
and I see no reason, wherefore we, that are Evangelical or spiritual priests,
should be void of understanding and ignorant. The ox knows his owner, and
the ass his masters crib, and shall we be ignorant Is. 1. 3.
of God, that owneth us, and of Christ, that is our Lord and master? Peter
exhorts us to grow in the knowledge of 2. Pet. 3. 18.
Christ; therefore we ought to have the knowledge of him. For as a man cannot
increase in wealth, unless he have some wealth: so no man can grow in
knowledge, except he have knowledge. A thing must be before it can be bigger.
Those therefore, that like the wicked colored out by Job desire not the
knoowledge of Gods ways, but are Job. 21. 14. Plin. not. hist. l. 9. c. 32.
content to live without eyes, like Seawinckles, and are by reason of their
peevishness as vnteacheable as Swallows, which (as Pliny writes,) cannot be
Hist. not. l.
brought to learn: those (I say,) do plainly show, that they are not as yet
called home to God, but are in thraldom under the God of this world, who has
blinded their minds, and leads them captive at his will. Surely they can be
no good Priests, no good men. A very Pagan, led only by the light of nature,
was able to say that it was a sin to be ignorant of those things that do quod
magis ad nos per^net, and n^^ci^e malum est: et quae sit natura boni. Hor.
most concern us, and not to know the nature of that which i^ good.

God commanded that Aaron the Priest should wear a plate, whereon was graued
Holiness unto the Lord, and that upon his breast plate should be the Vrim and the
Thummim: even so we, that are Priests by Christ our Priest, should not only
profess holiness unto the Lord in our lives, and have the Thummim of
perfection or sincerity in our hearts, but the Vrim also of divine and wholesome
knowledge in our heads, which i^ the light of the soul, and as it were the
true rudder of our zeal, and as comfortable as the Sunshine in a dark house,
or as a Candle is in a deep dungeon. Be not (therefore) like an Horse, or like
a M^le, which understand not: but Ps. 32. 9.
labor for true knowledge and understanding. Thou art a Priest: let thy lips
therefore preserve knowledge.

Secondly, Priests were to teach the people: so let us, if not all able to
instrict, yet be all willing to set forward one another, keeping our selves
soberly within ^he limits of our callings. Let parents and masters teach their
children, and servants and let us exhort one an other, and be ready to say with
those foretold of by the Prophet. Come and let us go Isa. 3.
up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will
teach us his ways, and we will walk in his paths. Then would religion
flourish, and profanesse would not be so rise: then should our light break
forth, as the morning, and the glory of the Lord shall embrace us. Provided
always that we truly teach our selves, as we labor to instruct others. For
otherwise, we shall be but like the Sumpter-horse, that carries riches for
others, but none for himself.

Thirdly, like Priests we ought to pray for others, and delight in blessing,
and take ^eed of cursing. The Priests had a special commandment to bless the
people with these words, saying; The Lord bless thee, and keep thee: the
Number. 5. 24. 25. 26.
Lord make his face to shine upon thee, and be merciful unto thee^ the Lord
lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace. And it were commendable
in us, that are spiritual Priests, thus to pray for our brethren, nor for our
brethren only: Ephesians. 6. 18. (...)
for Christ commandes us, to bless, Math. 5. 44.
even those, that curse us, and to pray for them, that hate us. Let us
therefore (like spiritual Priests) walk in the Spirit; Gal. 5. 16. Ephesians. 4.
31. 32.
Let all bitterness, and anger, and wrath, crying, and evil speaking, be put
away from you, with all maliciousnes: and be courteous one to another, as
Priests should be, not rendering evil for evil, neither rebuke for 1. Pet. 3.
9.
rebuke: but contrariwise, Bless; knowing that ye are thereunto called, that
ye should be heirs of blessing. For we should be patterns of piety and
patience, and as pictures of Christianity, that they, 1. Pet. 2. 12
which speak of us as of evil doers, may by our good works, which they shall
see, glorify God in the day of their visita^ion, when God also shall show
mercy to them, and convert them.

Fourthly, as the Priests under the Leuit. 6. 13.
Law, kept the fire on the Altar, and never let it go out, but fed it
continually: so let us never let the fire of Gods graces, go out upon the
altar of our hearts, but let us continually feed them by hearing and reading
the word, by receiving the Lords Supper, by prayer, meditations and godly
conference, that so we may grow in grace, as Peter 2. Pet. 2. 18.
does exhort us, and proceed in piety to the glory of him, that has thus
graced us, to the comfort of our brethren, and to the solace of our own souls.

Fifthly, seeing we are Priests, let us like Priests offer up Sacrifices unto
God. For (as Peter shows) we are 2. Pet. 2. 5.
an holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices unto God. And that we
may take a good course in performing this duty, I will show, First, the
sacrifices, which we ought to offer. Secondly, the Altar, whereon they must be
laid. Thirdly, the time when they should be offered. Fourthly, our preparation
before we offer them. Fifthly, the manner how we ought to offer them. And
sixthly, to what end.

For the first; our sacrifices are many. The first is prayer. I will therefore
(says Paul) that the men pray, every where 1. Tim. 2. 8.
lifting up pure hand^s, without wrath or doubting. This is that incense and
pure offering, which the Lord said shall be offered Mal. 1. 11.
to him in every place. A pithy prayer is (M^dullatu^ sacrificium) a mar^owish
or fat sacrifice, and (as it were) a cord, wherewith we bind Gods hands, when
he is ready to finite us for our sins. And yet as the Psalmist says: If I
regard wickedness in my heart, the Lord will not hear me. The second is Ps.
66. 18.
praising and thanksgiving. And therefore Asaph says, Offer unto God praise,
and Ps. 50. 14.
pay thy vows unto the most High. Hoseah wills the people to go to God in
prayer, and say; Receive us graciously: so will we render the calves of our
lips. Which the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, Hos. 14. 3.
seems to explain, when he says: Let us therefore by him offer the Heb.
13. 15.
sacrifice of praise always unto God: that is, the fruit of the lips, which
confess his Name. David also says, I will offer to thee a sacrifice of praise,
and will call upon the Name of the Lord.

The third, is a sorrowful, humble, and contrite heart. For the sacrifices of
God Ps. 51.
are a contrite spirit: a contrite and a broken heart, O God, thou will not
despise.

The fourth is almes-deedes, and the relief of the afflicted. Therefore the
holy Ghost says; To do good and to distribute Heb. 13. 16
forget not. For with such sacrifices God is well pleased. Paul says, I was
eue^ filled, Placent non placant. Phil. 4. 18.
after that I had received of Epaphroditus that (relief) which came from you,
an odor, which smells sweet, a Sacrifice acceptable unto God.

The fifth, is the sacrifice of our blood: when we are content to seal the
truth with our blood, which we confess with our tongues, and profess in our
lives. Paul says: though I be offered up upon the Phil. 2. 17.
sacrifice and service of your ^aith, I am glad, and rejoice with you all. And
to his natural son Timothy he says: I am ready 1. Tim. 1. 2.
to be offered, or powered out as a drink 2. Tim. 2. 6.
offering by martyrdom.

The sixth is, when Parents do dedicate their children unto God, either to
serve him in the general calling of Christianity, or in some special calling,
which approaches nearest to him, as Hannah did her son Samuel. Could 1. Sam.
1.
any be so devout in their superstitions, as to sacrifice their children unto
Ido^, unto Devils, and shall not Christians consecrate their children unto God,
that gave them: unto Christ, that bought them: and unto the Spirit, which does
renew them?

The seventh is the Lords Supper: which may be called a sacrifice, not because
any corporal, propitiatory, or applicatory sacrifice is offered unto God in
it, but because at the celebration 4. And it is a momoriall of Christ's
^a^rifice.
thereof, we offer up our praise, our selves and service unto God, in testimony
of our thankfulness to God for the death of Christ, set forth and signified in
that sacrament. And therefore it is called the Eucharist, or Thansgiuing. And
because also they did in the church use at the receiving of this sacrament to
offer their gifts for the relief of the poor, in witness of their thankful
hearts unto God. Which custom is yet religiously continued in some places.

Fightly, Gods Ministers in his church have a special kind of sacrifice, in
offering up those whom they do couuert unto God; The Minister being as the
priest; the word of God preached, as the sacrificing knife; and the convert is
the sacrifice. So Paul offered Romans 15. 16
the Gentiles to God as a sacrifice.

A ninth sacrifice is, when we offer up unto God and his honor, our selves,
soul and body. Paul says; Give your selves unto God, and give your members
Romans 6. 23.
as weapons of righteousness unto God. And again he says; I be seech you,
Brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye Romans 12. ^^
give up your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is
your reasonable serving of God. We ought to offer up our whole bodies and our
whole souls. For as every son owes honor unto his Father: as every subject
owes homage unto his prince: and as every servant owes obedience unto his
Master: even so every soul, and every body, every power of the soul, and
every part of the body, owes honor and service unto God, who is the Lord,
the king, the father, and preserver of it. And we offer up our bodies to God as
a sacrifice: first, when we make them the instruments of our souls to execute
the works of holiness unto God, of righteousness to our neighbors, and of
temperance and sobriety toward our s^lues.

Secondly, when we morifie and suppress the sins of the body, as anger,
bitterness, wantonness, sloth, and drunkenness. When we sacrifice our sins,
as Josiah did the I^olatrous Priests of 2. King. 23. 20.
the high places, then do we perform a notable sacrifice well beseeming our
Priesthood. Now these being our sacrifices, The second thing to be considered
is the Altar, whereo^ we ought to lay them; and that is Christ Jesus, as he is
God and Man. For he is our Mediator, he makes us and all our sacrifices
acceptable unto his father. For he covers all their imperfections with his
blood, and v^ with his righteousness. Whatsoever (...) the sanctified altar Ex
27. 37. Math. 23. 19.
was holy: even so whatso^uer sactifice we offer upon this Altar shall be
accepted. The Altar did sanctify the offering, ^uen so Christ our Altar does
sanctify and commend al our offerings, which in themselves are very lame and
faulty. But he remoueth their blernishes, and makes them sound, and as Salt he
sea so ^eth them all, and makes them savor and realish well in his fathers
taste.

The third thing is the time when they should be offered: and that is
continually upon all occasions, from the morning of ou^ age, even to the
evening thereof. They were commanded Leu. 2. 14.
in the time of the Law to offer up ears of come dried by the fire, and wheat
beaten out of the green ears: even so we should offer unto God the Primrose
of our life, and our tender and green years. Solomon advises young men to
Ecc. 11. 10. and. 12. 1.
cause eutll to depart from their flesh, and to remember their Crcator in the
dates of their youth. Abel offered to the Lord the Genesis 4. 4.
first fruits of his sheep, and of the fat of them: so let us offer unto God
the first fruits of our age, and the fat of our life. The lame and the torn
will not go for curran: Shall we give the Devil the Mal. r. 13.
strength of our days, and offer God our old bones? May he not in justice
repel us, and re^ect our offerings? And as we must begin betimes to show our
selves Priests unto God, so must we continue constant unto the end. ^. These. 5.
17
Therefore Paul says; Pray continually. And again: Let us offer up the
sacrifice Heb. 13. 15.
of praise always unto God. The Law Et. 29. 36. 38.
appointed certain sacrifices to be offered day by day continually: so we have
some sacrifices, which we should daily and humbly offer up unto God, as a
contrite heart, prayer, praising of his name, works of charity, and such
others. We must not be weary of well doing, but persevere in the constant
executing of our office. And i^ any thing trouble us we must repel it, as
Abraham Genesis 15. 11.
did the birds, which hindered him in his business. Constancy is an argument
of fortitude and sincerity.

The fourth thing to be considered is our preparation: which consists in two
things. First, in repenting of sin, and clensing the heart and life of
wickedness. Ps. 26. 6.
Therefore David says; I will wash mine hands in i^nocencie (O Lord) and then
will I compass thine altar. When Iosehp was to appear before the king of
Egypt, he shaued him, and changed his garments, and came to him: so when Genesis
14. 14.
thou a^t to appear before the king of heaven and earth with any gift or
sacrifice, change thy raiment of wickedness, shave away thy superfluous and
corrupt affections, wash thine heart and thine hands in innocence, and then
lay thy sacrifice upon the altar, and offer it.

They which send presents unto great men, will look that they be as pure and
good as may be, so we, that are to present our selves unto the great God,
should labor to be inwardly neat and holy. The Prophet says, that Is. 66. 3.
he that kills a bullock is as he that slew a man: and he that sacrifices
a sheep, is as he that cut off a dogs head; meaning, that their sacrifices
were abominable in Gods sight, because they offere their bullockes, but not
themselves, but delighted in their own wicked ways. But let us by repentance,
first sacrifice and slay our sins, and then sacrifice and offer up our selves.
Solomon says: take P 10. 25. 4.
the dross from the silver, and there shall proceed a vessel for the Finer:
even so say I, purify thine heart, and purge out the dross of sin from the
metal of thy soul, and there will be a gift, which the Lord will like of.

Secondly, pray to God, that he would accept of thy sacrifice, and pardon all
the blemishes in it. David says, O Lord I beseech thee accept the free
offerings Ps. 119. 108. Man. 3. 3.
of my mouth. Malachy says that Christ shall refine the sons of Leui, and
purify them as gold, that they may bring offerings unto the Lord in
righteousness. We are as the sons of Leui, Priests I mean, but spiritual: let
us pray unto Christ, that he would refine ^z. 36. 25.
us, and power the clean water of his Spirit upon us, that we may be clean
from our filthiness, that so we might sacrifice unto the Lord in
righteousness. For as he requires the sac^ifices of righteousness, so he
looks that they Ps. 4. 5.
should be offered in righteousness, that is, after a righteous and holy manner.

The fif^thing to be considered, is the manner how all our sacrifices should be
offered.

First, we must offer them in faith. For whatsoever is not of says is sin.
We Ro^. 14. 23.
must be assured of our offe^ings, that God will accept them. By faith Abel
offered H^b. 11. 4.
unto God a greater sacrifice the^ Cain. A sacrifice without faith, is as a
body w^^hout a s^ule, and a tree without pyth, and therefore the sacrifice of
the wicked, who are destitute of true faith, and not within the cou^nant, is as
Solomon Pro. 15. 8.
teaches) an abomination to the Lord.

Secondly, we must of^er up all our sacrifices, sincerely with an honest heart,
and in cons^ence of Gods c^^mandement. For God tries the hear^^ and the Ps. 9.
r^ines: and counterfeit sanct^ty is double iniquity. When we give alms,
which is one sacrifice, the left hand should not know what the right hand does.
And when we pray to God, which is another sacrifice, we must not des^^^ to
Math. 6.
be seen of men, but ought to go into our closets. By which our Sau^^^
means, that we should perform the^e dut^es sincerely without hypocri^^^. For
the hypocrite shall not come before God: but Job. 13. 16. Pro. 1. 20.
those, whtch are upright in their way, are his delight. And therefore must our
sacrifice be entierly offered, as David's was, when he said: I will praise thee
O Lord my God, with All mine heart. Ps. ^6. 12.


The Law appointed a sacrifice in Leu. 1. 8. 9.
which all the members were offered; And the meat offering, which the ^euit 6.
23.
Priests offered, was burnt altogether, and no part thereof was reserved. So
we, that are made Priests by Christ our High Priest; should offer unto God an
entire sacrifice, our whole heart, all the members of our body, and all the
faculties of our soul. For he made them all: and he will either have them all,
or none: he will not part stakes with the Devil.

Thirdly, we must offer up our sacrifices willingly, chearefully, and with
delight. Therefore the Psalm^st says; Let them offer sacrifices of praise, and
declare Ps. 107. 22.
his works with re^oycing. God loves free will offerings, and a cheerful
giver. Siracides says; In all thy gifts 2. Co^. 9 7. Eccle. 35. 9. 10.
shem a toyfull countenance, and look what th^ne hand is able, give with a
cheerful eye. Give the Lord his honor with a liberal eye. For he that
sows liberally, shall reapalso liberally. David and his people 2. Cor. 9. 6.
offered willingly, and with a perfect heart 1. Chron. 90. 9. 14.
unto the Lord, for the building of a temple ^d his name: even so should we
offer up all our sacrifices willingly and with alacrity for the glory of his
name.

Fourthly, we must offer up all our sacrifices being in charity with our This
also must be oblerued in the prepauation. Math. 5. 23. 24.
neighbors. Christ says; If thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there
remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee: leave there thine offering
before the altar, and go thy way: first be reconciled to thy brother, and then
come, and offer thy gift. Our sacrifices must not be mixed with wrongs. But
whatsoever gooddutie we do to God, let us be in charity with our brother. For
how can we think that he will accept ^t, if we hate our brother, whom he has
made? And whatsoever good work we do to man, let us do it in love unto him.

For (as Paul shows) though we 1. Cor. 13. 3.
should give al our goods to the poor, and have not love, it would profit
nothing.

Fifthly, we m^st offer up all our sacrifices in the name o^ Christ Whatsoever
ye do, in word or de^d, do all in the Col. 3. 17.
Name of the Lord Jesus gi^ing thanks to God even the father by him. The
Apostle Heb. 13. 15.
exhorts us to offer the sacrifice of praise unto God by him. For if we would
have our offerings accepted, we must not trust to their own dignity, which
deserves nothing, but rely only upon his merits and most meritorious
intercession. And therefore Peter 1. Pet. 2. 5.
says, our sacrifices are acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.

And so much of the manner.

The end follows: and it is either supreme or subordinate, greater or lesser.
The maine end of all our sacrifices, is the glory of God, which ought of all
men in their actions to be sought for, above all thing, else; and therefore Paul
says: whether ye cate or drink, or whatsoever 1. Cor. 10. 31.
ye do, do all to the glory of God. The subordinate and inferior ends are,
1. That men might behold our faith: 2. commend our profession: 3. and
glorify our heavenly Father for us: 4. that we may adorn our calling: 5. and
allure others to the liking both of it and us: 6. that we may edisie and
excite our brethren, by our good example: 7. that we may stop the mouths of
Atheists, papists, and Pagans: 8. and that we may gather certain assurance of
our election and effectual vocation, and at length attain to the end of our
faith, the salvation of our souls.

And this shall suffice for the four first general points.

CHAP. VII.
All our Sacrifices must be offered unto God.

THe fist and last, is the Person to whom we are made Kings and Priests: and
that is to God, the Father of Christ, and in him also ours.

The word God in the Scriptures, is taken two ways, properly, and improperly.
Properly, either for the nature or Godhead, as where it is said, God is Ioh.
4. 24.
a Spirit. Or for any of the three persons subsisting in that nature or
God^ead. And so it is taken in this place for the Father. Improperly this word
God is given to Angels, and to Magistrates, Ps. 8. 5. Heb. 2. 7. Ps. 82. ^.
unto Idols, and to the Devil himself.

Now the father is called God, not because he is more God, then the Son and
Holy Ghost. For they are equal to him. But because he is first in order, and
from him the Godhead is communicated to the Son and holy Ghost.

He is called the father of Christ, nor by the grace of creation, as he was the
father of the Angels, and of Adam before ^ob. ^. 6. Luke. 3, 38.
his fall: nor by the grace of Adoption, as Eunomius and the Bonosians did
imagine: but by Nature, (though the Marcellians say otherwise.)

The Father, from all eternity, communicating his whole Godhead unto him, and
yet not depriving himself of it. Hence we l^arne:

First, that as there is a God, (contra^ie to the opinion of Diagoras Milesias,
Plu^. de Plac. Phil,
Theodorus Cyrenaeus, Eumenes Tegeates, and al Atheists whatsoever: so that
this one God is not one in person, as ^e i^ one in nature, but distinguished.
For Esse (...) est est (...) sanc^um.
the Son is not the father, the father not the holy Ghost, but they are
distinguished by their incommunic^ble properties. The father is God begetting;
the Son is God begotten of the ^ather, and the Holy Ghost is God proceeding
from them both.

For they have all one nature, will, Esse pat^is est esse (...) and ^p^titus
sancti.
and natural power, which is common to them all, and not begotten: but they
differ in their manner of subsisting in that one nature by their personal
proprieties, which are not common to them all, as the ^a^^re is, but
appropriated to each of them Secondly, that Christ is the substantial Son of
God, equal for time and essence unto his father, and therefore to be honored
as well as the father: and beware of the opinion of Arrius, who b^ld that
Christ was not coeternall, coequall, and of the same substance with the father.

Lastly, seeing we are made kings and Priests to God, we must let him have all
the glory of our kingdom and priesthood. For to him and for his honor and
service are we thus especially promoted. We are not thus honored to live as we
list, but to set forth Gods glory, and his praise, who has so highly graced
us. Therefore all those a^e to be condemned, who give themselves to the works of
darkness, sacrificing to Venus by vnclea^nes, to Bacchus by d^unkenn^s, to
Mammon by worldliness. All these sacrifice to the Devil and to their own
flesh, which is the seed of the Devil, and not to God, to whom we ought to
live, that as we live by him in this world, so we may also live with him in the
world to come. And thus much of the description of Christ, which is the first
thing to be considered in this Thanksgiui^g.

CHAP. VIII.
The substance of John's thanksgiving and the testificatio^ of his desire of
Christ's glory.

THe second thing is the substance, or matter of it, contained in these words;
To him be glory and dominion for evermore. In which words the Apostle ^scribeth
all ho^o^r, p^a^se majesty, rule and Lordship to Christ for loving of us, and
declaring his love unto us by washing us from our sins in his blood, and
making us kings and priests unto his father. Which practice of his, teaches us
to show all thankfulness to him for these his favors, by doing all things,
which may set forth his glory, and manifest our obedience to his authority and
greatness.

The third and last thing to be considered, is the testification of the
Apostles says or seruent desire of Christ's glory, in the word Amen: which
signisieth certenily, so be it, or it shall be so. As if he should say, thou
shall have all glory ^^d mi^^ion ascribed to thee: or, ^^t it be so, let glory,
dominion and (...) give ^or ascribed to him ^or these inestimable benefits. And
thus (...) bles his desire, and shows how earnestly he d^^h wish that Christ
may have all glor^ and dominion ascribed to him, as it does indeed of right
be^^n^ unto him. For he is the king of ^^^ry, the redeemer of the world, the
h^^e of all ^^^ngs, the m^ghty God, the prince of pea^e, the gou^rnour of (...)
1. 2. (...) ^ath. 28. 18
the Church, and to him all power is given in heaven and in earth. And this
e^s^mple o^ John should proucke us (...) ^e ^^^^ent, and not to freeze in our
desires of his pr^yse and g^o^y. And as we ought to be vehement in desyring
(...) we should be as eager and pr^mpt (...) do all things whatsoever, which
may de^^re it among men, and ar^ue ^^e ard^^cy and integrity of our in^^rd
^ffection. And so doing we shall (...) com^^^ to our selves, and d^monst^a^e
^ur th^nkfulnesse to him; unto whom with the father and the Holy Spirit, three
persons, but one true, eternal and wise God, be rendered all honor, praise,
and glory, both now and ever,

Amen.
FINIS.
Trin-vni Deo Gloria.
Faults escaped.
Page. 2. Line 17. read described. Pa: 5. Line 10. re^de geuerall Pa: 8. Li:
11. read many. Pa: 25. Lin: 23 read goodly. page, 26. Li. ^. read quantum.
Pa: 31. Li: 20, re^de lovely, Pa. 40. Li 12. read affect. Pa: 66. Li: 1. read
we use. Pa: 66. Li: 19. read sinners. Pa: 70. Li: 7. read justification. Pa:
11. Lin: 22. read enjoy it. Pa: 110, Li^: 7. read expect it. Pa: 169. Lin: 19,
read was. Pa: 172, Li: 1. read the doctrine of. Pa: 176. Lin: 10. read
revived. Page: 181. Lin. 26. read he will give of the water of life freely. Pa:
225. Li: 5. ^ead but we are P^iests for no men properly, as they we^e pa: 229.
Lin: 20. read more. Pa: 232. Lin: 10. r^ade not think.

Quid pro^ers^ gaza^. Cuius? Christi. quibus add.
Ch^isti-colis. Dic, quot? Ni duo, si numores.
quae? Me^itu^ noxas perpurgans sanguinis omnes, Christi,
Reges atque Hiereis alter: cura facit.
quid Christus, quid sit purgari sanguine
quid Rex atque Hiereus, pagina tota docet.
Sic duo proponens tam paruo magna hbello,
Sortitus fato quis meliore tuchen?
Mirantur multi co^gestas Foenere gazas,
Ex Christi gazas Sanguine (Lector) habes.
E. S.

