depiction of Prince Charles HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE ICH DIEN coronet of the
Prince of Wales adorned with three ostrich feathers and motto and surrounded by
garter of Knights of the Garter with their motto

Prince Charles HIS VVELCOME FROM SPAIN:

Who landed at Portsmouth on Sunday the fifth of October, and came safely to
London on Monday the sixth of the same, 1623.

WITH The Triumphs of London for the same his happy Ariuall.

AND The Relation of such Towns as are situate in the ways to take
poste-horse at, from the City of London to Dover: and from Calais through all
France and Spain, to Madrid, to the Spanish Court.

LONDON, Printed by G.E. for John Wright, and are to be sold at the sign of
the Bible without Newgate. 1623.

Prince Charles HIS VVELCOME FROM SPAIN.
AFter Great Britain (overwhelmed with doubts, hopes, fears and most
careful, loving and dutiful Jealousy) had dolourously drooped, and mourned
in a robe of melancholy 8, months long, for the absence of our hopeful,
unparalleled, and illustrious Prince Charles, each minute of whose unexpected,
and unthought of Journey from hence, seeming a tedious torture to millions of
loving and wel-wishing hearts, whose happy and wel-comes home does like the
radiant Sun expel all the dismal and moody clouds of grief and melancholy;
to the universal joy of his Royal Father, and all his loyal Subjects, having
passed so long and tedious a Journey, so much change of air and varieties of
diet, preserved (by the Almighties especial providence) from all dangers and
casualties that might any way impeach his Highness health, or prejudice his
Princely person, in any of his affairs.

After his Highness stay from the 7. of March with his Catholic Majesty at
his Court at Madrid, with the great and magnificent Entertainments, Feastings,
Maskings, Banquettings, Huntings, Hawkings, and diverse other royal, pleasant,
laudable, costly, sumptuous, and manly disports, and exercises, where, with the
King, the Queen, the fair, virtuous, and lovely Lady Maria, (the highborne
Infanta) his Highness having all the content and welcome which so potent a
Monarch could any way express, or our gracious Prince expect: Then (to ease
our common grief, and to revive our half dead hopes, it pleased his Grace to
take his leave of Madrid, and passing by easy Iourneyes on his way,
accompanied some part with the King, after whose departure from his Highness,
he was attended by certain of the Graundes of Spain, so that in thirteen or
fourteen days space his Highness came in perfect health to the Port of Saint
Anderas, in the Province of Biscay, where, when our English fleet had
knowledge of his long looked for and welcome coming, then did the hearts of
every man leap within him for joy, their eyes ouerflowed with tears of loving
and dutiful affection, their voices shouted with acclamations. The great
Ordnance thundered and filled the earth and skies with loud reioycings, the
trumpets clangor pierced the welkin, the beaten drums ratled triumphantly,
all manner of Instruments sounded melodiously, and to better and sweeten all
the rest, his Highness most graciously accepted their loves mutually and
thankfully. But blustering Boreas, with his brother Eurus (the North and East
winds) blew most stiffly, and churlishly detained our joy and happiness from
us here in Britain. So that never any loving mother desired with more longing
to see her hopeful son, whose long absence had filled her with grief, then
all the honest Inhabitants of this Kingdom did hunger and thirst to see or
hear from their most hopeful and beloved Prince. With what greedy desire did
many thousands (as it were) nail their eye-sights daily upon Fanes,
Weather-cocks, the smoke of Chimneyes, and the Racking of the clouds; and for
fifteen long days and nights, the thwartouer and cross North and Easterly
wind blew us nothing bnt lengthening of our sorrows, and delaying of our
comforts, until at last on Friday the third of October last it pleased the
great Archmaster of winds and Seas, to turn the breath of Eolus the way we
most heartily prayed for: So that his Highness speedily taking advantage of this
most happy and prosperous Gale; Anchors were soon weighed, Sails suddenly
displayed, and by the providence of the Almighty, and the diligent industry of
the skillful Nauigators and Mariners, his Highness most safely landed at
Portsmouth in Hampshire on Sunday the 5 of October, betwixt the hours of three
and four in the afternoon, where he took coach and came that night and
lodged near Gilford in Surrey, 25 miles from London, at the house of the Right
Honorable the Lord Viscount Anuan's.

The happy news of his Highness most welcome ariuall was brought to London on
Monday being the sixth of October, and shortly after the same morning he came in
person himself, taking Barge at Lambeth with the Duke of Buckingham, followed
by the Archbishop of Canterbury, and diverse others; whence he past to
Yorke-house, betwixt eight and nine of the clock, where he having taken some
repast, he took Coach again to go toward his royal Father, to rejoice his
heart with his Princely presence.

The joyful news of his happy return, filled the whole Kingdom with
excessive joy: first his most royal Father had a chief share in the comfort:
secondly, many of his good Servants, who were almost with grief for his long
absence like so many bodies without life: but now they are all relieved by his
welcome presence, with the spirits of mirth and alacrity. But the City of
London in expression of their loving duties, have spared for no cost, either
general or particular. THe Bells proclaimed aloud in every steeple,
The joyful acclamations of the people.
The Ordnance thundered with so high a strain,
As if great Mars they meant to entertain.
The Bonfires blazing, infinite almost,
Gave such a heat as if the world did roast.
True mirth and gladness was in every face,
And healths ran bravely round in every place:
That sure I think this sixth day of October,
Ten thousand men will go to bed scarce (etc.)
This was a day all dedicate to mirth,
As 'twere our Royal Charles his second birth.
And this day is a jewel well returned,
For whom this Kingdom yesterday so mourned.
God length his days who is the cause of this,
And make us thankful for so great a bliss.


The whole day being spent thus in mirth, triumphs, and thanksgiving, wherein
the people of all degrees, from the highest to the lowest, both rich and poor
in London, Westminster, and the Suburbs, to their powers expressed their loves:
that not so much but the four Elements, Fire, Water, Air, and Earth, seemed
to applaud the celebration of this happy and welcome day, for the Heavens most
abundantly poured down a shower of rain of nine houers continuance, which the
dry and thirsty Earth drank most greedily, or as I may say most lovingly, to
the health of so joyful and auspicious a solemnity. The Fire (or fires) in all
places, streets, lanes, courts, and corners, (despite the rain, or envying
that it should quench the flaming ardency of its transcendent love) ascended
upwards in show of thankfulness: and the vast, empty, and subtle Air was
filled with the shouts and acclamations of people, with the rejoicing noyses of
Instruments, Ordnance, Muskets, Bells, Drums, and Trumpets. And further I heard
it credibly reported, that there was one Bonefire made at the Guildhall in
London which cost one hundred pounds (belike it was some Logwood which was
prohibited or unlawful to be used by Dyers, and being forfeited was ordained
to be burnt in triumph:) But (as good cause we had) the day was commanded to be
kept holyday, so that no shops were opened, no manner of work was done from
morning till night, but carrying and re-carying wood to make Bonefires, ringing,
filling and emptying of pots, that all seemed as if the world was newly
preserved from some second flood (as indeed our whole Kingdom was from a flood
of grief) to the safe and happy haven of happiness.

Moreover, his Highness happy and joyful coming on that day, was a putting
off of an execution which six men and two women condemned malefactors were to
suffer at Tyburne, whereby he was the most fortunate cause of their reprieues
and saving, and a larger time of repentance to amend their lives.

The very Vintners burnt their bushes in Fleetstreet and other places, and
their wine was burnt (all over London and Westminster) into all colors of the
Rainbow, whole pintes, quarts, pottles, and gallons, were made into Bonefires
of Sack and Claret, whilst good fellows like loving Salamanders swallowed
those liquid fires most sweetly and affectionately. But as concerning this
fuel of Bacchus, a great many would not stay, or could not endure to see it
burnt, and so devoured those French and Spanish billets and faggots raw, which
after being warmed with shouting, laughing, singing, and leaping, the heat
burst out so hotly that it appeared in many a high colored face, till in the
end the fire was quenched in the embers and ashes of sleep.

And to the intent all estates should be merry, there were diverse Noblemen,
Gentlemen, and others, that gave store of gold to the poor, some gave vessels
of wine in the streets.

Thus was the whole day spent, till the dark night came, and then began the
second part of England joy: for the nights love did as it were scorn to be
outstripped with the days affection and obedience. Amongst the rest, the
Spanish Ambassadors, both at Exeter house in the Strand, and at Ely house in
Holborne, did express their loves by their charges and reioycings.

Then began a most merry and joyful confusion of billets, faggots, bauins, and
logs, baskets, buckets, and tubs were hotly and merrily consumed, buts, pipes,
hogsheads, teirces, puncheons, barrles, kilderkins, firkins, runlets, and
drifats most bravely blazed and suffered; some in Smithfield burnt their old
Coaches, (and I wish they had all been so well bestowed) washing boules and
beerles went to wrack, old graters and stools were turned to ashes, mouse
traps and tinderboxes came to light, and he or she that had but four tokens,
or as much credit, committed their whole estate to fire and faggot; insomuch
that Chandlers shops and storehouses were most willingly emptied. But in
Paul's Churchyard was exceeding benighted triumphs, for on the cross round
about were placed, on the batlements and on the top of it as many burning
Linkes as the Prince his Highness was years old: and in some good distance
from the Cross, were two mighty bonefires; besides there was a cross of wood
erected which extended into four branches, and upon every branch a
pitch-barrell was fastened, and one in the midst on the top, which made a
brave show in the burning: then were there Cressit lights, and most excellent
fireworkes, with squibs, crackers, racketts, which most delightfully flew every
way. And it is certain to be proved, that betwixt Paul's Church yard and
London Bridge in the nearest way that could be gone, there were 108 Bonefires
told, many of them having at least one load of wood in each, some more, some
less: I speak not of other streets and lanes which are out of that way,
besides the Strand, Westminster, and Holborn, with hundreds of places which I
saw not.

All these and much more was done here in London, Westminster, and the
adjoining places, nor is it to be doubted but that all Cities, Towns, and
Villages, will generally and particularly show their loving obedience and
affections.

Here is set down the long and tedious Journey, with the several stages or
places where men take Poste-horse from the City of London, quite through the
spacious Kingdom of France; and so throughout into Spain, to the City of
Madrid, being in all 141 several stages or Poste-Townes, some 8, some 10, 12,
or 16 miles from each other, being in all about 1100 miles.

London Darford Rochester Sittingbourne Canterbury Dover Callaice Le Bison
Marquessa Bulloigne Neuchattell Franeaz Montruell Neupon Bernai Noieane
Abeville Aillyle hanc dordes Fleircourt Piguigny Amiens Hancourt. Flaire
Briteur Rauigny St. Remy Cleremont Roucellei Saint Leu Lufarder Escouen St.
Denis PARIS La Burlarayur Longuemiaux Chator Bonur Estampe Guillerua
Angueruille Shaupillary Shateugaillad Artenay Sercott ORLEANCE St. Minion
Nostra Dama de Clara Lestroya shemina Le Laurena der eux Maid Mondinaux BLOIS
Les Montriba Lambin Mont Richard Vr Liege Lochez Varenur Liguer La hay Perlane
Shatibben La Tredeuir Chaffener POICTIERS Rufigni Vrporte Aioutete Vinour
Vmenieur Cover Chour Chouffa Villa foignant Aiger Gouruille St. Seuerdeaux
Villara Chasteauneuf Nonnauille Barbefieux Raignar La Grole Mou Lien Plant
Blac Chauignon Vr voya de Lion Cusac Le port de Crussac Le Charbon blanc Le
port de la Bastil BOVRDEAVX Le petit Bordeaux Hauborre Troia Pooter Belleene
Muret Allispostel Le Brouheer Jen Guiller La haree Les Sperroone Chastel Maier
S. Vincent Le Cabalon Les Anders Vnposte Aioutee BAYON Bidarbe S. Ian de Luz
Arinanat.
What Towns are named in this Catalogue since you read Callaice, are all
standing in France: Now we come to relate of the passage through Spain to the
City of Madrid; And first after your passage from Bayon you come shortly into
the Kingdom of Navarre, which is now in the King of Spaines dominions, the
first place therein where they take Post horse is named, Iron, or Feria Oyason
Eseruand Toullousette Tolosa Verafrangii Segaur Gallarette Andicamer VITORIA
Poypela Miranda Maiogur Soguire Breniea Castill de pione Quinta Palla BVRGOS
Bisbregur Songuide Lerma Bahabon Arandadeduera Roubia Fressenuille Chastel St.
Mersieur Bouteagur Canauuille St. Augustine Acauenda MADRID.


Thus having showed the long and dangerous tract by Land from London to Madrid,
we may herein see in part how much we are all bound to be thankful to our
great and good God, who has so healthfully, happily, and timely preserved and
returned our gracious Prince so wishedly, after so many perils past on his
part, and so many doubts and fears on ours, upon the which I have (for a
conclusion) written these following verses.

THe Prince of Princes, and the King of Kings,
Whose eye of providence foresees all things:
To whom what ever was, or ere shall be,
Is present still before his Majesty.
Who does dispose of all things as he list,
And graspeth Time in his eternal fist;
He sees and knows (for us) what is bad or good,
And all things is by him well understood;
Man's weak conjectures no way can areed,
What Is in the immortal Parl'ament decreed,
And what the Trinity concludes there,
We must expect it with obedience here.
Then let not any man presume so far,
To search what the Almighties councels are,
But let our wills attend upon his will,
And let his will be our direction still.
Let not Plebeans be inquisitiue,
Or into any profound State-businesse diue.
We in five hundred and nere sixty year,
Since first the Norman did the Scepter bear,
Have many hopeful royal Princes had
Who as heaven pleased to bless, were good or bad,
Beauclarke was first (who was first Henry crowned)
For learning and for wisdom, high renowned,
Beyond the verge of Christendom, swift Fame
Did make the world admire his noble name.
The black Prince Edward, all his life time ran
The race of an accomplished Gentleman:
His valor and triumphant victories,
Did fill the world, and mount unto the skies.
The warlike Henry of that name the fifth,
With his innated virtue up did lift
His name and fame, to such perspicuous grace,
Which time, or no oblivion can deface.
Prince Arthur (whom our Chronicles record
To be) a virtuous and a hopeful Lord:
His budding fortunes were by death prevented,
And as he lived beloved, he did lamented.
His brother Henry from his fall did spring,
First to be Prince of Wales, then Englands King,
He was magnificent, and fortunate,
According to the greatness of his state.
Next Edward his undoubted heir by birth,
Who (for the sins of men upon the earth)
God took him hence as he began to bloome,
Whose worthy memory men's hearts intombe.
Prince Henry last, a Prince of as great hope
As ere was any yet beneath the Cope,
He lived and died bewailed and renowned,
And left this land with tears of sorrow drowned.
Then only this illustrious Branch remained,
Our gracious Charles, by Heavens high grace ordaind
To be our Joy, whose virtues (as I gather)
Will length the life of his beloved Father.
True love and honor made his Highness please
Aduentrously to pass over lands and seas,
With hazard of his royal person, and
In that, the hope of all our happy Land.
But blessed be his name, whose great protection
Preserved him still from change of Airs infection,
That gave him health and strength among sundry nations,
To Endure and like their diets variations,
That though to others these things might be strange,
Yet did his Princely vigor never change,
But with a strong and able constitution,
He bore out all with manly resolution.
Love sometimes made the gods themselves disguise,
And muffle up their mighty Dieties,
And virtuous Princes of the gods have ods,
When Princes goodness do outgoe the gods.
Then foolish man this is no work of thine,
But operation of the Power divine,
Let God alone with what he has in hand,
It Is saucy, folly, madness, to withstand
What his eternal wisdom has decreed,
Who better knows then we do, what we need.
To him let us pray for his most safe protection,
Him we implore for his most sure direction:
Let his assistance be Prince Charles his guide,
That in the end God may be glorifide.
Let us amendment in our lives express,
And let our thanks be more, our sins be less.
Amongst the rest this is to be remembered, that two Watermen at the Tower
Wharfe burnt both their Boats in a Bonefire most merrily.

FINIS.

