A Godly Treatise of the Church. Written by Robert Some.

The Lord added to the Church from day to day, such as should be saved. Act. 2.
ver. 47. You shall find in the end of this book, a Treatise against
Oppression.

LONDINI Impensis Geor. Bishop. 1582.

To the right Honorable Sir Francis Walsingham knight, principal Secretary to
her excellent Majesty, and one of her highness privy Counsel: Robert Some
wishes increase of Gods gifts by Jesus Christ.
IT pleased your Honor to favor me both at, and since my waiting on my Lord
and master, the Earl of Leycester in the Court, I do not forget your
goodness to me, and I thank God very heartily, for your Honorable both care
of, and affection to Gods Church and religion. It is very clear, that many
are as friendlye to Gods truth and Church, as the East wind is to the fruits
of the earth: I need not remember particulers, for there are so great store,
and (as it were) swarms of such, that if almighty GOD did not bridle them, as
he did Sanballat, the Arrabians, and the Ammonites in Nehemias time, and raise
up excellent personages for the rearing up of his Church now, as he did
Ezra, Nehemias, Zorobabel, and Iehoshua, after the captivity of Babylon, Gods
Church should go to wrack, and Religion should be handeled like a ward.
But Gods Church is alive, (thanks be to GOD) howsoever wicked men do make it
either a fair mark to shoot at, or a dead carcass to feed upon, and will
outliue and outcountenance all enemies whatsoever. Almighty God to that end
has blessed this noble Land in our time with an excellent Prince of our own
nation, (as he did the Jews with Zorobabel after the captivity) and with
many notable personages under her Highness (as he did the Israelites with
Eliachim under Ezechias the king of Judah.) Amongst which excellent
personages, because your Honors place is great in respect of the trust which
is committed to you, and that GOD has moved you to favor me, I do present
unto you these my Treatises of the Church, and against Oppression, as a sure
argument of my duetifull mind. My meaning is not to set down the several
points of this Book, it were a needelesse labor, and you have it in your
hands to read at your good pleasure and leisure.

Thus with my hearty prayer to Almightye GOD for the increase of his good
gifts in your Honor, I take my leave in most humble manner.

At Queens college in Cambridge the first of November. 1582. Your Honors to
command Robert Some.

To the Reader.
IF my Treatise of the Sacraments found grace with you (as I hear it has) I
presume these of the Church, and against Oppression, shall: for they have more
variety in them, by reading this book, you shall find it so. I have not as
yet written any thing of the Scripture and Confession, but hereafter I will
according to my promise by the grace of God, to whose merciful protection I
commend both you and my self.

Robert Some.

Jf any either have or do spoil the Church or Churchmen of their maintenance,
I refer them to this which immediately follows, and to the fourth Proposition
in my Treatise of the Church, and to my whole Treatise against Oppression.
Mich. 2. Iere. 5
IT is a gross sin to grind the faces of others, and to spoil them of that
they have: Gods judgments against Oppression, do sufficiently prove this.
But to rob the church, and Churchmen is a fowler sin, and will have greater
vengeance from almighty God. Is there any calling under heaven, that pleases
God more, and does greater service in a Christian kingdom, then the noble
estate of the ministry? Are they not the Lords Ambassadors, Malach. 2. Mat.
5. 1. Cor. 4. Ephe. 4. 2. King. 2.
the salt of the earth, the light of the world, the dispensers of Gods
mysteries, the buylders of Gods Church, and the chariot and horsemen (as
Elizeus said of Elias) of a Christian kingdom? If they be so, and that by
their sound preaching, Luke 10.
Satan falls down from heaven like lightning, and ye walls of Jerusalem are
built up, is it not most equal, yt they should not be robbed of the churches
maintenance, which belongs of duty unto the^? Is is not a certain truth,
and in ye eyes of all men, that many in vplandish and incorporate towns do
open their purses very willingly, and bou^tifully (for me^ of their place) for
the maintenance of godly preachers, and does not almighty God, besides ye
heavenly comfort he gives the^, repay those good me^ with increase of earthly
commodities? Does almighty God like of this Christian dealing? and do godly men
both justly and greatly commend it: and will not graceless Cormorants be
ashamed, which in steed of helping the Lords plough forward, ha^g it upon the
hedge, by making foul hauock of ye churches maintenance? If these which either
have or do feed upon ye church, (as the eagle does upon the carrion) did see
the goodly company of students in Cambridge and Oxeforde, or could consider
what sharp wits, and excellent learning and virtues almighty GOD has given
to many of them, or would be moved with the sight of those holy asse^blies,
wherein Gods truth is soundly taught, and his people singularly comforted,
would they not condemn their vile course, and be heartily sorry for their
monstrous dealings? If this I have already remembered will not mollify and bend
their hearts, then let them cast their eyes upon many Churches in this noble
land, which either want the preaching of the word, or if they have it, they
have it strawberie wise, that is, once a year: let them I say, look upon the
woeful estate of those places, and if they be not hewn out of Oaks, and have
hearts of flint, it will break them in pieces. If answer be made, that a
sufficient number of preachers cannot be had to furnish the whole land, I
grant they say somewhat: but sure I am, that if very fit men in the
universities and abroad, were heartened and employed accordingly, many should
not be drowned in ignorance and popery as they are, and many treacheries
against ye religion and Prince, would more easily appear, and the number of
skillful ministers (which are very precious jewels in a Christian kingdom)
would increase accordingly. For who are there, that have spent their time
profitably at their books, and are excelle^tly furnished for the building of
Gods Church, that would either hyde their talentes in a napkin, Mat. 25.
or bury them in the earth: yea rather, that are not with all their hearts
desirous to blow the Lords silver Trumpets, Number. 10. Ezech. 33.
to be watchmen over Gods city, and feders of his flock: and what hope is
there that these worthy men shall be employed, when the Churches maintenance is
not given unto them accordingly, but rather pulled from them most shamefully:
yea, what mean men are there, that will to their great charge maintain their
sons in the universities for the benefit of Gods Church (for very few of
greater calling dedicate their sons as Anna did Samuel to the Lords
ministry) when they see that learning, virtue and religion, are not preferred
and rewarded for learning, virtue, and religions sake: and that (as Aristodemus
of Lacedemon said, money, money is ye man, without money either given to
corrupt patro^s, or corrupt brokers, the Churches allowance is very hardly come
by. Lent shrift is found fault with long ago, but sure I am, that the shriuing
or rather shauing of the Churchemen, as it is more costly then Popish shrift,
so is it in some sort, as great an enemy to Gods religion, as that trumpery
was. If that which I have set down in my Treatise of the Sacraments, or in
this book can not work the good (I mean the unfeigned conversion) of such,
as either have, or do poll the Church, let them remember, that even the
popish sort, (howsoever they are wide, both of white and butte, in many
weighty points of Gods religion) do both mislike and condemn the giving and
taking of money, or pensions for clergy liuinges, and think it a very absurd
thing (as it is indeed) that any patron, because he has right according to
the law, to present a fit man, should pull away either the whole, or the
least part of ye churches provision. Secondly, that the time will come, when
these graceless cormorances shall sing this song with ye king of Babilo^,
vocetur Daniel, send, send, Dan. 5. 1. King. 13. Exodus 8.
for a godly preacher: and with ye king of Israel, Orapro me, etc. O man of
God, pray yt my withered hand may be restored: and with the king of Egypt,
Orate dominu^ vt auferat ranas, Moses and Aaron pray ye to the lord, that I and
my people may be rid of the frogs. Let the^ remember (I say) yt the time will
come, when they shall sing this so^g with these ungracious princes, howsoever
they either have or do poll godly me^ of ye churches maintenance. T. Liuius
lib. 42.
If. Q. Fuluius uncovering the one half of Iunoes temple, yt he might cover
another temple in Rome with the same tiles, was greatly both misliked and
condemned by the^ of Rome for his fact: if they told him that Pyrrhus and
Annibal would not have faulted so, and yt the pulling of ye tiles, from private
men's houses had bin too much, and therefore from ye Church, was intolerable, if
they caused the tiles of Iunoes temple to be sent home again: may not such as
either garnish their houses, or themselves, or both, with the spoil and ruin
of Christian churches, be justly both misliked and condemned? may they not be
truly told, that the Egyptians, and Philistines would not spoil the Temples
of their idols, and that the Churches mayntenance is too holy and precious a
thing for them to lay their fingers on, and may they not be justly called on,
to return home again not the tyles of Iunoes Temple, but all that which
belonges to the maintenance of almighty Gods religion? 1. Sam. 6.
The Philistines when they sent God's Ark from them, Luke 19.
sent it with a gift. Zacheus of Jericho, did offer fourefold restitution, if
he had iniuried any man. The Churchemen desire not any overplus, and usury of
them, which either have or do poll the livings of the Church: only they
desire restitution of the principal, that is, of their own. To conclude, if
Churche-pollers have any spark of Gods fear and religion in the^, Ier. 13.
if they be not as the black moore, which cannot change his skin, or as the
Leopard, which cannot change his spots, if they honor our gracious Prince, if
they love this noble Church and kingdom, if they have English men's hearts, if
they believe yt there is a heaven for Gods servants, and a hell for
Churchrobbers, the^ let them not use Gods Church, Plin lib. 1^ chap. 62.
as ye young vipers do their damme, that is, break the body of her: but let
them change their monstrous course, and if it please them not to be good to the
churchmen, let them be good to themselves, and remember that the wyld ass,
Iere. 2.
though she snuff up ye wind at her pleasure, is found in her month: and if
it like them not to favor themselves, Tertul. ad Scap.
let them be good (I will not say to Carthage, as Tertullian said to the
president of Carthage in another case) but to ye Church of God, Ephe. 53
which is Christ's both body and spouse, between which church, and his majesty,
because, there is a very sure and inseparable knot, it is most certain, that
the injury done to the Church, reaches to Jesus Christ ye head and
bridegroom of the Church, before whose judgment seat we must all appear,
and receive according to that we have done in this body, whether good or evil.
2. Cor. chap. 5.

A Table of such points as are contained in this Treatise.
1 What the visible Church is, and why it is called universal. 2 Without the
Church there is no salvation. 3 The preaching of Gods word, and the sincere
administration of the Sacraments, are the essential marks of Christ's
Church. 4 Godly and learned ministers must be freely and bountifully provided
for. 5 We may not forsake Gods Church, though there be evil men or blemishes
in it. 6 There is but one only true Church. 7 The estate of the Church in the
time of grace, is much better then the estate of the Church, either before or
under the law. 8 They are not always the Church, which vaunt themselves to
be the church. 9 The visible Church consists of good and bad. 10 The
particular Churches are mixte of the elect and reprobate, but they are not
called Gods Churches, but for the electes sake. 11 The external estate of Gods
church, is subject to many chaunges in the world, therefore Gods Church is not
alike visible at all times. 12 The visible church must not be tied to any place
or persons. 13 Gods church cannot be quenched. 14 God has his Church always
in earth. 15 The reprobates are not of the Church. 16 Succession of Bishops is
not an infallible argument of Gods church. 17 Antiquity is no sure argument of
Gods Church. 18 Every unity is not a sure argument of the true church,
neither is every discord a sure argument of a false church. 19 Multitude is
not an infallible argument of Gods church. 20 The church is not to be measured
by the external show. 21 None, which are or have been alients from the Church
of God, are to be admitted rashly into it. 22 Gods Church may err. 23 The
Church is not perfect in this world. 24 The Church of Rome has and may err.
25 They may not be accounted Schismatikes, which forsake the Church of Rome.
26 The Church must be built upon the word of God. 27 The Church is known by
the word of God. 28 Jesus Christ alone, is the foundation of his Church. 29
What the catholic Church is. 30 The catholic Church is not visible.
A Godly Treatise of the Church.
1 What the visible Church is, and why it is called universal?
THe visible church is ye company of those which make profession to serve ye
true God in Christ. This visible Church is called universal, because it is tied
not to any certain place, persons, or time, but is dispersed through ye whole
world, and shall so continue until the end of the world.

2 Without the Church there is no salvation, that is to say, unless we be of
the assembly of Gods children we cannot be saved.
BEhold, darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people, but
the Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee. Isa.
cha. 60. ver. 2. By which words it is manifest, that only the Church is
partaker of the light of Gods spirit, and of the brightness of his favor.

In Mount Sion, and in Jerusalem, (that is to say in the Church) shall be
deliverance. Joel chap. 2. ver. 32. Therefore without the Church there is no
salvation.

The Lord added to the Church from day to day, such as should be saved.
Acts chap. 2. ver. 47. Therefore without the Church, there is no salvation.

Christ and his Church, are most surely linked together, for Christ is the
bridegroom, and the Church is the spouse. Ephe. chap. 5. ver. 25.29.30. How
then can any be with Christ, which is not with his spouse (that is to say) in
Christ's Church? Cyp. lib. 2. Epist. 8.

He cannot have God to be his father, which has not the Church to be is
mother. Cyp. de vnitate Eccle. The Church is called the mother of the faithful,
because she nourishes them always by the word of truth.

Noe, and his family had perished in ye flood, if they had not continued in ye
Arc, Genesis chap. 7. ver. 21.22.23. The bra^ch, which is cut from the vine,
cannot but wither. A ma^s arm, which is cut from his body, is quickly without
life. They which are without Gods Church, are void of Gods spirit, whatsoever
visard of holiness they put on amongst men. Augustine is flat for this.
Epistle 50. and 152 So is Lactantius. lib. 4. chap. 14. and 30.

When any Popish Heretic uses the name of the Church, as an argument to draw
us from the written word, we must aunsweare, that he is not joined to the
Church, which is severed from the Gospel, and that whosoever sets up a
Church without the word, buildes not a Church, but a Hoggescote.

Question.

If there be no salvation without the Church, what shall become of the^, which
have not heard of Christ?

Answer.

They cannot pretend ignorance, for the great book of the heavens, wherein
Gods glory is written in capital letters, is opened wide unto them. Psalm. 19.
verse. 1. I grant that the condemnation of such shall not be so grievous, as
theirs, which have heard the Gospel, and contemned it: notwithstanding they,
which have not heard of Christ, shall not be saved, seeing they have in
themselves sufficient matter of condemnation, I mean, first, original sin,
and then many actual sins, which flow from original sin, as rivers do
from the spring head.

Question.

If there be no salvation without the Church, in what case are they, which are
justly excommunicated, that is to say, are cut off from the assembly of the
faithful?

Answer.

They are in a dangerous case, for if it be a grievous thing to be cast out of
a well ordered common wealth, it is more grievous to be cast out of the
Church, which is Gods common wealth. If David, when he was shut from holy
meetinges, not for any fault of his, but by the tyranny of his enemies,
lamented his own case very bitterly, and preferred the estate of the sparrowe,
and swallowe before his own: how would David have been grieved, if he had bin
justly barred from the Lords tabernacles? Psalm. 84. ver. 1.2.3. Besides, they
which are justly excommunicated, are delivered to Satan, yt is to say, are
alie^ts from Christ's kingdom, and are under the power and authority of Satan:
so were the incestuous Corinthia^, 1. Cor. 5. Theod. lib. 5. cap. 18.
and Theodosius the Emperor, until they were reconciled to Gods Church. The
captivity of the Israelites was great under Pharao in Egypt, and under
Nabuchodonozor and Balthazar in Babylon, but the captivity under Satan, goes
beyond it: for whatsoever is bound in earth, is bound in heaven. Mat. cap. 18,
ver. 18. The Popes excommunication against our noble Queen, and her best
subjects has not so much ground in Gods book, to stand upon, as ye Jews
excommunication had, when they cast Christ and his Apostles out of their
Synagogues.

Question.

If the Popes excommunication against our gracious sovereign Q. Elizabeth were
lawful, whether might ye subjects of England deny their obedience to her
Majesty, and depose her from her kingdom?

Answer.

They might not: my reasons are these. Tiberius was a wicked Emperor, yet
Christ and Peter paid him tribute. Math. chap. 17. ver. 24.27. 1. Pet. chap. 2
ver. 13.
Nero, Domitian were persecutours of Gods Church, yet the Apostles, and other
godly men obeyed them. The Emperor Julian was a wicked Apostata, but the
ancient Christians obeyed him. Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 20. Sozom. lib. 5. cap. 4.
Theodosius the Emperor was excommunicated by Ambrose the Bishop of
Mediolanu^, but Ambrose obeyed him, even during the time of his
excommunication. Theodor. lib. 5. cap. 18. If these Emperors were obeyed, shall
not our gracious sovereign, (though she were justly excommunicated) be
duetifully obeyed of her subjects? 2. Thessal. 3. ver. 15.
Are we commanded to account another, which is justly excommunicated, not as
an enemy, but as a brother, and shall we not perform the like to our noble
prince, if she were justly excommunicated? and sure I am, that those men are
very far from performing this duty to her Majesty, which deny their
lawful obedience unto her. Besides, what warrant had Pius the first, and
Gregory the 13, to discharge the subjects of England of their allegiance: if
it be said that Saint Peter's keys are warrant enough, Platina in Greg. 7.
and that Gregory the 7. had no better when he dealt against Henry the
Emperor, nor Gregory the second, Innocentius the fourth, Paschalis the 2.
when they dealt against the Emperors, Leo, Fridericus, and Henry the 4. nor
Pope Zachary, and Martyn the 4. when they dealt against Childericke the king
of France, and Peter the king of Arragonia: I aunsweare, that Peter's keys
(though the Pope had good right to the^) serve not to give entrance into, or to
shut out of earthly kingdoms, for they are ye keys of the kingdom of heaven.
Math. chap. 16. ver. 19. And who knows not, that the kingdom of heaven (that
is to say, eternal life) is a thing far different from the kingdom of the
world? Lastly, excommunication, (which is a notable and sovereign medicine in
Gods church) is the punishment of the conscience, not of goods, nor of the body
(otherwise then by some shame and reproach, which waits upon our separation
from the Church of God, and so are S. Paul's words of the destruction of the
flesh, 1. Cor. 5.
to be understood:) therefore they which have purposed since the Popes
excommunication against her majesty, either to hurt her royal person, or to
depose her from her kingdom, as they have passed the listes and bounds of al
excommunication, so their sin is very gross, and example very dangerous.

3 The preaching of Gods word, and the sincere administration of the
Sacraments, are the essential marks of Christ's Church: and where these
marks are, there undoubtedly the true church is, though there be otherwise in
that Church some blemishes.
IF the Church be the assembly of the faithful, Romans 10.
and faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, it is a clear
case that the preaching of the word belongs to the essence of the visible
Church.

We are taught in Gods book, Mat. 28.
that the Sacraments instituted of Christ, are the seals of Gods word,
therefore the Sacraments, pertayne to the essence of the visible Church.

The Churches of Israel and Judah, were therefore Gods Churches, because they
had Gods law preached and circumcision and the passover (which were their
Sacraments) administered amongst the^. Josias, 2. Chron. 34. and 35. chap.
yt he might pla^t Gods Church aright, caused the book of the law to be
published, and a passover to be proclaimed. Nehem. 8. Ezra. 7.
Ezra after his return from Babylon, expounds Gods law to the Israelites,
and restores the true use of the Passover.

S. Luke setting down the estate of the Primitive Church in orient colors,
Acts 2.
says, that they continued in the Apostles doctrine (which is the life of the
Church) and fellowship, (that is in performing of Christian duties one to
another,) and breaking of bread (yt is in the administration of the holy
supper,) and prayers (yt is public prayers, in which consists the profession
of our religion). This excellent Church had the Apostles doctrine, and the
holy communion, therefore it was the church of Christ. If any say that the
Sacrament of baptism is not here mentioned. I aunsweare in a word, that Saint
Luke needed not to mention Baptism, seeing he speaks of such as were
already baptized.

1. Cor. 1. 2. Cor. 1. Galat. 1.
The Churches of Corinth and Galatia, had great blemishes in them: yet because
they had Gods truth and sacraments among them, they are accounted by S. Paul
the Churches of God.

If the sound preaching of the word, and the administration of the sacraments,
are the essential marks of Gods church, then learned ministers are necessary:
for they blow the Lords silver trumpets, Number. 10.
and put their hands to the framing of the silver vessels of the temple. If
Godly and learned ministers are necessary and singular ornaments in the
Church of God, then schools of learning, and Universities (wherein students
are made fit to serve Gods Church) are especially to be regarded. 1. Sam. 19.
2. King, 2. and 22. chap.
Such schools of learning were at Nayoth in Samuels time, at Jericho, and
Bethel in Elizeus time, at Jerusalem in Josias time, Calvin in 1. Cor. chap.
14. verse 32.
at Corinth in S. Paul's time, and such are now with us in Cambridge and
Oxeforde. If these be vpholden, religion flourishes, and consequently Gods
blessings increase in ye land. If these go to wrack, farewell religion, and
the good estate of the common wealth. But Universities and schools of
learning, must needs decay, when the students are not provided for, and
employed accordingly: and preferred and employed they cannot be, if either the
Churches maintenance be pulled away, or Church livings be bought and sold for
money or pensions.

4 Godly and learned Ministers must be freely and bountifully provided for.
BEware, that thou forsake not the Leuite, as long as thou live upon the
earth. Deuteronomy. chap. 12. ver. 19. Almighty God commanded the Israelites to have
especial care of the Leuite, therefore they might not use him like a drudge,
or send him a begging. If the Leuite must be excellently used, greater regard
must be had of the minister of the Gospel, whose calling (because it is
greater then John the Baptistes, Mat. chap. 11. ver. 11.
is far above the Levites.

Gods Church is the pillar and ground of truth. 1. Tim. cap. 3. ver. 15.
because by ye ministry of the word Gods truth is preserved in the Church. If
the ministerye of the word preserues this precious jewel in the church (as the
priests did the fire upon the altar in the time of the law) the^ they, Leuit.
chap. 6.
which hinder Gods ministry, do rob Gods Church of inestimable treasure:
and hinder ye ministry do they, which discourage the learned ministers by
powling the^ of the churches provision. But if David sending his servant to
comfort ye king of Amon after his fathers death, 2. Sam. 10.
took in great dudgen the shauing of his servants beardes, and cutting of
their garments, will almighty God take it in good part, that his servants whom
he has furnished with excellent gifts, for the comfort of his church, are
polled and shaue^ of their maintenance, and stripped as it were into their
shirts, and handled as dishcloutes.

Who goes a warfare any time at his own cost? Who pla^teth a vineyard, and
eats not of the fruit thereof? Or who feeds a flock, and eats not of the
milk of the flock? 5. Cor. chap. 9. ver. 7. If they whom S. Paul mentions in
this verse, are provided for either of the common charge, as the soldier, or
by the fruit of the vine, as the husbandman, or by the milk of the flock, as
the shepherd: It is most equal that learned ministers should have large
allowance of the churches charge: for their warfare, vineplanting and
sheepfeeding does as far pass the others, as the precious diamond does the
peeble stone.

We beseech you brethren, yt you know (yt is have regard of) the^, which labor
among you, yt ye have them in singular love for their works sake, etc. 1. The.
cap. 5 ver. 12 13. If learned ministers must be especially favored, they may
not be kept from their own: if they must be singulerly loved for their works
sake, they may not be trode^ upon, as ye mire in ye streets, nor spoiled by
graceles me^ of ye churches maintenance. But churchpollers love churchme^, as
Philippides did his father, when he cudgeled him, Aug. epist. 168.
and as a rufler in Augustines time did his mother, whom he used in like sort
most unnaturally.

Balthazar the king of Babylon in the midst of a great feast, called for the
golden vessels which were brought from the temple of Jerusalem: they were
brought unto him by his servants. The king and his princes, his wives and his
concubines did drink wine in them: but mark what follows in the Text. At the
same hour appeared fingers of a man's hand, which wrote over against the
candlestick, upon the plaster of the wall of the kings palace, and the king
saw the palm of the hand, that wrote. Then the kings countenance was
changed, and his thoughts troubled him, so yt the joints of his loins were
loosed, and his knees smote one against the other etc. Dan. cha. 5. ver.
2.3.4.5.6. If Gods judgments appeared notably and strangely against a mighty
monarche, for drinking in a bravery in the holy vessels of the temple of
Jerusalem, will he spare mean men in comparison of him, which by spoiling the
Church rob GOD of his glory, Gods ministers of their maintenance, and Gods
people of the food of their souls? If neither the great river Euphrates, nor
the high and thick walls of Babylon, could keep Gods judgments from ye king
of Babylon, shall any either cunning dealing whatsoever, Theod lib. 3. cap. 12.
and 13
or mighty bulwarks be able to deliver Churchrobbers from the vengeance of
almighty God? Julian (the Emperor Iulians uncle) commanded the holy vessels
to be brought into his treasury: Almighty God punished him very strangely for
it, for he cast those excrementes upward, which should have passed downward,
and so the beast died. If God spare not the Cedars of Libanus, he will not
spare the Fur trees: if the Oaks of Basan go to wrack, what shall the box
tree look for? 2. Match. cap. 8. ver. 33. T. Liuius li. 29
Callisthenes set fire upon the holy gates, but he was burnt himself for it.
Pyrrhus robbed the temple of Proserpina, but the ships which carried that
treasure, did miscarrie, and Pyrrhus himself never thriued after. Heliodorus.


Do ye not know that they, which minister about the holy things, eat of
the things of ye temple, and they which wait at the altar, are pertakers with
the altar? So also has the Lord ordained, yt they which preach the Gospel,
should live of the Gospel. 1. Cor. cap. 9. ver. 13.14. As if S. Paul should
say, the Priests in the time of the law were bountifully provided for,
therefore Gods ministers must be excellently dealt with. The Apostle says,
that the Lord has ordained, that they, which preach ye Gospel, should live of
the Gospel, therefore they which are not careful for the minister, break the
Lords decree, much more they which rob the Church, and the minister. If any
reply yt S. Paul lived not always of ye Churches charge, 1. Cor. chap. 9 ver.
15.
I grant it to be true, and the reason, why Paul abstayned, was, that he
might not be inferior to the false Apostles of Corinth, which taught freely,
yt they might corrupt the^ of Corinth more easily.

Be not deceived, God is not mocked: Galat. chap. 6. ver. 7. Many amongst the
Galathians, defrauded the ministers of their maintenance: least they should
want some cloak for their absurd dealinges, they gave out, that they must
have care of their families, and that the ministers must preach the Gospel of
free-cost: but the Apostle aunsweares them roundly in this sort, be not
deceived, etc, As if he should say, you that deal hardly with your ministers,
deceive your selves, and though you go beyond them, yet almighty God sees you
well enough, and cannot be mocked. It is Satan's drift to take from men, if he
can, the truth of Gods religion, and to that end he opens his whole pack of
subtilties. When the Devil cannot compass yt, he labors mightily to hinder
Gods religion by alluring wicked men to pull away ye maintenance of the
ministers. For what learned minister can attend upon his study, if he want
books, or teach Gods people, if he want necessaries. Aristotle's drudge (I
confess) was enjoined to work, and did abide chasticement, Atist. in Occon.
but he had meat (yt is to say all things necessary) allowed him.

The Elders that rule well are worthy of double honor, specially, they which
labor in the word and doctrine. For the Scripture says, thou shall not
mouzell the mouth of the Ox, that treads out the corn: and the labourer is
worthy of his wages, etc. 1. Tim. chap. 5. ver. 17.18. If learned and painful
Preachers are worthy of double honor, it is a foul shame not to provide for
them, and a gross sin either to crop or girdle their maintenance. Saint
Paul uses two reasons to prove, that the ministers must have provision
accordingly, the first is out of the law, Deuteronomy. chap. 25.
and is this, thou shall not mouzel the mouth of the Ox, that treads out the
corn: as if the Apostle should say, the Ox may not be pinched of his
prouender, therefore the learned minister may not be pealted with. The second
reason is out of the Gospel, and is this: the Labourer is worthy of his
wages, Math. 10.
as if he should say, every mean labourer must have his hire, as the Ditcher,
Thresher, 1. Cor. chap. 9. ver. 11.
Dawber, etc. Therefore the learned minister, which sowes spiritual things,
may claim of duty to reap carnal things, and if of duty he may claim
them, then he may not be either shaven or polled of them.

The ministry is the strength of the land, and the life of the land. That
it is the strength of the land it is manifest, for when the ministers by sound
preaching do vanquishe riot, adultery, covetousness, pride, idleness etc.
(Of which sins many diseases, beggary, translating of inheritance from the
right heirs, unnecessary dearth, sedition, rebellion, polling of Churches and
Churchmen, etc. do grow) they may be truly called the strength and defense
of the common wealth. In Elias time the strength of the Israelites army did
consist of Charriots and horsemen. 2. King. 2.
Elizeus seeing Elias taken up by a whirlewinde into heaven, used these words:
My Father, My Father, the Chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof: whereby
Elizeus meant, that Elias by his ministry had been both Chariot and horsemen
for the defense of the Israelites. That the ministry is the life of the
land, it is clear by this: Solomon says, that where prophecy (that is to
say, the expounding of Gods world) is not, the people perish, Prou. 29.
therefore where Gods religion is taught the people are alive. Amos 8.
Amos teaches us, that no famine is so grievous, as ye famine of Gods word,
therefore where Gods truth is delivered, the people are free from ye sorest
famine. S. Paul charging them of Thessalonica, not to quench the spirit (that
is the gifts of the spirit) commands them not to despise prophesying (that is
to say, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
the expounding of the word) therefore it is a good consequent yt the ministry
of the word is the life of a Christian kingdom. If the ministry be the life
of a Christian kingdom, what deserve they to be thought of, which thrust it as
low as may be, and make it a piece of their study not to benefit the Church,
which is every man's duty, but to spoil the Church of that maintenance which
belongs of duty to learned Teachers? If the good estate of the ministry be
the strength of ye land, what do they deserve, which will very hardly allow it
any good place in the land? If it be the life of the Land, what friends are
they to the Land, which for vile bribes, and cursed pensions prefer corrupt
men which for want of sound learning, are unfit to teach, and for want of
Godly wisdom are unfit to govern. It may be truly said, that since the
raygne of our gracious Sovereign Queen Elizabeth, many Students in
Cambridge and Oxeforde are come to excellent proof. If their learning,
soundness in Religion, and other virtues be regarded, they are singular: if
their wits, they are I am sure equal at the least to other men's, what service
they are able to do, would easily appear to Gods glory, and ye great good of
the land, if they were employed according to their gifts: I mean not silver
and golden gifts which are the best Logic, and surest Rhetoric to persuade
corrupt men, but Gods notable graces and gifts for the which Pharao preferred
Joseph in Egypt, Genesis 41. Dan. 6.
and Darius preferred Daniell in Babylon. Is it not a strange case, that in
Trinitye, and Saint John's Colleges in Cambridge (which are two of the
greatest Colleges we have) not one fellowshippe falls void sometimes in a
year, and more? Does not this speak, yea rather cry very loud, that there
is little hope of places for younger students, and that fit men are not
provided for?

Possid. in vita August. 10. cap. 24.
A noble man of Hippo in Afrike, which lived at Carthage, gave a possession of
his own accord to the Church of Hippo, where Augustine was Bishop: he sealed
his deed of gift, and sent it to Augustine for the Churches behoof, only he
reserved for his life time, the use and profit (but not the propriety) of that
possession. Augustine received the writings, and commended the giver. After a
few years this noble man desired his deed of gift again, but sent five
pounds for the poores relief. Augustine seeing the noble man's inconstancy,
was mightily grieved, yet without delay delivered the writings, but refused
his alms, and by letters took him up roundly for his hypocrisy, and exhorted
him to earnest repentance etc. If Augustine dealt sharply with the noble man of
Hippo, for calling back his own deed of gift, how would he shake those
cormorants (if he were now alive) which spoil the Church of other men's
deeds of gift? If Augustine refused 5. pounds sent by this noble man of Hippo
for the benefit of the poor, what account would he make of their alms, which
poll the Church and Churchmen, would he put it into the poor man's box? It is
certain he would not, least he should be guilty of giving countenance to
graceless men, and of giving Gods religion a grievous blow.

Gods enemies, Aug. lib. 8. Confess. cap. 5. Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 12.
when they would overthrow religion, gave straight charge that the Christians
should not be trained up in learning, so did Julian the Emperor. If I should
say, that they which either poll the Church livings, or for money prefer
corrupt men, are of Iulians stamp, it might seem a hard speech, but it is
neither so hard, nor strange as their dealinges are. For is it possible for
schools to thrive, if the universities decay? And can the Universities
prosper, when the learned students are not furnished with maintenance? The
Universities of Cambridge and Oxeford are the fry of the ministry, and the
seed of religion in England. If the good students, which are worthy of
preferment, be not provided for, what place shall the younger students have?
How shall they grow in study, when for want of convenient encouragement in the
University they are feign to leave their studies before they be ripe, and so
become pettye schoolemaisters, or serving men, or untimely ministers: yea, to
speak more plainly, who sees not (if he be not stark blind) yt the want of
encouragement for ours, and ye bountiful provision by the Popish sort for
theirs, is as a great bell to call many to their seminaryes at Rome in Italy, and
at Rhemes in France. And who is there (if he set not Gods fear before his
eyes) yt is not easily moved to prefer wealth before want, and good
maintenance before beggary. I confess their fault is great, Exodus 16.
which prefer the fleshpots of Egypt, before ye Lords Manna in the
wilderness, Genesis 25.
as the Israelites did, and which sell their birthright for pottage as Esau
did: But woe to those Cormora^ts whose Churchpolling and brybery, is the great
hurt of the Church, and the spoil and undoing of many a goodly wit. But that
I may somewhat comfort such students, as are almost discouraged, may it please
them to call to mind two Christian lessons, first that David and Moses (which
were excellent personages) chose the one, Psalm. 84.
rather to be a door keeper in the Lords house, then to dwell in the
tabernacles of wickedness: the other rather to suffer adversity with the
people of God, Heb. 11.
then to be called the son of the king of Egypts daughter. Secondly, that our
life is more worth then meat, and our bodies then raiment, Math. 6.
that the fowls of the air are fed, and that Lilies of the field are by
almighty God more beautifully clothed, then Solomon in all his glory was:
therefore he will have great care of godly students in such sort and time, as
shall make most for his great glory, and their singular comfort. Bonus
Dominus qui non tribuit saepe quod volumus, vt quod malimus attribuat. Aug.
Epist. 54.

5 We may not forsake Gods Church, though there be evil men or blemishes in
it.
THE Apostle gives straight charge not to forsake the fellowship that we have
amongst our selves, Heb. chap. 10. ver. 25.
as the manner of some is. Because forsaking of the Church was a disease in
that time, the Apostle gives them a medicine for it.

Esaias 1.
The Church of Jerusalem was greatly out of temper in Esaias time, so it was in
our Savior Christ's, religion was fowlly stained, and there was great
corruption in their manners: Notwithstanding, the Prophets did neither erecte
for themselves either new churches, or new altars, but offered up prayers in
the temple of Jerusalem, which they would not have done, if it had been lawful
to have departed from that Church.

1. Cor. 3.5.6. and 12.15. cap.
In the Church of Corinth contention was ryfe, the incestuous man was tolerated,
the article of the resurrection was shrewdly shaken, and Gods gifts were made
to serve the ambition of men, not the profie of the Church: yet Paul wills
not any man to depart from that Church.

Almighty GOD resembles his Church to a vine, to a Corn field, and to a flock
of sheep: though the vine be spoiled, it is the Lords vine: though the field
have weeds in it, it is ye Lords field: though the flock run astray, it is
the flock of Christ, and therefore not to be forsaken for the abuses of it:
we must rather pray for skillful ministers to rear up, and to dress his vine:
to labor and to weed his ground, to gather in, and to feed his flock.

Augustine reproves Emeritus ye Donatist, because he departed from the
Church. Epist. 64.

We may not detest the oil presses, Aug. epi. 137.
because of the foame of the oil, nor forsake Gods Church, Cyp. lib. 3. Epist.
3.
because we see tares in the Church: it is our parts to be careful, that we
may be wheat.

We may not leave the Lords floor because of the chafe, Aug. Epist. 46.
nor break ye Lords nets because of the evil fishes, nor forsake the Lords
flock because of the goats, nor depart from the Lords house because of the
vessels of dishonor, nor for the iniquity of the badde, leave the unity of the
good.

They which made the Idol, (he means the golden Calfe) were slain with the
sword which is an usual death, Aug. epist. 162 and Epist. 172. Exodus 32. Number.
16.
but they which would make a schism died strangely, for ye chiefest of the^
were devoured by the opening of ye earth, and the multitude which consented to
them, was consumed with fire.

We may suspect our selves to be infected with great pride, Aug. epist. 209
when for ye sons of iniquity we forsake the pastures of unity. Christ has
commanded us to assemble together, and has reserved to himself, the
separation of the good and bad. For it belongs to him to separate, which is
free from error.

The Nouatians, Donatists, Anabaptists, etc. do leave the Church of God,
because all staynes and blemishes are not removed out of the Church.

As we may not forsake Gods church, though there be evil men or blemishes in
it, so is it every man's duty (within ye compass of his calling) to reform
evil men, and to remove blemishes.

6 There is but one only true Church.
THe Church is Christ's body and spouse, Ephe chap. 5. Cant. 6.
Christ's body and spouse is but one. My dove is one.

S. Paul says of the whole Church, Galat. 3.
yt we are all one in Christ Jesus. For amongst the faithful, there is one
body and one spirit, one hope, one Lord, Ephe. 4.
one faith, one Baptism, one God. Therefore all the particular Churches, which
consent in true religion, must be accounted but one only Church.

There are many beams in the sun, and yet the light thereof is but one: there
are many braunces in a tree, and yet but one body of the same tree: many rivers
do pass from one fountain, and yet the fountain is but one: so is there no
more but one only Church (says Cypr.) dispersed far and wide, De simpl.
prelat.
as appears by the particular Churches.

The unity of the Church consists not in a bodily dwelling together, (for
that cannot be) nor in the same outward Ceremonies (wherein the particular
Churches do often differ, and may use their liberty to edification) but in an
assured consent of doctrine and faith.

1. Cor. 10.
The Israelites Church and ours is one and the self same Church (touching the
substance) for their Church and ours have the same sacraments, Aug. Epi. 157
the same faith, and the same salvation in and by one comfortable Messiah. The
difference of times is no reason, why the Churches before, under, and after the
law, should not be one Church. Math. 20.
The vineyard in the gospel was one, and the self same vineyard, albeit at
diverse times, diverse were admitted into it.

I confess the Jews and Gentiles were two before they were united in Christ,
but after they were united, they are compared to one body whereof Christ is the
head, Ephesians. 2.
and to one buylding whereof Christ is the foundation and corner stone, John 10.
and to one flock whereof the same Jesus Christ is the shepherd.

7 The estate of the Church in the time of grace is much better then the
estate of the Church either before or under the law.
THe earth shall be full of ye knowledge of the Lord, as the waters that cover
the Sea. Isai. chap. 11. verse 9. The prophet Esaias speaks of churches, which
should be assembled in the time of the gospel. It is true, that the Israelites
were not destitute of knowledge: But we have greater measure of knowledge,
the^ they had: for of Christ's fullness we have received even grace for grace.
Ioh. cha. 1. ver. 16.

And it shall be in the last days, says God, I will power out of my spirit
upon all flesh, and your sons, and your daughters shall prophecy etc. Acts
chap. 2. ver. 17. Gods spirit is more plentiful in Christ's time then before.
For it is manifest by this place, that as a greater number are partakers of
Gods singular graces in Christ's time, then either before or under the law: so
they have larger allowance, and greater measure of Gods inestimable treasures.

No man has seen God at any time, the only begotten son, which is in the
bosom of the father, he has declared him. John chap. 1. verse 18. The
Evangelist John says that Christ was in Gods bosom, that is to say, of Gods
secret counsel, that we may be well assured, that almighty God does in the
Gospel open as it were his heart unto us.

Christ was promised to the Israelites, but is given to us. The Israelites saw
Christ a far off, we have him amongst us. The estate of the Israelites may
be compared to the break of the day, the estate of the Christians to the
broad day light: their estate to the sowing of the corn, ours to the harvest
and reaping of the corn. I confess that the Israelites had the same light
that we have, and the same corn that we have, though not in like measure. For
touching the substance of doctrine, the Gospel has added nothing to ye law,
because nothing is set down in the Gospel, which is not contained in the law.

8 They are not always the Church which vaunte themselves to be the Church.
THE Assyrian Rabsaketh, 2. King. cha. 18.
laying siege to Jerusalem, uses the name of the Lord against the people of
the Lord.

Zedechias ye false Prophet in his speech to Micheas, boasted of Gods spirit,
1. King. 22.
but he was void of Gods spirit.

The Jews had often in their mouths ye temple of the Lord, the temple of ye
Lord, Ier. 7.
but they polluted the temple of the Lord. John 8.
They gave out many times, yt Abraham was their father, but they did not the
works of Abraham. Romans 9.
Al they are not Israel, which are of Israel.

Marcion the Heretic rejected the Gospel, Irenaeus lib. 3 cap. 11.
and yet he bragged that he had the Gospel.

The Donatists did carry the sign of Christ against Christ, Aug. Epist. 61
and did brag of the Gospel against the Gospel.

The old Emperors of Rome after their co^quests of cities, had ye mappes of
those cities carried about in their triu^phs: the Papists after the overthrow of
Christ's Church, use in their triumph, the name of the Church, the Church: but
they have as much right to the name of the Church, Dan. 5.
as the Babylonians had to the holy vessels of the temple of Jerusalem, after
the overthrow of the City Jerusalem.

9 The visible Church consists of good and badde.
BEfore Christ shall be gathered all nations, Mat. 25. ver. 32.
and he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd separateth the
sheep from the goats etc. If the sheep shall not be severed from ye goats
before the day of judgment, it is manifest that the badde and good are mingled
together in the visible Church until that time.

The visible Church is compared to a net, Mat. 13. Mat. 3. 2. Tim. 2.
wherein there are good and badde fishes, to a floare wherein there is wheat
and chafe, to a field wherein there is both wheat and tares, to a great
house wherein there are vessels of gold and silver, and vessels of wood and
earth, Mat. 25.
and to ten virgins whereof five were wise, and five foolish.

In external assemblies, the badde are mingled with the good, so it was in
Salomons Temple, and at the marriage feast. Mat. 22. Genesis 4. Genesis 9. Genesis 16.
Mat. 26. 2. Pet. 2
Cain sacrificed as well as Abel. Cham was in the Arc as well as Iaphet. Agar
was in Abraham's house as well as Sara. Judas was in Christ's company as well as
Peter. And evil Angels were in heaven till they were cast our from thence.

When we see any which seemed to us goodly members sometimes of the Church, to
become enemies to Gods religion, and the very murrayne of the Church, we may
not be discouraged. 2. Tim. 2.
For we must remember that the Church is a great house, and that if they had
been of us, they should have continued with us, 1. John 2.
and that many wolves are within the visible Church, and lastly that men's
sins (as fire covered with Ashes) are hidden for a time: but afterward
appear in their colors. So did the sins of Cain, Judas, Cham, Saul, Demas,
and many others.

Question.

Why will almighty GOD have his Church consist of good and badde?

Answer.

Aug. Epist. 205.
That the good may be exercised and tried as gold in the furnace, and that Gods
love may appear more notably which for a very little wheat, spares for a time
great store of cares. The Sodomites were spared because of Lot, Genesis 19. Acts
27.
the Egyptians because of Joseph, they which were in the ship because of Paul.

Objection.

The Church is the Communion of Saints, therefore it has not both good and
badde in it.

Answer.

The meaning is not, that all which are assembled in the Church, are truly
sanctified: but rather, that there is no true communion, no true holiness, but
in the Church calling it (as we commonly use) by the best part.

10 The particular Churches are mixed of the elect and reprobate, but they are
not called Gods Churches but for the elects sake.
The visible Church (for the electes sake) is called the house of God, 1. Tim.
chap. 3. ver. 15.1.
the pillar and ground of truth, this cannot be given properly to reprobates
and hipocrits. For to be an hipocrite, and pillar of truth cannot stand
together.

The Church is the spouse of Christ only for the elects sake. Ephe. chap. 5
ver. 30.
For we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. By which
words of the Apostle, as the straight and near knot between Christ the
bridegroom, and the Church his spouse does notably appear: so it were strange
dealing to shut the reprobates and hipocrites within yt compass. I confess,
yt Christ is said to be the propitiation for the sins of the whole world, 1.
John 2.
but he is so called, because of the wheat, (that is, Aug. Epist. 4 8
Gods elect) which is dispersed throughout the whole world.

A heap of wheat, though it have chafe amongst it, is not called a heap of
chafe, but a heap of Corn, because it is a heap, by reason of the Corn. A
tun of wine, though it have lees in it, is called not a tun of lees, but a
tun of wine, because it is a tun by reason of the wine. No man did ever
call that the field, Mat. 13.
(wherein the tares appeared with the wheat) a field of tares, but a field of
wheat, because it was sown with wheat. In like sort, the visible Church,
though it consist of good and badde, is and must be called Gods Church because
of the elect.

When we say, that the vine yields wine for the use of man, we mean not the
dead, and withered, but the fruitful branches of the vine. In like case
whatsoever is spoken of the church is so to be referred to the visible Church,
that it belonges to the elect only, and not to the reprobates and Hypocrites.

11 The external estate of Gods Church is subject to many chaunges in the
world, therefore Gods Church is not alike visible at all times.
Psalm. 80.
GOds Church is sometimes compared to a flourishing vine, which filled the
land, and whose boughs were like the goodly cedars, and sometimes to a vine
destroyed by the wild bore, Aug. Epist. 4^.
and eaten up by the wild beasts of the field. It is compared to the moon
which appears not always alike unto us, and yet neither the moon is
destitute of light from the sunn nor the Church of the light of gods spirit
from the son of righteousness Christ Jesus.

In Enos time the face of the Church was beautiful, Genesis 4. Genesis 7.
but afterward it was shut in Noes family as in an Arc.

In the kingdom of David religion flourished, 2. Sam. 6.
the Church was very glorious, but after his time there was a great Eclipse,
and Gods Church was under a black cloud.

In the time of the captivity in Babylon, Read Dan. Nehem. Ezra.
the estate of Gods Church was very miserable, but after the captivity was
ended, and the Jews returned to Jerusalem under Zorobabel, the City was buylt,
the Temple was repaired, the true worship was restored, and the Church of GOD
was very fair in the eyes of the Israelites.

In what case was Gods Church, when the horn (that is the Emperors of Rome)
made battle against the Saints, Dan. chap. 7. ver. 21.
and prevailed against them?

In ye time of the Pharisees, Sadduces, etc. Gods church was in a strange
pickle, but Christ at his coming raised it (as it were) from death, and put
life into it, and made it very beautiful. Since yt time, popish darkness, more
then that of Egypt, covered the face of the earth. But in many kingdoms and
dominions (thanks be to God) Moses rod has eaten up ye rods of ye Egyptian
sorcerers, the Lord's Ark has cast the Philistines Dagon to the ground, and
the sound preaching of ye Gospel has broke the neck of Popery.

Because Gods Church is not always so visible, it is well compared to a bunch
of grapes, hanging under a few vine leaves after ye grape gathering: to an
olive remaining under ye leaves after the olive tree is shaken: to an ear of
Corn standing after harvest: and to the sun under a black cloud.

Esaias chap. 49. ver. 21.
Gods Church is called desolate and barre^, not because it is forsaken of
almighty GOD, but for that it appears not always in the world, and yet Gods
church both has, and shall be always visible, as it consists of true visible
members, for it is not an imaginary thing.

Objection.

My spirit, which is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth,
Esaias chap. 59. verse. 21.
shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out
of the mouth of the seed of thy seed, says the Lord, from hence forth even
for ever. Therefore Gods Church shall be always apparently visible in the world.

Answer.

The argument folowes not, and is like unto this. The scepter shall not depart
from Judah, Genesis chap. 49. verse. 10.
until Silo (that is the Messiah) come, therefore there was no interruption of
that visible Scepter. This is a weak argument, and yet it is as strong as the
other: My reasons are these. The Scepter of Judah was not visible and
conspicuous, when the Israelites were in captivity seventy years at Babylon.
After their return from yt captivity, the Asmonits (which were not of the
tribe of Judah) translated the kingly authority to themselves. Where was all
this while the visible succession of the scepter in the tribe of Judah? We must
aunsweare that the relics of the Scepter of Judah was in the stock of Isay,
Esaias chap. 11. verse. 1.
though it seemed for a time to be altogether withered.

In like sort, it may be truly said, that, although the face of Gods Church
has been obscured, and the visible succession interrupted, that Esayes
Prophecy stands sure and true. For a thing may not be said therefore not to be
at all, because it is not after this, or that sort.

Question.

Where was the Protestants Church two hundred years ago?

Answer.

It was hidden in the Papacy, as wheat under a great deal of chafe. For of
that little seed is grown up a goodly harvest, and of a few sparks a
comfortable fire, thanks be to God, has appeared. It was in the hands of
wicked husband men, which killed the Lords servants, and cast the son and
heir out of the vineyarde, and did their best to kill him. Besides, who knows
not, that there should be a departing (from the faith) and that Antichrist
should sit as God in the temple of GOD, and deceive all the world. 2 Thessalonians.
2.
(This Antichrist we take to be the Bishop of Rome, not meaning any one
singular man, but the succession of Bishops there, since their Apostasy from
Gods religion: and this interpretation is substantially proved by some
excellent men of our side) during all this time of darkness and tyranny,
could Gods church appear beautifully in the world? Was it not with the woman
in the wilderness, Apoc. 12. Mat. 2. 1. King. 19.
and with Christ and his parents in Egypt? Elias did think that himself
remained alone of all Gods children in the time of Achab and Iezabel, but there
were seven thousand besides, which bowed not their knees to Baal. If Elias
which was a holy prophet was far short and wide in this reckoning and
account of Gods servants, is it not both possible and likely, that the enemies
of our Church are greatly ouerseen in the numbering of our Churches?

12 The visible Church must not be tied to any place or persons.
1. Sam. 4.
ALmighty God was served in Silo until ye death of Heli: but when Gods religion
was defiled by the wickedness of the priests and unthankfulness of the people
Silo was destroyed. Iere. 7.


The children of Israel (says Hoseas) shall sit many days without a king,
Hos. 3. ver. 4.
and without a Prince, and without an offering, and without an altar, and
without an Ephod: That is to say, they shall have neither king to govern them,
nor priest to teach the^ Gods religion. If the Church were tied either to
place or persons, no such thing had fallen out amongst them.

Bethel was Gods house, but after that it was defiled with idolatry and
superstition, it was called Bethauen, that is, the house of iniquity.

Jerusalem was a famous Church, and enriched with heaps of Gods benefits, it
was Gods sanctuary, and the seat of ye kingdom and priesthood which were most
precious jewels, it was the fountain of Gods religion, and as it were the
star of the world. The Lord had so great delight in Jerusalem, that he did as
it were bind himself to it: Psalm. 132. ver. 14.
this is my rest (says the Lord) for ever, here will I dwell, for I have a
delight therein. But because they of Jerusalem dishonored God, trod his
religion under their feet, lived mo^strously, and went about to quench the
doctrine of ye prophets with ye blood of ye prophets, almighty God did set them
at naught, and gave them over (as a pray) to their enemies. For Jerusalem was
taken and ouerthrown, their stately temple was destroyed according to the
prophesies of Christ and Jeremy, Math. 24. Iere. 26.
by Titus the son of Vespasian: so yt Jerusalem which was sometimes a goodly
Theater of Gods glory, is at this day a notable monument of his judgments.

The Church of Rome was sometimes a famous Church in the West, Romans 1. and 6.
and 16. chap.
and was greatly commended by Saint Paul in the Epistle to the Romans, but
now it is an enimye to the weighty points of religion contained in that
Epistle.

The Church of England is a goodly Church: It has pleased God to power his
blessing upon it with a full horn. The particulers of Gods favor are written
in so great and fair letters, that he that runs may read them. If our
thankfulness to his Majesty appear in our lives, he will multiply his
blessings upon us. If we fail in performing this duty, that is to say, if we
profess religion only for a fashion, and use it (as a cloak) to cover our
Church polling, oppression, and other foul actions, GOD will sweep us with
the besome of destruction. If we think that the viserd of godliness and
religion will serve the turn, and stand as a wall between us and Gods heavy
judgments, we are in a gross error. For if Mount Sion and the temple of
Jerusalem, could not deliver the Israelites from such measure, as Silo had,
the bare name and face of the Gospel and religion will not deliver us from being
measured with the line of Samaria. God be merciful to this Church and land,
and give us grace to be thankful for his mercies, and to be afraid of his
judgments.

The Donatistes in Augustines time, did tie Gods Church to a corner of Affrike.
Ang. Epi. 50. and 161.
The Pharisees did tie Gods religion to Jerusalem, but they were fowlly
deceived. for Gods Church is not tied to any certain place, but rather to Gods
word, and sacraments, and to godly obedience, to his holy Gospel, so yt
wheresoever God is truly served, that people is Judah and Israel, that city is
Jerusalem, that house is Gods house.

13 Gods Church cannot be quenched.
GOds Church is compared to the bushe, which burnt with fire, Exodus 3.
but was not consumed: Genesis 15.
it is compared to a firebrand, shyning in the midst of a smoking furnace.

Gods Church is graven in the palm of the Lords hand, it is as the apple of
his eye, it is Gods inheritance, it is, as arrows in the Lords quiver, it is
a Crown of glory in his hand, Esaias 62.
and a royal Diadem in the hand of almighty God.

Gods Church is like to Camomile, which thriues best when it is trode^ on, and
to the Palm tree which flourishes most when weight is laid upon it. Tertu. ad
Sca.
Christianity grows fairest when it is under the cross.

Acts 8.
The primitive Church was grievously persecuted after the death of S. Stephen,
but it increased the more. For whereas the Church before that time, was shut up
(as it were) within the walls of Jerusalem, after the dispersion of the godly
by reason of that persecution, Samaria and Antiochia became goodly Churches.
Acts 11.
Gods enemies deserve no thanks for this, but almighty God does, which
fetches light out of darkness, and life out of death.

Gods enemies do what they can to cast Gods Church into the bottom of the Sea,
but they labor in vain. No man can stay the flowing of the sea, nor bynd the
wings of the wynd, nor darken the beams of the sun. The grain of mustard
seed will be a tree for the birds to make their nests in, Mat. 13.
and Gods Church will be alive, notwithstanding all the subtlety and violence
of the enemies.

14 God has his Church always in the earth.
Certain Paganes affirmed, Aug. de ciuit. Dei lib. 18. cap. 54.
yt Christian religion, should not continue above three hundred sixty five
years, but they were fowlly deceived. Esaias chap. 8.


The Prophet Esaias lived in a strange time, yet he had disciples, amongst who^
he sealed the law of God.

The Apostle asking, Romans 11.
whether GOD has cast away his people, answers, God forbid.

Except the Lord of hosts had reserved unto us even a small remnant, Esaias 1.
we should have been as Sodom, and should have been like Gomorrha (that is)
utterly destroyed.

Ezra speaks thus of himself, and the Israelites after the return from
Babylon, from the days of our fathers have we been in a great trespass unto
this day, and for our iniquities have we, our kings, (and) our priests been
delivered into the hand of the kings of the lands, unto the sword, into
captivity, into a spoil, and into confusion of face, as (appears) this day:
and now for a little space, grace has been showed from the Lord our God in
causing a remnant to escape, and in giving us a nail in his holy place, that
our God may light our eyes, and give us a little reviving in our servitude.
For, though we were bondmen, yet our God has not forsaken us in our bondage:
but has inclyned mercy unto us in the sight of the kings of Persia, to give
us life, and to erect the house of our GOD, and to redress the desolate places
thereof, and to give us a wall in Judah and in Jerusalem. Ezra chap. 9. ver.
7.8.9. By which words it is evident, that albeit Gods Church lies hid
sometimes as it were under a black cloth, yet it is not clearly put out, but
appears again.

Thus says the Lord, which gives the sun for a light to the day, and the
courses of the Moon, and of the stars for alight to the night, which
breaks the Sea, when the waters thereof roar, his name (is) the Lord of
hosts. If these ordinances depart out of my sight (says the Lord) then shall
the seed of Israel cease from being a nation before me for ever. Thus says
the Lord, if the heavens can be measured, or the foundations of the earth be
searched out beneath, then will I cast off all the seed of Israel, for all that
they have done says the Lord. Iere. chap. 31. ver. 35.36.37. The sum of
these words is this: Almighty God will continue the course of the sun and the
moon, etc. Whilst the world lasts. Therefore he will preserve his Church,
for whose benefit especially, the world was created. And yet we must
remember, that the condition of Gods Church dependes not of the nature of the
world, or course of the heavens. For they shall perish (says David to
Almighty God) but thou shall endure, even they all shall wax old, as does a
garment: as a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed: but
thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail. The children of thy
servants, shall continue, and their seed shall stand fast in thy sight. Psalm.
102. ver. 26.27.28.

Thus says the Lord, as the wine is found in the cluster, and one says,
destroy it not for a blessing (is) in it: so will I do for my servants sakes,
that I may not destroy them whole. But I will bring a seed out of Jacob, and
out of Judah, that shall inherit my mountain, and mine elect shall inherit
it, and my servants shall dwell there. Isa. 65. ver. 8.9. When almightye God
threatens destruction to the people, he respects the body of the people, in
who^ there is no sincerity: but when his majesty restraynes his punishment, he
respects a small number, which is the seed of the Church.

The corruption of the visible Church, is no hinderance, but that almighty God
may preserve the Church of his elect: and Gods promises of the perpetual estate
of the Church, pertayne properly to the Church of the elect.

15 The reprobates are not of the Church.
Ephe. 5.
TO be of the Church is to be united with Christ, the reprobates are not united
with Christ.

The Church is the body of Christ, Christ is the Savior of his body. If the
reprobates were of the Church (that is of Christ's body) they should be saved
as in deed they shall never be.

Christ which is the head of the church, Ephe. 4.
gives spirit and life to his church. But he gives neither spirit nor life
to the reprobates.

It is impossible for one and the self same man to be the member of Christ,
Cont. Cresc. Gram. lib. 2. cap. 21.
and the member of the Devil. God forbid yt these monsters ( Augustine speaks
of wicked men) should be accounted either amongst the members of the only dove
(yt is Gods church) or enter into the enclosed garden.

I confess yt the reprobates are, and may be many times in the Church (that is
in the assemblies of Gods servants) but of ye Church they neither are, nor can
be truly accounted.

16 Succession of Bishops is not an infallible argument of Gods Church.
IF personal succession (not having the succession of doctrine joined to it as
ye fou^datio^ thereof) were an infallible mark of the true Church, then must we
confess, yt Gods grace and spirit are tied to seats and countries, which is
a gross absurdity.

2. These. 2.
Ordinary and visible succession in the Church may be interrupted. For Paul did
foretell that there should be a departing from the faith. Apostasy and
succession, can no more stand together the^ the Arc and Dagon, then Christ and
Antichrist. Besides, the ordinary succession of priests was interrupted in the
Israelites church, and yet God had his Church there, 1. King. 19.
I mean them which retayning Gods truth, did not bow their knees unto Baal.

When Christ came into the world to be our mediator, was Gods Church to be
measured by the visible succession of Bishops?

Heretical Bishops might vaunt of succession in very famous Churches, Paulus
Samosatenus (which was a monstrous Heretic) succeeded Godly Bishops in the
Church of Antioch, and diverse Arians succeeded Athenasius in the Church of
Alexandria.

The succession of Bishops both was, and is, continued in the Greek Church,
and yet the popish sort will not allow the churches of Grecia, to be Christ's
Churches, because they dissent from the Church of Rome.

The ancient writers, Tertullian, Tertul. de praescrip.
Ireneus, (when they would confute Marcion and Vallentinus,) proved that, (not
those Heretics, Iren. li. 3. ca. 2.
but) themselves had ye succession of Gods truth amongst them. When these
godly fathers had made that clear, they set down the succession and row of
Bishops, as badges of their victory: so that the succession of faith, and
religion may be truly accounted as the life and soul, and the succession of
Bishops, as the body. If personal succession be without ye succession of Gods
truth, it wants life, and is a dead and unprofitable carcass. I confess that
the succession of Bishops (as a goodly and beautiful building) is of great
force to allure the^ which are alients from the Church, to look into, and to
behold the inward beauty of the church: but if the precious jewel of Gods word
be wanting, the personal succession is like a costly tomb, which is beautiful
without, but is full of dead men's bones within. Lib. 4. cap. 43. and 45.
Ireneus joins together the succession of persons and doctrine.

If the Papists (which have not succession of Gods truth) brag of succession
of Bishops, we may say to their Bishops as Tertullian said to Marcion the
Heritike, Tertul. lib. 1. cont. Mar.
who are ye, when, and from whence came ye?

The succession of Bishops without succession of Gods truth, is like a pair of
popish beads, which hang by a long, but yet by a sclender thread.

That is the true and lawful succession of Bishops, when as lawful Bishops
succeeding one another, do exercise the work of their ministry.

17 Antiquity is no sure argument of Gods Church.
THe Jews consenting that the Messiah is not yet come, is of greater
continuance then popery is, but continuance of time cannot make that good in
religion, which was bad at the first. Antiquity, if it have not the salt of
Gods word to preserve it, does argue rottenness, and gives an evil sent.

Your iniquities, Esaias chap. 65. ver. 7.
and the iniquities of your fathers (shall be) together says the Lord, which
have burnt incense upon the mountains, and blasphemed me upon ye hills:
therefore will I measure their old work into their bosom. If antiquitye would
have served ye turn of the Israelites, almighty God might have bin challenged
for punishing their ancient idolatry and superstition.

Ye have heard that it was said unto them of old time, thou shall not kill.
For whosoever kills, shall be culpable of judgment. But I say unto you:
whosoever is angrye with his brother unadvisedly, shall be culpable of judgment.
Mat. 5. ver. 21.22. The pharisees cleared him of murder, which had not killed a
man with his hand, because the Pharisees alleged antiquity for their error:
our Savior Christ refutes them by his own authority: But I say unto you, etc.
ver. 22.

There were ill buylders in Paul's time, 1. Cor. 3.
and such abuses crept into the Lords supper in Corinth, 1. Cor. 11.
that ye Apostle was compelled to say (this) is not to eat the Lords supper.

They which reason thus: such a religion is old, therefore it is good, may be
answered: yt this argument is as clear as midnight: the enchantmentes of Simon
Magus, Acts 8. and 19. chap.
the image which came down from Jupiter, the religion of Rome, are of great
antiquity, and yet Gods religion is more ancient then any of these: Tertul.
lib. 1. cont. Mar. ^
for truth is older then heresy.

When we hear any Papist say: I have been brought up in the religion of Rome,
therefore I will continue in it, and will not be wonn from it: we may answer
him, that wise men have their second thoughts, Euripides in Hippol. Cyp. ad
Iubaian, ad Quin fratrem and de lapsis.
and that we may not err always, because sometimes we erred, and that we are
not overcome, but instructed, when better things are offered unto us, and yt he
is not joined to the Church, which is separate from the gospel. Some of the
Popish sort have bin content to say, if the Church of Rome would allow the
religion, we have in England, that they would like of it. Tichonius a Donatist
said of himself, and his fellow Donatists, that, Aug. Epist. 48.
which we will is holy. Tiberius the Emperor, put up a grace in the Senate
house of Rome, Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 2.
that Christ might be a God, because the Senate denied yt grace, it is set
down a little after in that Chapter, unless God please man, he is not allowed
for a God. In like sort, if our religion had the Popes hand and seal unto
it, the Popish sort would allow it: because it has not his holiness warrant,
they refuse it.

Question.

How can it be, that God should suffer his Church to err so many years?

Answerre.

God suffered not his Church to err so long a time, but he suffered wicked me^
eue^ by his just judgment (which believed not the truth, that they might be
saved) to believe lies, and have pleasure in unrighteousness, that they might
be damned. 2. Thessal. 2. ver. 10.11.12.

18 Every unity is not a sure argument of the true Church, neither is every
discord a sure argument of a false Church.
THe Jews, which think, that ye Messiah is not yet come, have had unity many
years: but their consent proves the^ not to be Gods Church.

Acts 19.
Demetrius the silver smith and his company in Ephesus were at great unity for
the upholding of Diana against S. Paul's preaching: but that unity was no
argument, that they were Gods Church.

Apoc. cap. 14. ver. 8.
The Angel says, that Babylon made all nations to drink of the wine of the
wrath of her fornication. Therefore the general consent and unity of al
nations in religion, does not make a true religion.

The Arrians, Nestorians, Eutichians, and the blasphemous Heretics of the
family of love, have, and do consent in their blasphemous opinions, but this
consent of theirs, proves them not to be the true Church of God.

Unity in the essential points of Gods religion is an infallible argument of
the Church of God.

Every discord is not an argument of a false church. 1. Cor. 1. and 11. cha.
There were dissentions in ye church of Corinth, and yet God had his church at
Corinth. The Bishops which were assembled in the Nicene counsel against
Arrius were at great variance: Notwithstanding they were Gods servants. The
East and West Churches were greatly divided about the feast of Easter: and yet
they were the Churches of God. Acts 15 Galat. 2. Aug. Epist. 9.
There was hot stir between Paul and Barnabas, between Paul and Peter,
between Augustine and Hierome, and yet all these were Gods servants.

Gods truth sometimes deuideth the faithful amongst themselves. John chap. 6.
ver. 66.
Christ's sermon that his flesh was the true meat, was an undoubted truth: yet
it made a partition between the twelve, and the other which believed in Christ.

I confess that Gods spirit is the spirit of peace and unity. This spirit
should wholly possess us, if we were wholly regenerate: But the best men are
short of that.

19 Multitude is not an infallible argument of Gods Church.
Genesis 7. 1. King. 19. and 22. chap.
IN the times of Noe, Elias, Micheas, etc. The greater part was the worse part,
when the x. tribes did set themselves against the tribe of Judah Gods Church
was in Judah.

Except the Lord of hosts had reserved unto us, even a small remnant, we should
have been as Sodom, Esaias 1. ver. 9
and should have been like unto Gomorrha. Whereby it is manifest, that Gods
Church was very little, and that the greater number was the worse.

Enter in at the straight gate, for it is the wide gate and broad way that
leeadeth to destruction, and many there be, which go in thereat: because the
gate is straight and the way narrow, yt leads unto life, and few there be
that find it. Mat. 7. ver. 13.14. If the multitude had been an argument of the
Church, Christ's speech were not to be liked of.

Christ calls his flock, a little flock, and Christ himself was condemned to
death by the greater number of the Jews. Luke 12. Math. 27.


It is said, that Satan deceives all the world. Apo, 12. and 20.

As the greater number is no sure proof of the Church, if they have not the
marks of the Church amongst them: so is not the less number an argument of
Gods church, unless they have the essential marks of Gods Church amongst
them, if they may be come by.

20 The Church is not to be measured by the external show,
Rejoice, thou barren, Gal. 4.
that bear no children etc? If the Apostle out of the prophet Esaias call the
Church barren, it is a good lesson to teach us not to measure the church
always by the outward show. Esaias. 53.
Christ the bridegroom was so afflicted that he had neither form nor
beauty: When the Churches case is such, we must remember that it is Christ's
spouse.

When the Israelites were in captivity at Babylon, Ezec. chap. 11 ver. 15.16.
Gods Church was in Chaldaea, as in a dungeon, albeit they which remained in
Jerusalem thought otherwise. If Gods Church had been measured by the outward
show, it had been wide with them, which were then in captivity.

Cant. 6.
I confess that Gods Church is said by Solomon to be fair as the Moon, and
pure as the Son. But it is so to men's eyes not in the time of persecution,
but in the time of ye peace of the church, when as the order in Gods Church is
very beautiful.

Esaias. 60.9.
When we read in Esaias that the ships of Tharsis shall bring (to gods church)
sons from far, and their silver and their gold with them: We must not by
and by dream of a golden church, as the Jews do of a golden Messiah: but the
meaning is, that God will greatly advance his Church, and set it out with
excellent furniture. If they of Tharsis deserve great commendation for bringing
their own silver and gold with them to Gods Church, I am sure they deserve
very little, which by cropping the Churches maintenance, hinder the building of
the spiritual temple. For can gods church be built without skillful masons
and carpenters, I mean, able ministers: and ca^ they either provide
instruments for the framing and setting up of Almighty gods house, when they
are kept fasting from the Churches allowance? And is not this the true cause,
why in many places of this noble land, some such open Gods book in the body
of the church, as would be goodly implements and ornaments in the Belfray. I
will not rub this sore any longer, and I am very sure that all which love
religion, do pray heartily for the redress of this.

21 None, which are or have been alients from the church of God, are to be
admitted rashly into it.
If Rahab of Jericho and her company, Iosu. 6.
had been presently admitted into the Israelites assembly, their uncleanness
would have been easily forgotten: but the putting of them apart for a time,
without the host of Israel, was of great force, both to make them ashamed of
their former behavior, and to esteem the company of gods people afterward, a
more excellent benefit.

Acts. 9.
The not admitting of S. Paul at the first amongst the Disciples, did teach
him to prefer the lowest place in Christ's Church, before the highest room in
the Sinagogues of the Pharisees, and may teach us not to open the Church doors
over hastily to every one without exception.

Acts. 19.
Many, which believed (in Ephesus) came and confessed, and showed their works,
before they were joined to the Church.

1. Tim. chap. 3. ver. 6.
If no man may be admitted rashly into Gods church, then no man may rashly be
set over Gods Church. Unseasoned timber, will not serve for a groundesell. He
is not fit to be a Captain, which cannot be accounted a soldier. No man may
be allowed a Prophet, which has not been the son of a Prophet.

22 Gods Church may err.
To err, is to go out of that way which almighty God has prescribed to us
in his holy word.

If the Church cannot err, what needed godly and learned Bishops and ministers
to look to the Lords field, vine, and flock.

The family of Sem was gods church: Genesis 11.
but idolatry entered into that family. I confess, Genesis 9.
that a singular blessing was given to Sem, but his posterity could not be
keept within their compass.

If the Church was any where in Esaies time, it was amongst the Jews. But
the Prophet says, that the Priest and the Prophet were not only corrupt in
their manners, Esaias. 28. verse. 7. Eze. 8.
but that they failed in vision, and stumbled in judgment.

The flourishing Churches of Asia, Grecia, Africa, which had the precious
treasure of Gods word plentifully amongst them, are now stripped of
Christian religion.

The Church erred before, and under the law, and in the time of grace: before
the law, Genesis 3. Exodus 32.
for Adam and Eve erred in Paradise. Under the law, for Aaron and the
Israelites erred foully in making a golden calfe. In the time of grace, for the
Churches of Corinth, Galatia, Acts. 21. ver. 20.
and the Primitive Church in Judea, erred about the observation of Moses law,
and otherwise.

The Church in Augustines and Cyprians time did give the holy Supper to
infants, Chap. 6. ver. 3
grounding upon the place of Saint John: but it was a gross error.

Let no man deceive you by any means: 2. These. 2.
(for that day shall not come) except there come a departing first. This
Apostasy or departing (which Paul speaks of) is not in one or two Churches,
but even in the body of the whole visible Church. The holy ghost did so
prophecy.

Jesus Christ is the head of the church, as of one body. This head is unto the
Church, as reason unto man, so far forth as the desire of man obeys
reason, and the body of the Church, the head of the Church, it is well with man
and with the Church.

The Church is as a Moon, which has no light but from Christ the son
thereof. When she looks toward him, she is bright and clear: the more
she turns away from him, the less brightness she has.

Objection.

The Church is the pillar of truth, 1. Tim. 3.15.
therefore it cannot err.

Answer

The argument follows not, and S. Paul's meaning is, that Gods truth is
preserved in the Church by the ministry of the word: the reason of this my
answer, is set down in these words, he gave some (to be) Apostles, and some
prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Doctors, for the
gathering together of ye saints, for the work of the ministry, for the
edification of the body of Christ, that we henceforth be no more children
wavering and carried about with every wind of Doctrine. Ephe. 4. ver.
11.12.14.


Objection.

The spirit of truth will lead you into all truth: therefore the church cannot
err. John. 16.13


Answer.

If follows not: It is certain that Christ's Disciples, which heard his
heavenly Sermons, were persuaded very hardly, that the Messiah should die, and
they dreamed of a stately kingdom in the world both before his death (as the
sons of Zebedeus) and after Christ's resurrection (as all the Apostles. Mat.
20. Acts. 1.
) Our Savior Christ: least they should be discouraged, because they were not
then able to bear and digest his speeches, comforts them in this sort, the
spirit of truth will lead you into all truth: as if he should say, your
capacity is weak and my speeches will not enter into you, but be of good
cheer, it shall not be so with you always, the spirit of truth shall open
your understanding, and lead you into all truth.

When we read or hear that the spirit will lead us into all truth, we must
not think that either the spirit does lead us without the word, Esaias 59. 1.
These. 5.
as the Anabaptists teach, (for the spirit and the word cannot be severed)
or that the Church not bringing the word for her warrant, is, in matters of
faith, Cypr. de lapsu
to be believed, for he is not joined to the Church, which is severed from
the Gospel.

23 The Church is not perfect in this world.
THe Gospel is a sieve or fan, Matthew. 3.
which separateth the chafe from the corn. If chafe were not mingled with
the corn, this fan, (that is, the preaching of the Gospel) were needles.

The knowledge of the Church is but in part: 1. Cor. 13. Matthew. 6.
and the whole Church desires pardon of their sins.

The Church shall not be perfect before the last day, but then it shall be.
Apoc. cap. 21. ver. 10.11.12
Which thing, that S. John might set before our eyes, he remembers that the
estate of the heavenly Jerusalem, shall be most glorious after the end of the
world.

If we consider the visible Church in her own body, it is far from
perfection. For it is compared to a field, Math. chap. 13
wherein is Wheat and Tares, and to a draw net, wherein are good and bad
fishes.

That Church, which bragges of perfection in this world, is a Pharisaicall
Church. Aug. epi. 48.
Such Churches were and are the Churches of the Donatistes, Nouatians, and
Anabaptists.

Objection.

Whosoever is borne of God, sins not. 1. John. 3. ver. 6.9.

Answer.

By not sinning, S. John means, that the regenerate serve not sin, and that
sin reigns not in them, because they withdraw them selves by Gods
assistaunce from sin, and withal their hearts do give them selves to
holiness of life. It is very true that the faithful do sin, that is to say,
can not live so holily, but that they offend the Majesty of god: so did
Aaron, Noe, Daniel, Job, Barnabas, Peter, and the virgin Marie, otherwise she
had not needed a Savior. The just man falls seven times. Prou. 24. 1. John
cha. 1
If we say, we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, etc.

Objection.

Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify it,
Ephesians. 5.25.26 27.
and cleanse it by ye washing of water through the word, that he might make it
unto him self a glorious Church, not having spotte or wrinkle or any such
thing.

Answer.

This Argument was used of the Pelagians in Augustines time: Epist. 50. and 57.
Idem lib. 1. retract. cap. 19 and li. 2. cap. 18
but August. says, that the freedom of the Church from all stains is not in
this world, but in the world to come. Besides, it is one thing to consider ye
church in it self, another thing to consider it in Christ. The Church in it
self (whether we respect each member of it severally, or all the members of it
jointly) have many spots and wrinkles: otherwise it were not true, that they
are saved by the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, as the Apostle Peter says.
The Church considered in Christ, Act. 15. ver. 11 1. John 1. Apoc. 1. 1. Cor.
6. 1. Cor. 1.
may be said to be without spot, because it is washed and purged by the blood
of Christ: and without wrinkle, because it is clothed with the righteousness
of Christ by the imputation of whose righteousness, we are at Gods hands
both absolved and sanctified.

24 The Church of Rome has, and may err.
Behold the bountifulness and severity of GOD: toward them, Romans cha. 11.
verse 22.
which have fallen, seuerytye: but toward thee, bountifulnes, if thou
continue in (his) bountifulnes: or else thou also shall be cut off. If the
Church of Rome could not err, why should Paul write this.

Lib. 1. cont. Marcionem.
Tertullian makes mention of alters dedicated to unknown gods (which he
calls the Idolatry of the Athenians) and to uncertain gods, (which he
calls the superstition of the Romans.)

Hormisda a Bishop of Rome, in a writing of his to the Bishops of Spain,
makes this matter very clear: The sum of his words is this, Dearly beloved,
let us pray without ceasing, that we may cleave soundly unto Christ, and not
forsake him, least we be justly forsaken of him.

If Saint Paul's doctrine in the Epistle to the Romans be sound (whereof none
that fear God, does make any question) then the popish Church, which holds
many things disagreeing from that Epistle, is not free from error. Let the
questions of justification, election, freewill, obedience to the Magistrate, be
considered. Besides, their spoiling Christ of his priesthood, and Gods people of
the cup in the Lords supper, their transubstantiation, and a number of gross
absurdities, which they hold, are manifest demonstrations of the erring of the
Popish Church.

25 They may not be accounted Schismatikes, which forsake the Church of Rome.
If any Church give over the truth of Gods religion, we must forsake that
Church, that we be not infected with that leprosy, and yet we may not be
accounted Schismatikes, for men are then Schismatikes, when they depart from
the true Church and doctrine, not when they return from error to truth.

He is a Schismatike, which is the cause of schism, and not he which
begins the separation: even like as he, which denies the law, is the
cause of the process, and not he which first began.

The Protestants have not forsaken Sio^, but Babylon, not Bethel, but
Bethauen: they have not erected Alter against Alter, Aug. epi. 162.
as Jeroboam and the Donatistes did, but they have cast the Alter of Damascus
out of the Lords house, and have restored the true worship of God.

26 The Church must be built upon the word of God.
Ephe. chap. 2. verse 19.20.
Now therefore ye are no more strangers and forreiners: but Citizens with the
Saints, and of the household of GOD: and are built upon the foundations of the
Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ him self being the chief corner stone,
etc.

If the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles be the foundation of the church,
how can the Church stand, if the doctrine be removed? and how can the
doctrine continue without sound teachers? and what heart can they have to
teach, when they want maintenance? Shall they which be noble men's, and
gentlemen's gardiners, huntsmen, be bountifully provided for of their Lords and
Masters charge, and shall not they, which are fit to attend upon the Lords
vine, field, garden, orchard, have allowance of the churches charge? If this
soar be not looked unto, many students of divinity must of force betake them
selves to some other course. for men must live, and to go a begging, is a point
next the worse, and a very unfit occupation for a learned student in divinity.

The Gospel and spirit of life, Iren. lib. 3. cap. 1.11.
is the foundation and pillar of the Church.

They which will build Gods Church without the foundation of the word, build
with untempered mortar: for Gods word is the life of the Church.

Objection.

The Church was before the word of God: therefore it is not built upon the
word of God.

Answer.

The argument follows not. I confess, that Gods Church in the beginning (as
for example, Adam, Abel, Enos, Noe, Se^, Abraham, and many other of Gods
children) was, before Gods word was put in writing, but Gods church was not
before Gods word. For if the Church be an assembly of ye faithful, and ye me^
cannot be called faithful without faith, and that faith cannot consist without
the word of God: it is a necessary consequent, that Gods word was before
Gods Church.

Gene. 4. Heb. 11.
Abell sacrificed unto almighty God by faith. Therefore Gods express word
was his direction, for faith has relation to no other thing. The difference of
clean and unclean beasts is mentioned in Genesis before the flood, Gece. 7.
but this difference could not be understood but by the voice of almighty
God. Noe after his coming out of the Arc, offered a burnt offering: this
sacrifice of Noe, pleased God: therefore it is a good consequent that Noe had
Gods word to direct him: for no wilworshippe did ever please God.

Objection.

1. Tim. 3. verse 15.
The Church is the pillar and ground of truth, therefore the word is not the
foundation of the Church.

Answer.

It follows not, and the Church is therefore called the pillar and ground of
the truth, because amongst men it vpholdeth and retayneth Gods truth.

17 The Church is known by the word of God.
SEarch the Scriptures, John. chap. 5. ver. 39.
they testify of me, says Christ. We know Christ by the Scriptures,
therefore we know the Church by the Scriptures. This consequent is very good,
and is framed thus by Augustine.

In the Scriptures we have learned Christ, Epist. 166.
(says Augustine) in the Scriptures we have learned the Church. And a little
after: where we have known Christ, (meaning in the scriptures) there we have
known the Church: which sentence he repeateth very often in that epistle.

The Donatists said, that Christ's church remained only in Afric, Epist. 166.
but Augustine tells them, that their warrant is not taken out of the law, or
the Prophet, or the Psalm, or the Apostle, or Evangelist, but out of their
own hearts, and cauils of their progenitors: by which words it is evident,
that the Church is known and must be showed by the word of God.

We seek the Church in the holy scriptures, Aug. devnita Eccle. cap. 2. and
Epist. 48.
and in the same scriptures we do manifestly know the Church.

28 Jesus Christ alone, is the foundation of his Church.
OTher foundation can no man lay, then that which is laid, 1. Cor. 3. ver. 11.
which is Jesus Christ.

Thus says the Lord God, behold I will lay in Sion a stone, Esai. 28. ver. 16
1. Pet. chap. 2 verse 6.
a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation, that is, Jesus
Christ: so does the Apostle Peter expound it.

Ye are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Ephe. chap.
2. ver. 20.
Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone, that is, the foundation of
the Church.

Upon this rock, I will build my Church: Mat. chap. 16. verse 18. Aug. lib.
1. retract. cap. 12
By this word (rock) Christ understands himself, who^ Peter confessed.

The Apostle Peter cannot be the foundation of the Church, for Peter was
mortal, and the foundation of Gods Church must be immortal.

29 What the Catholic Church is.
The catholic Church is ye number of all Gods elect, which have been from the
beginning of the world, and are now presently in the world, and shall be until
the end of the world

30 The Catholic Church is not visible.
ALL the elect, whether they be in earth or in heaven, do belong to the
Catholic Church: But all these cannot be seen of us.

Christ when he uttered these words (upon this rock I will build my Church)
did mean that Church, Mat. 16.
which should be unto the end of the world: but that church is not visible,

If the Catholic Church were now visible, it were improperly said in the
creed, I believe the Catholic Church: for invisible things are believed, and
not those which are seen. They therefore, which say, that the Catholic
Church is visible, either believe not that, which they confess in the
Creed, or speak otherwise then they believe, which is a gross absurdity.

I confess that the particular churches of Corinth, Ephesus, Thessalonica were
visible in Paul's time, not only, because they of whom these Churches
consisted, were visible, but because of the order and external form of those
Churches, which order and external form are the cause, why the Churches are
visible. 1. King. 19.


The seven thousand (of whom Almighty God spoke to Elias) albeit they were
visible in that they were men, yet they were not in the visible Church:
otherwise Elias had seen them.

A few of Gods elect are called the Church, but yet the invisible Church: not
because, 2. Tim. cha. 2 verse 19.
we do not see the elect, but because we do not descerne with our eyes, who
are Gods elect: for GOD alone knows, who be his.

FINIS.
A godly and short Treatise, against the foul and gross sin of oppression.
Written by Robert Some.

Oppession makes a wise man mad. Ecclesiastes, chap. 7. verse 9. To the
Reader.
IT has pleased an English Papiste, to give out in print, that the Church of
Rome, does both teach, and require actual restitution, and that our Church
does neither. His speech of us is very slanderous, and my treatise against
oppression, is arguments enough to confute him. If they of Rome, teach and
require actual restitution, it is no work of supererogatio^: they do no more
but their duties. If we should fail in this clear point, we deserve great
condemnation at almighty Gods hands. I confess that a man is good (and
therefore justified in Gods sight) before he does good works: but with all I
set down this, that good works do follow him that is truly justified, and
that such as have oppressed, or iniuried any man, shall not be pardoned at Gods
hands, unless they make actual restitution, if they be able to do it. If
any require proof of this, I refer him to this Treatise of mine, against
oppression.

A table of such points as are contained in this Treatise.
1 What oppression is. 2 It is not lawefull for any man to oppress another. 3
They which have done wrong unto, or oppressed any, must make actual
restitution. 4 It is the duty of the Magistrate, to deliver the oppressed out
of the hands of the oppressor. 5 The Magistrate loses nothing by delivering
the oppressed. 6 Oppressors, shall be grievously punished. 7 Oppressors,
have no religion in them.
A godly Treatise against the foul and gross sin of oppression.
Question.

What is Oppression.

Answer.

It is unjust deailng, used of the mightier, either by violence, color of
law, or any other cunning dealing, against such as are not able to withstand
them. The ground of this definition, is contained in these places of scripture.
Micheas. chap. 2. verse 1.2. 1. These. chap. 4. verse. 6.

It is not lawful for any man to oppress another.

Give us this day our daily bread. Mat. chap. 6. verse 11. Every christian
desires God to give daily bread, (that is, all things necessary for this
life) both to him self, and to others: therefore no christian is privileged,
to spoil another of his necessary food.

If one of us must pray for the good of another: one of us may not pray upon an
other. Eccle. chap. 34 verse 23.
He that takes away his neighbors living, is a murderer.

Thou shall not desire thy neighbors house, his field, etc. Deuteronomy. 5.21. If
we may not desire his house, or land, then we may not spoil him of his house,
or land, Mich. chap. 2.1.2.
or enclose that ground, whereby the poor either by right are, or by right
ought to be relieved.

If thou meet thine enemies ox, or his Ass going astray, thou shall bring
him to him again. If thou see thy enemies Ass lying under his burden, will
thou cease to help him? thou shall help him up with it again. Exodus 23.4.5.
Almighty God commands us to deal well with our enemies Ass, therefore we
may not by undoing our neighbor, or spoiling him of any part of his land or
goods, make him an Ass and send him a begging.

He that oppresses the poor, reproves him that made him, etc. Pro. chap.
14. ver. 31.
It is a gross sin to reprove the majesty of God, therefore it is a gross
sin to oppress the poor.

It was one of the sins of Sodom not to reach out the hand to the poor
Ezech. 16.49. If it be a great sin, not to relieve the poor, it is a very
gross sin to spoil the poor. The bread of the needful, Eccle. 34.22.
is the life of the poor: he that defraudeth him thereof is a murderer.

There is a writ in England which bears this name, Ne unjust vexes, that
is to say, vex not any man unjustly: This is a godly law, and is derived from
the law of God, which forbids and condemns oppression.

There are certain beggars, which of purpose keep their legs sore to get
money by it: If they are justly misliked, which gain by their own sore
legs, what deserve they to be thought of, which gain by other men's sore
legs?

When thou sellest ought to thy neighbor, or buiest at thy neighbors hand,
ye shall not oppress one another Leuit. 25. ver. 14. This is the will of God,
that no man oppress or defraude his brother in any matter. 1. These. 4.6.
Therefore men of trade may not gain by little measures, false weights, and
false speeches and oaths, nor any mighty men, may gain by cunning dealing, by
color of law, or by using any violence whatsoever.

3 They which have done wrong unto, or oppressed any must make actual
restitution.
GOd says thus unto Moses: speak unto the children of Israel, when a man or
woman shall commit any sin, that men commit, and transgress against the Lord,
when that person shall trespass, then they shall confess their sin which
they have done, and shall restore ye damage thereof with his principal, and put
the fifth part of it more thereto, and shall give it unto him against whom he
has trespassed. But if the man have no kinsman, to whom he should restore the
damage, the damage shall be restored to the Lord, for the Priests use, etc.
Number. 5. ver. 6.7.8. We are taught in this place, to whom this actual
restitutio^ must be made, even to him whom we have iniuried: if he be dead, we
must restore it to his kinsman: if he have no kinsman alive, actual
restitution must be made to Almighty God, for the Priests use, and in our
time for the poores use.

Iud. chap. 17. ver. 2.3.
Michah robbed his mother of xi. hundred shekels of silver: his mother did not
know that he had it, but he had remorce of that sin, and made actual
restitution.

Samuel says thus of himself: Whose Ox have I taken? or whose Ass have I
taken? or whom have I done wrong to? or whom have I hurt? or of whose hands
have I received any bribe, 1. Sam. 12,
to blind my eyes therewith, and I will restore it you, etc. It is certain
that Samuel did not deal either corruptly or unjustly in his office: if he
had, he would have made actual restitution.

Luke. 19.
Zacheus was sometimes very disordered in his life, it pleased our Savior
Christ to be a good God unto him, and to lodge in his house: Zacheus having
feeling of his former wants uttered these words: If I have taken from any man
by forged cauillation, I restore him four fold. If Zacheus of Jericho, after
his conversion, was content to restore four fold, it is a good consequent yt
they have little touch of sin, and little sense of religion, which will not
restore the principal.

Question.

If a man have deceived, robbed or oppressed other men, shall he be pardoned
at Gods hands, if he make not actual restitution?

Answer.

God will not pardon him, unless he make actual restitution, if he be able
to do it, my reasons are these.

If the wicked restore the pledge, and give again that he had robbed he
shall surely live and not die, says the Lord. Chap. 18. ver. 12.13.
Eze. 33.15. Therefore, it is a sure consequent, that he shall not live
eternally, which being in case to make actual restitution, does it not
accordingly.

Is not this the fasting that I have chosen, to loose the bands of wickedness,
to take off the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye
break every yoke, etc. Then shall thou call and the Lord shall answer, thou
shall cry, and he shall say, here I am, etc. Esaias. 58.6.9. If the oppressor
must let the oppressed go free, he must make actual restitution. If Almighty
God will not hear the prayer of the oppressor (until he let the oppressed
go free) it is a necessary consequent that God will not pardon him.

Epist. 54.
Augustine, is very flat for this point: if men be able to make actual
restitutio^ and do it not, poenitentia non agitur, sed fingitur: that is to
say, their repentance is no repentance, and their sin shall not be pardoned,
until actual restitution be made.

Question.

If a man have secretly either robbed or deceived another, and is very willing
to make restitution, but cannot do it with out some worldly danger, and
disgrace to him self, what must he do in this case?

Answer.

Let him send that which he has taken unjustly, by some trusty messenger to
him whom he has wronged, and let his name be concealed.

Question.

If he that has taken unjustly from others, have wasted all, and is not able
to make restitution, what shall he do?

Answer.

Such a one, must desire pardon very humbly at Gods hands, and water the earth
with his tears.

4 It is the duty of the Magistrate to deliver the oppressed out of the hand
of the oppressor.
EXecute judgment in the morning (that is, Iere. 21.12. Esaias. 1.17.
carefully and without delay) and deliver the oppressed out of the hand of the
oppressor, says the Lord, etc. Seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge
the fatherless, and defend the widdowe. Almighty God commands the
Magistrates to execute judgment in the morning, therefore they must use no
delays in doing justice. God commands the Magistrates to seek judgment,
therefore in cases of oppression, they must not stay till they be called for.
God commends unto the magistrates all that are oppressed, but specially the
fatherless and widdowe, because they want the defense of their parents, and
husbands, and every man goes over, where the hedge is lowest.

Ierem. 22.
Josias executed judgment and justice, he judged the cause of the afflicted and
poor, (says the Lord) of Josias.

Job says thus of himself: I delivered the poor that cried, Job. 29.
and the fatherless, and him that had none to help him, etc. I put on
justice, and it covered me: my judgment was as a robe and a crown, I was the
eyes to the blind, and I was the feet to the lame: I was a father unto the
poor, and when I knew not the cause, I sought it out diligently, I brake also
the chawes of the unrighteous man, and plucked the pray out of his teeth, etc.
It appears by this, that Job was a worthy Magistrate: God send us many such
as Job was.

The Sunamite (whose son Elizeus raised to life) soiourned in the time of
famine seven years in the land of the Philistines: in her absence, her lands
and goods were unjustly entered upon: at her return, she complained of the
injury to Iehoram the king of Israel: Iehoram without delay commanded an
Eunuch to restore her goods and lands unto her. 2. Kings. 8.
Restore thou (says Iehoram) all that are hers, and all the fruits of her
lands, since the day, she left the land even until this time.

The Jews in Nehemias time were greatly oppressed: Nehe. chap. 5
Nehemias was very angry with the princes and rulers which oppressed them, and
said unto them: You lay burdens every one upon his brethren etc. Restore unto
them this day their lands, their vineyards, their olives and their houses.

If it be the magistrates duty to deliver the oppressed, Amos chap. 5 ver. 7.
and chap. 2. ver. 6.
they must take great heed yt themselves be neither principals nor accessaries
in ye sin of oppression. If they be guilty, judgment shall be turned into
wormwood, and the righteous shall be sold for silver, and ye poor for shoes:
that is to say, filthy bribes shall be more accounted of, then men's lives,
which are most precious.

5 The Magistrate loses nothing by delivering the oppressed.
If he do it with a single heart (beside the testimone of a good conscience
which is a continual feast) he may assure himself of Gods favor and
blessing, Prou. 15.
and of the singular liking of all Gods people.

Josias did eat and drink and prosper, when he executed judgment and
justice, Ierem. 22.
when he judged the cause of the afflicted, and the poor.

Job. 29
Job delivered the poor that cried, and the fatherles, and him that had none
to help him, the blessing of him that was ready to perish, came upon him.

Our sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth has dealt graciously with many poor
suitors at the Court, she has spoken comfortably to them, and procured
restitution accordingly. If it be no disgrace to this noble Lady, which sits
under the cloth of Estate, to deliver the oppressed, it is no blot to inferior
magistrates if they do the like. If ye Prince pleases God highly, and winnes
the hearts of her subjects soundly for relieuing the oppressed, it is very
certain, that those Cormorants which grynd the faces of the poor are accursed
of God, and loose ye hearts of his people. If the Prince sits fast in the
seat of her kingdom for tendering the case of the oppressed, can they assure
themselves of sitting quietly under their vines and fig trees, which eat
bread, baked with ye tears of poor men? It is certain, they cannot: (for
besides the manifold curses of God and his people) their own consciences, do
mightily sting them, and are enemies enough to torment them.

6 Oppressors shall be grievously punished.
CVrsed be he, that remoueth his neighbors mark, and al ye people shall say,
Deuteronomy. 27 ver. 17.
Amen. If they are accursed by God, and his people, which remove the mark of
the la^d, they are more accursed, which take away house and land.

Oppression makes a wise man mad. Madness is a grievous punishment, Eccle.
chap. 7. ver. 9.
God punishes Oppression by madness, one gross sin, by another.

Ye have builded houses of hewe^ stone, but ye shall not dwell in them: Amos cap.
5.11.
ye have planted pleasant vineyards, but ye shall not drink wine of the^. The
reason of this, is set down by almighty God in the same verse, in these words:
Your treadings is upon the poor, and you take from him burdens of wheat, (yt
is to say, ye necessary relief of himself and his family.) If ye taking away
of burde^s of wheat from the poor was so great a sin, the taking away of
arable ground (which by tillage and Gods blessing brings relief to a man and
his family) is no little sin.

They shall not mourn for him (says God of Ioachim the king of Judah which was
a great oppressor) he shall be buried as an ass is buried, Iere. 22.
and cast forth (as a carrio^ above the ground) eue^, without the gates of
Jerusalem. Ioachim had closed himself in Cedar, but that was not able to keep
Gods judgments from him.

Abac. chap. 2. ver. 11.
The stone shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber shall
answer it, etc. As if almighty God should say, rather the^ the vile
dealings of Oppressors should not come to light, the stone shall cry out of the
wall, I am built of blood and iniquity, and the beam out of the timber shall
answer, I am built likewise of blood and iniquitye. If the stones and beams
of oppressors houses, give in their evidence (like honest Iurates) against
such houses, the Oppressors must prepare themselves, to hear this fearful
sentence pronounced, by the Lord chief justice of heaven, Abac. cha. 2. ver.
12.
and earth against the^: woe unto him that builds a town with blood, and
erecteth a city by iniquity.

Aug. Epist. 211.
They which oppress others, do more hurt themselves, then those who^ they
oppress, the smart of the oppressed has an end, the smart of the oppressor
is everlasting: for he heapeth unto himself wrath against the day of wrath,
Romans chap. 2.
and of the declaration of the just judgment of God.

There were never any oppressors so many and mighty, but at ye length they
were met with. Gods judgments have feet of woll, but they have arms of
brass: It is long ere God begin, but when he strikes, he pays home. Esaias
chap. 30, ver. 14.17.

Woe unto the^ yt imagine inquity, Iere. 5.
and work wickedness upon their beds: when ye morning is light, they practice it
because their hand has power, and they covet fields, and take them by
violence, and houses, and take them away: so they oppress a man and his house:
eue^ a man and his heritage: therefore, thus says ye Lord, behold, against this
family have I devised a plague, whereout ye shall not pluck your necks. Mich.
2. ver. 1.2.3. God be merciful unto us, and make us afraid of his judgments.

7 Oppressors have no religion in them.
GOD looked for judgment, but behold oppression for righteousness, Esaias chap.
5. ver. 7.
but behold a crying etc. Judgment and righteousness are ye true fruits of Gods
religion, therefore oppression is no bra^ch of Gods religion, and consequently,
ye oppressor is void of al religion. Do not all the workers of iniquity know,
that they eat up my people (as) they eat bread, they call not upon ye Lord?
Psalm. 14. ver. 4. Oppressors call not upon the Lord, therefore they are void of
religion. for invocation is a principal and necessary fruit of religion. If the
oppressors say, yt they stretch out their hands, and make many prayers, I
grant they do so, but almighty God gives the^ this answer: Esaias. chap. 1.
ver. 15. Mich. chap. 3. ver. 4.
I will hide mine eyes from you, I will not hear, for your hands are full of
blood.

I will be a swift witness against those, that wrongfully keep back the
hirelings wages, (and vex) the widow, and fatherles, and oppress the
stranger, Malach. chap. 3. ver. 5.
and fear not me, says the Lord of hosts etc. They which oppress others
fear not God, therefore they are void of religion. If they say they fear God,
they deserve no credit, because their doings confute their speech. A good
tree, bringeeh forth good fruits, and a iustifiyng faith appears by good
works.

The former governors did burden the people, Nehem. cha. 5 ver. 15.
and their servants bare rule over the people, but so did not I (says
Nehemias) because of the fear of God. If Nehemias did neither oppress, nor
deal hardly, because he feared God, it is manifest that oppressors fear not
God, and therefore are void of religion.

When he (that is Josias) judged the cause of the afflicted, and the poor,
Iere. 22. ver. 16.17.
he prospered, was not this, because he knew me says the Lord? But thine
eyes and thine heart (he speaks to Ioachim the king of Judah) are but only for
thy covetousness, and for to shed innocent blood, and for oppression, etc.
Josias was a singular defense to the oppressed, because he did know, and
fear GOD: Ioachim was a notable oppressor, because he did neither know, nor
fear GOD, that is to say, because he was void of Gods religion.

This which I have set down against Oppression, may serve for a crystal
glass for Oppressors to look upon, and to reform themselves by. If it
work their good, it is happy for them: If it do not, let them remember that
dye they must, and that after death, they shall have a fearful judgment. The
best advise that I can give to them which are oppressed, is that they desire
the magistrate, to be their defense. If by this ordinary means, they cannot
compass their own, they must patiently bear injuries, and commit their cause
to almighty GOD, who has their flittinges in his register, Psalm. 56. ver. 8.
and their tears in his bottel, and will be surely, but yet justly, revenged of
their Oppressors.

Veritas and dulcis est and amara. Quando dulcis est, parcit, quando amara,
curat. Aug. Epist. 211. ad Romulum.
Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vintree by Thomas Dawson for
George Bishop. 1583.


