The fourth book of Virgill, entreating of the love between Aeneas and Dido,
translated into English, and drawn into a strange meter by Henrye late Earl
of Surrey, worthy to be embraced.

Imprinted at London by John Day, for William Awen, dwelling in Pater noster
row, at the sign of the Cock.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

ornamental woodcut border (not in McKerrow)

To the most puissant prince Thomas Duke of Norfolk, Wyllyam Awen his most
humble Orator wysheth perpetual health and felicity
WHen it chanced a copye of this part of Virgill, traunslated by your graces
father (right honorable Lord) by the means of a friend of mine, to come to my
hands: I not only held ye same as no small treasure, because I had heard it,
like as others the monume^tes of that noble wit of his, which was in this kind
no doubt incomparable, of al men to be commended: but also my desire was great,
at one time or other, if by a means convenient I might, to publyshe the same:
and that the rather, because I could understand of no man that had a copye
thereof, but he was more wyllyng the same should be kept as a private treasure
in the hands of a few, then publyshed to the common profyt and delectacion of
many. But forasmuch as my copy although it were taken of one, written with the
authors own hand, was not yet so certain, that it might be thought of it
self sufficient to be publyshed, partly for that the writer had not time
sufficient to the due examinacion thereof, after it was written, and also
because the reding of the authors copy it self, by reason of speedye writing
thereof was somewhat doutful: for these causes, gettyng two other copies also,
written out by other men, I caused mine to be conferred with them both, and of
them yt to be received, as most worthy to be allowed, which was both to the
latin most agreeable, and also best standing with the dignity of that kind of
mytre.

And this my doing I trust no honest man shall be able to reprove, but rather
it shall be an occasion, to such as favor the monimentes of so noble a wit, if
they have a better copy to publyshe the same. As for the unthankful, I pass
not how much they repyne at my deed: so that I may understand your grace to
take in good part my good will herein. Which if you do (as I nothing doubt of
your graces goodness) it shall no little encourage me hereafter to bring other
his works to light, as they shall come to my hands. Thus beseching our Lord god
to continue your grace in wealth and increase of virtue, I wyshe you hartelye
well to fare.

Your graces most humble Orator Wyllyam Owen.

The occasion of the love between Elissa the Queen of Cartage, after called
Dido, and the Trojan lord Aeneas, briefly gathered out of Virgyll.
AEneas a man of great prowes, and one that had the Gods, his parents and
country in much reverence and love, ouerpressed with cruel Iunos wrath, in
seeking Italy, roued upon the seas of Sicil, till after much tossyng, at the
last he arrived in the coasts of Libia: not knowing the same what country it
was. But having with him his assured companyon Achates, he learned by his
mother, that the Lady Elissa was Queue thereof. After, conneighed under acloude
he came to the city of Cartage, where the Queen was resident: and there
meeting with others of his company, who by the like fortune were driven into
the same costs, he was of the bountiful Queen received with much honor. To
his company also which were upon the sea costs, she sent.xx. bullockes.C.
porkes.C. lambs together with their dammes, and thereto of wine great plenty:
gifts fyt for their entertainment, as that time, and as their necessity asked.
The which Achates, sent by Aeneas to the sea, presented to them, and at his
returning brought with him young Iulus Aeneas son, who by his fathers
commandment should for the Trojans part likewise present to the Queen
certain rich gifts, ornaments of the fair Elen, which they had got from
the Grecians hands at their spoil of Troy. But the Gods Venus, mother to
Aeneas, who always douted what would be the end of this her sons so great
entertainment in a strange land, thought that thus she should best make all
things sure, if she might by any means bring the Queen in love with him.
Which thing to do she wrought this feat, she byds her son Cupid (who was the
God of Love) address him self in the lykenes of Iulus to go present the
gifts, and in daliaunce with the Queen privily to inspyre her with unquenched
fire of love. The child therefore Iulus coming with gifts to be to the Queen
presented, she brought on sleep, and so carrying him in her lap into the
mount Idalium, left him there amongst the flowers. In this mean time Cupid (as
his mother had bydden him before) took upon him the shape of Iulus, goes like
to him accompanied with Achates, caryeth the gifts, and instead of Iulus
prese^teth the same to the queen. She sets her down to meat, causes the
Trojans to sit down. The Tirians come together, which also sit down,
commanded by her. They wonder at Aeneas his gifts, and at the goodly boy,
who^ they took to be Iulus: but of al others, unhappy Dido could never enough
be hold either the sweet boy, or yet the presents, but still more and more is
she enflamed, and what with the gifts, and with the child marvelously styred.
This child after he had hanged in the neck of Aeneas, so to begyle the love of
his feigned father, sets upon the Queen. He goth to her: she is with him
maturilosly ravished, she imbraseth him, she takes him in her lap, and thus
with kyssyng and colling, she delights her self. But the subtle boy Cupid,
remembering what his mother had said to him, amongst these kysses breathed fire
into the Queen's breast, which naught but death it self, or scarce that, could
quench. He begyns to make her by little and little to forgeite quite her former
husband Sichens: he styrs up her mind so loath to be kindled, and assanltes
that heart of hyrs, out of use with love. After meat, the board the bords
removed, the mighty boles of gold set with stones, were plied with the wine,
drynkyng there was, quassyng one to an other, with great mirth and gladness. The
Lord Inpas with his long tresses, king of Affricke, played on his gilde^ Lute,
synging of the course of the sun, the Move, of the original of mankind, of
brute, of water and fire, of the rysyng of signs, of the shortuesse of days,
and length of the nights. The Tyrians make hu^fyng chere, the Trojans do the
like. Selye Dido also passing the uyghte with diverse talk, drynckes a draught
of love (alas) al to deep. Many a question she demaundes of the king Priam,
many a one of Hector, in what armor came Vulcan, what manner horses Diomedes
were: yea, she desires her new guest be gynning at thoriginal of the matter, to
tell her of the Greeks disceite, of the Trojans chance, of his adventures by
sea and land, in that his seven years travail. Which things by that time he
had told from the beginning to the end, she was so enflamed in love, that
sheene will what wai to take. And thus arose the love between Dido, and Aeneas,
which is at large expressed in Virgils fourth book of the Aenedes.

(*)

The.iiii. book of Virgill.
But now the wounded Queen with heavy care,
Throughout the veins she nourishes the plai,
Surprised with blind flame: and to her mind.
Began eke resort the prowes of the man,
And honor of his race: whiles in her breast
Amprinted stacke his words, and pyctures form:
Ne to her lyms care grants quiet rest.
The next morrow, with Pheebus laumpe the earth
Alyghtned elere, and eke the dawnyng day
The shadows dark began from the pole remove:
When all unsound her sister of like mind
Thus spoke she to: O sister Anne, what dreams
Be these, that me tormented thus afray?
What new guest is this, that to our realm is come:
What one of chere? how stout of heart in arms?
Truly I think (ne vain is my belief)
Of Goddish race some offpryng should he be:
Cowardry notes hearts swarued out of kind.
He driven (Lord) with how hard desteny:
What battayles eke atchyued did he tell?
But that my mind is fyxte vnmourably,
Never with wight in wedlock aye to join:
Sithe my first love me left by death disseuered,
If geniall brands, and bed me lothed not,
To this one fault perchance yet might I yield.
Aim, for I grant, sithe wretched Sicheus death
My spouse and house with brothers fewyde defiled,
This only man he has my senses bent,
And prycked forth my mind, that began to slide,
Now feelyngly I taste the steps of mine old flame.
But first I wyshe, the earth me swalowe down,
With thunder, or the mighty Lord me send
To the pale gostes of hell, and darkness deep:
Or I thee stayne, shamefastnes, or thy law.
He that with me first coppled, took away
My love with him, still enjoy he in grave.
Thus did she say, and with supprysed tears
Bayned her breast. Whereto Anne thus replied:
O sister, dearer beloved then the light:
Thy youth alone in playnt still wylt thou spyll
That children sweet, nor Venus gifts do know?
Does dust (thynkest thou) mind this? or graued gostes?
Time of thy doole, thy spoule new dead, I grant.
None might thee move: Iarbas not to feere,
The Lybian king dyspised yet by thee:
And other princes mo: whom the rich soil
Of Affrike breeds, in honors tryumphant,
Wylt thou also wythstande the love, that lykes thee?
On this side, in the Getules town behold,
A people bold vnuanquyshed in war,
And the undaunted Numydes compass thee,
With Syrtes, the vnfriendlye harbroughe:
On the other hand, a deserte realm for thirst
The Barceans, whose furye stretches wide.
What shall I touch the wars that move from Tire?
Or yet thy brothers threats?
By Gods purueyaunce it blewe, and Iunos help
The Troiaynes ships (I think) to run this course
Sister, what town shall thou see this become?
Through such allye how shall our kingdom rise?
And by the aid of Troiane arms how great?
How many ways shall Cartages glory grow?
Thou only now beseech the Gods of grace
By sacrefyce: which ended, to thy house
Receive him: and forge causes of abode:
Whiles winter frettes the star and watrye Orion,
The ships shaken, unfriendly the season.
Such words enflamed the kyndled mind with love,
Losened al shame, and gave the doubtful hope.
And to the temples first they haste, and seek,
By sacrifyce for grace, with Hogreles of two years
Chosen (as they ought) to Ceres, that gave laws,
To Phoebus, Bachus, and to Juno chief,
Which has in care the band of marriage.
Fair Dido held in her right hand the cup,
Which twyxt the horns of a white Cow she shed
In presence of the Gods passing before
The aulters fat, which she renewed often
With gifts that day, and beasts deboweled:
Gasyng for counsel in the entrales warm.
Ay me, unskillful minds of prophesye
Temples, or vows, what boot they in her rage?
Gentle flame the Maryes does deuowere:
Whiles in the breast the sylent wound keeps life,
Unhappy Dido burns, and in her rage
Throughout the town she wandreth up and down:
Like the strycken Hynde with shaft yshotte:
Throughout the woods which chasing with his darts
Aloof, the Shepherd fasteneeth in her unware:
And left in her vnwyst the thyrlyng head:
That through the groves, and lands glides in her flight:
Amyd whose side the mortal arrowe styckes.
Aeneas nows about the wales she leads,
The town prepared, and Cartage wealth to show,
Offryng to speak, amyd the doyce, she whystes.
And when the day began fail, now feasts she makes
The Trotanes trauayles to hear a new she lystes
In ragedal: and stared in his face
That tells the tale. And when they were al gone:
And the dymme now reprysed the day light:
And slyding stars provoked unto sleep:
Alone she mournes within her pallyce void:
And syts her down on her forsaken bed.
And absent him she hears, when he is gone,
And sees eke: often in her lap with holds
Ascanus trapte by his fathers form:
So to begyle the love, that cannot be told.
The turrettes now arise not, erst begone,
Neither the youth weldes arms, nor they auaunce
The ports: nor other defense they make for war.
Broken there hang the works and mighty frames
Of walls high raised, threatnyng to the sky.
Whom as soon as Jove's dear wife saw in effect
With a pestilence, ne fame resyst the rage:
Saturnes daughter thus burdeneth Venus then.
Great praise (quoth she) and worthy spoils you win.
Thou and thy son, great Gods of memory,
By both your wylles one woman to deuower.
Yet am not I deceived that foreknewe
Thee dread our walls, and buyldynges to suspecte
Of high Cartage. But what shall be the end?
Or whereunto now serves such debate?
But rather peace, and brydeale bands knytte we,
Sithe thou have sped of that, thy heart desired.
Dido loves, and burns, the rage her bones does perse:
This people is then now common to us both,
With equal favors let us govern them,
Lefull be it to serve a Troiane spouse:
And Tyrianes yield to thy right hand in dowry.
To whom Venus replied thus: that knew,
Her words proceeded from desmembled mind.
To Lybian coasts to turn thempyre from Rome,
What wight so fond, such offer to refuse?
Or yet with thee had leauer strive in war?
So be it fortune thy tale bring to effect,
But destenyes I dout: least Jove will grant,
That folk of Tire, and such as came from Troy,
Should hold one town: or grant these nacyons
Myngled to be, or joined in a leage.
Thou art his wife: leful be it for the
For to attempt his fansye by request:
Pass on before and follow thee I shall?
Queen Juno then thus took her tale again:
This travail be it mine: but by what mean.
(Mark in few words I shall thee learn eftsoon)
This work in hand may now be compassed.
Aeneas now, and wretched Dido eke
The forest till, a huntyng mind to wend,
To morn as soon as Tytan shall ascend,
And with his beams has ouerspred the world.
Dum trepidantale.
And whiles the raunger does set the groves about:
A cloudy shower myngled with hayle
Pour down on them, with thunder shake the skies.
The assemble seattered the mist shall cloak.
Dido a cave, the Troiane prince the same
Shall enter to: and I will be at hand.
And if thy will stycke unto mine: I shall
In wedlock sure knyt, and make her his own.
This shall the marriage be: to whose request
Without debate Venus did seem to grant.
And smyled fast, as she that found the wyle
Then from the seas, the dawnyng began aryfe.
The sun once up, the chosen youth began thrunge
Unto the gates: the hayes so rarely knytte,
The huntyng staves with their broad heads of steel
And of masile the horsemen forth they brake
Of sentyng hounds a kenell huge lykewyfe.
And at the threshold of her chamber door,
The Cartage Lords did there the Queen awayte.
The tramplyng steed with gold and purple decht,
Chawyng the fomy bytte, there fiercely stood.
Then issued she, backed with a great route,
Clad in a cloak of Tire ymbradred rich
Her quyuer hunge behind her back, her tresses
Wownde up with gold, her purple vestures eke
Butned with gold, the Troianes of her train
Before her go, with gladsome Iulus.
Aeneas eke the goodlyest of the route
Makes one of them, and joins close the thronges:
Like when Apollo leaves Lycia,
His wyntryng place, and Xanthus flouddes likewise:
To vyset Delos his mothers mansion:
The Candians, and folks of Driopes,
And painted Agathyrsies shoute, and cry:
When he walks upon mount Cynthus top:
His sparkeled tresses he pressed with garlandes soft
Of tender leaves, and trussed up in gold:
His qwyueryng darts clattering behind his back:
So fresh and lusty did Aeneas seem:
Such lordly port in countenance present.
But to the hyls, and wild holtes when they came:
From the rocks topye then driven savage rose,
Lo from the hill above to the other side,
Through the wide lands: whereas there course
The hearts likewise, in trompes taking their flight,
Raysyng the dust, the mountain fast forsake.
The child Iulus, blythe of his swyft steed
Amyds the plain now pryckes by them, now these:
And to encounter wysheth often in mind
The fomyng Bore in steed of tymerons beasts:
Or Lion brown might from the hill descend.
In the mean while the heavens began roumble sore:
In tail thereof, a myngled shower with hayle.
The Tyrian folk, and eke the Trojans youth,
And Venus neyhe we the coltage for fear
Sought arounde about: the flouddes fell from the hyls.
Dido a den, the Troiane prince likewise,
Chaunsed upon. Our mother (then) the earth,
And June that has charge of marriage,
First tokens gave with burning gleades of flame,
And pryuy to the wedlock lyghtnyng skies:
And the Nymphs waited from the mountains toy.
Aim, this was the formest day of myrthe,
And of myshappe the first occasion eke.
Respect of fame no longer her with held:
But museth how to frame her love by stelthe.
Wedlock she calls it: under which pretense
Of that fair name she cloketh now her faut.
Forth with fame flies through the great Libian towns:
A myschiefe fame, there is none else so swift:
That moving grows, and flytting gathers force:
First small for dread, sone after clymes on hye
Perecing the earth, and hydes her head in clouds.
Whom our mother the earth, tempted by wrath
Of Gods begat: the last sister (they write)
To Caeus, and to Enceladus eke,
Spedy of foot, of wings likewise swyft
A monster huge, breadful for to tell.
For every plumme, that on her bodystyckes,
As many waker eyes lurk underneath
So many mouths to speak, and harkenyng ears.
By might she flies amyd the clouds and sky,
Shrykyng by the dark shadow of the earth,
Ne does delyne to the sweet fleepe her eyes.
By day she syttes to see, on the house top,
Or turrettes hye and the great towns afrayes,
Myndefull of ill, and lies as blastyng truth.
This menster blythe with many a tale began sow
This rumor then into the commons ears:
As well things done as that was never wrought:
Aeneas ce^men, sprung of Trojan blood
To whom fair Dido would her self be wedde,
Innatures lust the winter for to pass.
Regnorum immemores, turpique cupidine captos.
This in the mouths, the fylthy Gods spreddes,
And takes her course to king Iarbas straight,
Kyndlyng his mind, with tales she fed his wrath,
Gotten he was by Ammon Jupiter
Upon the ravished Garamantida.
An hundred temples in his large realm be buylt,
Aulters as many, with waker burning flame,
Awatche always upon the Gods to attend.
Flowers embrused yielded blood of beasts,
And threshold spread with garlandes of strange hue.
He wood of mind, kyndled by bitter bryntes,
Before the aulters, in presence of the Gods,
With reared hands began humbly Jove entreat,
Almighty God whom the Moors nation
Fed at rich tables presents with wine,
See thou these things, or fear we thee in vain
When thou let fly the thunder from the clouds,
Whose flames of fire with vain noise us affraye.
A wandryng woman in our coasts has bought
A plot for price: where she a vyllage set:
To whom we gave the stronde for to manure,
And laws to rule her town: our wedlock lothed,
Has chosed Aeneas to command her realm.
That Paris now with his unmanly sort,
With mytred hattes, with oynted bushe and beard,
His rape enjoys: whiles to the temples we,
Our offrynges bring, and follow rumors vain,
Whom praying in such sort, and gryping eke
The autors fast, the mighty father heard:
And with his look began thwarte the ryal walls,
And lovers eke forgettyng their good name,
To Mercurye then gave he thus in charge.
Hence son in have, and call to thee the wyndes:
Slide with thy plumes, and tell the Troiane prince,
That now in Cartage loytereth, recklesse
Of the towns granted him, by desteny:
Swyft through the skies, see thou these words report.
His fair mother behyte him not to us
Such one to be: ne therefore him twyse saved
From Greekyshe arms, but Italye to rule,
Dreadful in arms, charged with seigniory,
Discoueryng his worthy tencryne race:
And under laws, the whole world to subdue.
If glory of such things naught him inflame:
Ne that he lystes seek honor by some pain:
The towers yet of Rome does he envy
To young Ascanus, that is his father.
What myndeth he to frame? or by what hope
In enemies land does he make his abode?
Ne his ofspryng in Italy regardes?
Ne yet the land of Lauin does behold?
Bid him make sail: have here the su^me:
Our messenger thus report. Then Mercury began,
When Jove had said, bend him to obey
His mighty fathers will: and to his heels
His golden wings he knittes, which him transporte:
With a light wind above the earth, the seas.
His wande he took, where with he calls from hell
Pale gostes: other some also thither he sendes
Comfortles,
Whereby he foreceth sleeps, and them bereues,
And mortal eyes he closes up in death:
By power whereof he drives the winds away.
And passes eke amyd the the troubled clouds.
And in his flight he ganne descrye the top,
And the stype flanks of rocky Atlas hill:
That with his shoulders susteines the welkyn up:
Whose head for crown, with pyne circled always,
With mysty clouds beaten, with wind and storm:
His shoulders spread with snow, and from his chinns
The springes descend: his frosted beard with yse.
Here Mercury with equal shining wings
First touched, and with the body headling bette:
To the water thence took he his extent.
Like to the foul, that endlong costs and strondes
Swarming with fyshe, flies sweping by the sea:
Rushing betwixt the winds and Libian lands
From his graundfather by the mothers side.
Cyllenes child so came, and then alyght
Upon the houses with his wynged feet.
For towers, whereas he Aeneas saw
Foundacions cast, are ryng lodges new:
Gyrt with a swearde of Jasper starry brigh
Of Tirian purple honge his shoulders down
His shyning pawle of mighty Didos gift,
Strypped throughout with a thyn thryd of gold.
Thus he encounters him: Oh careless wight
Both of thy realm, and of thine own affairs:
A married man now do thou rear the walls
Of high Cartage, to build a goodly town.
From the skies bright the ruler of the Gods
Sent me to thee, that by his beck commanndes
Both heaven and earth, in have gave me charge
Through the light air this message there to say.
Why buyldest thou? or by what hope thy time
In idleness thus wastes in Affrycke land?
Of so great things, if naught the fame thee stir,
Ne lystes by travail honor to pursue:
Ascanus yet, that waxes fast behold,
And the hope of Iulus seed thine heir:
To whom the realm of Italy belonges,
And soil of Rome. When Mercury had said:
Amyd his tale far of from mortal eyes
Into light air, he vanysheth out of sight.
Well nere bestraught, vpstarte his hear for dread,
Amyd his throat, his voice likewise began stycke.
For to depart by night he longs now,
And the sweet land to leave astoyned sore.
By the advise, and meswage of the Gods
What may he do, alas? or by what words
Dare he persuade the ragyng Queen in love?
Or in what sort dare he his tale begin?
Now here now there, his reckles mind began run,
And dyuersly him draws discussyng all.
After long doutes this sentence seemed best:
Anestheus syrst, and strong Cloanthus eke
He calls to him, with sergest unto whom
He gave in charge his navy secretly
For to prepare, and drew to the sea coast,
His people, and their armor to address:
And for the change of things to feign a seuse,
And that he would, when Dido least foreknew,
Or did suspect, so great a love could break,
Awayte his time to speak thereof most meet:
The nearest way to chasten his intent.
Gladly his will, and hyddynges they obey.
Full soon the Queen, this crafty slyght began smell,
Who can disceyue a lover in forecast?
And first foresawe the mocions for to come,
Things most assured fearyng: unto whom
That wicked fame reported, how to flight
Was armed the ship all ready to auale.
Then ill bested of counsel rages she:
And whysketh through the town like Bachus munite
Bacchatur, qualis commotis excita sacris
Thias, vbi audito stimulant Trieterica Baccho
Orgia, nocturnus que vocat clamore Citheron.
At length thus bordes she Aeneas of her self.
Unfaithful wight, to cover such a flight,
Could thou hope vnwyst to leave my land?
Not thee our love, nor yet right hand betrothed,
Ne cruel death of Dido may with hold?
But that thou wylt in winter ships prepare,
Cruel to try the seas in boisterous wyndes.
What if the land thou seek, were not strange,
If not unknown? or ancient Troy stood,
In rough seas, yet should Troy town be sought?
Shunnest thou me: by these tears and right hand,
(For naught else have I wretched left my self)
By our spousals, and marriage begone,
If I of thee deserved ever well:
Or thing of mine were ever to thee leefe:
Rue on this realm, whose ruin is at hand,
I thee bescche: and do away this mind.
The Lybians and Tirians tyrans of Nomadane
For thee me hate: my Tyrians eke are wroth
My shame fastnes eke stained for thy cause,
And good renoume, whereby up to the stars
Pereles I came. To whom wylt thou me leave
Ready to dye, my sweet guest? sithe this name
Is all as now, that of a spouse remaynes.
But whereto now should I prolong my death?
To tarry till my brother Pigmalion
Beat down my walls? or the Getulyan king
Iarbas yet captyue lead me away?
Before the flight a child had I conceived;
Or seen a young Aeneas in my court
To play up and down, that did present thy face,
All utterly I could not seem forsaken.
Thus said the Queen: he to the Gods advise
Unmoved held his eyes, and in his breast
Represt his care, and strove against his will.
These words yet at last then forth he cast:
Never shall I deny (Queen) thy desert
Greater then thou in words may well express:
To think on thee, ne yrke me aye it shall:
Whiles of my lelfe I shall have memory,
And whiles the spirit these synowes of mine shall rule,
It is not great the thing that I require:
Neither meant I to cloak the same by steith
Sclaunder me not, ne to escape by flight,
Nor I to thee pretended marriage:
Ne hither came to join such leages.
If desteny at mine own lyberty
To lead my life would have permytted me
After my will my sorrow to redout:
Troy and the remaynder of our folk
Restore I should: and with these escaped hands,
The wailes again unto thee vanquyshed
And palace high of Priam eke repair.
But now Apollo, called Gryneus,
And prophecies of Licia will me advise
To lease upon the realm of Italy,
That is my love, my country, and my land.
If Cartage turrettes thee of Phoenis land,
And of a Lybian town the sight deteyne:
To us Trowns why do thou envy
In Italy to make our resydence?
Lefull it is for us strange realms to seek.
As often as night does cloak with shadows darks
The earth: as often as flaming stars apeare:
The troubled ghost of my father Anchises
So often in sleep does me fear, and advise.
The wronged head by me of my dear son,
Whom I defraude of the Hispriane crown,
And lands allotted him by destenye.
The messenger eke of the Gods of late
Sent down from Jove (I swear by either head)
Passing the air, did this to me report.
In bright day yght the God my self I saw
Enter these walls, and with these ears him heard.
Leave then with plaint, to vex both the and me.
Against my will to Italy I go.
Whiles in this sort he did his tale pronounce:
With wayward look she began him aye behold,
And rolyng eyes, that moved to and fro:
With silence look discoursyng over all,
And forth in rage, at last thus began she brayde,
Faithless, forsworn, thy dame ne Gods was,
Nor Dardanus begynner of thy race,
But of hard rocks mount Tancase monstrous
Bred thee, and teates of Tiger gave thee suck.
But what should I dyscemble now my chere?
Or me reserve to hope of greater things?
Minds he our tears? or ever moved his eyes?
Wept he for ruthe? or pytyed he our love?
What shall I set before? or where begin?
Juno nor Jove with just eyes this beholdes.
There is no faith, no surety to be found.
Did I not him throne up upon my shore
In need receive, and fonded foolyshe eke inuest
Of half my realm? his navy lost, repair?
From deaths danger his fellows eke defend
Aim, with rage and furyes am I drive.
Apollo now, now Lycian prophesies,
Another while the messenger of the Gods.
(He says) sent down from mighty Jove him self
The dreadful charge amyd the skies has brought.
As though that were the travail of the Gods,
Or such a care their quyetnes might move.
I hold thee not, nor yet gaynesay thy words,
To Italy pass on by help of wyndes,
And through the floods go search thy kingdom news
If ruthful Gods have any power I trust,
Amyd the rocks, thy hyre thou shall find,
When thou shall cleape full often on Didoes name,
With buryal brandes I absent shall thee chase.
And when cold death from life these lymmes deuydes,
My ghost each where shall still upon thee wait,
Thou shall abye, and I shall here thereof.
Among the souls below this brute shall come.
With such like words she cut of half her tale,
With pensive heart abandonyng the light:
And from his sight, her self began far remove:
For sakyng him: that many things in fear
Imagened, and did prepare to say.
Her swonyng lymmes her damsels began relcue,
And to her chamber bare of marble stone:
And laid her on her bed with tappettes spread.
But just Aeneas though he did desire,
With comfort sweet her sorrows to apease:
And with his words to banyshe al her care:
To wayle her much, with great love overcome,
By the Gods will yet works he, and resortes
Unto his navy, where the Troianes fast
Fell to their work from the shore to vnstocke
High charged ships: now fleetes the talowed kele,
Their owers with leaves yet grene from the wod they bring
And mastes vnshaue, for have to take their flight.
You might have seen them thrunge out of the town
Like Anttes, when they do spoil the buige of corn:
For wynters dread which they bear to their den:
When the black swarm creepes over all the feldes:
And thwarte the gras by strait paths drags their pray,
The great graynes the^, some on their shoulders trusse,
Some drive the troop, some chastyce eke the flow?
That with their travail chafed is each pathe.
Beholding this, what thought might Dido have?
What syghtes gave she? when from her towers of hight
The large coasts she saw hauted with Trojans works,
And in her sight the seas with din confounded.
O wytlesse love, what thing is that to do
A mortal mind thou can not force thereto?
Forced she is to tears, and to return
By new requests, and yield the heart to love,
Least she should before her causeles death
Leave any thing untried: O sister Anne
Quoth she, behold the whole coast round about,
How they prepare assembled every where.
The strayned sail abides but for wind:
The shypmen crown their shyps with bows for joy,
O sister, if so great a sorrow I
Mystrusted had: it were more light to bear.
Yet nevertheless this for me a wretched wight,
Anne, shall thou do: for faythlesse thee alone
He reverenced, and eke his secrets told:
The meetest times thou knew to board the man:
To my proud foe, thus sister humbly say:
I with the Greeks in the port Aulide
Countured not the Trojans to destroy:
Nor to the walls of Troy yet sent my fleet:
Nor cynders of his father Anchises
Disturbed aye out of his sepulture:
Why lettes he not my words synke in his ears?
So hard for to entreat, whyther whurles he?
This last bowne yet grant he his wretched love:
Prosperous wyndes for to depart with ease
Let him abide: the foresaid marriage now,
That he betryed, I do not him require:
Nor that he should fair Italy forgo:
Neither I would, he should his kingdom leave:
Quiet I ask, and a time of delay
And respyte eke my furye to assuage
Till my myshappe teach me al comfortles,
How for to wayle my grief this latter grace,
Sister I crave, have thou remors of me,
Which if thou shall vouchsafe, with heaps I shall
Leave by my death well rendered unto thee.
Myngled with tears, thus wretched began she plain,
Which Anne reports, and answer bring again.
Naught tears him move, ne yet to any words
He harkens, though that he were myide of kind,
Destenies wythstand, and god stoppes his meke ears.
Like to the aged boisterous bodyed oak,
Amyd the alps, which that Nor the^ winds,
Blowyng now from this, now from that quarter blow,
Betwyxt them strive to ouerwhelme with blastes,
The whystelyng air among the branches rores,
Which al at once bow to the earth their croppes,
The stock once smyt, whiles in the rocks the tree
Styckes fast, and look, how hye to the heaven his top
Reares up, as deep his root spreddes down to hell:
So was this Lord now here now there beset
With words, in whose stout breast wrought many cares,
But still his mind in one remaynes, in vain
The tears were shed. Then Dido frayde of fates
Wyshed for death, yrketh to see the skies.
And that she might the rather work her will,
And leave the light (a griesely thing to tell)
Upon the aulters burning full of sense.
When she set gifts of sacrifyce, she saw
The holy water stocks wax black within,
The wine eke shed, change into fylthy gear,
Which sight to none, not to her sister told.
A marble temple in her palice eke,
In memory of her old spouse, there stood,
In great honor and worship, which she held,
With snow white clothes decked, and with bows of feast,
Where often was heard, her husbands voice, and speech
Clypping for her, when dark night hyd the earth
And often the Owl with rufull song complain,
From the house top to draw his playning tunes
And many things forespoke by prophets past
With dreadful warnyng began her now affray:
And stern Aeneas seemed in her sleep
To chase her still about, bestraught in rage:
And still her thought, that she was alone
Vnwayted on great vyages to wend.
In desert land her Tyrian folks to seek.
Like Pentheus, that in his madness saw
Swarmyng in flocks the furyes al of hell:
Two suns remove, and Thebes town show twain.
Or like Orestes Agamemnons son:
In tragedyes who represented ays
Driven about, that from his mother fled,
Armed with brandes, and eke with serpents blacks:
That syttyng sound within the temples porche
The hugely furyes his slaughter to revenge
Yelden to woe, when fransye had her caught:
Within her self then began she well debate
Full bent to dye the time, and eke the mean:
And to her woeful sister thus she said,
In outward cheer, dissemblyng her intent,
Presentyng hope under semblant glad:
Sister rejoice, for I have found the way
Him to returue, or lose me from his love.
Toward the end of the great Octian,
Where as the Sun dyscendeth, and declynes:
In the extremes of Ethiope is a place,
Where huge Atlas does on his shoulders turn
The sphere so round, with flaming stars beset,
Borne of masile, I hear should be a nun
Of the Hysperiane systers temple
The garden that gyues the Dragon food
That on the tree preserues the holy fruit
With honey moist, and poppey that sleep prouokes
This woman does auaunt, by force of charm
What heart she list to set at lybextye:
And other some to perece with heavy cares:
In runnyng flood to stop the waters course:
And eke the stars their meuinges to reuerse:
The gostes that walk by night, eke to assemble:
Under thy feet, thearth thou shall behold
Tremble and roar, the oaks fall from the hill.
The Gods and thee, dear sister, now I call
In wytnes, and thy head so sweet:
To Magike arts against my will I bend.
Right secretly within our inner court,
In open air rear up a stake of wood:
And hang thereon the weapon of this man
The which he left within my chamber stycke.
His weeds dyspoyled all, and brydeall bed,
Wherein alas Sister, I found my bane:
Charge thereupon, for so the Nun commaundes,
To do away, what did to him belong:
Of that false wight that might remembrance bring.
Then whysted she, the pale her face began stayne,
Ne could yet Anne believe, her sister meant
To cloak her death by this new sacryfice:
Nor in her breast such fury did conceive,
Neither does she now dread more grievous thyug,
Then followed Sicheus death: wherefore
She put her will in ure
But the Queen, when thestake was reared up,
Under the air within the inward court
With cloven oak, and byllettes made of fyrre,
With garlandes then, she does beset the place,
And with grene bows eke crown the funeral.
And thereupon his weeds and sword forsook,
And on his bed his pycture she bestows:
As she that well foreknewe what was to come.
The aulters stand about, and eke the Nun
With sparkeied tresse, the which three hundred Gods
With a loud voice does thunder out at once:
Erebus the griselye, and Chaos eke,
The three fold Goddess Proserpina,
And three faces of Diana the Virgin
And spryncles eke the water counterfeit
Like unto the black Auernes lake in hell,
And sprynging herbs reaped with brazen sythes
Were sought after the right course of the Moon,
Their venim black intermyngled with milk
The lump of flesh twene the new borne foles eyes
To reave, that wynneth from the da^me her love.
She with the Mole all in her hands devout
Stood near the altar, bare of the one foot,
With vesture loose, the bands vnlased all:
Bent for to dye, calls the Gods to record,
And gyity stars eke of her destenye.
And if there were any God that had care
Of lovers unequal in behest:
Him she requiers of justice to remember.
It was then night, the sound and quiet sleep
Had through the earth the wearyed bodies caught,
The woods, the ragyng seas were fallen to rest,
When that the stars had half their course declyned,
The feldes whyst, beasts, and fowls of diverse hue,
And what so that in the broad longes remaynde,
Or yet among the bushye thickes of brfar,
Laid down to sleep by silens of that night
Began swage their cares, myndles of travails pas
Not so the spiryt of this Phenysian:
Unhappy she, that on no sleep could chance:
Nor yet might rest in eye, nor breast could enter,
Her cares redoble: love rise and rage again,
And ouerflowes with swelling storms of wrath.
Thus thynkes she then, this roles she in her mind.
What shall I do? shall I now bear the scorn
For to assaye mine old woers again?
And humbly yet a nunned spouse require?
Whose marriage I have so often dysdeyned?
The Trojan navy, and Teucryne vile commaundes
Follow shall I? as though it should avail,
That whylom by my help they were releued:
Or for because with kind, and myndefull folk
Right well does sit the passed thankful deed:
Who would me suffer? (admyt this were my will)
Or scorned me to their proud ships receive?
Oh, woe begone: full little do thou wotte.
Or smell the broken oaths of Laomedons kind.
What then? alone on merry Maryners
Shall I wait? or board them with my power:
Of Tyryans assembled me about,
And such as I with travail brought from Tire,
Drive to the seas, and force them fail again?
But rather dye, even as thou have deserved:
And to this we with Ire give thou end.
And thou sister vanquyshed with my tears,
Thou in my rage with all the myschiefe first
Did burden me, and wyshe me to my foe,
Was it not granted me from spousals free,
Like to wild beasts, to live without offence^
Without taste of such cares? is there no faith,
Reserved to the sinders of Sycheus?
Such great complaynt brake forth out of her breast:
Whiles that Aeneas certain to depart,
All things prepared, slept in the poupe on bygh.
To whom in sleep the wounted God heads form
Began aye apeare, retournyng in like shape
As seemed him: and began him thus advise:
Like unto Mercury in voice, and hue,
With yellowe bushe, and comelye lymmes of youth.
O Goddess son, in such case can thou sleep?
Ne yet be straught the dangers do foresee,
That copasse thee? nor hear the fair wyndes blow:
Dido in mind roles vengeance and deceyte,
Certain of death, swelles with ^ble Ire.
Wylt thou not fly, while, thou h^ time of flight?
Straight shall tho(...)ouered with sails
The blasyng brondes ^he shore staid all with flame:
And if the morrow (...)the here:
Come of, have (...) on side,
Full of chaun(...)en be always.
This (...) night he began him hyde.
(...) sudden vysion
A^rad starts up from his sleep in have,
(...) up his feeres awake get up my men,
Aborde your ships, and hoyse up sail with speed,
(...) God me wylles sent from Jove again)
To have my flight, and wrythen cables cut.
Oh holy God, what so thou art we shall
Follow thee, and all blyth obey thy will:
Be at out hand, and friendly us asyst:
Adresse the stars with prosperous influence.
And with that word his glysteryng sword vnshethes,
With which drawn he the cables cut in twain.
The like desire the rest embraced all,
All shyng in have they wrest, and forth they whurle,
The shores they leave, with ships the scas are spread,
Cuttyng the some, by the blewe seas they sweep.
Aurora now from Titans purpie bed,
With new day light has ouerspred the earth,
When by her wyndowes the Queen the crekyng days
Aspyed, and the navy with splayed sails depart
The fhore, and eke the port of vessels void.
Her comely breast three or four times she smote
With her own hand, and toare her golden tresse.
Oh Jove (quoth she) shall he hence thus depart
A stranger thus, and scorn our kingdom so?
Shall not my men do on their armor pressed?
And eke pursue them throughout all the town?
And out of the rode soon shall the vessel warpe.
Haste on, cast flame, hoyse sail, and welde your owers.
What said I? but where am I? what fransy
Alters thy mind, unhappy Dido? now
Has thee beset a froward desteny.
Then it behooved, when thou with him deuydedst
The seepture lo, his faith, and his right hand,
That leads with him (they say) his country goods?
That on his back his aged father bore,
His body might I not have caught and rent?
And in the seas drenched him, and his feeres?
And from Ascanus his life with Iron rest?
And set him on his fathers board for meat?
Of such debate perchance the fortune might
Have been doutfull, would God it were assayed,
Whom should I fear? syths I my self must dye.
Might I have thrown into that navy brandes,
And filled eke their deckes with flaming fire,
The father, son, and all their nation
Destroyed, and fall my self there ouerall.
Sun with thy beams, that mortal works discryes,
And thou Juno, that well these trauayles knows,
Proserpyne thou, upon whom folk do use
To houle, and call in forked ways by night,
Infernal furyes eke, ye wreakers of wrong,
And Didos Gods, who stands at point of death,
Receive these words, and eke your heavy power
Wythdra we from me, that wicked folk deserve,
And our request accept, we you beseech.
If so that yonder wicked head must needs
Recover port, and sail to land of force,
And if Jove's will have so resolved,
And such end has set as no wight can foredoe,
Yet at the least asayled might he be
With arms, and wars of hardy nations,
From the bowndes of his kingdom far eryled,
Iulus eke rauyshed out of his arms,
Driven to call for help, that he may see
The gyltles corpses of his folk lie dead.
And after hard conditions of peace,
His realm, nor life desired may he brook:
But fall before his time unburied amyd the sands.
This I require, these words with blood I shed.
And Tyrians, ye his stock and all his race
Pursue with hate, reward our fynders foe,
No love nor leage, betwyxt our peoples be.
And of our bones, some wreaker may there spryng,
With sword and flame that Trojans may pursue,
Now from henceforth when power may stretche,
Our costs to them contrary be they for aye,
I crave of God, and our streams to their fluddes,
Arms unto arms, and of spryng of each rate.
This said, her mind she wrythed over al sides,
Seeking with speed to end this irksome life.
To Sicheus nurse Barcen then briefly thus she said:
For hers at home in ashes did remain.
Call unto me dear nurse my sister Anne:
Bid her, in have in water of the fludde
She sprynckle the body, and bring the beasts,
And purging sacrifice, I did her show:
So let her come: and thou thy temples bind
With sacred garlandes, for the sacrefyce,
That I to Pluto have begone my mind,
Is to reform, and give end to these cares:
And Trojan statue throw into the flame.
When she had said: redouble began her nurse
Her steps, forth on an aged woman's trotte,
But tremblyng Dido al egerly now bent
Upon her stern determination,
Her blood shot eyes rolyng within her head:
Her quyueryng cheeks flecked with deadly stayne,
Both pale and wan, to think on death to come,
Into the inward wards of her palace
She rusheth in: and clam up as bestraught
The buryal stacke: and drew the Trojan sweard
Her gift sometime, but meant to no such use.
Where when she saw his weed, and well known bed,
Weeping a while, in study began she stay,
Fell on the bed, and these last words she said.
Sweet spoils, whiles God and desteny did permytte,
Receive this spirit, and ryd me of these cares.
I lived and ranue the course, fortune did grant,
And under earth my great ghost now shall wend
A goodly town I buylte, and saw my walls:
Happy, alas to happy, if these costs
The Trojan ships had never touched aye.
This said, she laid her mouth close to the bed:
Why then (quoth she) vnwroken shall we dye?
But let us dye for thus, and in this sort
It lyketh us to seek the shadows dark.
And from the seas the cruel Trojan eyes
Shall well decerne this flame, and take with him
Eke these unlucky tokens of my death.
As she had said, her damsel might perceive
Her with these words fall peresed on the sword,
The bolyng blood with gore and hands embrued.
The clamor rang unto the palace top,
The brute ran throughout al thastoyned town:
With waylyng great, and women's lamentyng.
The roofes began roar, the air resound with playnt
As though Cartage, or ancient town of Tire
With prease of entered enemies swarmeo full:
Or when the rage of furyous flame does take
The temples tops, and mansions eke of men.
Her sister Anne, spryteles for dread to hear
This fearful stir, with nails began tear her face,
She smote her breast, and russhed through the route:
And dyeng thus she cleapes her by her name:
Sister, for this did you with craft me bouroe?
The stake, the flame, the auters breed they this?
What shall I first complain, forsaken wight?
Lothest thou in death thy systers fellowship?
Thou should have called me to like desteny:
One woe, one sword, one hour might end us both.
This funeral stake buylt I with these hands,
Or with this voice cleaped our natyue Gods
As cruel for to absent me from thy death?
Dystroyed thou have (sister) both thee and me,
Thy people eke, and princes borne at Tire,
Give, here I shall with water wash her wounds:
And suck with mouth her breath, if ought be left.
This said, unto the high degrees she mounted,
Embrasyng fast her sister now half dead:
With waylefull playnt, whom in her lap she laid
The black swarte gear wyping dry with her clothes.
But Dido straue for to lift up again
Her heavy eyes, and has no power thereto:
Deep under her breast, the fyxed wound does gape.
Thryse leanyng on her elbowe began she raise
Her self upward: and thryse she ouerthrewe
Upon the bed: rangyng with wandryng eyes
The skies for light: and wept when she it found.
Almighty Juno having ruthe by this
Of her long pains, and eke her lyngryng death,
From heaven she sent the Goddess Iris down,
The thrallyng spirit, and ioynted lymmes to loose.
For that neither by lot of desteny,
Nor yet by natural death she peryshed:
But wretchedly before her fatal day,
And kyndled with a sudden rage of flame:
Proserpyne had not yet from her head berefte
The golden hear: nor judged her to hell.
The dewye Iris thus with golden wings,
A thousand hues showing against the sun,
Amyd the skies then did she fly adowne:
On Didos head, where as she began alyght,
This hear (quoth she) to Pluto consecrate.
Commanded I bereue, and eke thy spirit unloose
From this body: and when she had thus said,
With her right hand she cut the hear in twain:
And therewyth all the natural heat began quenches
And into wind the life forth with resolve.
FINIS.

