A Treatise of Penance, WITH AN EXPLICATION of the Rule, and manner of living,
of the Brethren and Sisters, of the third Order of S. FRAVNCIS; commonly
called, of the Order of PENANCE, ordained for those which desire to live
holilie. and do Penance in their own houses.

By F. W. S. Strict. Obser.

WHEREUNTO IS ADDED, THE EPIstle and Annotations upon this Rule, of the
Reverend Father, Fa. PETER GONZALES, Commissarie General.

With a Catalogue made by him, of the names of the chief persons of this
Order, as well Canonized Saints, as Beatified, with the other Honorable and
worthy persons, who for their virtuous deeds, and holiness of life, are
Cronacled to their perpetual memory here in earth, and no doubt to their
everlasting glory in heaven.

MAT. 3. Do penance, for the kingdom of heaven draws near.

Yea, I say unto you, unless you do penance, you shall all perish together.
Luc. 13.

Sed paenitentium tercius sexum caput vtrumque. At Douay by JOHN HEIGHAM, with
permission of the Superiors. ANNO 1617.

TO HIS VVELBELOVED BROTHER, A. B. and the rest of the Brethren and Sisters, of
the third order of S. FRAVNCIS, commonly called, of Penance. Fr. W. S. wishes
all spiritual health and comfort in our Lord JESUS.
EVen as by the law of God and man, Children are bound to honor, reverence,
and obey their Parents, both Spiritual and Temporal: so in like sort is it
comprehended in the same, that Parents are no less obliged to have a due care
to nourish and correct, to comfort also, and instruct their Children.
Wherefore, devout Brethren and Sisters, servants of Jesus Christ, pardon me
(unworthy the name of a Father) for that these many years past, I have not
written unto you all in general, but only once, to encourage you in the holy
Profession, which our Lord has called you unto, and in the battle which you
maintain against the flesh, the world, and the devil, by reason of the happy
way, and perfect course of Penance, which you have begun. For if the father,
which begets one according to the flesh, is so bound to bring him up in his
youth in virtue, that if through his fault and want of due correction, and
instruction, he do amiss, great punishment hangs over his head (whereof we
have a lamentable example in Hely the high Priest, who for default of his
children was punished himself with sudden death, and his house overthrown
and quite dejected) Much more care ought the Spiritual Fathers have, to
cherish, instruct, and encourage their children in the virtuous course, which
they have begun, and to admonish and reprehend them, if they do otherwise,
for that most severe is the threatening of Almighty God against them, if through
their negligence any should fall to ruin, saying by the mouth of Ezechiel:
Ezec. 34.
That he would require the blood of those which shall perish at the hands of
such, as by their negligence were cause thereof. Wherefore, though heretofore
whilst your number was but small, I was able by word and presence to supply,
what by writing I omitted to do, yet now, your holy company daily increasing,
and my years and strength continually decaying, my purpose and desire is by
Gods grace, (and his divine aid assisting me) now to accomplish and perform
that, wherein I have hitherto failed, and to that end, I have compiled this
little TREATISE OF PENANCE, for your direction and comfort: to whom, with all
sincere and fathertly affection, I dedicate it, making humble petition in my
poor prayers, and daily Sacrifices with my whole heart, to the end I may
further you in what possibly I can, to win and procure at last the crown,
prepared for you in heaven, and promised you here on earth, at your profession,
for your Penance and pains taking, to gain the favor of God, which every
good Christian ought also chiefly to seek: for I assure you, a Christian has
but this one business, or at least this ought to be the principal, to learn
how to find favor before God, seeing that to please him, is the happiest
thing that can come unto us: for without this, what are all other things but
affliction and misery? But having well labored therein, and accomplished that
matter, there is nothing that should terrify us, because having Gods favor,
one ought not to care, although all afflictions and pains should fall upon
him. And I fear that one of the causes why many live, without having, or
obtaining the favor of this our Lord and Redeemer, contenting themselves with
the vanities of this world (which by your Rule and holy Order, you are to
contemn) is, for that they know not the worth thereof, or the vehement desire
he has to bestow it on us, and himself withal, in whom all grace and
goodness is comprehended. For who is he that should perfectly know, that in
one thing only, all goodness is heaped together, but would truly desire,
rather to have it, then to wander up and down, begging of every creature some
parcel thereof, and after much pains, to remain as if he had gotten nothing?
For though he had gotten all the world, yet if he want the favor of God, all
is as nothing, for that it would nothing at all profit him. Our Savior Jesus
Christ by his holy grace, give us his light, that we may lift up our eyes to
him, and that his love and favor may appear to be so worthily accounted of,
that without any fear at all, we may go foreward in that happy course we
have begun to obtain it, that we may give for it whatsoever he will demand of
us in exchange, for who soever will give but something for the love of God, and
not all, has too base a conceit of the same, and therefore deserves to
remain without it.

Wherefore, though in this third order, you are not bound or commanded to sell
and give away all unto the poor, as in the other two orders they are counseled
to do, either in deed, or good will at the least: yet all such as will do
well, and get Gods grace and his favor, must give all that they have, and
themselves withal, wholly unto God, who did not think much to give himself
wholly upon the Cross, for our sakes.

We must give much, to have much, and to rejoice not a little, that we have
to give, that which God demands for himself, and his honor, thereby to
declare our affection unto him. And if this be good (as good it is) for all
sorts of people, by far greater reason does it appertain unto you (most
dear Brethren and Sisters) which after a more particular manner then others,
are his chosen servants, which have renounced the vanities of the world, to
serve him in this holy order of Penance.

But forasmuch, as the natural inclination and disposition of men is such,
that seldom or never will they willingly undergo any danger, labor, or
pain, unless they hope thereby to get honor, gain, or pleasure; but where
there is expectation of any one of these, there is no danger so imminent, no
pain so grievous, nor labor so great, but they will voluntarily undertake it,
for to obtain their wished desire. What danger is there so perrilous, but the
valiant Soldier will expose himself unto, in hope to atchiue honor? what
pain so grievous, but that the voluptous men, and lovers of the world, do
subject themselves here unto, for to obtain a momentary pleasure? What toil
and travel is there so great, but that the husbandman will undertake, for
future hope, and uncertain gain.

Wherefore, seeing that all other persons also, of what degree or estate
soever, are thus naturally inclyned, and that not only Penance it self, but
the very name thereof, seems hateful unto many, for want of the knowledge,
and due consideration of the honor, profit, and pleasure, that it brings man
unto. For that cause, before I go about to set down your holy order of
Penance, or declaration of your Rule and manner of life, which our B. Father S.
FRAVNCIS, by the inspiration of the holy Ghost, did institute in the year of
our Lord 1221. for all sorts of persons, whose desire was to live devoutly in
their own houses, to fly the pompes of the world, and to intend chiefly to
the works of piety. The more to encourage you in your good purposes, and to
animate others to follow your virtuous examples, I deemed it not a miss, to
take away first, that hardness and hatefulnes which seemed to many to be in
Penance, by declaring the necessity and utility thereof, with the great
graces which redound unto all persons in general from it, but especially from
this your holy order of Penance, which forasmuch as it requires every month
some exhortation to be made unto you thereof: I have set down here this little
Treatise, to the end that at such times as you want that opportunity, you might
read some of these Chapters following. And seeing that our holy Patron S.
FRAVNCIS, does require in his children, an special obedience above all
others, unto the Cathotholike Church, I as a poor child of his, do with all
humble submission of will, mind and understanding, submit not only this my
simple collection, and declaration of your rule, unto the correction and
reformation thereof, but in like sort, all my actions and thoughts, beseeching
sweet Jesus, which is our chief Patron, that this my poor labor may
redound to his honor and praise, and unto the increase of grace and virtue in
you his devout children, so hoping of your favorable acceptance of good will,
herein I rest,

Your humble Brother in our Lord JESUS, Fr. VV. S.

The Epistle to the Reader.
GEntle Reader, pondering, and diligently noting, the great fruits, and
manifold helps, which diverse holy members of the Catholic Church has in
times past, and even until this day, do continually receive from this third
holy order, instituted by our Seraphicall Father, S. FRANSCIS, which he, (as
testifies S. BONAVENTVRE) would have to be called, the third order of Brothers
and Sisters of Penance, for that the way of Penance is common to all men that
desire to come to heaven, so in like sort this order, admitting both the
Clargie and Lay people, Virgins and married folks of both sexes. I did
therefore obtain from my Superiors, the form of this Rule in French some 17.
years past, and seeing that it was first ordained for all devout persons, of
what degree soever, that would undertake it, I did presently translate it into
our native mother tongue, to the intent, it might according unto the first
institution, be made common unto all such zealous persons, as had any desire to
embrace it: forasmuch as this Rule and worthy form of life, being made in a
Catholic Country (where all virtuous actions, and pious devotions, are freely
practiced) does exhort all followers thereof, to frequent and fulfill diverse
holy works, which many persons, not well weighing the whole contents of this
Rule, and the careful provision, which our holy Fathers have made for all
persons of what estate, and place, soever, have thought it to be a matter of
great difficulty, if not impossible to observe the contents of this Rule in
our Country at this time. Wherefore, seeing that it was ordained in the
general Chapter, which was held last at Tolledo, that all Superiors; of the
orders of holy S. FRAVNCIS, should use their best means, to publish this his
third order, in all Provinces, I (though unworthy of the place) not long after,
being made Commissarie General, of the Province of England, desirous both to
fulfill the commandment of the General Chapter, in doing my best endeavor, to
publish in our Province, this holy order, and in like manner, to take away and
make clear all such doubts and difficulties, as seemed to be contained in this
Rule, did translate it again out of Latin, verbatim, as it was set down in
the Apostolical breue, of NICOLAVS 4. for the confirming of it, and according
to the privilege which his Holiness granted, in the 18. Chapter of this Rule
and form of life, did dispense, and accommodate it in abstinences, fastings,
and all other austerities, unto the conueniencie, of the persons, time and
place, of our Country. But seeing afterward, that the number of Brothers and
Sisters, did increase in such sort, that it was, and would be hereafter more
troublesome, both to write out large Copies thereof, for every one which
desires it, or to give unto each person those particular instructions, which
was necessary for so holy a congregation: I purposed to put it into print, and
therefore made a more ample declaration thereof, to the intent, that such as I
could not conveniently instruct in all points of this Rule by word of mouth,
they did either doubt of, or were willing to learn, for the perfect
observation of this holy estate of life; and for their better encouragement
therein, I had gathered also a short collection of the chiefest perfections of
this most pious order, and therewithal endeavored to show how every point
thereof did take his firm foundation from the holy Scriptures, purposing to
have joined it, unto this preasent Treatise. But having at length obtained this
Rule written in Spanish, with the brief annotations, of the Reverend Father,
Commissarie General, of our whole order in these parts behither the the Alps*
I fearing least that this present Treatise, would altogether mount to a greater
volume, then I thought it convenient for this present time, have left out the
collection of the perfection of this Rule, until some other convenient
opportunity, and added in stead thereof, this Reverend Fathers Epistle, and his
annotations upon this Rule, to the intent that every one may both see, how this
Rule is observed in Catholic Countries, and also that it is an order much
respected, and not worn out of request, or like easily to be trodden down,
seeing that all the chief Fathers and superiors of our order, in the whole
world, being assembled together, in a general Chapter, were so careful in
making a special ordenance, for the publishing and conseruing of it, which
caused this our Commissarie General, not only to request, but also to command
all our Prouincials to publish and establish, and use all their best means,
for the conservation of this so holy a thing, whereby this holy congregation is
so increased, within this last ten years, since that commandment was given,
that not only the meaner virtuous sort, but also a greater part of the
Nobility of Spain, has and does daily embrace and observe it most sincerely,
being moved not a little thereunto, by the examples of many worthy persons,
which did both excel them in many degrees of Nobility here in earth, and now
much more in heaven; being some of the^ Canonized Saints, others beatified,
besides those honorable and worthy persons, which for their virtuous deeds,
and holiness of life, their names are cronacled to their perpetual memory
here in earth, and no doubt to their everlasting glory in heaven: whose names
as our forementioned Commissarie, did place in the end of his little book, so
have I joined them in the end of mine, adding thereunto the name of our most
virtuous and renowned Queen, KATHERINE, mother unto Queen MARIE, of happy
memory, being the only person of great worth, that I can learn to have been
of this third order in our Country, which may as yet be conveniently
cronacled. And for as much as the followers of this holy Rule and form of
life, do (and must if they may conveniently) serve the Saints of all the three
orders, which our holy Patron S. FRANCIS instituted, I have (both for their
ease, and the devotion of all such as will devoutly invoke their help) added
also the commemorations of all those Saints, which imitating the Rules of our
Seraphical Father here in earth, do now to his greater glory, and their
everlasting happiness, euioy with him the sight and company of our heavenly
Father, in his glorious kingdom, which as we desire all to do, so I beseech
God of his infinite love and goodness, to grant us all his grace to contemn
in such sort as those blessed Saints have done the vanities and pleasures of
this world, that passting by their example, through the narrow way of Penance,
we may come in the end, to the happy home, where they now live in all
felicity, and possess eternal bliss, with God and all his heavenly Court.

The Epistle of the Commissarie General. THE EPISTLE OF THE Reverend Father,
Frater PETER GONZALIS, Commissarie General of the whole order of our holy
Father S. FRANCIS, in his family, on this side the Alps, unto all the
Prouincialls in General, but especially of Spain.
FRater PETER GONZALES, of Mendoza, Commissarie general, of the order of our
holy Father S. FRANCIS, in this Family of Cismontana,
to all the Reverend Father Prouincial Ministers of the same, health and peace
in our Lord
Forasmuch as in the last general Chapter, held at Tolledo, Anno Dom. 1606.
It was ordained, that the third order, which our Seraphical Father, S. FRANCIS
did institut, as well for married, as single persons, should be published. And
that it should be procured to be instituted and observed in the Provinces of
the Crown of Castile, to the immitation of that which is kept already in
Arogone. And finally, that there should be no less knowledge of his holy Rule
in any part of Spain, then there is in many other parts of the world. And
that the devout Christians, might not loose so many spiritual fruits, as may be
gained by the observance of this Rule, and the graces of so many Popes granted
unto it, Wherefore that this ordinance of the general Chapter, may be
fulfilled and put in execution, with all diligence; We send unto all you (most
Reverend Fathers) a copy of the said Rule, with some notes and aduertisements,
which we have thought necessary, for the better keeping, and observing of the
said Rule, beseeching all your Reuerences, and for the more increasing of your
merits. We command you, by the virtue of holy obedience, that with all
diligence, you cause the said Rule to be published in the towns of your
Provinces, and especially where there is any convent, and that you give order
unto the venerable Father Guardians, that they be very careful to establish
and conserve this so holy a Rule. And also to the Fathers, Preachers, and
Confessors, to persuade all devout persons unto it, both in public and
secreete. And in like manner, that it be published in the towns where there
is no Monastery of Friars or Nuns. And that they use all the best means
they can, that so great a good be not lost, commanding it to the Religious
Fathers, who shall go thither to preach, hear confessions; And in all the
Conuents, let there be a book wherein may be written the names of all such
as shall enter into this Religion, and ^^t their profession be set down under
the hands of him who made it, and the superiors who did assist it: which
book ought to remain in the custody of that Religious person within every
Convent, must be be named by the Reverend Father Provincial, for the
Confessors of the brethren of this order, that he may assist with them in the
meetings which the rule requires. We declare moreover, that if any of them
have devotion and desire to make his confession to some other, let him not be
hindered. Dated in our Convent of Madrid, the 4. of August. 1606.

Fr. PETER GONZALES of Mendoza, Commissarie general.

The Arguments of the Chapters, of the Treatise of Penance.
AN introduction and exhortation to Penance. cap. 1. Of the necessity of
Penance. chap. 2. Of the dangers in deferring of Penance. chap. 3 Certain
reasons, to make the more manifest the danger which proceed from delay and
negligence in doing of Penance. chap. 4. That Penance is not to be left off
whilst life last. cap 5. That the Austeritie of Penance is made easy by due
consideration of the sweetness which is in it, and profit which comes
thereof. cap. 6. How great is the profit which proceeds from Penance. cap. 7
That penance ought chiefly to be done for the love of God. chap. 8. That the
best and most in Gods love, have not neglected to do Penance. chap. 9 An
Epilogue unto the B. and S. of Penance.
The Arguments of the Rule of the order of Penance.
THe breue of NICOLAVS 4. Of the institution of this order of Penance. Of the
benefit and privileges of this holy Order of Penance. 1 Of the manner of
examing in these which will undertake this form of life. chap. 1 2 How they
are to be received which will enter into this Order. chapter 2 3 Of the form of
the habit, and quality of their apparel. chap. 3 4 That they ought not to
go unto dishonest banquets, sights, or courts. chap. 4 5 Of Abstinence and
fasting. c. 5 6 How often they ought to go to confession in the year, receive.
chapter 6 7 That they ought not to wear wapons of offense. chap. 7 8 Of saying the
Canonical hours chap. 8 9 That al they which may by right ought to make a
will. chap. 9 10 Of making of peace between brethren and other strangers. chapter
10 11 When they are molested against their constitutions, or their privileges.
chap. 11. 12 That they ought to beware as much as may be, of solemn oaths.
chap. 12. 13. Of hearing Mass, and making the Congregation. chap. 13. 14 Of
the sick brethren, and of them who are deceased. chap. 14. 15 Of the officers.
chap. 15. 16 Of the visitation and correction of offenders. chap. 16 17 Of
avoiding strifes between themselves and others. chap. 17 18 In what manner, and
who may dispense in fasting. chap. 18 19 That their ministers ought to declare
unto the visetor their faults. chap. 19 20 How in all their foresaid things no
man is bound to mortal sin cap. 20 The confirmation of the Rule. A
catalogue of the Saints of S. FRANCIS his orders. The Table of the principal
matter contained in this book.
AN INTRODVCtion, and exhortation to PENANCE. CAP. I.
Our weakness is so great, and they that fight against us so strong, that it
is no great marvel, if many unwary persons be often overcome; Wherefore the
vessel of Election, holy S. PAVLE considering the great subtilities and dangers
of the world, Ephesians. 5.
writing unto the Ephesians, warns the^ to walk warily and prudently, in so
dangerous a time and place, saying: See my brethren that you walk warily, not
as unwise, but like wisemen, redeeming the time, because the days are evil,
S. JOHN also the holy Evangelist, and dearly beloved disciple of our SAVIOVR,
Epist. ca 5. Ioh. cap. 5
speaking of the corruption of the world, says, That the whole world is set
in wickedness, S. Bernard.
which holy S. BERNARD did most notably note in his time, saying, There is
nothing in this world but filthy love, there is no sincere faith, for all
things that belong thereunto are defiled with pride, avarice, covetousness and
leacherie, for piety is gone from Priests* Justice from Princes, Counsel from
the ancient True Discipline from Religious love from Parents faith from the
people, reverence from subjects, love of Chastity from virgins, shame^acenesse
from married people; and what else should we expecte, but the coming of
Antichrist, for now Christ is forgotten, and not known of many, and is held
as a stranger by the mighty Potentates: hitherto S BERNARD.

If the holy Apostles did complain of wickedness which reigned in their time,
and S. BERNARD in like sort of his, how much more cause have we now to lament,
where all sins and iniquities do so greatly abound, Tren. 3.
that we may justly say, It is the great mercy of God that we are not consumed.
Wherefore most necessar e it is for us, that devoutly ma^king, and diligently
remembering the foresaid wholesome doctrine of the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.
we set^le our steps warily and wisely in this vale, and time of misery, and
returning by Penance, redeem with auster^^^e of life, the time misp nt in all
liberty. and so walk perseuerantly with open eyes of the interior man, at
the least, in that straight and narrow way, which leads Unto the heavenly
country, from whence we were banished by sin, Math. 7. Gen 19. Psalm. 118.
and not to look backwarde, least declyninge from that way we err and go
astraye, and so fall into the bottomeles pit of eternal damnation, from which
that by Penance and Austerity of life we may the more securely escape, our
Savior exhorts us to enter by that narrow gate saying. Math. 7.
Straight is the way that leads to heaven, and few do find it, but broad is
the gate, and large is the way which leads to perdition, and many enter
therbye.

The reason why many do enter into perdition, of eternal damnation by the
broad gate and large way, is this (as it is written in Eccle. 1.) The perverse
and wicked men are hardly corrected, and infinite is the number of fools,
which alas do more look unto this present life, S. Chrysostom.
the^ unto the end which follows. Unto whom S. Chrysostom: says. Do not thou
regard that the way is hard, but consider whither it leads: neither do thou
respect that it is straight, but whither it brings.

This differerence is between the good and the bad, that the evil and wicked,
will celebrate the Feast before the Vigill, and reiectinge Penance, will
rejoice temporally in this world, and therefore in the world to come, they
shall celebrate the Eve, for the Feast which they have had here, for there
shall they weep everlastingly: as most notably declares S. Gregory saying.
S, Grego.
Perpetual lamentation, and weepinge do follow the present joys of this
life. S, August.
Therefore O brethren fly here vain joy and mirth if you fear there to
lament for none can rejoice here with the World and reign there with God. S.
August. affirms as much saying. Noe man can take joys and delights in both
worlds neither can an^ man rejoice here and in the world to come, but of
necessity he must loose the one, which will possess the other, he therefore
which will reign in the eternal life, let him despise the triumphs and
pleasure of these transitory vanities, which do greatly hinder, and deeply
wound the poor soul, whom Christ so dearly loves, that he refused noe
panies to cure and heal the greiuousnes of thy wounds wherefore Saint Bernarde
speakinge of the love of Christ to thy soul, exhorts thee to weighe well the
greatness of the wou^des thereof saying. Know o man and well consider, how
noble and worthy is thy soul, and how great were her wounds, for which it was
needful that our Lord and Savior Christ should be wounded If these wounds ha^
not been great even unto death, yea eternal death, the Son of God would never
have died t^ cure them. Do not thou therefore neglect to do ^ennance for thy
sins, for which ou^ Savior has endured so many torments, and regard not
what the flesh suggesteth but what the spirit is able to do: most worthily
therefore says the same S. Bern. If the say this i^ very hard. I cannot
co^te^ne the word and hate mine own flesh in doing Pe^nance T^ me I pray you,
where are the lovers of the world who were within a small time with us? Now
there remains nothing of them but ashes and and worms: consider well what
they now are, and what they were, they were men, as thou art, they did eat,
drink and laughe, they led their days in joys, and in a moment descended
into hell, where their flesh is deputed unto worms, and there their souls to
eternal pains. Now what has it proffitted them, their vanie glory, short
joy, power of the world, pleasure of the flesh, deceitful and false riches,
their great and wicked concupiscence? where is now their mirth? now how great
sorrow remains? After so much voluptuousnes and pleasure, now how great
misery and grief? They have fallen from that exaltation and height, to great
ruin and confusion, and noe less torment and pain. Whatsoever has happened
unto them, may also happen unto thee, because thou art a man, a man of earth,
dunge of dunge, of earth thou art, of earth thou live, and into earth thou
shall return, when thy last da^ shall come (which will come suddenly and
paraduenture this present hour) it is most certain thou shall dye, but it is
uncertain when, how, or where, for that death does every where expect thee,
if thou art wise, thou will also attend him in like sort. All these are S.
Bernards words: whereby every one may see how just cause ^he has to prepare
him self by daily Pe^nance against this uncertain hour (...), and specially
seeing that although the hour of death is uncertain, yet most assuredly shall
he dye. Wherefore hold and esteem thyself always and in all events humbly
patiently, and wisely, as a dead man, and say: these things would not move a
dead man, neither ought they to move thee, whether they are prosperous or
contrary: let every day be also unto thee as the last day, and ponder well with
thyself what preparation thou have made for it, what Pennaunce thou have
hitherto done, or what spiritual riches thou have heaped together, that is,
what vices thou have overcome, and what virtues thou have gotten, or what good
deeds thou have coffered up in thy soul all the time of thy life. Where is
the fruit thou have brought forth being a tree so long planted, so
diligently pruned, and so carefully conserved in our Lords vineyard? and
whether the fruit that thou have offered be sweet and pleasant to thy espowse,
or galle and vinegar to disgust his taste? whom therein have thou sought? whom
have thou had a mind to content: thy self, or him? O silly blind fools that
we be, that in seeking our own conte^tme^t, we loose it, and our Savior also,
for who so seeks himself, at his last end, shall assuredly loose himself
whether he will or not: who so runs after his own pleasure and contentme^t,
shall fall into discontentmentes, seeing that he is an Idolater, in respect of
himself, and forsakes his true God, who is the only repose and comfort of our
souls.

Let us turn bridle, and think that we are far out of the way we should
houlde, and let us bend our pace toward the commandments of God (which are
the principal part of the vow of our profession) that we may walk in them
assuredly, having so sure a promise of our Savior himself of his heavenly
kingdom, if we truly observe them. Let us seek his good pleasure and
contentment, be it never so much against our own: let us be severe, and
austere: against our selves, that we may be me^k and gracious toward him,
seeing that to have once our desires and pleasures we have so often offended,
and displeased his divine Majesty: let us from henceforth crucify this naughty
man of ours, that Jesus Christ our Savior may live in us, seeing that he has
been crucified for us, and suffered death to give us life, let us therefore
humble our selves to death, even of the Cross: let us mortify our flesh with
great feruor; let us chastise it with abstinence and severe penance, having so
much offended God in not acknowledginge his goodness; let us cast off the yoke
of vanity, according to our profession, and as one who has been slothful and
lazy most part of the day, let us make have and be diligent to dispatch our
business at night: and seeing that we have taken upon us a higher estate of
perfection then the common sort, let us not content ourselves with the common
course and kind of life, but as our profession is of Penance, so let us
endeavor that our life may be correspondent there unto, and as our sins have
not been little, let our penance be accordingly, and considering that we have
had force and strength to sin, let us in like sort have it to satisfy by
Penance therefore; what reason were it that haiunge by miserable diligence
served sin, we should after a cold sort and in a ma^er against our own will,
serve virtue, shewinge our selves able and vigilant men to spoil our souls,
and weak and negligent in purginge, and cleansing them again?

The Devil has heretofore obtained much at our hands against our selves, shall
we continually be so miserable and wretched that God cannot find like favor
with us, when his holy motions and desires tend only to our good, both here and
everlastingly? Let us not be like unto these which walk ^o negligently in the
way of God, that that they care not much in what sort they travel, and what
path they take, but seeing that our Savior has towched our souls, let us
aunsweare his divine inspiratio^s, and thankinge him infinitely for his grace,
walk so carefully in this holy way of Penance, that by it finally we may
come to everlasting joy and felycity.

Of the Necessity of Penance. CAP. 2.
IN the 3. Chap. of S. John, our Savior showing the necessity of the Sacrament
of Baptism to be such, that the very Infants could not enter into the
kingdom of heaven without it, says. Ioh. 3.
Unless a man be borne again of water and the holy Ghost, he cannot enter into
the kingdom of Heaven: so in like sort in the 13. of S. Luke, he shows
plainly the necessity of Penance to be noe less for poor sinners, saying.
yea, Luke. 13.
I say unto you unless you do penance, you shall all perish together. In
which words he shows the necessity of Penance to be such, that he leaves a
hard choice for poor sinners, that would neglect it, that is, that if they
will not make choice to do Penance, they cannot avoid eternal perdition and
therefore said plainly, unless they should do it, they should all perish
together S Hierome therefore worthily calls it, S. Hier. ad, Demetr. cap. 6.
the second table after Shipwreck: for that the world after the sin of Adam,
is likened unto the sea, wherein all that enter into the ship of Baptism do
ascend and sail: which vessel is said therefore to be whole, for that by it
all sins are absolutely forgiven, both in respect of the fault, and pains
also due thereunto, and therefore by it men sail and swymme in great safety and
innocence: but that ship being once broken by mortal sin (which is the
Shipwreck of the soul) for as much as Baptism imprinteth a Caracter which
cannot be reiterated, therefore remains Penna^ce to save the sinner after such
Shipwreck, whereu^to of necessity by our Saviors words, every one must ru^ne
that will not perish

How necessary Penance has always been unto salvation, does manifestly
appear herein, that the father of mercy and God of all consolation, did by his
faithful servant inuit men always thereunto. For what other thing did Noe
in the law of Nature preach unto the people of God, 2. Cor. 1.
by Gods express commandment for an hundred years together, Genes. 6.
but Penance and amendme^t of life, which they neglectinge to do, not any of
the whole world was saved from the deluge and general flood, but perished
every one, 8. persons only excepted which followed him? In like ^orte, what did
God cry out by the mouth of all his Prophets in the written law, but Penance,
behold I here my says. Convert o Children flying from me says our Lord,
Iherom. 3
and I will heal your auersions. But how they should return, he shows in
the 4 Chap. saying. Girde your selves with hair cloth, mourn and howl out,
for that the wrath of the fury of God, is not turned away. The like did God
command Ezechiel to preach to Jonas and all the rest. Ezech 33. Ion. 3.


Holy S. John Baptist who (being between the Prophets and law of gtace) was
by the testimony of our Savior more then a Prophet, what was the beginning
of his preachinge but Penance, for as testifyeth S. Luke, he said unto the
troops that came to be baptized of him. Ye vipers brood, who shows you to
fly from the future wrath, do therefore the worthy fruits of Penance; as
though he would say, if you will fly from the future wrath, you must do
penance: and to make them to be the more diligent therein to obtain thereby the
kingdom, of heaven said, as reports S. Math. Do penance for that the
kingdom of heaven draws near. Math. 3.
And not only did he teach it by his words but much more by deeds, his whole
life being noe other but a continual penance leading it in great austerity,
where upon holy S. Bernard taking occasion to reprehend the loosenes of the
world says. S. Berna.
The austerity and strict course of life of holy S. John Baptist is a hard
Messenger of eternal death unto delicate and wa^ton persons. Why are we
senceles and unreasonable beasts, and worms of the earth so mad, when that
most holy and blessed man, of whom our Savior himself says that, Amongst the
Sons of women there has not risen a greater; did so afflict and punish his
most innocent body, and we make have to cloth ourselves with precious and
gorgeous apparel? to ba^quet and riot largely and live delicately? It is not
so (o wicked) this is not the way to heaven: for that our sweet Savior, and
louinge Redeemer, the giver and institutor of the law of grace, therein also
shows that the way to go to heaven is quite contrary, when he says that,
straight and narrow is that way, and that the path of Penance is so
necessary, that whosoever will go to his heavenly kingdom, must of necessity
pass thereby: and to induce all men to walk therein, he himself came into this
world to direct them, and call them thereunto. Luc. 5.
Therefore he says. I come not to call the just, but sinners to Penance,
thereby insinuatinge, that Christian religion is a cross and penance, for
Christ calls not unto delights, nor to riches, neither unto honor or
dignities, but unto Penance, and for it, does promise to cleanse our sins:
Esai. 1.
saying by the Prophet Esaias: If your sins shall be like unto Scarlet, they
shall be made as white as snow: signifyinge by this color of scarlet which
hardly changes, that though our sins were never so much inueterated, and
engraf^ed in us, yet by his grace, if we do penance, they shall be cleansed and
made as white as snow; and how we should do it, he shewe^h by h^s Prophet
Joel saying. Turn unto me with all your heart with fasting, Joel. 2.
weepinge and mourninge, that by the abundance of our tears we may wash away
the multitude of our sins, and offenses. In all these before said sentences of
holy Scripture we may see plainly, the necessity of Penance to be great, in
that it is always required at our hands for the cleansing of our sins:
therefore not without just cause does S. Aug. say. That he which created thee,
S. August.
without thee will not justify thee without thee, that is unless thou do thy
part, and return unto him by Penance.

Amongst all the divine admirable works which God has wrought in the world,
one of the most wonderful and hardest, is to make of a wicked and perverse
sinner, a just holy and unspotted man, wherein truly he shows all his power
and mercy more clearly and manifestly, then in all other things whatsoever;
Great certainly and divine power is required to make so^thinge of nothing,
yet no less power but rather greter is expected to justify a sinner. For in
creating, though he were to create the world again, there can be no impediment
to hinder him, for in the creation of the whole world he said but the word,
and al things were made. Genes. 1.


But in the iustifyinge of a sinner there is great difficulty, if the wicked and
sinful person continue and make little account of his divine counsel and
means (that is) Penance. S August. therefore upon these words of our Savior
(He that beleiueth in me shall do the works that I do and greater then
those) says in this manner. S. August. ho. 14. Ioh. 5. Ioh. 14.
Let him judge that can, whether it be more to create just Angels, then to
justify the wicked, certainly if both be of equal power, yet this is of
greater mercy.

The gretest and chiefest work of God, was to absolve and cleanse a sinner from
his offenses, for that to accomplish this work, it was necessary for the Son
of God, to suffer most cruel and bitter death, and to shed his most precious
blood, to purify and make white the soul infested, and defiled with the
spotts, and filth of sin. If the necessity herein were so great in the Son
of God, truly it is not less needful, that thou should suffer some pain
with him for thy souls health, Philip. 2.
seeing that the Apostle S. Paul says. Christ suffered for us leauinge you an
example, that you should follow his stepps. And the said Apostle says
again. If we suffer with him we shall reign with him also. Whereby we see
plainly, that if we will be partakers of his glory, we must of necessity be
partners of his pains and follow his stepps, and to that end does our Savior
say. Luc. 9.
If any will follow me let him renounce himself, and take up his Cross and
so follow me. For in the words immediately going before, he having made
me^tio^ of his death and passion, and of his Resurrection, does now here
insinuate, that it is not enoughe for us, that he suffered his bitter passion,
and shed his most precious blood for our Redemption, but that it is also
necessary that we follow him, and renounce our selves, bridelinge our sensual
appetites, taking up the Cross of labor and penance, least that any man
should vainlie and foolishly think, that Christ's only passion were sufficient
to save us without this, that we should do any thing at all; wherefore most
notably truly, the Son of God, of his eternal wisdom, when he makes
mention of his passion, and what he had done for us: presently there treats
of these things, which of necessity we must do, if we will enjoy the fruit
and merits of his passion, that is if we will follow him, this of our parts
must we do: first renounce our selves, and take up our Cross, and follow him
in his sufferings and passion, and thereby be partakers of his glorious
Resurrection. Excuse can we make none, for that our Savior shows plainly,
that all does depend upon our own will, and therefore says. Luc. 9.
If any one will follow me. Behold, his great, clemency and benignity! he
declares manifestly that he refuses none, but any one that will may, of what
estate or condition so ever he be, noble or base, rich or poor, strong or
weak, whole or sick, our Lord does admit all indifferently that will follow
him, here perfectly by the way of Penance, to reign with him everlastingly
in glory.

But alas how miserable and doleful a thing is it to see, how little account
we make to be his followers and Servant, which he foreseeinge did worthily
say. Luc. 9.
If any one will follow me, If any one will renounce themselves, If any one
will take up their Cross of Penance and mortification? thereby insinuatinge,
how few there are which do so; as if he should say more plainly: amongst
such and so many which fulfill the desires of the flesh, seek to satisfye
their concupiscence, and obey the devil, is not there any one, which will
follow me? Amongst many which run into the broad way of perdition, is
there no body that will enter into the straight way of virtue and Penance,
which leads directly to eternal felicity? how great is this to our shame and
confusion, that the world calls to deceive us, the flesh to spot and defile
us, the devil to ruin and overthrow us, and Jesus Christ the king of glory
calls to save us, and not withstanding many follow the others, but few or
none in comparison will follow Christ our Lord, which came from the high
throne of glory, into this vale of misery, to call sinners to Penance, which
is a thing of such necessity, that without it, though Gods mercy be infinite,
yet neither will he, or yet can he by his ordinary power, remitt actual
sins, because to pardon a man his sins, is to receive him again into his
grace and favor, but God accepts of none into his freindship, unless he be
just and good, which a man cannot be, unless he convert his will to God from
whom by sin he had auerted it, which true conversion is made by detestation
of his sins, and sorrow for it, which is penance: for though in little
ones (before the righ: use of reason) their sin may be remitted, and they
without their proper mouinge and means, may be justified, because without
their own personal act they had committed in Adam original sin, but
whosoever commits actual sin, God will neither remit the sin, nor
pardon and forgive the pains due thereunto, unless the sinner do first
Penance, wherefore holy Iobe said. I did fear all my works knowinge that thou will not spare the offender; Job. 9.
that is unless he do penance as holy David, S. Peeter, S. Mathewe, S. Mary
Magdalen and many others did, whereby their offenses were pardoned and they
received highly into the favor of God. Seeing therefore, that the necessity of
Pe^nance is so great and needful for all sinners, and according to S. John we
have all offended in many things, let us herein time, do penance that thereby
we may come to gain Gods holy favor, and consequenlie everlasting joy.

Of the dangers in deferringe of Penance. CAP. III.
Daily experience teaches us, that brute beasts, though void of reason, yet
by the very instinct of nature, have such care of the conservation of their
bodies, that if they feel them selves to be sick or wounded, they diligently
do seek for remedy. S. Ambrose affirms, that the cruel and savage bear,
when he finds himself to be greiued and sick, searchethe for Emmets or Ants,
and eatinge them is presently cured. We see in like sort, that sensual men
and lovers of their bodies, as soon as they are corporally sick or wounded,
make noe delay to seek out a Physician or Surgeon to heal the^, and willingly
will endure any hard diet, bitter potions, and painful incisions, yea cuttinge
off sometimes of some principal members of the body, for safety and health of
the rest; seeinge therefore, that the health of the soul, is, and ought to be
unto every one, far more precious then that of the body, and the wounds
thereof infinitely more dangerous, by reason that they are hidden and secret,
and bring finally to greater danger and ruin, for that which they bring the
soul unto, is not momentary but everlasting pain, what diligence then ought
every poor sinner use, to find out, and willingly take the wholesome medicine
of Penance, which is the most souueraigne salve for the wounded soul? Were
not he worthy to be thought void of sense, or rather a mad man, that having a
present Remedy in his own power, to cure the dangerous disease of his body,
would so long delay to take it, until the disease, were either past cure, or
in great danger thereof? what does he then deserve to be accounted, which has
the Remedy of Penance always ready to cure his soul, and upon hope of long
life, will delay to use it, until such time that he be sudde^ly prevented and
called away, and thereby perish everlastingly, or at the least in emine^t
peril so to do? Or to defer it so long, that if then he should do it, yet
no certainty of Salvation would it afford him, as notably notes S. AUGUSTINE,
saying. S. Aug.
If one being in the last extreamitie, would receive Penance, I confess we
deny not unto him, that which he demands, but we cannot give him security,
that he goes well from hence, Penance may we well give him, but security
can we give him none. What shall I say? shall he be damned? no. Shall he be
saved? noe. VVilt thou therefore be sure? do Penance then whilst thou art
well in health, for that in a whole man, Penance is perfect, in a sick man
infirm and imperfect, in a dead man, dead. S. AUGUSTINE says again. That
Penance in the hour of death is very perilous. For that in all the whole
Scriptures there is found but one, that is the thief which in the end did
truly repent himself; he only, that none should despair, and he alone, that
none should presume. Our Savior, to show the folly of those which under hope
of long life, do defer their Penance and amendment of life, proposes in
the 12. of S. LVKE a similitude of a certain rich Luke 12.
man, which said. O soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years rest
now, eat, drink, and make good cheer; but God said unto him; O fool, this
night they will take again thy soul from thee, and the goods which thou
have prepared, whose shall they be?

Behold the folly and madness of this rich man, which promised unto himfelfe,
a long and happy life, saying. Thou have great riches for many years, when he
had not one certain hour of life. O how many are there, which with like
folly do settle all their care and study, on a long life, and on those things
which hereafter they will do, promising unto themselves most vainly a life at
their pleasures! This folly truly, does at this day cast many a one down into
hell, when procrastinating from day to day their Penance, and deferring their
conversion, they are suddenly prevented by death: for as S. AUGUST. says most
notably. S. August.
Many are damned for ever, and deteyned finally in their sins, which hear
the voice of secret inspirations, but do not correct and amend their life,
saying; Cras, Cras, to morrow, to morrow, and suddenly the gate it shut, and
the poor miserable soul remains without doors, before the Arch of the
heavenly Country, with the voice of a crovve, because they would not in
time, when they might, and ought, mourn and lament for their sins, with
the voice of a Dove, saying, Nunc. Nunc, now, now: Wherefore (as holy
DIONISIVS the Carthusian writes) the sorrowful voice of a certain man dying,
D. Dion. Cart.
said. O, Cras, Cras, how long a delay have thou made unto me? and by this
procrastinating and deferring from day to day, have drawn me into the
bottomless pit of death: thou have deceived me and I am deceived. Does not
this my misery now surpass and exceed all the miseries in the world? is not
my heart worthily afflicted with this, and my soul wounded? Beh^uld my days
which I ought to have spente without intermission in the praise of God, and
procuring the health of my soul, are now, alas, all spent without any fruit of
good works Thirty years, forty, fifty, more or less of my age are now
gone, lo, and miserably perished and spent so negligently, that I know not if
ever I have spent one day of all this time, in d^ing the will of God, and in
the exercise of virtues so landable, as peradventure I might and ought to have
done: little do I know if ever I have done at any on time, so pleasing gratful,
and acceptable service unto my Creator, as my estate did require. Helas woe be
unto me for grief! this is it wherewithal my bowels and entrails be wounded!
O eternal God, how shamfully shall I stand before thee and all thy Saints, at
the dreadful day of Judgment, when I shall be constrained to render a strict
account, of all that I have committed, or omitted and left undone? and what
shall I say more? behold my tribulation and incessant pains are at hand.

Note this I beseech you all you lovers of the world, and take heed in time
whilst ye may, for time stays for no man, the time is now ours, lent unto us
by God, to work our good here, by employing it wholly to Gods honor, and to
the profit of our souls; and consider therefore, how many hours, which will
never return again, thou have lost, when for temporal affairs and worldly
business, thou have neglected those things, which were most profitable for thy
soul, to employ thy self in frivolous actions. O how many good deeds
might thou have done in so long a time, either in sickness or in health,
which thou would wish for hereafter, before all the delights, riches and
honors of the world, which in only seeking for hitherto, have often
endangered thy self to loose the inestimable treasures of heaven, and gained
little or nothing, but eternal torments in hell, or at the least intolerable
pains in Purgatory. If God should call thee in that negligent estate, wherein
peradventure thou have, or do spend the greatest part of thy time, I may
well call it now thy time, because, if thou will, thou may use it to thine
own good now. For all time is Gods, yet notwithstanding God has made us lords
thereof in this life, that whilst it is ours, we may merit therein life
everlasting; yet after, when this transitory life is past, God will take his
time which he had len^ us, when we shall ^e no moreable to merit, or make
satisfaction by Penance for our sins, but then we shall find God so strict
and severe, that he will judge our very best works, as he testifyeth himself
by the mouth of his Prophet DAVID saying. Psalm. 74.
When I shall take my time, I will judge your righteousness. He does not here
speak of theft, murder, adultery, or such like, but of our own
righteousness, that is, he will weigh our just and good works, in the
balance of his right judgment, where will be known, whether they were done
for the love of God, or love of our selves, or fear only, whereby many
works, that seem here to be good and virtuous (before the judgment of God)
will be of small moment. To what danger then are those persons incident, which
have deferred to do Penance, or any other good work, until fear of death, or
some other extremity, drives them unto it?

But peradventure some may say, we will do Penance for what is past, and
employ our selves to do good works, but there is no such need that we should
presently do it. The perfect pattern and example of worthy and true Penance,
Luc. 3
S. JOHN Baptist shows how much they are deceived, when teaching the people
that came unto him, that the way to fly the wrath of God, was by bringing
forth the worthy fruits of Penance with all speed, for that the axe is put
unto the tree, yet for the comfort of poor sinners he says, that it is only
put unto the tree, and not that it cutteth: thereby insinuating, that in this
life there is time yet by Penance, to fly from the wrath of God, if we will
presently whilst we may, put our hand to the plough, and do Penance before the
axe cut down the tree: which is so near and ready to cut it down, that it
is already put to the root thereof, and little do we know, what day, what
hour, or how soon it will do it.

Eccl. 3.
The Ecclesiastique therefore, exhorts us to make no delay therein, saying: Be
not slow to turn unto our Lord, and defer not thy penance from day to day,
for that suddenly the wrath of God will come upon thee, and destroy thee in
the day of Revenge. Woe be unto those, which when the axe is now put unto the
tree, and their heads full of gray hairs, will not see how quickly the day and
hour of Penance passes, nor consider how the day of salvation may pass away:
It is a strange thing to see thee so negligent and slouthful, when death is at
the door with his axe ready to cut thee down, and thou to be cast into hell
fire, for deferring so long the amendment of thy life, and doing Penance for
what is past, that thereby thou mighst have made satisfaction for thy sins,
gained Gods favor, and everlasting glory.

Certain Reasons, to make more manifest the dangers which proceed from delay
and negligence, in doing of Penance. CAP. IIII.
THE long delay of Penance, brings such danger unto thy soul, that there is
scant any one thing, whereof either the holy Scripture, ancient Fathers, or
modern writers, have made more mention, or labored more carefully to exhort
and stir up all men to avoid and to fly, by diligently exercising of Penance,
then this delay: yet notwithstanding, such is the lamentablenesse of our time,
that there is nothing which is now made less account of. Wherefore I exhort all
such as have a due care and perfect desire to come to eternal rest, to take
some pains in seriously considering these four reasons here following, and to
prevent accordingly in convenient time, the dangers which hereafter may
otherwise befall unto them.

The first reason therefore is, according to the common saying, That as a man
lives, so will he Die. Wherefore as he which has lived well, does seldom dye
ill: so of the contrary side, he which has spent his life in lewdness,
hardly makes a good end We see commonly, that which ways a tree has
continually bended, to that side will he ordinarily fall; for if some great
tree does crook and bend all his weight and bows toward the left side, if
this tree be cut down, without all doubt he will fall one the left hand; even
so, if thou cast all thy desires, affections, and thoughts upon worldly things,
and employ all thy carke and care, whilst thy life lasts, only to get
honor, riches, and pleasure, how should it come to pass, that when death shall
cut thee down, thou can fall into the right hand of God, and most happy
company of the blessed? Woe therefore be unto them, which leading their lives
in vice and sin, do hope to be Citizens of heaven, and have place in those
happy seats, for that lot will happen unto them which they have always
sought for, and loved in their life. Wherefore the chief care of every one
ought to be, so to live continually, as he would be found at the hour of
death. Wherefore seeing (as I said in the Chapter before) that the axe is put
to the root of the tree, apply thy self now in austeritie of Penance, and say
not to morrow I will do this, often repeating to morrow, but now begin to do
it, knowing that of every moment of lost time, thou must render a strict
account; and peradventure when thou would employ it well, thou can not,
for God is not at thy command. Labor therefore with all thy forces, whilst
time serves thee, that thou may fall on the right side, for in what estate
the tree finally falls, there shall he remain for ever: Eccl. 11
according to that of the Ecclesiasticus: Where the wood shall fall, there
shall it remain, whether it be to the South, or to the North. Consider well
and diligently observe all the foresaid things, for that thou know not for
certain, when or how soon, thou shall be cut down, or whether thou shall be
cast into the fire, as most severely S. JOHN Baptist threatens, saying, Every
tree therefore which brings forth not good fruit, Luc.
shall be cut down and cast into the fire. Note I beseech thee that he says,
not every tree which has not, or shall not, bring forth good fruit, but
which does not, or is not bringing forth at the very present, and not that
which has not heretofore, or will not hereafter: thereby signifying, that it
is not enough that thou have done well once or twice, or that thou will
hereafter do, but that without any further delay, thou must presently, do what
lies in thee, to pacify by Penance the wrath of God, and so escape the fire,
of which by long deferring the amendment of thy life, thou put thy self in
great peril.

Secondly, how much the longer a man remains in sin, so much the more is
he burdened and ouercharged therewith, for that one sin draws one another,
as testifyeth holy S. GREGORY, S. Greg.
saying, That sin, which is not blotted out by penance, presently with his
weight, draws into another. And thereby when he would, he is the less able
to rise, being still more burdened by sin; for he that cannot lift up a
burden when it is little, how will he be able when it is greater? If thou
should see one that had so heavy a load, that hardly could he bear it, to
add more weight thereunto, thinking thereby to make it the easier to carry,
would thou not think him to be a fool, and laugh him to scorn? Turn the
eyes, of thy understanding upon thy self, and behold thine own folly, and
see how thy adversaries would do the like unto thee, if having laid one
mortal sin on thy soul (whose weight is such, that without the great mercy
of God, would press thee presently down to hell) then by deferring thy
Penance, and making the burden the heavier, by adding more sins thereunto,
should think to rise the more easily: I know thou would be loath that thy
adversaries should deride and mock thee, take therefore away in time the
occasion, and considering in what estate thou stand, defer not thy
Penance. As soon as ADAM had sinned, Genesis 3
God asked him: Adam where art thou? thereby to admonish him and all sinners,
prudently to consider* whither sin has brought them, that by due
consideration of the dangerous state they stand in, they may be moved
presently to rise and make satisfaction by Penance therefore: for he which does
otherwise, and sleeps in one mortal sin, S. Aug. sect de verb. O^.
is by the testimony of S. AUGUSTINE more bold, then he which fights with
seven deadly enemies at once, which have all coniured and sworn together his
death.

Thirdly, he which long deferreth Penance, many times by the just judgment of
God, is either suddenly prevented by death, and so falls into everlasting
damnation, or else is taken unawares and oppressed with grief and sickness,
in such sort, that he forgets himself quite, S. August.
for as S. AVG. says, The sinner is justly punished with this punishment, that
he which whilst he lived forgot God, in the hour of death shall forget
himself: Many times also, besides the terror of death, which of all terrible
things is the most terrible, the extreamitie of the pain is so grievous, that
he loses the use of Reason, which many times falls and happens unto him,
for a just punishment of his former offenses, seeing that, as he, against all
reason, has offered and employed himself (as long as he was able to do any
thing) and all his wit, w^l, strength and force, both of body and mind, to
serve his pleasures (yea his mortal enemies) he would then offer and yield
only them unto Gods service, and the health of his own soul, when little
means remained in them to do any thing at all. Wherefore, as they have lived
like brute beasts, following their sensualities without all reason, they do
worthily deserve to die, void of all grace, without the Sacraments and
Spiritual comforts: which often happens unto them, which would not in time
use their reason in seeking of Gods grace, and their own salvation, but used
it rather against God, and justice in all wickedness. And though they loose
not reason, yet are their pains so great, that they can then hardly think on
any thing else, as witnesses S. GREGORY saying. S. Greg.
When thou art oppressed with sickness thou can scantly think one any thing
else, but what thou feel. S. Hier.
Which S. HIEROME affirms also saying. For that the intention of the mind is
drawn thither where the force of the grief is. Wherefore he which when he was
in health, would not think of Penance, much less is he able to do it in
extreamitie of sickness, whereby it comes to pass, that of a 1000 men that
delay it to the last instant, there is hardly one saved: This is the judgment
of S. AUGUSTINE, and S. HIEROME, and so well known to other hosie Doctors, and
to al men of sound judgment, that it needs no further proof.

Fourthly, although a man should do true Penance in the end, in such sort, that
God should forgive his sins, yet notwithstanding remains a long and hard
satisfaction to be made in Purgatory, for the pain due unto the same, which
easily and in short space might, by perfect and lively Penance, have here been
accomplished, and the poor sinner freed both of the offenses, and fault of
sin, and of a great part of the pain due thereunto. Wherefore whilst we have
time, let our study be to do well, declyning from vice, and willingly and
patiently suffering all persecutions, afflictions, and infirmities, that
thereby we may here make satisfaction, and be released of the pains due unto
our sins in Purgatory. S. August.
S. AUGUSTINE considering how grievous is the punishment of sin after this
life, beseeched Almighty God, here to punish him, and to spare him afterward,
saying: Lord burn me, cut me here, that thou may pardon me for ever.

But many there be which do make little account to defer their Penance, and
leave it to be fulfilled and accomplished in Purgatory; and for that the pain
is not eternal, they weigh not greatly how large it be otherwise, or how
grievous, having only regard unto that which is present, and look not to that
which is to come: which if they did as duly consider as they might, and ought
to do, I make no doubt but that the fear of the greatness of the pains of
Purgatory, would cause them willingly to do Penance here. S. AUGUSTINE
speaking of the greatness of the pains of Purgatory, says. That although it
be not eternal yet does it far pass all the pains that ever any man suffered
or can suffer. S. Aug.
A learned and ancient writer affirms, that although by any light and easy
means, a man may presently make satisfaction for a venial sin, yet if
nothing be to be done or suffered for it here, he shall suffer far more greater
pain in Purgatory for one venial sin not satisfied for, then S. LAVRENCE
did suffer, Decree. distins. 25
when he was broyled on the Grydion, wherefore it is said in the Decrees, that,
No temporal pain is to be compared unto the pains in Purgatory.

If therefore a man incurreth so great danger by not satisfying here for a
venial sin, which is so little, that though it obliges to pain, yet so
small, and so easily may satisfaction be made here for it, that either by
compunction, contrition, confession, or other virtuous works, or holy
actions, one may be so clearly cleansed thereof, as though it had never been in
him. What danger does he incur then, which neglects and deferreth to make
satisfaction here for the pain due unto his mortal sins in Purgatory,
after that by confession the offense is remitted. For though no man can know
assuredly, how long, according to Gods justice a man is to be punished in
Purgatory, for the pain of one mortal sin, yet notwithstanding a learned
and ancient writer says, that it is probable enough, that one should be
punished there, for the satisfaction of the pain of one mortal sin, so many
years as there be days in seven years: Decr. 32. qu. hoe sanctu^. Ezech. 4
alleging for his reasons, that it is said in the Decrees, that. The penance
of a mortal sin, are seven years. To those which do Penance, our Lord says,
I have given thee a day for a year, that is, a day in this present time of
grace; and mercy for a year in the other life, which will be a time of
Justice: which though it might seem credible, yet do I leave it to the
judgment of the discreet. But though this should be most certain and true,
taking it according to the rigor of Gods justice, yet is his mercy so
infinite, and his love so great, that he offers means daily unto all
sinners, that will in time accept of his grace, and benig sorrowful for their
sins leave them, that by good works, and perfect Penance, we may here not
only make satisfaction for them, but also win thereby, after a short
passage, everlasting glory.

Lastly, he which deferreth his Penance unto the end of his life, which
peradventure may be to morrow, though God should grant him so much favor and
grace, truly to do it, yet (unless the satisfaction be extraordinary) can he
not then expect to have so much glory in heaven, as if he had done it in like
sort sooner; for it was not without cause that the Ecclesiastic said: It is
good for a man when he has borne the yoke of our Lord from his youth: For
though our Savior said in the Parable of the workmen which were hired in the
vineyarde. Mat. 20.
The last shall be first, and the first shall be last. Yet truly their Penance
and good works must then be extraordinarily, to deserve in so short a space so
great a reward, which is not often seen, therefore worthily our Savior
adds there, That many are called, but few are chosen. Let us therefore no
longer delay the amendment of our life, but spend it so in Penance here daily,
that afterward we may reign with God eternally.

That Penance is not to be left off, whilst life lasts. CHAP. V.
MANY there are, which do much deceive themselves, in thinking that as soon
as they have obtained Absolution of their sins, and the grace of God
therewithal, that there remains then no more for them to do, and therefore
live carelessly and unprofitably, whereby it comes to pass, that suddenly
they fall into their former offenses; wherefore to preserve them from so great a
ruin and misery, which by many degrees would be worse then the first, they
must be careful to spend their time in continual Penance and virtuous deeds,
for that our Savior himself declares that, Luc. 11
The devil being gone out of a man, walks up and down, and finding no rest,
says, I will return unto my house from whence I came out, Mat. 12
and when he comes and finds it swept with broomes (and S. MATTHEW says
empty) then takes he other seven devils worse then himself, and entering
d^^el there, and so the last things of that man, are made far worse then the
first: what gave the boldness unto the devil to enter in again, but that
returning, he found only the dust swept away with broomes, but not the dirt
scraped away, with the hard iron of strict Penance: not daily laboring by good
works, but idle, void, and empty? For some you shall find (I would to God
I had not occasion to say many) which as soon as they have ended their
confession, and but newly gone from the feet of the Priest, it seems to
them that they now have so attained all perfection of grace, that they can
never fall again, and taking little care of the conservation of the health of
their souls, they give scope unto the devil to enter again through their
idenesse, therefore the Apostle admonishing us to beware thereof, says. Give
not place unto the devil. Ephesians. 4
Truly he gives place to the devil, which is not studiously intentive to
some good thing, for where the soul is daily busied in some holy exercise,
the devil can find no place of entrance. God would not give the children of
Israel Manna in such sort, Exodus 16.
that it should last them for a week, or a month, but only for every day,
except the Sabbath, for which they gathered the day before: Thereby insinuating
and giving us to understand, that in this life we should never be idle, and
that we ought never to cease to gather and get by Penance and good works Gods
grace, until that long desired Saboth shall come, where then shall be no more
need to gather, but to possess and enjoy, that which we have here before
gathered

But for as much as many having made their Confession, and received heavenly
grace, sit with their hands closed up, forgetting, and neglecting to work
their salvation, the devil makes his entry again, whereby their estate is
far worse then before, as may well be demonstrated and made plainly to
appear, by the sickness of the body. For as when a sick person has newly
recovered his former health, if he fall again afterward, the sickness is
more dangerous and greater, because then the forces of nature are weak, and
strength decayed, whereby sickness takes greater force, and nature less able
to resist, brings with it oftentimes many other diseases more perilous then
the first. Even so fares it with sin (which is the sickness of the soul)
whereof whosoever is cured, and delivered from the power of Satan (under whose
bondage, as long as they were in sin they lived) if they fall through malice
or negligence into their former offenses again, they are far worse then at the
first, for the blot of ingratitude toward God, who had so mercifully dealt
with them, in receiving to his grace again, those which had deserved hell
fire, for offending of him, which causes him many times utterly to leave
them: wherefore justly complaining by JEREMY he says, Iere. 15
We have cured Babylon, and she is not healed, behold we will leave her; and
unto Jerusalem he said, Who will have pity on thee, O Jerusalem, Exodus 4
or who will go to entreat peace for thee? for thou have left me says our Lord,
and have returned backward: as though he would say, I will now apply no more
salve unto thee. Oftentimes did he cure and heal Pharao king of Egypt, by
plagues and tribulations, but he returning again unto his sins, he would
apply no more medecines, and so the wicked wretch most miserably and unhappily
perished, God leaving him, for the multitude of his sins. O what person then
can possibly be in worse estate, then to be left of God? which the returning
unto sin again, oftentimes causes. What vigilant care ought every one
therefore to have, not to leave off Penance whilst life lasts, being a
principal means to preserve a man that is sorrowful for his former sins,
not to return unto them again, and give God just occasion to leave him For if
a man which has had a great sickness (if he have any care of his health) will
not neglect and soon leave off the means ordained for the preservation
thereof; should not he then be thought to be desperate and void of all care
of his soul, which would neglect and make little account of Penance, ordained
both for to cure, and preserve it, from the sickness of sin. For as in a man
recovered of a great and long sickness, there remains still a certain aptnes
and pronesse to fall thereinto again: so in like sort, though sin it self
be cleansed, yet rests there still a cetraine inclination and enticement to
return to former offenses, against which by the arms of Penance, we must
daily fight.

And even as God delivered the children of Israel out of Egypt, and brought
them into the land of promise, Exodus 54
yet notwithstanding, did he leave the^ the Philistians near neighbors, which
were a valiant and warlike nation, with whom they were sometimes to fight: so
unto thee, O poor sinner, he leads thee out, and delivers thee from the
darkness and sin of Egypt, yet notwithstanding, he here leaves thee
terrible and cruel enemies, that is, contradiction and rebellion of flesh and
blood, against whom, thou must with the weapons of Penance wage war
continually; do not thou then, because thou have once by Confession overcome
Satan, and cast away sin, think thy self therefore altogether safe, and in
security, and leave off thy arms of defense, against the flesh, the world,
and the devil, but rather then stand more upon thy guarde, and prepare thy
self to the combat, knowing that then will the adversary be more cruel
against thee, and more ready with all manner of temptations, to assault thee.
For as S. GREGORY witnesses: S. Greg.
He neglects and makes little account to tempt those, whom he sees to come
headlong unto him But he bends his chiefest forces against those which leave
sin, and come unto God. Whereof the Ecclesiastike gives us warning saying,
My Son, coming unto the Service of God, stand in fear, and prepare thy
self to temptations: and S GREGORY upon these words says, Lib. 4. more.
cap. 24.
Our enemy whilst we remain in this life how much the valianter we encounter
him, so much the more does he bend himself and his forces to overcome us.
Wherefore assure thy self, that in the very first moment that thou shall begin
to leave sin and Satan, and come unto the service of God, thou shall find many
assaults both of the flesh, and of the world, and the devil also will not omit
to use presently what subtilitie he may to overcome thee, for he neither
fears the austeritie of the place, or holiness of the person, but is vigilant
to assault whomsoever he sees to begin to do Penance: yea he feared not to
assault the very Son of God, i. 4
for as soon as in the desert he had exercised the acts of Penance, (to teach
us by his example to do the like) presently Satan with his subtilities, and
vain temptations, did assail and set on him; wherefore no great marvel, if
he do presently assault thee, for weapons are given thee to that end, that
thou should always fight against him. Let it not therefore any whit dismay
thee, if when thou think to do best, that then thou find him one way or
another, to go about to assault and supprise thee. A dog does not bite his
friends, and those of the house, but such as are strangers: So the devil does
not bark, or make war against the wicked (which as long as they remain in
their wickedness are Domestiques of hell) but only he impugneth the just, the
good, and such as seek to serve God; wherefore though thy life have been never
so good, and thou as high as may be in the favor God, yet must thou not
therefore lay aside the weapons of Penance, but ought rather to be more
careful to use them, having received so great a favor by holy Penance, as to
be made of a Bondslaue of Satan, the child of God, and heir of the kingdom
of heaven, yea then principally to stand upon thy guarde and more carefully to
take unto thee the arms of Penance: following therein the example, that our
Savior did give us in the desert, knowing and being well assured, that as Sa
han did then principally assail him, when he had received so great favors
from his Father: so in like sort, will he deal with us, and leave no means
unattempted, to make us loose the favor of God, and bring us by falling into
our former offenses, into his servitude and bondage again. Whereunto, if
through our negligence, in omitting our accustomed course of Penance and
austeritie of life, and fighting valiantly against sin, we shall happen to
fall, in far worse estate should we be, then ever before, for then more
cruelly does he deal with the poor sinner, and keeps him more vigilantlie.
For it happens unto him, as unto a man held in prison, whom the keeper
thereof, seeing him to be one that is willing to please him, and do his will,
does not bind him with fetters and chains, as he does the rest; but if this
man break out of prison, it is most certain, that then with all fury he will
use all rigor, subtilitie, or any other means that he can possible, to take
him again, which if he happen to do, he will be more vigilant, careful, and
severe, in the keeping of him afterward; and if before he had but a simple
chain, or none at all, now will he add double fetters; and if before, in the
quiet of the night, he did not trouble him now every night will he come unto
him, to see whether he attempteth to break his yrons, or to fly out of prison.
The self same does Satan with the poor sinner; for first when he holds a
man in his power, and uses so little care and diligence in the keeping of him,
that he flies and escapes out of his power, and laugheth him to scorn: th^n
with all fury he seeks by all means to catch him again. But if thou be so
infortunat, as by negligence and want of care, giving thy self to the pleasures
of the world, thou fall into his captivity again, thy second condition will
be far worse then the first; for then will he load thee with waightier chains,
and keep thee more vigilantly and if before he did offer unto thee someone or
other temptations, now will he suggest ten, and carefully close the gates,
whereby thou did first fly away: If he did see that the society and company
of good and virtuous persons did recall thee, and bring thee out of his
captivity, he will be vigilant and wait that thou shall not enter into
familiarity with such devout persons; and if he perceived that by hearing of
Sermons, and good exhortations, thou were auerted and delivered he will not
omit any means to turn and withdraw thy mind from giving ear unto any such
comfortable matters; and by these and the like means, shut up the doors,
whereby thou did first escape out of his bands, and so without the greater
goodness and mercy of God, he will so nonsell, nourish, and accustom thee
in sin, that thou will in the end, glory therein, and not be ashamed thereof
at all. Ierem. 3.
For as holy HIEREMIE speaking of him which is accustomed unto sin, says.
Thou have made to thy self the forehead of a harlot, thou would not blush
or be ashamed.

Behold therefore (o sinner) what negligence, and leaving off thy armor of
defense, brings thee unto! for whereas in thy first estate thou wagest war
and were to fight against the flesh, the world and the devil, if thou should
lay thy weapon a side, and fall into sin again, then besides these three,
thou should have another enemy to fight against thee, that is, evil
custom, which not only will make war with thee, but will lead and draw thee
after it, and will bring thee to that miserable and unhappy estate that thou
shall not feel, or perceive the malice of sin, but rather drink sins
down as pleasantly to thy seeming at the first, as any sweet wine, and
cause in thee that wicked and lamentable habit, that very hardly and with
great force, and difficulty can thou convert and turn unto God. For as the
Prophet JEREMY says, Ierem. 13
If the Ethiopian can change his skin, so can thou do well, when thou
have learned to do ill,

Let these dangers therefore cause thee to beware, and learn, not to leave
whilst life does last, any means to preserve thee from sin, which would
soon cause thee to perish everlastingly. Wherefore note I beseech you, that
when our Savior showed that the necessity of Penance was such that unless we
do penance, we should p^rish all likewise. Luc. 13
He did not prefixe any time when we should make an end and leave off doing
it, saying, unless you do Penance for three or four days, or so many years
but said absolutely, unless you shall do Penance: as though he would say. If
at any time you be without Penance, you shall be in danger to perish.

Whereupon to conclude, it is not enough for a man that is delivered out of the
bondage of sin, and the hands of his enemies, to begin to do Penance,
please, and serve our Lord thereby, but as holy Zachary in his Canticle says:
That being delivered from the hands of our enemies, we may serve without
fear, in holiness and justice before him all our days: that is, we should
not serve him only for a month o^ a year, but that without any tarrying,
resting, or pausing of time, we should do it all the days of our life.

SAVL did well begin, but forasmuch as he did not persevere all the days of his
life, 1. Reg. 9 1. Reg. 15
his end was miserable. What would it profit a man to plant a Vineyard, if
before it brings forth fruit, he leaves off the laboring and husbanding
of it? And what commodity were it to plowe, and sow the ground, if in time of
harvest, one would not take pain to gather in the corn? Or what advancement
would the soldier get (the enemy coming) if of his own accord, he should
take his armor and fight valiantly against him, if afterward before he had
gotten the victory, he should cast his weapons aside? Or what would it benefit
the Sailors to go to sea, hoyse up sails to the prosperous winds, to sail
and have a happy course, if afterward, through their negligence, the ship
breaking even in the mouth of the Haven, all should be lost? So in like sort
would it little avail thee, if thou should begin never so happy a course
of Penance, and should leave it off, before thou arrive safely at that
happy port of death, to which a good life, conducted by the way of Penance,
brings thee with speedy security. All would little avail thee, if thou
do not persevere unto the end: For that as the Apostle S. PAVL affirms.
Nemo Coronabitur, etc. No man shall be crowned, but he which shall lawfully
fight. And our Savior also says. He which perseuereth unto the end, shall be
saved. Let us therefore embrace the counsel of S. PAVL, Let us not fail or
faint in doing good, for that we shall reap the reward thereof in his time,
that is, for small pains, everlasting happiness.

That the Austeritie of Penance, is made easy by the due consideration of the
sweetness which is in it, and profit which comes thereof. CHAP. VI.
THE precursor of our Savior, holy S. JOHN Baptist, sharply reprehending the
people for their enormious crimes, (whereby they had incurred the wrath and
indignation of God, said, Ye vipers brood, who will teach you to fly from
the future wrath? Luc. 3.
) did presently teach them the way and said. Do therefore the worthy fruits
of Penance: as though he would say, if you will avoid and fly from the
indignation of God, which is ready to come hereafter upon you, the only
means which is left unto you is, to do the worthy fruits of Penance: For such
is the profi^, force, and virtue thereof, that it stays the hand of God from
inflicting just punishments, for your manifold offenses, and wicked sins;
whereof we have a most manifest example in the Ninevites, whose wickedness was
so great, and their sins so heinous and displeasing unto God, that his wrath
was stirred up, so much against them, and he was so ready to punish them, that
he said within forty days he would destroy the City of Niniuie But such
(behold) was the benefit and utility of Penance, and the force thereof so
great, that the Prophet JONAS h d no sooner declared unto the Ninevites, in
what eminent danger they did all stand, and that the severe punishment of God
was read^e to fall upon them; but they all presently had recourse unto Penance,
even from the highest unto the lowest, yea, in such fervent sort, that they
caused the very beasts to fast. And such wonderful profit did their Penance
br^ng, that they thereby pac^fyed the wrath of God, stayed his hand of
Revenge, saved themselves and their City, from utter ruin and destruction

But there be many which bring forth only the buds and flowers thereof, and
are l ke unto the children of Israel, which hearing of the fertility of the
land of promise, did prepare themselves to the battle, and to possess it,
but when they did hear there were strong Giants, against whom they must
fight, they would return again into Egypt, and for the difficulty of the
way, they began to grow weary: so, many hearing of the great profit and
utility which proceeds from Penance, and of the great glory which is
promised in the end to a man that perseuereth therein, will with great joy and
alacrity hearken thereunto, and begin their journey, to possess their
promised glory, with prayer, fastings, and other austerities of Penance, but
through too much fragilitie and weakness of mind, being terrifyed with the
hardness, which seems to be therein, return unto their former vices and
pleasures, and leave Penance in the budde, and expect not to bring the worthy
fruits thereof to maturitie, thereby depriving themselves of the profit which
Penance brings in the end, and take a contrary course, and so fall into
eternal perdition, as we have a lamentable example of ACHAB, 3. Reg. 22
which proceeded so far, as to bring forth the buddes of Penance, and did
turn unto our Lord, but failed in the midst of the way, and therefore dying
in his vices and former sins, perished everlastingly.

Some also bring forth only leaves of Penance, that is, good motions, and
holy intentions, saying that they have a good will to do Penance, and make
satisfaction for their sins past before they die, yet defer so long the
amendment of life, that being by death prevented before they go about to
accomplish and prosecute their good intentions, are the more severely punished
in the life to come, for that according to our Saviors own words; The child
that knows the will of the Father (as the good intentions they had do show
they did) and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes, and go laden
into hell with many good motions, for neglecting and putting of them in
execution in due time. Wherefore it is neither the leaves of cold intentions,
nor the buddes of unripe purposes, which save a man from hell and perdition,
but it is the worthy fruits of Penance which does deliver from those dangers,
and bring and yield unto us profit and comfort, both here and everlastingly;
happy therefore are they which walk deuourlie and perseuerantly by this holy
path of Penance, which leads to so great consolation, Psalm. 127
for that as the Prophet DAVID says, Blessed are they which fear the Lord,
and walk in his ways Worthelie truly may Penance be called the way of our
Lord, for that it was the perfect way wherein our loving Lord and master walked
continually, from his first entrance into this world, until he went out of it
again. It was the course which he taught us both by word and example to
follow; and whereas this way seemed before so hard, that few in comparison
(but such as the necessity of their sins caused to undertake it) spent their
days therein, yet now he both by his holy example, and by the profit and
reward which he has promised thereunto, has made it so plain, easy and
pleasant, that innumerable persons, yea of holy innocent and tender virgins,
have joyfully passed their whole life therein.

The Royal King DAVID, in the forementioned Psalm, amongst many benefits and
vtilities; which they shall reap which walk in the way of our Lord, Psalm. 127
reckons for the first, that, Thou shall eat the labors of thy hands, thou
shall be blessed, and it shall be well with thee. Behold and attentively
consider how DAVID does not only call those blessed, which did enjoy the
eternal felicity in heaven, but those also which walked here in earth in the
way of our Lord, for the sweetness and comfort that they find therein: and
therefore did not say, Thou shall eat the fruits of thy labor, but thou
shall eat thy labors. The husbandman does not eat his labor, but the fruits
thereof, he planteth and sows his seed in winter, that he may reap and
enjoy the corn thereof in Somer. It is the labor to dig the vineyard, the
fruit is the vendage and gathering of grapes; even so in the service of God,
the labor is fasting, but the fruit of the labor, is to be filled and fed in
heaven, the labor in this life is tears, the fruit thereof is everlasting
joy. But the holy Prophet DAVID, considered the love of God to be such toward
his servants that walk in his ways, that not only they shall enjoy the fruits
of their labors in heaven, their fasting and Penance, but also in this life,
the same to be a sweet food, and pleasant meat, which makes them fat and
strong, and therefore he says, that they should eat their labors: for that
the virtuous and just persons, have more spiritual consolations in their
labors and Penance in this life, then the wicked in their pleasures and
delights, from whence S. AUGUSTINE expounding this place of the Psalmist,
says, S. Aug. in Psalm. 127
The tears in prayer of those which pray, are sweeter then the joys and
pleasures of the Theaters. Plain is the way of heaven, and more sweet and
pleasanter, then all the flowers and delights of the world. What is the cause
therefore that this way seems unto many to be so hard and paineful, and that
so few will pass thereby? The same S AVG. alleges the cause to be, S. Au.
ibid
for want of trial, and taking that happy way in hand, for they which never
begun the entrance of this journey, affirm it to be rugged and hard. But since
we rather believe and give credit unto those which have often passed unto the
Indies, what the way is, then unto those which never sailed thither: much more
ought we to believe the holy Saints, which have walked this way of our Lord
and passed through those paths, having left behind them in their writings and
monuments, that to serve our Lord, and walk in his paths, is both sweet and
pleasant.

The Covetous man thinks it to be hard to give alms; Examples.
and he which follows his fleshly lusts, judges it impossible to live
chaste; to the ambitious man also, it seems no less difficulty to be made
subject: to those and such like persons, the way of heaven seems to be
sharp, paineful and uneasy, because they have never entered into it, neither
do they know what it is to serve our Savior, but if they had or would but
consecrate and give themselves wholly unto his service, they should certainly
see by experience it self, that it were more pleasant, easy and delectable,
to follow our Savior in this way of Penance, which he himself taught, then to
give themselves to their vices and voluptuous pleasures.

Does it not happen sometimes unto thee, that as soon as thou art risen from
the feet of thy Ghostly Father, to be so content and joyful, that thou seem
already altogether to be placed in heaven it self, being unloaded of the
great burden of thy sins? Oh if thou would proceed and go forward in the
way of Penance, how soon should thou find great sweetness therein! seeing
that in the very beginning of thy journey, that is, leaving thy fore passed
life and sins, thou have found so great consolation in thy soul. What
sweetness the Royal Prophet DAVID did find in the holy way of Penance, he
himself did declare saying, I did walk in largenes, Psalm. 118
because I have sought out thy Commandments: For though so strict was the
course of Penance, that he said that he clothed himself with Hair clothe,
and that he did eat ashes as bread, and that he mingled his drink with
tears, and washing his Couch every night with them, did rise in the midst of
night to praise God, yet notwithstanding such joy and sweetness did he find
in this strict course of Penance, that he said, I walk in largeness, that
is, though the way which leads to life be strait, yet I did walk it in
largeness and joy of my heart, for though my body be contracted and drawn
near together, afflicted and punished by labors, yet such joy and comfort
does it bring unto my heart, that, It is dilated and extended, that thy
iustifications were most commendable and pleasant unto me in this place of my
Pilgrimage. Our Lord dea^eth with his servants in this life, as many great men
do, which having invited some worthy friend to a banquet, which coming
thither accordingly at the accustomed time of dinner, if the meat be not
ful^ie ready, presently the master of the feast commands some dainty wine
to be brought forth to stay their stomachs in the mean while, that they may
not be altogether fasting: even so truly does on Lord deal with the just,
and his friends, whom he has invited to a great and worthy banquet in heaven;
yet in the mean time, that they may not altogether fast, and that they should
not faint in the expectation thereof, he sends them here some pleasant wine,
of Spiritual Consolations, and joys of the soul. The cause wherefore many do
not taste here of these Spiritual comforts, and divine consolations, proceeds
from themselves only in that their care being wholly bent to seek for temporal
joys and commodities, no place is there left for his heavenly graces.
Wherefore even as our Lord did not send unto the Children of Israel Manna from
heaven, until there remained no more of the flower and meal of Egypt; so in
like sort, Exhortation.
our Lord does never send his sweet and heavenly joys, as long as the vain
desire of earthly pleasures remains in their hearts: fly therefore, and
relinquish (o poor sinner) the way of pleasure which leads to hell and
perdition, that thou ha^^ heretofore followed, and seek carefully the path of
Penance, and walk perseuera^tl^ therein, pulling down the rocks of the
passions, and breaking the flinty stones o^ thy heard heart, and overthrowing
the walle^ of thy ancient costomes and manners, an^ thou shall presently find,
that most pleasan^ and easy is the way of Penance, which leads soon to
everlasting joys.

How great the profit is which proceeds from Penance. CHAP. VII.
THe sweetness of Penance did so long detain me in the declaration and
consideration thereof, that if I should have returned again to the
demonstration of the great profit which it brings unto the true Penitents,
the precedent Chapter would have been of that length, that it might
peradventure have been tedious to the Reader, Wherefore knowing that profit
draws many persons, sooner then sweetness or pleasure, I will now return
again to declare more at large the utility and benefit which proceeds from
it, The holy Abbot Pynusius speaking thereof says, Cas. Colla. Pr. Col. 20
that After the general grace of Baptism, and that most precious gift of
Martyrdom, which is gotten by shedding of our blood, the most excellent are
the fruits of Penance, whereby is gotten and attained the purifying and
cleansing of our sins. Wherefore S. PETER says, Be penitent and convert,
Act. 3
that your sins may be put out.

Holy Dionisius the Carthusian, does in like sort declare, that great is the
profit, Dionis. Carthus.
and many are the benefits, which the soul receives from penance, for that
true penance (says he) does deliver the soul from the bondage of Satan, and
does sanctify it, does adorneit wit virtues and gifts of the holy Ghost,
places it in Paradise, presents it to be crowned, and is a Mediator for it.

God himself speaking by the mouth of his Prophet Ezechiel says: If the
wicked shall do Penance for all the sins which he has done, Ezech. 18
and s^all keep my precepts, and shall do judgment and justice, he shall live
the life, and shall not die. Yea, moreover he adds in the same place, that
Penance blotteth out the very memory of sin, saying, that. He will not so
much as remember the iniquities that the penitent sinner has done, but he shall
live in the Justice which he has wrought. Especially if he exercise true
justice upon himself, which requires that according to the greatness of the
sin, so should the Penance be correspondent thereunto. Therefore must he
first judge of the offense, and then use condign justice upon the offender,
that is, himself, poor sinner, whose Penance ought not to be small, when the
offense is great, which Penance is a thing so pleasing unto God, that by the
foresaid Prophet he says, When the wicked man shall turn himself from his
impiety and wickedness which he has done, Ezech. 18
and shall do judgment and justice, he shall give life unto his soul.
Therefore he says again, I will judge every one (o house of Israel) according
to his ways. Convert ye, therefore and do Penance for all your iniquities,
and your iniquities shall not be to your ruin. Behold, here what God requires
of every poor sinner, that he should do condign Penance; behold of the
other side the profit that proceeds from Penannce is very great, whereas it
saves from eternal death, blotteth out not only the sins, but the very
memory thereof also, gives life to the soul, and preserves it from ruin
and eternal pains, which we take in doing thereof, S. Greg.
does deliver and preserve us from the endless pains of hell, as witnesses
S. GREGORY saying, VVhilest we are wasted and spoiled with transitory labor
and pains, we are delivered from everlasting torments.

Yea, Note diligently.
such benefit comes unto us from labor, pains, and afflictions, that if
we do but patiently suffer them in this life, for the love of God, by their
means we shall be freed from the pains in the life to come, either in hell,
or in Purgatory. S. Greg.
Therefore S. GREGORY noting how mercifully God deals with those whom he
loves, says. God does here most mercifully apply temporal severity, to the
intent he may not hereafter inflict everlasting revenge, therefore he spares
some here, that he may punish them for ever, and some he strikes here not any
ways pardoning them, that he may spare the^ in the life to come And though
that all, we can do or suffer here, is but little in in respect of the
punishment which our daily imperfections, and ordinary sins do deserve,
yet such is the goodness of God, that he does more accept of a little
punishment and satisfaction made here, then of much more which should be done
elsewhere, Eccles. 29.
whereof the Ecclesiastike bears witness saying. The least thing does please
thee for a great: that is, the least punishment, either voluntary done or
suffered here, does more please and pacify thee, then a greater suffered
elsewhere of necessity, and though the pains were never so great which we
suffer in this life, yet are they little in respect of the future punishment
and torments, S. August.
as S. AUGUSTINE most notably notes, saying. No grief or vexation of
temporal pains, may be compared to the everlasting torments of the wicked.
But the sinner cannot avoid one of these two, for that he must of necessity
be punished, either hereafter, or here in this present life, for that no evil
remains unpunished. Wherefore to the intent ye may the more plainly see the
profit which proceeds from present Penance, and that all that ye have done
or can do, is but little, in respect of the future pains from whence it
delivers us, mark I beseech you, how great and intolerable are the future
pains of Purgatory, and of hell, which of necessity on of the two, the poor
sinner must suffer, if through Gods mercy, penance here does not preserve him
from those intolerable pains there. S. AVG. speaking of the pains of
Purgatory says: S Aug. li, de vera and falsa poeni^,
This fire truly, although it be not everlasting, yet notwithstanding it is
most grievous, for certainly it does far excel all the pains, that ever any man
suffered in this life. There was never found in flesh so great and
intolerable pain, although the holy Martyrs have suffered merueilous torments.
Let every one therefore (says he) study so to correct his offenses,
Exhortation.
and do such penance for his sins here, that after this life he be not forced
to suffer such and so many intolerable pains of Purgatory.

Though the pains of Purgatory do far exceed all the torments of the world,
and if it were possible they should be ten thousand times more, yet were
they all little or nothing in comparison of the least of the torments of hell,
which shall be inflicted for any mortal sin, that the sinner does desperately
and voluntarily die in. S. Anselm
So infinite and inexplicable are the pains of hell, that holy S. ANSELME
says, that If all the men that ever were borne since the time of Adam, until
this present day were now alive, and great Preachers, and that all of them
should endeavor to speak but of the least pain in hell; yet were they not
able altogether to declare the very least part, of the smallest torment
there. So in like sort does he say, that noe less innarrable and
impossible, by all those to be declared, is the greatness of the joys of
heaven which the sinner dying but in one mortal sin, loses for ever,

S. Aug.
S. AUGUSTINE is nothing inferior unto him in declaring of the torments of
hell, but says after the same manner, that, If all the men that ever were from
the beginning of the world; or shall be to the worlds end, and also all the
grains of corn that ever sprung up were men and if they all should suffer but
one pain which the soul endures for a mortal sin, every one for his
part should suffer more pain, then all the blessed Martyrs, and all the
wicked malefactors ever suffered.

S. Greg.
S. GREGORY also briefly declaring how great are the pains of hell, says,
That things cannot be thought of pains, which is not given them there for
torment.

Isidor. in Sino.
ISIDORVS therefore exhorting the poor sinner to weigh attentively the greatness
of the foresaid torments, says. Bend and enforce thy mind earnestly to
consider what pains soever of the world, Note this consideration.
what griefs soever of torments, and what bitterness soever of grief, and
compare all those together to the pains of hell, and then shall thou see that
light is all that thou suffer.

Penance brings unto the soul, when not only by Gods grace (which it
procures unto man) it delivers him from all those aforesaid pains, but also
brings it to as inenarable glory and joys in heaven, Wherefore the Apostle
S. PAVL says, The eyes have not seen, neither the ears have heard, nor the
heart of man can think, what God has prepared for those which love him.
Wherefore S. AUGUSTINE affirms that, S. August. exhortation
The joy of eternal light is so great, that although a man might remain
therein but one hour, yet for to obtain this only, innumerable years of
this life, full of delight and all temporal goods, are rightly and vvorthily
to be contemned. Holy DIONISIVS recites, that a certain devil being demanded
(in a possessed person) how great was the joys of heaven, answered, Dionis.
Carthus.
Number the stars, who answered again that he could not, so also said he, no
man can number the joys of heaven; and being demanded of returning again unto
heaven, answered: If there were a fiery burning iron pillar, reaching from
earth unto heaven, set with sharp Rasors (if I were cladde with human flesh,
wherein I could suffer) I would continually draw my self up and down upon it
even unto the day of Judgment, so that I might then find favor at Gods
hands, and come unto his glory: Note that the devil did not see the essence of
God, but only had some evident understanding thereof.
being demanded how long he did see God before he was cast out of heaven, he
answered, Little more then the twinckli^g of an eye: but that I might see but so
long again, that most glorious face, I would willingly my self alone endure
all the pains of the damned, as well of the devils, as of men, unto the worlds
end. Hitherto holy Dionisius.

S. BERNARD speaking of the beauty of God (which the holy Saints having passed
their times here in Penance, do now continually behold) says. Al do rejoice
there in God, because in sight he is most worthy to be desired, in face most
beautiful and sweet to enjoy, by himself he pleases, by himself he is
sufficient for reward, nothing is sought for out of him, and in him alone is
all things that can be desired. This holy Saint, having declared the beauty
of God himself, shows in like sort the excellency of his kingdom and
says: There is true joy, full knowledge, al beauty and bliss, there is
peace, goodness, light, virtue and honesty, joy, mirth, sweetness, true
love, and what good and pleasant thing soever can be thought, is there
superabundantlie found.

The Royal Prophet David, considering how pleasant above measure are the joys
of the house of God, Psalm. 83
says. One day is better in thy gates, above a thousand (vid. in the world)
and therefore said that he made a choice to be an outcast in the house of
God, Psalm. 83
rather then to dwell in the Tabernacle of sinners. Wherefore knowing that
Penance was the way that leads thereunto, did give himself unto the
austeritie of Penance, as you heard before in such sort, that he said, Tears
were my bread both day and night, Psalm. 41
whilst it is said unto me, where is thy God: as though he would say; so great
grief is it unto my soul, to be so far separated by sin from the house of
God, that a man may say unto me. Where is thy God? Wherefore I will endeavor to
shed daily such plenty of tears, to wash away my sins which have made this
separation, that my tears shall be unto me my bread both day and night, until
such time as I may come to the presence of my God, and dwell in his house, for
that our Lord will give grace and glory, Psalm. 83
and will not deprive those of his goods which walk in innocence: We were
first created in Innocence; by sin we lost that happy estate, the means to
cleanse us of our sins, and bring us to our former happiness, is Penance,
Ezec. 18
as God himself by his Prophet Ezechiel declares. To conclude therefore with
this last and chiefest profit proceeding from Penance, that they which being
cleansed from their sin, by it, do walk in innocence. God (as you see DAVID
testifyeth) vvil give them grace and glory, and vvil not deprive them of his
goods. Psalm. 83
Wherefore as we desire to enjoy with this penitent king, all those aforesaid
happiness, let us endeavor in this transitory life, to imitate him in penance,
so doing we may assure our selves to be partakers with him in glory. Psalm. 83
For that (as he says) God loves mercy and verity: through his infinite
mercy, he will accept of our penance, and by his loving verity, he will
perform what he has promised for it: that is, his grace here, and after
everlasting glory in heaven.

That Penance ought chiefly to be done for the love of God. CHAP. VIII.
EVEN as it is not the death or pain which makes a Martyr, S. Cyprian in
diverse. loc.
but the cause wherefore it is suffered; so in like sort it is not the Penance,
but the intentions and chief motions thereunto, which makes it meritorious.
For as COSDRAS the king of the Athenians, though he offered himself unto
death, and also that stout CVRTIVS, though he cast himself down into the
gaping gulf of the earth, yet notwithstanding they, nor any other Romans, or
ancient Gentiles were Martires, because their intentions, and ends of their
death, were not for the love of God, but for their own vanity: so many,
though they have used great austerities to themselves, and done great Penance,
yet forasmuch as vain glory, or some other fond or foolish matter, has been
the end thereof, their Penance has little profited them. Wherefore as God
being the chief cause and only end of Martyrdom, makes the death of Martyrs
to be glorious: so in like manner comes it to pass, that thy penance is then
most meritorious, when the chief intention and end-thereof, is only for the
love of God. For otherwise if thou should have never so great grief and
repentance, and should do thy penance according for thy sins, and for
their sakes, should shed as many tears, as there are drops of water in
the sea, if thou should do all this for fear of going to hell, and not
chiefly for the love of God; know thou for certain, that this would profit
thee little, in respect of that profit which thou should have, if it were done
merely for the love of God; Notwithstanding, that such penance called
imperfect contrition, commonly conceived either by the consideration of the
turpitude of sin, or by fear of hell, or severe punishment, if it exclude
the effect of sin, and include hope of remission, by a special gift of God,
and a divine impulsion of the holy Ghost; yet of it self it is not sufficient
to justify or expel the spot of sin, but is a disposition and operation,
for the obtaining of justification, in the sacrament of Penance: but the other
conceived by the consideration of the goodness of God, and for his sake
embraced, called perfect contrition, is not only a special gift of God, and a
divine inspiration of the holy Ghost, but of it self is sufficient to
justify and blot out all deadly offenses, before the penitent be actually
absolved. Yet this justification and reconciliation, must be ascribed precisely
to contrition, but in as much as it includes the desire of the sacrament of
Penance, which the penitent is bound to receive finding opportunity,
notwithstanding any precedent contrition never so perfect. For in sin thou
must consider two things, the one is the offense which thou have committed
against thy Lord: the other is the only hurt which thou have thereby brought
unto thy self; for thereby thou have made thee a bondslaue to eternal pain in
hell. If therefore thou art rather sorry, and do more repent thy self, for
fear of the torments of hell, then for that thou have offended God; it is most
manifest, that thy penance is more to fly and avoid that, which is against
thy self, then that which is against God. Whereby it comes to pass, that
thou do more love thy self, then God. And therefore thy sins, without the
sacrament of penance, shall never be remitted, although thou should have the
greatest sorrow and grief that might be, unless thou repent thy self and be
sorrowful also, that thou have offended God, for God does more respect the
cause of the grief, then the greatness thereof, and does chiefly behold the
end, that the sinner has in doing of Penance; whereof we have manifest
examples in the holy Scriptures. 1. Reg. 15 Reg. 12
SAVL and DAVID were both kings of Israel, and both of them also offended, and
were in like sort both of them reprehended by two Prophets, and to conclude,
both of them did penance, and said, peccaui, I have offended. Wherefore then
did God pardon DAVID, and not SAVL? what is God an acceptor of persons? Act. 10.
God forbid we should so think. In verity (says S. PETER) God is not so.
The cause wherefore that the Penance of DAVID did please our Lord, and not that
of SAVL, was in that, DAVID'S chiefest and greatest grief was, for that he had
offended God, but the sorrow of SAVL was not principally for his sin, but for
that thereby he lost his kingdom of Israel, wherefore he said unto SAMVEL, 1.
Reg. 15
Honor me before the elders of the people, and before Israel; he said all
this, that he might not be contemned by his people, and that he might remain
safe in his, kingdom, if it might be. For this cause likewise God did not
hear ESAIAS, Heb. 12.
although (as witnesses S. PAVL, he sought for mercy with tears.

So also ANTIOCHVS. 2. Mac. 6.
did not obtain mercy of God, for that his grief and tears did not proceed
from the root of the love of God; For as no man could enter into the court of
Assuerus, that was clothed with sackcloth, so neither can any man enter into
the Royal Court of Almighty God, that is clothed only with this fear,
which is attrition, but must be adorned with the Nuptial garments of the love
of God. For although Penance which is done for fear is not bad, yet
notwithstanding, it is not so good, as to be meritorious of the life
everlasting, unless it proceed further, that is, unless it pass from fear,
to love,

Although thou do not worship strange gods, if thou do not take the name
of God in vain, if thou do not violate and break the holy days, if also
thou keep all the rest of the commandments, and Evangelical counsels, if
thou should do al these things, I say, without the love of God; know thou,
that it will come to pass, that thou shall scarce enter into his kingdom.

The reason truly is, for that in every good work whatsoever, there are two
things; the one is, the honor and glory which is due unto GOD; the other is,
the utility and profit which he, which does that good work, is to reap
thereby, that is, the everlasting joy which our Lord gives unto them for the
same. If thou therefore, when thou do exercise any holy action, or virtuous
deeds, do more attend unto thy profit, then unto the honor of God, it is
most manifest that thou love more thy self then God, and even as the work
wants the love of God, so also shall it be not so meritorious: and for such
works that do not enclude formally, or virtually the love of God, thou shall
never enter into his kingdom, neither will our Lord give unto thee his glory
for them.

Leuit. 27
The love of God is the balance wherein was weighed all that was offered in the
Sanctuary, for if thou shall pray, or give alms, or do any other good work
whatsoever, weigh it in the balance and scales of the Sanctuary: love ought
to weigh it, according to the saying of S. Augustine: My love is my weight,
with this I am carried, whither soever I am carried; and so much merit shall the
good work have, as it has in it of the love of God, and the worthiness of the
deed: and therefore if thou shall keep all the other commandments and
Euangelical Counsels exactly, and shall do many other good works, unless they
shall proceed from the divine charity and love, and unless God himself shall
be the final end of them, as I said before, they will not be worthy of heaven:
For in the sight of God, the Supreme Judge, the end and intention of the work
is more regarded, then the greatness or excellency thereof; Wherefore, though
it seem unto thee, to be a most excellent work to serve God, yet wanting the
love of God, as has been said, thy intention being chiefly that he should
therefore give thee glory, thou shall loose it truly: but if thou shall serve
him only for himself and his love, thou shall assuredly gain a great crown
of glory; where seeking thine own gain, thou shall not: and forgetting thine
own, thou shall reap infinite profit. By a little labor, thou may gain
much, if thou will, but such is the folly of many, that they will not, but vex
and torment themselves with thousand labors, and get little.

This therefore ought to be thy study, whatsoever thou shall do, that always
thou may direct and bend thine intentions therein to God, and that thou
may do it only for his love: and because he will have it so, and that it
pleases him, and that this is his will. If therefore either through frailty,
or the suggestions of the devil, (thy wicked inclinations inclyning thereunto)
thou have fallen into sin, be sorrowful, repent thee, and do thy Penance,
chiefly, for that thou have offended so holy, so just and so great a Lord,
whom thou ought with all Reverence and love rather to have served, having
received daily and hourly so many benefits of him.

A similitude.
If thou had a friend whom thou louedst dearly, though thou did expect
nothing from him but only louedst him, for that he was a wise, good, and
virtuous person, in whose company thou did delight: thou would (I know if
any spa^ke of virtue did remain in thee) be sorrowful if that through thy
offense, thou had lost his company and love, and would with diligence
^eeke to win it again. Much more then ought thou to be sorrowful, when
through sin and offense thou have lost the familiarity and love of God,
which is so good and prudent, and so merciful. If thou would do so much for
man (which is full of a thousand imperfections) in whom thou see only the
sign and shadow of divine beauty; what should thou then do to recover
again his love and friendship, which is the continual and everlasting
fountain of all goodness, beauty and virtue it self. Wherefore whenever
thou have committed any crime, let thy chief grief and sorrow of thy soul
be, that thou have lost thy familiarity of God, and also his divine presence;
in whom all the joy, comfort, and delight ought to be. Bend therefore al thy
study, and endeavor with all diligence, that by Penance, thou may recover his
love again, which ought to be the only end of al whatsoever thou do; apply
al thine whole care to root out of thy heart, the love of thy self, and to
plant the love of God therein, in such manner (that if that might be which is
impossible) that by offending God thou might enter into the eternal
beatitude and happiness and enjoy the heavenly co^forts with the blessed Saints;
An exhortation.
or for that thou would not loose his love and favor, thou should go to
hell, and suffer all the torments of the damned, thou ought rather to be in
hell, and not offend God, then to go to heaven by displeasing him. Therefore that
most blessed Father, S Anselme in his bis book of similituds, said I had rather
being pure from sin and innocent, to enter into hell, Ansel lib. de Simil. Cap.
190
the^ being polluted with the filth of sin, to enjoy heaven: words truly worthy
of so great and holy a man, speaking as a man most perfect, and long accustomed
in the service of God.

Let thy hell therefore be, the displeasure and breach of the love of God, and
thy glory, in carke and care, humbly to beg at the hands of God, that thou
may love him, and never offend him, and that he will send thee whither soever
he please, for as long as this is his holy will, thou ought every where to be
glad and content, and thou should rather fear hell for that end, because
thou know all which dwell there, are the enemies of God, then for the
avoiding of thine own pain; So desire everlasting glory, but rather in that
thou know that all which are there are Gods friends, then wishing thine
own rest, quiet and happiness. The chief cause therefore which ought to
move thee to desire the eternal beatitude and bliss, is, because they which
are in heaven are confirmed in grace, and sure never to offend God; so on the
other side, thou ought to hate this present life, because it is reddie and
prompt to give thee occasion to that, wherein thou may offend God.

Finally to conclude. Penance, austeritie of life, or any other virtuous
action, or good deed whatsoever, the only means to make them worthelie
meritorious of heaven, is to direct thine intention to do all merely for the
love of God. And to this end we read a notable example in the liue^ of the
holy Fathers, of two devout persons, the one being a young man, the other very
old, Herom. in vita Pat.
whom the young brother very diligently served, as a true servant of God,
whereat the devil greatly envying, appearing unto the old Father said: I am
the Angel of God, by whose Commandment I am to tell thee some things whereof
I am greatly sorry; know therefore that thy young brother, is the child of
perdition, and eternal damnation, and all the service which he does unto God,
does profit him nothing toward the life everlasting: and having said these
words departed. The old Father afterward whenever he did see this young
brother, did alvvaies presently sigh and mourn, which he considering said:
Good Father, what is the cause that you do thus grieve at the sight of me? Who
answered, what the wicked angel had said unto him, he replied again; be not
sad, if it be Gods holy pleasure, that I should be damned, his will be
fulfilled, and if he please, I shall be saved, I shall be saved. For I do not
serve God for hope of the kingdom of heaven, or for fear of hell: but I serve
him only, for the exceeding great charity and bounty which he showed
toward me, and for the bitter pains which he suffered in his passion for me.
If he will give me the kingdom of heaven, he can; if he will throw me down
to hell, it is in his power also. The next night, the Angel of God came unto
the old Father, and made manifest unto him that the other was the devil, and
said, that the young brother had more merited by this his constancy in his
love, then by all the other good deeds which he had done in his life before.
For that the foundation of all our merits is, that all our works be done for
the love of God; For though thou should endure never so many labors, or
should do the most strict and hard Penance that might be, or exercise thy
self in all other virtuous works and good deeds, if thou should not do
them, chiefly for the love of God, they would all be of little value or
moment, seeing that in the love of God consists principally the merit of thy
labors. Our sweet Savior to make this most manifest, always when he made
mention of labors, persecutions; or mortifications, commonly did add the
cause of merit to be, for his love. As when he said of the persecutions which
were to be suffered of his Apostles, he added. Blessed are ye when they shall
curse and persecute you for my sake. Mat. 5
Also of the contempt of the world, Every one that shall leave Father and
Mother, Mat. 19
house, or lands, for me, etc. And in like sort of Martyrdom. Luc 9.
He which shall loose his life for me, etc. So in like manner in the 10. of S
MATTHEW, and in the 18. in the 18. again of LVKE, and in the 21. and 15. of
S. JOHN. In all those places, he shows, that the pains which we suffer, or
the good deeds which we do, must be done for the love of God himself
chiefly, and not for hope of our own commodity or profit. But you may
peradventure object, that DAVID being a just and holy man said, Psalm. 118.
I have inclyned my heart to keep thy iustifications for ever, for retribution
and revvard. This reward was no other thing principally, then God himself, for
whose love DAVID did all his virtuous actions, and good works, for in times
past, God said unto ABRAHAM, Genesis 15.
I will be thy great reward. Let us therefore set this for our daily principal
end in our Penance, and all other good actions: and no doubt but he himself
will be our reward in like manner, and place us after this life, in his
heavenly kingdom with him for ever.

That the best, and most in Gods favor have not neglected to do Penamce. CHAP.
IX.
THe wickedness of this our miserable age, but specially in this our poor
desolate and lamentable Country is such, that though sin is now grown
every where to the uttermost height of his pride, that possible almost can be,
or ever was, yet notwithstanding, the chief remedy (next unto Baptism, vid.
Penance) which God of his great mercy and love, and desire of the salvation of
poor sinners, had ordained, both for the cleansing of our sins, and
obtaining his grace, and preservation from sin, is now either altogether
conte^ned, or made so base account of, as though none did Penance, or exercised
any austeritie, or holiness of life, but only such as had been, or were
notorious malefactors and wicked sinners, taking their special grounds from
this, that whereas in many places of the holy Scripture, where mention is
made of grievous sins, penance is ordained there as a special remedy, both
to purge sin, and pacify Gods wrath, and to win his favor again; as in S.
Luke 13. Eze. 18. Isa. 55 Joel. 2. Eccl. 2. Actor. 3. and in the 18. also and
2. of the Apocalips. Yet as there are many places declaring that Penance
works the aforesaid effects, so is there no small number of testimonies, as
well in the old and new Testament, as also in the writings of ancient and
holy Fathers of all ages, to prove that not only sinners, but such also as
were the friends of God, and clean from any notorious crime, yea some that
had but small sins, have notwithstanding been careful to do penance. As first
for example, the holy pattern of patience, blessed JOB, although his
perfection and sanctity was such, that God himself gave testimony thereof,
saying, that There is not the like unto him upon earth, a man simple and right,
and fearing God, and going from all evil. Yet notwithstanding this holy man,
considering with himself, Job. 7.
that A man's life is but a warfare upon earth, daily fighting against vice,
whereunto from his youth he is prone and ready to run unto: said, Job. 9
I did fear all my works, knowing that thou would not spare the offender.
Wherefore the better to preserve himself from sin, and to continue in the
love of God, he did not neglect or was slouthful in doing of Penance, but did
exercise it with all austeritie, as he gives testimony thereof himself
saying: Job. 42
I know o Lord, that thou can do all things, and that there is nothing
that lies hidden from thee, therefore I do reprove and reprehend my self,
and do penance in embers and ashes. Ier. 1.


JEREMY also, though in his mothers womb, he was sanctified and preserved
from great sin, yet was he so far from passing his life in pleasures, and
casting away of Penance, that he did even for other men's offenses, shed such
plenty of tears, that he said, Who vvil give unto my head water, and unto
mine eyes a fountain of tears, I vvil weep day and night, and bewail the
slain persons of the daughters of my people? If he did penance for to win
favor for others, no man can justly think, that he would be negligent to do
the like for himself.

Likewise holy S. John Baptist, who was so great in the favor of God, that as
you have heard before, by the testimony of our Savior, Amongst those that
were borne of women, there has not risen a greater. Being a Prophet, yea
more then a Prophett, who was not only sanctified as JEREMY, but so
replenished with the holy Ghost, in his mothers womb, at the coming of our
blessed Lady, newly conceived with the Son of God, that he leapt for joy
therein: and though as he did grow in years, so did he increase in grace, and
was comforted in spirit, yet nevertheless did he fly the pleasures of the
world, and retyring himself into the desert, did spend his time in such
severe penance, that as the Scripture records, Mat. 3
His garments were Camels hair, his food locusts and vvild honey.

Behold the flower of al Virgins, our most blessed Lady, who though by the
spiritual favor and grace of God, being chosen to be the worthy mother of his
only begotten Son, was preserved both in her conception, birth, and in all
her life, from all spots of any kind of sin, in such sort, that holy S.
Augustine said, Aug. li. de nature. and gra. ca. 36 Theoph. and Euth. in 19.
can. S Io. 5.
that When he was to speak of sin, he would not have any mention of the
boly Virgin. Yet notwithstanding, from the time that she was three years
old, she lived a most retired life in the Temple, until the age of 14. where
her life was a true pattern of religion and piety, and no less example of
perfect penance. For as SABELLI. Lib. 2. exempl. 1. 4. and l. 18 4.
writes, she divided the day in this manner. In ihe morning for three hovvres
together, she gave her self to prayer and devotion, from thencefoorth till
Midday she did read the holy Scriptures. She contemned riches and wealth, S.
Brig. lib. 1. Reave. 10. and Gal. lib. 11. de Archa. Catho. virt. c. 5.
in so much that what she could get, she gave to the poor, she took delight
in nothing but in God, she withdrew her self wholly from idle discourses, and
her body (of which the Angels had care) was obedient in all things to the
soul.

S. ELIZABETH also, daughter of the king of Hungary, and wife of the Lantgraue
of Thuring, Surius in vita.
though from her very cradle she began to fear and serve God, yet as she grew
in years, so did she continually increase in devotion, giving her self
daily to all kind of piety and exercise of Penance: in such sort, that
though in her husbands time, she lived most holilie in the order of Penance,
wearing hayre-cloath under her Regal apparel, yet after his death, she took a
stricter course of life, and casting away all secular glory, clad her self
exteriorly also with the humble habit of Penance; and she which was most noble
of parentage, made her self most ignoble to the world, that she might be made
noble in heaven: neither was she any whit defrauded of her expectation there,
and in the mean time so highly here in the favor of God, that one day being
in an Ecstasy (as mention is made in her life) she did see heaven open, and
sweet JESUS the Son of God, inclyning himself unto her, saying. If thou will be with me, I will be with thee, and at no hand will be separated from
thee.

Many examples could I produce, to show that such as were high in Gods favor,
did give themselves nevertheless here to great austeritie of life, and daily
penance, which for breuity sake I omit, nothing doubting, but that those
aforesaid, will be sufficient to move any such as have any love to God, and
desire to continue in his favor, to imitate the manner of life, which the
Saints and chief friends of God did lead in holy penance; and also plainly
to see, how those are greatly deceived, which think that none do Penance, or
take the virtuous course of Religion, but such as had committed some heinous
offenses in the world.

Although one of the chief effects of Penance is, to cleanse us of our sins
and offenses; yet God forbid that any man should have so base a conceit of this
so excellent a virtue, as to judge that it were not exercised for any other
purpose, which if it had been so, these holy persons, which never offended
grievously, would not have been so careful to use it; but they being
singularly illuminated by Gods holy grace, considering diverse other benefits
to proceed from it, most carefully used it as a medicine and means, both to
preserve them in Gods friendship, and to win thereby greater favor with him.
Some also (though the friends of God) falling into some small offense, did make
here satisfaction by Penance, for the pains due unto those sins in
Purgatory, that thereby they might the sooner come unto everlasting glory,
knowing that God so hates sin, that he leaves not so much as a venial
sin (yea in his friends) unpunished. How seueerly he dealt with the Angels
which were, in a certain manner of his Court. S. PETER declares, showing that
He spared not them, 2. Pet. 2
but left them to be tormented in everlasting fire. ADAM being the first man
created to his own image and likeness, Gen, 3.
and a most holy person, yet did he not leave his offenses unpunished. Neither
yet did he suffer the sin of DAVID (though bound unto him with so strict a
bond of friendship, that he said of him. I have found a man according to mine
own heart.) to be without punishment. Most severely did he punish in like
sort the offenses of MOSES, Number. 24
though he dearly loved him. Yea such is his justice, that though ZACHARY,
the father of JOHN Baptist, was so just and careful in keeping all the
Commandments of God, that S. LVKE gives testimony of him in his Gospel, that
he and his wife S. ELIZABETH, were both just before God, and observed his
Commandments; yet God did not leave his sin (though it were bu^ venial)
unpunished. Who is he therefore, that can rightly think his life to be so
perfect and pure, that he needs not to use the best means that he can, to
avoid punishment hereafter, at the least in Purgatory, by making some
satisfaction here by Penance, especially if he duly ponder withal, that this
present life is no other, but a vale of misery, and time of penance, wherein
whosoever has well employed himself during this life, the hour of death
(which unto worldlings and lovers of the world, of all terrible things is the
most terrible) will be unto him most joyful, being the end of all pains; and
beginning of all felicity; whereas if thou do otherwise, thou must of
necessity make a longer delay, before thou come to that place of rest: Apoc. 9
for that, Nothing which is defiled, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven.
And though perhaps there may be many, which have not occasion, or so great
need to spend their whole life in Penance for their mortal sins (from which
by Gods grace they have preserved themselves from their infancy) yet
notwithstanding, few there are, or none at all, which have not still occasion
to do some penance for their ordinary offenses, Prou. 14.
whereunto, as the Wiseman says, The just man falls seven times in the day.
For whosoever looks well into all his actions, and daily infirmities, shall
soon find, that he seldom passes many hours, but that he does some
ways offend, either wittingly, or not so unadvisedly, either by culpable
ignorance, or forgetfulness, or by thought or word, or participating with
others. For as the Prophet DAVID says, Psalm. 18.
Who does know his offenses? and therefore prays unto our Lord to cleanse
him from his hidden faults, and to spare him from other men's. The Apostle S.
PAVL also, though he were confirmed in grace, yet notwithstanding did find so
great difficulty to do well, and such promptnes and prones to do evil, that
with great lamentation he said, The good which I would I do it not, but the
evil which I hate, this I do: and therefore cries out: O I unhappy man,
who will deliver me from the body of this death? The means therefore that
he used was, as he declared himself, to punish his body by penance, saying. I
chastise my body, and bring it into subjection, for fear least whilst I
preach unto others, I become my self a Reprobate. If this holy Apostle, and
vessel of election did, acknowledging his imperfections, and for his small
offenses, and suppressing of sin, think such penance and punishment to be
necessary; who is he that can think himself to be clean, that he needs
not to do penance, that has any grace at all? For as S. GREGORY says. Greg.
lib. 31. Mor.
How much more light of grace any man has, so much the more does he know
himself to be reprehensible and faulty. Let every one therefore, look
diligently into his own life, and consider what he has done, and if
peradventure thy sins should be but small or venial, yet do not thou neglect
to make satisfaction, and do Penance for them also, knowing that as the
Ecclesiastike says; Eccle. 19 S. Hierom. in Epist.
He which contemns small things, by little and little falls into greater.
Wherefore Holy S. HIEROM says, that A mind dedicated unto Christ, ought
as well to take heed of little sins, as of greater. For an enormious sin,
does seldom draw us into hell, because the greatness thereof does terrify us
in such sort, that it brings us to the knowledge thereof, whereby it comes
to pass, that with great repentance, and amendment of life, we do penance for
it; but other sins wherinto we do slide often, and do not regard them,
those are they, I say, which with a swift course, do carry us to destruction,
as detraction, murmuration, defamation, and vain pleasures, of which forasmuch
as they seem unto us often but small, therefore doing no Penance for them, by
little and little they draw us very often into deadly offenses, and
consequently into hell: Wherefore though thy fault be so little, that it is
only a venial sin, yet must thou not therefore neglect by penance, to
cleanse it, whereupon, worthelie says S. AUGUST. Do not thou contemn venial
sins, Aug. lib. de decen. Cherd.
for that they are little, but fear them, for that they ar^ many, and many
little beasts may kill a man. The grains of the sand, are they not little, yet
if overmuch sand be put into the ship, it will sincke her? How little are the
drop^ of water, do not they nevertheless fill the rivers and courses of
water, and cast down houses? the destruction and ruin therefore coming by
the multitude, is to be feared, though not the greatness.

Wherefore to conclude, for as much as little and venial sins (from whom none
in these our days are altogether free) do breed (as thou may plainly
see, by the sentence of S. Augustine) so great danger, seeing that we do fall
daily into them, as long as we carry this corruptible body about us, let us
be careful to make satisfaction and do Penance for them: for if these
aforesaid Saints, which were so innocent, did notwithstanding, lead their
lives in such sort as you have heard, in continual Penance, much more then
ought we, being defiled with sin, to do it.

He therefore that is desirous to fly the pains of Purgatory, and come with
speed to enjoy the happy sight of God, ought to pass here his life howe^lie
in Penance, until the soul does separate it self from the body, to reap
the fruits of her labor, and enjoy for his small and momentarie pains, ^he
great and inestimable joys in heaven: which I beseech God to grant unto us
^ll, Amen.

An Epilogue unto the Order of the Brethren and Sisters, of Penance.
EVEN as the goodness of almighty God is so infinite, that he turns all
things to the good of mankind; so on the contrary side, the malice of Satan
is so great, that there is not any thing so good, but that he will bend all
his forces to turn it into evil. Therefore as God by alms deeds brings
forth piety; by Prayer, devotion; by fasting, continency, etc. so quite
contrary, of all those does the devil draw forth, Arrogancy, pride, and a
kind of slothfulness to all other virtues. And as God, and the devil are of
contrary wills, so do they bring forth contrary effects; For what is more
opposite, then Arrogancy and Humility, but the devil brings forth Arrogance
of virtue, and God produces Humility of sin, and Penance from Humility,
and from perfect penance grace and everlasting glory. The devil on the other
side, seeks to procure from penance a contrary end, for by persuading a
man, that penance soon purges sin, and wins heaven, allureth him to all
kind of unlawful pleasures, under hope that he shall have time sufficient to do
penance, in the end, that so being led away with this vain pretense, he may
defer his conversion and amendment of life, so long, till at the last, by the
just judgment of God, he is prevented, and finds now no place for Penance.
And having vainly spent the precious time, that God had lent him to gain
eternal glory, falls suddenly into everlasting ignominy. But if a man's
zeal be such, that the devil sees that he cannot hinder him from beginning
to do timely and true Penance, then does he bend all his forces to incite and
allure him to take such violent and accustomed courses therein, that following
either obstinatlie, or indiscreetly his own will, he loses thereby, both the
greatest part of his merit, and also many times, growing weary of the virtue
of Penance, through his own fault, returns again to his former vices and
pleasures, in worse sort for the most part, then ever before.

Wherefore our holy Patron, humble S. FRANCIS, to prevent through his sincere
zeal and charity, the malice and envy of Satan, and to give help, comfort,
aid, and direction to all, which thirsting after the salvation of their
souls, have an earnest desire to attain to all the perfection, that their
strength and estate will permit them, did by the inspiration of the holy
Ghost, ordain an order of Penance, setting down therein instructions and
rules, fit and convenient for any estate, degree, or sexes that would undertake
it, S. Bona. chapter 3. in vita S. Franc.
as the Seraphicall Doctor of the Church, S. BONAVENTVRE testifyeth; in the 3.
chap. of the life of S. FRANCIS, saying that, Many of both sexes enflamed with
the zeal of his preaching, serving our Lord in the purity of wedlock,
according to the form received of the servant of God did bind themselves with
new laws of Penance whose manner of living, the said humble servant of Christ
decreed to be named, the order of the Brethren and Sisters of Penance. For as
the way of Ponance is common to all men that desire to ^ome to heaven, so in
like sort is this Order, admitting both the Clergy and La^e people, Virgins
and married folk of both sexes; of how great merit it is in the sight of God,
does manifestly appear by many miracles, which some of them have wrought
hitherto S. BONAVENTVRE.

Wherefore having set down the necessity and utility of Penance, as it
belongs to all persons in general, so now by the grace and assistance of
almighty God, for the comfort and help of all those which have undertaken
this Order; and for the encouragement of all such, as bending their minds to
the perfection of Penance, have any desire to be admitted into this Holy
Congregation, I will endeuuor to set down at large, the Rule of Penance, with
the manner of the Institution, the Privileges, obligations; and perfections of
it.

THE RVLE AND manner of living, of the Brethren and Sisters, of the third order
of S. FRANCIS commonly called, of the Order of PENANCE, ordained for those
which will live holily, and do Penance in their own houses.
NICOLAS Bishop, Servant of the Servants of God, to his loving Sons, the
Brethren, and well-beloved Daughters in Christ, the Sisters of the Order of
Penance, as well present, as to come, health, and Apostolical Benediction.

THe firm foundation of Christian Religion, is known to be placed upon the
mountain of the Catholic faith, which the sincere Devotion of the Disciples
of Christ, burning with the fire of Charity, did teach by the word of careful
preaching unto the people of these Nations, which walked in darkness Which faith
the Roman Church does hold and keep, whose foundation is not to be at any
time moved with any whirlewindes, nor waves of Tempests: For this is the right
and true faith, without whose company, no man is acceptable, and gracious in
the sight of the highest. It is this faith, which prepares the way of
Salvation, and promises the rewards and joys of eternal felicity. And
therefore the glorious Confessor of Christ S. FRANCIS, Institutor of this holy
Order, showing both by words and example, the way to ascend unto our Lord,
did instruct his Children in the sincerity of this faith, and would they
should profess it, constantly keep it, and also fulfill it in works, to the
end, that they walking healthfully by the paths thereof, might merit after the
prison of this present life, to be made possessors and hayres, of eternal
beatitude.

Of the Institution of this Order of Penance.
Our holy and blessed Patron, S. FRANCIS, being by a special favor of God,
called from the pleasures of the world, unto a perfect holy life, and strict
course of Penance, did not at the first, and presently after his renouncing of
the world, institute any of his three orders, that is, In legend. trium
Socior. in principio.
of the Friar Minors, otherwise called Gray Friars, of S. CLAKE, and this of
Penance, but did at the first take unto himself a mean course of Heremetical
habit: but not of any religious order, but only an habit of Penance, which for
his first two years he did wear: But in the second year, after his
conversion, from the world to God, taking upon himself the form of habit,
which he gave afterward unto his brethren, did in the year of our Lord 1206.
begin his order of the Friar Minors, and within the 6. year after, instituted
the order of the Sisters of S. CLARE; and not long after, Specul. Minor. tract.
1. fol. 60
did ordain for an order of life, for all persons, the form and life of
Penance, which he himself had exercised in his first beginning, though after a
far more mild and easy manner.

S. BONAVENTVRE declaring the cause and means of the institution of this holy
order of Penance, says, Bon. in 4. part. legend mayor.
that After S. Francis had gotten his Religion to be approved by Innocentius
3. he began to treat and reason with his brethren, whether it were better for
them to converse amongst men, or to re^yre themselves to solitary places. And
whereby earnest diligence and fervent prayer, he had sought the good pleasure
of Gods holy will, and being illuminated and enlightened by Oracle of Super^al
and divine Revelation, did understand that he was sent by God to this end, that
he should win unto Christ the souls, which the devil did endeavor and go
about to draw from him. Yet notwithstanding, such was his great humility, that
he which had learned great things from his supreme master, JESUS CHRIST, was
not ashamed to seek the knowledge of little things, from those which were
inferior unto himself.

Wherefore Brother SILVESTER being a man of great sanctity, and highly in the
favor of God, S. FRANCIS having a great hope and trust in him, did send
Brother MASSEVS unto him, to desire him, that he would humbly beseech
Almighty God, that he would vouchsafe to reveal and show unto him, whether it
should more please his divine Majesty, that he should go abroad and preach
unto others, or that he should give himself continually to prayer; he sent
him with the like message unto blessed S. CLARE also; Brother MASSEVS going
therefore presently unto them both, and having declared what S. FRANCIS
desired; brother SILVESTER, betaking himself presently unto his prayers, and
having received therein the divine answer, signified the same with all speed
unto Brother MASSEVS, and said.. Tell Brother FRANCIS, that God has not called
him for himself, but that he should work the good of many souls. The like
answer holy S. Clare did send, whereby (as witnesses the holy and Reverend
Father BERNARDINVS DE BVSTIS) does appear; that blessed S. Farcis, Ser. super
illud exe nos reliq. omne.
was induced to preach penance, by divine inspiration (yea rather commandment)
and so consequently to institute this holy order of Penance: for having
received that answer, he was so inflamed with the zeal of charity, that he
rising up presently, girded and prepared himself with so great fervor, to
fulfill this new received commandment, that he went his journey so speedely,
as if he had been touched with the hand of God, and had been endued with some
extraordinary virtue and strength from heaven, and walked with so great force
of spirit, that he looked not, or premeditated whither, out by chance, and as
God would have it, came unto a certain town or Castle, called Canarij, in the
vale of Spoleta, where he preached with so great zeal, the contempt of the
world, and the dangers to live therein, that all of that place, both men and
women were so moved with his preaching, that they were ready to leave al, and
desirous to follow him; but our holy Patron S. FRANCIS said unto them, you
shall not so do, but I will ordain for your comfort and souls health, what
you shall take in hand: and then presently he determined to institute this
third ORDER, which is called Of the Brethren and Sisters of Penance: for his
only intent in instituting this Order was, to incite all sorts of people, so to
follow the examples of Penance, which our Lord and Master did give us, both by
word and example, that following him here in earth, they might reign with him
in heaven, whereunto S. FRANCIS desiring as much as lay in him, to bring al
indifferently, without exception of Sexes, or persons: did prescribe this form
and order of Penance, as a singular help to the attaining thereof; and
forasmuch as his love being equal unto al, seeing that it was a thing
impossible for him to set down a Rule precisely for every one, did ordain it
in such sort, that it should be made fit and convenient for all such, as with
fervent zeal and affection would undertake it; for, such is the love of out
Redeemer toward al persons, that he does not require great matters at our
hands, Matthew. 11
or any thing above our power, but says, My yoke is sweet and my burden
light. Therefore S. Francis, as a true Imitator and follower of our Savior, does
not here lay any heavy burden, or require any hard matters, above the power of
the meanest, or least able, but setting down, and ordeyning a form and manner
of life for the strongest, takes such order for the weakest, that the
Superiors may make it fit, and convenient for their strength and calling,
leaving only for them, what with fervent love to God, and alacrity both of
body and mind, they may accomplish, whereof our Holy Father NICOLAVS 4.
which lived and was assumpted to the government of the whole Church of God,
within 55. years, after the death of S. FRANCIS, 1288.
of whose orders being the General, and governed them five years together, had
good means to understand perfectly the Rule, gives sufficient testimony,
when in the 18. Chapter of the Rule, which he collected together, and confirmed
it with his Apostolical letters; he says. The Ordinaries of the places, Reg.
c. 18
or the visitor, may for any lawful cause (when they shall see expedient)
dispense with all t e Brethren and Sisters, in abstinences, fastings, and
other austerities.

The or e^y and chief Obligation, which remains vndispensed is, the
Observation of the Commandments of God, which the Brethren and Sisters, by
their vow at their Profession, do bind themselves a new to observe, though
not under the pain of a double mortal sin, if they should after transgress
any of them, as by Gods assistance, I will declare in the end of this Rule
more at large.

And in all other matters, S. FRANCIS requires no more here in Gods behalf,
but what our heavenly Father requires, saying; My son give me thy heart.
Prou. 23
What request could be more reasonable and easy to be performed? If God had
required any thing which had not been in our power, or above our possibility,
we might have had some reason to say, O Lord how willingly would I fulfill thy
demand and desire, especially knowing that it is altogether for my good, but
alas my infirmity and weakness is so great, and my strength so little, that
though my heart is good, and my desire not inferior, yet wanting force to do
what thou would, I am not able to fulfill what thou command.

But all occasion of such excuse is taken away, by this that he requires, no
more but our heart, wholly to be given unto him, and not either lent or sold,
They lend God their hearts, which serve him for temporal prosperity, and when
it is taken away from them, then do they withdraw their hearts again, which
before they had given unto him, and of those did the Psalmist speak when he
said, He will praise thee, Psalm. 51.
when thou shall do well unto him.

They sell their heart, which only serve him for eternal reward, and are
rather called Mercinarie persons, then loving children: For he which serves
only for hope of reward, deserves no other title, and loses a great part
of his reward, for as S. Chrysostom says most notably. Thy recompense shall be
the greater, when thou labourest not for hope of gain, but only with love,
and a desire to please God above all.

They only therefore give their hearts to God, which out of their mere love
and affection to himself, do serve him; and this is the service which God
requires, when he said, Prouer. 23
My son give me thy heart. Behold the benignity and prudence of our tender
Father, which knowing that love is the loadstone of love, seeks by loving
words to draw thy heart and love to him, by showing his particular affection
toward thee, saying: My son, my son, for whom I have created heaven and
earth and al things that are therein; my son, whom I have made to mine own
image and likeness; my son, upon whom I have appointed one of my heavenly
Court to attend; my son, under whose feet I have made the beasts of the
fields, the fowls of the air, the fishes of the sea, and al things subject;
my son, whom I have preserved and fed from the very first conception, until
this present day. My son, I say for whose Redemption I have given my only
begotten Son, and my self with all; my son, for whom the inheritance of
the kingdom is prepared: Give me thy whole heart therefore as freely,
without any other more principal hopes. This does our Savior teach and
exhort us unto, when he says: Matthew. 22
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart.

He therefore which will have God for his Father, and reign with him in his
heavenly kingdom, must show himself here to be his true son, in giving his
whole heart, love and affection unto him, seeing that this is the only thing
which he demands for all that, which he has already given, or hereafter
promised in heaven, which he shows himself to be most willing to give, in
that he asks nothing for it, but what every one may easily give, of what
degree, estate, or condition soever he be.

For the poorest man that has not a penny, may give his heart as wholly (and
love God as entirely) as the most rich and might king: So the foolish person
that knows not a letter, may as well as the wise and learned, the weak and
lame, no less then the strongest Giant; and to conclude, the poor Shepherd
which feeds his sheede, may give his heart as freely, and love God, as
devoutly, as the Pope or Emperor. For that it is a thing of such great
necessity, to give thy heart wholly to God, and to love him entirely that
without charity none can come unto heaven. There are many in heaven, which
were very poor, which were weak and ignorant, which could not fast or give
themselves to much prayer, yet notwithstanding, there is none there which want
the nuptial garment of charity.

But if peradventure this demand may seem to be so hard, that it cannot be
fulfilled, for that God demanding our whole heart, demands there withal our
will, in such sort, that there is nothing left to our own other affairs. Note
I pray you, to the intent you may the more plainly see, that this demand is so
easy and sweet, that any man may yield to the fulfilling thereof. This
Commandment is affirmative, which binds always, but not for all times, but
in time of necessity: Even as the Precept of reuerencing our Parents, does
not bind for always, or at al times, but as occasion recuireth; so likewise
thou art not bound always to love God, but as time and place shall require.
For God commands that when the world, the flesh, and the devil, do set any
thing before thine eyes to be loved, then ought thou rather to loose any
such thing, then thou should neglect thy duty, or displease thy God. He
therefore loves God truly, which will not for the love of any Creature
displease God, but in the mean space, whilst no occasion of sin is offered,
thou may love all other things ordinatly, as Parents, wife and children; yet
notwithstanding, with this employed condition, that thou have thy soul always
ready to suffer any torture, torment, or damage, were it never so grievous,
rather then for any of them, it should offend mortally. Whereby thou may
easily see, the words of our Savior to be most true, when he says, Matthew. 11
My yoke is svveete, and my burden light. When he gives thee leave to love all
creatures, as much as thou will, so that for their love, thou do not
adventure to offend him.

I have a little willingly digressed, and been the longer upon this point, for
that the chiefest obligation, and most principal part of the Vow of this holy
order, is, to observe the Commandments of God, which burden (if it may be so
called) being light, there is no other point heavy; especially seeing that
NICOLAS the 4. (which gathered, as I said, this Rule together) sets down in
his Breue and Apostolical letters, that no point thereof binds, under the
pain of a mortal sin, unless it be otherwise against the Commandments of
God, or Ordinance of his Church, saying, in the last Chapter of the Rule. In
all these aforsaid things, whereunto the Brethren of your order are not bound
by the Commandments of God, or Ordinance of the Church, we will that ^one of
them be bound under mortal sin to keep them. What can be therefore more
comfortable or easy then this Rule, where the obligations, labors and
austerities are ^mall, and the benefits, privileges and perfections, are very
great.

Of the benefits and Privileges of this holy Order of Penance.
THE great utility and profit which proceed from any labor or pains, make
for the most part the time to seem short, and the labor little, as appears
in JACOB, Genesis 29
who served LABAM seven years for his daughter RACHEL, which time seemed
short, and to be but few days, as the Scripture says, for the greatness of
the reward.

Wherefore whosoever does duly consider the inestimable benefits, which the
true obseruers of this order do get thereby; if will and strength concurring
together, he should keep all the fasting days, and austerities contained in
this Rule, in as strict a manner as ever any has, or may keep them, yet
notwithstanding he^ should have just cause to think, that they were little and
easy, in respect of the great utility and profit thereof. What greate^
benefit can any man expect or desire (remaining in this mortal life) then to
b^ cleansed both from all his sins and pain due thereunto in Purgatory, and
to be restored to that state as it were of innocence, wherein he was when he
was first baptized? This inestimable benefit is granted in most ample manner at
the first entrance of any devout person (if it chance not that he himself
puts hinderance unto the grace of God, which is then offered him) as
appears plainly in the form of Absolution, at the entrance into this holy
Order, granted by many Supreme Bishops, as here follows.

Our Lord Jesus Christ, by the merits of his most holy Passion, absolve thee,
and power his grace abundantly in thee, and by his authority, and of the
blessed Apostles, S. PETER and S. PAVL, and of the Supreme Bishops, committed
unto me herein, and granted unto thee, do absolve thee from all
excommunication, greater or lesser, from all sentence of suspention, and
dispense with thee in all irrigularities, that thou have any ways Contracted,
and restore thee to the union and participation of all the faithful, and also
to the holy Sacraments of the Church: and by the same authority, do absolve
thee from all vows (if thou have made any) except of some approved
Religion, and from all sins, vvherevvith thou have offended and trespassed
against God, either by human frailty, ignorance or malice, granting unto
thee Remission of al thy sins, confessed, and of all other which thou can
not remember, or have forgotten, so far forth, as the keys of the Church do
extend in this matter: and by the said authority, I do absolve thee of all
the pains of Purgatory, which for thy sins hitherto done, thou have
deserved, restoring thee to the state of Innocence, wherein thou vvast first
baptized. In nomine Patris, etc.

Wherefore to obtain this great benefit they which will undertake this happy
estate of Penance, must at their first entrance, make a General confession,
which is the last that ever they need to make for as daily experience teaches
us, Gabriell Maria, Ord. Minor. in Reg. Annunciat.
and also the Reverend Father, GABRIEL MARIA, which composed the rule of the
Annunciats, and was all his life time, after the confirmation of that order,
Confessor thereof; witnesses that, The often general confession of a man's
whole life, does hinder more devotion, then augment it. Therefore in religion,
such general Confession ought to be made but once, unless it should happen, that
that which one had made before, should for some defects be not vaileable: yet
notwithstanding forasmuch as it does greatly help, both for the ouercomming of
our daily imperfections, and increase in virtue, to make every half year a
General Confession, of al such notable things as may chance to happen in that
time; it is counseled, though not commanded, as well by the Fathers which have
had, and have charge of this Order, as also in that devout book entitled, The
Rules of good life, that every one should make a general confession of every
half year, to the intent that he which takes the charge of their whole
life, may see what victory they have made of vice, and daily imperfections, or
how they have proceeded in virtue, and virtuous actions, that their good deeds
being as well known, as their evil, they may receive encouragement to
proceed, if they have done them well, or if otherwise, they may be admonished
how to do them better, to the good of their souls; for it is not enough to
do a good deed, unless it be well done, which assuredly will be the more
meritorious and pleasing to God, if it be taken in hand by the advice of a
prudent Ghostly Father: especially seeing that in this our poor Country, the
Brethren and Sisters cannot come unto those monthly Assemblies, which by the
Rule is desired, where both by the virtuous examples of the whole Congregation,
good admonitions of the Ministers of this order; with the pious and zealous
exhortations, which ought to be then made, to encourage them in their happy
course of Penance, they should be stirred up to virtue, and withdrawn from
vice.

The Visitor for these causes, is enforced the oftener to make his visitations,
that thereby (to the uttermost of his power) he may endeavor, by the help of
this half years continual general confession, to supply the place of all
those aforesaid motives, and persons, may be al way ready either by himself,
or by the means and authority, which he had received from the Supreme
Pastors of the Church, and his Superiors, to give himself (if he may
conveniently) or grant his power unto the Ordinary Ghostly Fathers to give
(if need require) unto the Brethren or Sisters at the hour of their death,
the general absolution again, both from their sins, and pains due
thereunto in Purgatory: which benefit and Privilege, though for diverse good
considerations, many Supreme Bishops have granted, yet specially for this
that every night before they take themselves to rest, by the Rule they are
bound, not only to make a diligent examination of their consciences, but
satisfaction in like sort to their ability and opportunity for the
imperfections and offenses of that day, if they chance to fall into any, either
great or small.

For seeing that the uncertainty of man's life is such, that no man of
whatsoever state, condition, years, or sexes, is assured of one half hour of
Penance, our Holy Father S. FRANCIS, by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost,
did for the great good, How we ought to make this examination, see chap. 12.
and comfort of the Brethren and Sisters, ordain this daily satisfaction to
be made, to the intent that every one having done Penance, according to the
quality of his offense, either in act or will, he might rest and sleep in
security; which otherwise, with assured repose of Conscience he could not
do, not knowing in what dangerous estate he stands, being assured that God
will not forgive sins, and the pains due thereunto, unless the sinner shall
first do penance for them, by hearty contrition, and full purpose of
confession, when he may conveniently, with satisfaction in like sort. Job. 19
Wherefore holy JOB, considering how severely God punishes sinners, said. I did
fear al my works, knowing that thou will not spare the offender. That is,
leave his sin unpunished; for God never leaves the offense without revenge
and punishment, for either the sinner must punish his own offense in himself,
by doing Penance, or else God in his wrath will chastise it. Let every one
therefore choose one of the two, that is, either make choice to punish himself
presently, or expect the severe punishment of God, and when he is in the
midst of his choice, or ready to make it, let him remember well the sentence
of S. PAVL, Heb. 10
saying. It is a horrible thing to fall into the hands of the living God, whose
mercy and goodness is such now, that whosoever does with sorrow for his sins,
but meanly punish himself, God will not inflict any other punishment for his
former offenses, as the Apostle S PAVL does insinuate saying, 1. Cor. 11.
If we did judge our selves, we should not be judged. In which words the
Apostle does manifestly show, that the cause wherefore we are judged and
punished by God is, for that we neither judge or punish our selves.

Worthily therefore does S. Francis command, that the Brethren and Sisters of
this order of Penance, should every night examine and judge themselves, and
being sorry for their sins, do some penance for them, knowing that God our
most loving Father as one which is benign and merciful, does not punish twice
the same thing. For if thou will correct thy fault thy self, God will not
punish it again. Therefore holy DAVID being a man according to Gods own
heart, and rightly knowing his divine disposition and mind, said, Psalm. 11
I have done judgment and justice, therefore thou vvilt not deliver me over,
to those which calumniate me. Wherefore if the Brethren and Sisters in
examining duly every night their conscience do judgment, and in making
satisfaction, as the Rule requires for their daily imperfections, do justice
whenever they find that any way they have offended, they may assure
themselves with the Prophet DAVID, that God will not deliver them over, into
the hands of those which shall calumniate them, that is, torment or punish them
any more, after this life in Purgatory. Whereby you may plainly see, how great
is the benefit of this holy Order of Penance, and upon what just grounds it
is freely bestowed. As all men are, and would be glad, to enjoy assuredly this
great benefit; so must they be as diligent in the examination of their
conscience daily, and as willing to perform, that pain and penance which
(equity and reason being placed as judge) shall think the imperfections of
that day to have deserved: Which labor will seem but small, if it be
compared with the greatness of the pains, which otherwise they must suffer;
or with the excellency of the reward, which this little labor does soon bring
them unto, after this transitory life. Unto this labor may be applied the
words of the Psalmist, saying, They shall labor always, but yet they shall
live in the end. Psalm.


See therefore and consider well, how necessary for the good of our soul, is
this daily examination of our conscience, and punishing in our selves our
offenses and imperfections; for though the pain be but small, yet is it great
in the sight of God, who is so willing to accept of any good that we do; that
he does accept of little things for great: as the Ecclesiastike most notably
remarketh, Eccle. 29.
and says. The least thing does please thee for great: Which we must needs
confess to be true, if we well weigh the greatness of the future pains, due
unto our sins, from which here little labor delivers us.

That great pillar of the Church, holy S. AUGUSTINE, S. August.
comparing the greatness of all the pains and torments of this life, with
those that are after it, That no torment of temporal pain, can be compared
unto the everlasting torments of the wicked. But the sinner cannot avoid
punishment, but that either he must be punished here, or in the world to come;
for no sin says he, is left unpunished. If therefote the poor sinner do
well consider, either the cruel and everlasting torments of hell, or the
intolerable pains of Purgatory, though he should labor much in the
examining of his conscience, and endure great pains in making satisfaction for
his sins and imperfections: yet would all this seem to be very small and
light; Isodor. in Sin^.
as ISIDORE plainly declares saying; VVaigh well in thy mind what pains
soever of the world, what griefs soever of torments, and all the bitterness
of griefs, and compare all this unto hell, and all that thou shall suffer
will seem but light, especially if thou add hereunto, the greatness of the
reward which thou hopest for hereafter. S. Chrysostom.
For as CHRYSOSTOM says: If the Tempests of the seaes seem light to
Mariners, if wounds unto Soldiers, if cold unto the husbandman, for hope of
temporal reward, how much more then ought all labors and pains seem
light through hope of eternal happiness? Which S. Gregory affirms to be of
that force, that it will make all labors seem so light, that a man shall not
feel them at all: For hope, says he, of the eternity does so eleuate the
mind, that it feels no evil which exteriorly it suffers. Not without
cause therefore does ISODORE say, Isidor. de sum. bon.
that He which does diligently meditate and think of the rewards of the
life to come, does joyfully bear all the evils of this present life, for that
the sweetness of the one does temperate the bitterness of the other: worthily
therefore says S. PAVL: The passions and sufferings of this time, m. 8.
are not condign to the glory to come, that shall be revealed in us.

O how miserable are they which will suffer nothing for the life everlasting:
and again, how happy are the Brethren and Sisters of this order of Penance,
which by that little pains, in examining, being contrite, and punishing their
own faults; do obtain assuredly so great a benefit, as to be freed from
future pains, and be absolved, both at their entrance, and hour of death
also, from all their sins and pains due thereunto in Purgatory, and be
restored again at their last hour, to that estate as it were of innocence,
wherein they were, when they were first baptized, and after this transitory
life, to pass securely by Gods grace, to eternal glory.

Note that I have added in the end of every chapter of the Rule, the
Annotations and Ordinances, which the Reverend Father F. PETER GONZALES of
Mendoza, Commissarie general in this our family, of Cismo^tana, let be made
for the Province of Spain, that every one may see, how this holy order is
observed now in Catholic Countries.

Of the manner of examining of those which will undertake this form of life.
CHAP. I.
WE therefore prosecuting this Order with convenient favors, intending
beninglie to the augmentation and increase thereof, do ordain, that whosoever
is desirous to be admitted to keep this form of life, must be diligently
examined before their admission, of the Catholic faith, and obedience to the
aforesaid Church, and if they shall firmly profess, and truly believe it,
they may be safely admitted thereunto; yet diligent care is to be taken, that
no heretic, or suspected of heresy, or yet defamed, be in any wise admitted
to the observation of this Order of life. And if it should happen to be found
out, that any such have been received, he is to be assigned over with all
speed, unto the Inquisitors of heresy to be punished.

Commissarie General. Sismontanae.

CONCERNING this first Chapter, it is to be noted about the reception of any
into this order, that they which are to be admitted, must be Catholics and not
suspected of Heresy: whose Fathers and Grandfathers have not been punished by
the holy office of the inquisition for it, neither have been vicious scandelos
people, nor infamous, or of bad life and opinion.

This information which is to be taken of such persons, must be committed to
some grave religious person, of good judgment, or to some of the Brothers of
the said Congregation, (if the superior think it convenient) and this
information must be made with all secrecy, having always respect unto the
honor and good credit of those persons.

Although blessed S. FRANCIS, our holy Patron, and pattern of al perfection,
imitating in all things as near as he could, the example of our most loving
Lord and Redeemer, which was not an acceptor of persons, but offered mercy to
all and every one a like: so he in like sort desiring the good of all
Christian souls, of what estate, degree or quality soever, did ordeyne this
Rule for all sorts of people (as testifyeth S. BONAVENTVRE) without any
exception, whether young or old, rich or poor, S. Bonav. in vita S. Fran.
weak or strong, of high degree or mean estate, whether Virgin, or Widow,
married or unmarried, Priest or Lay man, of what lawful trade or calling soever,
yet notwithstanding he had, a diligent care, that a special regard should be
had both of the firm faith and laudable commendations, and manner of life, of
any person that was desirous to be admitted into this holy order of Penance.
For considering that the first ground, and firm foundation of all happiness,
both in this life, and in the other to come, is the true belief and constant
profession of the Catholic faith, the first thing which he requires, that
with all diligence should be looked unto, was the sincerity of the faith of
him which desired to be received into this Congregation, which ought to be
such, that not only he should firmly believe all such things, as our holy
Mother the Catholic Church believes, but seeing that the Apostle says, that
with the heart a man believes unto justice, but with the mouth, Confession
is made unto salvation: He wills that he must also constantly profess the
same faith, and with true humility, rejecting all obstinacy, and self will
opinions, be obedient unto the Catholic Church.

Moreover, he had so great a care for the conservation of integrity in faith,
that if any hidden or secret heretic, should have been received, or that any
one of the^ should fall into heresy; that though in his first Order of Friar
Minors, he gave a general Rule for his two others, that the love between all
his children should be such, that it should excel the very love of the tender
Mother toward her natural child, saying: If the mother did love and nourish
her natural child, Reg. Min. 6. cap.
how much more then ought every one to love and nourish his spiritual
brother. Yet notwithstanding he did so much detest heresy, that if any of the
brethren admitted, were but suspected of heresy, he willed that the other
setting al particular love aside, should for the love of God, and preservation
of the members of his Church, with all speed assign over the said party unto
the Inquisitor of heresy to be punished. For seeing that the Brethren and
Sisters of this order were in Catholic Countries exempted (in respect of their
persons) from seculer Jurisdiction, by diverse supreme Bishops, as by Honorius
3 Gregorius 9. and Sixtus 4. Bonifacius 8. Ioh. Baptist. Confect. in Colle.
Priuil. mend. fol. 460. Paul. 2. Constit. 1 Clem. 4. constable. 9.
Benedict. 11. Nicholaus 4. as appears by their Apostolical Breues, they
must therefore themselves be most diligent to see their particular offenses
amongst them condignely punished, but specially heresy, or the least suspicion
thereof, seeing that one of the principal things which is required in those
which are desirous to be admitted, is sincerity and constancy in the Catholic
faith. So in like sort, no person that is defamed, or has been justly
reprehended or punished by public justice, can be admitted; for that the
Reception of any such person (though now penitent) which is but private, yet
his offense having been public, would breed scandal to the whole order, and
discouragement unto such as might be desirous to be thereof, thinking that if
the Congregation were so perfect as they ought to be, they would not admit so
imperfect a person, which has been defamed, into their company. It was not
therefore without just cause, that in the old law it was strictly forbidden,
that he which had any defect or spot, should not offer bread unto God, neither
might come unto his Ministry, if he were blind or lame, or had any other
notable mark or defecte. But if that every one which shall have any filth or
spot, may not offer bread unto his God; much less then ought he to be
dedicated unto the service of God in this holy Congregation, which is defiled
and spotted with heresy, or any notable infamy.

But if any person that had been any ways infamous in the world, and being
demanded thereof, by him which receives him, either to probation or
profession, should fraudulently hide it, notwithstanding that he should be
thereby received and professed, yet by Apostolical authority, he may be
lawfully expelled, least that an infected sheep, should corrupt the good fame
of the whole flock of our Lord, and be an example unto others.

Artic. 2.
How they are to be received, which will enter into this Order. CHAP. II.
WHen any would enter into this Fraternity, let the Ministers, deputed for the
Reception of such persons, search diligently and consider his office, state and
condition, and plainly declare unto him the burden of this fraternity, and
chiefly concerning the restitution of other men's goods, which being first done,
if he please, let him be clothed after this manner; and as for other men's goods
(if there shall be any in his custody) let him endeavor to make satisfaction
in ready money, or giving sufficient security, and notwithstanding let him
take heed to reconcile himself to his neighbors. Al which things being
accomplished, after a years space (if he seem to them to be fit) let him (by
the advice of some discreet Brethren) be received in this manner, that is.
That he promise that he will observe and keep all the Divine Precepts, and
also that he will make satisfaction (as is convenient) for the transgressions
and faults, which he shall commit against this manner of living; when, and
according unto the Visitors will, he shall be called thereunto; and let this
promise there made by him, be set down in vvriting by a public hand. Let no
man be otherwise received by the said Ministers, unless it should seem fit
unto them: the Condition of the person, and his instancie being discussed with
judicial consideration. Moreover we defyning do decree, that no man after his
entrance into this fraternity, may be able to go out again to return to the
world: yet not vvithstanding, he may have free passage to any other approved
Religion, But women having husbands, may not (without their leave and
consent) be admitted to the company of this aforesaid fraternity.

Commissar General. Cismon.

If Carpenters and Masons, which are to build a house for a Prince, will not
accept of all manner of wood and stone, but are careful to make choice of such
as is fit for their work; far greater reason then have they which are to
build a house and holy Congregation for the Prince of all Princes, Proverb. 8
our Savior Christ (whose delight is to be with the sons of men) to make
choice of such persons as are fit for that building: wherefore the ancient
Fathers in times past, would not receive all into Monasteries, but only such
as were fit and endued with good manners and sanctity of life. For as one
scabbed sheep, may infect a whole flock, so one of evil manners and life, may
trouble the whole company, and confraternitie, for that one JONAS alone was
cause that all the Mariners in the ship, were in great danger of drowning.
Not without just cause therefore did S. FRANCIS ordain, that great care ought
to be taken to make choice of such only as were both for faith, fame,
conscience, and charity, fit for this Order: wherefore having in the former
Chapter declared, that none but such as are of firm faith, and good fame, can
be received; so now in this chapter, he shows plainly that such are only to
be received, which through a good conscience, are ready to restore unto every
one his own, and with perfect charity to reconcile himself unto his
neighbors. And to that end, gives a special charge unto the Ministers
deputed for the Reception of such persons, that they should search diligently,
and consider his office, state and condition: likewise, according unto the
form of the Rule, he must examine him of those conditions following, that is,
First of the Catholic faith, if he be a faithful Catholic, suspected of no
error. Also of his obedience to our holy Mother the Church. In like sort, if no
suspision of heresy, if he be not infamous, or noted with any notable infamy.
Also whether he be not in debt, or have other men's goods in his hands, which
he is not able to make present restitution of, or make satisfaction for in
ready money, or giving sufficient pledge; or whether he be in perfect charity
with all men; and reconciled unto his neighbors: For in whomsoever any of
these defects are found, he cannot by the Rule be received or admitted unto
this Holy Order.

Concerning the second Chapter.
IT is to be noted, that after the year of Probation is past, Co^miss. Genesis
they must make a new information and examination of the same Religious person;
of his good and holy conversation in this manner of living, and of his good
proceedings, and finding him capable, and that there be hope that he will serve
our Lord in this Religion, then by the council of some Fathers of the Convent,
and Brothers of the Order, they may admit him to make his profession, all the
Convent being assembled together in the Chapter house (or in the Church if it
be a woman) the Prelate or Superior having made first a profitable and pious
exhortation to that purpose, of what he is to promise, and what is promised him
And to what he is bound by his profession, then shall he which is to make his
vow say. (the Superior helping of him thus)

I Brother N. do promise to God, and our blessed Lady, and to our holy Father
S. FRANCIS, and to all the Saints in heaven, that all my life I will keep the
Commandments of God, and live in chastity as long as I change not my estate
(and if he be married) that he will live in conjugal chastity, and that I
will be obedient to receive the penance which shall be given me, by the
minister and superior of this Order, for the transgressions committed against
this manner of life.

Article. 2
LEt the Minister plainly declare unto him, the burdens of this Fraternity.

If after diligent examination, the Minister do find a hinderance to this
Reception, then must he make some declaration unto him (before he receive him
unto Probation) of the benefits which he is to reap by his admission into this
holy Order, and the burde^s which he is to undergo therein. Many persons
heareing mention to be made in the Rule, of burdens of the Fraternity, and not
seeing any one point of such weight and difficulty to be plainly set down
therein: may think those burdens here mentioned, to be some secret
constitution, and heavy yoke, which every one is not able to bear. I thought
it therefore not amiss, before I proceed any further, in the declaration of
the benefits of this Congregasion, here to set down a summarie of all the
burdens, and obligations of the Rule, and constitution of this Order; to the
intent that whosoever are desirous to enter into this Faterternitie, may
plainly perceive, how easy they may bear the burdens thereof, and perform
al such things, as any manner of ways they are bound to accomplish and observe.

Here follows a summary of all the burdens and constitutions of this Order,
wherein the whole effect of all the Chapters of the Rule is briefly expressed.
FIrst they are bound firmly to believe and profess also the Catholic faith
and obedience to the said Church, Reg. 1. chapter
and to expel out of the Fraternity all heretics, or suspected of heresy,
or defamed persons.

Secondly, they must use all diligence, Chap. 2
in the due observation of all the divine precepts, and to make restitution of
other men's goods, if they chance to have any in their custody, and be in
charity with all persons, to reconcile themselves to their neighbors, and
must not (after their profession) go out of this Order, unless it be to
ascend to some other of higher perfection.

Thirdly, Chap. 3
to wear either their apparel of gray color, or else under their accustomed
attire, a white habit, or thin Petticote of linen or woollen, but therein no
rigor must be used, but that the Superiors dispose it according to the quality
of the persons: and must (if they may conveniently) be buried in their habits,
in the Churches of the Friar Minors, that as in their life they were as members
conjoined to the said Order, communicating with them in all spiritual graces
and favors, that now their bodies should not be separated from them in their
death.

Chap. 4
Fourthly, they must absteyne from dishonest banquets, Courts and daunces, or
from giving any thing unto Stage Players, and sights of vanity. If the time or
place were such, that it were publicly known, that though they live abroad in
the world, yet were retired from the vanity and pleasures thereof, then were
they bound to show how much they contemn the vanities, not to give so vainly
any thing, and to hinder in what they might, their servants also, of whom they
ought to have a special care: but now the case being otherwise, they are not
bound to do but as they shall find it convenient. So likewise for wearing of
weapons: For the sword is as it were a common ornament, and is permitted unto
those with whom is dispensed in the habit.

Chap. 5
Fifthly, they are bound to absteyne from flesh the Wednesdaies, Frydaies and
Saturdaies (and they which live in the Monasteries the Mondaies also) except
infirmity, weakness, or some other reasonable cause do otherwise require.
They must (the sick, languishing, travelers, and laborers excepted) content
themselves with dinner and supper, and before each refection, say one Pater
noster, if no other Catholic grace be said, and must repeat the same again
with Deo gratius, after both repasts, and if they forget so to do, either
before or after their meals, they are bound to say three Pater nosters for that
fault. In the Lent of S. MRRTIN, they must fast both Moundaies, Wednesdaies,
Fridaies and Saturdaies, and from the first Sunday in Aduent, until Christmas,
the Tuesdaies and Thursdaies in like sort, and must keep Shrouesunday and
Tuesday with one Refection, according to the diet of the company, eating only
of one or two dishes, the least curious or dainty. They must fast all the
Frydaies of the year, unless Christmas day do happen thereon, which is
excepted. From Allhollowtide until Easter, they must fast the Wednesday also,
and all other fasting days observed by the Church, and in all those last
aforesaid days, they are to abstain from eggs and cheese, if they may
conveniently. But the Minister or Visitor, may for any reasonable cause (when
they shall see it expedient) dispense with all the Brethren and Sisters in all
these fasts, abstine^ces, or other austerities, and instead thereof, to enjoin
them to say some other prayers, either the Litanies, or 15. Pater nosters and
Aues, on those days whereon they cannot conveniently fast. Every one also
according to his strength, condition and calling, must labor daily and do
something to avoid idleness.

Chap. 6
Sixthly, at the Feasts of the Nativity of our Savior, of his Resurrection, and
Pentecost, they must make even, as much as they may, with God and the world,
and at these three times, they are bound by the Rule to receive, but by the
custom and constitutions of the Order, they must receive once in fifteen
days at the least, if they may conveniently.

Chap. 8
Seventhly, they must (unless that sickness excuse them, say daily the 7.
Canonical hours (Mattins, Prime, third, sixth, ninth, Euensong and Compliue)
either of the Breuiarie, or of our blessed Lady, or at the least to say for
Mattins, 12. Pater Nosters, and for each other 7. with Gloria Patri, and in the
end of Prime and Compline, to say the Apostles Creed, in profession of their
faith, the Psalm Miserere, for the whole state of Gods Church, and De
profundis, with the prayer, Deus venia largitor, for all Christian souls:
particularly for those of this Congregation. Moreover the Comissarie of the
whole Order, by authority received from the General Chapter A.D. 1606. does
charge every one of the^ to say every day, the Corone of our blessed Lady,
or the third part of the Rosary, quietly and devoutly, fixing their mind upon
some of those mysteries, which the devout servants of the blessed Virgin do use
to meditate upon in the Church. In Aduent and Lent, to hear Mattins also in
their own Church or Chapel, if conveniently they may: and if through
negligence they omit to say their hours in due time, they must say three Pater
nosters for that fault.

Eighthly, Chap. 9
they must always stand as well provided for death as they may, both by making
their wills within three months after their entrance, and setting in order
their goods. Chap. 1
And also by making continually, present satisfaction for all such faults as by
the nightly examination of their consciences (which they are specially bound
to make very diligently) they shall find they have committed that day, and
must be careful to abstain from all oaths, except in cases of necessity; and
if they perceive that in the day time they have (by using many words)
unadvisedly sworn, or in any other thing else, done otherwise then they ought
to have done, they must forthwith say, three Pater nosters, or do some other
penance, according to the greatness of the fault.

Ninthly, In the time of health, Chap. 13.
they must every one hear Mass daily (if with conueniencie they may) and
though they cannot now make here these monthly public assemblies, which the
Rule requires; yet must every one exercise and do as well as he can, most
part of those things for which the Assemblies were instituted, that is, every
month to read or hear the Rule read, to get some exhortation unto Penance to
be made or otherwise to be read some Sermon or Treatise of Penance, to get a
Mass to be said for the comfort of all the Brethren and Sisters, living; or
for the souls of them departed, and to give them some small alms, or allot
something out, to be reserved for the relief of the sick, or poor Brethren
and Sisters.

Chap. 14.
Tenthly, they must needs exercise the works of mercy, by visiting the sick
brethren and sisters, relieuing their wants, assisting at the burial, if they
may conveniently, and praying for their souls departed; saying within eight
days after the departure of any of them (if they have notice thereof) every
Priest a Mass, the learned the whole Dirige; the vnlearnnd 50. Pater nosters,
adding to the end of every Pater noster, requiem aeternam. And the selfsame is
to be said of every one of them, for the comfort of the Brethren and Sisters,
living and dead, at three several times in the year, that is, immediately
before Ashwednesday, within the Octaues of the blessed Sacrament, and a little
before the feast of our holy Patron, S. FRANCIS.

Eleuenthly. Though our Country now not being Catholic, the Brethren and
Sisters cannot assemble all together at the common visitation, yet
notwithstanding for reformation of whatsoever might be amiss in this
fraternity, and to yield unto every one of the Brethren and Sisters, what
comfort and help may be convenient, the Visitor must now visit every
particular place and person twice in the year, at which times every one ought
to renew the promise which they have formerlie made, and is bound to inform
him what helps he himself desires, and what in his conscience, Chap. 19.
he thinks to be worthy of Reformation in any one whatsoever, that the
incorrigible persons after their admonition, may be justly expelled.

Twelfthly, Chap. 17.
All the Brethren and Sisters are bound to avoid, Chap. 10.
to the uttermost of their power, all strifes among themselves, and by the
help of the Ministers of the Fraternity, endeavor to keep peace both
amongst themselves, and with all other persons besides.

These are the chief bonds and obligations which our Holy Father (as you have
heard in the Rule) called Burdens. Wherefore out of a tender care that he had of
these his children, he ordained that the Visitors, Chap. 18.
or their Ordinary Ghostly Fathers by him appointed, may for any reasonable
cause (when they shall see it expedient) dispense with all the Brethren and
Sisters, in all these aforesaid abstinences, fastings, and other austetities;
and at the first entrance, or at any time after, ordeyne all these things in
such sort as shall be most fitting for the strength, quality, and condition
of the party, which either is, or has a desire to be of this Fraternity. And
for the greater comfort of all persons, and to take away all occasion of any
manner of scruples, he declares, that it is not his will to bind them to
observe any thing contained in this Rule, under the pain of a mortal sin,
unless they are otherwise bound thereunto, by the Commandments of God, and
Ordinances of his Church, but binds them only to observe these things under
such temporal pain, as the Visitor shall enjoin them in penance, for their
transgressions, which they are bound with prompt humility to accept of; and to
study to accomplish and fulfill it effectually. In which words, he shows
plainly in conclusion of the Rule; how prompt, ready and humble their
obedience ought to be unto the visitor, in all such things, as concern the
Rule, and good of the Congregation, repeating here again in the end, Chap. 2.
that which he had set down, in the beginning of the Rule: where declaring the
manner of the receptio^, unto profession, after the year of their probation,
shows that they must promise (by vow) (for that this promise is the vow,
which they make at their profession) to observe all the divine precepts, and to
make convenient satisfaction, for their transgressions and faults, against this
manner of life, when according unto the Visitors will, they shall be called
thereunto. He had this Obedience in such Recommendatio^, and held it to be so
necessary for the confirmation of the Order and Congregation in all holiness,
fame, and good name, that whosoever should go against it, and be incorrigible
and disobedient, he commands in the 16. Chap. of the Rule: and for the better
confirmation thereof, repeateth again in the 19. that after thrice admonition,
the Visitor should cast him out of the company of this Fraternity, and
publish it afterward in the Congregation, thereby showing that every one
ought so to bend all his endeauours, to the obtaining of that heavenly reward,
which is promised for their labors, that they should not suffer any one
amongst them, which either by word, or example, should be any hinderance unto
them.

But it happens many times, that even as the Explorators or Spies (which the
children of Israel, sent to discover the land of promise, which by Almighty
God was promised unto them) being timotous and fearful persons, seeing some
thing that seemed through their cowardlines, to be matter of difficulty; did
endeavor to discourage the Israelites, from attempting that journey, by
telling them that the difficulty of the way was great, the enemies strong
Giants, their fight hard, and doubtful, so many indeuout persons, and some
inexperienced Ghostly Fathers also in matters of perfection, do no less go
about sometimes to discourage many virtuous persons, and devout children of
God, from undertaking this happy course of Penance, which leads to that
heavenly Country, and happy home of endless happiness, alleging many
supposed difficulties; as the breeding of scruples in their timorous
consciences, the endangering thereby of their health, and hinderance from other
necessary affairs, and want of strength and ability to go forward, in such
sort, and such a course of life, where they may see so many burdens,
obligations, and paineful bonds; as to fast, pray, rise early, often to go
to Confession, and as often to receive that most holy Sacrament of the Altar,
to visit the fick, relieve the poor, bury the dead, avoid strife, seek
peace, deprive themselves of sensual delights, refrain from oaths and vain
words, make daily satisfaction for their offenses, and do such other acts of
Penance, as are of themselves painful. But little do they see or consider as
men altogether in expert, either of the inward fervent affection, of devout
servants of God, where with all their hearts being wholly enflamed, do little
feel and easily bear these light burdens, or the manifold benefits, which
proceeding from these burdens themselves, do render all these actions, most
sweet and pleasant to be done, nor yet the greatness of the reward, promised
for the accomplishing of them, which being no less then the life everlasting,
do make the devout Brethren and Sisters, not only to be most prompt, ready
and diligent in keeping of all Gods Commandments, as by vow they bind
themselves thereunto, but also it provoke them with joy and delight to do al
manner of good works, not only in those which are commanded by Gods laws, but
such also as are only commended unto their free will by his Counselles, being
incited thereunto, by these holy ordinances of S. FEANCIS, which by the
inspiration of the holy Ghost, did ordeyne them for their comfort, both here
and everlastingly.

Wherefore as IOSVA and CALER did give encouragement unto the children of
Israel to go forward to the land of promise by protesting, not only that
the Country was beautiful and fruitful, but also that the winning and
possession thereof, would be both easy and agreeable to their wishes. So by
Gods grace, and holy assistance, I will (imitating the example of IOSVA)
endeavor to give encouragement, unto devout souls, and virtuous persons (the
loving children of God) to go forward unto that land of promise, and holy
Order of Penance, by declaring, that not only it promises and yields great
profit in this life, to those which undertake it; and far greater afterward,
unto those which observe it, and persevere therein, but also that the possession
and keeping thereof, will in like sort be easy, and agreeable unto their
wishes, seeing the great benefit, which proceeds from every one of these
bands, which seem to be burdens.

As concerning therefore the profit which is promised unto this holy
Congregation, and reaped therein; it is so exceeding great, that hardly can
their estate and calling, expect greater, either for this present momentarie
life, or for that other, which never shall have end, as appears plainly, in
that most ancient form of their Profession, where the Prelate or Visitor,
which receaueth them thereunto, giving that General Absolution (which the
Supreme Pastors of the Church have granted unto them, at their first entrance)
does absolve them, not only from their sins, but from the pains also of
Purgatory, due unto all those, which until that time they may have committed,
restoring them (if they themselves do not put a bar and let unto grace) unto
that state of Innocence, wherein they were first baptized, that being freed and
cleansed from al sin and pains due thereunto, they may with all alacrity
serve God continually, in all holiness and sanctity; for to this end is that
great grace imparted unto them, that being through the merits of Christ's
passion, and power which he left unto his Church, delivered from the Tyranny of
Satan, which reigns over sin, now (according to that worthy sentence of
holy ZACHARY) Being delivered from the hands of our enemies, Luc. 1.
should without fear serve our Lord in Holiness, and Justice before him, all
the days of our life: Even as in this sentence, holy ZACHARY does declare
three special great benefits, which the coming of our sweet Savior, brought
unto us, which are, first, That we might be delivered from our enemies;
secondly, that we might serve God in Justice and Sanctity: and thirdly, that
we might serve him all the days of our life: So by these three benefits may
be gathered, and plainly perceived, what profit this Order yields unto the
obseruers thereof: when as concerning the first benefit, that is, Deliverance
from our enemies: You see a little before, how at their entrance, they are
delivered, not only from sin (the greatest enemy of the soul) but also
from the pains due thereunto.

And as touching the second: that is, To serve God in Justice and holiness.
All the constitutions of the Rule, tend only to yield them that profit,
as well by forbidding all such pleasures and actions, as might be any hinderance
thereunto, as by exhorting them to practice all such virtues, as may any ways
h^lpe therein, and commanding in like sort, justice to be exercised, in
punishing in them selves, their daily offenses, that satisfaction being made
for what they have offended, they may the better serve God in all holiness.
Neither is the third benefit here left out, of Perseverance in Gods service,
but for that end is ordained, that they may not leave this Order, to return
unto the world again, but to stir them up the more to Perseverance therein,
all the days of their life, upon hope of greater reward: he which does receive
them to Profession, promises them in Gods behalf, and upon his firm
Ordination (if they observe those things) the life everlasting.

And for the better obteyning thereof, are not only aided all their life time,
in all their pyous actions, by the merits, prayers and good deeds, of all the
devout persons of their own Order, and pertakers in like sort, of all those
of the Friar Minors, and of their spiritual graces, favors and indulgences
also, but at the hour of death, receive most singular comfort, being then by
privilege of the Order, to receive the same absolution again, which they did
at their entrance, to the end, that as they did begin their spiritual life in
innocence, so likewise they may pass out of this rransitorie life, in the
same state, that being clad with that garment they may have free entrance into
the Court of heaven, to receive their everlasting joy, for those their
transitory pains.

But for as much as many persons do more look unto that which is present,
the^ what is to come hereafter, for the comfort and satisfaction of all
parts; I will here by Gods holy assistance, set down, what benefit
proceeds from every one of those bonds, of the Rule, which may seem to some
to be burdens.

And first to begin with Obedience, the companion of Humility, the
groundworke and foundation of all virtue, which is the first and last Ordinance
of the Rule and burden thereof (if it may be so improperly called) from this
virtue proceeds so great a benefit, that it adds both double merit unto
their Penance, and works of piety (which otherwise they ought to exercise of
themselves) and makes them also to be more acceptable to God, being clothed
with double beauty: the one, taken from the goodness of the work it self,
the other from the virtue of Obedience, whereby it is done. Therefore, in the
chief ground and firm foundation of this holy Order, that is, firm belief,
and constant profession of the Catholic Faith. Chap. 1.
S. FRANCIS requires this holy obedience unto the said Church: whereby, as by
the constant profession of the Catholic faith, they do so much please our
Savior Christ, that he will acknowledge them for his children, before his
Father; and therefore says himself: He that shall confess me before men, I
will confess him before my Father, which is in heaven So by their obedience
unto the Cathol^ke Church, they rest in great security, to remain always in
true faith, for that our Savior did promise, to send the Holy Ghost, to
teach his Church all verity, and to remain with her, unto the worlds end.

Secondly, they which fulfill this Obligation, wherein they bind themselves by
vow, to observe the Commandments of God, stand thereby, in assured hope of
the kingdom of heaven: Fulg. de fid ad Pet. cap. 3.
for that as FVLGENTIVS says: To every one that vovveth unto God, and
rendereth that which he has vowed, God himself will give the rewards of
his heavenly kingdom, which he has promised.

Matt. 19.
Wherefore they which keep Gods Commandments (seeing, that he has promised
unto such as keep them, the kingdom of heaven) may demand it at his hands,
and God (according as holy S. AUGUSTINE defyneth it) is bound to give it to a
due debtor. Aug. epist. 105. and lib. de gra. and l arbit C. 8. and lib. 4.
contra Iuli. C. 3. 2. Tim. 4.
Wherefore S. PAVL calls it the Crown of Justice, for that it is due, by the
rigor of Justice, unto them which keep the Commandments of God, because he of
his mere liberallitie, has promised everlasting bliss unto those which keep
them, and do deserve it worthelie. That restitution also which they are bound
to make, delivers them from that sin, which otherwise would not be
remitted: For as S. AUGUSTINE says, The sin is not forgiven, unless that
which is taken away, be restored.

Thirdly, The ash color, or graynes of apparel, is to put them in mind,
that as from earth they came, so to dirt and ashes they must return: and that
having always that color of death before their eyes, they may thereby be moved
to dye unto the vanities of the world, that they may live unto God; or by the
whitenes of their habits, (or petticotes) they may be stirred up to be
mindful of that brightness, and innocence of life, which their calling
requires, that their conversation may be according unto that which their habit
signifies: for this more mortifyed, and certain kind of Religious Habit,
ought to seem as as a bridle, to pull them back from doing any uncivil or
indecent deed; and by their burial in their Churches of the Friar Minors, they
reap so great a benefit, as to be for ever partakers of all the Suffrages and
prayers, which are made for all those which are buried in their Monasteries.

Fourthly, by abstaining from banquets, Courts, daunces, and other vanities,
they are made the more apt to receive divine comforts, and heavenly
consolations, which God does never impart unto those which give themselue unto
worldly pastimes and pleasures: God did not give his Manna from heaven, unto
the children of Israel, as long as there remained any of the meal of Egypt
amongst them.

When God would speak with Moses, he lead him to the high mountain of Sinay.
Exodus 19.
Neither did the Angel of God appear unto ELIAS, but when he was out of the
City, and free from humane conversation: Wherefore the ancient Monks
heretofore knowing, Sulpi. Seen dial. 1. ca. 12.
that he which was much frequented of men, could not be of Angels also; their
study was always to withdraw themselves from the familiarity of the world,
that they might the more freely attend unto God and themselves: When our Lord
finds our heart free, and our soul separated from worldly pleasures, then
does he reveal unto it, his divine secrets, whosoever therefore did rightly
know what great loss he suffers, when he gives himself unto these vain
affairs, would without all doubt think it no burden, but find it to be a
great benefit to fly them, that he may join unto God alone. And seeing that
silence and solitude, are the strongest walls of devotion, they therefore
which will either get comfort in their devotions, or not loose that fervor,
which they have gotten, must love silence, and fly vain company, and sighs
of vanity.

Fifthly, The benefit which proceeds from Fasting, does plainly appear in
this, that as by the forbidden meat which our first Parents did eat, death
entered into the world. So did the Reparer of our life by Fasting, begin our
Salvation and Redemption; the holy men, and blessed Saints, Luke. 4.
both of the old and new Testament, have by the means of abstinence, and
fasting, obtained great matters: What overcame and ouerthrewe the army of the
Assirians? The fasting of IVDITH. Judith. 9.
What did deliver the people of Irael, from the sentence of death, Hestor. 5
which was given against them? HESTORS fasting. The NINIVITES, though Infidels,
Ion. 3.
yet by fasting did mitigate Gods wrath and justice. S. PAVL, by fasting, did
begin his Spiritual life, Act. 9.
when as in Damasco, for three days together, he did neither eat or drink;
whereby it came to pass, that he was afterward ravished up into the third
heaven. S. Bernard
S. BERNARD calls it a great Martyrdom, and says: What is a greater
Martyrdom, then to fast, and endure hunger in banquets? to shake and shrille
for cold, amongst garments? To endure poverty amongst wealth? For, to see
delectable things, and not to taste the^, when a man may, is a thing of great
difficulty, for that nature is there overcome, which seeks alvvaies
delectable things. Therefore, Hug. de Sancto Victo.
an ancient learned Father says, Happy is he that can live sparingly, for a
spare diet kills vice, extinguisheth lust, nourishes virtue, strengthens
the soul, and eleuateth the mind to heavenly things. And their transitory
labor, delivers them (as testifies S. GRRGORIE) from everlasting pains.

Sixthly, by often frequenting the holy Sacraments, they cleanse their souls
from sin, and replenish it as often with Gods heavenly grace, receiving
therein in like sort, the Author of all grace, our Savior himself.

Seventhly, Even as the just man does fall seven times in the day, so by
saying daily, the seven Canonical hours, they endeavor to rise as often
again, that they may justly with DAVID say unto God, Psalm. 118
at the day of Judgment. Seven times in the day, I have song praises unto
thee. Unto this often praying, Christ does exhort us, when he said, That we
must alwaie pray, Luke. 18.
and never cease: For that prayer (as says S. CHRYSOSTOM) is as necessary
unto man, and all men have no less need thereof, Lib. 1. de Orand. Deo. Ibid.
lib. 2 1. These. 5. Gloria super illud. these.
then the Trees of moisture: and as water is life to the Fish, so is Prayer
unto man. For as this body of ours, if the soul be not present with it, it
is dead and stincketh, so the soul unless it do stir up it self unto
prayer, is dead and miserable, and stinketh greatly. Therefore the Apostle
warns us to pray without intermission; he prays continually, which does
always well, the just man never cea^eth to pray, unless he leave to do good,
and for their timely saying of them, they shall be the sooner heard: Psalm. 5.
Wherefore Holy DAVID said, In the morning, O Lord, thou vvilt hear the voice
of my prayer, and thereby fulfill the Commandment of our Savior, which
wills to seek first, the kingdom of God and his justice, and for the
reward of their labor, promises that all things necessary shall be given
unto them.

Eightlie, By making their will, and settling their goods in time, they reap
great quietness and tranquillity of conscience all their life after, and in
time of sickness, great comfort for their souls, which being by that means,
rid of that great trouble and care, which otherwise, they must have had, to
dispose of their Temporal goods and livings, may now the more devoutly
attend, to seek the life everlasting, giving themselves and their minds
wholly thereunto, and to frequent the holy Sacraments, that through the
strength and grace which is given therein, they may with more ease, valiantly
overcome their cruel adversary, which is always then most busy, and soon
pass with all alacrity, to endless joy, receiving great aid and help for
that end, by the pains which they have taken in making satisfaction for those
offenses, which upon diligent examination of their consciences, every night
they shall find themselves any ways to have committed, whereby they are freed
from far greater punishment, which otherwise, they should have suffered
elsewhere: Number. 2
for that as God does leave no sin unpunished, so will he not punish one sin
twice.

Ninthly, How great benefit they receive by taking pains to hear Mass
daily, S. Chriso.
may easily be gathered out of S. JOHN CHRYSOSTOMES words, where he says,
that, The Angels of heaven be always present in great number, to honor this
sacred mystery: And we being present with them, and assisting with the same
intention, cannot but receive many excellent influences, by such a Society,
two quiers of the triumphant and militant Church, joining themselves to our
Lord, in this divine action, to obtain mercy and grace for us.

By reading also, or hearing the Rule read once every month, they gain as
often an 100, years of pardon, granted by diverse Supreme Bishops, unto all
those which shall either read the Rule, or hear it read at these times. And by
their monthly almes-giuing, not only do they endeavor thereby, according
unto the counsel of the Prophet DANIEL, to redeem their sins; and lay up
(as our Savior himself teaches) treasure in heaven for themselves, but in
earth also. For as the Emperor OCTAVIAN, would that his daughter should learn
to work, to the intent, that if he should chance to fall into poverty, they
might themselves be able to relieve their wants, by their own work: So do
the Brethren and Sisters, giving alms to be kept, for the relief of the poor
(but especially of their Brethren) prouid means to be relieved themselves, if
they should chance to fall into want hereafter. In causing in like sort a
Mass to be said every Month, for the comfort of the rest of the Brethren and
Sisters, as well living as dead, they are made pertakers thereby, of many holy
Sacrifices, which the rest of the Brethren and Sisters cause in like sort to
be offered for them.

Tenthly, For the works of mercy which the Rule binds them to keep and
exercise, in visiting the sick, relieuing the poor, burying the dead, praying
for the souls of their Brethren and Sisters, both at their death, and
afterward, not only shall they hereby hear, at the dreadful day of
judgment, that comfortable voice of our Savior, saying unto them, for these
their labors: Matthew, 7 Luc. 6
Come ye blessed of my Father, receive the kingdom that is prepared for you
from the beginning of the world: but also be assured by the Testimony of our
Savior, To receive the same measure that they have measured unto others. And
praying for the comfort of all the Brethren and Sisters, living and dead, at
three several times in the year, not only those prayers redound also to their
own benefits (as testifyeth S. BONAVENTVRE) saying. He that prays for
another, labors for himself: but also their prayers, are more meritorious,
and often sooner heard, then if they prayed for themselves.

Eleuenthly, From the Visitations, which are made once every year, at the
least, or twice at the most, they receive this benefit, that by renewing their
vows, their works are made more meritorious, and help and comfort, is there
then specially to be had, and granted, unto all those which having need of
any, shall desire it. And seeing God has commanded every one, to have a care
of his neighbor, they may then fulfill this precept, by informing the Visitor,
and seeking Reformation, of any of the Brethren, or Sisters, that has done
amiss, when, according unto the Commandment of our Savior, After the first
and second admonition, they should tell the Church, that is, Matthew. 7.
The Prelates and Pastors thereof, whose place the Visitor does hold in this
Congregation, whose admonition is most like to do good, for that much better
will one accept of fraternal correction of him which has authority, then of an
old ordinary Brother. And for as much as our Savior says: He which will
not hear the Church, (that is, obey the Prelates thereof) let him be unto
thee, as a Publicane and Ethnicke; The Visitor, both for the benefit of the
whole Congregetion, and of himself also, must after their admonition given,
expel the incorrigible person, whose company, tolerated in that holy
confraternitie, might breed both scandal and infamy to the whole society,
and great hurt unto himself, for his silence and negligence, for as S.
GREGORY says: We kill so many persons, as we see go daily to the devil,
and through slothfulness hold our peace. And how severely shall they be
punished, that so do, for their conniuence and silence, God himself shows,
when he said, by the mouth of EZECHIEL, Ezec.
That if they speak not, that the wicked may leave his bad ways and live:
the wicked shall die in his wickedness, but GOD will require his blood, at
their hands. For all the sins that the Prelates may correct, and do not,
shall be imputed unto them, and they damned for it.

Twelfthly, The avoiding of strife, and conseruing of peace, brings this
benefit unto them, that as by taking upon them this holy estate of life,
tending to all perfection, they enter presently into warfare and combat
against Satan, the sower and stirrer up of all hatred and discord, so by this
bond of concord and charity, whereby they are bound in two Chapters of the
Rule, to avoid all strifes amongst themselves, and keep to the uttermost of
their power, peace and unity with all persons, they receive such strength and
force, that all their enemies (though never so strong and potent) cannot
prevail against them. For what was it, that gave such strength and power, unto
the Christians of the Primitive Church, to overcome in such sort, and plant
the faith of Christ, throughout the whole world, but concord, peace and unity?
whereby they were so united together, that, The whole multitude of the
beleeuert were (as testifyeth S. Luke) but one heart and one soul, Act. 4
by which means, Christ dwelling in them here, now they reign with him
everlastingly. God gtaunt us all his grace, so to live here, that we may do
the like there in his heavenly kingdom. Though those benefits here mentioned,
be equivalent unto the burdens of the Rule, and sufficient to show how easy
the rule and burdens thereof are to be borne, by any devout person, and willing
mind; yet are there many other vtilities, profits, and spiritual graces,
annexed unto the observation thereof, proceeding from the favors and
Privileges, which many Supreme Pastors of the Church, through the singular
affection, and great love which they have always borne unto this holy order of
Penance, these 400. years, have granted thereunto: but for as much as I may
have fitter occasion, to declare both them, and diverse other benefits besides,
more at large in their own places, I will now leave the declaration of them:
and refer the Gentle Reader, to the due consideration, of every one of them, as
he shall happen to read them; having taken occasion, to speak of all these
aforesaid, by reason that the Rule commands, that he which shall receive any
one into this Order of Penance, must first declare unto him, the burdens of the
Fraternity.

ARTICLE III. And chiefly concerning Restitutio^.
AS this Order, tends unto the good of all persons, so in no sort to the
prejudice of any, wherefore none may be received, but such as are either out of
debt, or else able and willing with all speed to discharge it by payment,
pledge, or security convenient, to the end that before their Profession, they
may be according to that ancient saying, Free from debt and deadly sin: In
4. did. 15,
For that according unto all Divines, whosoever does unjustly possess any
thing, or has against Justice damnifyed any man, and will not make
restitution, and Satisfaction, being able, lives in mortal sin, for that
the sin is not remitted, unless that thing which was taken away, be
restored. Wherefore, no Bankeroute, unjust person, or any that is in debt, more
then he is able, or willing presently to pay, can be admitted, least that the
Reception of any such person, might be a discredit, or burden to the order,
which is bound, with all charitable means, to relieve the necessities of the
Brethren and Sisters, which do not fall in to it, by their own default, for if
any shall go about so to do, after thrice admonition given by the Minister,
if they will not leave off such courses, as may soon draw them into great
want, they are by the advice of some discreet brethren, to be expelled by the
Visitor.

ARTICLE IIII. And to reconcile himself to his neighbor.
FOR, as much as the greatest gift and present, that a man can present of his
own unto God, is to give and dedicate him self wholly, unto his divine will
and service, at his first entrance into any virtuous and religious approved
course of life, to the intent that his gift may be acceptable unto God, and his
virtuous enterprise profitable unto himself, he must endeavor to be in
perfect charity with all men, which is attained unto, by his humble
reconciliation, unto all those whom he may suppose to have any way offended:
For that God does so highly esteem of reconciliation, whereby perfect charity
is gotten and preserved, that he commands us first to reconcile us unto our
brethren, before we offer our present and gift unto him, and therefore says,
If thou offer thy offering at the Altar, and shall there remember that thy
brother does any thing against thee, go first and reconcile thy self to thy
brother, and then come, and offer thy gift. Wherefore, to the intent that this
great gift, which a man at his first entrance, in to this Holy Order of
Penance, offers unto God, may be more pleasing unto him, and better accepted
of, here is required, that before any be admitted into this Congregation, he
must first reconcile himself to his neighbors and friends. S. Greg.
For as S. GREGORY says, that, The gift is not accepted of, unless discord
be first expelled out of the mind. S. Aug.
S. AUGUSTINE upon these words (if thou offer) says in like sort, If thou
art so far off, that thou can not go unto him, with the feet of thy body,
then prostrate thy soul before God, unto whom thou art to offer, if thou art
nigh, or present, seek to win his love, humbly demanding pardon, if thou
have hurt him, or if he has endamaged thee, remit first the rancor and hatred
of heart. Hereunto does S. PAVL exhort all men, saying, Do you what lies in
you, Romans 12 1. Ioh. 1. and heb. 12
to have peace with all men, for this is the means to have God to dwell in
us. For God is Charity, and he which remains in Charity, remains in
God, and God in him.

ARTICLE V. After a years space.
ALTHOUGH, the zeal of many is such, that seeing in a short space, they have
made sufficient trial, of all the Austerities and difficulties, that may be
found in this Order, are therefore desirous not to expect, so long before they
make their profession, that they may with all speed, enjoy all the
Privileges, Graces, Indulgences, and remission of sins, which the professed
do enjoy; yet notwithstanding, to the intent, that the Brethren by longer
continuance of time, may have better experience of their former lives, and
present natures, and conditions; and whether that hot fervor, will not soon
grow cold, they are not to be admitted unto profession, until a years
trial, unless it should chance, that they falling so sick, that by the advice of the Physician, they could expect for little other then present death:
for then may they be admitted to profession, and receive then, Pius 5. bull.
sum. sacerd.
and also give at their departure, that most comfortable general absolution,
before rehearsed.

ARTICLE VI. That he promise, that he will observe all the divine Precepts.
S. FRANCIS, Having declared in the former part of this present chapter, what
conditions are required to be in them, which are desirous to be of this Order,
and what diligent inquisition is to be made of them, before their Reception.
now does he proceed to the form of the vow which they are to make at their
profession, saying: That he must promise that he will observe all the divine
precepts: For as one estate does exceed another in perfection, so ought the
lives of the Professors thereof, to be the like: wherefore this estate,
exceeding far the ordinary secular calling, more perfection is therein
required. For this cause therefore, seeing that al Christians, are bound to
observe the Commandments of GOD; here is required a more special care to be
had, in the delight and perfect observing of them, wherein consists such
perfection, that thereby, easily we shall come to heaven. Wherefore, the
Brethren and Sisters, do here renew, in this second (as it were) Baptism,
that promise which they had made at their first, which, for as much as it is
the chiefest obligation of the Rule, and principal part of this order, I did
first begin to declare it, in the Proeme, and Preface to this Rule,
wherefore, referring the Reader, to that declaration thereof there, I will omit
to speak of it here.

ARTICLE VII. And that he will make satisfaction (as is convenient) for the
transgressions and faults, which he shall commit, against this manner of living.
THIS is the second part of the vow, which our Holy Father NICHOLAVS 4. which
before was General of the whole order of S, FRANCIS, did in this his Breue set
down, for those which living in their own houses, or kinsfolks and friends,
do make at their profession, wherein, although they do not all generally make
here withal, so express a vow of obedience, as they do which now live in
Monasteries: yet blessed S, ELIZARETH, daughter of the King of Hungary, and
wife unto Prince JEWS the Lantgraue of Theuring, though from her infancy she
lived in all holiness, and sanctity: yet to the intent that all her works,
by the virtue of obedience, might be made more meritorious, she did by the
consent of the Prince, her husband, promise obedience unto Father CONRADVS. a
Friar Minor, her Ghostly Father, in all things that were not prejudicial, unto
the duty of marriage, the like no doubt many others have done, though not so
much noted o^ the world: For that it has been always the custom of all S.
FRANCIS children to do much, but to make little mention thereof, unless the
deed has been so eminent and manifest, that it could not be hid from the
world, especially in this matter of obedience, though their chiefest virtue in
estimation; For that (as S. AUGUSTINE testifyeth) Amongst all vows, Aug. fo.
9. Ser. de obed. and humil.
Obedience is the chiefest and only virtue, if thou shall fast day and night
and shall pray, if thou shall cloth thy self in sackcloath and ashes, if thou
s^alt do no other thing, but what is commanded in the law, and shall seem
to t^y self, to be as it were wise, and not obeying thy Father thou have lost
all thy virtues. The Scripture it self affirms as much, 1. Reg. 15
when it says. Obedience is better then Sacrifice: He therefore (says S.
BERNARD) which is obedient, both eating fasteth, sl^eping watches, and in
rest and quiet, Genes. 22
labors Although ABRAHAM, neither had the example of Obedience, nor
exhortations thereunto, which we have had daily, yet notwithstanding, so
prompt and ready, was he to obey, that although the thing commanded, seemed
to be altogether contrary, unto that God had promised, yet he without reply
or delay, or respect to the love of his son, whose seed, God had promised to
multiply; went with all speed, to fulfill what was commanded him; being
thereby, an example of perfect obedience unto all posterity. For as S. BERNARD
says: A true obedient person, De precept. and Dispens. Gre mag. in Cap. 3. 1.
Reg.
does not attend and regard, what it is which is commanded, but is
contented only with this, because it is commanded. Whosoever has learned
perfectly to obey, never judges of his Superiors Commandments, for that he
thinks only this to be good, if he obey what is commanded.

Blessed S. FRANCIS said unto his Brethren, that they should not judge any
impossibility to be in his Precepts: for that (says he) Although I should
command you any thing* above your strength, yet holy obedience will not want
strength. S BASIL therefore adds, That he which detracteth the Precepts of
his superior, and strives with words against his commandments, it is a
great sign, that he which so does, abounds and is infected with many
vices, as debiliti^ of Faith, doubtfulnes in hope, arrogancy of manners, and
pride of life.

In the ancient Testament, and law of MOSES, God was so strict in this
matter of Obedience, that in Deutronomy, Deutro. 17
he threatens the disobedient persons with death, saying, He which shall be
proud, and will not obey the commandment of the Priest, he shall die the
death. He showed an example thereof, in CHORE, DATHAN, and ABIRON, whom for
their rebellion, and disobedience unto MOSES and AARON, the earth opened, and
swallowed them down alive.

In the new Testament also, he had obdience unto Priests and Prelates, in no
less recommendation, when he had said unto his Apostles, Luc. 10 S. Basil.
constable. Monasti. c. 23.
He that hears you, hears me, and he which contemns you, despises me.
Which words of our Savior, spoken unto his Apostles, S. BASIL does most
worthily affirm them to be understood, to be given as a law in common
afterward, for those which were to be the Rulers and Governors of others:
wherefore their precepts and ordinances, are not to be contemned, for though
they do not intend to bind thee, or that the thing which they shall command
thee, be but small, yet if through contempt, thou leave it undone, for this
cause alone thou shall offend therein, by reason of thy contempt. To them
therefore must thou obey (by reason that their authority proceeds from God)
and for that cause does he no less esteem it, Romans 13
then if it were done unto himself, yea, a certain learned and devout Father,
Barth. Pisa, 117.
did esteem it to be a thing of so great merit, that he said. I do repute it
more to obey a Prelate, for the love of God, then to obey unto the Creator,
giving any Commandment by himself: And adds the cause saying; He which
obeys the Vicar, of our Lord for his Love, Sulpi Sen. l. diale. 1. cap. 5
will well obey our Lord himself, commanding him any thing. The first
virtue therefore of a religious person, is to obey another man's commandment.
Aug. 14. de Ciuit. Dei. c. 12. vitas Patr, part. 1. cap. 131.
S. AUGUSTINE did so much esteem of Obedience, that he said, that, This virtue
in a reasonable Creature, is after a certain manner, the Mother and conseruer
of all virtues. Obedience is therefore, of that merit and excellency, that it
is held to be, The health of all persons, and finder out of the kingdom of
heaven, obedience opens the heavens, and eleuateth a man from the earth:
obedience, is the companion of Angels, it is the meat of the Saints, by this
they are nourished, and thereby did they come to perfection.

The foundation of this virtue, is the holy Scriptures, and example of our
Savior, of whom S. PAVL writes, that, Phil. 2.8
He did humble himself, being made obedient even unto death, yea, the death of
the Cross, wherefore God did exalt him, and give him a name, that is above all
names: by which words, the Apostle did set before our eyes, an example of most
notable obedience, and the merit thereof withal. Consider therefore (o man)
says S. AMBROSE, Amb. Ser. 20 in Psa. 118.
what thou do read. The Apostle did not labor to prove the power of
Christ, but to Preach his obedience, but to show how great the grace of
Humility is, and what is the profit thereof. The Apostle therefore, to move us
the more said: First feel this in your selves, what was in Christ Jesus.
Thereby, exhorting us to imitate him therein, Bernard. de grad. Humil.
in those things, which he being God and man, did suffer for us. Let us (says
S. BARNARD) learn, what we being pure men, ought to suffer for obedience, for
which, he which was God also did not doubt to die. The Apostles were called by
our Lord, and without any delay, they left all, and followed him, Matthew 4
and when they heard him say, Behold, I send you as lambs, amongst the
midst of wolves, and that which was more bitter, saying, They will deliver
you into the Counsels, and they will vvhippe you in their Sinagoges, and you
shall be led before Kings and Presidents for my sake. They neither gaine-saide,
or repined at any thing: (But as S. BASIL says) With humble meekness of
heart and mind, did subject themselves to the yoke of obedience, S. Basil.
constable. mo. c. 23.
and with all alacrity of heart, went forward, into all dangers, reproaches,
ignomies, Crosses, and diverse kinds of deaths, and did with such willingness
and joy, suffer all things, that they did wounderderfully rejoice, when they
were thought worthy to suffer reproaches for his sake.

Seeing therefore that our Savior himself, being God and man, did by his own
example, so highly commend unto us this virtue of obedience, and made choice
also of such Disciples, which though poor men, Basil. constable mon. c. 13 Act.
5.42
yet for obedience sake (as worthily notes S. BASILE) did with all alacrity
and joy, embrace al ignomines, reproaches, and crosses, yea, diverse kinds of
deaths, leaving this form of virtue to be imitated, by all future posterity.
It would be a great shame, for the Brethren and Sisters, of this holy Order of
Penance, if they should not bend their forces, to do every one something,
according to his ability and calling, to show their desire and affection, to
the obtaining of the benefit and merit, of this most meritorious virtue of
obedience. Wherefore (as I said before) though living abroad, they neither do,
or are bound to make so express a vow of obedience in all things, as those
which live in Monasteries are: yet, notwithstanding, considering these things
aforesaid, but especially, seeing that our Sauiuor requires such obedience of
all persons (of what degree soever) unto their Prelates and Superiors, that
whatsoever is done unto them, he reputeth it, Luc. 10.
as done unto himself. The Brethren and Sisters therefore of this
Congregation, seeing that they have taken upon them, a course of higher
perfection, then other ordinary Christians have, are bound in like sort to
embrace this virtue of obedience, in a more eminent manner. Wherefore seeing
that obedience, is so necessary also for the good of all congregations, that
without it (at the least in all spiritual affairs, and such as shall
concern, the credit and benefit of the whole Fraternity) it would soon fall
out to be rather a confusion, then a Spiritual Congregation; they do
therefore under the vow of making convenient satisfaction, for such faults as
they shall commit against this manner of living, when according to the Visitors
will, they shall be called thereunto, show the great affection and regard
which they have, unto the obedience, which is due unto their Superiors, in
respect of their Rule, and form of life.

Cap. 20. Regul. 11
Neither was it without just cause, that this kind of obedience, was here
ordained, for that seeing by the declaration of our holy Father, they are
bound to observe any point of the rule it self, under the pain of a mortal
sin. If they were not bound by obedience, to make such convenient
satisfaction, for their transgressions, against the rule, as the Visitor or
Superior, should enjoin them for their faults, some indeuout persons, would
make little account, to make any satisfaction at all: And of the otherside,
other scrupelous persons, considering that the greatest benefit which can be
wished for, or desired (which is, the kingdom of heaven) is assuredly
promised, unto those which duly observe the Rule, would, if they should
chance to transgress the same) think that they themselves, could hardly make
satisfaction for their fault. Wherefore, both for the good of the one, and of
the other, our Holy Father did ordeyne, both in the Vow, and in the last
chapter of the rule also, this form of obedience, unto the Superiors, that
the Brethren and Sisters, should with prompt humility, receive the Penance,
enjoined for their faults, and study to effect it effectually; when, and
according unto the Visitors will, they shall be called thereunto. Which form
of Obedience, amongst many true comfortes of the rule, is not the least, for
that seeing every one is, or may be, too partial unto himself, in making
satisfaction, and thereby some might do too little, and others rest still
doubtful, whether they had done enough; now, being done by the advice and
commandment, of the Superiors, he which otherwise would have done too little
here, and thereby left more satisfaction to be done in Purgatory, may be
induced to do such Penance here, that he may be freede, from all other there,
and the doubtful and scrupulous person, rest fully satisfied, in doing what
the Superior shall think, most fit, and convenient, to enjoin and command
him, and though it should be far less, then otherwise he wo^ld have done
himself, yet is it better pleasing unto God, and more meritoous unto
themselves, by renouncing therein their own wills: whereby they stand also
the freer, from all danger of hell, as worthelie witnesses S. BERNARD, saying,
Bern. Ser 3. de Resur dom. Eusebius. in Epist.
Take away our own will, and there shall be no hell, for nothing shall burn
in hell, but our own will. Therefore, EVSEBIVS, wills thee to think, that
thou have only lived well that day, wherein thou have denied, and renounced
thine own will, and resisted thy desires. The fountain of all goodness and
wisdom, christ Jesus did testify, that he came not to do his own will, Ioh. 5.
but the will of him that sent him. If the only begotten Son of God, says,
that he came not to fulfill his own will, but another commandment, how
justly then shall we deserve to be punished, if we seek daily to follow our
own? our Savior Christ, even from the beginning of his life, to the last end
thereof, did by all his actions and examples, teach us to contemn, our own
wills, and to execute the will of God, of our Parents and Prelates. S.
BERNARD, to this end does exhort us, To consider what the Angel of the great
Counsel did, how he did make little account of his own counsel, Ser. 3. de
Resur. ^o^.
but did prefer before it the counsel, yea rather the will of one woman (I
say, the blessed Virgin) and of the poor Carpenter, that is JOSEPH, for being
found in the midst of the Doctors, Luc. 2
hearing them, and asking of them questions, he was in a manner, blamed by his
mother, saying, My Son, wherefore did you so unto us? he answered and said,
what was it that you did seek me? A rhethorical exageration.
did you not know that in these things which are my Fathers, I must be? but
they did not understand the word, and what did the word? he did not rely
on himself, but did descend with them in such sort, that he was subject
unto them: who will not then be ashamed to be obstinate in his own will
and counsel, when the divine vvisdome it self, did leave his own will? he
did change his Counsel in such sort, that what he had now begun from
thence forwards, he left it altogether, until the thirty year of his age,
for that from this 12. year, you find nothing of his doctrine or work,
until the thirty year thereof S. BASIL, therefore says, that, The true and
perfect obedience, Basil. Ser. de fest. nouua. Chor.
of the subjects toward the ruler of the order, is perceived in this, If any
one by his Counsel, do abstain not only from wicked and unlawful things, but
if he will not do these things truly, which are laudable without his
sentence. It is good therefore, says S. HIEROM. To obey unto our Prelates and
Rulers, and after the rules of the holy Scriptures, Hiero. Epist. 5. ad Demetr.
to learn the way of our life from others, and not to use that most wicked
master, that is, our own presumption and will.

But there are some, which, like as ANNANIAS and ZAPHIRA, Act. 5.
made show unto the Apostles, of the whole price of the field, which they had
sold, yet secretly, reteyning part thereof unto themselves, were punished
with sudden death: so they making show, to give unto their Superiors, their
whole will, give only part thereof, fulfilling their command, in matters of
small moment, but in such affairs sometimes, as they ought chiefly to
renounce wholly their will, they will reteyne part, if not all, to pleasure
their own taste, and themselves; and thereby, not only deprive themselves of
great merit, but also endanger their souls health and salvation. What I pray
thee, would it profit thee, if thou should shut all the gates of the
City, and leave but one place open, whereby the enemy may enter, and taking
the City, spoil the Citizens, both of goods and life? So in like sort,
what would it avail thee, shutting up all the gates which are directly, for
the conservation of thy soul, thou should by reteyning thine own will, in
a matter of moment, leave a gappe open for the enemy, to enter and spoil thee
of thy good, of thy merits, and life of thy soul.

The merit and perfection of thy soul, consists more in denying thine own
will, and in an humble and constant heart, ready to do, that which the Superior
commanded, then in feeling, a tenderness of heart, or sweetness in devotion,
because, in the one is declared, the sincere love which we bear unto God, when
for his sake, we renounce our own wills, and those things which seemed most
pleasant to our selves, (wherein consists al true perfection) but in the
other, there may be often hidden self-love, which so defiles our actions,
that soon we loose all devotion.

We may take example hereof, in a devout Brother, Apolog. Sedulii. lib. 2. c.
5. de obed.
of the Order of S. FRANCIS, which feeling great sweetness in prayer, desired
to be freede from his office in the Kitchen, that he might give himself wholly
unto prayer; but having obtained his will and desire, he presently lost that
piety and devotion, wherefore being restored to his former office, he
recovered that grace again.

Be not thou therefore, any whit at all dismayed, though thou find at the
first (by leaving thine own will, and accustomed manner of living) a kind of
dryness, or wearisomnesse of heart, but walk with all patience, joyfully
therein, and thou shall soon find, either the former sweetness, or greater
merit, for thy perseverance.

Wherefore, though it should seem unto thee, at any time, that in thy prayers,
thou neither find profit or taste, yet do thou not desist or turn thy
heart, any moment from God, but read a little, and in reading meditate
something agreeable thereunto, and then returning to thy vocal prayers again,
offer thy self, and thine own will wholly to Gods holy disposition, Luc. 11
and most assuredly he will accept thereof, seeing that he has commanded it so
to be done, when he teaching his Disciples to pray, and what petitions to make,
joined this next unto that of his heavenly kingdom, as a mean to attain
thereunto, for that the first and chiefest thing, whereby we may get that
everlasting life, is to conform our selves to the divine will of God:
wherefore not only in our prayers and devotions, must we say daily with our
Savior; Matthew. 26
Not my will, but thine be done: but in all our actions whatsoever, to say
still the very same from our heart, and not with our lips only, as many a
one does, little thinking what they say, as appears manifestly by their great
coffeehouse, at such things, as by Gods holy permission, does happen
sometimes unto them. If therefore thou will either gain heaven, or enjoy here
all happy quietness, thou must make a perfect and entire resignation, Note
all this diligently.
of thy will unto God, and unto his servants; for as by seeking and reteyning
thy will, thou shall find no rest, so by renouncing and leaving of it, thou
shall live as it were in Paradise upon earth. The slaves in the Galleys do
eat and drink, and have sometimes rest, but he which makes himself a slave
to follow his own will, shall never have repose, rest, or perfect comfort; our
own will is like unto a Raven, which will pick out the eyes of such a one that
feeds him: even so does self-will, make those blind which nourish it most,
and that which is worst of all, puts out their eyes in such sort, that they
cannot behold their blindness and destruction. The Prophet ESAIAS declared unto
those, which complaining that they had fasted, and God had not beheld them,
they had humbled their souls, and God had not regarded them, that their own
self-will was the cause, saying, that In the day of your fasts, Esaias. 58
is found your own will.

Seeing therefore that our own will, brings such hurt and hinderance to all
virtue and goodness, let us bend all our endeauours to renounce it, that we
may joyfully follow the will of our Savior, and of his servants, who have rule
over us, and though their precepts should seem some times to be contrary unto
our skill, yet knowing that our Savior is the chief Governor, let us for his
sake renounce wholly our will, in respect of the great reward, which we
assuredly obtain by so doing, whereof our Savior gave us a little taste and
token, in the reward which he bestowed upon S. PETER, before he was called to
be an Apostle, for renouncing his own will, Luc. 5
to obey and fulfill, the will and commandment, of our Savior which willed
him, to launch out into the deep sea, and cast forth his nets in the day
time, for to take some Fish. S. PETER did know right well, (as one cunning in
the art of fishing) that in the night, the fishes do swim aloft in the
water, and in the day time, go down to the deapth thereof, yet having
labored all the whole night, could take no Fish: and though that which CHRIST
commanded him to do, seemed to be against reason, yet nevertheless, did he
cast his nets forth, and by that means, he which had labored all night
(which was the fittest time for fishing) and could take nothing, now in the
day, which was altogether unfit for it, did merit, to take a great
multitude of Fishes, for the reward of his obedience; he had lost a great time
in the night, and did take nothing, following his own will and skill, now by
renouncing them both, to fulfill our Saviors command, he recovered all the
time lost: so thou may also labor much and long, and get little merit, and
may in like sort, with a little labor, deserve and get a great reward. If
thou labourest never so much, if it be against thy obedience, thou shall reap
no benefit at all; and if thou labor only, according to t^ine own will,
thou shall gain little: but if renouncing thine own will, thou labourest by
Obedience, though the labor be but little, yet assure thy self, thy merit
will be great; for that both thy penance, good works, and all virtuous
actions, which thou should, as an ordinary Christian, exercise of thy
self, to avoid eternal damnation, if in doing of those very deeds, thou
renounce thine own will, and do them, by the advice and ordinance of thy
Superior, or ordinary Ghostly Father, thou may be most assured, that they
will be much better pleasing to God, and more meritorious to thy self, in
regard that thine intention, in doing of them by obedience, adds merit to
the goodness of the action, and withal, makes thee to live in more
security; for that God will never suffer them to go astray, who have
submitted their own wills, to the disposition of his servants. Therefore,
regard not thy Superior simply as a man, neither trust in him, nor in his
humane prudence, but in the providence of Almighty God, who will no doubt,
favor thine endeauours, and speak unto thee, by the means and interposition
of this man, putting into his mind, and into his mouth, that which shall be
most expedient for thy spiritual advancement, so that thou ought to hearken
unto him, as unto an Angel descended from heaven, to conduct and lead thee
thither. Treat with him freely, and with an open heart, manifesting without all
dissimulation, or fayning the good and evil, which thou find in thy soul,
and by this means, thy good shall be more excellent and assured, and the evil
corrected and amended, thou shall be both easied and fortified in thine
afflictions, and moderated and ordered in thy consolations; place then an
exceeding confidence in him, joined with a religious and a respective
reverence, yet so, that the reverence diminish not thy confidence in him, nor
thy confidence hinder the reverence due unto him; both which laudable respects,
to a Ghostly Father, were most eminent, in that thrice noble, Queen Katherine
the first wife of K. Henry 8.
and virtuous Princess, Queen KATHERINE (a Saintlike member of this holy
order of Penance) as does appear, in that most religious Epistle, which she
did write unto F. FOREST, a little before his Martyrdom, where, in respect of
the confidence, which she always had in him, she wrote, that he was the
only man, upon whom she wholly had relied in all divine affairs, and how
greatly she reverenced him, the whole Epistle makes manifest proof: wherefore
hoping that no man, which shall see also the great piety and prudence, which
that most worthy, and magnanimous Matrone, has showed therein, will not think
his labor lost to read it, I have set it down here at large, as it is
Registered in the Cronicles of our Order.

MY Reverend Father, Gensog. histo. seraph. relig. de prouincia Angli.
which was always wont to be ready with your counsel, for others in their
sorrowful, and doubtful cases, do know right well, what is most convenient
to counsel and comfort your self in like: I doubt not therefore (considering
the great piety, and also learning, where withal you are endued) but that you
will (if need require) most willingly suffer death for the name of Christ,
and do know that for this cause, it is not to be feared, Go forvvard
therefore, and be of good courage, for though you may suffer short pains in
these torments, yet (as you cannot be ignorant thereof) you shall receive
eternal and everlasting reward, which who so neglects, and suffers
himself to be deprived thereof, I think him to be most grieuouslie mad, and
out of his vvittes. But yet (alas for grief) in the mean while, you shall
leave me, your poor Daughter (gotten in the wounds of Christ) for a short
time (I say) sad, heavy, and swallowed up in the greatest grief that may be,
vvhilest I loose that man, on whom I did only rely, in all Divine affairs,
for that he was vvounderfully armed, and endued with the knowledge of them,
and piety toward God, and truly, if what I vvish, may be freely expressed,
I had rather to go before, by a thousand torments, then to follow after. But
certainly, if that should happen unto every one, which he wishes for, who,
I beseech you, would willingly live long in hope? Wherefore, renouncing mine
own will, I resign it into his hands, which (giving us also an example)
did rather choose utterly to deny his own will, then to follow it, saying
unto his father, Not what I will, but what thou vvilt: thy will be done.
You therefore shall go before, you shall teach the way, that by your prayers,
you may obtain, that I may follovv you, by the same way, with a corragious (I
hope) and constant mind; Go on therefore, and know for certain, that how
grievous and great soever the torments are, which you may suffer, that I am
pertaker of the same, for which God doubtless, will render unto you, that
incorruptible Crown, which is prepared for you and al others, which suffer
for Christ's name, if, with a strong and undaunted mind, you pass through
those torments, which are heaped on you. Be mindful of your noble and ancient
family, which doubtless, will animate and encourage you to suffer, that most
grievous and vvorthie death, for Christ's name, least that you which being
honorable by nobility of birth, should basely dishonor the same, by
subscribing unto the wicked petition, of the King, although I know well, that
you bear so great a respect unto the dignity of your O^der, that you make
little account, of this nobility of worldly things, if it be not joined with
virtue, you shall render with glory this body, unto his Creator, which has
so long led a holy life, under this poor veil of the institutions of S.
Francis, which you have hitherto observed. But nevertheless, whilst I your
obedient Daughter, consider and reflect in my mind, what great sorrow I shall
have for your sake, I know not what to say, chiefly, for this cause, that you
will leave me without any Consolation, in such sort, that this habitation in
this worid, and my expectation, can be no other the^ misery, and mere death
in this mortal life. But notwithstanding, I trust in the goodness of
Almighty God, to whom I have said, My part and portion, is in the land of
the living: wherein I hope you shall see me, not long after you, where the
tempest of this cruel world, toward me ceasing, I may be taken to that
quiet life, of the blessed. So farewell (my honorable Father) commending my
self to your prayers, here in earth, with which, I do firmly hope that I
shall also be chiefly comforted, when you shall have obtained those supernal
seats in heaven.

Your daughter full of sorrow, KATHERINE.


BY this present Epistle, sent with so great piety, by the worthy child of S.
FRANCIS, unto her ancient Ghostly Father, thou may most evidently see, not
only virtue, piety, and desire of Martyrdom, but also her exceeding great
love, reverence, confidence, and obedience, which she had always borne unto
him, that the example, of so great and worthy a Princess, may animate thee, to
do the like unto thy guide and Superior, considering the great merit and
benefit, which this little foregoing discourse does show, to redound unto
thee for it. To the intent therefore, that thou cause thy obedience to be more
meritorious, thou must endeavor, to renounce wholly thine own will, and obey
thy Superior sweetly, without reply, promptly without delay, cheerfully
without repyning; and above all, lovingly, for the love of him, who for our
love, made himself obedient, even unto the death of the CROSS, and who (as S.
BERNARD says) chose rather to loose his life, then to loose obedience.

Let this promise made by him there, be set down, etc.
FOR as much as they of this Order, did enjoy in Catholic Countries, diverse
temporal privileges, and exemptions, to the intent therefore, that none might
fraudulently challenge them, but they only take the benefit thereof, which are
truly professed, their profession ought to be publicly set down, unless the
quality of the person, and conueniencie of the time and place considered, the
Visitor should think it meet otherwise to be done.

ARTICLE VIII. Moreover, we defyning, do decree, that no man after his
entrance, into this Fraternity, may return unto the world.
OUR holy Father, NICHOLAVS the 4. having declared, by his Apostolical
letters, the promise and Vow, which those of the third Order should make at
their profession, does now here bind them in such sort, by his decree to
observe that which they have promised, that it is not lawful for the^ to leave
it, to return again unto the world, but had not any intention thereby to
bind them, which live abroad in the world, not to deal in worldly affairs,
but only that having taken upon them this manner of life, tending to all
perfection, that they should not leave it, unless it were to ascend unto a
state of higher perfection, considering that our Savior says. No man putting
his hand to the plough, and looking back, is apt for the kingdom of heaven.
For to such may be applied, 2. Pet. 2
that saying of S. PETER, that, It is better for them not to have known the
way of Justice, then after the knowledge thereof, to return back from the
holy commandment which was given them. To pious vows, Ps. 15.22
the Scripture it self does exhorre us, saying: Vow and render your vows
unto your Lord God. But no man constrayneth thee to vow any thing, for a vow
is a matter of counsel, and not of precept. A counsel is one thing (says S.
AUGUSTINE: Aug. sermon 61. de Tempore.
and a precept is another. A Counsel is given to keep Virginity, to absteyne
from wine and flesh, to sell al, and give it to the poor; A precept truly is
given, that justice should be conserved, that every man should diverse from
evil, and do good Moreover of Virginity it is said. He that can take it, let
him take it. But of Justice it is not said, Matt. 19.
Every one that can do it, let him do it; but, Every tree which brings
not forth good fruit, shall be cut down, and cast into the fire: He which
hears a Counsel and does it, shall receive a great reward for his labor but
he which shall not fulfill a precept (unless Penance help him) he cannot
avoid and escape punishment.

The vow therefore, which they of the order, are to make at their Profession,
though it be but first a counsel to perfection, yet after it is made, ^s is a
precept of obligation, by which our holy Father, binds the^ in such sort,
August. Epist. 45.
that they may not return again unto the world. For as S. AUGUST. says.
Before thou were bound by vo^e, thou were free, whereby thou were inferior,
although such liberty, is not greatly to be rejoiced at, wher^y thou art free
from owing that whisch is gain for thee to pay, but now, because thy promise
does bind thee before God, I do inuit thee (says he) to great justice, but
terrify thee from iniquity, for if thou do not perform that which thou
have vowed, thou shall not be such a one as thou had remained, if thou had
not vowed any such thing, for then thou should have been less, and not
worse, but now if that thou shall break thy faith to God, thou shall be so much
the more miserable, by how much the more blessed thou had been, if thou had
kept it; wherefore, Eccles. 5.3
according to the counsel of the Ecclesiast. If thou have vowed any thing unto
God, make no delay to render it unto him, for that an unfaithful and foolish
promise, does greatly displease him, but render unto him what good thing soever
thou shall vow. It is much better not to vow at all, then after thy vow, not
to fulfill thy promise; for it is the^ justly exacted of thee, to pay, and
fulfill it. Tertullia^ aduersus Psychicos cap. 11.
For as Tertul. says A vow when it is accepted of God, it makes by the
authority of the acceptor, a law for the time after, for that he which approved
the deed, he^ceforth has comanded it to be don.

They therefore which do vow, must endeavor that they may perform their vows,
unless they will, Genes. 19
by the example of LOTS wife, looking back, be seuerly punished, for returning
(according to the old true proverb) as a dog to his vomit: August in Psalm
83. 2. Pet. 2.
For that their consciences, being laden with sin, which did oppress their
breasts, having received those great indulgences (which I spoke of before) at
their entrance, they did then, as it were vomit out their sins, and of a bad
conscience, was made an exceeding good: wherefore should thou return
again, to thy old manner of life, and vomit? If a dog should do it, thy
eyes would abhor it, think then, what thou shall be in the eyes of God, in
breaking thy vow to do it. Of those which should so do, 1. Tim. 5.
the Apostle says, that, They have their damnation, because they have made
their first faith void, and without force. What is it (says S. AUGUSTINE)
they have made their first faith without force? August. in Psalm. 75.
They have vowed, and not rendered their vows. This most learned and holy
Doctor, seeing that men love liberty in such sort, that by a little terror
and fear, they will be soon drawn from undertaking any thing that may any
ways hinder it, having showed how far by vows they had lost their
liberty, Aug. epist. 45. ad Armentar et Paulin.
to encourage them again in so good a purpose, said: Let it therefore not
repent thee, that thou have vowed, yea rather rejoice, that it is not now
lawful to do, that which with thine own detriment and loss, was lawful
before: adventure therefore, without fear, and fulfill thy words and promises
by deeds, he will help thee, which requires and coueteth thy vows. Happy
is that necessisitie, which compels thee to do better. No less
encouragement does FVLGENTIVS give, when he says. Fulg. de fide ad Pet. c. 3.
Every one vowing unto God, and rendering that which he vovveth, God himself
will render also the rewards of his heavenly kingdom, which he has promised.

ARTICLE IX. No married woman may be admitted, without the leave of her
husband.
VVHHREAS, in the thirteenth Chapter of this Rule, is made mention, that in
Catholic Countries, where they may conveniently. They must every month
assemble themselves, for all accidents that may happen, but especially, that
they may be instructed, in that most healthful, and necessary way of Penance,
hearing not only an exhortation to that end, but also to hear the Rule. And
the more to animate them so to do, diverse Supreme Bishops, sucsessors of S.
PETER, have granted many indulgences to those which shall hear the Rule read
once in the month, but chiefly CLEMENS the 5. which did grant 14. Quarantines
of Indulgences, which are 190. days of pardon thereunto, as appearreth in his
Breue. In the 14. chapter likewise is declared, that they must assist at the
Funerals of the Brethren and Sisters. And in the 16, Chapter also, they are
commanded to come unto Visitations, unto all which meetings, a married woman may
not conveniently come, without the leave of her husband: for these causes
therefore, when and where these exercises and meetings must be used, not only
by the Brethren, but also by the Sisters, when with conueniencie they may, no
married woman may be admitted without her husbands leave. But now here in this
our Country no such meetings are, or can be made conveniently, neither any
thing else required or exercised, but what is so far from any manner of
prejudice to the husbands in any sort, but rather tend greatly to their good,
by withdrawing them from the pompes and vanities of the world, as much as
their condition, and estate will permit; and thereby joining them the nearer
unto God, and not only a means to keep them from vain comcompanie and idle
expenses, but also an introduction to perfection, and to have a greater care of
her husbands good, and his family also: Wherefore though we may justly
presuppose, that no Cathotholike, will be against his wives good, and his own
also, yet nevertheless, seeing that many devout women, are married unto such
persons, which be so concontrarie unto them in religion, that they are so
far from giving their consent to any virtuous course of life, that they
rather seek all means possible, to with draw them from that Religion, wherein
they were first baptized, or by Gods holy inspiration, called unto. God
forbid, that such devout souls, which have so great need of all aid and
consolation, should for want of their husbands consent, be deprived of so many
and so great comforts* as this Holy order of Penance, does afford unto all
such as are admitted thereunto.

Of the form of the Habit, and quality of the Apparel. CHAP. III.
Moreover, let the Brethren of this Fraternity, be commonly clothed, with
mean simple cloth, both in price and color, neither altogether white, nor
black, unless the Visitor (with the advice of the Minister) should for some
lawful and manifest cause, dispense with some one for a time, in the price. Let
the foresaid Brethren have cloakes also and furs, without falling collers,
cut or whole, yet buttened or open, as agrees to decency, and the sleeves
close. Let the Sisters also be clothed, with a cloak or coat, made of the
like mean and simple cloth, or at the least, let them have with the cloak,
a sauegarde or petticote of white or black color, or a large veil of cloth
of hemp, or of flexe, sowed together, without plaits: as concernning the
meanness and simpleness of the cloth and garments of the said Sisters, it may
be dispensed vvithall, according to the condition and quality of every one of
them, and ordinary custom of the place. Let them not use Ribandes, and silk
bindings. and let asvvell the Brethren and Sisters, have govvnes furred only
with Lamb, purses of leather, and the stringes simply made, without any
silk, and not otherwise, casting aside (according to the healthful Counsel
of the Prince of the Apostles, S. Peter) all other vain ornaments of the world.

As Concerning the third Chapter.
IT is to be noted also, that about the garments and habits, which they are to
wear; the Superior ought to observe that manner of habit, which they shall
think conueniente in these Kingdoms of Castile, according to the devotion of
every one, dispensing with the persons, according to the quality and office
of them. And if any, but especially the Priests, will not wear it publickely,
let them wear under their Cassocke, an other of Flanel, or cloth, with the
guirdle. And at the least, they must show themselves to be of this order, by
eschewing all kind of superfluity, curiosity, and high prices in their
garments. The women also, in dressing of their heads, in their apparel and
Jewels, must keep great moderation, for it is most just and requisite, that
there be a change in all things, as well of the body, as the soul, for their
own good, and profit of their neighbors.

The rest, which desire no dispensation, may use their ordinary habit, of the
cullor and cloth, which the Friar Minors do use: Finally, in their habit,
there must no rigor be used, but that the Superior dispose of it, according
to the quality of the person.

Let the Brethren be Clothed, etc.
ALthough it is not the Habit which makes a religious person, Commis-general.
Cismon.
but their Profession, and due observation, of their approved order, yet not
withstanding, for as much as the religious habit does truly admonish them, of
a holier and purer life, above the common people; all Religious persons, do
wear a distinct habit. Wherefore, NICHOLVAS the 4 in the collection, which
he has made of this Rule of this order of S FRANCIS, which has remained
approved almost this 400. years, seeing that though it was ordained, chiefly
for such devout persons, as had a desire to exercise themselves in the works
of Piety, and Pennauce, at home in their own houses, or in their Parents,
Kinsfolks or friends houses, yet notwithstanding, for that diverse virtuous
persons, out of a great zeal and love to God, having an earnest desire to
attain unto some higher perfection, and finding themselves to want ability,
as well for years, as otherwise, to undertake those other strict courses of
religion, did proceed from this manner of living abroad, to build Monasteries of
their own, that leaving the world in a more eminent manner, they might there
make their essential vows of religion: did ordeyne here this mentioned form
of habit for the^, leaving as it is most probable, the other Brethren and
Sisters, which remained still abroad, to their accustomed manner of Habit,
permitted by S FRANCIS, their first founder, and Instructor; for that as
concerning the Habit of these persons, a learned Doctor does will us here to
observe, that although in this rule, set down by NICOLAVS the 4. Ioh. Bap.
Confect. sum. li. 20. ca. 14.
here is not determined, or mention made expressly of any other habit, but of
those which live in Monasteries: yet notwithstanding, by the custom
Canonically prescribed in diverse parts, but especially in Italy; they which
live abroad, wear an habit more decent and proper, both unto reason, and unto
their estate, because, in respect of the form, they wear their apparel like
unto other Seculers, but in regard of the color, like unto the Friar Minors,
(otherwise called here, the Gray-fryers, by reason of the the greynes of their
Habit) And (that aforesaid Doctor says) it is most like that S. FRANCIS would
that the forementioned, Brethren and Sisters, should wear that kind of
Habit, for that from ancient time, in those parts, where he did first
institute this first Order, and where he himself for the most part conuersed
and lived, Cord. An. super priuil. Fra^c. Minoruil. 1539.
did wear, and unto this present day, use this form of Habit, as testifyeth,
the Reverend F. Friar ANTHONY DE CORDVBA, in his Annotations, upon the
Compendium of the Privileges of the Friar Minors, upon this word, Tertiarij:
where at length, he declares, that when after the Reception, they chance to
die, Clem. 4. Constable. 9.
Their bodies are to be brought clothed with their Habits, openly unto the
Churches of the Friar Minors, and there be buried, although they had chosen
some other place of burial, as is declared in the Privileges of SIXTVS the 4.
which seems to be most agreeable unto reason; for seeing that the foresaid
persons, are made as members of the Order and religion, by receiving the
Habit, and by their profession, made in the Chapel of the Church, of the said
Order, where also having an Altar erected, they come together to hear the
divine service, and institutions of the Rule; the Superior in like sort,
called by the name of Visitor, by whom they are chiefly governed, being of the
forementioned order, it is most equal and just, that seeing by reason of the
Habit and Profession, they are conjoined unto the Order, and did Communicate
in all Spiritual graces, favors, and Indulgences, with the other Brethren of
the Order, in their life time, that now their bodies, should not be separated
from them in their death, but should be buried in any convenient manner, in
their Churches. Whereunto is added, that if they which did ordeyne at the hour
of death (as many do) to be buried in a religious Habit, ought to be buried
in the Churches of the said order, although they had chose^ to be buried
elsewhere, much more then ought the bobies of those of the third order to be
buried there, least otherwise, injury should be offered, unto the order, and
Brethren. Wherefore, though the election of the place of burial, may
sufficiently be judged to be chosen by them, in receiving of the Habit; yet to
take away all occasion of strife, such as may hereafter receive any, ought to
declare thus much unto them, for that it is not expressed in the Rule, to the
intent, that they may perfectly understand what is required in their estate,
and form of living, before their profession.

ARTICLE II. At the least, let them have a Sauegarde, or Petticote of white or
black color.
BY these words, and the other following, in this Chapter, NICHOLAS the 4
does infin^ate, not only that he does not bind precisely the Brerhren and
Sisters, which live abroad, to wear that kind of habit, which he has set
down in this Chapter: but also as it were, foreseeing that all persons, cannot
conveniently wear, so much as their ordinary apparel, of that mean and
simple graye color, says that, Concerning the meanness and simplenes of the
cloth, it may be dispensed with al, according to the Condition and quality
of every one, and ordinary custom of the place. For where the custom of the
place, is to wear their ordinary outward apparel of Gray, yet every one
(their states well considered) cannot conveniently do it. They therefore,
whose condition, estate, time, and place, do permit it, do wear either their
habit, according to the form here set down, or otherwise their apparel, as
other Seculers do, only observing, the colors of the Gray Freyers, but
otherwise, whose quality and condition, does not permit them so to wear,
they flying as much as they may, all vanity, and superfluity, in their
ordinary apparel, do wear under it some kind of white habit, either a
wastcoate, or petticoate, of linen or woollen, or else haire-cloath, whereof
we have many notable examples, in the lives of many holy Saints, and blessed
persons, both men and women, of this holy order of Penance, as well Canonized,
as others; but especially, in the life of that holy King of France, S. JEWS,
which did not only observe this institution of S. FRANCIS, in the humility of
his outward garments, but did (as the Church of God makes mention) wear
Haire-cloath under them also.

The like mention does the Church make of that Princely Confessor, In vita
ipsius.
S. ELZEARIVS, Count of Alsatia, and that he added to the Haire-cloath, which
he did wear in the day, a Cord full with knottes in the night, whereby, he
did so chasten his body, that living twenty six years, in marriage, without
separating in bed from his Spouse. S. DELPHINE, at his departure, out of this
life said. I render God humble thanks, that I leave my Spouse DELPHINE a
virgin, both in body and mind. Pet. Rodulph. seraph. lib. 1. in fine.
Blessed GALLOTVS also, from his youth, wearing continually hair-cloath, kept
perpetual chastity with his wife, and ended his life in all holiness and
sanctity.

The Sisters also of this order, though weaker in Sex, yet have not been
inferior in virtue or diligence, to observe the holy institutions herein, of
our Patron S. FRANCIS, as for example, that worthy Princess, S. ELIZABETH
did, of whom the Church of God makes mention, that she being daughter unto
the King of Hungary, and wife unto the Lantgraue of Thuring, though outwardly
she was clothed with royal apparel, that she might not displease her earthly
husbands eyes, yet under that most decent apparel, she did wear
haire-cloath, that she might be acceptable, in the sight of her heavenly
Espouse, whole example, blessed SALOMEA Queen, daughter unto the Duke of
Craconia, and wife unto COLOMAN, King of Galatia; for the better conservation
of her chastity, which by mutual consent, the King and she, for the space of
twenty eight years, kept in such sort, that after his death, she remained a
pure Virgin, did wear three sorts of haire-cloath; the one made of
Horse-haire with hard knots, another more fine, of the like hair; the third of
horse-hair and hemp, wouen together; which though, in her life time, to avoid
vain glory, she kept so secreet, that only her Confessor, F. Adelberte a
Franciscan, did obtain to see the sleeue of one of her coats; yet after her
death, were they kept with great veneration, in the Castle of Sandamer.

Many other examples might be produced, of great personages of this order,
which have done the like in times past, but these few may suffice, to show
that some have worn Haire-cloath, for their Habit of Penance; so in like
sort, of latter times, there has not been wanting, many notable personages,
which have under their Princely attire, borne that poor Habit of Penance, of
S. FRAVNCIS, amongst whom was that Sainctlie Princess, of our age, and in our
Country, that most virtuous Queen KATHERINE, of whose virtue and piety, her
forementioned Epistle, to her Ghostly Father, does give testimony.

This noble personage, which was the daughter of Ferdinando, King of Spain,
Aunt unto the Emperor Charles, and wife unto King Henry the 8. with whom
living here, 20. years in marriage, being Mother unto our most worthy
Princess, of happy memory, Sander. de Schi. Ang.
Queen MARIE, did wear under her Princely robes, the habit of S. FRANCIS, to
whose third order, (as testifies Doctor Saunders) she had dedicated her self,
endeavoring to adorn the interior parts of her soul, with the precious
gold, of the love of God, little esteeming, of her exterior and outward
ornaments, but only to please the eyes of her earthly husband and king, having
learned by by the instruction, of her holy Patron and ours, S. FRANCIS: how
much the pomp of the world was to be despised, when he taught and ordained,
that the Brethren and Sisters, of this order of Penance, should wear, either
their exterior garments, of the color of ashes, or their inward apparel,
of such stuff and color of humility, as might put them in mind of the
mortality in this life, that they may be thereby moved the more to seek with
all diligence, after that life where is all glory without end.

The Apostle S, PAVL plainly shows, that the garmenss of the Saints, of the
old Testament, were but poor and simple, Heb. 11.
when he said, that, They which the world, was not worthy of, went
about, in fells and goats skins. They were men as we are, and might have
therefore as great cause to desire precious garments, as we can imagine to
have; but they knowing, that naked they came out of their mothers womb, into
this vale of misery, and that they must return again naked, out of this
world, did walk here like unto Pilgrims, that they might obtain the riches
of heaven. Before sin came into the world, man needed no garments, for as the
Sun was clothed with light, so was man with grace, and was (as the white
Lilly) adorned with innocence, but after that he had lost the garment of
innocence, he was ashamed to be naked; wherefore the divine hands, made a
garment of beasts skins, wherewithal, our first Parents were clothed, for
that man being wounded with sin, wanted wherewithal to cover his body, and
hide his wounds: whereby it comes to pass, that he which glories in his
apparel, may be said to be like unto him, which braggeth and boasts
himself, of those rags and cloutes, wherewith his soars wear bound up,
which were a great shame so to do, for that he would be thought to be mad and
out of his wits, which should vaunt himself of his imperfections and wounds.
Job. 16
Holy JOB, was far from glorying in rich ornaments, when he declares his
apparel to be so mean, that he said, I have sowed Sackcloath upon my
skin, and have covered my flesh with ashes; Psalm. 68.
neither were the garments of holy DAVID, any richer, which said, I have put
on hair cloth for apparel. Unto those which glory in their rich and vain
ornaments, God says by the mouth of the Prophet ESAIAS. Esai. 14
Thy covering shall be worms: and not without just cause, for that their
vain and gorgeous apparel, makes them hateful unto God, and void of his
grace, for that it seldom happens, that they which have such care of this
corruptible carcass, but they leave their poor souls naked for Gods grace,
and despoyled of all virtues. For which cause S. PETER declares that, The
ornaments of a Christian woman, 1. Pet. 3
is not the outvvarde frifled hairs, or the deckings with gold, or finenesse
in apparel, but in incorruptible quietness and modesty of spirit, in
chaste and pure conversation, and fear of God. But they which adorn
themselves otherwise, let them understand, how much they do displease God,
by the heavy threatening, which he pronounces against them, saying. Esai. 3.
For that the daughters of Sion are puffed up with pride, and with a neck
stretched out.

The Romans, which wear the richest of all the Gentiles, and commanded the
whole world, did publicly ordeyne, that no married woman, should use more
then half an ounce of gold, for the adorning of her apparel.

To conclude, behold JESUS CHRIST the Lord and Emperor of the whole world,
hanging for thee naked upon the CROSS, that by consideration thereof, if thou
art a true Christian, thou should banish out of thy thoughts and mind, all
pride of apparel, and human foolishnes, seeing that he which, whilst he
lived was most rich, having heaven and earth at his commandment; dying,
carried nothing away with him, but a poor shroude, wherein he was buried:
Neither shall thou carry away any more with thee, out of this world,
whenever thou departest (which peradventure shall be to morrow, or far
sooner then thou think) but a winding sheet, or a poor Gray habit,
wherein (as I said before) al those of this third order ought to be buried, if
they may conveniently, to the end, that as in all humility they lived, so with all humility, they may be buried, that by perseuering therein, they may attain
to that happy place, from which by pride, al mankind was banished, and bound
with the ba^ds of sin; which the girdle wherewith they bind themselves withal,
ought to put the^ in mind of, as also of the cords and chains, which the
Son of God himself, was bound withal, to free us of those bands, and make
us coheyres, of the kingdom of Heaven.

That they ought not to go unto dishonest banquets, sights, or plays, and that
they ought not to give ought unto stage-plaiers. CHAP. IIII.
LEt all accesses, or coming unto dishonest banquets, or fights, or Courts, or
daunsings, be altogether forbidden them. Let them give nothing to Stage
players, or sightes of vanity; Let them be wary to forbid that not any thing
be given unto them, by their own family.

Commis-general. Cismon.
NOTE, that in the 14. Chapter, the going to the marriages of their kinsfolks
and friends, is not prohibited, (where they be celebrated with due gravity
and modesty) but that they abstain from pastimes, and entertainments, if not
unlawful, yet at the least, dangerous, and that they do not converse with
people of bad fame, nor enter into their houses. And in their behavior and
ordinary speeches, they must be moderate, mild, and humble, chaste and
religious; and above all, let them be attentive to the exteteriour and
interior government of themselves, and that they go abroad, when the
necessity, or charity of their Brethren requires. And it is demanded
therefore at their hands, that they give and apply themselves to Christian
piety, visiting and comforting the sick, making their beds, and all other
offices of humility, according to each man's necessity, and their
possibility, with conueniencie, by which exercise, they shall reap great and
worthy fruits of merits, before our Lord and Savior, and shall be confirmed in
the favor and love of God, according unto the saying of the Wiseman. Be not
vvanting unto those that cry for help, and assist the afflicted. Be not
slothful to visit the sick, for by this thou shall increase in charity,
and establish thy self in the same. And these are the exercises which do not
hinder prayer, but rather help it, and make it more acceptable, and brings
forth many virtues; for that from true prayer, comes spirit, love, and
mercy to our neighbors: therefore the Apostlee says: Orationi instantes
necessitatibus sanctos communicantes.

Let all access unto dishonest banquets, Courts, etc.
THE intention of our holy Father here, is not to bind the Brethren and
Sisters, to any such inconueniency, that they might not come at Courts, when
necessary business requires, as all other Religious do; but that they
should not, without necessity, often frequent and long remain in those
places; where for the most part, all vain delights, wanton pleasures, and
lascivious company is, but to commonly found: therefore under the name of
courts, all such places are forbidden, where the like vanities are used.
Wherefore seeing that by this course of life, which they have taken in hand,
they seek to fly the vain pleasures of the world, they must also endeavor,
as much as lies in their power, to fly all occasions, and company, that may
either hinder them, or draw them from their good purpose, seeing that such is
the frailty, or rather corruptnesse of our narure, since the fall of our first
Parents, that it is more prone unto evil, then unto good, whereby it falls
out many times, that the good are sooner and oftener corrupted, by evil
company, then the wicked are corrupted or amended by the good.

The law of God therefore commanded, Exodus 34 Genesis 6.
that the Israelites should not contracte martiage with the Gentiles, least by
their evil manner and custom, they should be corrupted. The children of SETH,
were excellent good truly, before they matched with the daughters of CAINE,
but afterward by their company, they ran into so great wickedness, that it
was cause of the general deluge, and flood, wherein all the whole world was
drowned, except those few persons, which were in the ark of NOAH. The Hebrews
which were the only beloved people of God, above all nations, Esai. 1
were shartly reprehended by the Prophet ESAIE, for conuersing and keeping
company with the Gentiles, saying unto them: Your wine is mingled with
water. For even as wine which is mingled with water, loses a great part of
his force, so in like sort the good, which mingle themselves, and converse
with the badde, by little and little, loose their virtue, and diminish the
fervor of their devotion: Whereof we have a manifest example in the Prince of
the Apostles, S Peter, who being amongst the good Disciples; did co^fes our
Savior Christ, to be the true Son of the living God, but afterward in the
Hall of the high Priest, amongst the wicked, he did forswear his Master. If
the company of the wicked, Luke, 9 Matthew. 16 Mar. 14.
brought so great hurt unto so worthy an Apostle, which so few hours
before, being in the company of Christ, made so constant a promise unto him,
that although all should be scandalized, yet would he never be, yea though he
should die for it, yet would he not deny him; how greatly ought we then to
shun and fly the company of the wicked, for fear, least the like
inconvenience and hurt may happen unto us.

The just man in the Scriptures is compared unto a tree, that is planted by the
riuersside, and the wicked unto thorns; Of the just man, which has not entered
into the counsel of the wicked, neither has stood in the way of sinners; Psalm.
1.
the Prophet testifyeth, He is blessed, and shall be like unto the tree, that
is planted near the courses of the waters, which will yield his fruit in
time, that his leaves shall not decay, and all things whatsoever he does,
shall prosper, but not so the wicked (says the Prophet) for he shall be like
the duste, which the vvinde blovveth away, from the face of the earth. And as
the duste is very hurtful unto the eyes of those, which shall walk therein,
unless they make some provision to keep it from them; so no less hurtful is
the bad examples of the wicked, unto the eyes of those, which shall converse
with them, unless the greater grace of God preserve them from it; whereof the
Prophet DAVID having had experience, beseeched God to turn his eyes, that he
might not so much as behold vanity: the dust in like sort defiles our
apparel and ornaments, so does the conversation and company of the wicked,
defile the ornaments of thy good name and fame. The wicked therefore (as I
said) are compared to thorns, according unto that speech of the great Prophet
of Israel, saying: All the false dealers, as thorns shall be rooted up, 2. Reg.
23.
Many travelers in the heat of the day, in Summer, will fly to the shade of
good trees, but the snakes, adders, vipers and venomous beasts, fly unto
thorns and bushes, to lurk and hide themselves: so the just and civil
persons, do fly unto good and virtuous men, and do associate themselves with
the just, as good and fruitful trees, whereas the wicked fly unto their like,
and seek to hide their wickedness, under the thorns and bushes, as vipers
and serpents. If thou therefore frequentest often the company of bad livers,
and conuersest daily with those which are noted with some infamy, and
ignomie, what do thou think that any will judge of thee, but that thou art
some bad person, Viper, and Serpent, seeing that thou ioynest and flyest unto
the thorns, neither can thy innocence, save thee from this suspicion of
ignominy: For as a looking glass, though of it self it be pure, and shining
bright, yet is it blotted and infected by the breath of the standers by; even
so he which is clean, and endued with honesty and virtue, is blotted and
defiled with the conversation of the wicked. For as the Ecclesiastike says:
Eccles. 13.
He which touches pitch, shall be defiled by it: So he which communicates,
and conuerseth with a proud man, will put on pride. For as a man can hardly
run among thorns, and escape pricking; so it is no less difficulty, to
run with wicked persons, and not to be hurt thereby: And as the prick of a
thorn, if it be not soon cured, is held very dangerous, so is the hurt
which is taken from the evil, by reason, that what a man does, by example of
another, that does he think he may lawfully do: and so as the Apostle
says, A little leaven, 2. Cor. 3
corrupts the whole paste: that is, a little bad example, may corrupt the
whole life: Worthelie therefore does the Ecclesiasticke (exhorting thee to fly
from all evil company) say, Fly from the wicked, and evils will leave
thee. SAVL the King of Israel, Eccles. 7
among his own company was mad, but leaving them, and coming unto the
Prophets, did prophecy: So on the contrary side, S. PETER amongst the
Apostles, did confess Christ to be the Son of God, but in the house of
CAYPHAS, amongst the Jews, he did deny him. Thou can not have greater
strength and courage, then he showed to have; yet thou see, what hurt the
evil company brought unto him: let this example cause thee to follow that old
proverb, Happy is he whom other men's harms do make to bevvare. Little trust or
confidence is there to be put to thy own strength or goodness, without Gods
special aid and assistance; for we see that some Planet, which of it self is
benign and healthful, if it happen that it conioyne with some evil disposed
constellations, and hurtful signs, it sends forth, and produces evil
influences; even so a man, which of himself is virtuous and good, if he join
in great familiarity, with evil disposed persons, he will soon become like
unto them in manners, and bring forth evil actions, for that every one for
the most part will imitate the manners and customs of those, with whom they
do daily converse, whereof we have example of the Jews, which conuersing with
the Gentiles, did adore their Idols, as witnesses the Prophet DAVID saying:
They are mingled with the Gentiles, Psalm. 15
they have learned their deeds and actions, and have served their Idols.
Neither let thy virtuous life heretofore, make thee presume so much as to
aduentur thy self to so emine^t danger. For eue^ as that pleasant and
profitable land of Iourdane, Aspholtites.
when it enters into that wholesome lake of Palestine, becomes unsavory,
and loses his virtue: even so he, which in his own course of life, before
was sweet, pleasant, profitable, and delectable, when he runs out of it,
into the company and unwholesome lake, of seculer conversation, with the wicked;
his sweetness of devotion, is rendered unsavory, and his accustomed good
actions, and manner of life, loses the virtue thereof, he being defiled with
vice. Just cause therefore had S. FRANCIS, out of his fatherly love, to exhort
all his children, to avoid all such occasions, and company, by avoiding
Courts, banquets, dances, and sightes of vanity.

Daunces.
THOUGH honest exercises, and recreations are not forbidden, In decretde Cons.
Di. 2. in Relig.
yet seeing that many abuses are oftentimes committed in uncivil daunces, they
must avoyde them specially, seeing that that most famous light of the Church,
S. AUGUSTINE, considering the danger and hurt to the soul, which comes of
dancing, to be so great, says, It is better for a man to go unto the plough
on the Sunday, then to dance, and better for a woman to spin and card her
well, then to dance uncivilly upon fest days.

Let them give nothing unto sightes of vanity.
IF the time and place were such, that the Brethren and Sisters were publicly
known to be such persons, that though they live abroad in the world, yet were
retired from the vanities and pleasures thereof, then were they bound to show
how much they contemn, what others esteem and seek after; not to give so
vainly, that thing to frivolous sightes and pastimes, which many poor persons
(of whom they ought to have a special care to their ability) stand in great
want of: and ought to be careful in like sort, that their servants under their
charge, by their example and exhortation, may be hindered from spending their
money vainly, that they may employ it profitably, but now as all things are in
this sort, in our Country, they are not otherwise bound to do, but as they
shall find it convenient.

Of Abstinence, and Fasting. CHAP. V.
LEt them abstain from eating of flesh, the Mondaies, Wednesdaies, Frydaies,
and Saturdaies, except the necessity of infirmity, or weakness do otherwise
require, but let flesh be given unto those which are let blood, for three days
after, neither let it be with-drawen from them which travail in Journey; let
also the eating of flesh be lawful unto every of them, when there happens
any principal solemnity to come, wherein all other Christians of ancient time
are accustomed to eat flesh. But all other days in which fasting is not
kept, let not eggs and cheese be denied them. And also they may lawfully eat
with other religious persons in their Monasteries, of such meats as are, by
those persons set before them, and let them be contented with the refection of
dinner and supper (except the languishing, wayfaring, and sick persons) let
the meat and drink of the healthful, be moderate, seeing that the Text of the
Gospel says, Take heed that your hearts be not ouer-loaden, with
surfeiting and drunckennesse. But let neither supper or dinner be taken without
one Pater noster, which is to be iterated with Deo gratias, to either of the^,
which if it chance to be omitted, let three Pater nosters be said: but let
every fridaie, through the whole year be fasted, unless peradventure,
through sickness, or some other lawful cause they may be excused, except also
the feast of the Nativity of our Savior should happen to be kept the same
Ferie. But from the Feast of al Saints until Easter, they shall fast both
Wednesdaies and Fryedaies, and are to keep nevertheless the other fasts which
are appointed by the Church, or upon occasion commanded, commonly by the
Ordinaries. Also, let them see they fast in all days (except Sondaies) in the
Lent of S. MARTIN, until Christmas: and from the Sunday of Quinquagisma, until
Easter, unless sickness peradventure, or some other necessity should
constrain them the contrary. The Sisters, great with child may (if they will)
abstain from all corporal exercises (only prayer excepted) until the day of
their Purification. But the Laborers, in regard of their wearisomnes of their
labor, may from the feast of the Resurrection of our Savior, until the Feast
of S. FRANCIS, lawfully eat three times in the day, wherein they labor. But
when it happens, that they are employed in other men's work, then it is
lawful for them to eat of al things that are set before them any day, unless
it be Fridaie, or some other day, in which it is known to be appointed to
fast generally by the Church of God.

Concerning the 15. Chapter.
NOTE that in the keeping the Fastes, Commis. general, Cismon.
and the days of Abstinence, we command, that they keep the chap. of the
rule, dispensing with those who have necessity, the which the Prelates,
Guardians, and Confessors of the order may do: And where there is no Convent,
the Confessor of the Noones may do it, or any other ghostly Father. And mark,
that concerning the order of not eating flesh on Mondaies, wednesdaies, nor the
fat or intrals, on Saterdaies. They who are under their fathers care, are not
bound to abstain from it, nor servants, if their superiors give them not
sufficient of other meats, to pass that day co^uenie^tly. And in this manner
are they also reckoned, who are occupied and employed, about healing the sick;
and they who by reason of poverty, can not provide otherwise, because favors
must be extended, and interpreted to the best, they may change their fastings
and abstinences, into other works of charity, and into prayer for the dead.
And finally, let their ghostly father have full power, for disposing al these
abstinences and fasts.

Let them abstain from eating flesh Mondaies, Wednesdaies, etc.
OUR Holy Father, NICHOLAVS the 4. although as chief Pastor of the Church, he
had a general care over his whole charge, yet having been a religious man and
General (as I said before) of our whole order; reteyning still his ancient
love thereunto, does show a particular affection, unto this holy Order of
Penance: Whereof seeing that many of them were entered into Monasteries of
their own, and had made three essential vows of Religion, to the intent, that
as true Religious, persons, they might have a perfect form of religion, having
in the 3. cha. of this Rule set down, a religious form of their habits; does
now here in the beginning of this Chapter, prescribe for them most specially, a
most perfect manner of religious diet, both for their abstinence and fasting.
Wherefore in religious houses, of this order, and also such persons as live
either so privately to themselves, or in such places, as no man noting them
with so much singularity, in their diet, be scandalized thereat, do strictly
keep this abstinence, yet notwithstanding, in this Countreye now, where the
keeping of Mondaies and Wednesdaies, in this sort might breed some scandal,
the devout Brethren and Sisters, are freede from keeping them here in this
manner, by the leave, which this foresaid NICOLAAS the 4. gives in the 18.
chapter of the Rule, unto the Ordinaries of the places, or Visitors, to
dispense upon any lawful cause (when they shall see it expedient) with all the
Brethren and Sisters, in abstinence, fastings, and other austerities. Yet
nevertheless, I counsel houshoulders (where they may conveniently keep the
Wednesdaies) with abstinence, and the Mondaies, also to use some restraints in
their diet, either abstayning from those meats which are most pleasing to
their taste, or at the least (setting scrupulositie aside) to take a more
sparing diet then on other days: and insteede of strict fasting, to redeem it
with alms deeds or prayer, saying at the least (if sickness do not hinder
them) five Pater nosters and Aues, in all such days as they cannot
conveniently fast: for although it was not the intention of S. FRAVNCIS, to
found this rule so strictly, upon the exercises of Fasting, abstinence,
discipline, and other austerities, or paineful corporal afflictions, as his
former Orders; yet notwithstanding his will and desire was, that they should no
less employ themselves in devout exercises and works of mercy, both
spiritual and corporal, according to their power and calling, then the other
Orders do. And as for abstinence and fasting, to use them in such sort, that
thereby the body may be kept able to go forward, with that alacrity in the
service of God, but not so nourished and pampered, as to rebel against the
Spirit, whereunto of it self, it is most prone, as witnesses the Apostle,
saying: The flesh coueteth against the spirit, Romans 8.
and the spirit against the flesh: and in the aid which thou give to either
of these, consists the life or death of thy soul: For as the same Apostle
says: If thou live according to the flesh, thou shall die, but if by the
Spirit, thou shall mortify the acts of the flesh, thou shall live. That is,
have the life of grace here, and after, in glory for ever. Wherefore, whosoever
is a faithful friend unto God, and his own soul, must by abstinence, fasting
and prayer, so macerate and weaken his flesh, that it may not rebel, but be
obedient and subject unto the spirit. For if by these aforesaid means, we give
aid unto the Spirit, and subject the flesh unto it, and sensuality unto
reason, the soul certainly shall overcome, and having the victory, shall enjoy
together, with the body, the eternal bliss, and be most gracious in heaven:
Whereas by pampering and ouercharging of thy body, thou make both sincke
down to hell. For as a ship which is laden above measure, must needs of
necessity, sincke to the bottom, so in like sort, if thou ouerchargest thy
body with too much, or too many kinds of dainty meats, thou will cause thy
body to sink to the gulf of sin, and from thence to the bottomless pit of
hell.

The devil overcame our first Parents by meat, so the chiefest weapons
wherewith he fights and seeks to overthrow, and spoil thee, is thy own
flesh pampered up with dainty and superfluous meats, Wherefore, if thou will
overcome thy enemy, and be without danger hereafter, break first the force of
his strength and weapons, and by abstinence and fasting, chasten and pull down
the fleshly inclynatio^s of thy body. For as there is nothing which does so
much terrify and overthrow the devil, as austeritie of life: so on the other
side, there is not any thing which makes him boulder to tempte and assault
men, then riotousnesse and excess in meat and drink, and delights of the
body: wherefore, he that gives his mind to delicattenesse, and favors
overmuch his own flesh, falls soon into the power of Satan. Wherefore as
DANIEL did first destry the Idol of BAAL, Dani. 14.
and afterward the Dragon, which lay hidden therein, so must thou afflict and
overcome the Idol of the flesh, by abstinence, fasting, and prayer, and then
thou shall triumph afterward easily over the dragon, the enemy of mankind.

ARTICLE II. Except the necessity of infirmity or sickness, etc.
EVEN as in the words immediately going before, was set down a general rule
for those of this Oder, which did either live in Monasteries, or such as had
conueniencie and strength, to keep the rule in the strictest manner: so now
here is a favorable course taken for the weaker sort, setting down for what
cause the Rule it self, does exempte them from that general forementioned
abstinence, without any further leave, or dispensation, as debilitie,
sickness, infirmity, letting blood, travail, high feasts, and solemnities,
company of religious persons, in their houses, laborers in other men's houses
(under which name, may be comprehenped all servants, and also children in their
parents houses, or Surggeners in other men's houses, which for brevity sake he
omitted) for making his Rule for all manner of persons, of all ages and degrees,
endeavoring to avoid overmuch teadiousnesse therein, and studying brevity, as
much as he might, could hardly set down a course of life for every one,
according to his ability, therefore declaring in brief, what fastes the
strongest, and such as had best opportunity should keep; left the ordinary
Prelates (as you have heard) to appoint unto the others, what abstinence and
fastings, should be convenient for their estate and ability. Wherefore though
amongst the obligations, and bonds of the Rule, I have set down a form of
abstinence and fasting general to be kept in this our Country, by those which
may conveniently, yet would I advise every one in all those fasts, to follow
the advice of the Visitor, or his own prudent Ghostly Father, which duly
considering what the Rule requires, and what his Penitent may well perform, to
appoint unto him in particular, what is convenient for him to do, whose
devise, if they devoutly follow, shall be a sufficient discharge for them,
especially, seeing that the rule, not only does give authority to their
Rulers and Superiors, to dispense with them in all such things, as shall be
convenient; but does in a manner it self, free and exempt them from all such
obligations in fasting, as might breed any inconueniency, declaring, that the
infirm, the sick, the weak, the languishing, the travelers, and laborers,
are exempted from the abstinences and fastes of the rule, and withal, gives
leave unto every one, both weak and strong, to eat flesh, in high
solemnities, wherein all other Christians of ancient, or accustomed to eat
it, and with Religious persons in like sort in their Monasteries and houses;
whereby we may gather that S. FRANCIS would not but that his children should
sometimes rejoice and feast, as just occasions should fall out, and that in
civil and virtuous company, they may eat as the company does: wherefore it
is not to be attributed unto them as a vice, to feast and rejoice sometimes,
because that they living abroad in the world, may not altogether renounce
humanity and civility, but to feast, banquet, and make merry every day, can
hardly be without sin. Therefore he exhorts them at other times (the
languishing, wayfaring, laborers and sick persons excepted) that only they
should use abstinence some days, Mundaies and Wednesdaies, but that other
days also, they should content themselves with the Refections of Dinner and
Supper only, wherein also he requires great moderation in their diet,
alleging to move them the more unto it, that saying of the Gospel, Take heed
that your hearts be not ouerloaden with surfeiting and drunk^nnesse.

ARTICLE III. But let neither Dinner or Supper be taken without one Pater
noster, etc.
IT is a thing usually practiced, to distinguish three degrees of
thankfulness; one is to acknowledge in heart the benefit received; the
second is to praise the same, and confess it in words; the third is, to
recompense it in deeds, according to the ability of him which has received
it; and seeing that our ability is so small, that it is not able to requite
the least part of the great goodness, and infinite benefits, which God does
daily bestow one us, we should be much too blame, if we did not bend all our
forces, and endeavor with heart, word, and deed, to requite them in what we
may, which our loving Father, S. FRANCIS well considering, and knowing in like
sort, that amongst the daily benefits, which God so liberally imparteth unto
us for our bodies, one is the food whereby we live, and nature is sustained To
the intent therefore that the Brethren, and Sisters, of this holy order of
Penance, which endeavor thereby, to make satisfaction for all former
negligences, should not now by unthankfulness, commit any new offense,
ordeyneth that for thanksgiving unto God, for that which through his goodness,
they are then to receive, they should both before Dinner and Supper, say one
Pater noster, at the least: For if no other Catholic Grace be said, and that
they themselves cannot say one, then must they in private and hearty manner,
repeat one Pater noster, as well to show themselves thankful unto God, as also
to invoke his divine grace and fatherly benediction, from whence proceeds
our chiefest susteynca^e: Luc. 4.
wherefore our Savior objected unto Satan which tempted him, to turn stones
into bread, that man did not live only by bread, but in the word and virtue,
Exodus 16 Number. 20.
which proceeds from God. He sustained the Children of Israel 40. years,
without any temporal food. Our life truly does not depend upon the common
use of natural things, but upon the benediction, and will of God, For if it
please him (although natural things do never so much repugne) he will sustain
and feed his servants. He brought out of the hard stone, Exodus 15.
plenty of water to refresh the Children of Israel, which were ready to die
for thirste. The life therefore of spiritual me^, does not so much depend upon
the natural order of temporal things, as it does upon Gods will and blessing.
Whenever therefore thou shall see thy self, in never so great distress,
either without bread, or any thing else, wherein thou may have any hope,
call to mind, and firmly believe, that God is so potent, that he can as well
without bread, as with it sustain and nourish thee. Cast therefore thy care
upon God, and seek him, and he will feed thee: yea fair greater care has
our Savior of those which seek him and follow him, then they have of
themselves, whereof we have a manifest example in that great multitude, which
without care of themselves, followed him for three days together, so far
into the desert, that they were so far in danger and distress, for want of
food, that our Savior himself said, that, Marc. 8.
If they should return fasting, they would faint by the way. Wherefore (to
show how ready he is always to aid and nourish those which seek him) he
fed the whole multitude, being 4000. so plentifully, that after they were all
satisfied, there remained seven basketsful of the fragments, which were left,
so bountifully does God deal with all those, that rely sincerely upon him,
and implore with all humility his grace and blessing, which as the Prophet
DAVID testifyeth, Opens his hand, and fills every living creature, with
Benediction: Whereby thou may see, how necessary and profitable it is for thee
to give both thanks unto God for his benefits, and also to crave his blessing
before thy Refections, saying at the least, one Pater Noster, and Aue.

ARTICLE IIII. Which is to be iterated with Deo gratias.
AS benefits do increase, so must we do in like sort, in love and
thankfulness for them. Wherefore as the Brethren and Sisters were bound to say
before each refection, a Pater noster, at the least, so now is required, that
they must not be unmindful of God, and his benefits, after they have received
them, but rather show themselves more thankful, and not only devoutly to
repeat the former Pater noster again, but to add also thereunto, Deo
gratias, for that forgetfulness of a benefit, deserves so great punishment,
that amongst the ancient Romans a bondslaue that was set at liberty, might
afterward for that vice be recalled into bondage again. The first thing that
God commanded the Prophet ESAIAS to preach, was the accusation of the ungrateful
persons, which when he might have reprehended the people for many other
vices, yet did he make choice rather to begin with this, as the chief root
and fountain of all other vices, saying: Hear o heavens what I speak, and o
earth, understand with tears, because our Lord has spoken and said, I have
brought up children, and have exalted them, but they have despised me. The Ox
has known his Possesser, and the Ass the stable of his Master, but Israel
has not known me. The Prophet calls the heaven and earth to witness, that
they may hear him most justly complaining, that for ingratitude men are made
worse then brute beasts. Many are found, which the more benefits they have
received, they become worse then before, and giving themselves to all
licentiousnes and drunkenness, forget quite both the gift and the giver: Psalm.
75.
of whom the Royal Prophet DAVID says; They have forgotten his benefits, and
the vvonderfull things which he has done for them.

To prevent therefore this great forgetfulness and negligence, S. FRANCIS not
only exhorts them, Col. 3 1. These. 3.
with the Apostle S. PAVL, to be thankful, and, In all things, that they should
give thanks to God, but also to make them to be more mindful thereof, and to
draw them to use all diligence therein, sets down here a Penance for those
which should neglect it; ordeyning, that if they chance to omit to say one
Pater noster at the least, before or after any of their refections, that then
they must say before they go to their rest, three Pater nosters, for that
negligence and offense, esteeming it no little fault to forget or omit to show
themselves thankful for the goodness of God, which has so bountifully
bestowed on them those daily benefits, which many one perhaps that has
better deserved it, do want it, and which they themselves may also hereafter
do, if they should be unthankful for what they have already received, for
that he is not worthy of a second benefit, which is not thankful for that
which was bestowed before.

ARTICLE V. The Sisters great with child, may ahstaine from corporal
exercises.
AS S. FRANCIS does exempt by these words Women, in this case from corporal
exercise, so by the same sentence, he shows that married women though they
make not that express vow of Chastity, which many of this Congregation do,
yet are they not exempted and debarred from being admitted into this holy
order, but may (if they have all other conditions requisite, and do earnestly
desire it) be admitted, and may nevertheless, after mature deliberation, vow
that kind of Chastity, whereof that ancient and learned Doctor ORIGIN makes
mention, when he exhorts married women to propose and vow chastity of
widdow-hood, in case their husbands should die before them, that in wedlock
they may enjoy the merit, of chaste widdowhood, by this promise and vow made
before hand. Of this kind of Castitie does S, AUGUSTINE seem to speak, Aug.
in Psalm. 75 id. in psalm. 83.
when he says that Some vow unto God matrimonial Chastity, that besides his
wife, he will not know any other, so likewise, the woman that besides her
husband, she vvil not know any other, Some in like manner, though they have
assayed and tried such acts of marriage, do vow to suffer no such thing any
more, and not to desire or sustain any such thing, and they have vowed,
something more then the first: others do even from their tender years, vovv
virginity it self, in such sort, that they will not so much as assaie what
others have tried and left, those truly have vowed very much: hitherto S.
August.

An example of the first manner of vow of chastity, we have in that worthy
Princess, S. ELIZABETH, before mentioned, which having, by the consent of her
husband, vowed obedience in all things that were not prejudicial, unto the
duty of marriage, did after his death, perform this which in her tender
years, she had made, (if it happened that she ouerliued her husband) of never
knowing any other man: observe that chastity of widdowhood, in which happy
estate, she remained and performed, most Holielie, all such things as are
required, to be in a true chaste Widdowe, both in body and heart also, with
such an immutable purpose, to keep her self in that estate, that being
vehemently urged by her friends, after the death of her husband, to marry
again, most constantly resisted them, making choice rather to lead a poor
holy professed widows life, then to accept of great preferments by a second
marriage: For those which are widows, but only while they expect marriage,
are not separated from husbands, but only in respect of bodily pleasure, for
they be already joined to them in heart and will; but if the true widdowe,
with good deliberation, to confirm her self in the state of widdowhood, will
offer unto God her body, and chastity, by vow, as this blessed Saint did,
she shall add a great outward ornament to her widdowhood: and make her
resolution secure, for since, that after her vow, she is no more in her own
power, and cannot leave her chastity, without forgoing her part in Paradise;
she will be more zealous of her own designement, and suffer not so much as one
little thought of marriage, to stay in her heart, no not the space of one only
moment, so that this sacred vow, will put a strong bullwoorke, between her
soul, and all manner of thoughts, that are contrary to her holy resolution.
And for this cause, that great Pillar of the Church, holy S. AUGUSTINE, did
counsel this vow very earnestly to a Christian Widdowe.

Of the second manner of vow of chastity in marriage, to abstain from the act
or desire of former pleasures, by mutual consent, the daily commendable
practice thereof, is a sufficient example for it, and though oftentimes, both
parties do enter into diverse religious Orders, notwithstanding, if both of
them have made the vow of continency, and give free leave unto each other,
the one may by the consent of the Bishop of the Diocese, enter into
Religion, though the other (being of that age, that no evil suspicion may rise
thereby) do live still abroad. The ancient writer TERTVLLIAN, Tertul. li. 1.
ad vxor. c. 6
does with these words confirm it, that, In times past married persons, did
by mutual consent vow chastity saying: When any thing seems difficile and
heard, let us declare and show others, to have undergone far harder: how
many are there, which even from their Baptism, do shut and seal up their
flesh? how many also, which with mutual consent, do abolish and repeal the
debt of Matrimony? the abstinence thereof, is mantained and allowed in those,
which voluntarily have gelded themselves, for the desire of heaven, their
matrimony remaining safe and sound; how much more then, it being removed.
These things do appertain unto the continency of Wedlock, which as with
mutual consent, they did vow it in the Primitive Church amongst themselves, so
by the like, did they mutually remit the debt of Matrimoney, unto each other,
their marriage notwithstanding safe, and the Church of God does acknowledge
among such to be true Matrimony, as was that most sacred marriage, Aug. de
Ser. Dom. in mont. cap. 14. Tom. 4.
between the Blessed Virgin MARIE, and JOSEPH: yea, S. AUGUST. affirms, that
those marriages are to be held more blessed, which either having children,
of contemning their earthly offspring, could with mutual consent, keep
continency betvveene them, for (says he) it is not against that precept,
wherein our Lord forbids a man to dismiss his wife, for he does not
dismiss her, because he lives not carnally, but spiritually with her, and
fulfilleth that which is said by the Apostle, 1. Cor. 7.29.
The rest is, that they which have vviues, be as though they had none.

Of the third kind of Vow, which was of Virginial chastity, even in
Matrimony, diverse holy persons of the third order of S. FRANCIS, Cap. 3. huius
Regul.
taking the Virgin of all Virgins, the blessed Mother of God for their Patron
and example therein, have observed this happy vow from their infancy, in such
sort, that S. ELZEARIVS, aforementioned, living 26. years in marriage,
without separating in bed from his Spouse S. DELPHINA at his death, Ibid.
said, I render God humble thanks, that I leave my Spouse Delphine a virgin,
both in body and mind: B. GALEATVS in like sort kept perpetual chastity with
his wife, in all sanctity and holiness. So in like ma^er, that blessed Queen
SALOMEA, with mutual consent of her husband. COLOMANVS king of Galatia, living
15. years with him in marriage, remained after his death, so pure a virgin,
that PRANDOTHA, the Bishod of Craconia, Pet. Rodul hist. scrip. Relig. li. 1 in
fine.
gave unto her in token thereof, The veil that belongs only unto Virgins,
They which vow this (says S. AUGUSTINE in the forementioned place) vow
very much.

But all, says our Savior, do not take this word, but they unto whom it is
given: upon which words of our Savior, Chrysostom. op. imp. hom. 33.
S CHRYSOSTOM. says: Our Lord did not say, al cannot, that al do not take it,
that is, al may truly take it, but notwithstanding al will not. The Palm and
Crown is proposed: he which seeks for glory, does not think of the labor,
no man should be victorious, if al men should fear the danger of the fight. In
that we see some cannot, and do fall from their purpose of chastity, we
ought not therefore to be the more negligent, about the virtue of chastity,
for if some follovving in the battle, do not discourage the others, but say
it vas his chance, they do not apply it unto the battle, but unto the man:
how much more then, ought we to impute the fall of any to the negligence of
such as fall, and not unto the difficulty of virginity: wherefore S. Greg.
Nazia: says; When thou hear but to whom it is given, add thou, that it
is given unto those which will, and unto those which inclyne their mind
thereunto.

That it is a thing lawful for married persons, by mutual consent, to vow
chastity: the example, of many holy and blessed Saints, which have so vowed and
wrought many miracles, both in their life, and after, do make it so manifest,
that no man can justly deny it. S. AUGUSTINE alleges, the act of the
glorious Virgin, and Joseph her husband for an example; that married persons,
though by mutual consent, they keep perpetual continency: yet do their
Matrimony remain perfect. He declares this matter more plainly in his
Epistle to S. PAVLINVS, which with his wife THERASIA, Aug. Epist 32. ad Pa.
by mutual consent, vowed perpetual chastity. Also of our happy King of
England, S. EDWARD, SVRIVS writes, that living in perpetual chastity with
his wife, remaining a virgin, did many miracles, and an 100: years after his
death, his body was found altogether whole, in such sort, that his beard
being long and white, nothing thereof was fallen away,

The only and chiefest reason wherefore it may not be lawful for a man to
profess and vow continency is, because being married, he has not power of
his own body, and no man can give that which is another, against his will,
but this cause cease, and is taken away, when the vow is made by mutual
consent.

Of these three sorts, Amb de vid.
of continency and chastity, speaks S. AMBROSE, saying: We are taught,
that the virtue of chastity is triple, the one of married persons, the second
of Widows, the third of Virgins, for we do not so much extol the one, as
to exclude the others. We praise therefore virginity in such sort, that we
do not reject vviddovves, and we reverence vviddovves in such manner, that
due honor is reserved unto marriage. Chrysostom. de virg. Chap. 11.
Therefore worthelie says S. CHRYSO. Marriage is good, but for the same case
virginity is admirable, in that it is better then marriage, which is good,
and is so much more better as the Governor of the Ship and Gallye, does
excel the Ores: or the Captain is more noble then the Soldiers, but even as
if you take the Ores from the Galley, you shall soon make Spipvvracke, and if
you remove the Soldiers from the battle, you will deliver the Captain
into the hands of his enemies. So if you throw down Matrimony out of his
place, you shall bereave virginity of her glory. Virginity, say you is good,
that do I likewise confess, and also that it is better then marriage, and
unto this in like manner will I agree, but I will add this, that it does so
much excel marriage, as heaven does surpass the earth, and as much as Angels
do exceed men: for marriage (says S. HIEROM) does fill the earth,
virginity Paradise. Hiero. li. 1 aduers. Io c. 9. Ansel lib. de virg. ext.
Aug. lib de virg. Abdius in vita eius.
S. ANSELME affirms, virginity to be the joy of the Prophets, the glory of
the Apostles, the life of the Angels, and crown of Saints. Let not man (says
S. AMBROSE) marvel, if they are compared unto Angels, which are espoused
unto their Lord.

Wherefore the blessed Apostles, and holy Fathers, have always labored, to
enduce chaste Virgins, to dedicate their virginity unto God. S. MATTHEW
persuaded IPHIGONEA to vow virginity: S. PAVL did in like sort, that holy
virgin TECLA, as witnesses S. AMBROSE, and S. CLEMENT induced the holy Virgin,
Lib. 2. de virg. Bed. in Mar. Mart. Epist. ad Telos, c. 8.
DOMITILLA, to make the like vow. S. MARTIAL also says, that he persuaded the
holy Virgin VALERIA, to vow her virginity unto God. S. AUGUSTINE was not
inferior to any, in exhorting virgins to make this holy vow, but exhorted all
that could and had not made that vow, to make it. Li. de vir. cap. 30
He held that vow to be worthy of such honor, that although he said, that,
No fecunditie, or fullness of the flesh, is to be compared unto virginity: yet
he affirms, that virginity is not honored of it self, but for that it is
dedicated unto God. To do any good thing by vow, is bettet and mote pleasing
unto God, then that which is done without it. For how much greater the virtue
is, from whence the work proceeds, so much the more is it meritorious and
pleasing unto God: wherefore, seeing that virginity, which is kept without
vow, proceeds only from continency, which is an act of Te^perance, whereas
that which is observed by vow, is both an act thereof, and of religion also,
which act of religion, is far more noble and greater the^ te^perance. Virginity
therefore which is kept thereby, must needs be more honorable before God: for
eue^ as a sin which proceeds from a will settled unto evil, is far worse then
that which comes from frailty only, so is that deed much better which is done
with a mind, and will, confirmed in good, then that which wants that firmenes
and stabilitie. They therefore which vow virginity, not only do gain (as we
have said) that their act is more excellent and pleasing unto God, but also do
arm themselves against the assaults of the devil, and human frailty and
mutability: for men in those things whereunto they are bound, by the bo^ds of
the law, although they be good and profitable, yet do they easily change their
purpose, as well by the instigation of the devil, as by their own mutability and
inconstancy; wherefore we see that in human affairs, oaths are oftentimes
required, whereby the will and mind may be so tied, that they may not easily be
changed; happy therefore is that band which keeps man's will stable and
constant; and makes the^ more gracious in the sight of God, then other devout
persons which are not bound.

Wherefore, though all in general of this third order of Penance, do enjoy all
the Spiritual favors, privileges, and indulgences, of all the Orders of S.
FRANCIS, yet such regard is and always has been had, of these which do
solemnly vow chastity, virginal, or single life, that all men with one
consent do agree, that though they do not solemnly vow or profess any
other Religion, or other vows, whether they live in their own houses, or
kinsfolks, or friends, yet ought they to enjoy, al and singular privileges
and immunities, of all the Orders of S. FRANCIS, that are convenient unto their
estate and calling.

ARTICLE VI. The Sisters great with child may abstain if they will from al
Corporal exercises.
SO precious is the time that God has lent us, in this transitory life, to
work our salvation therein, that there is hardly any one thing, whereof he
will exact a more strict account, then how and wherein we have employed it. For
this momentarie time, is not lent us in this vale of misery, to spend it in
our vain pleasures and delights, as many most imprudently do, but as holy
ZACHARY says, That we should serve God all our days, Luc, 1
because the time of this mortal life, which is granted unto us, is given to
that end, that by our deeds, we may get the life everlasting, for death will
soon come, and then there will be no place to work our salvation, or to do
Penance, Therefore our loving Redeemer, exhorts us himself, To work
whilst the day lasts, for that the night will come, when no man shall be
able to work. Wherefore, his worthy Apostle and vessel of election, S. PAVL
exhorts us thereunto in like sort, saying: Behold now is the time, 2. Cor. 6
now is the day of our salvation, let us show our selves in all things, as
the Ministers and Servants of God: whose profitable counsel, our holy
Patron, S, FRANCIS, did not only follow himself, but endeavored to draw all
his children and followers to do the like, inducing them thereunto, both by
word and example, for though he himself had obtained unto that height of
perfection, that his heart and mind were as it were, in all places and times
wholly employed in prayer and contemplation, yet notwithstanding to give
example unto his Spiritual children and followers, to avoid with all their
power idleness, did give himself unto bodily labor, as is made mention, and
plainly appears in his last will and Testament, where he says: I have
labored with my hands, and will labor, and firmly command that all my
other Brethren do work in that labor, which belongs unto honesty, and they
which know not how, let them learn, not for Covetousness, to receive the
reward, and hire of the labor, but for good example sake, and to chase away
idleness: which he did know to be hurtful unto the soul, that one of his
principal Chapters of his first Rule, Chap. 5. Reg.
was to prevent it, giving their strict commandment, that, All his Brethren
unto whom our Lord, had given grace and strength to labor, should labor
faithfully and devoutly, but yet in such sort, that idleness being excluded,
they should not extinguish the Spirit of holy Prayer and devotion, whereunto
all other Temporal things should give place. Wherefore, though he gives here
leave unto women great with child, that they may if they will, abstain from
corporal exercises, and labor until the day of their Purification, yet does he
except prayer only, wherein they ought then principally to employ themselves,
until such time as they have recovered both health and strength, whereby they
may betake themselves again, to their virtuous corporal exercises, to avoid
idleness, which he calls the enemy of the soul, for that no sooner does
our deadly enemy find us idle, but presently does assault us with his wicked
temptations. Wherefore one of the principal caueats, which the holy Fathers
gave unto us is, S. Hirom. ad Rusti. Monarch.
To do always some good thing, that our adversary may not find us idle.

Behold, our Savior himself, was so careful for our example, in spending of
his whole time in holy exercises, that he spent the whole nights in continual
prayer, and the day in preaching, and seeking the good of all persons, both in
body and soul. The glorious virgin, his blessed Mother, C. 4. and li. 8. C. 4.
used much diligence therein. For (Sabellicus writes) She divided the day time
in this manner. In the morning for three hours space, she gave her self to
prayer and devotion, from thenceforth till midday, she sat at her work, and
after dinner, she did read the holy Scriptures.

Our happy forementioned Queen KATHERINE, Doct. Sand lib. de schi
imitating to the uttermost of her power this glorious Queen of Angels, was
most careful to spend her whole life, in the service of God, and good of her
soul, in such sort, that, At midnight she did rise out of her bed, to be
present at the Mattins of Religious people by five of the clock in the morning,
she apparrelled her self in a very short space, saying, that she lost no time
but what was bestovved in that manner: upon every VVednesdaie and Frydaie,
she confessed her sins unto her Ghostly Father, and every Sunday, she
received the B. Sacrament of the altar. Every day in the week she said the
office of our B. Lady, and bestowed 6. hours in the morning at the Church in
prayer: After dinner, she did read something daily of the lives of Saints
(her maidens standing about her) for the space of two hours. Then returning
again unto the Church, she bestowed all her time there, till nigh supper was
ready, which she did alvvaies take with great moderation: she prayed
alvvaies upon her knees without cushion, or any thing else put between them,
and the cold pauement,

Many other examples could I here allege to this purpose, as of S. CLARE,
which though for many years, through weakence, she was enforced to keep her
bed, wherein though she spent the greatest part of her time in prayer, yet
causing her self to be boulstred up with pillowes, did sitting, labor so
much in spinning fine cloth, that she made thereof 50. pair of Corporalles,
which she enclosing in Cassis of silk, bestowed upon the Altars of the
Churches, near unto the City Assisium. S. JEWS also King of France, a most
worthy member of this third order, though with a wounderful care, he
administered Justice, and managed his affairs of state, yet did so spend the
rest of his time, in such sort in prayer, and virtuous exercises, that he was
wont to hear two Masses every day, to say Euen-song and Complain with his
Chaplains, and besides, kept duly every day his prefixed time of
Meditations, and visited often the Hospitals, every Wednesday went unto
Confession, hard holy Sermons, and used Spiritual Conference; yet for all these
Spiritual exercises, was he so careful of his temporal affairs, belonging to
his charge, that he did not omit the least occasion of the Public weal,
exteriorlie offered, which he did most diligently put in execution.

Infinite in a manner are the examples which the Holy Saints have left behind
them, to induce us to be careful in laboring, and spending well our time, which
for brevity sake omitting, I did make choice of these few particular, to the
intent that such as may conveniently, and have health and opportunity, should
endeavor to follow them as near as they may, for seeing that great
indulgences and graces are granted unto al persons, of what degree or sex
soever, of this holy order of Penance, every one may well think, that so great
benefits are not granted for small trifles, for though the perfection and
excellency of the Order, consists in that, it requires no matter of such
difficulty, but what every one of any degree, be he never so weak or
feeble, may easily fulfill, as much as is required of him, his state and
strength considered: yet notwithstanding, every one must endeavor to do
something daily, what he may conveniently; so doing, though his ability be
able to do little, yet is it esteemed much in respect of his goodwill; For it
is not the greatness of the service, but the fervent affection of the heart,
which is most regarded.

Our Savior himself, did most manifestly declare as much, in the gift of the
poor widow, whose poverty, though it were such, that she was not able to
offer, either gold or silver, but only a little piece of brass, valewing
about a farthing, yet he (which being both God and man, does more regard the
mind and intention in all our actions, then the work it self) said* Truly,
I say unto you, this poor widow has given more then all the rest. More I
say, not in respect of the greatness of the thing it self, that was offered,
but in regard of the fervent devotion, of the promptitude of the mind, of the
divine acceptance and quality of the gift, which was to the uttermost of her
power, and more then she could well spare, which deserved therefore to be thus
rewarded by our Savior: Luc. 21.
So in like sort, if every one of this third order, will (with hearty love and
earnest desire to please God) every day and hour thereof do something,
though his power be little, yet assuredly his reward shall be great, if he
labor according to the talent and grace which God has given him, which thing
our Savior does insinuate, in the Parable of those which hired to labor in
the Vineyarde, where every one that did work, whether he were weak or strong,
did receive all the like reward: Neither do we read for what work every one
was hired, whether to dig and delue, or to prune the veins, but only that all
which did work, received their hyre, and no others, whereby he admonishes us,
That every one must labor according to his strength, condition and quality,
if he will in the end of the day, that is, after this life, receive his
penny, and everlasting glory: Whilst therefore the day lasts, and we have
time and space, let every one employ himself, continually in prayer,
meditation, or some other good works, according to his vocation, that thereby
upon good grounds, he may assuredly hope for a great reward in heaven. For our
bodies are given unto us by God, to this end, that therewith we should be doing
always some good thing, so serve him in this transitory life, that in this
heavenly kingdom, he may justly in the end, recompense our momentary labors,
with everlasting glory: which after the honor of God, ought to be the chief
mark whereunto all actions should tend, seeing that from the rightnesse of our
intention, proceeds the greatness of our Recompense; Mat, 20.
For though the intention seems to be last in the work, yet it is the
greatest in merit.

Let every one therefore, not only be careful to do well, but also, be as wary
to direct his intention in all his actions, principally to the glory of God,
seeking of him for reward of his work, more the health of his soul, then the
good of his body: whereby he shall merit, a hundred fold more, then he which
in his labors intends neither good or evil, but labors only for temporal
reward, like an ox: Ecclesp 4.
of such persons, the Ecclesiastic says, A man has nothing more then a
beast, whereas otherwise, they might make the fruits of their labors glorious,
as the wise man notes saying: Sapient. 4
The fruit of good labors, and works is glorious.

Neither ought any man's greatness to make him the less careful herein, for
no man has any certainty of the continuance of his wealth, which thing, the
Emperor Octauian well considering, would not suffer his daughters, to be
brought up without some art of laboring, saying, I may become poor, for all
my great wealth now, and then may my daughters by their own labor maintain
themselves. Job. 5
Holy JOB affirms, that it is as natural for a man to work, as birds for
to fly, saying, A man is borne to labor, as Birds to fly. The Apostle S.
PAVLE is so earnest herein, 2. These. 3.
that he says, He that vvil not work, let him not eat: and he for his own
part did not only labor for himself, but for those which were with him. S.
Hiero.
S. HIEROME also holds, that there is no alms more pleasing to God, then
what is given out of the labor of thy own hands, and says, Though thou
should distribute al thy rents and revenues among the poor, yet
notwithstanding there is nothing more precious and aceeptable unto our Savior,
then what thou have gotten with thine own hands. In this sentence, S. HIEROM
does prevent the objection which some rich idle persons might make, saying: I
need not to labor, for I have enough otherwise: behold he tells thee, that
though thou have never so much to give, yet is there nothing more precious then
what thou have gained with thine own hands to bestow. S. ELIZABETH was a
kings daughter, and left rich by the Prince her husbend, both in possessions,
and otherwise, yet did she with her Handmaides spinne, and make therewith
cloth to cloth the poor, for reward whereof she is now clothed with
glory; wherefore as all persons are desirous to be clad in like manner, so let
every one according to his calling and degree, endeavor to imitate therein,
this their holy Patroness, that following the examples of her life here in
earth, they may enjoy with her the endless joys of heaven.

ARTICLE VII. The laborers in regard of their wearisomnesse of their labor,
may from the feast of the Resurrection, eat three times in the day. etc.
Act. 10.
S. PETER considering, how justly God does deal with all his Creatures,
says, In verity I have found, that God is not an acceptor of persons; So our
holy Father S. FRANCIS, imitating the example of our Savior, shows here
that his care is no less of the poor labourer, then of the rich Potentate:
wherefore considering that the wearisomnesse of his labor, requires more
sustenance and food then they which rest, grants him free leave to eat,
three times in the day, when he labors from Easter, until October: For he
would not that any whosoever should so indiscreetly fast, that he should hurt
himself, falling thereby into weakness and sickness; but is most careful that
every one should so live, as to conserve the health both of body and soul,
directing his intentions therein, and in all other actions whatsoever, only to
the honor and glory of God; for otherwise, how good and right Christian
soever thou seem to be, and to keep the rest of the divine Commandments,
yet if thou failest in the first principle, that is, the love of God, when thy
good Angel shall present all thy good works before the Tribunal seat of God,
presently the Adversary the devil, will seek to make them nothing, and say as
he said of JOB, Serve God freely? and the like will he say of thee, Job. 1.
Did he those good deeds, freely for the love of God, without hope of other
recompense: For the good works truly shall be waighed by the end it self,
which thou had in doing of them.

Therefore the poor labourer or servant may as much merit, and win heaven
as soon by his labor, and faithful service, as his Master, by his prayers
and alms deeds: if all his intentions be (in whatsoever he does) chiefly
for the love and honor of God, which will most assuredly reward him for it,
with his heavenly kingdom.

ARTICLE VIII. But when it happens, that they are employed in other men's
work, then it is lawful for them to eat. etc.
SO provident and careful was S. FRANCIS, for the comfort of all persons, that
might have any desire to this order of Penance, that he does prevent and take
away all inconveniences, that might discourage them: Wherefore seeing that it
would be a great trouble for laborers and servants, if they should be tied
unto such a diet, that special preparation must be made for the^, he gives
them free leave to eat all such meats, as the other Catholics, where they
remain, may lawfully do: Neither is it to be supposed, but that his
intention was to grant that leave both unto children in their parents houses,
and soiourners in like sort: But though in quality of diet, they do conform
themselves unto the devout Catholic company: yet notwithstanding to show,
that they are not unmindful of what they should do, if they might
conveniently, they ought to use in all those days and times of abstinences (if
health permit them) some austeritie in their diet, thereby to keep the body
obedient unto the soul, and themselves the more free from the bondage of
Satan, which as by the forbidden meat, and gluttonnie, Genes. 3.
did overcome our first Parents, so by the same does he seek to overthrow us
daily, for that many evils proceeding from the vice of gluttony, the devil
not being ignorant thereof, seeks continually to draw us into that filthy
vice. Wherefore our sweet Savior and loving Redeemer, gives us special
warning thereof, in the Gospel of S. LVKE, saying, Luc. 21.
Take heed that your hearts be not ouerloaden with surfeiting and
drunkenness: Thereby insinuating that it hurts, not only the body, but the
soul also. If he had said, take heed that your bodies be not ouerloaden, it
had been then manifest, that he had spoken of the infirmities of the body,
which proceed from inordinate feeding, and too much meat, according to that
saying of the Ecclesiastic: Eccles* 37
From such meat pro^eedeth infirmities and sickness: But he said, take heed
that your hearts be not ouerloaden, for by gluttony, man is not only subject
unto the death of the body, but of the soul it self also, as may be plainly
seen by a manifest example of the Jews which sat them down to eat and
drink, and rose up to play and dance before the Idol, saying: Those are thy
gods (o Israel) which did bring thee out of the land of Egypt. The Philistines
also banqueting and making merry, Iud. 16. 1. Reg. 2.
death fell suddenly upon them. The children of HELIE, would not take of the
offering of sodden flesh, but raw, that they might prepare it for themselves
more delicately, which for their labor were killed and perished most miserably
in the wars. 1. Rig. 14.
IONATHAS also for that he did but eat a little Honey, against the
commandment of his Father, he had killed him, if the people had not hindered
it: Wherefore holy JOB, knowing that in banqueting and gluttony, Job. 1.
many sins are committed, did therefore after that his sons had banquetted,
rising very early, offer every day Sacrifice, saying, Least peradventure my
children have offended herein If riotuousnesse and gluttony had not been much
displeasing unto God, our Savior himself would never have given it so heavy
a curse in the Gospel, saying: VVoe be unto you, Luc. 6.
which shall be filled, because you shall suffer hungar. Every good Christian
therefore ought to make a great account of abstinence and Temperance, as a
thing most profitable and healthful for man, both for body and soul, and as
a Preservative against that filthy vice of Gluttony, which brings
everlasting death unto both; much more then ought the Brethren and Sisters, of
this Order of Penance, be careful to use what abstinence they may, or at the
least to observe Temperance in their diet, seeing that their Rule and
Profession of Penance, does bind them thereunto.

How often they ought to go to Confession in the year, and receive. CHAP. VI.
LEt not any of the Brethren and Sisters, omit to confess their own sins,
and devoutly receive the precious Sacrament of the Altar, thrice in the year,
that is, in the Feasts, of the Nativity of our Savior, of his Resurrection,
and Pentecoste, rec^nciling themselves to their neighbors, and also restoring
what they have of other men's.

Concerning the 16. Chapter.
NOTE, that because by often confession and receiving of the B. Sacrament,
Co^mif. Genaral. Cismon,
they receive so many spiritual fruits, being done with due preparation, and
good disposition, in the Church of God: the use of the Sacraments is more
frequent, then it was in the time, when this manner of life was instituted: We
do ordain, that on the said days of the Nativity, Resurrection, and
Pentecost; and on the rest of the Feasts of our Savior, and of our blessed
Lady, and of the Apostles, of our blessed Father S. FRANCIS, and Saints of
his order, they must communicate, both Brothers and Sisters, and oftener if
their Confessors and Ghostly fathers, will give them leave: to which we charge
them, to look how they give the said license, attending always the profit
and increase in virtue, and the spirit of those which are to have license. Let
them hear Mass every day, if they have not some just cause of excuse, and
also let them hear the Sermon of the Friars of the Order, or other Preachers,
and especially of those, whose doctrine is most fruitful and perfect for them,
and do animate them most to the keeping of the Commandments of God, and the
observation of their Rule,

SEEING that the devotion of many was grown so cold, and so far from the
example of the Primitive Church, wherein the faithful Christians did then
frequent the Sacraments once every week at the least; now some would hardly
do it once in the year, were it not for the strict commandment of the
Church: our Holy Father, would not therefore bind the Brethren and Sisters,
to receive any oftener upon obligation of the Rule, but only thrice in the
year to frequent them. For being desirous by this order, to draw all persons
that he might, from the snares of sin, and place them in the way of virtue,
would not tie them to any thing that might seem burdensome, for knowing by
experience, that having once enflamed the hearts of any with desire of virtue,
and led them into the way thereof, that they would themselves run with all
alacrity, unto all perfection. He would not therefore go about to draw them
by force to receive the Sacrament often, knowing that a generous mind, is
rather induced and led by fair means, then drawn by force, as the event in
these affairs does make manifest; where now see for example, that the devotion
of the Brethren and Sisters, is such, that it is grown unto a common custom
amongst them, to receive every where (when they may conveniently) once in
fifteen days at the least, and when they want opportunity, by making due
examination of their consciences, with like preparation, and fervent desire, to
receive spiritually their sweet Savior, in the holy Sacrament of the Altar,
do in this Spiritual receiving, sometimes gain almost as much merit, by their
contrition and charity, as if they had received corporally: Wherefore seeing
that this long practiced fervor, of often receiving is grown to so common and
ancient a custom, every one that may conveniently, ought devoutly and
carefully to keep it, but such is the devotion of many (and most highly to be
commended) which do not content themselves herewithal, but out of a singular
affection, unto their most loving redeemer, use al reverence and diligence to
feed their souls every Sunday at the least, at this most admirable and
heavenly banquet; resting both certain and assured that such are not a little
pleasing unto God* which out of their fervent love, do so often unite
themselves unto his best beloved Son, which is also a manifest token, that in
requital of his love, they shall obtain the love of their heavenly Father
again, according unto the words of our Savior, which said: My Father loves
you, because you have loved me. For the obteyning therefore of this love. S.
ELZEARIVS and S. Sur. in vita S. Elzear.
DELPHINE his wife (both of them being of this holy order of Penance) did not
only receive their Savior every Sunday themselves, but caused their whole
family, to seek every week for increase of his grace, by the holy Sacrament
of Penance, and once every month, at the least, to receive the Author of all
grace, in the most admirable Sacrament of the Altar.

So in like sort, our most holy and worthy Queen KATHERINE, had so great and
fervent love unto our Savior, and to the abundance of grace which he gives
in the Sacrament, that not only she did receive her self, every Sundaie, but
did endeavor by cleansing her sins, thrice in the week, by Sacramental
confession, to be as often partaker of his heavenly grace given therein.

Reconciling themselves unto their Neighbors, and restoring other men's goods,
etc.
THOUGH at all times of the year, prudent persons, are careful to provide
things necessary for their housekeeping; yet against these three feasts, they
are diligent to furnish and adorn their houses more abundantly; so in like
sort, though the Brethren and Sisters, ought to be careful, continually to
provide for the good of their souls, yet in respect of the highness of these
feasts, and greatness of the benefits received therein, they ought to make a
great preparation to cloth themselves with nuptial garments of charity, and
by reconciling themselves to their neighbors, and restoring what they have of
other men's, to the intent that if they have not, or could not, at other times,
make even with God and the world, at the least against those high solemnities,
and great feasts, they should endeavor to do it, and to make at those three
times a general Confession of all the chief matters, that may happen, from the
one feast unto the other. The like counsel that learned and worthy Bishope,
Franc. Lola. fol. 397.
FRANCIS ZALER gives thee saying: Change not lightly nor easily thy
Confessor, but having made choice of a sufficient one, continue constantly,
rendering him an account of thy Conscience, on the days and times appointed,
opening unto him freely and plainly the sins thou have committed from time
to time, and monthly: or from two months to two months: Tell him likewise
the state of thy inclynation, though thou have not sinned by them, as whether
thou be tormented with sadness, or with peeuishnes, whether thou be given to
overmuch mirth, or desirous of gain, and such like inclynations.

That they ought not to wear weapons of offense. CHAP. VII.
LEt not the Brethren bear with them weapons of offense, exeept it be for the
defense of the Roman Church of the Christian faith, or else of their own
land, or by the leave of the Ministers.

Concerning the seventh Chapter.
NOte, Co^mif. Genaral. Cismon,
that the same means which is ordained and counseled about the Habit, they
must keep concerning the Arms and weapons, for the sword is as it were a
common ornament, and ought to be permitted, to those with whom is dispensed in
the Habit.

HERE is showed, that they ought not to be any quarrellers, or reuengers of
other men's, or their own quarrelles, or injuries? Wherefore they have no need
at all, to wear weapons of offense, but only in these cases set down here,
or for such causes as the Ministers shall think fit to give them a general
leave. Our chiefest weapons (says Bless. EGIDIVS) against all injuries and
tribulations, is Patience, whereby how much the more any is ready to suffer
them, Hist. Seraph Rel. de B. Agid 3. S^c. S. Franc.
so much, is he greater before God, and no more: If any one therefore, says
he, do say any evil unto thee, help him, if he say any good unto thee,
render it unto God, If thou vvilt rightly make thy own part good, do thou thy
self make it evil and the others good, and when any does str^ue with thee if
thou will overcome loose Do not offer injury to any, and whosoever does thee
vvrong suffer it patiently, for the love of God, and for the remission of thy
sins. It is much better to suffer a great injury, for the love of God,
without murmuring, then to feed daily a hundred poor people, and to fast
thy self for many days together; blessed is he which has alvvaies his
sins before his eyes, and the benefits which God has bestowed one him, and
does suffer patiently all tribulations and afflictions, for hereby he ought to
take great consolation, for he which alvvaies has in his sight, his own
offenses, shall not fail in any tribulation. If our Lord should rain stones
from heaven, they should not hurt us, if we were suc^, as we ought to be:
If thou ouercommest thy self, thou shall overcome all thine enemies: It is a
great virtue, if one should permit himself, to be overcome of all men, for
that such a one should be Lord of this world. If thou will be saved,
endeavor to despise all the Consolations, that any mortal creature can yield
thee, because greater ruin and hurt come from consolations, then from
tribulations: noble, says he, is the nature of a horse, which though he be in
a most swift course, yet notwithstanding, he which rides on him, may turn
and bend him into any other way: Even so ought a man permit himself to be
ruled by him which corrects him, seeing that for the only love of God, a man
ought to desire as much as lies in him, to give a reward unto others, to vex
him and pull him by the hairs: A certain person therefore murmuring before
him, he said unto him: My brother, how much more thou murmurest, so much more
thou do vex and burden thy self, and the more humbly thou do submit thy
head unto holy obedience, so much more light and sweet, will it be unto thee.
Thou will not be reprehended and reproached in this world, and wilt be honored
in the other? thou will not be evil spoken unto, and wilt be blessed? thou
vvilt not labor, and yet would have rest? This is not the way, but by
patience and well doing, thou shall overcome, and revenge thy self best of
thine enemies. Though in doing well, thou have many enemies, it is noe great
marvel, Seeing, that our Savior him self, which was the Author and
fountain of all goodness, was not without them, but it does not belong unto
the modesty of a Christian, and much less unto his calling, which tends
unto perfection, to revenge himself, in any other manner, then as Diogines said
unto a certain person, Diogines.
which asked him* how he might best revenge himself of his enemies. If thou
(says he) shall show thy self to be a good and honest man: Laert. lib. 6.
meaning thereby that thy continual good life, and virtuous deeds, will make
all men to condemn him, that offered thee those injuries, or spoke so evil of
thee; or otherwise, even as we cast a crust of bread to the dogs that bark
against us, so against evil disposed persons, let us cast our prayers, that
they may be cured and delivered from this evil, because the fountain of al
wisdom, Christ himself did teach it unto us, both by word and deed, saying in
the Gospel: Love your enemies, and do well unto those which hate you, and
pray for those which calumniate you and persecute you, that you may be the
children of your fathers vvhi^h is in heaven. And by his deeds he taught no
less, when praying for those which crucified him said, O Father pardon and
forgive them this offense, for they know not what they do. Holy S. STEVEN,
which now reigns with him in glory, did here entreat his holy example in
earth, praying with such fervor for those which stoned him to death, that
bowing his knees, he cried out with a loud voice, saying, O Lord, Act. 7.
impute not this sin unto them: Wherefore all such as desire to reign with
Christ in glory, must endeavor to imitate his holy manner, in revenging us of
our enemies, that is, with perfect patience and charity, to pray for them. And
if in so doing, we show our selves according to the words of our Savior, to
be true children of our heavenly Father, he will revenge our quarrel, Romans 2.
and therefore wills us, as S. PAVLE testifyeth: To leave the revenge unto
him.

Of saying the Canonical hours. CHAP. VIII.
LEt every one of them say daily, the seven Canonical hours (that is to say)
Mattins, Prime, third, sixth, ninth, Euensong, and Compline; The Clerks (that
is, they which can read) the Psalter, let them say for Prime, Deus in nomine
tuo, Beati immaculati, until Legem pone, and the other Psalms of the hours,
after the use of the Clergy, with Gloria Patri, etc. But when they shall not
come to the Church, let them be careful to say for their Mattins, the Psalms
which the clergy, or Cathedral Church do say, or at the least, let them not
omit to say as the other unlearned do, for Mattins, twelve times Pater
noster, and for each other hour, seven times with Gloria patri. And in the
hours of Prime and Compline, let the^ which do know it: add the Apostles
Creed, and the Psalm, Miserere mei Deus: But if they shall hrppen not to say
them, at the appointed hours, let them say, three times Pater noster, for that
default. But the sick persons, are not bound to say these aforesaid hours,
unless they will. But in the Lent, let them be careful to go personally to
Mattins, to the Parish Churches, where they dwell, unless for some reasonable
cause they be excused.

Concerning the eight Chapter.
NOTE, that for the divine office, Co^mis. Genaral. Cismon*
Priests and other, who are in Holy order, do fulfill it, in saying the
Roman Breuiarie, as other Ecclesiastical persons do, although it be moreover
commanded, them, that in the Euensong and Mattins, and amongst other
Commemorations, to make commemoration of our holy Father S. FRANCIS, both how,
when, and in the same manner and form as the Religious of his Order do; and
having ended these two hours of Mattins, and Euensong, and said, Diuinum
auxilium maneat semper nobiscum, they must add, Deprofundis for the souls of
their Brethren, departed out of this life, with the prayere, Deus veniae largi,
etc.

And moreover, it is to be noted, that they must say the Office of the Saints
of this third order, and of the rest of which the Frior Minors say.

They who can say, the Office of our Lady, and will say it, being not in
Holy Orders, shall fulfill their obligation, by saying of it, adding some
prayers for the dead, and particularly, for those of this Congregation.

Moreover, we charge every one of them, that they say every day the Crown
of our B. Lady, or the third part of the Rosary, quietly and devoutly,
fixing their mind upon some of those mysteries, which the devout servants of
the blessed Virgin, do use to meditate upon in the Church.

EVEN as the body of ours, if the soul be not present therewith, is truly
dead, and soon smells, so in like sort, the soul which gives it self not
unto prayer, Chrysostom. lib. 1. de Orand. Deo.
is dead, miserable, and stinketh before the face of God: wherefore S.
CHRYSOSTOM. says: Certainly all men have no less need of this holy work of
prayer, then trees of mo^stnesse of the water: And as the water, says he, is
the life of the fish, so is prayer unto thee: Which thing our holy Patron did
so profoundly and devoutly consider, that he did give his heart and intention
so wholly thereunto, S. Bonauent. c. 10. vitae, S. Fran.
that both walking and sitting, laboring and resting, both within and abroad,
he was intentive unto prayer, with all the force of his mind, in such sort,
that it seemed, he had not only dedicated thereunto, whatsoever was in him,
either of heart or body, but also of work and time: Wherefore, finding that
prayer was his comfort, refuge and aid in all things whatsoever he went about,
desiring to inflame and stir up the hearts of all his children, to the
continual practice of that holy exercise, he ordayneth here this particular
form of prayer, which all the Brethren and Sisters, which profess this Rule,
should bind themselves to observe, as well the learned, as unlearned (that
could conveniently) ordaining them to say daily, the 7. Canonical hours,
that is, Mattins, Prime, Third, Sixth, Ninth, Euensong, and Compleine, as before
I said.

ARTICLE I. They which can read the Psalter, let them say for Prime, Deus in
nomine tuo.
NOTE that all sorts of people, being admitted into this holy order of
Penance, some of them are learned, and in holy Orders, others are learned, and
not in holy Orders: there are also certain which are not learned at all: The
first, when they have no lawful impediment, are bound to say now the Mattins
of the Breuiarie, according unto the use of the Roman Church: For although in
the beginning of this Chapter, there is nothing set down for Mattins, but
only begins with Prime, and so consequently with the other hours; yet
immediately after it is said, that, When they shall come unto the Church, they
must be careful to say for Mattins, the Psalms which the Clergy, or
Cathedral Church do say: Which is to be understood, that they must say their
Mattins, as well when they come to Church, as when they come not. And in like
sort, all the rest of their hours, which obligation, does only belong unto the
Clerks, that is, unto the Priests, with those which are in holy orders, and
must in like sort serve the Saints of the order of S. FRANCIS, and to add his
name unto their Confiteor. But as for others, though they are learned and can
read, yet may they, and do for the most part, as well women living in
Monasteries, as also the other Brethren and Sisters, which live abroad, say
either the Breuiary, or our Blessed Ladies Mattins: Or at the least, say as the
unlearned do, for Mattins, 12. Pater nosters, and for each other seven, with
adding to each one, a Gloria Patri: and in the end of Prime and Compline, to
say the Apostles Creed, in profession of their faith, the Psalm Miserere,
for the whole state of Gods Church, and the common custom is to add also, for
all Christian souls, departed in the state of Grace, the Psalm, De prosundis,
with the prayers, Deus venia largitor; And to say the commemorations of our
holy Patione, Spec. Minore Tract 1. fol. 3.
S. FRANCIS, both at Mattins, Euensong, and Compline: To the intent, that the
Brethren and Sisters, may the better accomplish, this holy exercise of prayer,
the Supreme Pastors, GREGORIVS 9. INNOCENTIVS 4. and NICHOL. 4. granted that
in time of general interdiction, the Brethren and Sisters (if they themselves,
be in no part cause of the interdiction) may (the interdicted and
excommunicated persons, being shut out, and the doors shut up) both hear and
say, with a loud voice, the divine Service, in their own Churches, or other
privileged places, for that time: NICHOL. the 4. does add moreover, that
they may not only read the divine Office, and celebrate the Mass, but also
in the ordinary times, according to the custom of the order, receive both the
Sacraments of the Altar, Ibid tract 1. fol. 3.
and of extreme Unction: GREGORIVS the 9. his affection was such, and so great
unto this holy Order, that he granted them a special Bull for this intent.

ARTICLE II. But if they shall happen not to say them at the appointed hours,
ande.
THOUGH the appointed hour of Mattins, is most commonly at Midnight, at which
time most religious persons do rise, following therein the example of the Royal
Prophet DAVID, Psalm. 118.
which although in the day time, he did employe himself in kingly affairs,
yet in the midst of the night did he rise to praise God, as testifyeth
himself, saying: In the midst of the night I did rise to confess unto thee,
and praise thee. The like did S. ELIZABETH: our blessed Queen KATHERINE, and
diuets other holy persons of this Order. yet the most common custom of all
such as live privately in their own houses, is only to rise as early in the
morning as they may conveniently, taking it for no small shame, that the little
birds of the air, should be more careful to praise God, after their manner,
then, they should be, for that we see, the little birds very timely in the
morning, before they go to seek their food, praise God with melodious tunes,
and that they for whom God has created all things, and bestowed so many
benefits upon them, amongst which, this is none of the least that he has
called them, though not altogether out of the world, yet from the thraldom of
sins and vanities thereof, to be his particular servants above many, that
now they should give themselves to sluggishnesse, and not fulfill in due time
that particular service, which by their profession they have bound themselves
to perform at appointed hours, that is, as early in the morning, as
conueniency and health may petmit them, S. Amb. lib. de offic.
specially seeing that holy S* AMBROSE holds it for so great a fault to
loose the morning, that he says. What Christian will not be ashamed to let
the morning pass, without singing praise unto God, when the smallest birds
do prevent the dawning and breaking of the day, with solemn devotion. S.
AVGVSTIAE also affirming that, S. August.
It is a thing very indecent, that the Sun should find a Christian in his
bed, that is, the Sun should be risen, and he in bed. S. BERNARD says,
Such sluggards, and a man that is given thus to sleep, S. Bernard
is an image of death, and that too much sleep, hurts both body and soul.

But to rise early, has been always held to be not only profitable for the
soul, but also singular good, for the health both of body and mind, as the
very Pagan Philosophers did acknowledge. The Royal Prophet DAVID, right well
knew how acceptable and convenient a time the morning was for prayers* Psalm. 5.
when he said, In the morning, o Lord, thou will hear the voice of my prayer,
in the morning, I will attend on thee. For that the morning is the principal
time, to get the divine consolations and food of the soul, in sign whereof,
the Manna, Exodus 6
where with the children of Istael were fed in the desert, was to be gathered
in the morning. In the morning also God is sooner found; for a man is soonest
found in his house in the morning, so is God in the heart of man: For the soul
has more purity and cleanness, and consequently* is more fit for
contemplation, in that hour, also a man is more apt to eleuate his heart unto
God, before the soul and mind be withdtawen from him, and employed in diverse
occupations, and vain thoughts, or hindered by many Fantasies, gathered
together, and for that cause it is said of the just man. He has given his
heart to be vigilant and vvatch betimes unto God; which has created him.
Eccles. 39 Ber* sup. Cant.
S. BERNARD exhorts us thereunto, showing that, The morning and the Euenings
are the aptest times to pray, and therefore says, that these times are not to
be permitted, but that we should alvvaies pray in them. This cause did our
Savior himself take, to provoke us by his example to do the like; of his
praying in the morning, Marc. 1.
says S. MARK; That rising very early, he went out into the Desert, and
there prayed. And of his prayer in the night, S. LVKE says, Luc. 6. Matt. 14.
That he passed the nights in fervent prayer. And S. MATTHEW declares, that
he passed both day and night in prayer, saying, that He went out into the
mountain alone to pray, and the night being come, he was there alone.

S. CLEMENT, showing the reason of these seven Canonical hours, says* Lib 8.
constable. Aplic* c. 40.
For Prime, Make your prayers early in the morning, to give thanks that our
Lord has illuminated, and given us light, the night being passed, and the day
coming in. The third, Because, that hour our Lord received PILATE his
sentence: The sixth hour, for that our Redeemer was then for us crucified. The
ninth, because all things were moved, when our Lord was crucified, abhorring
the audacitie and boldness of the wicked, and not able to bear the ignomie
and cruelty which was done unto our Lord Euensong and Compline, to give thanks
for that God has given us the night to rest in, after the vvearisome labour^
of the day, and the Cock cro^ing, because at that time, the day is denounced
unto us, to exercise the works of light therein.

Touching the distinct and set time of public prayer, the continual practice
by Tradition teaches us, that Mattins, with Lauds, were said in the night,
about the first cock crowing, Prime, early in the morning, the other hours
in the day time, at Evening, Euensong, and last of all, Compline: Let the
example therefore of Christ, and custom of the Church, move thee to pray,
both morning and evening. In the morning for thy Direction in all thy actions,
which thou art that day to do, in the Evening to give thanks, for that which
is past. S. HIEROME exhorts us to have a special care at these two times,
that is, Morning and Evening, of these things which we are to do, and what we
have done. Therefore, says he, we must pray in the morning, that all things
to come, may be well done. And in the Evening, that wherein we have done
amiss may be remitted. And though we ought to be careful to dedicate unto God
our whole time in prayer, as much as lies in us possibly to do, yet more
special heed and diligence is to be used in these two times, as beginning and
ending of all our actions, offering unto him which is Alpha and Omega, that is,
the beginning and end, the due fruits of our beginning, and the tenthes of the
Consummation of all our works: wherefore S. FRANCIS, knowing that time and
Order, cause every good thing, to be much the better, here requires, that
such diligence should be used in the service of God, that every office should
be said at his appovnted hour, for that accursed is that man that does the
service of GOD negligently. Wherefore to draw the Brethren and Sisters, to have
a special care to perform their service in the due time, does enjoin a
particular penance, for such as should be negligent therein, ordayning that if
through sloughtfulnesse, or negligence, they should omit to say their service,
at the appointed hours, that they must say, three Pater nosters for that
fault.

ARTICLE III. But the sick persons are not bound to say those aforesaid
hours, unless they will.
BEHOVLD, how S. FRANCIS, by the instruction of his Lord and Master (whose
Secretary he was only in penning of his Rules) has a most vigilant care of
the health, both of body and soul, and therefore would not tie the Brethren
and Sisters, to say any thing that might prejudice the health of their bodies,
but leave it to their own free choice, as they are able to say it, or not at
all.

ARTICLE IIII. In the Lent of S. Martin, and also in the greater Lent, let them
be careful to go to Mattins in their Parish Churches.
THE parish of every one now in this Country, is the Oratorie, or proper
Chapel in their own houses, in which place, in the Holy time of Aduent and
Lent, they must not only hear Mass every day, if they may, but also be
present there at Mattins, if they can conveniently, and have opportunity; that
their prayers thereby may be the sooner heard, for that a multitude does often
obtain, that which one alone cannot, for that according unto the saying of S.
HIEROM, It is impossible that the prayers of many should not be heard. And S.
AUGUSTINE does confess of himself, That when he assisted at the Church
service, in the beginning of his conversion, his heart did melt in sweet
content, and his eyes ouerflowed with tears of devotion. And to say the
verity (all things alike considered) there is ever more comfort and merit to
be gained at the publik service of christ, the^ in other particular actions,
God having so ordained, that the Community, be preferred before all
singularity: Wherefore, seeing that S. FRANCIS here, does exhort the
Brethren and Sisters, to go unto the Divine Service at the Church, in these
two Lents every day, all men may justly presuppose that his desire was no
less, that they should perform their duties therein on Sundaies and
Holidaies, and be there continually on all those days, both at Mattins and
Euen-song, so far forth as their state and opportunity will permit them. For
those days be dedicated unto God particularly, therefore in them, every one
ought to perform many more acts, of his honor and worship, then upon other
days, seeing that God by his express Commandment, and the Catholic Church,
binds them thereunto, saying, Remember that thou sanctify the Saboath day,
wherein is not only commanded thee, under the pain of his heavy displeasure,
to abstain from handie labors and servile works, but also to employ thy self
in holy exercises of virtue and devotion, and in such things as tend to his
honor and glory, and health of thy soul.

That all they which may by right, ought to make a will.
Moreover, let all those which have ability of right, frame or make a Will,
and within three months, immediately after their entrance, let them order and
dispose of their goods, least any of them should happen to dye without a will.

Concerning the ninth Chapter.
Co^mis. Genaral. Cismon,
NOTE, that for the better keeping of what is contained of the Rule, there, in
seeing that death can not be escaped, and the hour so uncertain, and to hope
to make their will, when they are oppressed with sickness, is so dangerous, by
reason of the grief and haste, wherewith many times we are commanded to leave
all, and go meet the spouse. We ordain that they which have power to make a
will, they finish in time, following in the making thereof, the counsel of his
Ghostly Father, or some other learned person, of good and sincere conscience,
attending first of all, to make restitution of that which shall happen to be
owing, as well of goods as honor. And that they may the more purely and pyously
enter into this form of life, it is ordained, that presently, as soon as any
one shall be admitted thereunto, or at the farthest, at his profession, that he
shall make a general confession, wherein he making up his accounts with the
world, may serve God with more freedom: and having made his will, if he has
any thing to dispose of, let him do it with the counsel of men of learning and
zeal, which himself may choose. And perchance he ask council of any of our
Religion, let that religigious person, make much account of the precepte of our
Rule, which although it concerns the Nouices, who take habit in our
Religion, yet we will have it kept with these aforesaid persons also. And we
command, in virtue of holy obedience, and under pain of privation, of the
lawful acts, those which are subject unto us, that they neither meddle
directly or indirectly in the disposition of the goods of the foresaid persons,
nor persuade them to leave part thereof, unto our Order, but that freely they
may dispose, every one of his own goods, as almighty God shall inspire him,
and they themselves understand, for according to the doctrine of the Apostle
S. PAVL, We seek not their goods, but their salvation. Non querimus vestra,
sed vos.

UNTO the state of perfection, is required an abstraction and alienation of the
mind, from all those things, whereby a man is hindered, that he cannot wholly
give himself to the service of God. And for as much as in this vale of
misery, amongst all other things, there is no greater impediment, then the
care of worldly goods; wherefore to the intent, that by a provident foresight,
this daily careful care, and the great hinderance, which comes thereby, may
be avoided. S. FRANCIS does here ordeyne, that they which may conveniently,
ought with speed, to setle their estate, and make their will, and though he does
not require such haste herein, that they must do it before their entrance into
this Order of Penance, yet notwithstanding, considering the hinderance and
dangers, which come by long deferring, he does exhort the^ to make it within
three months after, at the furthest, least he should die (says he) intestate
or without will. S. FRANCIS did presuppose, that whosoever did enter into this
third order, if he were then sick and did it to enjoy the great benefits
which are to be obtained herein, at the hour of death, would make presently
all preparation for it, knowing that sickness is the speedy messenger of God,
to inuit all persons to make present repair unto him: But if otherwise they
were at their admission into this holy Order, in perfect health, he did know
by daily experience, that such is the fervor of all persons, at the
abandoning of worldly pleasures, and returning unto God by true love, and
sincere penance, that if any sickness or danger should soon happen after,
they would as quickly make themselves ready for whatsoever God should please to
despose of them, but as time grows on, so devotion oftentimes waxes cold,
therefore whilst fervor lasts, he requires that they should despose of
their goods, and settle their estate, and not to defer the making of their
will any longer then three months at the most, yielding this reason for it,
Least they should dye intestate, and thereby, not only deprive their poor
soul of that comfort which it expected, and otherwise might have had, but
insteede thereof, heap thereon great pains, and many heavy curses. For such
is now, the greedy desire of worldly goods, that a great many seek to catch
what they can, whereby it often happens, that not only the soul of the departed,
is forgotten in such sort, that the memory thereof perishes with the sound.
But therewithal, brotherly love and true friendship is so broken, that hatred
and couetuousnesse possesses in such sort the hearts of many, that
charitable and good dealing, has no place therein, when extreamitie of law,
yea if forgerie and perjury may sometimes prevail: And whereas, if the
diseased, had well disposed in time of his estate, not only should have reaped
the benefit of the good deeds which he had done, but also have been partaker
of all which should be done hereafter, by his good example unto the worlds
end. Now for his negligence, not only is he deprived of that great benefit,
which by his diligence he might have obtained, but seeing that it is a Maxim,
that he which gives the cause of sin, is partaker of the offense. And he
which gave the occasion of the hurt, seems to have given the hurt it self.
Wherefore without the greater mercy of God, he shall be punished for all the
offenses, which his negligence, in desposing of his estate in time, gave
occasions unto his heirs, or possessors of his goods to do, and worthily
does deserve to be forgotten of others, which had so little care of himself,
as to dye intestate and without a will, and not settled his goods in some sort,
for the good of his soul, which must render a most strict account for the good
deeds, which he omitted to do, when he might have performed them.

Just cause therefore, had our prudent Father, to admonish his children and
followers, not to prefer the settling of their affairs, but to dispose of all
their business, in such sort, that they may always live in that state of
life, wherein they may be ready and willing, to render their soul unto God,
and not to defer a matter of so great importance, least by sudden and
unsuspected, or at least unprovided death, which by diverse ways do happen,
often those aforesaid hurts and hindrances do fall to their lot: For though
there is nothing more certain then death, yet notwithstanding, nothing more
uncertain then the hour thereof, as witnesses S. BERNARD, saying, In human
affairs, S. Bern.
what is there more certain then death, and what can be found more
uncertain, then the hour thereof. For as the Ecclesiastic says: A man
knows not his end, Eccles 6.
but as the fish is taken with the hook, and the birds with the snare, so
are men taken in an evil time, which comes upon them upon a sudden.
Wherefore our Lord does exhort us to watch, for that we know not the day or the
hour, Neither were the very Ethnicks ignorant hereof. For SENECA faith:
Seneca in Thieste. Ciccer. lib de Senec.
No man had ever the gods so favorable unto him, that he could promise the
next day unto himself. CICERO also a says: Who is so foolish, though he be
a young man, can say that he shall live until night. S. JAMES held the life
of man to be so uncertain, that he comparde it unto a vapor, saying: Iac. 4.
What is your life? it is a vapor appearing for a little while: It is also
compared by IOBE unto the wind, saying: Remember that your life is but a
wind: Uncertain also is the place of death, for they which think to take
their last farewell in their own Country, in their own proper and domestike
houses, and amongst the Troops of their friends and kindred, oftentimes
departed this life in a strange Country, either taking their journey
forwards, or in the midst of their journey, or returning homewardes, or
devoured by wild beasts, or killed by thieves, for no man can conjecture what
the kind or manner of his death may be, for that this man perishes, by
dangerous falling, another by hanging, this man by the sword, the other by
poison, some gluttony kills, others famine, the earth ouerwhelmeth some, the
water drowneth others.

And although, very uncertain is both the hour, place, and kind of death,
yet no less uncertain, is the estate wherein the poor soul stands, which
is not prepared for death, when it is called from this pilgrimage, to appear
before the dreadful judgment seat, for that (as the Ecclesiastic says) A
man knovveth not, Eccles. 9.
vvhet^er he be vvorthie of love or hatred, which sentence, though it may be
ordinarily verified of all men, yet much more, of those which have been
negligent, to prepare and settle themselves, and their affairs in a
readiness, for that hour, which is so fearful unto them, that that they
seek nothing more, but how to avoid it. For that as Holy JOB says, Job. 27.
A man will give skin for skin, and all that he has for his life. From
hence proceeds the willing suffering and enduring, of so many bitter
potions, sharp medicines, and great labors, for the conservation thereof.
Wherefore, Saint FRANCIS, to take the greatest occasions of fear away,
exhorts the Brethren and Sisteres, to stand so well provided for Death, that
as it is fearful unto others which are unprovided, so it may be most
comfortable unto those, which have made due preparation for it.

If the safe arriving of a Ship unto a happy Port, after cruel Tempests
of the Sea, is most grateful unto those which have sailed therein: If the
returning home into a man's own Country, be most pleasant unto Pilgrims, and
if unto such as have been banished, it is a thing most wished for, after a long
exile, to return unto his native soil, how joyful and acceptable, then ought
death to be unto those which are prepared for it, seeing that it brings a man
to all these aforesaid happiness: For death truly conduces and delivers us
from dangerous and troublesome sea of the world, unto the quiet state and rest
of life everlasting. And after our long Pilgrimage, reduces us into our own
house, which we have long sought for. For as S. PAVL testifyeth, we have not
a permanent city, Heb. 13.
but we seek after another to come. And by the benefit of death, we are
recalled also from banishment, into our own celestial Country: There is no
cause therefore, if we be well provided for death, to fear it, but rather to
wish for it, Phil. 1.
and say with the Apostle For unto me to live is Christ, and gain to dye.

Let worldlings then, and lovers of the world, fear death, but let us rejoice
to dye, which pass by death to immortality. For as S. CYPRIAN says, It is
for him to desire to live in the world, whom the world does delight, and
whom flattering and deceiving it does inuit to the snares of earthly
pleasures. But seeing that the world hates a religious and virtuous person,
why should be love that which hates him? And not rather follow Christ which
loves him, and has redeemed him; how great a desire S. PAVL had to do so, he
shows, saying, unhappy man am I, who will deliver me from the body of
this death, I desire to be dissolved and be with Christ. Happy therefore, yea
thrice happy is he which stands always ready, I do not say to die, but to
live in our Lord For though Satan does at the hour of death, diverse ways
tempt and seek to trouble the mind, by reducing into memory all worldly
affairs, yet against such, as following the counsel of S. FRANCIS, have
disposed of them prudently before, he cannot prevail, for that our Savior, is
most ready to help always his servants in their greatest distres, and that
soul which devoutly has served him, he will never leave it, without comfort
in his agony, but is most like to use, then unto him, this most comfortable
speech, and say, I am the life which for thee have overcome death, why
fear thou it? I am the light, wherefore art thou afraid of darkness? I am
the port of health, why do not thou (o my Son) having passed the
tempestuous Seas of this transitory life, make haste to come unto me, which
have delivered and redeemed thee, and have been alvvaies with thee. Let the
soul therefore comfort it self, and say with DAVID. Psalm. 22.
If I shall walk in the midst of the shadow of death, I will not fear
any evil, for that thou art with me. And the soul thus prepared and armed,
departing from this corruptible body, the Celestial spirits will meet it,
that they may carry it unto the Tabernacles, where it shall be for ever the
companion of the Angels, of the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs,
Confessors* and holy Virgins, where I say it shall truly sing the song of our
Lord, not in a strange Country, but in its own: where a man shall most
assuredly find all the good deeds, which by the careful and prudent
diligence, which he has used in disposing in due time, his wealth and
substance, and all his affairs, for the good of his body and soul, he has
sent thither before him. Matt. 5.
That is the place where our Savior exhorts us, to heap up treasure. Let us
send therefore, to that Treasure-house, gifts from our hearts, by holy
meditations, and pious affections, gifts from our mouth, by devout prayers, and
fervent thanksgiving. From our feet, by directing al our steps toward heaven,
from our hands, by almes-giuing. Galat. 6.
For according to S. PAVL, What a man has sowed, that shall he reap. But for
as much, as many begin then to sow, when time is come, that they should reap,
that is, in the agony of death, they will begin to set their goods, and give
alms, when the time is now come, that they should reap the fruits of their
charity and liberality, if they had desposed and made their will in time,
which now peradventure shall never be fulfilled: wherefore to prevent this
great inconvenience, and eminent danger. S. Francis most earnestly exhorts
his chilhren and followers, which have power to make a will, to make it in such
time, that they may, partly, if not wholly, see the performing thereof
themselves, and not to leave the kingdom of heaven to be purchased by others
for the^, but to do their best endeauours to purchase it themselves in this
life, which is the time of meriting, as the other is, the place of rewarding.
Now is the time that the kingdom of heaven is to be bought, wherefore some to
purchase it, give al their goods for it, as many religious persons do, but
specially the two first orders of our holy Patron, S. Francis, which imitating
the example of the Apostles, which said, Behold we have left al things, and
have followed thee: do so freely renounce and give al temporal things, that
they neither do, or may retain any temporal goods or possessions, either in
proper or common. Others do buy that vnpretiable and heavenly kingdom, for
half their goods, as many devout persons have done in times past, but
specially those of this 3. order, which imitating Zacheus (our Saviors happy
host) do as he did first make restitution of other men's goods, and as he
said, Matt. 19.
Behold I give the one half of my goods to the poor: so in like sort may it
be said of them that gave half their goods away: For that prudentlie disposing
of them in time, for the good both of body and soul, the best part is
reputed to be given unto God, for to purchase his heavenly Paradise. Neither
are the poorest left without means to buy it, seeing that our loving redeemer
has faithfully promised that, He which shall give but a cup of cold water
in his name, shall not be unrewarded. Yea our Savior is so willing to bestow it
on them which devoutly desire it, that he which is deprived of all other
means to get it, may only by fervent good will obtain it, as holy S. AUGUST.
witnesses, saying: If thou can give any thing give it, if thou can not,
show thy self affable and vvilling to give, if thou had it, for God
crowns the will within, where he finds not means to do otherwise. But
such as have faculty and means, August.
and may conveniently, must (as I have said before) dispose in time their goods
to buy it, making their last will, chiefly for that intent; and not only must
they endeavor to do this within the three first month after their entrance,
but also if they may conveniently to do it, every half year, or once every
year at the least, that every one may see, how faithful a dispensor and
steward he has been, of the goods which God has lent him, to purchase heaven
withal: whether he has increased or diminished them, and how he has employed
them, for few there are, whose estate does not alter every year, wherefore,
if in like sort, he should not accordingly alter his will, many inconveniences
might thereby arise and be defrauded, of that benefit which S. FRANCIS much
desires that he should have, that is, by making often his will, it should cause
in him, a perpetual memory of death, whose daily Recordation, S. HIEROM
witnesses, not only does preserve a man from sin, but inciteth him to virtue
also, and therefore says, Remember the day of death, and thou shall never
offend, For he which always remembers that he must die, contemns what is
here present, and hasteneth unto that which is to come hereafter: whereunto the
often making of his Will, does greatly help, by settling thereby daily his
temporal affairs, in such readiness in his health, that when extreamitie of
sickness happens to come, his worldly business being already set in good
order, he may freely attend unto all spiritual comforts, and expect with joy,
to go unto his loving Lord, whose faithful Steward he has showed himself, in
disposing of his substance, to that use, for which he received it.

Of making of peace between the Brethren and other strangers.
AS concerning the making of peace, between the Brethren and Sisters, as also
strangers that be at discord, to let it be done as shall seem good to the
Ministers, using the counsel (if it be to be had) of the Bishops of the
Diocese in this behalf.

CHAP. X.
Phil. 4.
THE Apostle S. PAVLE, considering, that so worthy and excellent a thing is true
and perfect peace, that it excels and surpasses all sense, therefore
writing unto the Ephesians, Ephesians. 4.
does carefully admonish them to keep the unity of Spirit, in the bond of
peace: For even as the soul and spirit does not give life unto the body,
unless the members be united and conjoined together, so the holy Ghost, does
not revive and power his grace into the members of the Church, unless they be
conjoined together, with concord and peace. Our Savior himself, to the
intent, that we should have this peace in ^igh estimation, did show how
highly he did esteem of it, when he used it for the first salutation which
he gave unto his disciples, after his Resurrection saying, John. 20
Peace be unto you. It was one of the first things which the Angels did
denounce, and declare when Christ came into the world, Luc. 2.
saying Glory be unto God in the highest, and peace unto men of goodvvill.
Christ also in his last Super, when he was to depart from his Disciples, did
give this peace unto them, as a singular gift, saying: I leave you my peace. I
give my peace unto you. John. 14
As he brought it into the world with him, so did he leave it unto us, at his
departure, and whilst he remained here, did so greatly love it, that he
suffered his most bitter death and passion, to set peace between God his
Father and us. Behold I beseech you, how much he loved it, and with what great
affection he did prosecute it, when he did not disdain to suffer death for it,
and to show how we should keep it, did most benignely and freely forgive all
injuries done or offered unto him: And exhorting us to do the like, if we will
have peace with God, said, Mat. 6.
If you forgive men their offenses, done against you your heavenly Father will
forgive you, and if you forgive not them, neither vvil your Father forgive you
your offenses, which he proves notably by the Parable of the king, which at
the humble suit of his servant, which was indebted unto him, Matt. 18.
forgave him al his debts, but for as much as this servant would not do the
like afterward unto a fellow servant of his, which did owe him but little, and
with violence required it. The king forthwith sends for this cruel wretch,
and said unto him: O wicked servant, I forgave thee thy whole debt at thy
suite, Matt. 18.
it should therefore have beseemed thee, to have showed the like compassion
unto thy fellow. And the king sore displeased with his cruelty, committed him
unto tormentors, that should strictly hold him in prison, until he had paid
the whole debt: upon this parable, Christ infers and says, Even so will
your heavenly Father do with you, if you forgive not every one of you his
brother even from the heart: Whereby it does plainly appear, that if we will
have peace with God, and be forgiven, we must endeavor also to have peace
with all men, and put out of our heart, al rancour and malice, and will to
revenge, patiently suffering all injuries: Yet notwithstanding, though Christ
commands us, and charity binds us, for the conservation of peace and
concord, to remit and forgive all injuries and trespasses against us, yet he
which has done the injury or trespass, is nevertheless bound to acknowledge
his fault, and to ask forgiveness, not only of God, but of him also whom he
has offended, and to make satisfaction therefore, according to his power and
ability, as the grieuousnes of his offense required* and in case that he which
has committed the offense, and broken the bands of peace and concord, be
obstinate, and will not of himself do these things aforesaid: S. FRANCIS,
has so great a desire, that peace may be made, and discord avoided, that
though the offense be only particular, yet if it be great, ordains, that they
should seek to have all parties to be righted, by the advice of the Ministers,
or the parties Ghostly father, and if their authority cannot here prevail,
the^ to use the counsel of the Bishop of the d^oces in this behalf (when it
may conveniently be had) that by this means, peace and concord may be made and
kept, between the brethren and sisters: and also other strangers with them,
before they proceed, to further trial by law: which thing, S. FRAN. seems to
give the^ free leave to do, in seeking justly of their own right: when in the
17 chap. of this rule, speaking of according, and pacifying of strifes, says:
Otherwise let them answer of right before him with whom power of judgment
remains. For when the brethren and sisters, which find themselves much
oppressed, have sought al peaceable means and courses, and cannot prevail to
have any amendme^t, the^ may they without breach of the commandments of God,
or counsel of this Rule, ask and seek recompense of such injuries and wrongs,
as have been done unto them, according unto the order and provision of the
laws of the realm, made in this behalf: So that they always have respect
unto peace and charity, doing nothing for rancour, hatred, or revenge,
remembering always that he exceed not this general Rule, taught by our
Savior, that is, As you would that other men should do unto you, even so do
you unto them, for this is the law and the Prophets.

When they are molested against their constitutions or their Privileges.
CHAP. XI.
But if the Brethren or Sisters, be assailed with vexations, by the Commanders
or Governors of the places where they dwell, contrary to their right and
^riuiledges: Let the Ministers of the place be careful to have recourse to the
Bishops and other Ordinaries of the places, and proceed in such cases,
according to their counsel and order.

EVEN as in this corporal body of ours, we see it so to come to pass, that
though it be but one, yet are the members thereof many, which notwithstanding
have not every one the same act, but all are governed by the head: So in like
sort, in this little body, of this holy order of Penance, though the members
thereof are many, yet every one has not the same power, but by the general
consent, having made choice of one to be head and Ruler thereof, who for his
time, is to govern the members in such sort, that if any of them be molested
and wronged, he as head, is to have care to see them easied: For S. FRANCIS
being desirous, that all his children and followers, should keep peace,
concord, and love with all persons, to the uttermost of their power, would not
(for fear of breach thereof) that every one that was molested by any one,
should seek presently to right himself, with the same party, but ordained
that they having recourse unto the Minister (as head of that Congregation) he
according to his office, should and might with greater charity, being
peradventure nothing interessed in the molestation) seek with all peaceable
means redress, by the help of the Bishop of the Diocese, and other
Ordinaries of the Place, who by the Apostolical letters, of diverse of the holy
Fathers, are commanded to aid them, as appears at large in the Breues of
HONOR. 3. GREGOR. 9. and SIXTVS 4. Speculum Minor. Tract. 1. fol. 3.
Our holy Father GREGOR. 9. writing in their behalf, unto the Bishops and
Archbishops of Italy, for that this order being then but newly founded, was
scantly as then planted else where, declared, that, It came unto the ears of
HONORIVS 3. his Predecessor of happy memory, that many of those parts,
remembering most prudently their last things, leaving the vanities of the
world, did determine with a contrite heart, and humble spirit, to do penance
in their own houses, or else where, and that restoring unto that miserable
daughter of Babilo^, the retribution and reward, which she had reco^penced the^
withal, did desire to chaste^ their own proper bodies, and to bring the^ into
servitude. But the Magistrates and rulers of the cities, wherein such
Servants of God did dwell, not attending that no man vvarfaring under God, may
entangle himself in the affairs of seculer persons, and that the Spouse of
God does deny and refuse to defile her washed feet, do strive to exhort and
dravv oaths from the^, to follovv the^, and be exercised in arms* and
endeavor to compel the^ to execute public offices, calling back again into
their own houses, these which had retired themselves to secret and privy
places to do Penance, laying on them new exactions and burdens, and other
wise dishonouring those, whom they ought by all manner of ways to honor, as
the true servants and friends of God, for as much as it does appertain unto us
to comfort and nourish the friends of God in their religious purposes:
therefore follovving the example of our Predecessor* we do commend unto our
fraternity, by this our Apostolical writ, that you suffer not these Penitents
(whilst not^ithsta^ding, they do acknowledge and pay the duties and burdens,
which by reason of their temporal goods they are bound unto) to be rashly
molested in the^, or in any thing else, vvherby their good purposes may be
hindered, compelling and keeping under their molesters, by Ecclesiastical
censurs, all appellations set aside, 3. Pontif. A. D 1229. The second year of
his Popedom, he had given a Breue to this effect which begins. Detestanda
humani Generis hostis: Specul. Minor. Tract 1. fol. 2.
but seeing that, that first did not take the effect which he desired, he
granted this last recited here, to see the former executed.

O^r holy Father SIXTVS the 4. above 200. years after, A. D. 1471 ibid.
tract. 1. fol. 33. and 52.
seeing that the Brethren and Sisters, of this third order of Penance, were
molested in his time, gave his Apostolical letters in their behalf, in like
sort, but more severe against their molesters, for that he by his Apostolical
authority, did prohibit al Governors, men in authority, and Seculer
officers, under the pain of excommunication, latae sententiae ipso facto to be
incurred by them, if they presume any ways to molest these brethren, and
commands al archbishpos, bishops canons, Ecclesiastical persons in dignity,
not to permit the Brethren and Sisters to be molested by any of what authority
soever they be.

They ought to beware as much as may be, of solemn oaths. CHAP. XII.
But let them all abstain from solemn oaths, unless constrained by
necessity in cases, except by the indult and permission of the sea Apostolic,
that is to say, for peace, credit, calumniation, and in giving testimony, and
also in contractes of buying, selling, and giving, where it shall seem to be
expedient: let them also in common talk, avoid oaths as much as they can;
and he which shall in the day time, unadvisedly by the slip of the tongue
swear (as it often happens in many words) let him the self same day in the
evening (when they ought to recounte what they have done) say three times Pater
noster, for such oaths made unadvisedly: Let every one also be mindful to
exhort his family to Devotion, and to frequent the Divine service.

OUR holy Patron, S. FRANCIS, considering that our Savior, to induce men to
avoid all kind of vain oaths, counsels them that all their affirmations
and speech, be no otherwise then, It is, it is, and not, no* Wherefore he
desiring that all his loving children, should bear that affection, unto our
benign Lord, and sweet Redeemer, that all his counsel, which they may
conveniently follow, should serve them for Commandments, does here with all
paternall benignity, bind them from all solemn oaths, that is, from solemn
protestations, and calling God to witness, where no urgent necessity is,
which who so does, cannot be altogether excused, from the breach of the
second Commandment of God, where he forbideth to take his name in vain: For as
by this Precept, we be commanded, to use the name of God, to all goodness and
truth, as necessity requires. So contrariwise, we are forbidden in the same,
to use his name in any manner of evil, as lying, deceauing, in any untruth, or
in vain. But when necessity requires, the rule gives them leave to swear,
but being no necessity, though the thing they swear be true, yet do they
take the name of God in vain, against the Commandments.

ARTICLE II. Let them also in common talk, avoid oaths, etc.
THIS wicked custom of swearing, has taken in this our miserable times, such
root in many persons of most nations, that al their common talk is mingled
with oaths, though many times they little regard, or think what they swear,
whether it be true or false, putting themselves in danger of perjury, upon
every light fantasy: wherefore S Frauncis, to prevent it, or the like
mischief in his children, does admonish them here to be careful to avoid so
great an imperfection, Sur. in vita S. El-
as to utter any oaths in their common talk: S. ELZEARIVS, that blessed
Prince, and true obseruer of al poin^s of this order, did so greatly detest
these kind of oaths, that he did set down a law in the Court, amongst his
servants, that whosoever of the^ should chance to swear in his house, that
either he should be locked up all day in his chamber, or else to dine with bread
and water only. S Francis did esteem vain oaths to be so great an offense,
that he would not that any of the brethren and Sisters, should presume to go to
their rest, until they had diligently examined their conscience, and if they
did find, that through many words, they had unadvisedly sworn, that by prayer
they should make present satisfaction* and say, 3. Pater nosters. Although this
Penance here set down, seems to be much less then that which S. Elzearius
did impose on his servants, yet is this no less meritorious, for that the
other was to be done of necessity, and their temporal good: now this being
voluntarily performed, a man's own conscience enioyning it him, cannot but be
much acceptable in the sight of God: For that a little Penance here
voluntarily done, makes better satisfaction then a far greater, which of
necessity must be done, here, or else where: and upon this ground, does he
exhort them, that upon due examination of their conscience, every night with
hearty sorrow, for any offense committed, that they should say three times the
Pater noster, for any such oath vnad^isedly made by the slip of the tongue, as it
often happens in many words. How dangerous, vain, and idle oaths are, you
have already heard; now here does he set down the cause of such oaths to
proceed from many words; whereof there is no one thing, whereof a man ought
to be more careful the^ of his words, for which he must render a strict
account, for that they are the beginning and cause of many sins and offenses:
wherefore S. FRANCIS, showing that idle oaths proceed oftentimes from
multiplicity of words, does give therewithal warning to beware of such
unprofitable speeches.

In his two former rules, he does give express commandment, to use few
words and often silence: now here in this third Rule, for as much as the
Brethren and Sisters, conuersing abroad in the world, though they cannot at all
times, use that sparingnes in their speech, as the other Orders may, yet
notwithstanding does he admonish them also to slye much speech, showing the
danger thereof to be such, that by many words they fall into oaths. The
Ecclesiastic therefore, to prevent this inconueniencie, exhorts us to ponder
well our words before we speak them, saying: The words of the wiseman (which
every one thi^keth himself to be) shall be vvaighed in the pair of golden
balance: Eccles. 21
where the weight of every grain is regardal* the rich man does consider and
reckon his money before he lays it out, or gives it unto others. So ought
thou to weigh well, and ponder they words before thou pronounce them, and give
them to others hearing. The wiseman would have a young man to be so sparing of
his words, that scantly should he speak, when necessity requires saying: O
young man, Eccles. 32
speak scantly in thy cause, when need requires, but when thou art twice
demanded, let thy head then have an answer. For he which uses many words,
shall seldom come to true perfection: Wherefore Saint JAMES says: He which
thinks himself to be religious, and does not bridle his tongue, vain is his
religion. Gregor. in mor. lib.
Therefore S. GREGORY says: Whosoever gives himself to much speech,
cannot keep rightnes of Justice. For according unto the saying of the
Psalmist, A man full of tongue, Psalm.
cannot be directed in earth: yea, nature it self induces us to be moderate
in our speech, in this, that a man has from nature, but one mouth to speak,
and two ears to hear, in token, that every one ought to hear much, and to
speak little, according unto the counsel of S. JAMES, Iacoh. 1.
Let every man be swift to hear, and slow to speak: But you shall find many
persons, which take such delight to hear themselves speak, that with one
mouth, they will utter so many words, that others having two ears, yet are
wearyed to hear them, and sorry to see them to go against nature, which
moves him unto taciturnitie, and to keep his tongue. Prove. 21
SALAMON in his Proverbs says, that* He which keeps his mouth and his
tongue, keeps his soul from sorrow and danger, lib. de offic. 2.
and of the contrary side, he which uses many words, hurts his soul. S.
AMBROSE says, I have seen many by speaking to fall into sin, but scarce any
by holding their peace. The very Heathens did acknowledge as much, as for
example, CATO which said, Cato.
It hurts none to have held their peace, but it hurts many to have spoken.
The forementioned S. AMBROSE affirms in like manner, Amb. sup. psalm. beati
immaculati.
that it is very hard that he which speaks much, should not lie. Whereby we
see, that from multiplicitie of words, proceed many dangers, amongst which S.
FRANCIS reckons here vain oaths, saying, that by many words it often
falls out, that by slip of the tongue, they swear unadvisedly.

And by the same means, many do show their own folly to be great, for he
which uses many words, shows but to plainly, that there is no true ground
and foundation of wisdom in him, seeing that every one thereby, may
certainly know, whether he has any spark of wisdom, or not. The Scripture
witnesses, that he is a fool, saying that a fool does multiply words.
SALAMON also says, that Dreams do follow many cares, and foolishness is
found out in many words. SALAMON also says: Dreams do follow many cares,
Eccles. 10
and foolishness is found out in many words: Where as, on the contrary
side, Taciturnitie and few words, is a sign of wisdom, as witnesses most
prudently that wise SENECA, saying, Taciturnitie and few words, is reputed
even in a fool, for vvisdome.

But if the folly of any, should be such, that all these aforesaid sentences,
will not sufficie to draw him to be hereafter more wise, and use fewer words,
let him but weigh the severe sentence of our Savior, which says, that of
every idle word, Mat. 12. lib. moral.
men must render a strict account: What an idle word is, S. GREGORY does show
saying: An idle word is that which wants, either the just cause and reason
of necessity, or the pyous intention of utility and profit. S. HIEROM also
says, that an idle word is that which is vtttred without the profit of
the hearer or speaker: Hier. in Ser. quoda^
he adds moreover, that, whatsoever does not edify the hearers, turns
unto the hurt of the Speakers.

But least that any man might say, though he used many, yet not idle words,
and for that cause, not to be bound to render an account of them, S. GREGORY,
to prevent all such excuses, says, If so strict an account is required of
every idle word, it is very deeply and profoundly to be waighed and
thought of, what pain may follow many words wherein a man offends by
pride also. Great care therefore ought every one to have to make satisfaction,
of unnecessary words, as well as for idle and vain and unadvised oaths,
seeing that by the sentence of these Holy Fathers, more pain is due unto many
words, then unto idle: For which notwithstanding our Savior himself says, we
must make an account of every one: Cass* coll. 14, 19.
Wherefore CASSIANVS says: That silence is the first beginning and entrance to
all good discipline. So of the other side CLYMACHVS says, Clym. gr: 11.
that much speech and many words, is an assured argument of ignorance, it is
the gate of detraction, the Captain of scurrilitie, the worker of lies, the
desolation of compunction, the Author of sloth, the Precursor of sleep, the
dissipation of intestine, and good fixed thoughts, and the extermination of all
true Custody: whereas of the contrary, Taciturnitie and silence, is the
mother of prayer in our thought, it is a diligent observation of the fire of
the divine love, a secret going forward toward God, and a hidden ascending
unto him. He which knows his sins, will contain his tongue, but he which
uses many words, has not yet known himself as he ought. Matt. 27. Mar. 15.
The silence which our Savior used before Pilate, made him to be admired and
reverenced. Let us therefore so imitate his holy examples in earth, that we may
reign with him in heaven.

ARTICLE III. Let him the selfsame day, in the Evening, when he ought to
recount what he has done, say three Pater nosters, for such oaths, etc.
SO good an estimation and opinion had S. FRANCIS of all those which did fly
the vanity and pompes of the world, as much as their estate would permit them
to do penance, and live holy in their own houses, attending unto the works
of mercy, that even as LYCVR^VS the lawmakers of the Lacedaemonians, did not
make any law against the Parricides, esteeming that none would be so unnatural,
as to kill his own Father: So in like sort, S. FRANCIS judging, that all such
as did bend their whole course to perfection, and virtuous life, would not be
so unnatural unto their heavenly Father, as by sin and evil deeds, to go
about to kill, his only begotten Son, their redeemer again. Therefore he did
not set down any punishment or Penance here, for il actions and wicked deeds
expressly, but only for words, that is, vain oaths, wherein he was so strict,
that though they were uttered unadvisedly, or happened by the slip of the tongue,
as it often cha^ceth (says he) in many words, yet notwithstanding, he
ordains, for so small an offense (as that seems to be) that they should
make present satisfaction, for fear least any being prevented by sudden
death, should be enforced to make a far more paineful satisfaction elsewhere;
for that no offense, be it never so small, can escape unpunished, but must of
necessity be purged, seeing that as holy S. JOHN the Evangelist testifyeth,
Nothing which is defiyled, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven: Apoc. 9
which is the cause that moved S. FRANCIS to require such present satisfaction
to be made here by Penance and prayer, for the cleansing and purging of the
poor soul, which (as you have heard) must by the testimony of our Savior,
render an account of every idle word, which if it be so, as most true it is,
what reckoning then must every one make of his deeds, seeing that he which is
now a most merciful Redeemer, and faithful Advocate, will be then so severe a
judge, that for the very sins of omission only, he will pronounce that
dreadful and doleful sentence: Go ye cursed of my Father, into everlasting
fire, and shows in the Gospel of S. MATTHEW, the cause thereof to be: For
that (says he) I was hungry, Matt. 25.
and you did not give me to eat, I was naked, and you did not cloth me: by
which words of our Savior, we see that in that general and dreadful
judgment, the sins of omission are discussed, and diligently examined, and
laid against the wicked: For there shall they be appeached and condemned, for
that they omitted to do good, when they might: whereby we may plainly
perceive, that a man may commit a mortal sin, and thereby he condemned to
everlasting fire, for only omitting and neglecting to do good, when he might
and should have done it: Because our Savior here in S. MATTHEW speaks only
of the sins of omission: wherefore, not only he which does evil, shall be
condemned, but also he which omitteth to do that good, which he was bound to
perform, whereof our Savior gives us an example in that unprofitable
servant, whereof he said in S. MATTHEW: Matt. 25.
Cast the unprofitable servant into extreme darkness: What heinous offense
had he committed to be thus punished? truly his offense was, that he was
slouthful, and had not well employed the talent which was given him. How strict
our most just judge is in this matter, the Precursor of our Savior, holy JOHN
BAPTIST does declare, in the 3. of S. LVKE, when he exhorting the people not
to defer their Penance and good works, for that the axe was already sat
unto the root of the tree, added presently, that every tree which is not
bringing forth good fruit, Luke 3.
should be cut down and cast into the fire. Wherefore S. GREGORY says, that
it is not enough for a man to do no evil, unless he study also to employe
himself in good works. For S. JOHN did not say* that every tree which
brings forth bad fruit, Hom. 13. in Euag.
as theft, murder, adultery, and such like, but says only, Every one which is
not bringing forth, that is, which omitteth and does not daily bring forth
good fruit, shall be cast into the fire: Seeing therefore so strict an account,
will be exacted at our hands, for omitting to do good works, let every one
now in time diligently examine himself, what he has done every day, and as
opportunity shall serve, to consider what in all his life time he has done, to
the intent that if he find that either he has done evil, or been negligent,
in doing good, he may now endeavor with all his forces, to follow the counsel
of holy DAVID, saying, Declyne from evil, and do good, For if God will use such
severity, for only omission and negligence, what favor can be expected,
where wicked deeds are found, and no good to counteruaile them? Most prudently
therefore and most profitablie, for the souls of the Brethren and Sisters,
does S. FRANCIS ordain, that every one of them should, every night make an
account, between God and his conscience, what he has done that day, that is,
how he has employed the talents and gifts, which our Lord has bestowed on
him. For whatsoever we have, are the gifts of God, given by him unto us, to
purchase and get the kingdom of heaven, by employing our selves, and all that
is within our power, to his honor and glory, and our own salvation:
wherefore we ought to make a most strict account every night, whether we have
well used, or else abused Gods benefits, to his dishonor, scandal of our
neighbors, and our own destruction. As concerning the gifts wherewith he has
adorned our soul, diligently ought we to consider, before we give rest unto
our body, whether we have employed the sharpnes of our wit, the industry of
our mind, the perfectness of our memory, the freenes of our thoughts, and
our whole art and science, and whatsoever we have spoken or done chiefly, if
not only for the love of God, or otherwise to our own vain desires, or
prepared them to commit sin and wickedness.

In like sort, no less account is to be made of his benefits, bestowed upon
the corruptible body, but seriously ought we to call to mind, if by and with
them, no abuse has been committed, either by exercising our strength, to use
violence and force in doing wrong unto others, or our health to filthiness,
and our beauty to vanity, and lascivious allurements, exhibiting by these and
the like, arms of iniquity unto sins, we must also use no less diligence
in our nightly examinations, about temporal goods, which our bountiful Creator,
has bestowed upon his Creatures, not only for the consuming of them
unlawfully and riotously, in banqueting and drunkenness, in pompes and
vanities, in gorgious apparel, and frivolous buildings, in carding and dicing,
and such like folly, but also whether they have been gotten by fraud and
deceit, by rapine and usury, or any other unjust means, or consumed them
vainly.

Moreover, in this that S. FRANCIS does here require, that his children should
every night make this exact account, he does prudently admonish them, that
they should stand always prepared, to render a good account at the hour of
death. If thou were Cofferer or Steward, to some great Prince, which would
command thee to render an account the next night of certain thousands of
pounds, which he had given thee to bestow and employ, would thou not before
thou did show him thy reckonings, first look over thy books, that thou
might render a just and ready account of all thy actions; For though thou
had desposed, and laid out all exceeding well: yet notwithstanding, for
fear least, that rendering thy account before thy Lord and Prince, thou
should stutter and stammer, not having foreseen or premeditated the matter
before, thou would diligently look over thy books, and consider every
thing exactly, that thou may render a just and joyful account for thy credit.
Were it not a thing very strange then, if that for thy Creator, Redeemer, and
most just judge, thou would not use that diligence which thou would, for
thy temporal Lord, seeing that thy credit and everlasting health of thy soul
do depend so much thereupon? note well therefore, that thou must render an
account, whether thou will or no, not before an earthly Prince, but before the
Prince of Princes, and Judge of the whole world, not of small ^oies, but of the
greatest of al, that is, of thy goods, of thy soul and body, with the
Corporal riches and gifts which were granted unto thee, from that omnipote^t
and Almighty Prince, thy creator, thy God, and thy most just Judge, which will
without fail, say unto thee, Render an account of thy Stewardship, and
peradventure this very night, will take his stricte accounte. How needful
therefore do thou see, it is to examine thy self* and make thy accounts
ready every day, yea twice or thrice in the day, if thou could
conuenie^tly, being assured that after death, thou must make it very strictly?
Who is he then that is, or would be esteemed a perfect Christian, which will not
diligently endeavor, to make himself and his accounts ready, by examining
his conscience daily, and what he finds therein to have been amiss, to make
satisfaction for it; and despisi^g his former evil customs, turn his wicked
and perverse manners, into good and holy exercises, preparing himself daily,
for all events that may happen: for when we least think of death, then many
times are we soonest taken away thereby; For such is the uncertainty of man's
life, that no man can assure himself one day, yea one hour: let every one
therefore bend al his endeauours so to live this day, as though he were to dye
to morrow, and if he be wise, let him be no less ready for his accounts, then
if he were to render them presently. Take therefore to thy self alone, some
convenient times in the day, or at least every night, and leave the business
of the world, and the very thoughts thereof, leave all temporal things
whatsoever, and search diligently the secrets of thy conscience within thy
self, for from it (which is thy chief accuser) if thou will obey and give
ear unto it, thou shall hear what thou must do; With thy conscience alone
have care of the health of thy soul, for there are few other such true
friends, for that as the Apostle says: Phil. 2.
Every one seeks his own profit, and not the health of thy soul, but
rather follow and seek after thy temporal goods: therefore leaving all such
frinds, and all exterior affairs for that time, enter into thy self, and
consider what hitherto thou have done for to morrow, peradventure thou shall
die, when al thy honors, riches, and friends, will then nothing profit thee.
Scarcely shall thy soul be departed from thy body, when thou shall be left of
all persons, and few or none will remember to do thee any good: but although
all the world did remember, yea, if all the Saints, and Queen of heaven, would
pray for thee, yet if thou should depart this life, but in one mortal
sin, all would little profit thee, when thy soul at the instant, appearing
before the dreadful throne of God, is to hear of thy most just judge, his
particular judgment, of everlasting damnation, for thine offense, which here
in time through the merits of Christ's passion, and his holy grace, by the
intercession of the Holy Saints, and thy self cooperating thereunto, might
easily have avoided, by hearty contrition, and true satisfaction, for those
sins and offenses, which by due examination of thy conscience alone, thou
should find thy self to have offended therein. Justly therefore, and with
a most pious care, does our holy S. Francis exhort thee to examine thy
conscience, and by satisfaction, to make eue^ thy reckonings; in the morning,
and at noone, or at the least in the Evening, well considdering, how hitherto
thou have lived, do then make an new resolution, to satisfy for that which
is past, and endeavor to live better hereafter, and in thy heart, to despise
and make little account of all those things, which thou art assured thou can
not carry with thee. For seeing that thy soul is to remain alone, without the
company of whatsoever it did take so much pains for, save only the merit of
those good works, which she here did, leave therefore in time al transitory
trash, and vanities of the world, before they leave thee, and consider now what
thou shall be, and what thou desire to be, which easily thou may
perform, if retyring thy self from external things, which hinder the internal
quiet of thy conscience, thou look and examinest diligently what thou art
now, or what thou have done, and upon this due consideration correct and
amend thy self, wherein it has been faulty, and make a steadfast resolution,
not to return unto the like again, and now to change all thy old manners and
customs of sin, or tending thereunto, and blot out what has been evil
heretofore, by sighs, tears, or other due satisfactio^s, according to the
greatness of thy foresaid offenses; and consider that S. FRANCIS (instructed
by our Savior) ordeyning that for every vain and unadvised oath, thou
should do penance, and for satisfaction by prayer, to say presently three
Pater nosters: does thereby insinuate, that far greater penance, ought
every one to do, if in his nightly examinations, he do find that he has
offended that day, either by by lascivious and vain thoughts, idle and wicked
words, or unprofitable and hurtefull deeds, of all which not only S.
Francis, but also many other holy Saints, Chrysostom. in sermon.
do exhort us diligently, to examine our selves before we go to our rest,
S, Chrysostom says. When thou art ready to go to bed, or laid therein,
and no body to trouble thee, before thou settle thy self to sleep, brining
forth the book of thy conscience, Gregor. lib. mora.
remember thy sins, if thou have any vvayes offended, in thought, word or
deed. S. GREGORY in like manner says, The just men when they consider the
straitnes of the judgment to come, they call their sins to memory, and do
deplore them, weep and lament, and are sorry, for what they have committed,
and do severely and strictly judge themselves, that they may not be judged.
Let every one therefore, which will find favor before the great judge of the
whole world, exercise the office of a just judge unto himself, not only by
examining daily his offenses, but also punishing them so severely in himself,
that by pains purging them, and making here amends for them, he may without
delay afterward, possess the eternal joys in heaven.

ARTICLE IIII. Let every one also be mindful to exhort his family to
devotion, and to frequent the divine service.
S. FRANCIS here in the Conclusion and end of this Chapter, does show his
great care over poor servants, for knowing that in the kingdom of heaven,
there is no difference of persons, but they only are highest in favor and
glory, which have with a sincere conscience, served their masters duly and
truly for the love of God, happens many times to be much preferred before his
master, which has spent his time idly. Many one does complain of the badnes
of their servants, but do little regard that their own negligence and evil
examples, are the chief cause thereof. Wherefore S. FRANCIS, to take away the
occasion of evil in both, persuades the Masters to be mindful to exhort his
family and servants to devotion, not by words only, but by example, for that
his words will little prevail, whose examples teach far the contrary: For
as children do look unto the actions of their parents, to imitate them, so do
servants the l^ke unto their Masters: wherefore the Masters must endeavor to
be such themselves, as they would have their servants to be, if they
therefore, through the great love they bear unto God, and desire to have him
served, do not only show their own diligence therein, but by their example
induce and cause their Servants to do the like, not only shall they receive
reward for their own deeds, but also be partakers of all the good, which
their servants shall do by their good example, and their servants thereby
being brought to be true servants unto God, will be most careful without doubt
to do them faithful service. ABRAHAM, Genesis 18
(which is called the Father of the faithful) being good and diligent
himself, in receiving of Pilgrims, his servants, imitating his example, did
show their goodness and diligence, when the Scripture makes mention, that
one of them did run with all speed, unto the flock to fetch something for
the entertainment of the Angels, which under the form of Pilgrims, came
unto their masters house. LOATH also which was brought up in ABRAHAM'S house,
was likewise merciful and charitable: On the contrary side* ABSOLON being
wicked, his servants were as badde, which committed a most heinous offense, in
killing AMON their Lord and Masters brother, and no marvel, having so badde
a master, by whose wicked examples, they were instructed.

In times past, many were careful to pla^e their children in great men's
services, that thereby they might learn virtue, civility, and good manners,
but now insteede thereof, in many places they learn nothing, either at home
or abroad, but drunckennes, play, and idleness: From whence comes it to
pass, that the world is so full of evil servants, but from carelessness of
evil Masters, which as the Pharisees sent their servants to betray and
apprehend our Savior, John. 7
so not much unlike do they, which send their servants, to do dishonest offices
and wicked deeds, yea though they do not send the^, yet can they not be
excused, which do not hinder the^ from it, when they may conveniently, or are
greatly negligent in seeking to amend them. The Apostle S. PAVL, holds it to
be so great a fault for a master to be careless of his family, that he says.
If any have not a care of his Domestiques and household, he has denied his
faith, and is worse then an Infidel. It is not sufficient for a man to have a
care of his children only, but must be vigilant also, over his Servants, and
whole family, and as time, place, and conueniencie do serve, ought to know
how they live, whether they be blaspheamers, brablers, drunkards or
Adulterers, or given to any other notorious crime: wherefore seeing that such
vices do oftentimes creep into many houses, S. FRANCIS does here admonish
every one to exhort his family unto devotion, and to frequent the divine
service and Sacraments, as chief means to preserve their families, from such
inconveniences and vices. S. Elzearius had so great a care, in instructing his
servants, and ruled his family in such sort, that his Court seemed to be
rather a Religious house, then the Palace of a Prince: For at his first
coming to keep house, he prescribed unto his servants those laws, That
every day they should here devoutly the whole Office of the Mass, that
having every week cleansed their souls by Confession, should receive every
month, the holy Sacrament of the Altar, That the Gentlemen, Matrons, and
Virgins* from betimes in thy morning, until dinner, should employ themselves
in prayer and meditation of heavenly things, and after dinner, should
diligently exercise themselves in some handie works, and finally, that none
should presume to swear vitiouslie or lightly, and not so much as to speak
an dishonest or uncivil word. A worthy Pattern, left unto all devout
posterity, for the government of their family, and to induce them unto
ve^tue, wherefore as every one does rejoice in the glory of the Saints, so let
them endeavor to imitate their holy actions, to the intent, that following
their virtuous examples in earth, they may be partakers of everlasting joys
with them in heaven.

Of hearing Mass, and making the Congregation. CHAP. XIII.
LEt all the Brethren and Sisters, of every City and place, being in health,
every day (if they may conuenie^tly) hear Mass, and every month, let them
assemble unto the Church, or place, or to which places the Minister shall have
care to give notice there, to here the solemnities of the Mass. Let every one
give a penny of current usual money, to him which says the Mass, who may
gather the same money, and conveniently distribute it, by the advice and
counsel of the Ministers, amongst the brethren and sisters, oppressed with
poverty, and chiefly amongst the sick, and those which are known to have
wanted the general funeral offices, and then amongst the other poor. Moreover
let them offer some part of the same, to the foresaid Church, and then let
them procure (if they may conveniently) some religious person, competently
instructed in the word of God, who shall exhort them, carefully warn the^,
and induce them to penance, and to exercise the works of mercy. Let every
one be careful to keep silence whilst the office of the Mass is celebrated,
and the word of God preached, and let him be intentive unto prayer, and his
office, unless the common profit, of the fraternity hinder him,

IT is a common Maxim, that examples do more move then words, for that words
do oftentimes pass with small profit; but examples have such force, that it
draws a man to follow and do that which he sees to be done before his eyes,
and the greater that the person is, which gives the example, the more force it
has: for the lesser, by the guide of nature, do follow the example of the
greater. Wherefore our holy patron S. Francis, having in the precedent chap.
given a certain commandment unto al Masters, that they should be mindful to
exhort their family, to frequent the divine Service; but knowing that they are
sooner to be brought thereunto, by examples, then words, does now here after
his kind custom of Commanding, will all the brethren and sisters, being in
health (if they may conveniently) to hear Mass devoutly every day, to the
intent that by their presence there, they may not only draw their servants to
do the like, but also reap thereby, great and inestimable benefit, daily
enjoying there, the company of the Angels, which S. Ambrose affirms are
always the^ present there, Amb. super luc.
saying: doubt not but that the Angels are present, when Christ does assist at
the altar, that is, when he is offered up there in Sacrifice. S Chrysostom. in like
sort says, S. Chrysostom.
that the Angels of heaven be alvvaies present in great number, to honor this
sacred mystery, and we being present with them, and assisting with the same
intention, cannot but receive many excellent influences by such a Society, the
two Quiers of that Triumphant and militant Church conioyning themselves to our
Lord, in this divine action, to obtain mercy and grace for us: The prayer also
made in this divine Sacrifice has an unspeakable force and efficacy, so that
the soul by aid hereof abounds with heavenly favors, whereunto the prayer
of the Priest does not a little help, when as in particular he prays in the
Cano^, for all that are present, whose faith (says he) and devotion is known
unto thee, for whom we here offer. S. Anselm.
S. Anselme therefore considering what benefit it was to be present at the
Mass, said that one Mass which was heard whilst a man lived, was more worth
then a thousand after his death: that is, in respect of the essential reward.
How great benefits and what inestimable comfort shall those the^ receive, which
following the exhortation and counsel of S Francis, do force themselves to the
uttermost of their power, to hear Mass every day, seeing that a most reverend
and learned Father affirms, Card. Tol. lib. 6. de instruc, Sac. c. 10.
that he which comes well desposed to hear Mass, receives many fruits
from this holy Sacrifice: the first is, augmentation of grace, for that he
which is in state of grace, in hearing devoutly Mass, gets increase of
grace: The second is the Remission of temporal pain, due unto sin: Thirdly,
he obtains with more ease, that which he demands, for that he offers
to GOD, a most acceptable oblation, that is, CHRIST. They do easily get of men
their requests, which bring with the^ gifts to offer unto them, and so much
the easier, as their gifts are more gracious: Fourthly, he exercises the
principal acts of virtue, and chiefly of three, he exercises Faith in
believing those things which a^ celebrated in the mysteries. Charity also,
vvhilest his will is wholy carried by love unto Christ present: he
exercises in like sort Religion, by adoring Christ in the Sacrament, with that
Supreme adoration of Latria.

Moreover, by their devout assisting there, they may in like sort daily
receive him Spiritually, For he which devoutly hears Mass, being out of
mortal sin, and in state of grace, having a pious affection* and fervent
desire to receive the author of all grace, in that holy Sacrament of the
Altar, and thinks, and says devoutly in his heart: O most loving Lord, and
Savior JESUS CHRIST, how willingly would I receive thee this day in this
holy Sacrament, but alas I dare not approach and come thereunto* for fear
least that I should by my indisposition, want of preparation and unworthiness,
offend thy divine majesty, yet notwithstanding, I humbly beseech thee from the
bottom of my heart (which thou, o Lord, know better then I can declare)
that thou will vouchsafe most mercifully to grant unto me (although far
unworthy thereof) such grace which thou vouchsafest to imparte unto all those
which devoutly do actually receive thee this day in all thy Churches, Mat.
1.15
in this holy Sacrament. Seeing therefore by the testimony of our Savior
himself, that the internal action of the will, is the substance of all our
works, and that the external action and deed, does depend thereupon, and is
also esteemed according to the quality thereof, good or evil hence may we
conclude, that they which being present daily at Mass, making this foresaid
preparation, with a fervent heart, and devout intention, do by this spiritual
receiving of the Author of all grace, obtain oftentimes, as much grace, as if
they had corporally received him in the Sacrament. And though every one that
can be present at this holy S^crifice of the Mass, notwithstanding cannot make
daily such fervent and devout preparation, to receive thereby this special
grace, yet nevertheless, seeing that by their devout presence and assistance
there, in that Holy place and company, he may obtain all the other aforesaid
graces and benefits, every one ought to do his best endeavor, to be as often
present there, as he may conuenie^tly.

If therefore, through the persecutions of our desolate Country, thou can
not have opportunity, as often as thou desire to be present, at the
Celebrating of this sovereign Sacrifice, at the least, send thy heart and
desire thither, to assist daily there, with a spiritual presence: And although
thou should live in such a place, where thou can but seldom come to this
holy Sacrifice, yet let thy soul, heart, and mind be daily present, and go in
Spirit (if otherwise thou can not) into the Oratorie or Chapel, and there
unite thine intention, with the intention of all the faithful Christians, and
use the same interior actions, in the place where thou have thus retyered thy
self, which thou would use, if thou were really present in some Church, at
the office of the holy Mass, with all the reverence that thou can: in so
doing, thou shall reap more fruit and merit oftentimes, then man^e, which
come with so small devotion to Mass, that sca^tly will bow both their knees at
once, and spend often the time, rather in prattling, then in prayer: Wherefore
S, FRANCIS giving a caveat, unto the Brethren and sisters, not to do the like,
does in the end of this Chapter say, that Every one ought to be careful to
keep silence, when the office of the Mass is celebrated, and to be intentive
unto Prayer: Seeing that the place where they then are, is ordained for that
end, as our Savior himself witnesses saying: Ioh. 2 Luc. 19
My house is the house of prayer: whosoever therefore goes unto that holy
place, let them consider, that God says by his Prophet Hier. Hier. 48
Cursed is he which does the work of God negligently.

Let them therefore, be careful to be attentive unto prayer, and bring with them
all humility and devotion, least it might happen unto them, Luc 18.
as it did unto the Pharise, which entering into the temple with pride and
arrogance, lost what virtue he had before: let this example teach all men to
beware, how they behave the^selus in that place; and seeing that Christ is
always present in the Sacrifice of the Mass, let al their care be to give
their hearts and minds wholly unto devout prayers, and fervent meditation,
wherein I would rather counsel such as can, to employ themselves in, at that
time, then in vocal prayers, whereunto many persons do so wholly then addict
themselves, that scantly do they once eleuate their mind, to think of the
passion of our Savior, which all the mysteries of that holy Sacrifice, do
represent unto us, thereby many times losing a great part of the merit, which
by meditating on the passion of our Savior, they might have gained; for that
S. BERNARD says, It is more merit (in meditating of the Passion of Christ) to
shed one tear with compunction, then to fast a whole week with bread and
water, or to say the whole Psalter of DAVID. For where the memory of Christ's
passion, is by often meditation thereon, engraffed in our heart, no vice can
take place, or virtue be wanting, wherefore though vocal prayers be good, yet
above all, I counsel thee, to apply thy self to mental and cordial prayer,
and specially for that which has for matter, and subject the life and passion
of our Lord. For beholding him often in meditation, thy soul will be filled
with him, thou will learn his carriage, as it were and gestures, and conform
all thy actions, as near as thou can unto his, which prayed with an enflamed
affection.

Do not therefore at the time of Mass strive to say a great many prayers,
but rather employ thy self in meditation, and endeavor to say those prayers,
which thou then use, from thy heart: For one only Pater noster, said with
heedful attention of mind, and desire, is better worth by far, then many
recited hastily without devotion. It is not therefore multitude of prayers, or
the manner of praying, which God so much regards, as wherein the heart is
employed: Exodus 17 4. Reg. 4.
For, MOSES did pray standing, when he did overcome AMALECH: HELIZEVS prayed
vvalking, when he raised the son of SVNAMITI^ his hostess. 3. Reg. 8
SOLOMON prayed with bovved knees in the Temple. DAVID prostrated himself
down upon his face upon the earth, crying unto God for mercy. Our Savior,
to show what exterior manner soever thou use in prayer, if thy heart and
affection be wholly fixed on him, are acceptable: In his passion, which this
Sacrifice represents unto thee, he did use him self all these kinds of
praying: For he prayed as it were standing, like unto Moses, upon the Cross:
and as Elizeus walking, when he praying in the garden, visited his Disciples
thrice: And like Solomon also kneeling, Luc. 22.
when (as S, Luke says) that vvithdravving himself a stones cast from his
Disciples, kneeling on his knees prayed. And at length, Mat. 26.
as David prostrating himself upon the earth: whereby our Savior by his
example, shows that in what devout manner soever, according unto the time and
place, we present our prayers unto God, they shall be acceptable, if our hearts
be elevated and united unto him. For it is not so much the situatio^ and
disposition of the body, as the elevation of the heart, which is most
required: for though at all times, thou should have thy heart lifted up unto
God, yet specially, here at the holy Sacrifice of the Mass, where is present
the King of glory, accompanied with the Angels, whose company thou enioyest,
by thy devout assisting there, wherefore not without cause, does the Priest
before the Canon of the Mass exhort us thereunto saying: Lift up you hearts,
etc. as though he would say, behoulde the king of glory is coming; with his
heavenly Court, attending on him, lift up your hearts aloft from all earthly
things, and prepare it to receive him, Pro. 8.
who says, my delight is to be with the Sons of men.

As we answer, then that we have elevated them unto God, so let us be
careful always to keep it in prayer, for otherwise it would profit thee
little or nothing, to pray with the mouth, and to have thy heart distracted
about many other things, For thou should be like unto those of ^^om our Lord
does complain by his Prophet ESAIAS, saying, These people do honor me with
their mouth, Esai. 29.
but their heart is far from me. Therefore S. BONAVENTVRE declares that, It
is a thing very absurd, to have the mouth in the Quire, and the heart in the
market place: For he says that, If thy heart does not pray, in vain does the
mouth labor.

He therefore which will have his prayers to be pleasing unto God, must employe
both heart, mouth and hands therein, and endeavor first to have a clean
heart. For as SOLOMON before he prayed, 3. Reg. 8.
caused the Temple to be prepared and adorned. So must thy heart, 1. Romans 3.
which is as S. Paul says, The temple of God; be first sprinkled with the
water of tears, and afterward, sweapt with the broom of contrition, and
sorrow for thy sins, and adorned with many ornaments of virtue, and holy
thoughts. wherefore the Ecclesiasticke exhorts thee to prepare thy soul
before prayer, Eccles. 18.
that thou may not be like unto those which tempt God. For as S. Clement
says, He which prays, S. Clem. in constable. Apol
before he has prepared his soul by contritio^ and sorrow for his sins,
does not pray, but stirs up the wrath and indignation of God against him,
reducing his sins to memory. For even as he which having killed the Princes
son, and should come with his hands imbrudred in blood, the father would be
so far from pardoning, that he seeing his sons blood, would presently
punish him. So in like sort, if by mortal sin, thou have killed and
crucified the Son of God again, as much as lies in thee, can thou
approouing it, expect any favor, as long as thy hands are full of blood? no
truly, but present punishment, for that God himself says by the Prophet ESAIAS,
that our sins have made such a division between him and us, Esai. 58
that though we lift up our hands and cry out all the day long, yet, says he, I
will not hear you, and shows that the only cause thereof is, for that your
hands are full of blood. By this, I diswade no sinner from praying, but
persuade him first to have repentance of his sins, if he intend to be heard,
for praying is an act of virtue, and an exercise much commended, in which, God
does so move the offender to contrition, by his special illustrations, and is
hindered from offending God otherwise, which perhaps he would do, if he
were not occupied in prayer.

Wherefore to the intent that we may find favor at Gods hands, and that our
prayers may be acceptable in his sight, let every one be careful to wash his
hands clean with the fountain of tears, for his sins, and prepare his
heart by perfect contrition, and sorrow for them, so shall his prayer be soon
heard, for that God does more regard oftentimes the preparation of the heart,
then the prayers, and to this end, are the words of the Royal Prophet DAVID,
saying unto God: Thy ear has heard, the preparation of their heart: Secondly,
thou must pray with mouth and voice, as holy DAVID says, With my voice, I
have cried unto our Lord, with my voice, I have earnestly beseeched God:
Wherein the Prophet does teach us, that our voice also must follow the
affection of our heart, and not to be as though thou were reading of some
matter, or merely discoursing, but with all humility, humbly and earnestly
beseeching God. Here also do I exhort thee, that the prayers, which by thy
mouth thou pronouncest, be such as are examined and approved by the Catholic
Church, and those whereunto most indulgences are granted; and which thou art
most bound unto, according to thy estate and calling, then any other particular
prayers, wherein thou may find sometimes more devotion and sweetness; it
is not the sweetness which thou find in thy prayers, which make them more
meritorious, but the love and affection, which thou show unto God, and the
desire that thou have to fulfill that, which for his sake, and thy service unto
him, thou have by thy profession and promise, bound thy self unto, as health
and time shall permit thee.

Thirdly, thou must also pray with thy hands, for which cause our Savior
says in S. Luke, Knock and it shall be opened unto you: For vvhilest MOSES
did lift and hold up his hands, Israel did win, but otherwise, if his
hands vere down, Amelech did win: Even so ought thou to lift and hold
up thy hands in prayer, that is, exercising thy self in good works. For what
is the cause that thy prayers often times are not heard, but that thou prayest
only with thy mouth, having thy hands stained and dipped, as ESAIAS says, in
thy neighbors blood, you recall back again your debtors, and you strike
quickly with your clutched fisto, and make haste to strifes and contention:
Wherefore that I may use the Apostles words: Lift up your remiss, Heb. 1^.
and forsaken hands, and your unbound and vveake knees: Cry unto our God,
says the Apostle, perseuering in pra^er, Romans 12.
offer unto God thy prayer, clean from the filth of sin, and he vvil hear
thee. Wherefore God commands in the law of MOSES, that the lamb which was
to be offered unto him, Exodus 12.
should be without spot. But alas, there are many which are like unto those
which in the house of Pilate, bowed their knees before Christ, saluted him, and
said, Hail King of the Jews, but rising from their knees, they buffeted him,
and stroke him with their fists on the face. So thou in the like sort, come
unto the Church to pray, and salutest God with holy meditations, devotions, and
prayers, but afterward thou art no sooner gone out of the church or oratory,
but him whom with thy mouth thou have praised, thou prouokest with a thousand
injuries, and dishonourest him with thy works. Take therefore from hence
forwards, no small care, but rather employ all thy study and endeavor, that
when thou prayest with thy mouth, thou may honor God also with thy heart,
and works of piety, whereby thy prayer may be made good. For as holy TOBIE
witnesses: Prayer is good, when it is accompanied with fasting and alms
deeds: Wherefore S. Francis, not only does exhort the brethren and sisters of
this order, to hear daily Mass, and to pray there with all reverence and
devotion, but also that they should, at the least, in their monthly
assemblies, give something in alms, for the relief of the poor, but
specially of the brethren and sisters, if any of them be in necessity and want.

ARTICLE II. And every month, let them Assemble.
ALTHOUGH, as I have said before, that these monthly assemblies and meetings,
cannot for diverse reasons be now made here so publicly, as in the rule is
here set down; yet notwithstanding, I would entreat, and with all fatherly
love, exhort every one to observe, as carefully, to the uttermost of their
power, what they may conveniently, as if they were present at those public
assemblies. And therefore, not only to hear Mass daily, as the rule
requires, that they should, if they may conveniently, but also where two or
three do remain in a house together, to assemble themselves once every
month, when they may most conveniently, to perform as much as lies in them,
of what is here ordained, both for the good of themselves, and of the whole
congregation, knowing that their prayers shall be sooner heard, and they
assembled together, obtain that, which one alone should not, according to
that saying of S. HIEROM. It is impossible that the prayers of many should not
be heard: having the promise of our Savior for it saying, If two of you shall
consent upon earth of any thing vvhotsoeuer you shall demand, it shall be
performed unto them by my Father which is in heaven. Wherefore all those
prayers, which this little assembly shall make, without all doubt, will be very
effectual, and most meritorious, whether they be made for the comfort of the
living, or of the souls of the brethren departed, or for any other necessary
occasion.

And this prayer which they make for the necessity and comfort of the
brethren, is a spiritual alms: That prayer also is very acceptable before God,
when through their fraternal charity, they pray for the other brethren and
sisters. For as holy S. CHRISOST. says: To pray for our selves, necessity
constrains us thereunto, but to pray for others, fraternal charity exhorts
us; that prayer is more sweet and pleasing unto God, which is not forced by
necessity, but fraternal charity commends. S, GREGORY in like sort, says
that whosoever goes about and endeavors to make intercession for others,
does rather by charity give his voice and suffrage unto himself, and
deserves so much the sooner to be^ heard for himself, how much the more
devoutly he prays for others: Wherefore though it should so happen (as many
times it may) that any of the brethren and sisters should live alone without
any of their own company and congregation with them, yet as they are all
desirous to be partakers both in this life, and after of the suffrages and
prayers of the rest of the brethren and sisters, so they ought, if they have
means, and can conveniently both pray themselves, and cause a Mass to be
said every month, for the comfort of themselves, and the rest of the order,
both living and dead.

ARTICLE III. Let every one give a penny of usual money, etc.
S. FRANCIS having exhorted the brethren and sisters, unto the often freque^ting
of the Sacrifice of the Mass; and having declared the reverence and devotion
that they ought to have there, to the intent, that their prayers should be more
pleasing unto God, does (after their spiritual alms, which in their monthly
assembly, they should bestow both upon the living and dead) here exhort the^
unto corporal alms also, saying: Let every one give a penny. S. FRANCIS
knowing, that it is not so much the greatness of the gift, as the goodwill of
the giver, which God does most regard: does not bind any one to give more the^
what his estate may well bear: and though he ordained that this third rule
as well for the poor, as for the rich, yet he did presuppose, that there would
be none but such as would give every month a penny, at the least, leaving
the others of greater ability, to give according to their devotion.

In the Primitive Church, liberallitie did so flourish, and waxed so strong
towordes the poor, that it seemed not sufficient unto any Christian, if he
gave in alms only, what he could well spare, unless he bestowed also even of
those things which were partly necessary for the sustenance of his own life.
And for this cause, the inhabitants of Achaia and Macedonia were highly
commended by S. PAVLE, which being very poor themselves, yet notwithstanding,
did above their power and substance, comfort the poor, giving for Gods sake,
such things as were most needful for their own mainetenance, beseeching the
Apostles with many tears, that they ^ would vouchsafe to accept of them, and
bestow it as they should think good; Wherefore, that alms cannot but be most
grateful unto God, which is given with so pious and devout a mind, which thing
the Prophet ABDIAS well considering, his piety and liberallities, were so
great, that he did run into great debt himself, to relieve the necessity
of the Prophets, which were in his time; and though God suffered his wife,
after his death to be for a while so vexed for his debt, that the creditors
ran to take away her son to sell him: yet God to show how ready he is to
relieve and comfort such as are in distress for his sake, sent unto her the
Prophet ELIZEVS, which by the power of God, did so multiple a little oil,
which she had, that therwithall she paid her debts, and lived her her self
and her son with the rest.

Although this notable charity of the Prophet, was so pleasing and acceptable
before God, that even in this present life, he rewarded his posterity for it:
yet notwithstanding, S. FRANCIS would not demand here any great alms, to the
intent that as in all other things of this rule, he desires nothing, but what
with alacrity and all facility thou may perform; so here in like sort,
he requesteth now but a penny, which the poorest may easily give once in a
month. And for as much as he did see, according to the saying of the Apostle,
That iniquity did abound, and charity grew cold* The more to stir up the
brethren and sisters to charity and alms giving, did show how their alms
should be bestowed, and by whom, that is, the Priest which says the Mass, by
the advice of the Minister, which oftentimes might happen not to be a Priest
(as first of all the Minister of the order it self was not) but only a Lawyer
called Master BARTHOLOMEVVE, which leaving foreign causes, and the vanity of
the world, was carried with so great a spirit, and love to God, that S. FRANCIS
ordained him, the first minister: and considering that the lips of the
Priests do conserve wisdom, he would that the Priests which said the Mass,
which was most likely to be their Ghostly Father, should (knowing best their
necessity) with the adiuse of the minister, distribute their alms, to the
greatest benefits of their souls.

And for as much as charity begins with it self, therefore chief
consideration ought to be had, to the relief of their own brethren and
sisters, oppressed with poverty or sickness: which amongst many consolations,
which this holy order does yield, this is one of the least, that what
adversity soever, should by Gods holy permission, fall unto the^, that the rest
of their brethren, are bound to have a special care, to relieve such as remain
in the order. If the Emperor Octauian did put so little trust in his wealth,
that he caused his daughter to learn some art, whereby to live, saying that
he might fall himself into poverty* what assurance then have others of meaner
estate, in this uncertain world? wherefore S. FRAVNCIS (to take away al fear
of this extreme want, that the Brethren and Sisters, might with greater
fervor serve God) did prouidently ordeyne, that out of this common alms, the
necessities of them should be relieved. And for the better enabling of the
brethren to do this charitable deed, commands in the second chapter of this
rule, that none should be admitted, but such as were either out of debt, or had
sufficient to discharge it: and toward the latter end of the rule, he
ordains in like sort, that if any should be faulty, in spending their goods
riotuously, or commit any other notorious and manifest faults, and after thrice
admonition, remain incorrigible and disobedient; they are to be cast out of
the company, by the visitor, with the advice of the Minister, and some
discreet brethren, that the good and virtuous brethren may be the more
honored, and better provided for.

And though S. FRANCIS, his desire was, that they should have a special care of
their own Brethren and Sisters, both in health and sickness, and after their
death, appoynting this foresaid alms, to serve for them, in every one of these
degrees: yet knowing, what infinite merit, and exceeding great profit,
proceeds from almes-giuing, declares that neither the Church, where the
Mass is said, or the common poor persons, should be forgotten, but each to
have their part, imitating therein (as in all other actions) the example of our
Savior Jesus Christ, which did chiesely recommend unto us always, that we
should be merciful and pitiful unto the poor: Whereof all the Evangelists
have abundantly written, but for breuitis sake, I will only set down, what
S. LVKE has written briefly, of the commendations of this work: Luc. 6.
He that has two coats, let him give one of them to him which has none,
etc. Be you merciful, as your father is pitiful, Luc. 10.
and again, Give and it shall be given unto you: And in the parable of him
which descends from Jerusalem unto Jericho: he did highly commend this
virtue. He fed also with five loaves, the hungry multitude, and exhorting to
alms deeds said: Sell all that thou have, and give alms, and you shall have
treasure in heaven: And in the 16. Chapter, Get you friends by the Mamon of
iniquity. Also be brought in the history of the rich Glutton, which not
showing mercy to the poor LAZARE, was buried in hell, and unto him which
asked, Luc. 16
what he should do to get heaven, he said, Go, sell all that thou have, and
give unto the poor: Luc. 15
He praised ZACHEVS saying, that he was the son of ABRAHAM, for that he gave
alms. To conclude, Christ always shows mercy to the poor, to the blind,
Luc. 19
to the leapers, to the sick and weak, to exhort us unto this virtue of
charity, not only by words, but also by his works themselves; wherefore if
there were no other argument or reason to persuade a man to exercise this
charity toward the poor and needy, but only so many and so great
testimonies alleged here, of the Son of God, both by word and deed it were
sufficient, firmly to engraffe in our minds forever, this notable and
profitable virtue, to see that he was cast into hell, which said, I have not
where to put my goods and fruits: when as there were many poor in the world
which wanted.

Although most commonly there is nothing which does more move, then the
examples which are set daily before our eyes, in so much that it is an
ancient and common saying, that, According to the kings example, the whole
world does compose it self: yet now in these our lamentable times, men's hearts
are so hardened, and they so prone to all kind of vice, that an evil example,
is as it were a law unto all men, but if it tend unto virtue, few will follow
it, but look only unto their private profit and commodity: wherefore the
more to draw the hearts of men unto charity, in alms giving, I will endeavor
to set down the private profit and utility, which redoundeth unto al men
from it.

The first commodity therefore is, that alms does after a certain manner,
make God himself debtor, and as it were servant unto the Almes-giuer, as may
be plainly gathered, out of these two testimonies of the wise man: if we
join one with another: Pro. 19.
The one is that, He which uses mercy unto the poor, lends unto God: Pro.
22
The other is, He which borrows, is servant of the lender. If this be true,
it follows then well, that God remains, as it were debtor and servant of
him which gives alms. For that this person, by this deed of charity,
lends unto God: What is there I beseech you, that can be worthy of greater
estimation, then to have God his debtor? Or what can be more excellent, or
better to be desired, then to have in our power, the means to obtain the
mercy of God, that thereby we may have abundance of his mercy? without all
doubt, the almes-giuer has this means in his own hands, seeing that out
Lord says, Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.

And besides this profit, there remains another more principal and chief
benefit, that is, to get thereby the pardon and remission of their sins. For
SOLOMON says: Eccl. 3
Even as water puts out fire, so does alms extinguish sin, and in the
Proverbs, A secret and hidden present, Prou. 21
does extinguish wrath, and a gift in the bosom, the greatest indignation.
And TOBIAS, alms delivers from all sin. DANIEL also said unto the King
NABVCHODONOZER, Redeem thy sin with alms: Dan. 4
And if that infidel and Ethnicke, had power to be saved, if he would have
received and accepted of the Counsel of the Prophet (how much more then may a
Christian satisfy for his sins, and be saved, by distributing by alms, his
well gotten goods.

It is a common saying, that he loses his oil, and his work, that goes
about a thing not likely to be brought to pass: so may we say, that he
loses his work and his oil, which lifts up his hands to God, that he
would remit and pardon his sins, if he shut his hands from giving alms to
the poor. And this is it which our Lord would insinuate, when he says: That
the Piiests did eat the sins of the people. Osa. 4,
For that the Priests lived upon the alms which the people did give, for the
extirpation and washing away of their sins, which was done by their alms.

Moreover, not only this virtue of remission of sins, proceeds from alms,
but also it enricheth the giver with new merits, for this payment is so
plentiful, rich, and abundant, that it is not only sufficient to pay and
make satisfaction for sins paste, but is of power also, and able to enrich
the giver, for hereafter: And the reason thereof is, for that this work of
mercy, specially when any one gives, more for GODS sake then otherwise he
were able to spare, of this part, wherein it is penal and painful, it is
satisfactorie, and makes perfect satisfaction. And because it is done in
charity, it is meritorious, and so of the one side, it satisfies the debt,
and on the other part, it does augment and increase, what the giver
possesses: both these benefits are plainly showed in the deeds of the the
Prophet ELIZEVS, which he did unto the widow of the Prophet ABDIAS: Whereof I
made mention, 4, Rog. 4
a little before, which giving more then he could well spare, to supply the
wants of the other poor Prophets, dyed in great debt, but his charity and
alms, were so pleasing unto God, that through his great goodness, and
fatherly providence, he did send his Prophet ELIZEVS, which did so multiply
that little oil, which the poor widow had left, in such sort, that not
only she paid therewith her husbands debts, but lived afterward with the
rest which remained; even so although thy soul be poor and need^e: yet if it
want not good will, and have the oil of mercy, to give alms, and will use
that industry, which that poor widow did, in shutting the doors close, and
pouring in part of that little oil, in the empty vessel, that is, amongst the
poor, empty, and void of comfort and consolation: shut the door close, that
is, do thy alms at least in thy intention, so hidden and secretly that thy
left hand, may not know what thy right hand does: hold it for certain, and
undoubtedly, that the fruits and merits of this alms, shall be so increased
and multiplied, that it will not only be sufficient to pay all the debts of thy
sins past, but also to enrich thee hereafter, with new merits; which the
Psalmist does show most manifestly, saying: He desperse^ he gave unto the
poor, and his justice remains world without end.

The Apostle compares Alms, unto seed which is sown, when he says, He
which sows sparingly, 1. Cor. 9
reapeth and moovveth also niggardly, and of the other side: He which sows
plentifully, abundantly shall reap. He which sows, although at the first
sight, it seems that he loses his seed: yet not withstanding looking well
into the matter, he finds it the chief means to multiply it; for as our
Savior says, Unless a grain of corn falling into the earth be mortified,
it remains it self alone: but if falling into the earth, Ioh. 12
it be dead, it brings forth much fruit: eue^ so, what might be bestowed in
alms, if it be kept up, it multiplieth not, but if it be cast into the earth,
that is cast unto the poor; which like unto the earth are trodden under foot,
it brings forth great fruit.

What great fruit I pray thee, or gain can be found then this? thou give
the earth, and find heaven; thou impartest to the poor, the bread of men,
and the bread of Angels, is yielded unto thee for it: thou bestowest a cup of
cold water, and find the water of life: to conclude, thou give that which
thou can not carry away with thee: and there is bestowed on thee, that which
no man can take away from thee: wherefore will thou not then transpo^te thy
goods to take place, where thou shall dwell for ever. But seeing that the whole
discourse of the scripture, is replenished either with notable exhortations
unto alms deeds, I am as it were enforced to add thse other special
benefits following, to the intent, that every one which reads them, may take
some one or other of those which he likes, and shall find most fitting for
his estate and condition, thereby either to encourage him in that he has
already begun, or to move him to make amends here after, for that which he has
hitherto neglected; therefore I know, there is not any one, scantly so bad, but
that he would be willing to have Gods help in his tribulations; truly there
are few means which are better, for the obtaining thereof, then Almes-deedes.
For seeing that Christ him self says, Luck. 6
That what measure you shall meat unto others, shall be measured unto you
again. It is therefore most just, that as a merciful man did succor the poor
and needy, in their necessities and distresses, that God should aid, help
and assist him in his own, as he did help others, for the love of God, in
their great extreamities. DAVID did insinuate as much unto us, when he reckoned
up, so many and so great blessings as shall come unto the merciful man, saying:
Psalm. 40
Blessed is he which understands the needy and poor, in the evil day our
Lord will deliver him: our Lord will keep him and give li^e unto him, and will
make him blessed on earth, and vvil not deliver him into the hands of his
enemies.

The second good, is that the almes-giuer shall he heard of God: For even as
he has heard the voice of the poor; so will Almighty God apply his ears to
hear his prayers, and humble requests: therefore ESAIAS after he had exhorted
unto almes-giuing and praised alms, he presently added, Then shall he cry, and
I will hear him: Esai 58
and on the contrary side, he which will not hear the poor, nether shall he be
heard of God, Prove. 21.
as SOLOMON witnesses, saying, He which shuts his ears to the cry of the
poor, he shall call and not be heard. But above al these things aforesaid, thou
ought chiefly to cast thy eyes upon this, that our Savior promises, unto
the charitable and merciful persons, the life everlasting: for in the last day,
when every one shall receive the reward for all the deeds of his forepassed
life, our Lord will say unto them: Come ye blessed of my father, receive the
kingdom prepared for you, from the beginning of the world.

Put therefore into one balance, al those profits and benefits, which do
accord unto thee, and into the other, all the temporal things which thou
loosest, by giving alms; and duly considering, which of these are of greatest
value; those which thou give, or those which thou receauest, and thou shall
find that thou gainest more then thou have lost: yea moreover, for thy greater
comfort and encouragement, I will show unto thee plainly, that not only thou
do gain these spiritual benefits, which I have rehearsed, but also that
thou loosest no temporal thing by it; and I will do it so much the rather, for
that though every one desires greatly to gain, yet many are of that
condition, that they will not in the mean time loose any thing for it. Behold
therefore, I beseech you, that such is the goodness of God toward those
which are pitiful, and Almes-giuers, that he does not only reward them for
it, in the life to come, but does also bestow on them here for their charity,
infinite benefits. Read Deutronomie, and you shall find there innumerable
benedictions, Deuteronomy. 28. prou. 3.
which our Lord distributeth unto the Almes-giuers. Moreover hear SOLOMON
saying: Honor God of the first fruits of al thy goods, and thy Barnes shall be
filled with fruitfulness, and thy vvine-presses shall ouer-flovv with wine:
And again: He which gives unto the poor, shall not want, but whosoever
despises their prayer and petition, shall sustain pennurie and want. Also S,
1. Tim. 1.
PAVL says unto TIMOTHY, that piety is profitable unto all things, having
promise of the life that now is, and of that to come. And our Savior himself
does with one accord confirm the same, which all those aforesaid did
testify saying, Give, Luc. 6.
and it shall be given unto you, that is, give temporal things, for the love of
God, and you shall receive here his grace, and plenty, and afterward life
everlasting. This does clearly and plainly appear, in that Widow, which
giving first to the Prophet ELI. a cake of that little meal, which she had
left, God did so reward her for it, even in her temporal goods, that from
thencefoorth she neither wanted meal or oils The like happened unto TOBIE,
whom our Lord enriched, Tob. 11.
for his exceeding charity.

Now would I willingly ask of thee, do thou believe these testimonies of
the Scripture or no. If thou do not believe them, thou art no christian:
seeing that thou beleeuest not, and give not credit unto the words of
Christ: if thou say that thou beleeuest, then of necessity, thou must
confess that when thou give alms, thou suffer no loss of thy temporal
goods, but art rather made more rich thereby, both in thy spiritual goods, and
in thy temporal also: And although thou should not find any way to persuade
thee thereunto, yet notwithstanding, thou ought firmly and steadfastly to
believe it, seeing that God has said it, that he which shall deal liberally
with the poor, shall never be oppressed with necessity, and need himself:

If thou therefore beleeuest it to be so, why art thou then so sparing and
niggardly in giving alms, when thy faith tells thee, that in distributing
it, the same will enrich thee more and more? There is no way to excuse thy
self, for if thou turnest thy eyes to spiritual goods, many are promised unto
thee here, if thou look into temporal, faith does render thee certain and
secure, that thou shall never want them: Wherefore, if thou should say that
thou do not see, how Almes-giuing should augmente thy goods and substance,
neither do thou see how God is three and one: it is he which has said
both, and therefore thou ought firmly to believe: thou must therefore
either deny thy faith, or else freely grant, which is my drift, that the
almes-giuer, merely for Gods sake, shall never want necessaries, that is,
those things which are necessary, for body and soul. Did holy DANIEL in the
Lions den want? If the birds of the air, which know not God, do not want,
how should true Christians then be forgotten? how should Christ forget them,
which feeds himself being hungry? For he does acknowledge that which thou
do unto one of the least of his, thou do it unto himself: how will he
deny thee earthly goods, which grants liberally heavenly treasures? how
will he refuse to give thee a crust of bread, or a little water, which powered
out his precious blood and life for thee? Wherefore all this considered, how
comes it to pass, that thou enjoying the name of a Christian, do not
trust and believe the words of Christ? Confess therefore the truth, say that
thou have no excuse, and show plainly that it is thy miserable covetousness,
which is cause thereof. But there are many Christians now, in this our
uncharitable age, which will not depart from their goods, until such time as
they see that death is so near at hand, that of force they must leave them,
and then such as before would not, neither for the love of God, or fear of
displeasure, give during their life any small alms, now death, sometimes
causes them to leave very much to be given for them. But it falls out many
times, by the just judgment of God, that such as had so little care to do
themselves good in their life, their friends have left any thing for them when
they are dead, whereby they are deprived of great merit, and blessedness,
which they might have been assured of, if they would have bestowed their alms
themselves: for that to conclude with SALOMONS testimony: He which pittieth
and relieueth the poor, shall be saved. O how excellent and great a reward
does he promise for so small a gift: worthily therefore did S. FRANCIS
ordain, that the brethren and sisters, should give themselves every month
something, though it were but a penny.

ARTICLE IIII. Let them procure some Religious, etc.
OUR holy Patron S. FRANCIS, endeavoring to heap upon his children, all the
happiness that may be, having in this chapter ordained, that they should (to
heap up bliss and happiness, both in this life, and in the other to come)
give every month some alms, whereby they may reap and enjoy all those
blessings, benefits, and vtilities before mentioned. Now considering that our
Savior himself says, Blessed are they which hear the word of God and
keep it; sets down here: that the brethren and sisters should endeavor to
attain unto this blessedness also; procuring every month, if they may
conveniently, some religious person to Preach unto the^ the word of God, which
is the beginning and root of blessedness: for that therein is contained the
remedies of all spiritual evils, and the inducement to all virtues, and
spiritual perfection, and therefore S. FRANCIS desires, that the exhortations
which should be then made, might be to exhort them to Penance, which is both
a means to preserve from all evils, and also to make amends and satisfy for
what is past, and for that the works of mercy do greatly help thereunto, S.
FRANCIS wishes, that they should by those exhortations, be drawn to exercise
daily the works of mercy, for that it is not enough to attain unto the
heavenly bliss, to hear the word of God, and to believe, unless thou do
exercise thy self also in good works. Therefore S JOHN in the Apocalypse,
when he says, Apoc. 1.
Blessed is he which hears and reads, the words of this Prophecy: he
adds presently, and keeps those things which are written herein. Iam. 1.
S. JAMES therefore says, Be you doers of the word, and not hearers only,
deceauing your selves: And S. PAVL also says in like sort, that not only the
hearers of the word, but the doers thereof shall be justified.

Wherefore S. FRANCIS, to the intent, that by hearing the word of God
attentively, they may be the more moved to put it in execution, ordeyneth,
that the Brethren and sisters thould be c^reful to keep silence, vvhilest the
word of God is preached. Insinuating by this careful silence, in hearing, the
prepared mind, that they should have to make their benefit thereof, and
ready to follow what they have heard.

Wherefore though the monthly public assemblies, cannot in this our poor
country be now made; yet I desire that every one (as opportunity serves)
should do what he might conveniently: so now also, though these monthly
exhortations to Penance, and to the works of mercy cannot conveniently be
had: yet to the intent that the brethren and sisters, may be the more mindful,
of the holy estate of Penance, which they have taken upon them, I do most
earnestly desire them, that if they cannot conveniently get some exhortation to
be made thereof every month, that they will be careful to read at these
usual times, some devout treatise of Penance, or of good works, which if they
want, I hope they will not think their time lost, to read some one of these
little exhortations of Penance, set down here in the beginning, or some other
of these discourses and exhortations, to good works, which I have hear set
down the more at large for that purpose, in this declaration of the rule.

And let them be attentive unto Prayer unless, etc.
FORASMVCH as S. FRANCIS, though he found in himself such extraordinary
sweetness and comfort in prayer, that his only desire was to give himself
wholly thereunto: yet seeing by divine revelation, he was informed that God had
not called him and his brethren for the good of themselves only, but for the
good of many: Therefore the instruction which he had received for himself,
the selfsame, does he here give unto others, whom though he does exhort to
be intentive to private prayer, and his common office, according to his
calling, that is, either the Breuiarie, our Ladies Mattins, or the Praer
nosters, set down in the ^ule, yet considering that every good thing, how
much the more common it is, is so much the better for the doer, does here,
preferring the common good of the fraternity, before every man's private
devotion, by this word, unless, excuse and exempt them from that which before
he had bound them unto, to employ themselves when need requires, for the whole
Congregation.

Of the sick Brethren, and them who are deseased.
But when it happens, any of the Brethren to be sick, let the Ministers be
bound, either by themselves, or by an other, or others, to visit the sick
once in a week (if the sick person do cause the same to be notified unto
them) inducing him carefully to receive the Sacrament of Penance, as they shall
think better, or more efficatious to be expedient, ministering unto him
necessaries out of the common goods; and if the sick person, shall pass out of
this present life, let warning be given unto the Brethren and Sisters then in
the place where he shall happen to dye that they may be careful to be
personally present at the funeralles of the dead; from whence let them not
depart, until all the office be ended, and the body buried: we will that the
like shall be observed about the sick sisters, and such of them as shall depart
this life. Moreover, within eight days immediately following, after the
departure of the said party buried, let every one of the said brethren and
sisters, say for his soul: a Priest one Mass, such as can say the Psalter,
50. Psalms, and the unlearned so many Pater nosters, and let them add,
Requiem eternam in the end of every one: and afterward, within the year,
let them cause three Masses to be said for the comfort of the Brethren and
Sisters, as well living as dead. but they who can read the Psalter, let them
say it, and the others, let the^ not omit to say 105. Pater nosters, adding
Requiem eternum, at the end of each one.

EVEN as the law of nature does forbid thee to do unto another, what thou
would be loath he should do unto thee; so by the same law, the self same
thing that thou desire that others should employ themselves in for thee: the
like of necessity must thou be willing to do for them, if thou can
conuenie^tly: wherefore if thou were sick, thou would be glad and willing
that others should visit and relieve thee; therefore S. FRANCIS, out of a
special care that he had of the sick, adds unto the law of nature, his
commandment; and ordayneth in this chapter, that the Ministers must have a
special care, that the sick Brethren and sisters, be visited and relieved;
herein showing himself, as in all other actions, a perfect imitator, and
follower of Christ our Savior, who had so great a care of the sick, that when
he sent his disciples abroad to preach, he commanded them to have a special
care of the sick, and to cure and heal those whom they found in the cities
where they preached. And what he commanded them to do, the selfsame he did
himself, teaching them both by deed and word. When he went to Jerusalem in
the Feast day, the first thing which he did, he came to the Ponde of Bethsaida
(where the sheep were washed, that were to be sacrificed) and cured him which
had been tormented with a grievous infirmity, for the space of 38. years: So
at another place, when he had ended his se^mon, he went to visit a sick
woman, which had a cruel Feauour (which was mother of SIMON) whom he restored
to her accustomed health, and magnified his doctri^e, by his pious works,
fulfilling himself, what he had taught others to do.

MARTHA and MARY, having their brother LAZARUS sick at home, John. 11.
sent word unto our Savior thereof, that he whom he loved was sick: They
went not themselves to him, as REGALVS the little king, the Centurian, the
Cananean, and others did, which were but Nouices, and new beginners in the
service of God; but these two sisters being ancient servants, and well
instructed by Christ himself, did know right well that our Lord was better
pleased, that they should serve the sick, and minister unto him al things
necessary, then leaving this undone, to come themselves, and that thereby,
they did win more his love, then they should have done by coming: Wherefore
the Ecclesiasticke says, Let it not grieve or repent thee, to visit the
sick, for hereby, thou shall be more confirmed in love.

This work of mercy, does greatly please him truly, which seeing us infirm,
miserable, and sick, did himself visit us from above, and with a reddie and
joyful mind, did exercise himself this office, for he both did give himself
to visit the si^ke: and also when the lame, the blind, the Paraliticke, and
many others came unto him, he cured and healed all. S. JAMES says. This is a
clean and immaculate religion, before God, to visit the Pupilles and
widows: Blessed JOB says: Visiting thy like, thou shall not offend: For S.
AUGUSTINE says: He which willingly practices the works of mercy, shall
more easily resist sin. And if it be a work of mercy, to feed the
hungry, and cloth the naked; how much more is it then to visit the sick,
and help him, whereby thou do exercise all the works of mercy together.

The health of body, is the chiefest and most excellent good amongst al
temporal things, wherefore he which is deprived of his health, wants the
greatest good; therefore he uses greater mercy, which visits the sick,
then he which otherwise feeds the hungry: for with good health. all other
bodily evils, are more easily tolerated; and without it, what is the greatest
or richest man's life, but misery: when thou see therefore, any sick person,
let thy piety (for the love of him which had so great compassion upon the
sick) be such, that thou may say with S. PAVLE: Who is infirm, and I not
sick, as who should say none; for otherwise, if thy heart be hardened against
them, though thou should have so great faith, as to translate mountains,
offending against charity, thy faith would profit thee little. And seeing
that Christ had so great a care of the sick, if thou will not follow him in
the like, thou art not worthy to be any of his, for that charity truly does
not shine clearer, and show it self more perfectly, then in the visitation and
care of the sick: because amongst all the miseries of the world, as hungar,
thirst, heat and cold, pennury and wearisomnesse* there is none that is
worthy of more commisseration, pity, and help, then the sick person:
Whereupon, a certain devout and learned Religious person said, that he did
more merit in one day, which did help, aid, and serve the sick person, then
he which fasted a whole year: yea God does reward them here also temporally:
whereof we have example in holy DAVID, which helping that poor sick
Egyptian, of him he understood, where the Analithites were, and obtained
victory, and he which was cruel toward the sick person, for reward of
his cruelty, lost the victory, and was taken captive.

How great merit it brings to a man after this life, may plainly be seen by
this only, that our Lord will reproach unto the damned, that he was sick, and
they did not visit him, and those which have had care of them, he will reward
them with his heavenly kingdom.

ARTICLE II. Let the Ministers be bound by themselves, or by another, or
others, to visit the sick.
SO great was the care that S. FRANCIS had, that the sick should be
comforted, both spiritually and corporally, that if the occasions of the
Ministers were such, that they might be lawfully excused, from not going
themselves, yet would he not, that the sick should be unvisited: wherefore he
declares here, that they are bound (if the sick party gives them notice) to
send some other in their place.

But specially, if the Minister be not a Priest, as oftentimes it may happen,
then ought he to send some other Priest, for we cannot think that S. FRANCIS
would have so great care of the sick body, and forget the sick soul; whose
sins are oftentimes, cause of the infirmities which come unto the body,
which caused the Disciples of our Savior, John. 9.
seeing the poor man which was blind from his nativity, to say unto him,
Master, who was it that sinned, either this man, or his Parents, that he
should be borne blind? And though our Savior did answer, that neither his,
or his Parents sins, were cause of his infirmity: yet did not he reprehend
them, as being in an error, to think that sins were cause of sickness,
which no doubt, but that he would have done, if it had not been so, and
therefore did rather confirm it to be oftentimes true: wherefore it has been
always a laudable constitution and order, ordained by an ancient council,
that the Physician (at the least, if he find the party to be in any danger)
ought not to administer any corporal Ppysicke, until such time as he has
admonished him to provide for the soul, by cleansing it from sin, which is
oftentimes cause of the sickness: wherefore, it were in vain to go about to
take away the effect, as long as the cause remains. Therefore S. FRANCIS,
upon just grounds ordains here, that the Minister himself, or some other
Priest, visiting the sick, ought first to induce him carefully to receive the
Sacrament of Penance. For though it may be well presupposed, that the party
living in so holy a Congregation, will be careful to preserve himself, or at
least, to make satisfaction for his great offenses, yet considering, that so
strict is the judgment of God, and so severe in punishing the least offenses:
and seeing that sickness is a messenger of death; now ought he to be
careful to make some satisfaction, and be sorrowful for the very least
offenses; for that a great sin, as theft, murder, rapine, etc. does not so
soon draw and lead us into hell, as others which seem to be less, do: for
the heynousnesse of a great offense, does so terrify us, that we come, soon
to the knowledge thereof; whereby it comes to pass, that we do presently
penance for it: But the sins of lesser note, into which we fall daily, and
whereunto for that we think the^ to be small, we take no regard: these I say
are they, which with a swift course, make us run into etenall perdition:
Murmuration, detractation, or scoffing, and secret whispering, by taking away,
the good fame and name of our neighbors, which are now so commonly used in
ordinary talk, that we little regarding such small matters (as we take them
to be) do no penance for them, and so by little and little, we run headlong
into hell.

Wherefore, God of his infinite goodness, and no less desire of the salvation
of such as serve him, does seldom punish their sin with sudden death, but
as a token of his love toward them, does send some lingering sicknesses,
thereby to bring them both to the knowledge of themselves, and of God in like
sort, and to have recourse unto him, for mercy and grace; whereof we have
manifest examples in the holy Scripture: for NABVCHODONOZOR the King of
Babylon, a cruel tyrant and persecutor, being stricken by the hand of God with
great pains and sicknesses, himself did penance, and in the end was saved
(as holy S. AUGUSTINE says) So King EZECHIAS in his affliction and sickness,
S. August
turned unto God, and wept bitterly.

God sends afflictions and sickness also unto his friends, whom he loves
dearly: Behold, LAZARUS was not exempted from sickness, though so dearly
beloved of CHRIST, that it was the only name which his sisters did give him
when they sent CHRIST word of his sickness saying, Behold whom thou love
is sick: our Savior himself did testify no less, speaking unto his
disciples, saying: Our friend LAZARUS sleeps. Wherefore seeing that we firmly
believe, that such is the love of God, toward his friends, that he sends
nothing unto them, but what he knows to be for their good: we may therefore
plainly see, that sickness is very profitable, unto the true friends of God,
for it purges the soul from evil customs and manners, as it were from evil
humors. SOLOMON says. Ioh. 17.
Hatred of the wound vvasheth away the evil: For even as in sickness, evil
humors are wasted and consumed in such sort, that the infirmity being past,
a man comes to better health: so in like sort, sickness of the body,
cleanses and purges the humors of sin, and wicked affections. But this is
to be understood, when the afflicted mind is cleansed from evil, and
enflamed with the fire of a certain heavenly desire, which is the chief end,
wherefore S. FRANCIS ordeineth, that the Ministers should so often, not only
visit the sick person, but endeavor to enduce him, to receive penance
carefully, that is, not to receive it as it were by force and constraint, but
to use all care, diligence and fervor, in the doing thereof; his heart being
inflamed (as I said) with the fire of heavenly desires.

For even as of unhard and vnshaped iron, no notable work can be made,
wherein the work man may show his cunning and skill, though he strike it with
his hammer never so often, unless the iron it self be fiery hot; even so the
cold and hardened heart, can never be polished and made shining bright, though
it be beaten with the hammer of sickness, unless it be made burning hot, with
the fire of the love of God, with which helps the Ministers, having first
endeavored, to reliue the soul of the sick person withal, then by the
commandment of S. FRANCIS, and his ordinance set down in this place; they are
to have care of his body, both living and dead; Ministering unto him (whilst
he lives) necessaries, out of the common goods.

Though S. FRANCIS does show herein, the great care that he had of the
comfort for the poor distressed sick persons, in taking such order for their
bodily relief: yet no doubt, his respect to the spiritual benefit of the
Ministers, for their pains herein, was not little, for not only are they
partakers of all the merits, mentioned both in the former Chapter, and in this
present also: but moreover here, by this particular act, and compassion on the
sick, do show herein themselves to be the true servants of Christ, and
deserve the more his favor: For as S. GREGORY says: S. Greg.
We are not otherwise made the members of our Redeemer, but by ayding and
having compassion upon our neighbors: and how much more compassion any man
has upon his Neighbors griefs: so much more favor does he merit, to find
before God. And the greater that any man is in perfection, so much more
perfectly does he compassionate the vexation and sickness of his Neighbors:
wherefore the Apostle S. PAVLE confirmed in grace and full of all perfection,
had so much compassion on other men's griefs, that he said, Who is infirm,
and I not sick with him.

Wherefore, though every one of the Brethren and Sisters, ought to have a
special care of the sick persons of their holy congregation, above others: yet
for as much as the Ministers, are chosen for their perfection and prudence, to
have care of the rest, S. FRANCIS appoynteth them, particularly to provide for
the sick brethren, out of the common goods. O prudent and fatherly care, of
our most worthy Patron, which prouidently forseeing that many times there is
no greater hinderance in the service of God, then fear of want! For though our
Savior, both in the sixth Chapter of S: MATH. and the 12. Matt. 6. Luc. 12.
of S. LVKE, does seek to take this fear away, showing what a care is had
to provide, both for the birds of the air, and flowers of the field, and
that our most loving heavenly father, whose love is great, and has power to
do what he please, knows our necessity, and therefore he promises, that if
we will first seek the kingdom of God, that al things necessary, shall be
given unto us. And that DAVID which had long experience of the goodness of
God, exhorts us to cast our care upon God, and that he will nourish us,
testifiing what he has seen himself, saying: I have been a young man, and
now am old, but yet never did I see the just forsaken, nor his seed to
seek his bread, yet notwithstanding, such is the incredultie of many, that if
they feel never so little want, insteede of having recourse, and setting their
whole heart and mind on God, from whom all goodness proceeds, they taking a
contrary course, set their affections, so to seek after temporal and worldly
maintenance, that hardly do they once apply their mind, to think on God, and
the health of their soul; Wherefore to the intent, that the brethren and
sisters of this order (which have after, a certain particular manner, dedicated
themselves unto the service of God) should not for fear of want, either in
health or sickness, be hindered in their devotions: let them know that by the
obligation of their order, the Minister is to have care that they may be
provided of necessaries, out of the common goods, of the Congregation.

But here some question may be made, from whence should arise this common goods
to be in this sort applied, seeing that in the chapter precedent, and
immediately going before, mention is made of the alms to be given monthly; it
is there declared, how it should be bestowed, whereby there seems nothing
to be left to raise any sum, to make a common purse for the relief of the
sick and needy: Truly, God fordid that any man should think so irreverently
of Saint FRANCIS, that he which had received from God such heavenly light, and
so many divine revelations from above, that he oftentimes did know and
declare the very hidden secrets, of the hearts of many, as holy S.
BONAVENTVRE does largely declare in his life; S. Bonauen: in vitae S. Fr.
should be so ignorant, as not to know that (setting Gods power aside) of
nothing, nothing can be made, or having our Savior for his instructor and
chief director, in the erecting of all his three orders, that he could so
much ouer-shoote himself, as to set down, for a principal point to be
observed, how the poor brethren and sisters should be relieved by the
Ministers, if they had nothing to relieve them withal.

Wherefore certainly S. FRANCIS, a true lover of the poor, as in the
precedent Chapter, he did set an order for their present relief; so in like
sort, he ordained, that the Minister should provide for the brethren and
sisters in sickness, did justly judge that they would not be so void of
discretion, seeing that the alms was to be given by their advise; but that it
should be so given, that continually some thing might be kept, to perform
that which is required to be done in this chapter, as well for the dead, as for
the living: for his desire was, that no less care should be had of the
brethren and sisters, after their departure, then in their life time. And
therefore he says, If the sick person pass out of this present life, let
warning be given, etc. I would with silence have passed over this place,
seeing that it is a thing which can very seldom or hardly at all be now
practiced in our country, were it not to make manifest unto thee, that such
was the provident care, of our holy Patron, in all the works of mercy,
which he ordained, that the Brethren and sisters should daily exercise, as
occasion was offered, that he did as much, if not more, regard the good and
merit, of the dooer thereof, both in this life, and after, as of him to whom
it should be done: Wherefore, as in setting down that, if the sick party
dyed, that warning should be presently given unto all the Brethren and Sisters,
then in the City or place, that they might be careful to be present at the
funeral, and not to depart from thence, until all the office be ended, and
the body buried: He greatly desired, that the poor soul of the disceased,
might presently have all comfort by their prayers, both for the multitude of
them, being all assembled together, for that intent, and also for the longenes
of the time, in that they were not to depart until the offiee be ended: and
for the feruentnesse of devotion, which the presence of the dead body would
move them unto* from whom they were not to depart, until it were buried, the
soul might the sooner be delivered, from the Pain of Purgatory.

So in like sort, no small benefits do redound unto them all, for this piety
showed unto the dead person, by their presence and assistance, at his burial:
For first it is a special means, to preserve thee from sin, engraffing in
thy mind, by thy presence, at this work of mercy, in burying the dead, the
memory of death, then which nothing is more profitable or effectual, to
preserve thee from falling into sin, as witnesses the Wiseman, saying,
Remember the last things, and thou shall never offend: Therefore S. FRANCIS [as
I said before) wills thee to be present personally at the burial of thy
brother, that seeing him laid into his grave, thou should forthwith
remember thy self to be mortal, assuring thy self, that thou art to follow
him in like manner by death, and to judgment also, according to that of the
Ecclesiasticke, saying: Be mindful of my judgment, so shall thine be also:
unto me yesterdaie, and unto thee to morrow.

This memory of death is therefore a most singular remedy, both to preserve
from sin, and to bridle the appetites of our flesh, when we do rightly
understand, by the president of the dead person, laid in the grave, before our
face, that this our body also shall be turned into wormes-meate, and ashes: It
casts cold water into the fire of our burning appetites and cools much,
and extinguisheth al our hot and inflamed concupiscences: Saint GREGORY
says, The sepulchers and graves do show what is the substance of human
flesh, and there is nothing which does more tame the vvanton desires thereof,
then that every one consider, that this which he now loves, what it vvil be
after death. The memory of death so fixed hereby in thy mind, will make thee
to contemn quickly, the vanities and deceipts of the world, and all things
that might hinder the service of God; for easil^e does be despise all
transitory things, which firmly believes, and daily thinks that he must
die, and so soon leave them. The life therefore of a wise man, is the daily
meditation of death: wherefore the Ecclesiasticke does admonish us most
notably, saying, If a man has lived many years, and has been merry and
pleasant in them all, he ought to remember the dark time, and the days of
many, which when they shall come, all that is past, will be accused and blamed
of vanity. Life seems fair, until death come to consume it, but thou must,
if thou will, besecure, expect the other part of thy time, which if thou keep
well in thy mind, thou shall never be deceived with the false lies and
vanities of this world, but rather thou will cleave unto God, and serve him
more religiously. God commanded that the feathers of the birds, which were
offered unto him in Sacrifice, should be cast into the place of ashes, to the
east side; thereby insinuating that by riches, honors, health, nobility: men
are lifted up as high as a bird with her feathers. But our Lord would have
thee cast all those things into the place of ashes* which is the grave, whereby
presently thou may see thy beginning to be no other but ashes, and from
ashes, and into ashes must return. Truly if thou would bring all thy
vanities and worldly honors, wherewith thou go puffed up, into the burying
and laying into the earth, thou would easily contemn them all, and esteem
them for nothing, and soon leave them for the good of thy soul.

Lastly, by the very deed it self, in burying the dead, thou do both
greatly merit, and shall find favor at Gods hands for it, who favors
greatly those which do exercise themselves in such works of mercy and
piety. DAVID sent unto the men of Iabes Galaad, to give them great thanks,
because they had buried the body of SAVL, saying, Blessed are you of God, 2.
Reg. 2
which have used this mercy unto our lord SAVL, and have buried him, and now
our Lord will render unto you again mercy and verity. So the holy Patriarch,
ABRAHAM and JOSEPH: TOBIAS also, which gave himself as it were, wholly to the
work of mercy, was highly in this favor of God for it. The Angel RAPHAEL
remembered this work of mercy, and praised it in him; 2. Mac. 12
Neither was Judas Machabeus worthy of less praise, in that he caused the
Jews that were slain, to be buried, and sent money to the Temple of
Jerusalem for them, to be prayed for.

In the new testament also, this work of mercy is remembered and praised. The
disciples of John Baptist are praised, because they buried honorably their
master. In like sort, Luc. 7.
they which went to bury the only son of the Widdowe of Naime, for that only
work of mercy, were made so happy, as to see both Christ, and that great
miracle which he wrought, in raising the dead to life: but above all praises
and benefits, the greatest is that, whereof our Savior himself speaks, that
for the works of mercy, which the good have done in this life, he will say
unto them at the day of judgment: Come ye blessed, Mat. 25.
receive the kingdom of heaven, which is prepared for you.

ARTICLE III. Moreover, within eight days immediately following, after the
departure of the said party buried, etc.
NO less care has S. FRANCIS, that the brethren and sisters should exercise
the works of mercy spiritual, then corporal; amongst which, knowing that
that which belongs unto the soul, is of greatest perfection, and most merit:
he does here exhort and command them to have a special care to perform, with
all diligence, this work toward the soul departed. For though by the
Privileges granted, by many supreme Pastors, unto this order; the Brethren
and sisters, are at the hour of death, not only absolved from all their
sins, but also from the very pains due unto their sins in Purgatory, as
appears in the form of Absolution, here following: which for as much as it
differs very little, from that which is set down, to be given unto them at
their first entrance, I have repeated it in Latin, as it is to be granted
unto them, at the hour of their departure.

Absolutio.
DOminus noster Jesus Christus, qui est summus Pontifex, per meritum sua
sacratissimae passionis te obsoluat, and gratiam suam tibi impartiri dignetur,
and ego authoritate ipsius and beatorum Apostoloru^, Petri and Pauli
sanctissimoru^que Pontificu^, nostro sacro ordini ab ipsis indultoru^, denique
and Ministri Generalis mihi in hac pare commissa, absoluo te primo a sententia
maioris and minoris exco^municationis, si quam incurristi, and restituo te
communioni fidelium, and Sacramentis sanctae matris Ecclesiae, si indigeas.
Item eadem authoritate: absoluo te ab omni irregularitate, suspentione and
interdicto, ab omni tra^sgressione legis diuina Regulae tuae, and statutorum
quorumcunque, nec non ab omnibus paenis tibi in Purgatorio debitis propter
culpas qua^ commisisti, in quantum claues sancta Ecclesiae se extendunt in hac
part, and in qua^tum mihi permittitur, restituo te illi innocentiae in qua
eras quando baptizatus fuisti, In nomine, etc. Et hoc, si de qua agrotas
infirmitate, morieris: si ista vice non morieris reseruo tibi plenaria^
indulgentiam tibi concessam, pro vltimo articulo mortis tuae.

Yet notwithstanding, forasmuch as the judgments of God are secret, and it is
also unknown, what hinderance the dying party himself may give unto the
grace of God, which is then offered: Therefore S. FRANCIS, for the parties
greater security, and present comfort, does bind every one of the Brethren
and Sisters, to yield him what help they may every one, according to his
calling, that is, he which is a Priest, to say a Mass for his soul; such as
can say the Psalter, 50. Psalms, or the Dirige: But they which cannot say the
Dirige of nine lessons, and which cannot read the Psalter, are to say 50.
Pater nosters, and Requiem eternam in the end of every one.

Amongst many comforts, which this holy Order does afford, truly this is
one of the principal, to be assured of help, when they stand in most need,
not being able to aid or relieve themselves: Wherefore holy IOBE speaking, as
it were in the person of the poor soul in Purgatory, in great want, and
penury of comfort, earnestly craving for help and compassion says: Have
pity on me, have pity on me, at least you which are my friends, for that
the hand of the Lord has touched me. Job. 19
In which words, the poor soul seems to say, My pains and necessities are
great, help my self I cannot, therefore, I beseech you that are my friends,
to relieve me. They which live in the world, may help themselves, and Christ
will put to his helping hand, as the words of S. PAVLE do insinuate saying:
Arise you which sleep, and Christ will illuminate you: And such as are in
hell, can neither aid themselves, or be succored by others, for that in hell
there is no redemption.

But the poor souls in Purgatory, although, being out of the state of
meriting for themselves, yet are they in the estate to be relieved by the
merits and pains of others. For that whilst they lived, they merited by their
good deeds, to be comforted after their departure.

Secondly, they dying in charity, are made partakers, of all the good works
which are done: For as holy DAVID says: I am partaker of all those which
fear thee, and keep thy commandment; so are the souls in Purgatory, being
of the communion of Saints, are capable of the graces and helps, which
proceeds from Christ, the chief head thereof; for even as in a natural body
the united members receive nouriture and strength, from the head; so likewise,
in the spiritual body, as S. PAVLE declares most notably: Wherefore being
in the way of help, the more to move all men by compassion to be drawn
thereunto, he shows the severity of the Judge, and greatness of their pain,
saying, that the hand of our Lord has touched them. The Apostle S. PAVL
declaring, how severe the hand of God is, says, It is a horible and dreadful
thing to fall into the hands of the living God, Therefore the afflicted soul,
desiring soon to be delivered, from those intolerable torments, cries out
with great fervor, have pity on me, at least you which are my friends, for
though the whole world, besides do forget me, they do but obse^ue the common
custom (which is, out of sight, out of mind:) but my only trust and
confidence, is in you my dear friends: Though all the souls in Purgatory,
do and may lawfully demand this help at the hands of their friends, yet
after a more particular manner, may the souls of the brethten and sisters of
this order, demand this aid at the hands of the rest of their congregation
living; by reason that many ways they are bound to yield them this comfort.
For first, if the Father and mother be bound to help their children, much more
the spiritual brethren, by the commandment of S. Francis, are bound to love
and cherish, each other.

Secondly, by the right of confraternity, whereby all Religious persons are
bound to aid their brethren, but more particularly, are the brethren and
sisters of this Congregation, obliged by their special precept of the Rule, set
down in this present Chapter, as you have heard, to yield all comfort, unto
the souls of their brethren and sisters: and show themselves to be true
friends, which according as the Scripture witnesses, owes always: He which
is a true friend, lou^ at al times: Eccle 6
He says at all times, for that a true friend helps his friend in his life
time by inducing him to do well, as by the whole discourse of this Rule every
one is bound, according to his calling and power. In his death also,
admonishing him to a happy end by Penance, as the beginning of the Chapter
does bind the Ministers to do, when they visit the sick brethren or
sisters, after his death by saying, within eight days those foresaid
suffrages, for his soul.

ARTICLE IIII. And afterward within the year, let them cause three Masses to
be celebrated, for the comfort of the Brethren and sisters, as well living as
dead.
SVch is the excellency and virtue of Prayer, that it is, and always has
been, the singular refuge, whereunto all holy men, and servants of God, had
recourse unto, for aid, comfort, and deliverance, in all their necessities:
thereby pacifying Gods wrath, opening the heavens, commanding both Sun and
Moon. Tying up the firmament from yielding rain, cha^^ng away the Devils,
curing all diseases, raising the dead, making the barren to be fertile. Luc. 1.
Getting grace, not only for themselves, but also for others* as S. STEVEN did
for S. PAVLE: Act. 7. S. Aug. sermon. 2. S. Steph.
as S. AUGUSTINE says: of S. STEVEN* If STEVEN had not prayed, the Church had
not had PAVLE. And briefly to conclude, they have obtained by it, not only all
good, both spiritual and corporal, but also to be delivered from all evil:
for by the prayer of the Church. S; PETER was delivered out of HEROD'S prison:
Act. 12. Ecc. 7, 1.
Wherefore rightly may we apply thereunto that sentence of the Ecclesiasticus,
saying: All goodness came unto me, together with it: Therefore our most
prudent and provident Patron, foreseeing that the Brothers and Sisters,
dispearsed into many places and countries, may stand in need, all in
general, or every one in particular, of those helps which prayer does
affoorde, although in the precedent chapter, he made mention, with what
devotion they shall pray for themselves: and in this chapter also, what prayers
they should say for every one in particular, of their Brethren and Sisters,
within eight days after their departure. Yet here to the intent, that not any
one of the brethren and sisters of this order, whersoeuer they live or die,
should be without comfort; he sets down what prayers should be said for all
in general, that such persons which stand in need, or die unknown, may be
relieved, by these suffrages, which he appoints, to be said, three times in
the year, for the comfort of the brethren and sisters, as well living as dead.

And although he studying as much brevity in this rule, as he might
conveniently, has not set down, what this three times are; yet by the general
consent of all the brethren, long since it was ordained for order sake, that
the Masses* Diriges, and Pater nosters, should be said at these three several
times, that is, between Septuagesima Sunday, and Ashwednesday, within the
Octaues of S. Anthony of Padua, or at the first convenient time, after the
Octaues of the B. Sacrament: and between the feast of the exaltation of the
Cross, and the chief feast of our holy Patron, S. FRANCIS. Great truly is
the force of prayer, which is made for our brethren, as worthily notes S.
Ambrose: Great is God, and pardons one sort, through the merits of others.
Therefore if thou doubt to obtain forgiveness of thy great offenses, join unto
thy self intercessors: use the Churches help, which may pray for thee, and
obtain for thee, that which our Lord deuie thy self.

God did greatly complain (by the mouth of EZECHIEL) of the City of
Jerusalem, that he sought amongst them a man that might enterpose a hedge, and
stand opposite against him for the land, that he might not destroy it; and he
found not one; showing thereby that the prayers of just men, are so pleasing
unto him, that if he had found any one which would have prayed for
Jerusalem, he would not have destroyed the City: Marvelous is the prayers
of the just men says S. HIEROM, S. Hierom
by which God suffers himself to be overcome: and it is most grateful to
God, when some do oppose themselves, to entreat mercy for sinners, that they
may repent.

Of the Officers. CHAP. XV.
LEt every one, devoutly receive the Ministeries and other offices imposed on
them, which the course of this present form, does express: and let him be
careful, faithfully to exercise it. Let the office of every one also be
limited, within a certain space of time: Let no man be instituted for term
of life, but let his office comprehend a certain limit of time.

WHereas it is a common saying, that office and benefice are Corelatiues, in
such sort, that where the one is, the other follows: for that according unto
S. PAVLE, The workman is worthy his hyer: yet was S. FRANCIS, so great a
despiser of that, which the world and worldlings most despiser, that in all the
3. Orders, which he instituted, he ordained, that no other reward for officers
of them, but only temporal pains, and spiritual gains; that is, not only
the prayers of all such as are under their office and charge, but also the
whole Church of God, does pray for all such as are in authority.

Let every one devoutly receive the Ministeries.
AS most men do receive willingly temporal offices, in respect of the temporal
gain annexed thereunto: so S. FRANCIS, considering what spiritual treasure,
does belong unto the charitable pains of the Ministers, and other officers,
does belong unto the charitable pains of the Ministers, and other officers,
does here, in regard thereof, exhort them to receive those offices,
willingly and devoutly*

The other offices, which are imposed on him, which is elected and chosen by
the Brethren, and confirmed by the Visitor, or chief superior of that
Province, to be the Collector and receauer, of such alms, as either in their
Monthly assemblies, or any otherwise is given, either by the congregation, or
unto it, for the conservation thereof, and relief of the poor, but especially,
of such poor souls, as through their poverty, wanted the funeral offices,
and prayers for their souls. For though, great was the care that Saint FRANCIS
had of all the brethren and Sisters, yet more specially, of the poor, that
their poverty, might not be cause of any want of comfort, either for body or
soul: Therefore he wills such, as any office is imposed on, by this
congregation, not only devoutly to receive it, but also to be careful
faithfully to exercise it.

Let the office of every one also be limited within a certain space of time.
THERE is no company so holy, but that sometimes there is some imperfect
person found amongst them; wherefore, to the intent that if at any time such
should happen to be in this holy society, he might not have occasion to
murmr, that such particularly were therein, that one should continually bear
the burden of the care and pains of the order, or always receive the chief
spiritual gains thereof, by the daily prayers which the brethren and sisters,
make specially for him which bears office. S. FRANCIS ordains, that the
burden shall be alike, by every one which shall be found fitting for it, and
therefore he says, Let no man be instituted for term of life, but let his
office comprehend a certain limit of time, that thereby he may be the more
careful to execute his office, both more diligently, and also more respectively
unto all persons: and deal with each on, as he shall expect and desire to be
dealt withal by others, which shall come into his place hereafter, using that
measur unto others, which he would have to be measured unto himself. And to
the intent, that none of them may want instruction, or that any one should
intermedle in another charge, it behooves to assign unto every one of the
Ministers of the order, what places appertain to his charge, what Cities,
Villages, Towns, Territories: for large Regions, require more Ministers, to
govern and comfort all the Brethren and Sisters.

Of the Visitation and Correction of offenders. CHAP. XVI.
Moreover, let the Ministers, and also the brethren and sisters of every City
and place, come together, to the common Visitation, in some Religious place,
or Church: where such a place shall happen to be wanting. And let them have for
the Visitor, a Priest, of some approved Religion, who shall give them
healthful penance for their excess, and faults committed. Neither may any
other exercise the office of this visitation. But for as much as this present
form of living did take his institutio, of the aforesaid S. FRANCIS: we
Counsel the^ that such visitors and informers, be taken out of the order of the
Friar minors, whom the Prouincialls or Gardians of the same order shall think
fit to be assigned, when they shall be thereunto required: yet will we not, that
this Congregation be visited by a Lay-brother: And the visitation shall be made
once every year, unless some necessary occurrant require it to be done
oftener. Let the incorrigible and disobedient persons, be thrice admonished* who
if they will not be careful to amend themselves, let them by the advice of the
discreet Brethren, be altogether expelled out of their congregation*

Comissarie General of Cismontana.
Co^mis. General, Cismon.
CONCERNING this 16. chapter, it is to be noted, that Pope NICOLAS the fourth,
of happy memory, for the good reformation and perpetuity of this Rule and
form of life, commanded, that the Visitors and Ministers of this family,
should be of our Order, as founded, by the Seraphical Father Saint FRANCIS.
Wherefore let all the Father Guardians be careful, that in every Covent, they
appoint Visitors and other Ministers, as the Rule requires: inculcating well
unto them the diligence which they ought to have in the keeping and
augmentation of it, in such sort that the Brethren and Sisters exercise
themselves in the works of Charity, and good of their own soul, and their
neighbors, eschewing all kind of superfluity and tediousness, that they be
not thereby cause of molestation and distraction, one to another.

EVEN as in the first Chapter of this Rule, S. FRANCIS was so careful in the
reception of the brethren and sisters into this Congregation, that he strictly
prohibited, and forbideth, that no Heretic or any suspected of heresy or
diffamed should be received, and if it should be found out, that any such had
been received, the Ministers should with all speed, deliver him over unto the
Inquisition, to be punished, that the rest of the Brethren might be preserved
from corruption.

So now here, to the intent that the Ministers should be the more careful to
look diligently, both unto their own actions, and unto those committed unto
their charge, ordeyneth that they shall come altogether, unto some Religious
place or Church (which may be private unto themselves for that instant time)
where not only the Brethren and Sisters, but also the Minister himself is to
be visited and corrected or deposed, if he be found faulty, either in his
life, or execution of his charge.

Tertullian in his Apology, reports that, in the Primitive Church, where all
perfection flourished amongst the christians, they were wont in that time of
persecution, to come together in the night, in the churches of the holy
martyrs* both to praise God, and to pray for the common good, as for peace for
the Emperor, for the state of the church, and other things: and also to
treat and confer, of the affairs of Religion, and in like sort, to correct
the Brethren which did not walk well.

Wherefore S. FRANCIS, seeing how far all men were in a manner fallen from
this forementioned perfection of the flourishing time, did endeavor by all
means possible, to raise his brethren to that perfection again, and to
observe these holy meetings, as much as they might conveniently, for the
selfsame godly imitations: For considering that our weak and frail nature,
falls very easiely from her good affections and resolutions, through the bad
inclinations of our flesh, which lie heavy upon the soul it self, and draw
her still downewardes, if she strive not oftentimes to lift up her self, by
maine force, of renewing her former resolutions: for this cause, he did not
only ordain the Monthly assemblies, wherein both by the fervent exhortations
unto penance (which as you have heard, ought then to be made unto the Brethren)
and by the devout admonitions of the Ministers of the congregation, with the
virtuous examples of the sincerest brethren, the rest should be alluered, and
drawn to amendment of life, and often repeating their former purposes.

But also instituted this yearly visitations and corrections, that hereby at
the least, all that was amiss, might be amended. For as a Clock, be it never
so good or well set, must be wounded up twice a day at the least, morning and
evening: and moreover, at least once a year, be taken all in pieces, to scour
away the ruste, which it has gathered, to mende broken pieces, and renew such
as be worn, casting away that, which cannot be amended.

Even so, our holy Patron, the pattern of all perfection, having a zealous
care of the souls of his loving children, united together in this holy
Congregation, as the wheels of a clock, to healpe one another, to strike the
hours so truly, and spend every moment thereof so piously, that their whole
time, and actions, as far as human frailty suffers, may be pleasing unto
almighty God, ordained that they should not only wind up their souls to God
by prayer, but also to make them have the more care, and be the diligenter in
doing thereof, appoynteth and enioyneth them penance: If in the morning they do
it not in the dew hour, that is, as early as they can conveniently.

In the Evening also, he exhorts them to do the like, both by diligent
examination of their conscience, and by making present satisfaction for any
offense, that they may happe^t to do that day: and besides every Month,
hearing bow necessary Pe^nance is unto salvation, to make a reuewe of their
estates, considering well what they have done, for satisfaction of their former
offenses, or present negligences.

But forasmuch as it is a thing naturally given unto all men, to be so partial
in their own affairs, that they can see a more in another man's eye, and not a
beam in their own: for which cause, fearing that for want of seeing their
own imperfections, the soul might get such filth and rust, that hardly would
it be cleansed and made bright in the end: ordeineth here, that at the least
once in the year, they should take it down, and consider precisely all the
pieces thereof, that is, all the affections, passions, unseemly behauiours,
scandalous actions, or negligences, whatsoever; that all faults and defects
being found out, may be corrected and redressed by the Visitor, in this public
visitation.

To visit, signifies no other thing here, then to look into the lives, and
diligently examine the conditions and manners of the brethren, and afterward,
to admonish and correct their excess and imperfections, enioyning unto them
healthful penance, for their faults committed, and for that end, he ordained
that the Visitor should be a Priest, of some approved Religion.

At the same time that this order was first instituted, our most loving and
careful Father, S. FRANCIS, seeing that the number of his own brethren, was
as yet but small, and that he had so great imployme^t for them, sending them
with all speed to preach, as it were to al parts of the world, Penance, that
they could hardly entend to make these Visitations: being desirous
notwithstanding, that it should be made by some Religious person, set down
that the Visitor, should be a Priest of some approved religion, and that no
other might exercise this office, of Visitation.

But our holy Father NICHOLAVS the 4. which lived within 40. years after S.
FRANCIS, and had been the next General unto Saint BONAVENTVRE, though seeing
that the number of our brethren were much increased, that they might, well
exercise this office: yet would he not give any commandment, that these
elections should be made of them for Visitors, but sought to enduce the
brethren and sisters, of this third order thereunto, by counsel, and gentle
persuasions, alleging, that, Seeing S, FRANCIS was the institutor of this
form of living, he therefore counseled the^ to choose visitors out of the
order of the Friar Minors. Also, he made a more speci^^al brief in the third
year of his Popedom, to exhort them thereunto.

In progress of time, Sixtus 4. a man of singular virtue and learning, which
governed long the Seraphical Order of S. FRANCIS, though he was called to a
far greater dignity and charge, being elected to the government of the Sea
Apostolik, yet did he not forget, the fatherly love and care which he had,
unto any of the Orders, which had been under his charge. Wherefore knowing that
the children of one father and mother, will be more careful of the
conservation and good of their brethren, then others, where there is not the
like obligation and cause of love: did commit the whole charge of the Brethren
and Sisters, of the third order unto the Superiors of the Friar Minors, as
appears at large, in his Apostolical letters, beginning, Romani Pontificis
prouidentiae, etc. Wherein he subiecteth this third Order altogether, to the
visitation and correction of the Generalles andprouincialls, and Visitors
deputed by them, of the order of the Friar Minors: and forbids any
Eccelesiastical Prelate whatsoever, from thence forward, that they should not
enter meddle, with the Visitation or correction, of the Brethren and Sisters of
this Order of Penance; or should go about to hinder, in any sort, the Friar
Minors, in these affairs: Granting unto the said Order, that they may
administer all Ecclesiastical Sacraments unto them, as often as they shall see
cause: wherefore though until this time, it remained only, as a thing
counseled to make choice of one of the Friar Minors, for the Visitor, yet ever
since it remains as an obligation, for the Visitors to be one of them, whom
and when the Provincial, or Gardians of the same order, shall think fit and
convenient.

ARTICLE II. Yet we will not that the Congregation be visited by a Lay-brother.
THAT is, one which is not a Priest, or in possibility to be: for though in the
beginning, many Lay-brethren, for their great zeal, were chosen to be
Gardians, as S. DIDACVS for example was amongst the Indians, yet forasmuch as
in those Visitations, many things might fall out, to be received under the
seal of Confession, and that the chief matters to be treated of herein
concerned the good, and cleansing the consciences of the brethren and sisters,
which a Lay-brother, except he were one of extraordinary gifts could not well
know to do. Therefore our holy Father ordains here, that only a Religious
Priest, should be the Visitor, that he by learning, virtue, and prudence, may
visit and admonish, correct and comfort the whole Congregation.

ARTICLE III. And the said Visitation shall be made only once every year,
unless some necessary oc^urrant, require it to be done oftener.
WHEN Monthly assemblies might be conveniently made, wherein the Ministers
and Ghostly fathers, together with the Preachers, did encourage them in the
way of virtue, and reprehend for their vice, such as should happen to do
amiss. Yearly visitations were sufficient, unless some extraordinary
occasion should fall out.

Yet now, where most of all these helps are wanting in this our poor country,
though public visitations, cannot be made also, yet notwithstanding, private
Visitations, in every particular house, where the Brethren and Sisters do live,
is most necessary and needful to be the oftener made, that is, every half
year at the least, as well to encourage those which do well, and yield them
all aid and comforts that may be necessary for their good proceeding in
virtue, as also to admonish and correct those which have done amiss, or lost
their first fervor, that they may renew it again, and by healthful penance,
scour away the rust, which their sinful soul has gathered, since their
last half years general Confession, to the intent that being made clean by
Penance, and anointed with the oil of Grace, which is given in this holy
Sacrament, they may with all ease and facility, run the happy way of
salvation: And by this means repair their weather-beaten forces, inflame
their hearts again, make their good purposes sproute out a fresh, and their
virtues flourish a new.

The ancient Christians (as testifies S. GREGORY NAZIAN. S. Greg.
did on the Feast of our Saviors Baptism) which we usually call here, Twelft
day, renew those promises and protestations, which they made in their
Christening. Even so do the devout and zealous brethren and sisters, renew
every half year, before the Visitor, in this his Visitation, the vow and
promise, which they have made, of the observation of the commandments of God,
and of this Rule, that by renewing their Vows, they may augmente, more and
more their merits. For even as the often committing of a wicked act, makes
the same sin, and the sinner to be heinous and hateful unto God; so in like
sort, the renewing and often doing of a good work, makes it to be more
meritorious, and the doer more grateful unto his divine Majesty, for his many
good deeds; Wherefore if it be a good thing for a man to give himself once as
wholly unto the service of God as he may, and the more to show his love, does
bind himself thereunto by vow, no doubt then, he which for to show the
continuance of his love, and to be more mindful of his promise, shall often
renew his vow, but that he shall increase thereby his merit. For that the
renewing of the vow, makes the work not only more acceptable unto God, but
fortifieth the will to do it more courageouslie, and gives to God, not only
the good works, which are the fruits of our will; but dedicateth likewise unto
him, our will it self, as the root and tree of all our actions. Wherefore,
even as he gives a greater gift, which gives the fruit and tree together,
then he which gives the fruit alone. So does he present a greater present
unto GOD, which presents unto him, not only his good works, but himself
withal by vow, in not reserving any possibility to go back from his word,
or promise so often renewed, rendering himself a happy bond-slaue unto him
whose bondage is better then all royalties.

How acceptable and pleasing vows are unto God, the Prophet DAVI^ does declare
when he says, Vow ye and render unto our Lord your God, all they that bring
gifts unto him, for that the soul inflamed with Gods love, is apt through
gratitude, for his goodness toward him, and all mankind, to make vows of
things, whereunto we are not obliged.

The holy Apostles which were confirmed in grace, illuminated with the spirit
of God, and brought up in the school of Christ, knowing what merit the vow of
Virginity did add unto that happy estate of life, did not only exhort many
to follow that most virtuous course of life, but also to bring themselves to
the observation and keeping thereof, by faithful vow and promise to God:
whereof we have a manifest example in the life of the holy Apostle and
Evangelist S. MATTHEVVE, which having most miraculously raised IPHIGINIA, the
daughter of the King of Ethiopia from tempotall death, desirous to bring her to
everlasting life, induced her to vow and dedicate her Virginity to God*
whereby she perseuering in her holy purpose, refused to marry with King
HIRTACVS, who caused therefore S. MATTHEW to be slain at the Altar, for that
by his means, this Virgin, had made the Vow of Virginity.

ARTICLE IIII. Let the incorrigible and disobedient persons, be thrice
admonished: who if they will not be careful to amend themselves: let them by
the advice of the discreet brethren, be altogether expelled out of the
Company of this holy Congregation.
ALTHOUGH many imperfections may happen to be sometimes in some one, or other
of this Congregation, yet is there not any one set down: for which any brother
or Sister is to be expelled and utterly rejected, but heresy and disobedience:
Wherefore, as in the first Chapter, express commandment is given, that the
person suspected of heresy, is speedely to be delivered unto the inquisitor to
be punished: so here the disobedient is for his punishment to be expelled,
which in respect of the good of his soul, is one of the greatest punishments
that man can inflict, for that not only is he hereby deprived of the
participation of all the good deeds and merits of the brethren and sisters,
and of the infinite prayers, which by many thousands of holy and religious
persons, should have been made for him, both in this life and after, but also
of that inestimable benefit (granted by many Supreme Bishops, unto those
which die in this holy order,) as to be absolved at the hour of death, not
only from all his sins whatsoever, but from the pains also due thereunto in
Purgatory, and to be restored as far forth as the Keys of the Church do
extend to that state of innocence, wherein he was when he was first baptized:
besides a number of temporal benefits, and spiritual comforts also, which he
does loose by this expulsion, and separation fron this holy company, and
blessed order of Penance: Wherefore seeing that there is nothing more precious
unto our Savior, then the comfort and salvation of poor penitent sinners:
Our holy Fathers desire is here, that all means possible should be used, to
bring the poor delinquent and offending Brother, to be penitent for his
sins and offenses, and therefore will not that he should be rashly punished
and cast off, but that he should be first, thrice gently, and most
charitablie admonished, according unto the counsel of our loving Redeemer, who
wills, that if thy brother offend against thee, go first, and admonish him
betwixt him and thee, Mat. 18.
and if he will not hear thee, take two or three others, viz. which are not
ignorant of his offense, that by their persuasions, joining to thine, he may
be brought to the acknowledgement of his fault: and if by this means he cannot
be reduced, then to go and tell the Church, that is, they which have
authority to correct him. But if he will not hear the Church, and Prelates
thereof: whose words thereof ought to be so much esteemed, that he which shall
contemn them, is held to despise Christ himself, who says: He which
hears you, Luc. 10,
hears me, and he which contemns you, despises me. And therefore worthily
he said, If he will not hear the Church, Mat. 18.
let him be unto thee as a Publicane and Ethnicke. The self same course is
here set down to be used toward the incorrigible and disobedient persons,
because Heresy excepted, it is the greatest evil that can happen in this
Congregation, whose light should (as our Savior exhorts) so shine before
men, that they seeing our good works, may glorify our Father which is in
heaven: which light would not be a little extinguished by those incorrigible
and disobedient persons, if they should not in due time be expelled. For that
their scandalls, riotous, and careless life, with their evil deeds, would be
attributed unto the whole company, which should suffer such lewd and infamous
persons, to remain in their holy Order.

Wherefore seeing that they have not, neither can any ways have prisons or
places of sharp corrections, as other religious orders have* their only way
therefore, after they have used all charitable means, to reduce such
offenders, is to cause them to be cast out of their company, and fraternity.

Of avoiding strifes, between themselves, and with others. CHAP. XVII.
IN like sort, let the Brethren and Sisters, avoid (to the uttermost of their
power) all strifes amongst themselves, carefully breaking them of (if any
should happen to be stirred up) otherwise let them answer of right, before
him with whom power of judgment remains.

AS there is no one thing which more displeases God, then strife and discord;
so is there nothing wherein he more delights, then in peace and charity.
SOLOMON says, Hatred rayseth brawles, Prou. 10,
and charity, covers all sins. And where sins are in such sort covered,
there will he remain which says: My delight is to be with the children of
men: Prou. 8.
Which thing, S. FRANCIS, well considering, took a most special care that
peace and charity, may be continually conserved amongst his children, For
which cause, though in this little Rule, Chap. 10,
he had already set down, one whole Chapter, for making of peace between
the Brethren and Strangers, yet not contenting himself there withal, Salust.
does add this present Chapter, for the better conservation of peace, by
avoiding all strifes, giving here a straight command unto all the Brethren and
Sisters, that they should, to the uttermost of their power, avoid all strifes
amongst themselves, for that, as by concord, little things increase, so by
discord, the greatest will be soon consumed. For as our Savior said unto
the Jews: Luc. 11
Every kingdom that is divided in it self, will be desolate, and house
will fall down upon house. So if there should remain strife amongst the
brethren, the Congregation would be soon overthrown.

Wherefore seeing that, in that thrice happy, and for evermore blessed
company of our Saviors own Disciples, there was, as testifies the Gospel,
a contention amongst them before they were confirmed in grace, Luc. 9. Luc. 18
and had in visible form, received the Holy Ghost, which of them should be
the greater. Saint FRAVNCIS, did not take it for any disgrace, unto this Holy
Order, that some strifes might happen to be stirred amongst them: but his
only care and command is, that they should be careful, and use all
diligence, presently to break them off, amongst themselves.

Otherwise, let them answer of right, before him with whom power of
judgment remains.
WHICH words, as they have relation, unto the strifes between the Brethren or
Sisters themselves, may be understood of the Visitor, whose love being a like
unto them all, ought without all partiallitie, by his power and prudencie, end
the strifes amongst them.

But as they have relation unto other strangers, over whom the Visitor has no
power, then if by gentle persuasions, he cannot end the debate, the Brethren,
as I said before, may take any lawful course to end those strifes, and right
their own wrongs.

In what manner, and who may dispense in abstinences and fastings. CHAP. XVIII.
But the Ordinaries of the place, or Visitor, may for any lawful cause, when
they shall see it expedient, dispense with all the Brethren and Sisters in
abstinences, fastings, and other austerities.

ALthough, in every part of this present Rule and form of living, our loving
Patron, and tender Father, does show, how great a desire he had to give
aid and comfort, unto all his children and followers of his counsel: yet here
in this Chapter, does he manifest more particularly his love and provident
care, to provide a sovereign salve, and present remedy to yield them all,
what comfort any virtuous and willing mind can desire, in ordeyning, that the
Ordinary of the places, or the Visitor, may for any (when they shall see it
expedient) dispense with all the Brethren and Sisters, Luc. 16.
in abstinences, fastings, and other austerities.

And whereas many devout persons, knowing by the testimony of our Savior,
that Penance is so necessary unto salvation, that unless we do Penance, we
shall all perish, and therefore would willingly undertake this happy estate
and form of living of Penance, here prescribed; but that they want ability,
through their weakness, to undertake the fastings, abstinences, and other
austerities thereof: for though their strength being now good, they may be well
able to begin: but years and fotces daily decaying, that they should not be
able to go forward, and then as our Savior says: All men seeing them,
will laugh them to scorn, saying, This man begun to build, but could not
finish it. Wherefore he ordained this Chapter, not only for the comfort of
those, which had taken this happy course of life in hand, but also for an
encouragement for others to do the like, seeing that if they have but an
earnest desire, and fervent love and good will, to do what their condition,
years, strength and health will permit them, with all alacrity to do: The
Visitor, or their Ordinary Ghostly Father, approved by the Visitor, may
dispense with them in all things that they themselves shall find to be necessary
for them, for that the will and intention being the principal cause of the
merit of our actions; it is not a little meritorious unto them, which have a
fervent desire to keep, all the abstinences, fastings, and austerities, that
their health will permit. For though the strength of their body, should happen
to be such, that they should be able to do little, yet their good intention,
would give such virtue unto their actions, that it would make them great and
acceptable in the sight of God.

For seeing that by the testimony of our Savior himself, Mat. 5.15
it is plain that the internal act of the Will, is the substance of our
works; the external indifferent action, both depending thereupon, and only
esteemed according to the quality thereof, good or evil: Hence may we
conclude, that the good will, and earnest desire, which many have to keep all
the austerities of this Rule, if strength and ability would permit them, is
often as effectual to salvation, and as essential merit unto them, as the
observation thereof is unto others, to whom God has given strength to observe
them: For God is neither acceptor of persons, or requires any thing, above our
possibility, but only our heart and trwe affection, and therefore says
only, My son, give me thy heart: Prou. 13
as I have declared at large, in the exposition of the first Chapter of this
Rule.

Yet notwithstanding, to take away all occasions of scruples, which many
devout persons might have, thinking still that their strength is able to
endure, and do more then they do: Our holy Father out of a provident care,
sets down here, that both the Visitor and Ordinaries of the places, may
dispense with all the Brethren and Sisters, in any thing contained here in the
Rule, that they shall think it expedient, giving them thereby also leave, to
settle the consciences of every one, by ordeyning them to keep, what with
health, both of body and soul, they may conveniently.

That their Ministers ought to declare unto the Visitor their manifest faults.
CHAP. XIX.
But the Ministers ought to declare unto the Visitor, the manifest faults, of
the Brethren and Sisters, to be punished, and if any one remain incorrigible,
after the instancy of thrice warning: let them (by the counsel of some
discreet Brethren) be denounced by the Ministers, unto the Visitor, by him to
be cast out of the company of this Fraternity, and to be published afterward
in the Congregation.

IT is a thing commonly known, that a little spot of filth, is sooner
perceived in a clean cloth, in a far greater, then one that is already
foul. So in like sort, few are ignorant, that a little fault is more noted,
and diligently marked, in any that make profession, to tend unto perfection,
then in other worldlings, which may peradventure be defiled with many enormious
crimes: wherefore, as a good person, shall be the more amply rewarded, for his
virtuous deeds, by reason, that through his goodness, others may be drawn to
imitate his pious example. So on the contrary side, if he should chance to
commit any small fault, he shall be more severely punished for it then any
other, for that his show of goodness, causes others of less perfection, to
do the like, or worse, being induced and lead thereunto, by his evil example.

Wherefore, S. FRANCIS, having drawn and brought, the Brethren and Sisters of
this Order, to a state of perfection, above the common worldlings, is so
careful to keep them from such faults, whereby they might incur the heavy
curse of our Savior, saying: Woe be unto them, by whom scandal comes: That
he ordained, two special Chapters in this little Rule, to persuade them,
whilst they remain in this Order, from such faults as might breed scandal.
Wherefore, in the first of them, which is the 16. Chap. 16.
Chapter, he sets down the time, place, and person, which should both come
and make the visitation. Chap. 19.
Now here in this, he does make a more ample declaration, how it should be
made, and who should specially punish the manifest faults, which may happen to
be committed. First, here he declares (how) saying, that the Ministers ought
to declare to the Visitor, the manifest faults, of the brethren and sisters, to
be punished. The Visitor may proceed, three manner of ways in correcting the
offenders: First, by denunciation, whilst he commands all the brethren and
sisters, that if any one of them do know, any thing amongst them worthy of
correction, that faithfully he declare it. Secondly, by inquisition and
diligent inquitie, which may be made of every one secretly, seeing that there
are many which will be loath to accuse others publicly of any crime. Thirdly,
by Expostulation, expostulating diligently of the person accused, whether those
things be true which he has heard, which if he seem to deny falsely, then to
bring the witness face to face, and so proceeding with all charity, to
correct him in time: for that even as a dangerous kindled fire, if it be
neglected, soon takes such forces, that afterward hardly will it be
quenched: so sins not corrected in time, quickly grow so great, that not
only with great difficulty, will they be rooted out, but also soon infect
others, or at least bring with all speed, infamy and scandal unto the
company where such a person is tolerated. Therefore S. FRANCIS, although his
desire is, that all mutual love and charity, should be maintained amongst all
the brethren and sisters, yet will he not in any wise, that an incorrigible
person, should be suffered amongst them, but does repeat here again, as a
matter of great weight, that after thrice warning, such disobedient persons, as
by the triple admonition of the Ministers, will not be corrected, That the
Ministers with the advice of some discreet brethren, should denounce it unto
the Visitor, by him to be cast out of the company.

Here now secondly does S. FRANCIS declare, that the Visitors only have power
to inflict this severe punishment of expulsion, and casting quite out of the
company for ever, such incorrigible persons: For though the Ministers ought to
instruct the brethren and sisters, and have a special care, to see that every
one, under his charge, be mindful to walk according to his calling, in all
virtue and piety, and to admonish those which do otherwise to amend; and if
their lives, being scandalous, and their offenses heinous, will not after
thrice admonition, desist from their wicked actions, he may debar them from
the company and benefits of the Congregation, until the coming of the
Visitor, yet not to expel him for ever. S. FRANCIS knowing that our Savior
has so great compassion on poor sinners, Ezech. 18
that, He vvil not the death of a sinner, but that he should rather be
converted and live. Does insinuate here that all means possible, should be
used to convert and draw, this disobedient brother from his obstinacy, before
that this great punishment of expulsion be used toward him, and for that
cause, he seems to reserve it unto the Visitor, to do it, and publish it in
the Congregation.

How in all these aforesaid things, no man is bound to mortal sin. CHAP. XX.
But in all these aforesaid things, whereunto the Brethren of your Order, are
not bound by the Commandments of God, or Ordinances of the Church: we will
that none of them be bound under mortal sin, to keep them, but with prompt
humility, let them receive the Penance enjoined him, for the excess of his
transgression, and study to fulfill and accomplish it effectually.

AT that happy marriage, where our Savior turned water into wine, the
ARCHITRICLINE and governor of the Feast, tasting the goodness thereof, and
not knowing from whence it came, Ioh. 2.
said unto the Bridegroom: Every man brings first good wine, and
afterward that which is worst, but thou have kept the best wine unto the
last. So in like sort* worldlings and worldly pleasures, do bring first their
best wine of vain consolations and comforts, and afterward, that men are
drunk with these pleasures, do bring that which is worst. But our Holy Father
keeps the best wine and chiefest comfort here unto the last, declaring for
the quietness of all such as either will, or have undertaken this form of
Penance, that though the Profession and vow thereof, brings great benefits,
both corporal and spiritual, and no less merit withal: Yet is there no
hardness or danger to be feared herein, seeing that concerning the strictness
which might terrify any: He declares in the last Chapter here, saving one, as
you have heard, that, The Visitors may take away all difficulties, and make it
as easy as the party, that has any zeal, can desire. And as for danger, he
shows here, that there is none at all, of falling into mortal sin, by
transgressing any precept or points aforesaid, of this Rule, unless it be
otherwise against the Commandments of God, or ordinances of the Church, which
(whether they enter into this order or not) they are bound under mortal sin
to keep, as all other Christians are.

And as all Doctors agree in this, and SOTVS most learnedly proves it, Lib.
1. de instit. quest. 6. Artic. 4.
that Superiors, both Ecclesiastical and Temporal, may bind their subjects,
under the pain of a mortal sin; and make precepts and commandments, binding
them thereunto. So in like sort, do they al hold, that when the Superior
intends to bind, under the pain of a mottal sin, then does he bind; and
when he intends not to oblige them, he does not bind.

That precept and commandment therefore obliges, under the pain of a mortal
sin, when it appears that such was the intention of the Commander. So
likewise, if it be manifest, that he had no such will, it does not bind.

Wherefore, seeing that it plainly appears here, by the sentence of Pope
NICOLAVS the fourth, which confirmed this Rule, with his Apostolical letters,
that he would not that any should offend mortally, in transgressing any point
of those things which are contained therein, all men are out of danger from
falling into mortal sin, by omitting any thing contained herein* seeing that
both S. FRANCIS, and the Pope, had no will to bind them to the observation of
any point, here under any such pain. 22. quest. 186. Artis. 9.
The Angelical Doctor, S. THOMAS of Aquine, affirms as much of the Rule of S.
DOMINICK, saying, that it does not bind, under the pain of a mortal sin,
because the Institutor of that Rule said, and expressed, that he would not
bind under that pain. But some may peradventure object, that though the
Brethren and Sisters, are not bound by the Rule; yet by the vow which they
make, specially above all other Religious persons, to observe the Commandments
of God, all their life time, do bind themselves, to keep them under the
pain of a double mortal sin; one in respect that the breach of them, is a
mortal sin, to any man whatsoever does it. Another, in respect of the breach
of the vow, which they have particularly made, or at the least, one mortal
sin, equivalent to them both. Unto which Objection, the virtuous and learned
Father, BERNARDINVS DE BVSTIS, some hundred years past answeareth directly;
that though a vow commonly of his own nature, do bind to observe that
promise, under the pain of a mortal sin, yet notwithstanding, the Vow
which is made in the profession of this Rule, does not bind, but under the
pain of a venial sin: Because, they which make this Vow, do not intend to
bind themselves, no further forth, then according to the Commandment of the
Rule, and the will of the Pope, which confirms it; which as you have heard,
has no intention, to bind them further.

Moreover, the most learned Cardinal TOLLET says, Lib. 4. instruct. Sacerd.
cap. 17.
that concerning the Obligation of Vows, we must rather regard and look into
the intention of him that Voweth, then unto the words. For that he is bound
unto those things whereunto his intention did intend: Wherefore (says he)
that whosoever makes a vow to fast three days; he is to be examined, how he
did entende this fast for that his vow is, according to his intention.

From hence therefore we do infer that, seeing, as you have heard, neither
the Precepts of the Rule, or the Confirmer thereof, nor yet the person which
makes the vow, do intend to bind themselves, under mortal sin to keep it,
though the merit is doubled, by making this vow; yet is there no more danger,
but much less in them, of falling into a mortal sin, the^ in others which
make it not.

Yet nevertheless, whosoever of this holy Order, should either by frailty,
suggestion of the devil, or by any other manner of ways, so far forget the
perfection whereunto their estate of life and profession does tend, as to
transgress any of the divine Precepts, which by vow here they do bind
themselves to keep; I earnestly exhort them, not only with all hearty
sorrow, to confess the enormitie and greatness of the same, but also
therewith the circumstance of their vow, that thereby their Contrition being
the greater, they may more easily make satisfaction, for their sinful
transgression, and as the Rule requires.

With prompt humility, receive the Penance, enjoined him for the excess
thereof, and study to fulfill, and accomplish it effectually.
THOUGH the greater the sin is, the more prompt and diligent ought the sinner
to be, to do Penance for it, with perfect sorrow and humility; yet
notwithstanding, must he not neglect to make satisfaction, for the very least
offenses: For that, as the Ecclesiasticke says: Eccles. 19
He that contemns small things, shall fall by little and little into greater.
The best remedy against great sins, is to avoid small ones, and not to
contemn the the least, but diligently to amend all. For that cause, though
the offense and transgression of any point of this Rule (being not against the
Commandments, of God and his Church) be but small; yet to avoid contempt and
confusion, which would soon destroy the Congregation, or at least, greatly
hinder the perfection, and merit, which is there to be gained: Our holy Father
ordained, that for the smallest excesses, sins, or transgressions, that any
should chance to commit against this Rule and form of life, he should with
prompt humility, receive the Penance enjoined unto him for it, especially,
seeing that by the vow of the Order, he is bound so to do: what benefit he
reapeth thereby, the Ecclesiastike declares, saying, Eccles. 20
How good a thing is it being rebuked, to show repentance, for so thou shall
auoyd^ wilful sins: And to that end, S. FRANCIS, not only exhorts, to
receive, with prompt humility Penance, but also to study to fulfill and
accomplish it effectually* for he that takes reprehension and Penance in good
part, when he is faulty, meriteth pardon; And when he is not faulty, he
satisfies for his other sins, and meriteth reward: that is, Gods grace here,
and thereby after this transitory life, everlasting glory.

The Confirmation of the Rule, by NICHOLAS the fourth.
LEt it not therefore be lawful for any manner of man, to infring this writ of
our Decree and Ordinance, or with rash temeritie, to with-stand it. But if any
do presume to attempt it, let him know that he does incur, the indignation
of Almighty God, and of his blessed Apostles, S. PETER and S. PAVLE. Given at
the Reate the 16. Kalendes of September. the 2. year of our Pontificate. Anno
Dom. 1209.

OUR Holy Father NICHOL. the 4. which before (as you have heard) being
General, of all the three Orders of S. FRANCIS; having found in his
Visitations, that although all his Predecessors, from HONORIVS the third, which
confirmed this Order of Penance, only viua voce, out of a special love that
they did bear unto it; for the greater good and comfort which it yielded unto
the souls of many virtuous and devout persons; had granted many Privileges
and immunities, and exemptions; yet had not any of them, set forth the Rule in
any of their Breues, thereby to express and put to silence, the indiscreete
and malicious tongues, of such as envy at other men's profit, good, and
perfection; he therefore, to compel, by fear of Censures of the Church, such
persons, as charity could not force to speak well of holy and virtuous
courses to perfection; not only did confirm the Rule, with his Apostolical
letters, but also imposes here the heavy curse of God and his Church, on all
such as infringe this Writ of this Decree and Ordinance; or endeavor with rash
temeritie to withstand it.

The Reverend and most worthy Cardinal TOLLET, declaring how all the Doctors of
the Church do agree in this, how far the Prelates Ecclesiastical may bind
their subjects, says that, Lib. de. 7. de pecatis mort. cap. 19.
when any thing is commanded under the pain of Excommunication, or any other
pain which cannot befall to a man, standing in the state of grace, as under the
pain of the malediction of his Apostles, or any other such like, it binds,
under the pain of a mortal sin, although there is not put, that
Exco^municatio^ is incurred by the deed it self. Wherefore hoping that amongst
the children of our holy Mother, the Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Church,
there will be none found, whose hearts will be so much possessed with rancour
and envy, as to encurre a mortal sin, by maligning, and with rash temeritie,
withstanding this holy Order of Penance, which can neither hurt or hinder any,
but is a secure means, unto all persons, that will embrace and follow this
path and happy course of life, to deliver them with speed, from the paineful
pains of Purgatory, and lead them to everlasting joy and glory in heaven. I
will omit to make any further mention here, of such danger and imperfection:
and now purposing to have d^clared the perfections of this holy Rule and
Order, having had occasion to add unto this present, the annotations of the
Reverend Father, Commissarie General, of all our Order in these parts, upon
this Rule, finding that this book, is thereby grown unto a greater volume,
then I desired that it should be, I have adjoined the perfectio^s of this
order, unto the directory, of the society of the Cord, of our holy Patron S.
FRANCIS, to the intent, that such devout persons, as for the affection, which
they do bear unto him, do wear one of those hallowed cords, may to augment
their devotion, and desire to imitate his perfection and virtues, see the great
perfections of this holy Order, gathered into a small brief together; that
thereby, such as are of that Congregation, may learn the perfections of this;
and of the otherside, such of this Holy order as are desirous to know the
perfections of their own Rule, may by getting them, see also the great
indulgences, which belong unto their Cord or Girdle, which they daily wear,
that by gaining those Heavenly treasures, may both here make satisfaction for all pains due unto their sins; and cleanse their souls from the least thing
that might defile it; and by the perfections of this Rule, so order it with all
kind of virtues in this life, that their action and conversation, may be so
acceptable in the sight of Almighty God, that for their reward, they continue
here in his favor and grace, and after reign with him, in euarlasting glory.

A CATOLOGVE, Of the Saints and worthy men of the Third Order of the Brothers
and Sisters of PENANCE, which our Seraphical Father S. FRANCIS founded, the
ninth year after his Conversion.
ALthough, in commendation of the third Order, which our Seraphicall Father S.
FRANCIS (inspired by the Holy Ghost) did institute for a general comfort and
aid of all men and women, as well Married, as Virgins, many things might be
said full of truth and Christian piety, yet to make it manifest and plainly to
be understood, how grateful it is to God, and of how great edification in the
Catholic Church, it is an evident and sufficient argument, to see the manifold
fruts, which in these years past, it has yielded in the same Church, as is
manifest by this Catalogue of Saints, and true Apostolical men, and holy
virtuous women, taken out of the Chronicle, and Books of this Order, where
their lives are written at large.

Popes who have confirmed the Rule, and favored it with gra^es and Privileges.
THE Pope Honorius the 3. Pope Gregory the 9. three times. Innocentius the 4.
Nicolas the 4. Clement the 5. Martin the 5. Eugonius the 4. Nicolas the 5.
Calixtus the 3. Pius the 2. Sixtus the 4.

Saints that be Canonized.
S. JEWS the King of France. S. Alexius, Earl of Arian in France. S. Iuo
Priest. S. Elizabeth, daughter to the King of Hungary.
Holy men Beatified.
BLESSED Alexander of Perusio, endued with admirable piety. Bl. Bonisius
Volaterranus, shining with miracles. Bl. Bartolus of S. Geminian, a most holy
man. Bl Charles of Monte Feltrio, endued with all kind of virtues B.
Gualterius, bish^p of Taruisi^us greatly renouned for his wonderful miracles.
Bl. James of the land Pompeia, a Priest, shining with miracles. Bl. John of
Vrbin, a man most perfect, and enobled with virtues. Bl. John of Rauenna, did
many miracles. Bl. Luchesi, copious and abounding in miracles, has a Church of
his name. Bl. Lucia, most famous for his miracles was the first which received
the habit at the hands of our father. S. Francis. Bl. Landonus of Mont
Feltrio, is had in great reverence, for the virtues which he wrought. Bl.
Nicoluccius of Senna, a man most entire and shining in virtues and miracles.
Bl. Peter Romanus, crowned with Martyrdom, for the faith of Jesus Christ under
the Soldane. Bl. Peter Pectinarius of Senna, most noble in Sanctity of life.
Bl. Peter of Colle, like in all things to these before named. Bl. Richard,
Bishop of Fossabrunencis, and a most holy man. Bl. Robert, Lord of
Ariminensium, noble both by birth and miracles. Bl. Rock, a man full of
devotion. Bl. Thomasinus, a man of great sanctity, which whilst he prayed on
the Feast of all Saints, he was in an ecstasy, from the Sun rising, until the
Sun setting. Bl. Torellus, a man absolute in all perfection. Pl. Thomas Vncius
of Fulginio, who was famous for miracles and prophesies.
Holy women beatified.
BLessed Angelo of Fulginio, who did give her self wholly to contemplation:
and for the space of 12. years together, never did take any meat or drink,
but contented her self with the B. Sacrament only. She was the first which did
reform the sisters of the third Order. Bl. Apolonia of Bonomia, most pious and
liberal to the poor, is highly reverenced for her miracles. Bl.. Blanch,
Queen of France, and mother of S. Jews King of France, most renowned for her
miracles. B Beatrix of Millane, copious in miracles Bl. Bona, wife unto the
blessed Lucius, which was the first that received the habit of this third
order, from our holy father. S. Francis. Bl. Clare of Monte Falcon, shining
with illustrious signs and miracles. Bl. S. Delphina, excelling in the vertue^
of Chastity, for though she lived 25. years, in marriage with S. Elzearius,
yet did the holy S. testify at his death, that he left her a pure Virgin. Bl.
Elizabeth, Empress of the Romans, and wife unto the Emperor Charles the 4.
but more noble, for the abundance of her miracles. Bl. Elizabeth, Queen of
Hungary. Bl. Elizabeth Queen of Portugal. Bl. Homiliana of Florena, nobly
descended of the family of the Circulie: and much more honored, for the
sanctity of her life, and famousnesse of her miracles. Bl. Ione of S. Marie.
Bl. Ione Signa. Bl. Margaret of Carena. Bl. Mea of Senna, much renowned for her
miracles. Bl. Pasquilina of Fulginio Celeber, and famous for her miracles, Bl.
Rose of Viturbia, buried at Viturbia, and shines with miracles.
Prelates.
DON Leo, Archbishop of Milan. Don Gualter, Bishop or Threliso. Don. Richard,
Bishop of Alexandria, Doctor of Divinity.
Empresses.
Lady Elizabeth, Empress wife to the Emperor, Charles the 4. Lady Ione,
Empress of the Greeks.
Kings.
CHARLES the 2. King of Cicilie, Father to S. Jews Bishop. Robe^t King of
Cicilie. Henry Prince of Cicilie.
Queens.
Lady Marie, daughter to the King of Hungary, mother to the Bishop S. Jews.
Lady Blanch, Queen of Cataluinia, mother to S. Jews King of France. Lady
Marie, Queen of Hungary. Lady Katherine Queen of Bosna. Queen of Hungary,
who built the Monastery; in the Royal field at Austria. Queen Katherine,
daughter to Ferdinando, and Elizabeth King and Queen of Spain, Aunt unto
Charles the Emperor, wife of King Henry the eight, mother unto Queen Marie of
England, of late and happy memory.
Dukes.
RObert of Malatesta, Duke of Vrbine. Lady Katherine, Duchess of Millan.
Earls.
ALberte Mountacute, to whom our Father gave the Habit. Orlande Chu^ssie in
Italy, who gave unto our holy Father, the Mount of Alnerne, and did entertain
him as his guest, and received the Habit at his hands. Don Artal of Alagon,
Ea^le of Sostage, and his wife, with many other very famous in sanctity of
life.
Worthy men.
1. ALexander, Doctor of Divinity. 2. Bartholomew of S. Hierome, to whom our
blessed Father S. Francis gave the habit. 3. Bartholomew, a lawier, to whom
our holy Father gave leave also, to receive diverse into the habit, of the
third order. 4. Brother Bruno, to whom our holy Father S. Francis, gave
himself the habit. 5. Charles Lundati of Mount Feltrio. 6. Brother Demetrius.
7. Brother Estupe. 8. Gerard Hermitane. 9. Brother Hierome. 10. John of Vrbilo.
11 John of Riberia. 12. Brother John of Hermitane. 13. Matthew Less, to whom
our holy Father S. Francis, gave the Habit. 14. Matthew Rubie Roman, father
to Nicolas Pope, which before was called John Caietane, to whom being a child,
our Father Commended his order. 15. Robert Coellus, to whom also our Holy
Father S. Frances, gave the habit. 16. Brother Peter, a Spaniard. 17. Bother
Peter Hermitane. 18. Peter Tercelane. 19 Tercellus of Papio Vinaldus. 20.
Brother Vitalles.

Noble and worthy women.
BOnuenuta married. Dulcelnia. Sister Francis of Eugubium Lady Lucia. Lady
Lucy, of Venice. Malquiliana married. Siriana. Viridiana.

ALthough this Catologue was made to the honor and glory of God, and of our
Holy Father S. Francis, and his Children, of this his third Order: yet would I
not have thee, gentle reader, to think, but there are infinite more, holy and
worthy persons, which are and have been of this most holy Congregation; but
these are only those which the Reverend Father, Comissary General, did set
down in the Spanish Coppie: Or that I could as yet find which might
conveniently be Croni^led published, and Registered amongst this holy Company;
but if thou do chance to find any others, I beseech thee to do them that
honor, as to add them to their places of worthiness, according to their good
deserts.

Of the glorious name of JESUS, The 1. of January.
Antiphona.
NOMEN IESV, tibi sit semper in cord, semper in ore, semper in sinu, semper in
manu, quo omnes tui in Iesum sensus dirigantur and actus, alleluia. Versu^. Sit
nomen Domini benedictum. Respons. Ex hoc nunc and vsque in seculum.

Oremus.
DEVS, qui gloriosissimum nomen Domini nostri vnigeniti filij tui Jesus Christi,
fecisti fidelibus tuis summo suauitatis, affectu amabile, and malignis
spiritibus tremendum, atque terribile: concede propitius, vt qui eiusdem
benedicte Saluatoris nomen celebriter veneramur in terris, eius foelici
consortio, perenniter perfruamur in coelis. Qui tec^m viuit and regnat in
secula seculorum. Amen.

The five Brethren Martyrs, the 16. of January.
Ant.
QVinque passeres veneunt dipondio, nec pereunt, IESV, propter te mortui, illi
sunt fratres minores quos trucidarunt tortores dum precones essent tui. Versus.
Letamini in Domino and exultate iusti. Resp. Ecce enim merces vestra, multa est
in coelis.

Oremus.
LArgire nobis quaesumus domine, beatis mar^yribus tuis Berardo, Petro,
Accursio, Adiuto, and Ottone, intercedentibus coelestia semper and Christum
amare, quorum glorioso martirio, Ordinis minorum initia conseruasti, Per eundem
Christum Dominum nostrum, Amen.

The translation of S. Bonauenture, the 14. of March.
Antiph
RVtilit vir seraphicus and totus scientificus, Parisiis rimari sacra dogmata
meruit, his Deum semper monuit prae cunctis adamari. Versus. Clara est and quae
nunquam marcessit sapientia. Resp. Et facile videtur ab ijs qui diligunt eum,

Oremus.
DEus qui Ecclesiam tuam B. Bonauenturae confessoris tui. atque pontificis
illuminare dignatus es meritis and doctrinis, concede propitius. vt eius
meritis and intercessionibus spiritualibus muniatur auxiliis, and donis gaudeat
sempiternis. Per Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

The translation of S. Antonie of Padua, the 15. of February.
Ant.
DOmus ab Antonio supra Petram Dominum, posita perstabit, quam maris elatio,
fluctus, ceu vox fluminum vltra non turbabit, Versus. Iustum deduxit dominus
per vias rectas. Resp. Et ostendit illi regnum Dei.

Oremus.
ECclesiam tuam Deus. B. Antonio Confessoris tui translatio votiua laetificet,
vt spiritualibus semper muniatur auxilljs and gaudijs perfrui mereatur
aeternis. Per Christum Dominum. Amen.

The translation, of Saint BARNARDINE, the 17. of May.
Ant
SEnarum ciuis inclytus, super na luce preditus, Bernardinus feruenter semper
amare studuit Christum Iesum, quem docuit reuereri. Versus. Puer eram
ingeniosus and sortitus sum animam bonam. Resp. Et cum essem magis bonus veni
ad corpus incoinquinatum.

Oremus.
DEus, qui corda fi^elium sancti Spiritus unction ad sancti nominis tui
honorem. and vitae sanctimoniam per B. Bernardinum confessorem tuum,
egregiumq^o doctorem inspirare dignatus es: tribue nobis quaesumus, vt cuius
sacram memoriam veneramur in terris, eius felici consortio perfruamur in
caelis, per Christum. On his Feast, as in the translation.

The translation of our Holy Father S. FRANCIS, the 25. of May.
Ant.
SAncte Francisse, propera, veni pater accelera ad populum, qui premitur, and
teritur sub onere, palea, luto, latere: and sepulto aegiptio sub sabulo, nos
libera, carnis extincto vitio. Versus Nemo mihi molestus sit. Resp. Ego enim
stigmata Domini in corpore meo porto.

Oremus.
OMnipotens sempiterne Deus, qui frigescente mundo ad inflamandum corda nostra
in carne, beatissimi P. N. Francissii passionis tuae sacra stigma^a renouasti:
concede propitius, vt eius meritis and precibus dignos paenitentiae fructus
faciamus, Qui viuis and regnas in secula seculorum.

The Feast of S. Anthony of Padua, the 13. of June.
Antiph.
DOmus ab Antonio supram petram Dominum posita perstabit, quam maris elatio,
fluctus, seu vox fluminum vltra non turbabit. Versus. Iustum deduxit Dominus
per vias rectas. Resp. Et ostendit illi regnum Dei.

Oremus.
ECclesiam tuam Deus B. Antonij confessoris tui solennitas votui laetificet, vt
spiritualibus semper muniatur auxilijs, and gaudiis perfrui mereatur aeternis,
per Christum Dominum.

The Feast of S. Bonauenture, the 14. of Iulij.
Antiph RVtilat vir seraphicus and totus scientificus, parisijs rimari sacra
dogmata meruit, his Deum semper monuit prae cunctis adamari. Versus Clara est,
and que nunquam marcessit sapientia. Resp, Et facile videtur ab iis qui diligunt

Oremus.
DEus qui Ecclesiam tuam B. Bonauenturae Confessoris tui, atque pontificis
illuminare dignatus es meritis and doctrinis, concede propitius, vt eius
meritis and intercessionibus, spiritualibus muniatur auxiliis, and donis
gaudeat sempiternis, per Christum Dominum nostrum.

The dedication of our Lady of Angels, called Portiuncula, the 2. of Aug.
Ant.
SVbtuum presidium confugimus sancta dei genitrix, nostras deprecationes ne
despicias in necessitatibus, sed a periculis cunctis libera nos semper, virgo
gloriosa and benedicta. Versus. Domum tuam Domine decet sanctitudo. Resp. In
longitudine dierum.

Oremus.
OMnipotens sempiterne Deus, qui gloriosae Virginis matris Mariae corpus and
animam vt dignum filii tui habitaculum effici mereretur, spiritu sancto
cooperante preparasti: da vt cuius commeratione laetamur, eius pia
intercessione ab instantibus malis, and a morte perpetua liberemur, per eundum
Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

The Feast of S. Clare, the 12. of August.
Ant.
POst vitae Clarae terminum, Clara cum turba virginum, ad coelos euolauit, suum
complexa Dominum. regnat in regno luminu^, quo Dominus regnauit. Verse. O quam
pulchra est casta generatio. Resp. Cum claritate.

Oremus.
FAmulos tuos quaesumus Domine B. Virginis tuae Clarae votiua natalitia
recensentes; coelestium gaudiorum sua facias interuentione participes, and tui
vnigeniti coheredes: Qui tecum viuit and regnat in vnitate spiritus sancti Deus.

S. Jews Bishop of Tolose, the 19. of August.
Ant.
TEcum fuit principiu^ beati Ludouice, virtutum Christus omnium pro meritorum
vice. verse. In conspectu potentium admirabilis ero. Resp. Et facies principum
mirabuntur me.

Oremus.
DEus qui Ecclesiam tuam dispensatione mirabili nobis semper illustras
sanctorum splendoribus, tribue quaesumus, vt qui Beati LVDOVICI Confessoris
tui, atque Pontificis solemniis gratulantur, ad eius consortium faeliciter
peruenire mereantur. per Christum Dominum nostrum, Amen.

S. Jews King of France, of of the third Order, the 25. of August.
Ant.
SImilabo eum viro sapienti, qui edificauit domum suam supra firmam petram,
Verse. Lex Dei eius in cord ipsius. Resp. Et non supplantabuntur gressus eius.

Oremus.
DEus, qui beatum Ludouicum confessorem tuum de terreno ac temporal^ regno, ad
coelesti and eterni gloriam transtulisti: eius quaesumus meritis and
intercessione regis regnum Jesus Christi filij tui nos coheredes efficias, and
eiusdem regni tribuas esse consortes, per eundem Dominum nostrum. Amen.

The Feast of the Stigmates of S. FRANCIS, the 17. of September.
Antiph.
Coelorum candor splenduit, nouum sidus emicuit, sacer Franciscus clarauit, cui
seraphim apparuit signans, cum caractere, in palmis, plantis, latere, dum
formam crucis gerere, vult cord ore opere. Verse. Signate Domine seruum tuum
Franciscum. Resp. Signis redemptionis nostrae.

Oremus.
DEus qui mira Crucis mysteria in B. Francisco confessore tuo multi formiter
demonstrasti, da nobis quae sumus, deuotionis suae semper exempla sectari, and
assidua eiusdem crucis mediratione muniri, per Christi^ Dominum nostrum. Ame^.

The translation of S. Clare, the 2. of October.
Ant.
POst vitae Clarae terminum, Clara cum turba virginum ad coelos euolauit, suum
complexa Dominum, regnat in regno luminum, quo Dominus, regnauit. Verse. O quam
pulchra est cas^a generatio. Resp. Cum claritate.

Oremus.
FAmulos tuos quaesumus Domine B. Virginis tuae Clarae votiuam translationem
recensentes, celestium gaudiorum sua facias interuentione participes, and tui
vnigeniti co^eredes. Qui tecum vi^it and regnat in vnitate spiritus sancti Deus.

The feast of S. Francis. the 4. of October.
Ant.
O Martyr desiderio Francisce, quanto studio compatie^s hunc sequeris, quem
passum libro reperis quem aperuisti. Tu contuens in aere seraph in cruce
positum, ex tunc in palmis, latere, and ped^bus effigiem fers plagarum Christi?
tu gregi tuo provide; qui post foelicem transitum dire prius and liuide
glorificatae speciem carnis pretendisti versus. Ora pro nobis B. P. Francisce.
Resp. Vt digini efficiamur promissionibus Christi.

Oremus.
DEus qui Ecclesiam tuam Beati Fra^scisci meritis foeta nouae prolis
amplificas: tribue nobis ex eius imitatione terrena despicere, and coelestium
donorum semper participatione gaudere. Per Christum Dominum nostrum.

The vij. brethren Martyrs, the 13. of October.
Ant.
Haec est vera fraternitas, quae nunquam potuit violari certamine, qui effusa
sanguine sequuti sunt Dominum, and contemnentes aulam regiam, peruenerunt ad
regna coelestia, Versu. Ecce quam bonum, and quam iucundum. Resp. Habitare
fratres in vnum.

Oremus.
OMnipotentiam tuam aeterne Deus suppliciter exoramus, vt suffragantibus
beatissimis martyribus tuis Daniele, Angelo, Samuele, Donulo, Leono, Augolino
atque Nicolao, discamus terrena despicere, and amare coelestia. Per Christum
Dominum nostrum. Amen.

S. Iue Confessor, of the third Order of S. FRANCIS. the 27. of October.
Ant.
HIc est qui post aurum no^ abiit, nec sperauit in pecuniae thesauris. Hinc and
laudabimus eum: fecit enim mirabilia in vita sua. Versus. Hic vir despiciens
mundum and terrena triumphans. Resp. Diuitias coelo condidit ore manu.

Oremus.
DEus qui B. Iuonem confessore^ tuum piis operibus, signis and miraculis in
Ecclesia tua clarere fecisti: praesta quesumus, vt eius meritis and precibus
tua beneficia capiamus. Per Christum Dominum nostrum.

The translation of S. Jews Bishop of Tolledo, November.
Ant.
TEcum fuit principiu^ beat Ludouice, virtutum Christus omnium, pro meritorum
vice. Verse. In conspectu potentium admirabilis ero. Res. Et facies principum
mirabuntur me:

Oremus.
DEus qui Ecclesiam tuam dispensatione mirabile nouis semper illustras
sanctorum splendoribus, tribue quaesumus, vt qui B. Ludouici confessoris tui
atque Pontificis solemniis gratulantur, ad eius consortium foeliciter peruenire
mereamur: per Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

S. Didacus, the 12. of November.
Antip
BEatus Didacus stadium virtutis ingressus carnem suam laboribus and flagellis,
vigiliis ac ieiunijs edomabat, Versus. Quae stulta sunt mundi elegit Deus Resp.
Vt confundat fapientes.

Oremus.
OMnipotens sempiterne Deus, qui dispositione mirabili infirma mundi elegis, vt
fortia quaeque confundas: Concede propitius humilitati nostrae, vt pijs B.
Didaci confessoris tui precibus, ad p^rennem in coelis gloriam sublimiari. Per
Christum Dominum nostru^. Amen.

S. Elizabeth VViddowe, of the third Order of S. Francis, the 20. November.
Ant.
Dvm esset vir in acubitu suo, nardus eius dabat suauitatis odorem. Verse. Manum
suam aperuit inop^, Res. Et palmas suas extendit ad pauperem.

Oremus.
TVorum corda fidelium Deus miserator illustra, and beatae Elizabethae precibus
gloriosis, fac nos prospera mundi dispicere, and celesti semper consolatione
gaudere: per Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

The Feast of S. Elzearius, Confessor, of the third order of S. Francis, the
28. December.
Ant.
EVge serve bone and fidelis, quia in pauca fuisti fidelis, supra multa te
constituam dicit Dominus. Verse. Amauit eum Dominus, and ornauit eum. Resp.
Stolam gloriae induit eum.

Oremus.
DEus, qui beatu^ Elzearium confessorem tuum, inter cetera virtutum insignia
Virginali pudicitia in co^iugio decorasti: concede propitius, vt cuius sacra
solemnia celebriter veneramur in terris, eius beata consortia foeliciter
consequamur in caelis, Per Christum.

Commemoration of all the Saints of the Order.
Antiph.
VOs sancti Dei incliti, qui estis mente simplici Franciscum imitato: Orate vt
hic feruidi, and in futuro lucidi, simus and nos beati. Versus. Aeterna fac nos
Domine cum sanctis tuis. Resp. In gloria numerari.

Oremus.
DEuotionem nostram quaesumus Domine tua gratia redd^t salutarem, vt quos
sanctorum tuorum Berardi, Petri, Accurtij, Adiuti and Ottonis martyrum,
Bonauenturae ac Ludouici Pontificum, Antonij and Bernardini confessorum, ac
Clarae Virginis deuota commemoratione laetificat. ipsos ad gaudia aeterna
perducat. Per Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

A TABLE, OF THE principal matters, contained in the Treatise of PENANCE.
Epistle Dedicatorie.
CHildren are bound to honor and obey their Parents. Parents are bound to
instruct and correct their children. God punishes those which are negligent in
correcting them. The obligation of spiritual fathers. The principal business
of a Christian. What is convenient for such as tend to perfection. Hope of
gain, encourages one to undertake any labor. The Authors intention.
Epistle to the Reader.
MAny benefits are reaped in this holy Order of Penance. The way of Penance is
common to all, that desire to go to heaven. Into this Order of Penance, all
sorts of virtuous people and sexes, may be admitted, as well married, as unmarried.
This order, exhorts to all pious works. The general Chapter commanded to
puhlish this Order again. The Authors motive to set forth this book in print.
This Order is much respected, and not worn out of request. A great part of the
Nobility of Spain, does daily embrace this Order. Queen Katherine, mother
unto our happy Q. Marie, was of this Order. The names of the Saints, and
worthy persons, arset in the end of this book. The Epistle of the Commissarie
General, unto the Prouincials.
Treatise of Penance, Chapter I. page 1.
AN introduction and exhortation to Penance. page. 1 Great is the corruption
of the world. ibid. An admonition. page 2 The cause of the perdition of many.
page 3 The difference between the good and the badde. ibid. No man can here
rejoice with the world, and reign with God in heaven. page 4 The great love
of Christ to man's soul. ibid. For the health of the soul regard not what the
flesh suggesteth, but what the spirit is able to do. ibid. A profitable
consideration. page 5. What man is in respect of his body. page 5 As death is
most certain, so is the hour very uncertain. page 5. How every one ought to
esteem of himself. p. 6. Every one ought to consider diligently, what
preparation he has made for the life to come. p. 6. No man can find any
assured contentment in this world. page 7. What course every one which
desires to live piously, ought to take presently. page 7 Penance must be
answerable unto the greatness of the sins. page 8
Chapter II.
OF the necessity of Penance. page 9 Baptism necessary unto Salvation. page
9 Penance is necessary for all sinners that have the use of reason. ibid.
Penance is the second table after shipwreck. ib. Baptism cannot be
reiterated. page 10. Penance has been in all ages, necessary unto salvation.
page 10 S. John Baptist did preach penance, both by word and deed. page 11
The austeritie of the life of S. John Baptist, does condemn the delicateness
of worldlings. p. 11. Christ calls all unto penance. page 12 True penance
washes away our sins, and makes us as white as snow. page 12 One of the
difficultst works of God, is to make of a sinner, a just man. p. 13 Whosoever
will reign with God, must suffer with his Son. page 14 How we must follow
Christ. ibid. What we must do which will follow our Lord. page 14 Our Lord
does admit all that will, of what estate or condition soever. ibi. Many follow
the desire of the flesh, but few follow Christ. page 15 The world calls to
deceive us, yet many follow it. page 16 Christ calls to save us, few or none
will hear him. ibid God of his ordinary power cannot remit actual sins,
with out the parties penance. ibid. By penance, great offenders became the
especial friends of God. p. 17
Chapter 3. page 22.
OF the dangers in deferring of Penance. Brute beasts, by the instinct of
nature, seek present remedy in sickness. page 17 Many for to recover health
of the body, will endure great pains. page 18 Much more dangerous is the
sickness of the soul, the^ that of the body. p. 18 Deferring of penance, does
put the soul oftentimes, in danger of perishing everlastingly. page 19 Penance
deferred until the hour of death, is dangerous. ibid Hope of long life,
makes many to perish. page 20 The sorrowful words of a dying man diligently to
be noted. page 21 Every one must render an account not only of what he has
done, but also what he has omitted, that he might and ought to have done.
ibi. Our whole time, is to be e^ployed to Gods honor, and the good of our
soul. p. 22 This present time is ours, granted by God to merit therein, the
life everlasting. ibid. God will judge our best works. page 23 They are much
incident to many dangers, which defer their Penance till death. ibid Penance
is presently to be done, to avoid Gods wrath, which otherwise suddenly
comes upon us. page 24
Chapter IIII. page 27
Certain reasons to make more manifest the dangers which proceed from delay
and negligence in doing penance. 25 The first reason wherefore Penance should
not be deferred. ibid. Which way a man has bent all his desires in his life,
that way is he most likly to sal at his death. pa. 26 A man must render an
account of every moment of time, how it is spent. ibi. The second reason, why
Penance should be presently done, is for that a man by long delay, is the more
burdened. ibid The longer a man deferreth to do Penance the les able is be to
do it. 28 The weight of one mortal sin, is so great, that without the great
mercy of God, it would press thee down to hell. ibid. Sinners ought to
consider, into what dangererous estate sin has brought them. ibid. The third
reason, that Penance ought not to be deferred, is fear of sudden death.
ibid. He which forgets God in his life, will forget himself at the hour of
death. page 29 The fourth reasons is, for that a little penance done in time,
makes more satisfaction for our sins, here then great and long pains which
are suffered in Purgatory, p. 30 The pains of Purgatory, though they are not
everlasting, yet do they far exceed, all the pains of the world. page 32
No temporal pain is to be compared, unto the pains of Purgatory. ib. A man
may make satisfaction for venial sins, by any pious and virtuous action. page
32. What Penance is due unto a mortal sin. page 33.
Chapter V.
THat Penance is not to be left off, whilst life lasts. page 34 He which
after his Penance is done, lives caresly, soon falls, either into his
former, or worse offenses. ibid. We must not only by confession, sweep away
the dust of our sins, but also scrape away the durte, with hard iron of
strict Penance. page 35 The servants of God ought never to be idle. pa. 26 The
second sins, of the same kind are worse then the first. ibid. Penance is a
means to preserve one from falling again into sin. page 37 Penance is the
weapon wherewith we must wage war, against the flesh and the devil. page 38
The devil be^deth his forces, chiefefly against those which leave sin. and come
unto God. p. 39. As Sat^a^, when our Savior fasted, did chiefly te^pt him, so
does he the like when any tend unto perfection page 40. A similitude to prove
the same. ibid. Fruits proceeding from Penance. ibid The second fall into sin,
is worse then the first. page 41 It is easier for one to keep him from sin,
then after that he is fallen, to rise again. page 42 Many dangers come, by
leaving off the armor of Penance. page 43 There is no end prefixed for
Penance in this life. page 44 It is not enough for one to begin to do
Penance, but he must persevere therein to the last end. ibid. Similitudes, to
exhort unto perseverance, in doing of Penance. ibid. The reward of
perseverance. page 45
Chapter VI.
THat the austeritie of Penance, is made easy, hy the due considerattion of
the sweetness, which is in it. page 46 The means to prevent and avoid Gods
wrath, is to make present satisfaction for sin. ibid. Examples how Penance
held the hand of God from inflicting just punishment. ibid. The Ninevites
received profit from Penance. page 47 An objection, and answer. ib. It is not
sufficient for salvation to bring forth the leaves or buddes of Penance, but
the worthy fruits ar required. p 48 Good motions which are not put in
execution, d^e augment the pains of the damned. page 49 The path of penance,
leads to eternal consolation. page 49 The way of penance, which seems very
hard, is by Christ's example, made plain and easy. page 50 The benefits which
are found in the way of Penance. ibid. What it is to eat our labors ibid.
Chapter VII. page 55
HOw great is the profit which proceeds from penance. p. 55 Penance
brings many benefits unto the soul ib. Justice requires, that according to
the greatness ^^ the sin, so should the penance be. page 5^ Penance is so
pleasing vnt^ God, that it restoret^ life unto the soul. ibid Wounderful is
the profit of penance. ibid God spares everlastingly those whom he punishes
here. page, 57 God does more accept of a little pains voluntarili^ suffered
here, then of as much more endured elsewhere. page 58 Little are all the pains
of this life in respect of future punishment ibid. Terrible are the pains of
Purgatory. page 59 Though the pains of Purgatory be great, yet little or
nothing in respect of the torments in hell ibid. The pains of hell, are so
infinite, that all the men of the world, are not aable to declare the least
part of them. ibid. That pain cannot be imagined, but that the damned endure
it. page 60 True penance, not only delivers one from all those aforesaid
pains, but brings him also to infinite glory and joy. p. 61 What the joys
of heaven are. ibid. All joys, happiness, and and all that can be desired, is
in God. page 62 The excellency of the kingdom of heaven. ibid. Example of
David, what we ought to do, to enjoy the presence of God. ibi. The state of
innocence was lost by sin, Penance is the way to regaine it. 63 As we desire
to enjoy with David, al happiness: So let us here endeavor to imitate his
penance. 61.
Chapter VIII. page 64.
THat penance ought chiefly to be done for the love of God. ibid. It is our
intention which makes our penance the more meritorious, ibid. The chiefest
intention in doing of penance, ought to be the love of God. pa. 65 In sin,
two things are to be considered. The offense unto God, and the hurt of the
sinner. page 66 God is no acceptor of persons. page 67 The cause why God did
accept of the Penance of David, and not of Saul: was the different actions in
doing. ibid. The example of Esau. ibid The love of God ought to be the balance
of all our actions. page 69 God more regards the intention of the doer, then
the work it self. ibid. In all our actions, we must direct our intentions, to
the love of God. page 70 What ought to be our chief intention, in doing of
penance. ibid. A similitude. ibid. What ought to be the chiefest cause of
sorrow; with an exhortation. page 71 A man ought rather choose to suffer all
the pains of the damned, then to offend. ibid. Let our hell be the displesure
of God, and our heaven to have his love. page 72 Hell ought rather to be
feared; for that Gods enemies dwell there, then for the pains therein. ibid.
The chiefest cause wherefore the eternal beatitude is to be desired, is the
assurance never to offend God. ibid. The means to make all our actions
meritorious, is to do them merely for the love of God. ibid An Example worthy
to be noted. ibid. The malice of Satan is often turned, by Gods goodness, to
the increase of our merit. page 73 Constancy in the love of of God, is more
meritorious, then any other action. page 74 The merit of our labors and
aff^ictions, consists in the love of God, ibid.
Chapter IX. page 75.
THat the best and most in Gods favor, have not neglected to do Penance. ibi.
The chiefest remedy for sin, after baptism, is Penance. ibid. It is a great
error and blindness, to think that none do penance, but such as have been
notorious sinners. page 76 Examples to prove that such as have been always
virtuous, yet not withstanding, have done great penance. ibi. Example of Jobs
penance. Of Ieremies, S. John Baptist, although sanctified in his mothers
womb, yet did great penance all his life. ibid. The whole life of the mother
of God, was little, other then continual penance. page 78 The Penance of S.
Elizabeth of Hungary, was not small. page 79 Though she were noble by parentage
in earth, yet penance made her more noble in heaven, ibid. Penance is not
only a salve to cure sin, but also a means, to preserve from sin, and to
win favor with God. page 80 God punishes small offenses, in his great friends
page 81 Example in Zachary punished for a venial sin. ibid. This life is no
other, but a vale of misery, and a time of penance. p. 82 The hour of death
to worldlings, is of all things the most terrible. ibid Nothing defiled, can
enter into heaven. ibid. Whosoever looks well into his daily actions, shall
consider some imperfection. page 83 S. Paul acknowledged his imperfections,
and did penance for them. ibid. The more that one increases in all perfection,
the plainer does he perceive his own imperfections. ibid. Little sins are
not to be contemned. ibid. They are often means to draw us into hell. page 84
Small sins, often breed great danger, by drawing many times into mortal sins,
and offenses. page 85 An Epilogue unto the order, of the Brethren and Sisters
of Penance. page 86 God of evil, oftentimes draws good. ibid Satan of
good, many times endeavors to draw evil. ibid
A TABLE OF THE Chapters, Articles, and chief matters, contained in the Third
Rule of S. FRANCIS, and in the explication thereof.
THe antiquity, institution, and confirmation of this Rule, by our H. Father
Nicolaus 4. page 89 The best means to understand Gods holy will and pleasure,
is to have recourse unto fervent prayer. page 92 S. Francis, by divine
inspiration yea rather commandment, did institute this holy Order of Penance.
page 94 The intention of S. Francis, in instituting this Order, was to incite
all sorts of people, so to follow our Saviors example here, that they may
reign with him in heaven. page 95 S. Francis ordained, that it should be so
ordered, as it might be fit for all such as with any zeal would undertake it.
ibid. In this Rule, is not required any hard matters, above the power of the
meanest or least able. page 96 The brethren and Sisters do by vow, bind
themselves, to observe the commandments of God, but not under the pain a of
double mortal sin. ibi. The chiefest thing which God requires at our hands,
is to give our heart wholly unto him. ibid. They lend their heart unto God, which
serve him for temporal prosperity. page 49 They sell their heart which serve
him only for eternal reward. ibid, They only give him their heart, which out
of mere love to himself do serve him without any other respect, p. 100 Love
is the loadstone of love. ibid. God has bestowed great benefits upon man, to
win his love to him. ibid. Gods true Children give their hearts wholly unto
him. page 201 The poorest beggar may gain heaven by his perfect love to God,
as well as the richest Emperor. ibid. There are many in heaven, which were
poor, weak and ignorant, but none which did not entirely love God. ibid. The
commandments of God, which are affirmative, bind always, but not for all
times. page 102 The chiefest point of this Rule, is to observe the
commandments of God. page 103 No part of the Rule it self does bind, under
pain of mortal sin. ibid. Of the benefits and privileges of this holy Order
of Penance. page 104 At their first entrance, they are cleansed from their
sins and pains due thereunto in Purgatory, and restored to the state as it
were of innocence, wherein they were, when they were first baptized. ibid. The
form of the general approbation, at their entrance page 105 They must first
make a general Confession of their whole life, but never to repeat it any
more. page 106 It does rather hinder devotion, then augment it, to make often
the same general confession. page 107 It is counseled, though not commanded,
to make every half year, a general confession of all notable things which
have happened in that time. ibid It is not enough to do a a good deed, but it
must also be well done. p. 108 The Visitor must oftener visit here, then in
other places, because he and the Brethren and Sisters, want the help here,
which they have else where. ibid. One of the chiefest obligations of this Rule,
is to make every night, not only a diligent examination of their conscience,
but also present satisfaction for any fault committed that day. page 109 How
we ought to make this examination ibid God will not forgive sin, and the
pains due thereunto, unless the sinner do make some satisfaction. page 109 The
cause why we are judged and punished by God, is for that we do not judge and
punish our selves, p. 110 God does never punish the selfsame fault twice.
page 111 This, and all labors of this life, will seem but little, if they be
compared with the greatness of the reward. ibid. The sinner cannot escape
punishment, but must either be punished here, or in the world to come. page 112
Assured hope of reward, makes all labor seem so light, that one shall not
scarce feel them. ibid Whosoever does duly meditate upon the reward of the
life to come, will joyfully bear all present pains. page 113 Most miserable
are they which will suffer nothing, for the life everlasting. page 114 Great is
the happiness of those which truly observe this rule. ibid. Every one may
see by the ordinance of the late general Chapter, at Tolledo, and annotations
since, of the Commissarie General, upon this Rule, that it is not worn out of
request. ibid.
The first Chapter of the Rule: Of the manner of examining those which will
undertake this form of life. page 115.
ARTIC. 1.
THis holy Order of Penance, is ordained for all Christians, of what estate or
degree soever. page 117 The firm foundation of all happiness, is the true
belief, and constant profession of the Catholic faith. ibid. He which will
not do both these, cannot be admitted into this order. ibid. A man must not
only believe, but must consta^tly profess the Catholic faith. page 118. The
love in Religion, does far excel al other whatsoever. ibid. In matters that may
hinder the good of the soul, al other love is to be set aside. ibid. Whosoever
has been justly and publicly reprehended or punished by justice, cannot be
received into this order. page 119 God requires all perfefectnesse in his
service and servants. ibid. One bad sheep, may spoil a whole flock. ibid.
Chapter II.
ARTIC. 1.
HOw they are to be be received, which will enter into this order. page 120 As
all wood is not fit for building, so all persons are not fit for Religion. page
120 Christ's delight, is to be with the sons of me^. page 123 All such as ar
desirous to be received, must be first deligentlye examined before they be
admitted. page 124 The vow which they do make, which after their probation,
are admitted to profession. page 125
ARTIC. 2.
THat the Ministers must plainly declare unto the Brethren and Sisters, before
their profession, the burdens of the fraternity. p. 126 A summary, of all the
burdens and constitutions of this Order, where in the whole effect of the
chapters of the Rule ar briefly comprehended. page 127 Chapter. 1. concerning
their belief. ibid. Concerning their admission. chap* 2. ibid Their apparel.
chap. 3. ib. Their communication. chapter 4. page 128 Their abstinences and fasts
ibid, Of receiving the blessed Sacrament. c. 6. p. 130 Of their Canonical howrs
c. 8. ibid, Of making their will. cha. 9. p. 131 Of examining their conscience.
chap, 2. ibid Of hearing Mass, and monthly exercises. chap. 13. ibid. Of
exercising the works of mercy. chapter 14. p. 132 Of the vissitation. cha. 16.
ibid. Of the correction of offenders. chap. 16. pa. 133. Of the conservation of
peace. chap. 17. ibid. How the Ordinary Prelates, may when need requires,
dispense in in all these aforesaid things, according unto the necessity of
each one. chap. 18. ibid That no point of this rule does of it seife bind,
under mortal sin. chapter 20. page 134 Of their obedience unto the Visitor, in all
such things as concern the Rule. chap. 2. ver. 20-ibid. Many undevout persons,
and some unexperienced Ghostly Fathers, in matters of perfection, do go about
to discourage many from taking this happy course tending to al perfection.
page 135 The fervent love of God makes a man easily to bear the burdens, that
belong to perfection. page 136 The great benefits which this Rule yields,
causes the followers thereof to observe it with all alacrity. ibid. A spare
diet, kills vice, and nourishes virtue strengthens the soul, and
eleuateth the mind. page 146 Chap. 6. by often frequenting the holy
Sacraments, they cleanse their souls from sin, and replenish it with grace.
ibid. Chap 7. As the just man falls seven times in the day, so by their
seseuen canonical hours, are they moved to rise as often. ibid. All men have as
much need of prayer, as trees of moisture. page 147 He prays continually,
which does always well. ibid. Chap 8. They reap great quietness, and
tranquillity of conscience, which make their will, and settle their goods in
time. ibid. They which after due examination of their conscience, make daily
satisfaction for their offenses, do free themselves from far greater pains
hereafter. page 148 Cha. 9. great benefits proceed from hearing Mass daily.
page 189 The Brethren and Sisters, gain 100. years of pardon, by reading or
hearing the Rule read once every month. ibid. By their monthly alms, they
redeem their sins, and lay up treasuere for themselves in heaven, and here
also, if they should stand in need. ibid. Chap. 10. Their works of mercy, will
work them, that favor, to hear that comfortable speech of our Savior, Come
ye blessed. page 189 Chap. 11. At the yearly visitation, they receive help
and comfort, both spiritual and temporal, page 190 God has commanded every
one to have a care of his neighbor. ibid. Severely shall he be punished, which
through his silence, or conuiuence, shall let his neighbor perish. page 191
Chapter 12. Concord and peace, give such strength unto a congregation, that their
enemies can hardly prevail any ways against them. page 192 Whosoever
begins a life, tending to perfection does presently enter into combat
against Satan. ibid.
ARTIC. 3.
Concerning restitution. page 193 This order tends to the good of all
persons, but to the prejudice of none page 194 He incurreth great hurt, which
with holds any thing against right ibid. As the Brethren which fall into want,
without their own fault, ar charitably to be relieved; so wasteful persons, if
they will not be corrected, ar presently to be expelled. ibi.
ARTIC. 4.
OF reconciliation to his neighbors. p. 195 No gift is pleassng unto God, which
is given by one that is not in charity, with his neighbors. ibid. No man can
be admitted into this Congregation, unless he first reconcile himself unto his
neighbors. page 196
ARTIC. 5.
OF the Profession, page 196 Every one must expect until the year of probation
be expired p. 197
ARTIC. 6.
OF the observation of the commandments of God. page 197 As this estate does
far excel the ordinary secular estate and calling; so is there more perfection
required therein, and greater care in observation of the Commandments of God.
page 198
ARTIC. 7.
OF their manner of obedience. p. 199 Although the brethren and Sisters, do
not make any express vow of obedience yet do they here make an implicit
vow thereof, in all such things as concern merely the good of the
congregation. ib. S. Elizabeth promised obedience unto her ghostly father in all
things, that were not prejudicial, unto the duty of marriage. ibid. Amongst
all vows, obedience is the chiefest. page 180 He which is obedient, both
eating fasteth, sleeping watches, and in test labour^th. ibid. The excellency
of the virtue of obedience, is proved, by many worthy sentences of the
ancient Fathers, page 181 The virtue of obedience is so necessary, for the
conservation of al congregations, that without it, they would soon fall to
confussion. page 205 No point of the Rule does of it self bind, under the
pain of a mortal sin. ibid It is a great comfort to have an instructor to
guide us in our spiritual actions. page 207 Think that thou have only lived
that day well, wherein thou have renounced thy own will. page 208 The merit
and perfection of the soul, consists more in denying thy own will, then in
feeling a tenderness of heart, or sweetness in devotion. page 210 Self-love
does so defile all our actions, that thereby we loose soon al devotion. ibid.
An example thereof. ibid. A comfortable caveat. ibi. How a man ought to behave
himself, when he finds a dryness in his devotion. ibid. One of the chiefest
things, whereby a man may win heaven, is in all things, to conform his will, unto
the will of God. page 212 Our own will is like unto a Raven, which will pike
out the eyes of his feeder. page 213 Our self-will, is often cause, that our
fasting is not accepted. ibid. Though the will of our Superior should be
contrary unto our own will, yet must we follow him, for that Christ himself
is our chief governor. ibid. A notable example of S. Peter. page 214 Though
we labor much, if it be against obedience, or only following our own will,
yet shall our merit be little. ibid. He which labors by obedience, though
the labor be small, yet the merit will be great. page 215 Obedience adds
double merit, to every good work. ibid. Every one ought greatly esteem their
superiors, and to behave themselus with all respect toward them. ibid. Example
of our Queen Katherine, and her worthy Epistle to Father Forest. page 216
How every one ought to obey his Superior. p. 222 How their vow and promise
made unto them, ought to be set down. ibid.
ARTIC. 8.
THat the professed may not leave this manner of life, page 223 From allow
estate, a man may profitably assende unto one of higher perfection, but not of
the contrary, ibid The scripture it self does exhort us to make pious vows.
page 224 A vow is a matter of counsel, and not a precept. ibid Difference,
between a counsel, and a precept. ibid. Every one must be careful to render
unto God what he has piously vowed. page 225 God severely punishes those
which keep not their promise with him. page 2^6 The breaking of lawful vows,
does greatly displease Almighty God. ibid. The ancient Fathers, give
encouragement, to make pious vows, and show what profit comes thereby.
ibid.
ARTIC. 9.
COncerning the receiving of married women. page 227 There is no rule so
geneneral, but time and place may have just occasion to alter it. ibid Where
cease the cause that obliged, the obligation also does cease. ibid. The
husband reapeth great benefit by his wifes entrance into this Congregation.
ibid, It seems to be against reason, that such as desire and have most n^ed
of comfort, should with out just cause, be deprived of it, when they may
lawfully have it. page 228
Chapter III.
OF the form of the habit, and quality of the apparel. page 230 It is not
the habit which makes a religious person, but the due observation of their
approved order. page 233 This holy Order, was chiefly ordained for such
devout persons as desire to exercise themselves already in the world, in the
works of piety and penance. The Habit ordained in this chapter, seems to
belong principally unto those which live in Monasteries. ibid. The brethren and
Sisters, in S. Francis time, and until this day, in those places, where he
lived, do wear for Habit, their ordinary apparel, the color, only is,
and ought to be gray. page 234 As the brethren, whilst they lived, were made
members of S. Francis order, so in their death their bodies ought not to be
separated from them. page 235 They which receive them into the Order, must
instruct them what is required at their hands. page 236
ARTIC. 2.
OF the dispensation, with the color and manner of apparel. page 236 The most
accustomed habit, is to wear, either their apparel of Gray, or otherwise,
under their ordinary garments some white habit of flannel, linen, or
heare-cloath. ibid. The examples of the Saints of this Order, do make it
manifest, as of S. Jews King of France. page 237 S. Elzearius count of
Alsatia. page 237 S. Iuo in like sort. ibid. Blessed Galeatus ibid. S.
Elizabeth, daughter to the King of Hungary ibid. Blessed Queen Salomea. ibid.
Holy Queen Katherine of England. ibid. S. Francis ordained that they should
wear, either their outward, or inward apparel of this color of humility, to
put them daiely in mind of their mortality. page 240 The garments of the
Saints, of the old Testament, were but poor and simple. page 241 Before sin
came into the world, man needed no garments. ibid. Gods great friends went but
poorly apparrelled. page 242 It seldom happens, that they which have such
care to apparel gorgeously their bodies, but that they leave their poor
soul naked of virtue and grace. ibid. The Romans made a worthy ordinance for
their wives herein. page 243 Christ, which was Lord of the whole world, and
all that is therein, carried nothing with him thereof, but a poor shroude. ibid
So thou shall carry no more unless it be a gray weed wherein thou ought to
be buried, if thou may. ibid.
Chapter IIII.
OF their conversation, and going abroad, and giving of gifts. page 244 They
are not forbidden to go unto courts, upon necessary business. ibid As their
happy course of life, inuiteth them to fly all vain pleasures, so must they
endeavor to avoid al vain occasions and company. page 246 Evil company,
corrupts the good. page 247 Example in the children of Israel. ibid Also the
Hebrews. ibid. S. Peter in like manner. ibid. The hurt which S. Peter received
by bad company, ought to make us fear and fly the like. ibid. Just, men are
compared unto a fruitful tree. page 248 As dust hurts the eyes, so does the
bad example of the wicked. ibid. The wicked are compared unto thorns. ibid. As
the company is which a man does frequent, so shall he be judged to be. A
similitude of the looking glass. page 250 It is very dangerous to converse
with the wicked. ibid. If the strength of S. Peter did not preserve him from
falling, how much then ought every one to fear. ibid. Every one does for the
most part, imitate the manners of those with whom he does converse. page 251
As the profitable floude of Iourdane, when he enters into the unwholesome lake
of the Palestine, loses his virtue. So he which is virtuous in his own
course, if he run into the company of the wicked, loses his virtue and
devotion. ibid. S. Augustine holds, that one offendes more to spend the
festiual days in dancing, then if he spent it in plowing. 252 The goods which
may be spared, belonging unto the poor, must not be employed upon vanity or
idle persons. page 253
Chapter. V.
OF abstinence and fasting. page 257 How the fastes of this rule, are to be
kept in our Country. 257 Fasting is to be used in such sort, that the body
and soul may be able to go forward in the service of God, with alacrity,
page 258 The faithful servant of God must by fasting and prayer, so weaken his
flesh, that it may be obedient unto the spirit. page 259 A similitude of a
ship. page 260 There is nothing which does more terrify and overcome the
devil, the^ austeritie of life. p. 261
ARTIC. 2.
OF dispensation in fasting. page 262 In all points of the Rule if the Br. and
Sisters, do follow the advice of the Visitor or of his prudent ghostly Father,
it is a sufficient discharge. page. 263 S. Frnacis would that his Children
should sometimes rejoice in civil company, as just occasion should fall out.
page, 264,
ARTIC. 3.
OF thankessgiuing, before their refections. page 265 Three degrees of
thankfulness. ibid. In token of thankfulness, every one must say one Pater
noster, before and after every refection at the least. ibid Our life does not
only depend upon the common use of natural things, but upon the will of God,
pa. 266 It is a great comfort in our greatest extreamitie, daily to consider,
and firmly to believe, that our heavenly Father, is so potent, that he can as
well sustain and nourish us without bread, as with it. ibid. Far greater care
has our Savior of those which seek him, then they can have of themselves.
page 267
ARTIC. 4.
OF rendering thanks after each refection. page 268 The more benefits that we
receive, the more are we obliged to show our selves, thankful for them ibid.
Great hurt comes from ingratitude. ibid By ingratitude, men become worse then
brute beasts. page 269 It is no small fault for a man to show himself
unthankful for the benfits received from the hands of God. ibid. The example of
the holy Saints, do sufficiently testify, that it is a thing lawful for
married persons, by mutual consent, to vow chastity. page 276 S. Aug.
alleges that act of the glorious Virgin, and Joseph, for an example. ibid. S.
Paulinus also with his wife Therasia. ibid. The like is written of S. Edward
our King. ibi. Chastity is triple. The first of married persons. The second of
Widows. The third, of Virgins. page 277 Virginity does so far excel
matrimony, as heaven does surpass the earth and as much as angels do exceed
men. ibid. Marriage fills the earth, Virginity Paradise. ibid. The blessed
Apostles, and holy Fathers, have all labored, to induce chaste Virgins, to
dedicate by vow their Virginity unto God. page 278 To do a good deed, by
vow, is more meritorious. ibid. Great benefits does Virginity reap, by the
vow thereof. page 279 A sin which proceeds from a will, settled unto evil,
is far worse then that which comes of frailty. ibid. So that deed which
is done with a mind and will, settled in God, is far better then that which
wants the stabilitie. ibid. They which vow virginal chastity, vidual, or
single life, do more specially enjoy all our privileges and spiritual favors.
page 280
ARTIC. 5.
OF corporal exercises. page 280 Nothing is more precious, then time, which God
has lent us, to work our salvation. ibid. They are much deceived, which
think that the time of this momentary life is lent unto the^ to pass it in
vain pleasures. ibid. S. Francis did give himself unto bodily labor, and
commanded that all his Brethren should do the like. page 281 Women in our
Ladies bands, must instead of other exercises, employ themselves as much as
they can conveniently in feruente prayer. page, 282 One of the principal
caueats, which the holy fathers have given, is to avoid idleness page 293 Our
Savior himself for our example, was most careful to spend his whole time,
for our good. ibid. His blessed Mother, used no less diligence therein. ibid.
Our most virtuous Queen Katherine, imitating the Queen of Angels, did spend
her whole time in the service of God. ibid. S. Clare in all her sickness,
lost no time. page 284 S. Jews King of France, dedicated his whole time to
the service of God, and good of his Realm. ibid. Great benefits are not
granted for small trifles. page 285 Every one of this Order must do something
daily, when he may conveniently. ibid. It is not the greatness of the deed,
but the affection of the heart, which is most regarded. pa. 286 The weak, and
such as are able to do little, yet if their affection be great, their reward
shall be answerable. ibid. Whilst life lasts, we must be careful to
spend our whole time in (...) virtuous and profitable exercises. page 287 The
greatness of our recompense, proceeds from the rightnesse of our intention.
page 288 No less diligence ought to be used in directing our intententions,
then in the doing of our actions. ibid A worthy example of the Emperor
Octauian. ibid No alms is more pleasing unto God, then what is given out of
the labor of thy own hands. p. 289.
ARTIC. 6.
OF the diet of the laborers. page 290 A man ought to have as great care to
comfort the poor labourer, as the rich potentate ibi. The labourer may eat
three times in the day, when he labors in the Summer. ibi. The labourer and
servant, may as much merit by his faithful service, as his master by his
alms deeds and prayer. page 291
ARTIC. 7.
Laborers in other men's houses, may lawfully eat, as other Catholics do. pa.
292 As Satan did overcome our first Parents, by the forbidden meat, so by
gluttony, does he seek to overthrow us daily. page 293 Gluttony hurts
both body and soul, ibid. Many great hurts proceed from that vice. ibid. Our
Savior himself gave a heavy curse unto the gluttons ibid. Temperance is
profitable, both for body and soul. page 294 Abstinence is a thing necessary
for all persons, but especially for the brethren and Sisters, which make
profession of Penance. ibid.
Chapter VI.
OF Confession and receiving. page 195 In the primitive Church, the Christians
did frequent the blessed Sacrament, once every week, at the least. page 297 S.
Francis desires, to inflame again the hearts of many, which at length were
grown to be very cold. ibid. A generous mind is rather led by sweetness,
then drawn by force. ibid. By spiritual receiving, much grace may be gained.
ibid. They cannot but be much pleasing unto our heavenly Father, which do by
this Sacrament, often unite themselves unto his loving Son. ibid. An example of
Elzearius, most worthy to be followed. page 299 No less is the example of our
most virtuous Queen Katherine. page 300
ARTIC 2.
OF the preparation against high feasts page 300 Against high Feasts, men ought
to make a great preparation. ibid. Necessary counsel, concerning Confession.
ibi.
Chapter VII.
THat they ought not to wear weapons of offense. page 301 The chiefest weapon
against all iniures, is patience. page 302 It is much better to suffer great
injuries for the love of God, without murmuring, then to feed daily a 100.
poor people, or to fast thy self for many days together. ibid. If thou
overcome thy self, thou shall eassily overcome all thy enemies. ib. The more
that a man murmureth, so much the more does he vex and burden himself. page
303. By patience and well-doing, thou shall best overcome and revenge thy self
of thy enemies ibid The best means for one to revenge himself of his enemies,
is to show himself to be a good and honest man. page 304 Even: As we cast a
crust of bread to stop a dogs mouth which barketh against us. So against evil
desposed persons, let us cast our prayers, that they may be stopped from these
evils. ibid. All such as desire to reign with Christ in glory, must endeavor
to imitate his holy manner of revenging. page 305
Chapter VIII.
OF saying the Canonical hours. page 305 The soul which gives not it self
unto prayer, is dead and stinketh before the face of God. page 308 As water is
life unto the fish, so is prayer unto the soul. ibid. S. Francis did dedicate
unto prayer, not only his heart and body, but in like manner, all his works
and time. ibid The Clergy, by saying the Roman Breuiarie, do discharge the
offiice of the Rule. page 309 The Laietie, which can read, by saying the Office
of our blessed Lady. page 310 The others, by devoutly meditating, in saying of
their beads, at their will. ibid. The manner how, by the the bond of the Rule,
and constitution of the order, they are to say, their divine office. page 311.
ARTIC. 1.
WHat office every one is to say. page 909
ARTIC. 2.
O^ saying their office in due time. p. 312 At what time they ought to say
their office. ibid The coustome is to rise as early in the morning as their
health, with conueniency will permit them. ibid. It were a great shame that the
little birds, being diligent timely to praise their Creator: man should be
slouthful in his service ibid. S. Aug. says, that it is a thing very
indecent, that the Sun should be up, and man in his bed. page 313 Too much
sleep hurts both body and soul ibid. To rise early, is not only profitable
for the soul, but also for the health both of body and mind. ibid. The morning
is the principal time, to get divine consolation, and food of the soul. p. 214
The gathering of Manna, in the morning, was a sign thereof. ibid. The reason
of the institution of the seven canonical hours. p. 315 What are the times
for public prayer, for what we ought to pray in the morning. ibid, Morning
and evening we ought to have a special care, what we have done, or are to
do. page 316 Though we ought to be diligent at al times in prayer, yet
specially in the morning and evening. ibid. Order in doing, causes every good
thing to be the better. ibid. Cursed is he which does the service of God,
negligently. ibid. S. Francis was only Christ's secretary, in writing of his
rules. ibid.
ARTIC. 3.
OF coming unto public prayers. pa. 317 In Aduent and Lent, the Brethren and
Sisters must be present at mattins, in their parishes or Chapels, if they may
conveniently. page 318 A multitude is sooner heard, and does often obtain
that, which one alone cannot. ibid. There is ever more comfort and merit to
be gained, at the public seruce of Christ, then in our other particular
actions. ibid. A Communualty is to be preferred before all singularity. ibid.
Sondaies and holy days are dedicated unto God particularly, therefore in the^
every one ought to perform more acts of devotion, then other days. page 319
Chapter IX.
OF making their will. page 320 He which desires to attain unto perfection,
must allienate his mind from all those things, which may hinder him in the
service of God. ibid. Every brother* and sister, which may conveniently, must
make their will within three months, after their entrance, at the farthest. 321
Sickness is the speedy messenger of God, to inuit all persons to make
present repair unto him. page 322 Feruor in religion, is commonly very great
at the first. page 323 As time increases, so not seldom does devotion
decrease. ibid. They which die intestate, not only do deprive their souls of
great co^forts which it might have had, but oftentimes, in steed thereof, heap
up great pains and heavy curses. ibid. Great hurt comes unto the soul of
him which dies without making of a will. The soul must render a strict
account, for the good deeds which it omitted to do, when it might. page 324
Every one ought to settle his affairs in such fort that he may always stand
ready for death, considering that the hour thereof is most uncertain. ibid
Many sentences, showing the uncertainty thereof. ibid. The place where a man
shall die, is uncertain. page 326 Neither is there any more certainty of the
manner and kind of death. ibi. No less uncertain is the estate, wherein the
poor soul stands, which is not prepared for death. page 327 To prevent
these harms, and uncertainties. S. Francis exhorts the^ to prepare them for
death, by making their will in time. ibid As death is not fearful unto those
which are unprovided: so is it most comfortable for the^ which have made due
preparation for it. page 328 Many similitudes, and sentences, to prove it.
ibi. By the benefit of death, we are recalled from banishment, into our own
country. ibid. To the lovers of the world death is most fearful, but to such
as love God and desire his company, it is most joyful. ibi. Example in S. Paul.
ibid. Happy is he which stands always reddy for death. page 329 That soul
which has devoutly served our Savior, he will never leave him without
comfort in his greatest agonies. ibid. The soul which is well prepared, the
celestial spirits are readdy to meet it, at her departure, out of this
corruptible body. p. 330 Heaven is a place where we should lay up our
treasure, and send our gifts from al parts of our body. ibid They which make
not their will in time, s^a^d in great danger, that it shall never be fulfiled.
ib We must do our best to purchase the kingdom of heaven our selves, and not
leave others to do it for us. page 331 Note how heaven is to be purchased.
ibid Some give all their goods, to buy it; others purchase it, with half
their inheritance. ibid. Neither are the poorest left without means to buy it,
when by goodwil, and earnest desire a man may obtain it. page 332 The reason
wherefore, a man should every half year renew his will. ib Often making of a
man's will, causes in him a perpetual memory of death. page 333 The daily
remedy of death, not only does preserve a man from sin, but inuiteth him
unto virtue also. ibid. He which remembers that he must die, contemns what
is here present, and hasteneth unto that which is to come hereafter. ibid.
Chapter X.
COncerning peace. page 334 The holy Ghost does not power his grace, but where
is concord and peace. ib Our Savior did much esteem of peace. p. 335 As
Christ brought peace at his coming into the world, so did he leave it unto us
at his departure. ibid. An exhortation unto peace ibid. A parable wherein is
showed, that none shall be forgiven by God, which does not forgive all others.
p. 336 What he must do which offered the injury. ibid. How the Ministers
must proceed to make peace. page 337
Chapter XI.
HOw injuries are to be redressed. 3^8 A comparison, between a natural body,
and a spiritual. page 339 When S. Francis would have the Ministers to see that
all wrongs were righted. ibid. The Apostolical letters of Gregorious the 9. in
the behalf of the Br. and Sisters. ibid The like of Sextus the 4. 200. years
after page 341
Chapter XII.
OF oaths. p. 342 Our Savior exhorts all men to avoid all kind of oaths.
pa. 343 How a man may swear and when. ibid.
ARTIC. 2.
OF common talk. page. 344. Many do little regard, whether their oaths be
true or false. ibid. A worthy example of S. Elzearius. p. 345 A little penance,
voluntarily done here, makes better satisfaction, then a far greater else
where. ibid From many words proceed vain oaths. p. 346 Idle words are the
beginning, and cause of many sins. ibid What hurt proceeds from many
words. ibi. A man ought to have a great care of his words, before he
pronounce them. page 347 He which is given to many words, seldom comes to
true perfection. ibid Nature it self induces us to silence. ibid. Great
benefits comes from silence, page 348 From much speech, proceed many lies.
ibid. By multiplicity of words, a man shows his own folly. ibid. A fool by
houlding his peace, is often taken for a wise man. p. 349 An idle word, is
that which is uttered without the profit of the hearer or speaker. ibid Many
words show a great pride in the speaker. ib. As silence is the beginning of
good discipline, so much speech is the gate of devotion. p. 350
ARTIC. 3.
OF penance for idle words, after the due examination of our conscience. pa.
351 Why S. Francis did not set down here any penance for other sins. ib. The
soul must render an accounte of every idle word. page 352 God will punish the
very sins of omission with hell fire. ibid Example hereof, in the
unprofitable servant. Mat. 25. ibid. It is not enough for one to do no evil. p.
353 He which omitteth to bring forth good fruit when he should, shall be cast
into hell. ibid Every one ought at night to examine himself, what good he
has done that day. p. 354 A necessary rule to be followed. ibid Whereof one
ought to make this daily examination of his conscience. ibid First, concerning
the gifts wherewith his soul is adorned. page 355 2. Of corporal benefits
bestowed upon our corruptible body. ibid. 3. About the temporal goods which
God has lent us. page 356 By this daily examination, a man must make him self
ready for that great and strict account to be made before God. ib Examples
showing, how needful it is for every one to make daily his accounts reddy. p.
357 What is the duty of a true Christian. ibid. How, and when every one ought
to make this daily examination. p. 359 A sincere conscience, is the true
friend unto the soul. ibid What is the common custom, of many worldly
friendships. ibid At the dreadful judgment day, all the court of heaven,
cannot help that soul which dyed in mortal sin. p. 359 The daily exercise
of every good christian. ibid The good resolution which every one ought to make
daily. ibid A worthy instruction of S. Chrysostom. The means how to find favor
before the just judge of the world. page 362
ARTIC. 4.
OF the care of ones family. p. 362 In the kingdom of heaven, there is no
difference of persons, but according unto their memerits. ibid A true comfort
for faithful servants. ibid The means for masters to make good servants. ib
Example of Abraham and Loath. ibid Absolon is but too much example of bad
masters. page 363 The cause of so many bad servants now a-daies. ibid. It is a
great fault for a master, to be careless of the principal good of his
servants. p. 364 A Worthy example of S. Elzearius for all masters to follow.
page 365.
Chapter XIII.
OF hearing Mass, and making the Congregation. page 366 Examples do more move
then words. page 367 The lesser, by the instinct of nature, do follow the
example of the greater. page 368 Great benefits are reaped daily, by hearing
Mass devoutly. ibid A worthy sentence, of S. Anselme page 369 Many particular
benefits Frist, increase of grace. ib. Second, remission of temporal pain,
due unto sins. ibid. Third, One obteineth, with more ease what he demands.
pa. 370 Fourth, He exercises 3. principal acts of virtue. ibid Fifth. He may
daily receive Christ spiritually. ibid. How to receive spiritually. ibid. The
internal action of the will, is the substance of al our works. page 371 What
every one ought to do, which cannot be present at Mass. ib. How a man ought
to behave himself, at Mass. ibid. In time of Mass, they which can, ought
rather to employ themselves in meditating, them in vocal prayer page 372. How
great is the merit of meditating, upon the passion of Christ. page 373 What
one ought to meditate upon, in the time of Mass. ibid The affection of the
heart, is more regarded, then either the manner or multitude of prayers. page
374 Christ in his passion showed all manner of praying. ibid. It profits
little to pray with the mouth, if the heart be altogether distracted p. 376
Sin hinders our prayers from being heard. page 377 What we ought to do to
make our prayers acceptable before God. First, we must wash our hands clean,
with the fountain of tears. ibi. Secondly, our voice and heart must go
together. ibi. A necessary caveat. ibid It is not the sweetness which we
find in in prayer, that mamaketh it more metorious, but the love and affection
to God. p. 379 Thirdly, we must pray with our hands, by doing good works.
ibi. As the ^ewes vexed Christ in the house of Pilate* so do many now. page
380 A good caveat. ibid.
ARTIC 2.
OF their monthly assembly. p. 381 Every one must endeavor to learn
whatsoever he can conveniently, as well as if he were present at these monthly
assemblies. ibid, To pray for our Brethren is a spiritual alms. page 382 That
prayer is most acceptable to God, which is not forced by necessity, but
commanded by spiritual charity ibid. How much the more devoutly a man prays
for a another, so much the sooner shall he be heard for himself. ib. What the
Brethren or Sisters, which live, alone should do. ibid.
ARTIC. 3.
OF their monthly alms. p. 383 God does not so much reregarde the greatness of
the gift, as the good will of the giver. ibid. Great was their charity in the
primitive Church page 384 The charity of the Prophet Abdias was very great, yet
greater was Gods care, to recompense his family for it in this life. ibid The
first minister of this third Order it self* was a lawyer, called Mr.
Bartholowe. page 385 In distributing their alms chief regard ought to be had,
of the relief of their own brethren and Sisters. page, 386 It is a perpetual
comfort, that the brethren and sisters, are sure to be relieved, in their
necessity, if they deserve it. ibid A worthy example of the Emperor Octauian.
page 386 Many special places out of S. Luke, concerning almes-giuing. page 388
Christ by his own examample, taught us to show mercy to all sorts of people.
ibid An evil example, is now held as a law, but a good, few will follow, page
389 Many particular benefits proceed from Almes-giuing. ibid 1. First, it
obteineth mercy. ibid 2. It extinguisheth sin. page 390 3. It enricheth the
giver. ibid. 4. God has great care of the posterity of the Almes-giuer. ibid
How alms must be given to reap benefit by it. ibid. Alms is compared unto
seed. pa. 393 The almes-giuer, bestows the fruits of the earth, and gets
heaven, and other many profitable excha^ges. ib 1. He which helps others in
their tribulatio^s, deserves to have help in his necessity. page 395 2. Their
prayers, shall be soon heard, but not of the contrary ibid 3. They shall enjoy
life eeuerlasting. ibid Weigh in equal balance and consider, whether the
spiritual benefits are not far greater, then the temporal losses. page 396
The almes-giuer, loses nothing at al. ibid God does not only reward him, in
the life to come, but here also. ibi. God bestows many te^porall benefits
upon him. page 397 Example in the poor widow. ibid. Let every man examine
himself how he believes believes all this aforesaid. ibid The unmerciful has
no way to excuse himself. page 398 God which has a care of al his creatures,
will never see the^ want, which feed the poor. p. 399 What is done unto the
poor, God reputeth it as done unto himself. ib Though it be good to give
alms, and leave to be given at the hour of death* yet is it far better for
one to give it in his life time. page 399 Great is the reward, for
almes-gifts. p. 400
ARTIC. 4.
OF hearing monthly sermons. p. 400 The word of God is the beginning and
root of all blessedness. ibid Penance is both a means to preserve from all
evils, and to make satisfaction for what is past. page 401 God did not call S.
Francis and his Children for their own good only, but for the good of many.
page 403
Chapter XIIII.
OF the sick, and such as die. page 404 What thou would have done unto
thee, do thou unto another. page 406 Christ had a great care of the sick. ibid
What Christ taught others to do, he did it first himself. ibid. It is a thing
most meritorious, to help the sick and infirm. page 407 Health is more
precious then any temporal riches. page 408 Charity does show it self most
charitably, in relieuing and healping the sick. page 409
ARTIC. 2.
OF visiting the sick page 410 The Ministers are particularly bound to visit
the sick, or send some oother, if he cannot come, or be not a priest. ibid.
Sin, is oftentimes cause of sickness. p. 411 Great hurt comes of the abuse
which is daily used and little regarded, in ordinary talk, by detractions.
page 412. God does seldom punish his true servants with sudden death. ibid.
God visits his dear friends also with sickness. page 413 A similitude of
the hard iron. page 414 By perfect compassion on our neighbor, we are made
Christ's true members. ibid S. Paul had great compassion on the sick persons.
page 415 In all sickness and afflictions, we must cast our chief care and
confidence on God page 416 They which put their trust in others then in God,
are oftentimes deceived. ibid. A great comfort for the brethren and Sisters,
that in time of sickness, they are sure to to be visited and provided for.
page 4^7 A question how this provision should be made. ib Our Savior was the
instructor and director of S. Francis, in the institution of all the 3. Orders,
page 4^8 The means how the brethren should be relieved. ibid A special cause
why all the Brethren and Sisters, are required to be personally present, at the
burials of the brethren and Sisters. ibid. What benefit the brethren and
sisters do reap the^ selves by their assistance. page 420 The daily memory of
death, is both a preservative from sin, and an inducement unto virtue. ibid.
Note what the sepulchers and graves do show. page 421 Many benefits proceed
from the daily memory of death. ibid. 1. It makes a man to contemn the
vanities of the world. page 422 2. It makes appear, what life is, for that
life, seems fair until death come to consume it. ibid 3. It preserves a man
from the false deceits of this world. ibid 4. It serves a man to consider,
that as from ashes he came, so to earth be must return. ibid. By the casting
of the feathers into the place of ashes, we are admonished, what we should
do. ibid He which exercises the work of mercy, in burying the dead, shall
find favor and mercy at Gods hands. ibid. Examples in the old testament.
ibid Examples in the new. p. 423
ARTIC. 3
OF their prayers for the dead 424 Amongst the works of mercy spiritual, that
is most meritorious which does comfort the soul. ibid. The general absolution
at the houer of death. page 425 The same absolution at the hour of death. page
425 The same absolution is to be given also unto those which are of the
confraternity of the Girdle of S. Francis p. 426 They which live in the world
may if they will help themselves in time. p. 427 The souls in Purgatory,
though they cannot help themselves, yet may be helped by others. ibid The
reasons why the souls in purgatory may be helped. 1. They did merit it,
whilst they yet lived. page 428 2. They which die in charity, are made
partakers of all good deeds, that are done. 3. They being members of the
Church, are partakers of all the graces, which proceed from Christ the head
thereof. page 429 A comparison, between the corporal and spiritual body. ibid
The brethren and Sisters are bound to help the souls of their brethren and
Sisters. ibid 1. By the bond of love. ibid 2. By the right of confraternity.
ibid A true friend loves always, and at al tims p. 4^9
ARTIC. 4.
OF their prayers, for all in general, both living and dead. p 424 Of the
excellency of prayer. ibid. As the precedent prayers were to be said for every
one in particular, so the other following, are to be said, for all in general.
page 430 The times when these general prayers are to be said. ibid He does a
thing most pleasing unto God, which prays for the conversion of a sinner. p.
432
Chapter XV.
OF the officers. p 432 Office and benefice do most commonly follow each other
page 433 The whole Church of God does pray for all such as are in lawful
authority and office of Collectors. pa. 434 The Collectour is to keep
faithfully such Alms as is given unto this Congregation, that it may be
employed, for the comfort of the poor, ibid. The burdens of the order, are to
be borne by every one alike, that is fitting. ibid
Chapter. XV.
OF the visitation and correction. p. 436 As the Ministers are to visit and
look unto others monthly, so in the visitation, are they to be visited and
looked unto ibid. ibid. A worthy devout coustome of the primitive Church. page
440 The intention of S. Francis in instituting this order of visitation. ibi.
The bad inclination of the flesh, seeks still to draw the soul down. ib A
co^pariso^ of the clock. ibi. The brethren of a Congregation, must be like unto
the wheels of a clock. page 441 Every one must do some penance, if he be
negligent to say his office in due time. ibid. Every night they must both daily
examine their conscience, and make satisfaction for the negligences of that
day, ibid What it is to visit. p. 442 By reason that the number of our order
was but small at the first, S. Francis did not give express commandment, that
the Visitor should be one of his order. ibid Nicolaus the 4. did first only
counsel, but afterward strictly commanded, that the Visitor should be a
Franciscan Priest. page 443 Although Sextus the 4. from a poor Franciscan, was
called to the highest dignity, yet did he not forget this poor family. page
444 Children of one family will be ever more careful of the good thereof, the^
other strangers. ibid. Sextus the 4. did subject al of this third order, unto
the government of the Fathers, of our Order. ibid.
ARTIC. 2
THe reason wherefore none but a Priest may be the Visitor, page 445
ARTIC. 3.
OF the time of the visitation. p. 446 What helps the monthly assemblies did
yield unto the Brethren and Sisters. ibid The cause that now every ha^fe year
visitatitions are made, and the benefits proceeding from them. page 447 A
laudable custom of the ancient Christians. ibi. An imitation of the custom,
in renewing oftentimes former devout promises. ibid. Great benefits proceed
from often renewing of vows made unto God. page 448 The renewing of a vow, of
any good work makes it not only more acceptable, but also fortifieth the will
to do it more courageously. ib The gift is made the greater, by giving of it,
by a continual vewe. ibid The Prophet David counsels, to make vows. page
449 The Apostles, after they were confirmed in grace counseled and induced
many to make the vow of virginity. ibid S. Matthew induced Iphiginea, to vow
virginity. ibid The rest of the Apostles did the like unto many, as I have
declared at large in the 5. chap. and 5. Article.
ARTIC. 4.
OF the expulsion of incorrigible persons. page 450 For heresy, or
disobedience, they are chiefly to be expelled out of this congregation. ibid
What great hurt, and how many benefits they loose which are expelled. page 451
What benefit they receive, which persevere in the order. ibid All convenient
means must be used, to bring the sinner to be penitent. ibid What estimation
is to be made of the words of the Church page 452 Next unto heresy,
disobedience, brings the greatest hurt unto this whole Congregation. ibid
Chapter XVII.
OF avoiding strifes, between themselves and others p. 453 What profit
proceeds from peace. p. 454 How great hurt proceeds from discord. ibid The
course which must be taken for the righting of all wrongs ibid.
Chapter XVIII.
IN what manner, and who may dispense in abstinences and fastings. page 457 A
special comfort for the weak and infirm sort of the brethren and sisters.
ibid Whosoever has an earnest desire to do what he is well able to do, it is
sufficient. p. 458 The good will and intention, are the principal causes, of
the merit of our actions. ibid The internal act of the will, is the substance
of all our works. page 459 A special remedy, to take away all occasions of
scruples, from the brethren and sisters. p. 460
Chapter. XIX.
THe very Ministers, ought to declare, unto the visitors, the manifest faults
of the Brethren and sisters. page 460. A little fault is greatly noted in one
that professes any perfection. page..461 How the Visitors ought to proceed in
correcting of offenders page 462 Sins not corrected in time, do grow very
great, page 463 The punishers, may debar the offenders, but not quite expel
them. ibid.
Chapter XX.
How in all these aforesaid things, no man is bound to mortal sin. page 465
The custom of worldlings is to present their best first, and to keep the
worst last. page 466 S, Francis does the contrary. ibid Most comfortable is
this rule, where there is no difficulty to observe it. or danger of sin, in
breaking of it. ibid. A manifest proof, that no point of this rule binds,
under the pain of a mortal sin. p. 467 The vow which is made in this order,
does not bind, but under the pain of a venial sin. page, 468 In vows, the
intention of him which voweth is more to be regarded the^ the words. pa. 469
The merit by making this vow, is doubled, and the danger of falling into a
mortal sin is made less. ibid What they ought to do in confession, which
break any of the commandments of God. p. 470 Not only must we with prompt
humility, accept of penance, but also fu fill it effectually. pa. 471 The
confirmation of the rule. page 472 Honorius 3, confirmed this rule, only viua
voce. ibid. Nicol. 4. to stop the mouth of alenuious persons, did confirm it
with his Apostolical brief. p. 473 This rule ^a secure means to salvation,
unto all that follow it sincerely. p. 474
FINIS.
Laus Deo beatissimae que Matri eius, and humilimo seruo suo, Sancto Francisco.
F. ANDREAS a SOTO, Ordinis Minorum, Regulae Obseruantiae, Serenissimae Dominae
Infantis Hispaniarum confessarius and super prouincias Belgicas, Coloniae,
Argentinae, atque Hyberniae, cum plenitudine potestatis, in vtroque foro
comissarius.
Reuerendo P. Fratri Gulielmo Staneo, eiusdem instituti predicatori and
confessori salutem.
Cum (sicut nobis significasti) librum quendam composueris Anglico ydiomate,
cui Titulus est, A Treatise of Penance, quem viri docti eius linguae periti
iudicant ad deuotionem fidelium excitandam fore vtilem, quemque ex nostra
comissione legit and approbauit, P. Fr. Robertus Chamberlinus sacrae Theologiae
lector. Nos pro zelo animarum laborantes omni fauore prosoqui cupientes
licentiam tibi impertimur, vt dictum librum imprimi cures, quamprimum
conuenienter poteris, seruatis alias circa librorum impressionem seruandis.

Vale pro me Deum precaturus, in Conuentu nostro Bruxellensi, 10. November.
1616. Seruus Andreas a Soto, Commissarius Generalis.

MAndato Reuerendissime Patris nostri Fratris Andreae a Soto Commissarius
Generalis Seraphici nostri ordinis super prouincias Belgicas and adiacentes and
legi diligenter librum Anglico sermon scriptum, a Reuerendo Patre Fratre
Gulielmo Staney, Predicti Ordinis predicatore and confessore cui titulus est, A
Treatise of Penance, in quo nihil inueni contrarium Cathelice fidei, aut bonis
moribus:

in cuius rei testimonium his subscripsi, Louani 26. Septembris. 1616. Fr.
Robertus Chamberlinus S. Theologiae Lector.

EXplicatio hac Regulae Tertiarioru^ Ordinis, Seraphici Patris Francisci, vna
cum Exhortatione ad Poenitentiam, edita a R. P. F. G. Staney Minorita, nihil
continet Catholicae doctrinae, aut bonis moribus contrarium: sed autoris
pietatem vbique spirat. Quam sicut diuina gratia fretus, per multos antebac
annos constanti persequutione perpessione, ita etiam deuota scriptione haec
testantur.

F. LEANDER de S. Martin, Sacrae Theologiae Doctor, Benedictinorum Anglorum,
Vicarius generalis, and in Academia Duacena Professor Regius linguae sanctae.

LIber iste aliquas exhortationes ad Paenitentiam continens, and ad
obseruationem Regulae tertij ordinis S. Francisci, necnon aliquam eiusdem
explicationem, nihil habet quod fidei Catholicae, aut bonis moribus, sit
contrarium

4. Februarij. 1617. Ioannes Redman, Sacrae Theologiae Doctor, and in Diocesi
Audomarensi librorum Censor.

The chiefest faults escaped in the Printing, arc thus to be corrected.
Page 87. line 13. accustomed, read unaccustomed. p. 108. l. 25. may, read and.
p. 112. l. 27. after it, That, read after it, says That. p. 129 l. 14. Shroue
Sunday, read Shroue Monday. p. 206. l. 18. are bound, read are not bound. p.
281. l. 25. obtained, read attained. p. 282. l. 10. be hurtful, read be so
hurtful, and ibid. l. 22, their, read there, p. 287. l. 22. this. read his, and
ibid. l. 27. al actions, read al our actions. p. 291 l. 9. Serve, read did Job
serve. p. 296. l. 1.16. read 6. p. 304. l. 26. fathers, read father. and ibid.
l antepenult, entreat, read imitate. p. 314. l. 28^ cause, read course. page
325. l. 5. prefer, read defer. p. 341. l. 4. our. read your, p. 432. l. 2.
deny. read denies. p. 477. l. 19. Alexius, read Elzearius.

Note the principal contents and obligation of the Rule, are to be found in
Page 120. Chapter 2. of this present Treatise.


