THE DEVOTIONS AND FORMS OF PRAYER, DAILY USED IN THE KING OF SVVEDENS ARMY:
Being the first part of our intended Book concerning the SVVEDISH DISCIPLINE;
Religious, Civil, and Military.

The Reason for our publishing this by it self, we desire the Reader to look
for in the Epistle.

LONDON, Printed for Nathanaell Butter and Nicholas Bourne. 1632.

The Stationer to the Reader.
Favorable and judicious:
THat having been heretofore by promise engaged to give you all the three
parts of the Swedish Discipline, we are here enforced to present you with the
first only, and that dismembered from the other two; We humbly desire you to
accept of this fair excuse for it. It Is done to prevent your being abused by
another: who aiming (as may be suspected) more at his own profit, than the
benefit of his Reader: upon hope of venting his Book under that most
acceptable name of this victorious King; is about to thrust these following
Prayers upon the world; barely taken, and perchance not so literally
translated, out of the Book called Arma Suecica. One thing or two (besides the
vselessenesse of the volume he is about to Print it in) over-slipped in his
Translation, we here think fit to tell you of, which upon sight of some of
the printed sheets (the Copy having by himself been before sold unto us) we
discovered. First, That his Translator has no where observed how many
sentences in these Prayers (which are taken out of the Common Prayer Book used
in the Kingdom of Sweden) are the same with those in our English Common Prayer
Book: the reason of it being, for that both our Common Prayer Book and
theirs, were taken out of one and the same Treasury of Antiquity.

The second omission of his Translater is this: That he has not been diligent
enough to turn unto those places of holy Scripture, out of which the most of
these Prayers are gathered: nor has observed the allowed and best Translation
of our Church; but done it in his own phrases. And that our Book has been
careful in this point, we appeal to the Scriptures quoted in the Margent:
which is a third thing in which his other Book is also defective. As for other
differences in performance, in the faithfulness and literallnesse of
Translation; that we wholly refer unto the Judgment of the able Readers.

Thus having made you acquainted with our purpose; we also refer it unto
your discretions, either to stay your hands from buying of either; or those
that buy ours, to keep it till next week that the other two Parts come out
also: at which time they may be bound together, as was at first intended. The
second part of the Intelligencer is likewise now in hand, which we hope ere
long to furnish you with, if it pleases God.

Vale.
THE CHRISTIAN PART OF THE KING OF SVVEDENS DISCIPLINE. The first Part.
IT is not without a mystery, I suppose, that the old Israelites had an Armory
in their Temple: they would show us, That these two cannot well be parted. And
truly, me-thinkes, that a Temple in an Army, is none of the weakest pieces of
fortification. How prevalent an Orator, the prayers of devout warriors have
been with the Lord of Hosts; the conquests and examples of the same old
Israelites, may abundantly inform us. How often has victory (and that almost
visibly too, I am sure, sensibly) come ryding down upon the triumphant wings
of devout prayer?

The Tabernacle carried about by that most Christian Emperor Constantine,
where ever his Camp went; and where, in stead of a Temple he celebrated his
daily devotions: conquered more, perchance, for him, than ten of his heathen
Legions. If Moses prays, whilst Iosuah fights, Exodus 17.
Amalek must needs be dung down. This our most pious Conqueror now, that he
might as nearly as might be, resemble that great Hebrew General, that first of
the nine Worthies: and that ever-glorious Constantine, that first of the
Christian Emperors; has not courage enough (it seems) to adventure himself
into the field, till he first be impregnably fortified with this holy Spell,
this whole armor of God.

Upon the days of the Israelites March, when their Camp in the Wilderness
removed, and the Ark of God with it; Moses had prayers then twice a day: at
the Rising, namely, and at the Setting down of the Arc again, Number. 10.35
had Israel a set form of prayer. And that this religious King, might not
seem to fight the Lords Battles, without the Lords direction, he has taken
order to have it called for, by most solemn and frequent prayers; twice aday
used throughout his whole Leaguer. And that not only when the Camp remoues;
but when it lies still too: not only before a battle, or a danger (as if he
were at Sea) but even when no enemy is at hand; even then he prays too. And
not only commands his Army twice a day; but himself, as I hear, uses to set
apart many whole days, to his own pious privacy, and his closest devotions:
upon which may no man then speak to him, because he then speaks with God
Behold here are two swords; Fighting and Praying, and Praying and Fighting:
thus has the King of Sweden learned to conquer. It is none of the unpolitikest
parts of his Majesty's new Discipline, that I now present you with; which the
exemplary piety of that religious Prince, has taught me to put in the first
place of his Discipline; seeing in the following Articles of his civil
Discipline, himself gives the first place unto those Articles, which concern
God and his service.

To cross that Proverbiall Verse therefore which says that Soldiers have
neither Faith nor Religion in them, I will here afford you some of those Forms
of his daily prayer, frequented in every Quarter of his Leaguer, as I find
them in the Book called Arma Suecica, Page 77.

The Prayers.
In time of our Necessities, and for the Christian Church.
manfully to resist; and so enlighten them, that they may bring them to the
knowledge of thy self. Grant, merciful Father, thy Holy Spirit unto all
Christian and lawful Magistrates, that they may well and peaceably rule their
own Subjects; and that under them we all leading a quiet and a blameless life;
may with a true faith celebrate the riches of thy grace; and with a constant
mind in all holiness and righteousness, as may be pleasing; serve thee the
true God and Lord of Lords, thorough thy only beloved Son Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

Another Prayer to the same purpose.
to the end, that they may be saved. Vouchsafe thy divine grace also, unto all
Christian Kings, Princes, and Governors; and especially the King our
Sovereign Lord: and to all their Counselors and chief Officers; that they
may so rule their Subjects, thy people, well and according to thy good
pleasure; as that peace, good dealing, and righteousness, may be cherished;
troubles, injustice, and all wickedness, may be banished, and quite taken out
of the way.

Look mercifully upon our enemies, and upon all those that persecute us: cause
that both they and we, may seriously repent us of our sins: grant them and us
and all the whole Christian world, such a mind to the love of peace, that we
may serve thee, O holy God, in all piety and honesty.

Comfort, moreover, all those that are afflicted, poor, sick, sorrowful,
distressed captives, troubled in mind, those that suffer persecution or
temptation; that they may bear the cross patiently, and obtain at last a
happy issue out of all their troubles. Bless the fruits of the earth also
unto us, for the necessary nourishment of our bodies; and preserve them from
all danger and ill weather. And especially be thou present with us in this our
expedition; pardon our sins, and mercifully turn away from us these
punishments which we have deserved.

Keep safe, moreover, our Lord the King from all dangers both of soul and
body, preserve all his Captains and Commanders, higher and lower together with
his whole Army, and our Fellow Soldiers. Grant us, O Lord our God, unanimous
and sincere minds, wise direction, happy proceedings, and our desired end, in
all our actions and endeavors: So as may best make to the glory of thy holy
Name, the quietness, peace, comfort, joy, and happiness, finally, both
temporal and eternal; of our selves, Country, and all these afflicted
Christians, which profess the Orthodox and true faith. Show us some token for
good, Psalm. 86.17.
that they which hate us may see it and be ashamed: because thou Lord have
helped us, and comforted us. These blessings that thou would vouchsafe unto
us, we thy poor children entreat thee humbly, by the death and passion of thy
only Son Jesus Christ, who lives and reigns with thee world without end.
Amen.

Another Prayer to the same purpose.
The Queen of Swedens name is Maria Eleonora; sister unto George William, now
Marquess and Elector of Brandenburg. This young Lady their Daughter being the
only child of the King of Sweden, now living, is named Christina: who was by
the States of Sweden in the Parliament of Stockholme. An. 1627. received for
their Queen, in case the King should dye without other Issue.
our sovereign Lady the Queen, their royal Daughter, and all the regal
Family, unto the glory of thy Name, and the general comfort and protection of
us all. Grant us a good government in the Commonwealth, and whatsoever else is
necessary for our wel-being; Peace, namely, a happy government, with a good
and an honest neighborhood. Bless, finally, our counsels and our
enterprises: and that through Jesus Christ our Lord, who lives and reigns
with thee and the holy Spirit, one God true and coequall. Amen.

Another Prayer to the same purpose.


Preserve we beseech thee pure and incorrupt, thine own holy Word and
Sacraments, in these dangerous times, against all Heretics and false Teachers.
Especially against the Papists: who at this present with many bloody
slaughters, and inhumane tyranny, do like ravening Wolves and roaring Lions,
undeservedly scatter and devour thy poor Christian flooke. Look down O Lord
upon the miserable condition of thy people, refrain the insolency of their
enemies, hinder thou their bloody purposes, that so they may perceive, that
thou thy self fightest for thy holy Church; nor wilt give it for a prey unto
them.

Next, O Lord, pray we for all those Deputies of thine, to whom thou have
committed the government of the Commonwealth, and the sword of justice. For
our own King first of all, whom thou in mercy have set over us, to be our head
and protector: Preserve his Majesty from all perils, as well secret as open:
grant prosperity of success unto him: victory and deliverance against the
enemies of his person and Kingdom. Defend him, Lord, with the strength of thy
right hand in this present and dangerous expedition; which for the safety of
his own Kingdom, and for the obteyning of a good Peace, he has undertaken:
and grant that the Wars being brought unto a happy end, both himself and
his whole Army, may safely return again into their own Countries.

Nor less earnestly do we recommend unto thee our Sovereign Lady the
Queens Majesty, with her royal Daughter: Bless Lord both him and her, and
keep them both with thy Fatherly goodness and mercy. We recommend unto thee
in like manner the Right Honorable the privy Counselors and chief
Magistrates of his Kingdom: so govern and direct them all with thy Holy
Spirit; that they may prefer thy glory before all; and with an honest and a
good heart, study the prosperity both of King and Kingdom, Pray we also for
his Majesty's Army, and Navy, and for all his Metal mines, and all things
else, which may be beneficial unto the Commonwealth, and commodious unto the
Subject. Turn away, for thy Christ's sake, what ever may either destroy or
endanger them: and give a blessing unto any thing, that may any ways advance
the truth of our Religion, and our Country in general. Look favorably, O
heavenly Father, upon all the Professors of the same true religion with us; who
being sorely at this present oppressed by the Papists, suffer the loss both of
their lives and fortunes: Succor them, Lord, that they may be delivered from
these troubles. Keep us in health from the noisome pestilence, from sudden and
unhappie death; from dearth, famine, scar-fires, mutinyes, disagreements
amongst our selves, and from hayle and tempest. Infuse into our hearts concord,
faithfulness, and mutual charity. Comfort all those that are afflicted,
sick, in prison or calamity. Succor and comfort all widows and fatherless,
women with child, and that give suck. Be thou guide unto all those that
travel either by land or by water: that they walking in thy right paths, and
having prosperously dispatched their own business, may safely return at
length unto their own families. Deliver us, Lord God, from all evil: and when
our fatal hour of death shall come, mercifully receive us into thy Kingdom:
translate our souls out of this vale of misery, into thy heavenly Paradise,
where we may laud and praise thee for it, world without end, Amen.

II. A Prayer for forgiveness of sins.


Another Prayer to the same purpose.
Mary Magdalene, that penitent sinner, when lying at thy feet, she from the
bottom of her heart sincerely bewailed her own transgressions: and the
Publican in the Temple when he smote upon his breast, and implored thy favor:
and the Thief upon the Cross when he entreated and obtained thy pardon. Lord
grant us to receive the same this day from thee: absolve thou us in Heaven,
forgive us our sins, O God, thou author of all comfort. Cast us not away from
thy presence; but cause us so to walk in thy fear, that in faith and love we
may serve and please thee, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

III. For Peace and Concord.


Another.


Another.
thee: who together with the Son and Holy Ghost live and reignest one true
and eternal God. Amen.

IV. For the King.


Another.
Psalm. 21.
exceeding glad shall he be of thy salvation. Thou have given him his hearts
desire; and not denied him the request of his lips For thou have filled him
with the best of thy blessings; and have set a Crown of pure gold upon his
head. He asked life of thee, and thou gave him a long life, even for ever and
ever. His honor is great in thy salvation: glory and great worship have thou
laid upon him. For thou have filled him with all kind of blessings for ever;
and thou shall make him glad with the joy of thy countenance. Hear him, Lord,
Psalm. 20.1.
in the time of trouble, let thy Name set him in a safe place. Send him help
from the Sanctuary, and strengthen him out of Sion. Remember also all his
offerings; and accept his burnt Sacrifice. Grant him his hearts desire, and
fulfill all his mind. Help Lord thine Anointed, and hear him from thy
Sanctuary, through Jesus Christ. Amen.

Another.
life, in all devotion, and in honesty, Amen.

Another.
of our life. Comfort us according to the time thou have afflicted us; and the
years wherein we have suffered adversity. Remember not our former iniquities.
Have mercy upon us, and that soon; for we are brought very low. Help us, O
God our helper, for the honor of thy Name. Deliver us and forgive us our
sins, for thy Names sake; because thou are the Lord, the highest above all
the world: thou art long-suffering, of great goodness, and gracious: nor art
thou prone unto anger and to vengeance; seeing to those that repent, thou have
promised remission of all their sins. So shall we thy people, and the sheep
of thy pasture, give thee thanks for ever, and will speak of thy praise from
generation to generation. Amen.

V. Against all evil.
make before thee in these our necessities: and grant that those evils which
the Devil or man works against us, be brought to naught, and that by the
providence of thy goodness, they may be dispersed: that we being hurt by no
persecution, may give thee thanks in thy holy Church, and praise thee evermore
for the same, thorough Jesus Christ thy Son our Lord. Amen.

Another Prayer.


Another.


VI. Against our enemies.
O Lord Jesus Christ, Son of the living God; thou only art the true Soldier
and Captain, the Lord mighty in Battle: Behold, thine enemies rage mightily,
and those that hate thee rise up against us: they take subtle counsel together
against thy people, and lay their heads together against thy secret ones. Go
too, say they, let us cut the^ off that they be no more a people, and that the
name of Israel may be blotted out. For we put not our trust in our own
strength; for we know, that there is no King that can be saved by the multitude
of an Host; Psalm. 33.15.
neither is any mighty man delivered by much strength. An horse is counted but
a vain thing to save a man; neither shall he deliver any man by his great
strength: but our trust is in thee, that art our refuge, and a Tower of defense
against our enemies. Thou being our Captain, Psalm. 18.29.
we shall discomfit an Host of men; and with the help of our God, we shall
leap over the wall. Thou being our aid, we shall do famous exployts; thou
art able to beat our enemies to dust: they compass us about; but in thy name
we will destroy them: they come about us like Bees, and smoke against us like
fire among thorns; but in thy Name we will destroy them. Thou overthrewest
Pharaoh and his Host in the red Sea; thou constreynedst Senacherib to turn
again into his own Country: thou overthrewest proud Haman; and threwest own
the haughty Holofernes. So Lord deal with our enemies: do unto them as thou
did unto the Madianites, and as unto Sisera and Iabin at the brook Kison.
Make their Princes like Oreb and Zeb; and their Leaders like unto Z^ba and
Salmana. Let the mischief which they prepare for others, fall upon their own
heads; and their wickedness upon their own pates. So shall we sing of thy
power, and praise thy goodness^ betimes in the morning For thou God art our
Protector, and our refuge in all our necessities Amen.

A Prayer of King Asa, 2 Chronicles. 14.11 etc.
AS A cried unto the Lord his God and said; Lord, it is nothing with thee, to
help, whether with many, or with them that have no power. Help us O Lord our
God, for we rest on thee, and in thy name we go against this multitude. O Lord
thou art our God, let not man prevail against us.

A Prayer of Judas Macchabaeus unto his Soldiers, 1 Macchab. 4.8.
THen said Judas to the men that were with him, Fear ye not their multitude,
neither be ye afraid of their assault. Remember how our Fathers were delivered
in the red Sea, when Pharaoh pursued them with an Army. Now therefore let us
cry unto Heaven, if peradventure the Lord will have mercy upon us, and remember
the Covenant of our Fathers, and destroy this Host before our face this day.
That so all the Heathen may know, that there is one, who delivers and saves
Israel.

A Prayer of Luther for Soldiers, found in the 3. Tome of the Edition at Iena,
fol. 330.
HEavenly Father, here am I by thy divine will in this external calling, under
the Command of my General; first to serve thee, as is fitting; and then for
thee to obey my Captain. I give due thanks unto thy goodness and mercy, that
thou have called me unto this condition, and set me about that work, which I
assuredly know to be no sin, but a right action, and a service acceptable
unto thy will. And for that I have learned out of thy saving Word, that our
own good works do not profit us for the meriting of salvation; and that no
man is saved for that he is a Soldier, but for that he is a Christian; I will
not therefore put my confidence in this work and service of mine: but what
ever I do, I will do it with a good will, as to do thee a service: and I out
of the bottom of my heart believe, that I am redeemed and saved, only by the
innocent blood of thy beloved Son, my Lord Jesus Christ, which according to
thy will, he shed for me upon the Altar of the Cross. In this belief I
resolve to stand, in this will I live and dye; for this do I now fight and
take pains: O Lord God, heavenly Father, preserve and increase this faith in
me, through thy Holy Spirit. Amen.

Against the Plague, and other noisome Diseases.
A Almighty God, Lord and Father of all grace and consolation, have mercy upon
us, and upon thy Christian people. Consume us not in thy fury by this
contagious pestilence: but as in the time of David thou commaundedst the
destroying Angel to hold his hand, and give over killing: so cause, O most
gracious Lord, this terrible rod of thine anger to cease from us, and not to
destroy thine afflicted people. Strengthen us with the wholesome power of thy
Word, that we may be healthy both in soul and body; that we may laud and
praise thee here on earth for a time, and for ever in the Heavens. O Lord Jesus
Christ, succor us in this sickly time, for those bitter pains that for our
sakes thou sometimes enduredst: make intercession for us with thy heavenly
Father: defend us against the heavy wrath of God; forgive us our trespasses;
give thine innocence unto us. Call to mind in this grievous plague-time, how
much our Redemption cost thee, and suffer not that thy bloodshed for us, to be
lost, or become in vain. O Holy Ghost, vouchsafe thou to descend sweetly into
our languishing hearts; refresh thou and recreate our souls. And if it so fall
out that this plague strike us also, then take thou the cure of our souls in
that hour, in which we must depart out of this life: lay us in the most sweet
bosom of Christ our Redeemer, that we may be there partakers of eternal joy
and quietness. Fulfill all thy most sweet promises in us, which are in thy
Word made unto us. Take from us all unbelief, doubting, and impatience: make
us ever ready to obey the will of God, even thou, who with the Father and the
Son, live one God world without end. Amen.

Of forgiveness of Sins: and of the Lords Supper.
O Good Lord Jesus Christ: I am no way able either in words or thought,
sufficiently to make expression of thy great love, which thou have declared
toward me, at such time as thou receivedst me miserable sinner into grace, and
have made me to eat and drink of thy true body and blood, unto everlasting
life. Accept in the mean time this sacrifice of Thankesgiving of my heart and
mouth, which in this mortal body I am able to pay unto thee; until I come
home unto thee, where I shall for ever praise thee. Give thy Holy Spirit unto
me, who may teach me to know how much good thou have already wrought in me:
that so in faith, charity, hope, and patience, I may begin to lead a new
life; unto thy praise, mine own amendment, and the good of my neighbor. Grant
this for the merit of thy precious blood, and the redemption which thou thereby
have made, Amen.

And these be some of those devout prayers, with which this most pious Prince
teaches his Army, to call upon the Lord of Hosts and Victory. Now unto these
good prayers, let all religious Readers that wish well unto this King; add
this or the like, for a close unto the rest. The Lord hear thee in the time of
trouble, and the name of the God of Jacob defend thee; be unto thee a Shield,
and Buckler, against thine enemies: arm thee with the sword of Gideon: and the
Lord of Hosts go forth with thine Armies: that the Victories which God shall
give thee, may bring freedom and justice unto the innocent and oppressed,
enlargement to Religion, liberty to Germany: and the benefits of a sweet and a
lasting peace unto all Christendom. This grant us for the Prince of Peace his
sake, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

ANd now that you may know that the King of Sweden does not only enjoyne
others to pray, but that in his own person he practices these devotions by
himself; I will here subjoyne you two several prayers, conceived, no doubt,
in his own more private and premeditated consideration; and uttered in
public, and extempore, as it seemed. The first was at his Majesty's first
landing upon the coasts of Germany; where so soon as ever he out of his long
boat set his foot upon the dry Land, he thus by prayer and thankesgiving, in
Gods Name took possession of the Country; himself whilst his men were
landing, stepping a little aside, and before them all, upon his knees, uttering
these words of devotion. O most great God, that commaundest what ever thou
please both in heaven, and earth, and in the surging Seas: what thankfulness
am I now bound to render unto thee, for that thou have preserved me thus
safely, in all this so perilous a voyage? Again and again do I from the very
bottom of my heart and soul, give thanks unto thee: and here I humbly
beseech thee, that seeing, as thou very well know, I have not undertaken
this expedition for any private end of mine own, but only for thine honors
sake; and to be some comfort and assistance unto thine afflicted Church: so (if
so be the time which thy self have appointed, be already come) thou would
now be pleased to favor and bless me hereafter also: and that, especially,
thou would send me a fair wind and a prosperous; that the Army yet left
behind, which out of so many people and Nations I have gathered together; I
may with joyful eyes shortly here behold, and with a happy beginning promote
with them the glory of thy holy name. Amen.

When his Counselors and Commanders then next his person, saw their devout
King thus on the bare ground upon his knees; and heard with what a fervencie of
spirit he uttered these devotions; an inward comfort and an holy joy they took
at it, wrought more with them than their enemies could yet ever do; that is,
even forced, and pressed tears out of their manly eyes. This his pious
Majesty then perceiving, Forbear to weep, says he to them, but heartily
conjoyne your prayers with me: for the greater the army of prayers is, the
greater and more assured shall the victory be. He that prays diligently, has
in part overthrown the enemy already, and already gotten the victory. Thus
having said, he out of two hundred long boats lands his men, then on the
shoares side, and then sends them to his ships to fetch more: and God so
heard him, and the wind so favored him; that according to his former prayers,
his whole Army very shortly, and very safely arrived.

I will not here compare this prayer of this pious and victorious Prince, unto
that of the great Iosuah; at whose request the Sun stood still, as the wind
here did at his: but that you may see that God did indeed hear the prayers of
this King too; I will now give you a more eminent example of it. The Papists,
had one of theirs done it, would undoubtedly have cried out, A miracle: and
well they might: for few such they have, but I will only think of it, as of a
present and a visible blessing sent from that great God, to whom the winds and
the Seas obeyed. And thus it was.

The King a little after this, having a design upon Stetin; and his Army now
ready upon the shore, and his boats ready upon the River to imbarke them;
the wind, behold, was contrary, and so had been for some days before. This
the King observing, turning a little aside, he before his Army with bended
knees, and hands lift up to Heaven, uttered these words.

O thou most just God! full well thou know, that this enterprise I did not
at first undertake, out of any rashness, or ambition, but for the glory of thy
most holy Name, and the defense of the truth of thy Word: here, therefore, now
call I upon thy Godhead, and most humbly do I beseech thee; that with the air
of thy favor, and with a prosperous wind, thou would vouchsafe to breath
upon this my undertaking. Amen.

No sooner was this prayer ended, but the wind suddenly, as a man might say,
chopped about, and swelled the Swedish sails with so hard a gale, that the whole
Fleet passing the Swing, or arm of the Oder, was in two hours space run
full six Germane miles (twenty of ours perchance if not more) and all on the
sudden, when they were little looked for, came to an Anchor within an English
mile of Stetin, to the great admiration of the beholders, and the greater
defeat of the hopes and purposes of the Imperialists; who had a design within
two days after, to have laid siege to the same Town, had not God thus
miraculously prevented them.

And thus much, though I now give you, out of a Latin Copy; yet, to confess
the truth, did I in the writing of my former Book, find mentioned in one of
the weekly Currantoes: how that the Kings Fleet was by a strong and a sudden
Northerly wind, strangely advanced through the Oder, even to the very walls
of the City. But this I durst not then write, upon the bare credit of a
common Curranto; nor durst I with this wind (though a strong one it were)
adventure to stem the tide of popular opinion; which I found not only to
run against, but (to use the language of the Sea) with a stiff current
strongly to be set against the credit of these weekly Currantoes. Which
wariness of mine, made me indeed to leave out many notable particulars, which
I since find reported, in the Book called Arma Suecica.

God Almighty, that has so graciously both heard and granted, these two
prayers of this pious King; hear all the rest also; both those that himself
makes, and what other good Christians make likewise for him. And those
Englishmen that will not, I wish they would say Amen unto it.

FINIS.

