The image of both Pastoures / set forth by that most famous Clerck,
Huldrych zwinglius, and now translated out of Latin into English, By John
Veron Sinonoys. A most fruitful and necessary Book, to be had and read in
all Churches, there with to enarme all simple and ignorant folckes, against the
raueninge wolves and false prophets.

M.D.L.

Cum Priuilegio ad Imprimendum Solum.

Actu. xx. Chap.
Take heed to your selfs, and to the whole flock, whereupon thee holy ghost
has appointed you, Bishops, to govern the Church of God, which he has
purchased with his blood.

Math vii. Chap.
Beware of false Prophets, that come unto you in shepes clothinge, but
inwardely, they are ravening wolves.

To the Most mighty Prince Edward, Duke of Somerset, Earl of Harforde,
Vycount of Beaw Champe, and Uncle to our most souerayn Lord the King. John
Veron wysheth peace and grace, health of soul and body, and encreace of divine
knowledge, and godly honor, from God the father, through our Lord and savior
Jesus Christ.
COnsydering wtin my self, most redoubted Prince, ye unspeakable and exceeding
great mercy, of our most bou^teous heavenly father, which so ple^teously has
now at this present, sent among us, ye most pleasant, and joyful light of his
holy and sacred word, yt sens the birth and nativity of our Lord, and
savior Jesus Christ, it was never in this illustre and flourishing realm, so
purely and sincerely preached, as it is now in our time, set forth to the great
comfort and co^solatio^ of our poor wretched consciences, which so long have
be^ dete^ted and holde^ captives in ye thick darkness of men's traditions: I
have a good cause to wonder, and meruail at ye i^gratitude, and vntha^kfulnesse
of many and sundry folks, which, in this most gracyous time, that
saluatyon is so freely, in the word of God, and holy scryptures, offered every
where unto them, yet to their utter undoing and destructyon have rather to
stycke to the dregs of men's dreams and deuyllysshe inuencyous of
Antichriste, than to embrace the joyful tidings of thee Gospel, where only
they may find rest too their poor wearye souls. Christ the everlasting
wisdom of the father does cry our there saying: Math. xi
Come unto me, all ye that labor, and are laden, and I will ease you. And yet
these mad and bewytched persons will in no wise harken unto him, but most
wretchedly labouryng and sweating, under the intolerable burden, of
Antichriste tradycions, do wyttynglye, and of all obstynate purpose and mind,
run head long into perdytyon, following in it their blind guydes, which
do yet at this present, contrary both to gods word and the kings most
godly procedinges, lead them into all kinds of deuelysshe error.

One of the princypall causes of the blyndenesse yt yet now a days raygneth
among the people,
These blind guydes, I say, are the^, that poysone the simple and ygnoraunt
people and are causes of their utter undoing and destruction. Then will they not
suffer to come into thee right way, and to follow the for goinge light of the
gospel, of our sauyoure Jesus Christ, whose doctrine and word, they
persuade these poor ygnoraunte and blind folckes to be plain heresye, and
that they, which now preach, set forth, and bring unto them, the glad and
comfortable news of saluatyon, are most pernytyous heretykes, which goo
about, to bring all men, from thee old and ancient relygyon, that was set
up, allowed, and establysshed, by the holy fathers of the prymatiue church, in
to a new kind of relygion that they invented them selfs out of their own
brains, thereby too take away and banyshe from among men thee true
worshyppynge of the living God. The ungodly perswasyons of the papists.
Are not (will these Antychristes say) thoroughe this new learning, all
lamable ceremonies, driven out of the churches? where be now thee holy
Saynctes become, that ye, in all your afflyctyons, and trouble were wont too
fly unto. As for thee holy and blessed Sacrament, of thee Aultare they have
most ungodly plucked it down. Within a while (sith that they have also put
down that most holy and sacred Mass) they will leave no God at all unto us.
Beware, take heed too your selfs, good folks, harken not unto them. We
waraunt you, they shall not continue long. Within there two or three years and
less, ye shall see all things clean altered and changed.

Those and many other like things, do these rauenynge wolves, and false
Prophets, not only whysper in men's ears, but also most boldly (as though
they fear nether God, nor King) blow out abroad, among the loving subjects
of this Realm. I tell the truth, I lie not (god shall bear me record of the
same). Not long a goo, I was in communication with one of the chiefest ringe
leaders of that unlucky company (whose name I do here wittingly pass over)
which is a man of great learning, and in the Philosophy and doctrine of
Aristoteles, most conninge and expert. This man after that we had reasonned
a while in matters of Relygyon, sodeynlye brake forth with these words: No,
no, said he, (and called me by my name) set your heart at rest, I do not
doubt, but that within these two or three years, al these fellows, that now
are busyest, and most earnest, in settinge forth of this heresye (for so did
he call the preachinge of the gospel, that is now used among us) shall be
glad to recante every one of them, as fast, to call back their erroniouse
opinions, and to say: tongue thou dyddest lie. Now most mighty Prince, if
this man, not wythstandinge the Kings proceadinges, and other godly acts, set
forth by the Kings most honorable counsayll, to thee utter subuersyon of
false doctrine, ungodly traditions, and Idolatrye, and again to the
mayntenau^ce of true relygyon, durst be so bold too have soche talcke, and
communication with me, whom he knew right well, though that I have but very
small learning and knowledge (how beit I do most hyghely thancke god, that he
of his goodness did vouchesafe, to direct that little yt I have, to his glory)
yet to be most earnest, in ye defense of this true doctrine and religion. What
will both he, and other of ye ungodly fact, do among the^, who^ they know to be
both unlearned and weak? Truly they will utterly subuerte the^. They will make
the^, that when they hear of christ, and of his gospel, they shall stop
their ears and cry out with the ungodly multitude of thee Jews, saying:
Away with him, crucyfye him. Mark ye this, o ye Christyan Magystrates (whose
part and duetye it is, to beware and take heed, that thee people committed
unto you, do not fall again into darkness and ygnoraunce). math. xxi Luke.
xix mark. xi
When our Sauyoure Jesus christ, King of all Kings, and Lord of all
lords, made his solemn entrye into Jerusalem: how joyfully with songs and
hymns was he received of thee commune people? Blessed be the king (said they)
that comes in the name of the lord: Peace in heaven, and glory in the highest:
But wtin a while after this poor simple and ygnoraunte people, that thus so
ioyfullye received our sauyoure christ, being moved and persuaded by the
high pryestes, mat. xvii Luke. xxiii Ioh. xviii mark. xv.
scrybes, and Pharyses, did prefer that thief and shameful murderer
Barrabas unto him, whom a lyttel while before they called King, desyryng of
Pouryous Pylate, with a loud voice that thee said rebelle and cruel
murderer Barrabas, should be let loose unto them, and that Jesus should
be delivered up, for too be crucyfyed. In like manner now a days, it doethe
happen and chance here among us. For when thee Gospel and glad tidings of
saluatyon, are by honest and godly men preached and set forth unto thee
good folckes of thee contreye: it is a great wonder and maruayle too see, how
gredely the most part of them do receive it, no less reioycynge, at those
joyful news of heaven, than thee multitude of thee Jews, did at the coming
of their Messiah. But as soon, as these false prophets (thee true preachers
being departed from thence, into soome other place) are come among them, and
have shreuen them a while, they are made a thousand times worse, than they
were before thee hearing of thee Gospel. These rauenynge wolves are so armed
with hypocrysye, with blaundiloquence, fair speaking and flattery, that it is
a thing impossyble, for the poor simple folks of thee contreye, which are
noseled in the old superstition of their forefathers, that they should at any
time without the specyal grace of god, beware and take heed of them: yea many
witted and learned persons that are not yet strong, steadfast, fyrme, and sound
in the faith, at oftentimes by them overthrown and clean subverted.

The names of the high learned Papists, whose learning consysteth only, in
philosophye and profane disciplines ar hurtful
What shall we say? thee names of them are noisome and hurtful. Which thing we
do se now a days to be most true. I know some, which if they were a lyttel
otherwise handeled, or some what more strayghtly look upon, but eue^ half so
much, as they did look upon us, when they bare rule and were in high
authority, having those laws in their hands, which (no man, of what degree
soever he was bearing open his mouth against the^) they had made the^ selves.
We should se, and that shortly, al those shyres, that have not yet received the
word, to come merelye, and with a lusty courage, and joyful heart, unto thee
truth and gospel, which are noe only let and stopped, by ye glorious names
and titles, of soch high renowned persons. Read my book that I made against
the lybertins and rebelies.
Well, it was not for naught (as I have often said, and now I say it again)
that those godly kings, which in times past did put down al ydolatry, and
superstition, setting up again, wtal godly study and dylyge^ce, iii. Regu.
xviii. iiii. Reg. x iiii. Regu^. xxiii,
the true worshipping of the living god, did slaye and kyl up al Baalles
priests, and false prophets of groves, and hille altars. Which thing truly
they did, because that they should not bring the people again into error.
Nor let any man think here, that it was cruelly done, no more, than when a
rotten remember is cut of, from the body, lest that it should infecte all the whole. Is it not (I pray you) much more expedyente, that.viii hundrethe
and.L. false prophets, should be killed up, by some Helyas, tha^ that all the whole Israel should perysshe. Judge ye all, that have any wit in your
heads. How be it, it is not my will, What moderation must be used in rooting
out of ye papists
that any man should be murdered or put to death, onelesse it be with the
sword of the spyrite, and as the lord speaks him self by the prophet,
saying: I will smite the earth with the rode of my mouth, and with the breath of my
lips, Esaye. xi
will I slaye the ungodly, I would wish, yt all such persons should be allured
and won, by charitable means, yt they might perceive and se, yt much more
ge^tylnes is showed unto the^, then they have before times showed unto us, and
again that ye magystrates, do seek only for their amendment, and
salvation of their souls, and not for their chestes and coffers. Nevertheless,
if they be obstynate and stubborn, or goo about some tumulte and nouatyon of
things, or else hinder still the people, and kept the^ back from the truth of
the gospel, and from Christ, the commen savior of al me^: let them hardely
feel that the Magistrate bears not in vain the te^porall sword. In deed,
it is time that some of them be tied up shorter, sith that they be not
afraid, The bold threateninges and shameful lyinges of the papists.
to threaten us, (and that, to thee great abashme^t of the weaker) that forenne
Princes, if we do not shortly recant, and come again to the old fashion,
will invade, and come upon t^is noble and flourishing Realm. Yea, say they
(when they be upon their ale benches, and in corners, the co^municatio^ of
Papists upon their ale be^ches and in corners, where they dare utter out their
poison.
where they think, they may utter out soche doctrine) the proudeste of them
all, meaning the head rulers and magestrates, through whose vigilante care,
true religion has been restored, and set up again, be in doubt, what they may
do. They tremble and quake for fear, if they do but hear ones, that noble and
most redoubted emprour, named. They do almost crepe into a mouse hole, when
they hear daily, how he handeleth their brethren in Christ beyond thee
sea. They woold give (yea marye would they) thousand thousands, that thee holy
and blessed Mass, had never been put down by the^. They would feign have it
up again, if they knew, how they might do it handsomely, and not to their
shame and rebuke.

Soche is their communication abroad, among the simple and ignorant people,
and that of late. It is no marvel then, that the most part of thee louinge
subjects of this Realm, do yet both abhor, and utterly refuse the
wholesome doctrine of their salvation, sithe that so many false Prophets, are
yet suff^red, to be among them, and so few faithful Pastors provided for,
and sent unto them. For truly, this is one of the chiefeste causes of the
blyndnesse of the people, Another cause of ye blyndnesse of the people.
and that they are so easily seduced, and brought into error, by false
Prophets, that dayelye and hourly come unto them in shepes clothing. They
lack true Pastors. They want faithful teachers and guydes. Their watch
men are all blind, they have all together no understanding, Esaias. lvi.
they are all domme dogs, not being able to bark, they are slepye,
sloggysh, and lie snortyng, they are shameless dogs, that be never
satisfied. Their shepehardes in like manner, have no understanding, but every
man turns his own way every man after his own coueteousnesse, with al his
power. How (I beseech you) can the people, having such blind bousardes too
their guydes and pastoures, get any understanding or knowledge? How shall
they dyscerne the false prophets, from the true pastoures and faithful
minysters. They truly, as young innocente babes, will embrace poysone, for
wholesome meat, and take up a scorpyon for all egg. But now, whom shall
we blame most chyefelye, for this? Thee Bysshoppes? thee King and his
honorable Counsel? Mark and waygh the se things o ye Princes of thee
world, and high prelates of churches, let the^ not be forgotten.
forsothe, if there were any suspycyon, that any forenne prince or nacyon,
would invade this Realm: by and by should in all thee haste, and with all
dylygence, watch mean be set out, in all thee ports and vttermooste
places of thee countreye, too espy out the coming of thee enemies, and to
give warning thereof. And why so, A pray you? because that the loving
Subjects of this Realm, should by their sudden coming and arryuing, take no
manner of harm in their goods and bodies, How much more then. sith yt so many
cruel and mighty enemies, do always without ceassing, and intermission, be
set us round about, endeuouri^g the^ self, both night and day, with all their
might and power, to spoil us, of that most precious Jewel, that christ him
self the only begotten son of the father, We are always in peril and
ieopardye to be spoiled by our ghosteli enemies, of that precious jewel that
christ has purchased unto us.
has with the shedynge of his dear blood, purchased unto us, and so to
murder most myserablye both our bodies and souls, having besides that their
espyes, every where here among us, so masked and disguysed in shepes clothing
and skynnes, that they can scarsely be known, from our friends and well
wyllers: ought true and faithful watch men to be sent out into al corners? to
be appointed and set in all places? O preposterous, perverse, and ouerthwarte
judgment. In things that are transitory, and fade away like the grass, yt is
to say, in things yt belong to our corruptyble bodies, and thee preseruatyon,
or sauegarde of the same, we are most dilligent and careful, but in things
that belong unto thee souls, which are immortal, and never dye, but after
thee death of thee bodies, be always, either in exceeding great joy, or
else in pains and torments unspeakable, yea, the bodies at ye day of
judgment, being united and joined again unto their souls, shall be
partakers of either of them: it is impossible to tell, how careless and
negligente we are. Which thing, besides all other arguments, may be proved
by this. In all thee towns of war, of this Realm, strong garrisons, (as it
is most conueniente and mete) are set, noble and valiant Captains, and
faithful, or trustye watch men are appointed, nothing is left vncared for,
that may be for the sauegarde of those fortes and towns: But now home many
paryshe churches in England, Churches are ye watchinge or espyinge towers of
the kingdom of Christ.
which Churches, by right may be called, the watchinge or espyinge towers of
the everlasting Kingdom, of our heavenly King and savior Jesus Christ, are
provided of true and faithful watch men? Not scarcely one among.xl. has a
true pastoure or minister, The c^use why parysshe Churches are not provided of
true and faithful ministers.
and why? This is one of the causes why. Lords and gentilme^, have all most
all the lyuinges of Churches in their hands. And as long as they may get
sir John lack latin, to serve their cure under them, for a little or nothing,
that is to say: for.vi. or viii.li. a year, where as they their self,
receive and take yearly upon it, some lx some.C.li. some more, some less, it
will never be, that they shall set godly learned men in them. O mercyful god,
what mean the head rulers, and gouernoures of this world (here I do
understand Kings, Emperors, high Prelates and Bysshoppes) whom the
scryptures and word of god do call, pastoures and shepeherdes of thee people?
What answer shall they make unto him, that is thee pastoure of all, when he
shall require out of their hands, thee blood of his dear boughte sheep, that
did perysshe, and daily do perysshe, thoroughe their negligence and fawlte.
My mind abhorrethe too remember, how horrible and grievous punysshementes are
prepared for them. God, of his merciful bountuousnesse grant, that our
noble and sovereign Lord thee king, and all his honorable counsel, for
thee dyscharge of their conscyences, may shortelye see an order in it, that
all thee parysshes thoroughe out all England and other of thee kings
dominyons, may be provided of true pastoures and mynysters.

In the mean season, that this shall be a doing, too fence and arm thee
loving subjects of this Realm against those rauenynge wolves yt come to them
in shepes skins, I have here, according to the little, that I can do,
translated out of latin into Englysh, a book, which may right well be called:
Thee image of both pastoures, set forth by that most famous clerk
Huldryche zwinglius Bishop of Tigure, and called by him Pastoure. It is a
very profitable and necessary book, and most worthy, not only to be
translated into all tongues, but also to be had and read in all thee
Churches of Christendom. The dyuision of the whole work
For there first and formoste the congregacyon shall see, thee true and
faithful pastoure, most lyuelye depycted, What is contained in the first
part.
and set out in his own colors, which are taken out none other where,
than out of thee chestes and coffers of thee holy and sacred scryptures.
Whereby, any man shall learn, how far from all voluptyes and pleasures of
thee flesh, this office and vocatyon is. For who so ever takes this
mynysterye and functyon in hand, must continually with out ceassing and
intermissio^, war, strive, and fight, against all flesh, and all the power
and strength of it, against his own patentes, kynsefolkes, brethren, and
systers, yea against his own self, and all the concupyscences, and lusts of
his own flesh, against all pomp and pride of this world, and all the
mighty Princes of it: Fynallye, what soever, is in any manner of thing,
repugnaunte unto god, he shall profess and declare him self, an open enemy
against it. Thee consyderatyon of which things, If a man does admynister
sufficiently the office of a Pastor, it is the very work of god and not of
man.
does playnelye teach us, that too administer this great and peryllous
office, worthelye and suffycyentelye, is thee very work of God, and not of
man's strength. To do it, I say, truly and syncerely, it commethe not of man, but only of God, which geuethe us strength, too bear so heavy a
burden. In thee second part, What is contained in the second part.
the rauenynge wolves, which being clothed in shepes skynnes, do
counterfeyte thee true shepeheardes, are descrybed and set forth to thee
eyes of thee congregatyon, and in a manner, showed with thee finger. For, there
any manne shall see, their wide gapynge mouths, their sharp teethe
(wherewythe they always threaten slaughter and murder) and woluysshe paws
(for thee shepes skynnes, wherewythe they have dysguysed them selves can not
hyde all things) to appear out. To be short, all the congregatyons and
churches, that are not yet provided of true mynysters, shall by this lyttel
book (if it be truly perused and read) learn, in the mean season, too
dyscerne and know thee true and faithful pastoures, from thee deuelysshe
rauenynge wolves, be they never so masked and dysguysed. Which truly, will be
no small help unto them afterward (when true pastoures, shall thoroughe
thee fatherlye care of our souereyn lord the king, and his honorable
counsel, be sent unto them (too come unto the true relygyon, and
godliness. A prayer unto God for to send true and faithful Pastors.
O merciful pryeste, and chyefe Bishop Jesus Chiyste, vouchesafe (we
beseech thee) of thy bountuous mercyfulnesse, to send out, true and
faythefull laborers, into thy holy harueste, for too break and dystrybute
thee bread of thy holy word, unto them, that hunger for it. Vouchesafe
also, o most true and faithful shepehearde, to strengthen, with thy holy
spyrite, all preachers and teachers, yt thou haste sent, and daily do send,
to feed thy dear boughte flock, too thee intent that they may boldelye and
earnestlye set their souls in the defense of thy holy word, and for their
sheep, against all the threatenynges, and false enterpryses, of thee rauenynge
wolves and false prophets that goo about too seduce and bring us out of the
right way, for their belyes sake, through their false doctrine. And that they
may so teach and declace unto us, thy holy law, and Gospel, that we being
taught and edyfyed, may daily more and more magnyfye thy godly honor.

Now I have shortly declared and showed, the chyefe and pryncypal causes of
thee blyndnesse, that yet at this present, raignethe among thee simple and
ygnoraunte people, and what moved me too translate this golden book, and
most excellent work. Which truly, if that godly Nehemias, thee
reparatour of Jerusalem were among us, I would have dedicated unto him, and
too none other. Sithe then that your grace has been a very Nehemias unto us
(for, thoroughe your vigilaunte care, the true Jerusalem, which is the
Church that was all covered with thee rubbisshe of Antichrists tradityons,
is now at this present, new builded up again) I could do no less, but to
dedicate it unto your grace. And though it is not so eloquentely and fynely
translated, as many, yt were naturally borne and brought up in this countreye,
might have done it: Yet not wythestandynge, have I a good hope, that your
grace (such is your Pryncely gentylnesse) will take it in good worth, not so
much consyderyng the thing it self, as the beneuolent heart, that it comethe
from. The Lord knowethe how great a love and affcctyon, not only I, but
generallye all true Christyans, do bear unto you, and that, for the exceeding
great zeal that your grace, has had always to true relygyon and
godliness. This love and affectyon, was right well declared and manyfested, by
thee tears and daily prayers of thee faithful, when that euerlyuyng and
almighty God (who always chastyseth them, whom he louethe) did suffer your
grace to be tried, with thee fire of trouble and afflyctyon. As then, all thee
whole congregation of thee faithful did with mourning tears, make earneste
intercessyon and prayer unto almyghtye God, for your graces delyueraunce: so
now I do most humblye beseech him, that is the auctoure of all good
things, that he vouchesafe of his goodness and mercy, so with his holy
spyryte too rule, guygde, and govern you, in all your wayghtye affairs,
with that most gracyous Lady, your true loving spouse and wife, that what
soever your grace shall think or do, may be to the glory of god, to the
common weal of this Realm, and salvation of your soul.

Your poor orator John Verou.

The Image of both Pastors, or ministers set forth by that famous Clerck
Huldriche zwinglius, and now translated out of Latin into Englisshe by John
Vtron Seuonoys.
They were called Apostolyke men that were disciples of the Apostles, as Luke
and mark were.
THat in times paste, many admonitio^s were given by the prophets, in the old
Testament, and in the new by apostolyke men, yea, and the Apostels the^
selves, which were the chief ministers of Christ's church, unto the Pastors
of the people, every man does know, that only has red with a diligent
mind, their books and writings, in the which, most dear brethren in Christ,
and most faithful servants, and ministers in the house of god, we may
deprehende and find very suit tokens of this thing. Wherefore I have thought
that it was also lawful for me, to speak, talcke, and reason, with all the
fydelytie and diligence that ca^ be, of our commune office and admynystration,
and that most especially in this godly and dyuyne Sinode, A Synod is an
assemble or convocatio^ of ye clergy togeath.x.
where so many hundredth of Pastors, so great number of learned men, and also
so great a multitude of brethren, that with a fervent desire do thyrste for the
word of God, are assembled. Let us therefore, in gods holy name begin our
matter.

The Christian Pastor, and flock, which he takes upon him to feed, does
with soche euydence and lyuelynesse express the type and figure of thee dyuyne
Majesty, and of us al: The scripture of the old Testament, does adumorate and
shadow the divine prouyde^ce of god under the similitude and shadow of a
shepeherde.
that the Scripture of thee old Testamente is wont often times too shadow
under thee similitude and Image of a Pastoure or shepeherde, that euerlarstynge
prouydence of thee high God, where with he does behold, care for, rule, and
as a faithful householder, dispose all things, that is to say, when it does
depicte and set forth that most high governor of the world, under the
person of a shepeherde, and us under the similitude of sheep. What should we
say? Sith that the savior of us all, Jesus Christ does vouchesafe to call
him self by the name of a shepeherd? John.x chap. For he is thee true fode, in
him the fat Pastors of the souls are laid forth unto us, to be short, he
is that true leader and shepeherde of the ^^ocke, which has brought us
miserable and wretched sinners, out of the thick darckenesse of ignorance, and
snares of men's traditions, into that pleasant light, of gods wysdom, and
in to the lybertye of the sons of God.

Where the office of a shepeherde or pastor ought to be learned
Wherefore it shall be necessary for all them, that are sent as Pastors, to
feed the flock of thee LORD, that they receive and take thee admynystration
and laws of their office out of none other Doctrine, than out of thee pure,
and sincere word of God, which in these latter times did declare, manyfeste,
expound and express it self vysyblye and most lively, with great
lyghtesomnesse and evidence in Christ Jesus thee true and natural son of
thee Father, which thing was also done before in thee old Testament (though
it was some what darckelye) in thee times of thee Patriarchs and Prophets.
The division of the whole work.
We shall therefore look first upon Gods word at Chistes mouth, and in
his Acts (which Christ is also a true God.) Then by and by, we will seek
out thee same in thee Prophets and Apostles, that we may know thereby, how
excellent, and of what dignity and worthynesse the office of a Pastor is,
whom by other names we do call either a Bishop, or Person, a Vicar, or Curate, a
preacher, prophet or Euangelyste. Secondely we shall likewise depicte and set
forth the false prophets in their own colors, that they may the better and
more easily be known and taken head of. We will also declare and set forth the
punyshmente, which is prepared for them, that thee knowledge, and
understanding of it, may either bring them to amendment, or if they refuse it,
move the Magistrates, to remove and put them from their benefyces and rowmes
that they are in. Christ is ye true example of a good Pastor.


But least we should be feign to tarry long upon the most holy and profunde
mysteryes of that wonderful incarnation and nativity of our Lord Jesus
Christ, we will begin to speak of those things, which he both did and
taught, sense thee time that he was manyfested unto this world. Among thee
which, we find this thing first, that he, being brought into thee Temple,
according to thee prescripte of thee law, was received into Symeons arms,
and not without high gratulation and joy, which after that he had declared
with many words, that he was thee Savior of all the whole world, turned him
self to his mother, and said: Luke ii.
Behold, this child is set to be thee fall and vprysynge again of many in
Israel, The Pastoure is ye stone of of fence and vpresinge again
and for a sign, which is spoken against. And more over the sword shall
pearce thy soul, that the thoughts of many hearts may be opened. This
therefore, shall the Pastor, before of all things persuade him self in his
mind, that there shall be many, which shall wax worsse by his fode, doctrine,
and labor, and also that many being taught and instructed by him, shall
rise from their sins and fylthynesse thereof. And also that there shall be
always some ungodly and unfaithful persons, which shall wythstande his
Doctrine and godly endeavors. For, thee flesshelye man does not receive that
spyrytuall word of God, but rather does resyste it with all his whole
strength. Whereby, it is wont to ensue and follow also, that thee Pastor
being most greuouslye hated and laid wayt for, The Pastor is in not without
peril and ieopardye
by those wicked and ungodly enemies of Gods word, is always in peril and
ieopardye. This thing also the parents, kynsfolckes and friends must be
surely persuaded, nor ought to look for any other end of this mynystery and
function, but that their children, kynsefolckes and friends being called to
this office, shall be hated, mocked derided and laughed to scorn of al me^,
yea, and that before their own eyes. For thee nature of flesh, is not soche,
that it can suffice it self to be kept and holden in so, that it does not
break forth at some times, and goo about to follow his own studyes and
affections. Here therefore a great grief and sorrow does spring and rise in
thee minds of the parents and kynsfolckes, here also they do feel that
swerd, which not without great grief and dolor did pearce thee ^oule of
Mary. For it is so ordained by nature, that patentes do love their children so
tenderly, that they are wont to have exceadynge great compassyon on them, not
only, when they are afflicted without a just cause, but also when they are
punished deseruingly. David is an example or prove of this thing, which does
so sore lament and bewail the destruction and death, ^. Regum xviii.
of his most ungodly and unfaithful son Absalon.

It is ye of fi^e of a pastor nether to d^, nor to learue undone any thing
for the love and respect of his parents
Again it is the duty and part of a faithful pastor, to renunce, and forsake
the love, friendship, and amytye of his parents, and to do nothing in favor of
them, but go on still, and persyste steadfastly in the work of the Lord,
without any respect of the^, which thing Christ with his own example does
teach in the same place. For, when Joseph, and the vyrgyn Mary his mother, had
by thee space of.iii. days, with a heavy heart sought him, and at length
had found him in the myddest of the Doctors and Scribes, his mother did some
what sharply reprehe^de or rebuke him saying: Son, why have thou so done
unto us. Behold, thy father and I did with a heavy heart seek the: He did
answer, why did ye seek me? Did ye not know that I must be in those things,
that belong to my father. A Christian pastor then must be of that mind and
must be so affectioned, least peradventure, he being moved, with thee grief of
his parents, does slowely administre Gods work, and thee office that he
has received of him. He shall (I say) regard nothing, nor pass upon thee
wepynges of his children, nor thee mourning and bewailing of his wife, nor
the affection and love of his systers and brethren, nor yet the tears of his
friends, and kynsfolkes. For he sees, that Jesus Christ thee son of the
Vyrgyn Mary (which else was most obediente) did thee same. Mathe.x.
Wherefore, when de did send his discyples too preach thee gospel, he did say
unto them: He that loves his father and his mother above me, is not worthy of
me. And he that loves his son and his daughter above me, is not worthy of
me, or he is not mete for this office and vocation. Also a faithful pastor
shall not suffer his patentes too have any auctoritye, or bear any rule in
thee admynystratyon and preaching of Gods word, that is too say, he shall
in no wise admynyster or preach the Gospel, and word of God, according too
their mind, affection and Judgment. For, it is known how sharply christ
did speak unto his mother, when she being moved with a womanly affection, did
begin to exhort him, John.ii.
as he sat at the marriage, that he should miraculouslye help them with
wine, for they wanted it. Did he not say woman what have I to do with thee?
Let this, I say, be the steadfastness and constancy of a pastoure, let this
be thee firm, steadfast, and constant purpose of his mind, to respect or
regard thee authority of no mortal men, no, not of his own mother, that bare
him, but follow on still the right course of his administration and office. And
if his parents will to importinatelye with stand his godly purpose, and with
stubbernes and obstinacye resist thee everlasting word of God, let then a
faithful pastoure count him self their utter fooe and enemy, he shall
forsake them, yea and hate them. For Christ se^dinge forth his disciples does
speak unto them after this manner: Math.x.
Think not that I am come to send peace into the earth. I came not to send
peace, but a sword, for, I am come to set a man at variaunce, against his
own father, and the daughter against the mother, and the daughter in law,
against her mother in law. And again in Luke: Luke.xiiii
If any man, says he, does come unto me, and doethe not hate his father, and
his mother, his wife, and his children, and systers, yea and his own life,
also he can not be my discyple. For, a faithful pastor of the Lords flock,
must be so wholye given and addicted to God the father, Though ye children
ought rather to forsake their parents, tha^ to swerve one jot from thee
truth of gods word, yet notwythstandynge we do not teach the^ too withdraw
their helping hand from the^ in the time of necessity and need.
that he shall also be ready to hate his own parents (whose love, and
careful lokyng to, the laws of god do in an other place commend) if at any
time they go about to let his godly functyon and office, howbeit, these
things, that we have rehearsed now, are not commanded to the Pastors only,
but to all mankind, but yet first of all, they are required of Pastoure, too
whom also they oughet chyefelye to be referred. Now therefore, I do think,
that we have declared suffycyently enough, and that ye do well see and
perceive, how a Pastoure ought to be have him self, toward his parents,
lest the respect of them should bring him any let or impediment. And
again it has been showed how the parents ought to be affectyoned and
minded, that is to say, how they ought in no wise to hope, look, or gape, for
any honors, and glory of this world in their children, that be sent to this
message and chosen to this office, yea let them know this also for a surety,
that their children can not but hate them, if they goo about at any time too
left them in this functyon and business of thee Lord. how a faithful
Pastor ought to be affectioned toward him self.
But now we shall se how the Pastor ought to be affectyoned toward him
self.

Christ the sauyoure of the world, and infallyble example of our life. Math
xvi. chap. and Luc. ix. chap. speakethe after this manner: If any manne will
come after me, let him forsake him self, and take up his cross and follow
me, for he that will save his life, shall lose it. And again: he that shall
lose his life for my sake, shall find it. Here first and formeste we do see
that it is required that a man do utterly forsake him self. For, thee
nature of man is such that he thynkethe always him self to be somewhat, or
too be worthy of no small honor, promising unto him self always
mountains of gold, of his own strength and wysedom. But here now, it is
necessary that a man do as a servant all together oppygnorate, bind,
and give him self over unto almyghtye god, and therewythe, cast or throw him
self wholye down in his sight. For he shall always have an eye only too
God, to learn his will, nor he shall in no wise enterprise too do any thing
of his own strength and wisdom, but still shall consider, behold and look
upon, that one only and infallyble example of his life which is God, and do
all things, according to thee prescrypte of his word. But as soon as he
has done this, by and by shall thee cross offer it self, which every
day must be taken upon our shoulders, for every day he shall feel new
cares, new heaviness, and some new misfortune, which all, he shall suffer
pacyentlye, nor shall in any wise, or at any time shake of the yoke, that the
Lord has set upon him For, if any man doethe forsake him self, and so,
leaving the flesh and Satan, comes unto Christ, for to have, or that he
may have only, in all his doings, an eye unto God, every day, he shall see
a great number of them, that have not yet forsaken them selves, which
company shall far pass thee number of the godly and faithful. Now, these
contrary kinds of people or of men, can no more agree among them selves,
than fire and water. For the flesh doethe covet against the spyryte, and the
spyryte against the flesh. Galat. iii.
The flesh chalenging unto it self no less knowledge and administracio^ of
the truth and of good things, tha^ the spirit: The nature of our corrupted
flesh.
she thinks always yt she ca^ do some thing, and does promise unto her
self, a very great knowledge of holy things. And although she does plainly se
yt her works in co^pariso^ of the divine works of god ar nothing else but a
vain painting, dece^itfulnes, and as if a man might say, a chyldyshe play and
game: yet notwtstandyng does she disdain to give place of the over hand to
thee divine majesty. How beit though she does counterfeyt before men no small
godlynes, and true religion, yet in the mean season can she in no wise escape
the judgment of a godly and faytheful man, which has wholye and from the very
heart forsaken him self. For, he does quickly smelle out the affections of the
flesh, and the co^^umacie or stubbernes yt is naturally toted in her: as soon as she ones begins to set forth her self. But if he ones enterpryseth or go
about to bring to light the paynting, hipocrysie, Who soever goes about to
^etecte and open ye hipocrysye of thee flesh shall feel sorrow and trouble.
and deceytefull nature of the flesh, by and by, shall he feel her enemytye
and armure. For, straight ways armyng, and weapynge her self, with most
ygnominio^s, reprocheful, and opprobrious words, she shall furiouslye fly
upon him, that has touched her payntinge and hypocrysye, never ceassynge too
spend all her whole strength against him, till she can either overthrow or
utterly destroy him. Christ therefore, wyllethe us before all things to be
persuaded, that every day, we must bear a cross, for yt more, that gods
word does increase and flourish, the more does the cross, and persecutyon rise
and follow, the greater that thee proceeding of gods word is, The godli ought
never to look for peace and quietness in this world
the more furyous and angrye does the flesh wax. Therefore they are all
together deceived and err all the world wide, yt are wont to hope and gape
for peace and quietness, nor will sustain or abide ye grievous scorns of
persecutions, for the holy words sake, or think yt they must suffer none For,
though the people does by flocks and swarms fly to ye word of god, and with
ferue^te studies come unto christ, yet not wtstanding, we shall feel, that ever
much persecutyon, and cross, shall be styrred up against us, by the mighty
rulers of the world, which will always, with al their strength endeavors, and
might, withstand and resyst the eua^gelical doctrine. Yes, put ye case, yt there
be no such in the world, or that the Princes and rulers do favor ye truth of yt
gospel yet shall we nevertheless se false teachers and false Apostles, The nature
of false teachers and false apostle.
rise daily, which having more learning, and knowledge, tha^ charity and
love, will set forth them selves not without great hynderau^ce of the truth of
gods word. For, they without any urgent cause, styrryng up contentious and
stryfes, for every light tryfle, shall grievously offend the weak and meke
hearted, they care not though they al offend ye world, so that they may be
counted of the simple and ygnoraunt people great clerks and well learned.
Here therefore shall a new gryef and cross rise and come up on us, which does
require in us a new and whole strength. For, they that at sound and steadfast or
constant in ye faith must needs be sore grieved in their minds, It is a great
^rosse to the godly to se the weak too be offended
when they se the weak to be offended, and truly there can be no greater,
greuouser, or bytrerer gryefe unto a godly man, as Paul testyfyethe of him
self to the Corinthi. saying? ii. Cori. xi.
Who is offended, and I burn not? What neadethe many words? Every day we
must take a new cross upon us: for, christ lies not, when he does say:
math, vi
Suffycient unto the day, is the travail thereof. And in an other place: math.x.
He that will save his life, shall lose it. Where ye must mark and note, yt this
word, anima (which communely is taken for the soul or life of man) does not
only in this place signify, ye life, yt we do live in this body but also ye
mind, intent purpose or counsel of man. Who soever the^, for to save this
frail and transitory life, does unfaithfully fall from the word of god, shall
lose his life, who soever trustyng in his own learning, wysdom, counsels,
and intent or purpose of his mind, will not suffer him self to be plucked from
it, but rather honeth, yt by it he shall obtain the true beatytude and ever
lastyng felicity, shall also lose his life and cast away his soul.
Therefore, the pastor shall utterly forsake him self, he shall al together
cast and throw down him self before god, he shall utterly take and banishe away
the froward intent or purpose of is obstakle and stubborn mind, and every day
prepare him self to bear some new cross. For, christ did also follow ye same
way and rule, ever submitting his will to his fathers will, which he did always
obey, bearing the cross that was laid upon him, till he was taken up, to that
glory that he should sit at thee right hand of the father.

After that the pastor has forsaked hi^ self he must be replenisshed with the
spirit of god
As sone the^, as ye pastor (and not only he, but also every mortal man) has
for sake^ himself, and by this forsaking, has wholly euacuated him self, yt is
to say, has made hi^ self of no reputation i^ his own sight, next of al it
behooves yt he be filled or replenished with God, yt is to say, that he put al
his hope and trust in ye one only god. Our lord Jesus christ did both
perform and express thee same in his disciples, who^ by and by as soon as
they leaving al things did stick and cleave only to him, he did not only
provide for, concerning externe and outward things, yt is to say, meat and
drink and clothing, and that so lyberally, that they being asked, whether
they wanted any thing, when they were sent to preach the gospel without scrip or
wallet, did answer that they did lack no manner of thing: but also wylled them
to be without all care, and too take no thought, what they should answer, if
at any time they should be brought before Kings and Princes, Math. x.
for in the same self hour, says he: it shall be given you, what ye shall
answer. Besides that he did not commit unto the^ the full office of
preachinge, before that he blowing upon them (as we may see in the.xx. cha. of
John) did say: Receive ye the holy ghost, signifying thereby that no man is mete
to feed the people, and that no man can well and truly execute the office of a
Pastor, To euacuate hi^ self which is half a latin phrase, is too esteem
hi^ self of no reputation. Philip.ii.
except he utterly forsakinge and euacuatinge him self has God inhabytinge,
dwellinge, and speakinge in, or by him. Besides that, he does command the^
also, that they should not depart from Jerusalem, till that they had received
the spirit, Actuu^. i
yt was promised unto the^. Which, being received, they did by and by begin,
and not without great gratulation and joy of minds, the function and office
of preachinge, for so it behooves to be, least the Pastor do le^de the sheep
committed unto him, into any other pastors, than in to the same, out of the
which, he has pycked and gathered ye fode of gods word, that is to say,
into the knowledge of the true god, and into a constant and most sure
confidence in him only. If he will the^ set forth these things unto ye people,
that is committed unto him, he mu^ himself learn to know god first, and put
his hole affi^unct trust, and confidence in him only.

These things being thus promised and done, he shall begin to preach ye word,
after ye same manner that christ him self did use. For, he being about to teach
ye world, did say: Repent ye, for, the kingdom of heaven is at hand.
Repe^ta^ce is the first part of the preaching of the gospel.
Which form and manner John baptist, the fore renner of Christ Jesus did
observe. But who will repent, who will amend his life, that before does not
understand and know how wicked and evil he is? Therefore the syckenesse and
disease must be first showed and declared, and than afterward ye salvation
ought to be preached. No man ought to be moved, yt our lord and savior Jesus
christ, Math. x mark.xvi
does command to preach only salvation, and the gospel. For, the sickness
must be known before yt any man will suffer the medicine to be ministered unto
him. Christ also in those places yt we now have made mention of, does by a more
sweet pleasant and comfortable word, denominate, and call the preaching of the
gospel grace, because that the gospel is the joyful tyding of that most sure
and infallible grace, What the knowledge of sin does work in us.
which of god is granted, and given unto us. The knowledge of sin, which we
do need here most of al, brings us to ye point, yt we do utterly despair
of our own selfs, wherefore, it co^pelleth, dryueth and forces us, to fly
unto the gratuite, and free mercy of god, of the which we are most sure, sith
ye god ye father did give his only begotten son for us. Wherefore christ (as
it is said before) did vouchsaue to call the hole misery of our salvation, a
medicine. And in an other place, as Luke xxiiii. he does join both together*
yt is to say, repentance and forgeuenes of sins, saying: So it behooves yt
christ should suffer and rise again from death the third day, and that
repentance, and remission of sins should be preached among all nations in my
name. Behold, how he has here joined both together and sets forth unto us,
both repe^ta^ce and forgeuenes of sins. For no man can worthily delight in
the preachinge of ye gospel, no man can worthily receive it with a full joy,
except he has before a full knowledge of his syckenesse and disease, that is
to say, of his sins.

The second care of a pastor is to take heed* yt they, which do repent,
perish not again.
But now as soon as the wretched and miserable man does know his sickness,
infirmity and disease, and seeing ye filthiness of his sins, does also espy,
deprehe^d and find a sure knowledge, and hope of salvation in Jesus Christ: he
ought in no wise afterward to live in sin. For since yt in christ Jesus we
are al dead to sin, we can not afterward live in sin, as the holy Apostle
S. Paul does largely and copiously declare and show Roma, vi.
This shall therefore be one of the chiefest and greatest care of a Pastor, and
true shepeherde, to watch diligently, and as nyghe as he can, to take heed and
beware, that the sheep, which are already washed and cleansed, do not voyltre
the^ selfs again in the stinking mire, and puddell of sin. For, after yt
the faithful, are ones come into the knowledge of their salvation, and have
tasted of the gratuite and free mercy of god, which the heavenly father does
most liberally grant and give unto us: it is most convenient, that they do
lead an innocent life and pure, from all contagiouse fyl thynesse of sin,
least parchaunce they dye again. For as Christ, being ones risen from death,
dies no more, death has no more power over him: so they doing or putting of the
old man, shall put on the new, which is created after the lykenes of god, that
is to say: our Lord Jesus Christ him self. what it is to putt on Christ.
They do (says the scripture) put on christ, that walk and live, as Christ
him self did live here in the earth. Therefore he does bid and command his
disciples after the same manner: mat. xxviii
Go ye therefore and teach all nations, and baptize them in the name of the
father, the son, and the holy ghost, teachinge them to observe and keep, what
soever I have commanded you. For, who soever does not think every day upon
ye ame^deme^t of his life, after that he feleth him self to be redeemed by
Christ, and renewed, does co^tempne the name of christ, abusing the same most
shamefully, yea, rather he is thee cause, that the holy name of christ is
evil spoken of, and blasphemed among the infidels and ungodly. We do read
therefore, that the holy Apostle S. Peter does not without a good cause say: i.
Pet. ii.l.
for as much then as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, arm ye your
selves likewise with the same mind, for he, which suffers in the flesh,
ceasseth from sin, that hence forward he should live (as much time, as
remains in thee flesh) not after the lusts of men, but after will of God.
For it is sufficient for us, yt we have spent thee time, yt is past of our
life, after the will of the Be^tils, walking in wa^tounes, lusts, in excess of
wine, in excess of eatinge, in excess of drinking, or dro^kenes, and in
abominable Idolatry. By the which words, we may easily see andperceyue or
understand, yt we have not yet fulfilled nor done fully our duty, if we show
and declare the salvation which is pourchased by Christ, for, we have most need
too beware and take heed, that we do not lose again the salvation which is
gotten and purchased unto us thereby, as most unfaithful Apostates and
Traitors, most ungodly blasphemyng the holy and blessed name of thee lyuinge
God.

It is ye dut^e of a pastor to live accordi^ge too his doctrine yt he teaches
Which thing yt it may be co^modiously brought to pass and done, there is none
other way more co^modiouse and ready, tha^ if the honestye of the pastor be
soche, yt he shall with his works and daily example of living express the
thing, that he does teach with his mouth, and words. Which thing, Christ
does highlye require. matthew. v
Who soever (says he) shall break the least of these commandments, and
teach men to do so, he shall be called less in the kingdom of heaven. But who
soever shall both do and teach, he shall be called great in the kingdom of
heaven. For, this is most sure, no man is able to deny this, but that it is a
plain payntinge and hypocrysye to speak gaylye of god, and in the mean
season to live nothing after the rule and prescript of his word. Which thing S.
Paul does manifestly declare, writing to Titus, Titum. i.
when he says: They confess, yt they know god, who^ with their deeds, they do
utterly deny, sith yt they be abominable and disobedient, and unapt to every
good work. And again, Roman. ii
he writes after this manner: Which teach another, and doeste not teach thy
self, which preachest yt a man should not steal, and thou stealest, which
say yt a man should not commit adultery, and thou breakest wedlock, why the
abhorrest ydols, and robbest god of his glory, which boastest in the law, and
by ye breaki^ge of the law do dishonor god, for the name of god is ill
reported and spoken of, among the Be^tyls for your sakes. Therefore the pastor
shall with all care and study beware and take heed, yt he do not destroy, with
his fylthyelyuyng and conversation, the thing, that he does buyld and set up
with his doctrine and traditions, for the nature of man's wit is soche, that ye
weaker persons are sore offended with this thing, they will not suffer the^
selfs lightely to be won, drawn, and allured with gods word, if they see
that the life and conditions of the pastoure, do not agree with the doctrine,
which is pure, holy and sound.

The pastor ought diligent^ie to shu^ne ye hypocritycal faynynge of relygion.
Finally here, with a diligent mind and most vigilant care head must be taken yt
the pastor be not decked with any hypocritical clothing and feigned coloring
of godlynes, rather than with that true, and pure wedding garment, which for
the most part, is wont to be now a days: that is to say, good bid must be
taken, that he be not clothed in a shepes skin, wearing a long gown down
to the fete, a long fattynet tippet, or a wide and broad hoode, cominge down
to his very myddell (these things, Many yet do seek by these tryme trames to
crep^ in to the estymation of the people
god woot, have been, and are yet taken of some, for most infallible tokens, and
signs of a godly and devout mind) where as he does bear a mind replenisshed
and flowinge over with avarice and coueteousnesse, as all most all thee
Doctors of divinity are wont to be, specially soche, as the world has in
estimation: Again, that he god not abroad in ye streets, with a bowed neck,
lokynge down, with his face to the ground, O ye hypocrites wasshe ye rather
the inner part of the cup.
where as he has a heart pufte up, with all kind of arrogancye and pride: Item
that he do not wear a white rotcher, which is a sign of chastity, and
clenlynesse, where as he is more lastiuious, wantonne, and lecherous, than any
he got, or stynkynge bore: Farthermore that he do not wear high shoone above
the ankles, and a deep cappe down benethe his ears, where as he does nourishe
and cloak inwardly in his heart, the most pernityous mo^sters of envy and
hatered: Fynallye that he do not mummell every foot a, m. Psalms, and in the
mean season does leave and neglect the plain, light some, and everlasting
word of God. The simple and rude people by ye outward show of ceremonies is
brought to hypocrysy and superstition.
For, if the simple and rude people, does se such outward show of worckes,
set forth before their eyes, in their teacher or Pastor, what shall they suck
out of it, but a vain and ungodly hypocrysye? which the pastor or teacher,
does outwardlye show, but inwardlye in his heart, is not a little troubled, and
exercysed, with the alureme^tes and cou^sayls of his affections. This therefore
shall be the duty and office of a Pastoure, to frame and order his life, not
according to ye prescrybed rules of men's tradytions, but according to the rule
of gods word, whereof he is a minister, For, except he does the same, he shall
plant nothing else, but a plain hypocrysie, as it is said even now. Christ
is a mo te perfect example of the Pastors life
And sithe that he has christ, for a most perfect example of his life, he
ought with all care and diligence to follow him. Wherefore, if christ was
farthest from all hypocrisye, and hypochriticall works: we ought in no wise to
be studious or folowers of the^. For, he is ye highest and most perfect God,
which as it wa^teth or lacks nothing, so by man's industry, labor, and study
nothing ca^ ever be added unto it to make it more perfect. In those things
then, yt pertain and belong to the ministry of the church, ye pastor shall
follow the condicio^s and nature of a godly and a loving father. A loving and
wise father, does in no wise come forth masked into the sight of his children,
to beg any thing of the^, but al his hole intent, study and endeavor is, to
teach, instruct, and bring them up so, yt they may live a chaste and impolluted
life, that they may be friendly and ge^tyl unto al men, yt they may be hurtful
to no man living upon the earth, yt they may in all things, follow temperaunce
and stubbernes or modestye, and always abhor al kinds of temperaunce. These
are thee chyefe things wherein a Pastor ought to exercy se him self, which
therefore is called by christ, a householder or steward. And Paul, i. Cor. iiii.
not without great sorrow and grief, does complain of ye Corinthia^s, yt although
they had a great nu^bre of scole masters and teachers yet they had very few
fathers. Whereby we do, Except ye teacher is a father he is a p^ayn deceauer.
and that by a sure and infallible demonstration gather, yt they can in no wise
be true teachers, except they be also very fathers of the congregation. For, ye
nature of fathers is such, yt they directi^g both their deeds and sayings, to
this end, yt they may profyt, and do good, unto other yt ca^ never be seen to
seek their own profyt and advantage, of ye disprofit, and harm of their
children, wherefore, no man can be a faithful, and true Pastoure, except he
does bear a fatherly affection, toward the flock, that is committed unto
him. And if the teachers do not delyght and have a pleasure in those things,
yt they do teach, they are very deceauers of ye people, but if they do exercise
the^ selves in those things yt they do set forth and inioine unto other, by
their doctrine: that lively example of ye true Pastor, shall bring more
utility and profit, to the sheep committed unto him, and shall take greater
increase, than if they should, as tynkelyng brass, resou^de a. M. times the
holy oracles and word of god. Again if they neglectyng the word of the Lord
do teach him value traditions and fables expressing as nigh as they can, the
same doctrine of their, both in their bedes and living: They are false
prophets, whom thee lord has oftentimes commanded to slaye, kill, and root
out of the earth. ye shall not every man do yt thing ye s^^^th good to you, but
ye thing ^^at I co^meu^d you, yt do ye only says ye lord.
But of the^, we will sneake hereafter. Therefore, the pastor shall not initiate
and follow, n^^ yet express in his own lyuinge, ye exemplary and pattern of
those things, that either he him self, or other do judge to be good, and
acceptable unto god, but he shall frame his life after, or according too those
things, that god does require of us by his word.

What the faithful pastor ought too preach
Now any man may easelye know, understand and gather, by this, that has been
said hitherto, what thing it is that a christian pastoure ought too preach:
Truly none other thing, but the pure word and scryptures of the eternal and
everlasting god. For, our of them shall he bring forth those things that
shall induce and bring the people committed unto him, in to ye knowledge of
their infirmitye, weakness, and disease, that is to say, of their sins.
Which after that they have ones known perfectly, they shall also feel that
there is no manner of strength in man, wherewyth he may obtain saluatyon. Then
shall he by and by declare and show unto them, the mercy of god, unto whom
they may with their hole heart and undoubted faith and affyaunce commyt the^
selves, and that chyefely for this cause, yt they se that most highest and
merciful father, to have delivered us, his one only begotten son, our lord
and sauyoure Jesus christ, for a most sure pledge of his grace, by whom, we
have always, a most free access and passage unto thee throne and seat of
thee dyuyne grace and mercy. After, then, that they have, with a sure and
undoubted faith known and understood ones, thee hole matter of their
saluacyo^ and that most sure writing and pledge of the mercy of god, so that
they are already made the children of god, our heavenly father, which before,
were the children of the flesh and everlasting da^pnacio^, this duty shall be
requires of the^, that they follow hence forward thee laws and rules or gods
holy will: For, they are, a new creature, Galat. vi.
as we may see. Therefore the Pastoure, shall with an earnest care and study
beware and take heed, that the sheep, which are already cured and healed from
their sycknes and disease, The knowledge of the word of God is necessari to a
pastor.
shall not fall again into thee same dyseases. But sith yt this thing can and
ought to be ministered, by the operacion of gods word only, no small
knowledge of gods word is required in him. Which ought to be sought none
other where, tha^ in the holy and sacred scryptures of both Testamentes. But it
shall profyt and avail little or nothing, to look upon the outward letter except
god does vouchesafe with his inward virtue to draw the heart and mind of
man, and cause him by his spirit to credit his word, and not too wraste it at
his own pleasure, according too his inordynate, affectes, lusts, and
passions, but rather follow the free, sincere, and plain meaning, sense, and
understanding, of it, which the holy spyryte and grace of god has
inspyred. Paul doethe in few words, most lyuelye comprehend all these
things, in thee later epistle too his dyscyple Timothe, ii. Tim. iii
wrythyng after this manner: All scripture given by the inspyratyon of god, is
profitable, to teach, to improve, to amend, and to instruct in
righteousness, that thee man of god may be perfect, and prepared unto all
good works. All institution, then, or teaching, wherwythe the faithful
Pastor will feed his people, shall be ordered after this form and rule. Which
books be Canonical and which be not, I have no neade in this place and at this
time to declare, for, I think that no man is ygnoraunte thereof, if only he
has any sight in the knowledge of the tongues.

After yt the Pastor, The Pastor must rebuke and rote away vyc^s.
is well instructed in all those things, yt pertain to his kinsefolkes, his
own life and doctrine (for, of the love of god, we will speak hereafter in a
due time and place) yt is most necessary for him, to know and understand how he
ought to be have him self in other externe and outward things, and what reward
he ought to look for. The first thing, yt offers it self, here in this
place, is that he must with a bold and stout courage rebuke all noisome and
pernicyous vices neither fearyng the vain pride and threateninges of this
world, The pastoure ought too dread nothing.
nor yet being abashed, that he is on every side laid wait for, for, the
lord does inioyne the same to Hieremy, Hierem. i.
saying: Behold, I put my words in thy mouth, and behold, this day do I set
the over the people and kingdoms, that thou may rote out, break of,
destroy, and make waste, and that thou may build up, and plant. Let therefore
ye pastor be mighty, and of ablenes to overthrow every high thing, yt
exhalteth it self, against ye prescript of gods word* let him* with a bold
stomach assawte and destroy all such things, as Paul does teach in the later
epistle to the Corinthians. ii. Corin. x
Christ him self did leave a most sure and evident example of ye same thing
which example is to be followed of al me^. The example of christ.
For, after that he had ones, by his everlasting wysdo^ perceived, that the
hipocrysie, and vnsatyable covetousness of ye prestes and scribes, was ye cause
and occation yt the rude and unlearned people did fall from the true and
everlasting god, which simple people being as if a man might say,
captyuated, and snarred, with the covetous deceates, tradityons, dreams, and
feigned inventions of thee pristes, did he, wrapped in all kinds of error, he
did rebuke no kind of men, with soche seueryte, and sharpness, as he did
use against them, speaking always openly against their painted hypocrysye, and
fylthy coueteousnesse, for, he did, and not without great grief of mind, pytye
always the poor people, whom thee deceyptfull crafts of thee priests did
deceive, and that, because that he did se the^ destituted of the fode of gods
word, Mathe. i^
which is that most pleasant and gracious meat of thee souls, and that they
did want a true and faithful Pastor, which should bear a fatherlye mind
and affiction toward the^. Many times also, he does teach and instruct the^
gentely. And if at any time necessytie does require, that he must also rebuke
them, yet does he never use soch austerite and sharpness in rebuking, as he
was wont to use against the ungodly priests, that so deceived and seduced ye
people. For, layinge to them lack of knowledge, and ignorance of the truth,
he calls them blind guydes, vipers, generation of Satan, hypocrites,
shameless crauers, liars, and other like names, which thing any man may see and
learn in the books and wrytinges of all the Eua^gelistes, wherefore we shall
have no need here of many testimonies. But now, sith that in our time, this
poisoned evil of hypocrisye, is growe^ to so great a power, has gotten and
pourchased lo great a strength and might, and is come up to that point, that
it can or dare no more for shame hyde it self, but rather defend with strong
hand their deuylyshe crafts and deceates, and that most shamefully, what (I
pray the, o faithful mynyster in thee house of God) is best for the to do?
for, if thou doeste hold thy peace, the blood of them that perisshe, shall be
required at thy hand, which thing, Ezechi^. iii.
we may learn by the words of God in Ezechiel. And you see that the
hypocrisye of the Papists (here I do call papists, Al ye spiritualty and
clergy are Papists except they do either favor or preach sincereli gods word.
all the sort of the^ that are called spiritual, or the clergy, the^ being
excepted, which preach purely and sincerely the word of God) has gotten and
pourchased so great treasours of riches, and so great might and strength that
they have no more need of a cloak, to cloak their deceytful craftines with all
(which thing nevertheless was most necessary to the Priests of thee
Jews, in the time of christ) but rather be not ashamed to defend them selfs
openly, with most mighty and strong arms, yt is to say, with rewards and
gifts, with wars, and fyering of villages and towns, with spoiling and
destroying of feldes and slaughter of the innoce^tes, and al other kinds of
crudelite, The Kings of Scicilia were counted to be ye cruellest tirau^ts of
ye world.
in so much yt the tyrauntes of Scicilia, which were of most famous crudelitie
could deal no cruellier. For, they did never handel a man cruelly, before that
his cause was heard, but these our spiritual prelates, do with all care and
diligence study this one thing, that they may in all regions and countries,
win to the^ selfs, with large gifts and rewards, thee minds of the
mighty rulers and magistrates, whom they so intoxicate and poysonne, that they
thyncke, that they have well and truly done their duty yea, that they do
high service unto god when they do most cruelly persecute al them, ye preach
the word of the gospel, without any hearing of the causes or trying of ye
doctrine. And if they their own selves have the secular sword in their hands
(as they do call it, by and by they do without any measure slay, kyl, and
murder the innocents, being in this point, more cruel, than Tygres, and
Crocodiles. And onles they should feate, yt they should be so served, if at any
time ye world should alter and change they would in no wise be content with ye
common and used kinds of punishments, Phalaris was king of the Argenti^s and
most cruel tyrau^t which daily invented new ki^des of torments
to exercise their ragiouse crudelitie, but would as a most cruel Phalaris,
day^ly inuente and find out new facions and kinds of torments, to afflicte
there with according to their inordinat lusts, the faithful ministers of gods
mind.

the iniquit^e and unrightful government of ye Magestrates of over time.
Besides that, thou do before thine own eyes see this thing also, o
faithful servant, which have wholly consecrated thy self unto god, that many
of the high powers, whose part it was to administer the swearde of justice, do
use exercise justice (if that manner of rul^ng that they do use may be called
justice) rather according too their coueteouse minds, inordinate lusts, and
bold rashenesse, that they may be high, and voyltre them selfs in all kinds
of pleasure than of any love or fear of God and true religion. The people is
s^een to ye very bones with importable tar^s exactyo^s and subsydies.
For, they do miserable vex their own subjects, with pride, hautenesse of
mind, and insolent arroga^cye, yea, they do oppress them, they torment and
afflicte them, they pylle and poole, rob and fley the^ to the very bones,
with unlawful exactions, taxes and subsydes. They trouble forenne nations, and
peoples, with wartes, excursio^s, or hostile renninges out, with daily
scarmychinge and battles. And at home (if you do behold and look upon
their private manner of living) they do nothing else, but ryotte, eat, and
drink and make merry, use unlawful games, in their abominable dronckenes, most
shamefully polluting all their studyes and doings, with fill thye whoredom and
adultery. This, is the sickness, and most pestilent boil, where with the
heads of the Christian people, are infected. Wherefore, Ezechi iii.
o faithful Pastor take good head to thy self, and se how these euyls can be
remedyed For, if thou do not set forth ye truth of the word of God, the
blood of them that peryshe (as it is said before) The office of a Pastor is
very peryllous.
shall be required at thy hand. Again, if thou do begin to speak and tell
the truth, thou shall fall unto the hands of them that be able to do the no
small harm. For, the deceate, fraud, subtyltie, The craft of ye papists in
winning ye hertes and favor of Princes.
and craft of the papists is soche, that they have crepte into ye palaces of
al princes, Emprours, and Kings, craftily at the first promoting the children
of certain Princes. For, they did make some of them Cardinals, some Bishops,
some again Abbates, Prious, Co^mendours, Administratours, or Coadiutours: yea,
they did also make the same self Princes parteners with them, of the money yt
they got of the simple and ignoraunte people by their pardons and
indulge^ces. Whereby it came to pass, that they have almost all earthly
princes, not a little subject and bound unto the^. Wherefore, if thou folowinge
the example of Christ do go about to assaute and expel and drive out this
deceyptful company and flock of hypocti^es, by and by thou shall see the
Princes leap forth, to defend these hypocrites with does and ^^ale. Again, if
thou casting away thy weapons and harneys, will run away and seek a mean,
how thou may co^modiously rydde and deliver thy self, from that pe^yllous
function and office, thou shalt be rekened among the unfaithful pastors,
which saying the wolf do forsake the sheep, and take them selfs to their
fete, saving the^ selfs by runninge away. Here, as if it were by ye way, the
virtue and strength of faith is known, for, when a man, being in extreme
danger, is in perplexity and all together doubtful of mind, he may not fly
to none other (if he be faithful in deed) than to thee o^^ god and his word,
as unto a most sure refuge, that he being fully instructed by i^, may p^t his
host trust and confidence in him only.

Having therefore a^ eye unto Christ, A pastor ought in no wise to fear death.
hea^e, take heed and mark diligently, what he does speak, John x. When he
says a good pastor, does ieoparde his life for his sheep. If then thou wylt
be counted a faithful and good pastor, and desyrest to be numbered and rekened
among them, that have wrought and labored faithfully in ye work of ye lord
thou must needs ieoparde thy life for thy sheep. Besides that, he does move
and stir us, with other words. Math. x when he sayth^ That thing, that I
say unto you in darkness, tell ye it in thee light, and that thing that ye
hear in your ears, preach ye it upon houses. And, be not ye afraid of them,
yt kyl the body, but the soul they ca^ not kyl, but rather fear ye him, yt
ca^ cast both body and soul into ye fire of hell. By the which words we do
most plainly learn, yt we ought in no wise to keep close, or hyde Gods word:
but rather ye lord does co^mau^d, yt we putti^ge aside al fear, do speak it
abroad. Also he yt is the minister of God shall in no wise dread the
manasshes and threateninges of the world. For, as it is our duty and office,
to speak boldly against all the^, that live in sin lycentiously and without
shame (as ye Lord does command the prophet, saying: Hierem. i.
Thou shall go to whom soever I shall send the, and cry out, cease not,
Esaias. iviii
lift up thy voice, as a trompette, and show unto my people their sins) so
it is the duty of a Pastor, to coope openly with the enemies of the truth,
and to withstand them to their faces, that so he may defend the flock
committed unto him, and help his sheep out of thee mire and puddell of sin,
for, unless soche things were done, cared for, and taken head of, we should
have no need of a Pastor, for, whiles no peril does hang over the sheep,
they have no neade of a pastor, nor of a watch man, that should watch for
them: but rhey have need of a pastoure, that they may through his fatherly
care and diligence both for see and shun the peril, If then the pastor, when
there is any danger, peril and ieoperdye, does run away, as touching the
sheep, it makes no matter at al whether that they have any shepeherde or not.

Wherefore it is most necessary, The example of christ.
that before all things we have an eye unto christ, which says. John. x. I do
ieoparde my life for my sheep. For, he did not only speak these things, with
words, but also he did fulfill and perform them in deed. For, when he was
going to Jerusalem he did with plain and manifest words declare unto his
discyples, what paryl and danger he should bring his life to Math. xv^
and when Peter did go about to turn him from the mind and purpose, he turned
him self to Peter saying: Goo after me, Satan, thou hynderest me, for thou
do not sauoure those things that are of god, but those things that are of
me^. And afterward being entered into ye city, he did cast the biers and
sellers out of the temple, fearyng nothing thee malycyous intentes of thee
Scrybes and priests, whom he knew did hate him deadly. Yea, he did also
openly in the audyence of all thee people, with great grauitye and sharp
words rebuke their sins and vices, that is to say, their covetousness
ambition, and hypocrysye. math. xxii^
And when the appointed hour or time of his death was come, that he should
deliver him self for us, and his enemies bei^ge issued forth did seek too take
him, he did come forth to mete them, and that we being instructed by his
own example, might understand that it is also thee office of a Pastoure, to
beware and keep of, those outewarde perils and ieopardyes, which may hurt
the lives and goods of the sheep, he did not only deliver him self too
death for us all, but also did deliver his dyscyples from this bodily death,
saving their lives when he, not without a dyuyne and godly majesty and power
did say: If ye seek me, suffer, these to go away. Therefore, he yt wylbe a
faithful and good pastor of the sheep, of our lord and sauyoure Jesus Christ,
following christ's example, must set him self against all peryllous
tem^estes and storms and come forth against all the enemies of Christ, which,
for gods sake, and his everlasting word, and also for the faithful care,
yt he takes for his sheep, do go about to persecute and afflycte him,
fearing nothing, nor yet regarding ye person of any man. Let him not be
afraid nor abashed in his mind. though he were compelled to reprove, rebuke
and speak against the great King Alexander magnus, or Iulyus Caesar, The true
Pastor shall also rebuke and reprove princes, if they use any extortion, or
burden over sore their poor subjects.
or thee Bishop of Rome him self to be short, against al ye mightiest and
most puissaunt kings and Princes of ye world. Which thing he shall not only
do, if they do obstinateli resist ye word of god, but also, if they do oppres
ye poor people that is under their subjection, with intolerable burdens of
subsidyes exactio^s and taxes. Which things we will prove now, with plain and
evident examples, and also with manifest testimonies of the scryptures.

When ye almighty and merciful father. did se, that ye people of Israel, was
oppressed we exceeding great and unmeasurable afflictions, and with an over
heavy yoke of servitude, by ye most cruel tirau^t Pharao, and all the people of
Egypt: by and by he did se^d Moses to deliver them, from so hard a thraldom and
bodage. For, he could bear no longer, ye tyrannical and unjust affliction, of
his people. Exo. iii. And although Moses excusing him self, by his
simplicity and rudeness, did all that he could, to put from him that functyon
and office, yet did he profytte or avail nothing prayed he never so much, but
being compelled and constrained of the lord, did bring forth, that great
people and innumerable multitude of men, women, and children, yea against the
tyrant Pharaos will, and how? Through the myddest of the sea, through ye
deserts, thoroughe thousands of their enemies, thorough infinite parylles of
hunger, thyrste, sycknesses, and punysshementes. So that to have read, or
hard such great pains, labors and trauayles, would make any man to tremble
and quake for horror God, notwythstandynge, although they were beset on
every side with parylles and most daugerous ieopardyes: yet remembrynge his
promise did give the vyctorye to his people. This therefore shall be ye office and
duty of every Pastor, to come forth, and to stand up manfully for the health
and save guard of his sheep if at any time the tyrauntes of this world, do
begin unjustly, and after new and ungodly ways, to aggrauate or burden, and
oppress thee people. For, they that mynyster thee lames of natyons and
peoples, The du^t^e of christian magistrate. ^.
and are gouernoures of publyke weals, ought too be benefycyall, not
iniuryous or wrongefull, not pyllers, and pollers, not robbers, and thieves.
Luke.xxii. Wherefore that famous and godly philosopher Seneca, Seneca.
did right well and justly call ye office or ruledomme of a King, Benefecyum,
that is to say, a benefytte. No man, I suppose, is ygnoraunte, what is dued of
subjects, to magystrates, which thing, Paul does playnelye set forth Roma.
xiii: but here in this place we speak of tyrauntes, which doing intolerable
wrongs unto all men, have in them no sparkle of love toward their
neighbor nor yet of true relygyon or godliness. A digression.
What shall we say, o faithful soul? shall we not believe, that this is
done, by thee syngulare love, mercy, and bounteous work of God thee father,
that in this our most wicked time, which is polluted, with all kinds of vice,
we see thee bryghtenesse of his holy word, too shine forth, with so great
virtue and lyghtesomnesse? In this our time, I say, that all inorydynate
lusts and fleshely affectyons, unrighteousness iniquity, a dyssolute or
lycentyous corruptyon of all good laws do raygne every where: that we se al
states and orders of men, yea thee greateste part of thee mighty Princes,
corrupted, co^taminated and polluted, with filthy whoredom adulterye,
rauyshyng of maiden, unfaithfulness, impudency or unshamefastness, with robberyes
theftes, detestable vsurye, and all other like horrible sins. Wherefore, sithe
that it is plain and euedente, that the word of god, was never hitherto, sens
that the faith of christ, began first to be preached and spread abroad,
set forth with such power virtue and lyuelynesse, as we do se before our own
eye^, to be done now a days, and that every where almost, it may easily be
gathered thereby, that this is done by the deuyne providence and not without our
great good, that we being instructed with the knowledge of our salvation should
rather rote out, this deceateful hypocrysye of humayne tradytyons. Woe be to ye
pastor which hydeth the light of gods word under a bushel.
Woe therefore, be unto ye pastor, which now, in this our time, ye children and
fools can speak, is not ashamed to hold his peace, which hidi^g the light of
gods word under a busshel, does the work of the lord fraudulently or
deceatfully, nor endeavors him self al yt he can yt the people of the lord,
may be delivered.

God, with expressed and plain words, reveled by Samuel, The example of Saul
and Samuel.i. Regum xv
had in times past commanded Saul ye first king of ye Israelites, yt he should
make war against ye Amalechites, and destroy the^ al, and kill with the sweard
all living souls, and yt he should save either to him self, or to his
soldiers no manner of thing of the riches and spotles of those ungodly men.
But Saul breaking ye co^maundeme^te of god, did bring alive Agag ye King of ye
Amalechites, and also he doubted not to reserve and save a great nu^bre of
catel, for to offer unto the lord, with the most precious and costely garments
and many other things. This proud presumption of Saul, that faithful prophet
Samuel could not suffer, nor abide, which fearinge him nothing, yt both was
lately made a king, and also was not a little pufte up, with ye prosperous
v^ctory yt ye lord had given him does boldly with such words blame and rebuke
his disobedience: Wherefore, have y^ not harkened unto ye voice of ye lord,
Soche are our good intentes yt are not gro^ded upon gods word.
but have turned to the pray, and have done that, which is wicked in ye sight
of thee lord? But Saul excusing him self, answered yt he had performed and
fulfilled the word of thee lord, saying: I have gone the way, which the lord
has sent me unto, and have brought Agag thee king of Amaleke, and have
utterly destroyed ye Aamalechites. But the people took of the spoil, sheep,
oxen and the chefest of the things, which should have be^ destroyed, to offer
unto ye lord thy god in Gilgal. Ma^^ke ye this, that will may ataine good
intentes
Which things being heard, Samuel did again blame and rebuke him very
sharply, saying: Has ye lord as great pleasure in burnt sacryfices and
offringes, as when ye voice of ye lord is obeyed? Behold to obey, is better
than sacryfyce and to harken is better than the fat of Rams. For, rebellyon
is as the sin of wytchecrafte, and stubbernesse, is as the wickedness of
Idolatryr Because thou have cast away the word of the Lord, therefore, has
the lord cast away the, from being king. A good pastor ought to follow ye
example of Samu^ll.
Howbeit these things being thus paste, and after that Samuel had executed
and done the commandment of god he did hew in pieces Agag the king of
Amaleke, which was brought too him prisoner, This deed then, of that most holy
and strong prophet. Samuel, does suffycyently teach us, that it is ye office
and duty of a pastor, to spare neither kings nor mighty magistrates, but as soon as he shall perceive them, to be deceived, and too go out of the way, by
and by, he shall rebuke their error, yt they may learn both to acknowledge
their faults, and also to amend.

Therefore, against the^ ye will not have si^nes to be rebuked by the Pastors.
a certain of those high prelates of the Romisshe church (whose name I will
wittingly pass over) was not all together folyshe, which when he did commit
the cure and administration of a parish, which did belong to his Diocesys
unto a certain minister, or pastor, he did bynd him to these conditions, that
he should in no wise rebuke or touch sharply his order, yea, not as much as
with a word: Again that he should so tempere and moderate thee preachinge of
the gospel, that he should in his sermons blame and rebuke noman. What shall
then, this poor wretched Pastor, being thus bound, entreat upon, in his
publyke sermons? Behold, ye whole world does lie buried in the stinking puddel
of sin, and is all together drowned in vices: and yet, it shall not be
lawefull too rebuke or blame it. What need have the^ the poor sheep of a
Pastor? In the mean season, I know right well, what this good and wise
father, did say, when he gave this commandment, forsooth, that the condition
and nature of the gospel was, to rebuke no man to sharply. But, o reverend
father, open your eyes a little, and look diligently upon Math. iii. and xiii.
Item Ioh. iii. and.viii. and other innumerable places, of the Evangelical
scripture, that ye may understand what words, and manner of speaking, Christ
and John did use in rebukinge men's sins I know that he will give this
answer: Forsouth, that it is thee duetye of a pastor: to rebuke thee sins
of the commune and rascal people, and to bring the^ of the basest sort, from
their acco^umed vices and manner of lyuinge. For, in this one thing, that holy
and reverend father, did not a little show and declare his godlynes, saying:
that he did in no wise gayn say or contrary the Evangelical doctrine but
rather that he did favor it, with all his heart. Behold then, how these
men, do bewray their own nature and mind. He^e, here, a snake lurketh in ye
grass. For, the mighty Princes and rulers of this world, ^he worldli^ges
could well ^^^de ye preaching of ye gospel, if it should not rebuke their
vicious living
could well abide or bear the preaching and doctrine of the truth, if they
should not feel and perceive, yt thereby their tyranny is brought to light and
rebuked, or if they were not afraid, to lose their temporal commodities and
profytes. Another thing shall also the faithful pastor learn in thee example
of Samuel: that he ought in no wise to spare the Princes and governors, but
blame and rebuke sharply their faults. Which thing, if they can not abide:
Actuum. v
he hears what Saint Peter says: Better it is to obey God, than man.

But because the anointed sort of the Papystes, are not ashamed, Of ye true
obedience ^ disobedience against ye papists
to affirm, strengthen, and establyshe that obedience, that they do require
of al kinds of men, by this example of Samuel, we must better look upon it,
and also speak more largelye of it. When Saul, in his factes and deeds, had
rather followed and observed his intent and mind, than thee plain decree of
Gods word: he did commyt a great sin of disobedience. Wherefore Samuel
says, that it is plain Idolatry if a man does not apply and submyt him
self too the laws of God, and in his doings fellow them as a most sure
and infallible rule: yea, that it is a thing, not only hurtefull and
peruitious, but also most deceyptful, wherwt a man is wont to be no less
deceived, than sorcerers, wytches, and iugglers, be wont to delude and deceive
thee simple and ignorant persons with their merye inventions and iuggelinge
canes. Which saying of the Prophet, ought to be taken after this meaning,
sense, and understanding: When a man by thee iustincte and counsel of his
own reason, does fourge and ymagyne unto him self some thing, as just,
good, and holy determining to observe and follow it, and in the mean season
will not learn of that one only God, and his words, what is good, righteous
and holy, he has already set up in his mind, a false and deceyptfull God, that
is to say, his own reason and will of his own flesh. Now, when this false
God is ones erected and set up, it is an hard and difficulte thing, to put him
down, or to banishe him away. For, by and by, he does show and declare him
self in externe and outward things, and that with wonderful mystes
iuggelinges, and hypocrisy, wherwyth, under the color of godlynes, he goes
about to deceive all men. For, as an ape does like her yonglinges, though they
be most deforme and evil favored, better than the whelps or yonglinges of al
other beasts, so al men generally ar wo^t to prefarre the inuentio^s of their
own reason and brain, unto al other ordinances, statutes and laws, that
ever were ordained, either by god or by man. The good intent of Saul.
For the same cause, Saul did think, that it was a just, an equal and semely
thing that one King should not handle another King too cruellye, nor slaye
him with the sweard, but rather that it was a Royal and Kyngly thing, to
lead his enemy, being ouercomed, captyue and bound. Likewise he did judge
that it was neither commodious, not profitable, that the costely garments, and
other precious things, which were found in the treasors of the Amalechttes,
should be destroyed with fire and thee sweard, or that all the herdes of
cattle, should thus unprofitably perish: Wherefore, he did suffer the soldiers
to take unto them selves, those things, that were costelye and precious, (as
though he should study and go about, by this mean to fulfill thee charity of
his neighbor, expressed in the law). And also he did iustitute, and ordain a
great and solemn sacrifice unto God his Savior, thereby studyinge to
fulfill the first law, that commands to honor, serve, and worship one
only God. Samuel having an eye too his sound and fleshely intent of Saul,
says: Better it is too obey, than sacrifice, and what shall a man call that
obedience? That obedience of Saul, whereby he suffers both the King to be
kept a live, and thee people too take of thee spoil, costely garments and
precious jewels, and to save a live great heardes of cattle for a sacrifice
unto almighty God? No, Have not all these things a gteat show of godliness?
Yeas forsouth. But the Lord does require another obedience: that is to say,
that we follow thee prescripte and rule of his word, which only, King Saul
ought to have observed and followed, and not to have preferred his own good
intent to the deuyne oracles of Gods word. The obedience yt Samuel does
speak of, does maintain nothing ye tyranny of ye Papystes.
By this do Monks, Popish priests, Nonnes, and all the flock of thee
Papists understand, that this saying of the prophet Samuel, where he
says, that obedience is better than all sacryfyces, does make nothing, to
the establishment and strenghtening of their tyranny, but that it does rather
directelye contrary their statutes and ordinances. For, by these words every
man is commanded to obey gods word without all tergiuersation and
controuersye (truly this worshyppynge is most acceptable unto god) and that
we ought too suffer our selves to be brought away or plucked from it, by no
man's authority, nor by the counsel of our own reason. Therefore, sithe
that all thee whole flock of thee papists, do teach only, their own
traditions, set forth their counsayls, and lean upon their inventions and
dreams which are all together repugnaunt and contrary unto gods word, it
shall be our part and duetye to oppone and set against soche traditions of
theyrs, the verity of the dyuyne word of God, When then they cry and
thounder out that Prelates, bishops, When Bisshops and prelates do command
us any thing we must look whether it agrees with gods word or not.
and Priests must be obeyed, let us by and by look whether that these men,
do command and set forth things, that may be proved and allowed by
gods word. If the things, that they command, are soche, as may be borne
by gods word, we have all ready in this thing, no neade at all, of their
Precepts, and Commandments, sith that we have Gods word it self, which
ought only to be brought forth and adduced, which ought only to be observed
of us after whose prescript all our life ought to be ordered, nor it is
conueniente and mete that we should ascribe it to any mo^rtall man. Again, if
their commandments be seche, that the truth of Gods word, toth neither
admit, nor allow them: and yet in the mean season be of soche impudencye and
unshamefastness, that they be not ashamed to say: Our decrees and laws,
though, they be all together contrary to Gods holy laws, must be obeyed:
for obedience is better, tha^ al other things, we shall by and by answer,
that those things, which they do trifingly allege for the obseruaunce and
keeping of their traditions ought to be referred to god only: Yea, we shall
dye rather a. M. deaths, than neglecte in any manner of thing the prescript
and rule of gods word, for, there can be nothing more pleasant and
acceptable unto god, than if we do diligently harken to his voice nor suffer
out selfs to be deceived by the authority of any man, be he never so great,
and holy in the sight of the world. As often then as ye command things
contrary to ye oracles of the divine wo^d of god, It is an high service to God
to be disobedient to the ungodly tradityons of the papistres.
as of ^^ini^st high (...) is (...) pury thee ^^^^ghrye; and that ^^ynge god,
if no man (...) over tradityous.

When (...) the king of Israel, had with most ^^^table and filthy adultery
des^ of that most valiant and godly man ^uas, The example of Dayud and
Natha^.ii Resguin.xii
^^ysing him most treattiously (which sought manfully again the unfaithful
enemies of god ieoperdynge always his life for the weal of his own country)
to be stay (...) and ^^^therd, with the sweathe (...) enemies: God did by and
by ^^de Nathan the prophet unto him, (...) should sharply ^l^^^e and rebu^^^
(...), for this most wicked and abho^^^ble deed: because that be (...) ye
contem^^ynge the divine majesty, was nothing neither afraid nor ashamed to
(...) this filthy wickedness in the sight of god, only ^^^ing deed to this
thing, that (...) should not (...) the heynousnesse of his faci^. (...) also he
co^m^^^^ed, yt the punishm^^, which ensued, should be, with sharp words,
denunced, and she med unto him.ii. Reg. xii. for he says: Thou have stain
with the sweard, ^^ias thee herbyte, (...) married his wife: and therefore those
death shall ^enet depart from the house. (...) be ^^than the ^^yph^^^s,
compelled to (...), that (...) ^^^yaunte and mighty king D^^^d too his face,
and to rebuke him for thee crime of adulterye and trayteouse murder, that he
had so shamefully committed. Many pastors are faint h^^ted and told in
rebuki^g ye vyt^s of the princes
What shall we say then of those faynte hearted and sold Pastoures, which
seeing baylye and hourtlye the stynkyng adulteryes of their high rulers and
couer^^u^^, before their own ^ye^ do not (...) much as open their mouths
(...) speak against th^^^ but rather (which is an horrible thing to be
sp^^^^) are coadintoutes and helpers, unto them, that they man thee easely^^
poll^ge all the who^^ world, with adulteryes? What can be spoken of ye ^^^thy,
The detestable chastity of ye Papystes.
^y^ ^ynge and ^eggy she ab^^ytye of the Papystes, whose for^ycatyon and
adultes (...) me mo^^ shamefully exce^^ (...) them as the (...) of all men* And
yet in thee m^^ne season these wicked hypocrytes will he coumpted chaste of
all men. Which things thought they be ungodlye and most wicked yet they
were too be borne in some of them, if they would keep them selves, mythe
their detestable lecherye, within thee Limytyes and bonds of nature.

Hieroboam the first king of the.x. The sexample of Hieroboam and of the
prophet.ii. regum.xiii.
trybes, did conceive such a pride, an dacytie, and ungodliness in his mind,
that he did set up.ii. calves for too worship, one in Bethell, and all
other in Da^, boldelye peruertyng the feast of the Tabernacles, which ought
only to be celebrated in thee trybe of Judah, least thee people should have
any occasyon too return too Jerusalem: He as the first of thee Kings, that
did so we the seeds of Idola try, and false relygyon in Israel, as we
may.iii. Reg.xii. and.xiii. But when thee time appointed for relygyon was at
hand or come, and the ungodly king standing at thee aultare, did burn
incens: behold, thee manne of God, whom we call and Prophet, being seure
from Judah, did sodaynely appear before the king, which did blow forth and
declare with a loud voice, thee commandments that the was charged with all,
by almyghtye god, saying: iii. Re. xiii.
altar altar, The Lord god sayethe these things, Behold, a son shall be
borne unto the house of David (called Josias) and upon thee, wall he offer thee
pryenes of thee hill aultates, that burnte incense upon thee, and men's bones
shall be burnt upon thee. And he gave a token thee same time saying: This is
thee token that thee Lord has spoken it. Behold, the aultate shall tente,
and thee ashes that are upon it shall fall out. And when thee King heard
the saying of thee man of god (which had ceyed against thee aultare in
Bethel) he stretched out his hand, from thee aultate, saying held him. And
his hand, which he put forth against him, dried up, and be could not put
it in again too him, the aultare also claue assunder, and the ashes fell out
from the aultare according to the token, which the manne of god had given,
by the word of the lord. And when thee same prophet had made intercessyon
unto god, for thee health of that ungodly King, his hand was myraculouslye
restored to be former state, and yet for all that, he would not thus leave
and forsake the Idolatrye, which he had ones begone and set up, so great
was thee indutaryon and hardenesse of his heart. Now we are taught by this,
that it is thee duetye and office of a Pastoure, too suffer in no wise his
sheep to be brought into any peril of Idolatye, or into any kind or spear
of ungodliness: yea though some ungodly and rasshe Hieroboam doethe tyse
against him, The Pastor ought not to leave of, though he knowethe, ye he
shall profit nothing.
yet he ought too tesyste him, too his face, and not too cease or leave of,
though he knows that he shall spend all his labor in vayue. For god, did
right well know thee hard heart of Hieroboam, and that no reasons could
persuade him from his ungodliness: yet notwythestandynge he doethe vouchesafe to
send a Prophet unto him. This thing doethe make against those Pastoures,
which be woute too excuse their silence that they do use, with this reason,
saying that they do spend and bestow all their labor in vain. For,
Christ doethe not therefore cease too teach, whiles he was among that
froward and stubberne natyon of thee Jews, because that he did see them too
be obstynate, and that they could with no reason be persuaded too receive
his doctrine.

The example of Achab and of Elias thee Prophet. iii.xi.xviii
Achab also king of thee people of Israel, being no less ungodly and rash,
did walk in the ways of Hieroboam: yea, he did pass all other Kings (were
they never so naught and ungodly) in mayntaynynge of false relygyon and
wickedness. For, vesydes thee Idolatrye, which his forefathers had brought
in, he did also execte and set up thee Idol of Baall, instytutynge or
ordarynynge a great multitude and number of priests to worship Baal, and to
up hold his relygyon: Wherefore thee heavenly father, being not a little
moved did stutte up thee heavens, that by thee space of three years no reign
did come down, or fall upon thee earth: afterward he did send ye Prophet
Elias, which should both shame the prelates of Baals relygion, and also reduce
or bring thee poor people again into the true knowledge of god. When then,
that most wicked and ungodly king Achab, the extreme enemy both of god him
self, and also of true relygyon, did mete this holy prophet, he did
incontynentlye say: Art thou not be that trouble Israel: Whom thee prophet
did answer: I have not troubled Israel, but thou, and the house of thy
father, which have forsaken ye comaundeme^tes of ye Lord, and have followed
Baall. How be it send now, and assemble all whole Israel together unto me,
in thee meaunte Carmell, and thee four hundrethe and fyftye Prophets, and the
four hundrethe propthes of the graves. Whom when, he had gathered, (that is
to sayt Achab the king) Deltas coming too he people of Israel, said: How
long halte ye between two opynyons? If the Lord be God, follow him: but if
Baall be he, goo after him. And when he had offered unto them this
condytyon, that they should by fire coming down form heaven, for too
consume the sacryfyce, declare and show, thee dyuyne power of Baall, they
could in no wist do it. But be calling upon thee dyuyne power, and name of
the high and true living God, did see his sacryfice to be consumd with
fire, that came down from heaven. Thou see then, with what stedfastnes and
constancye of mind, Elyas does assawte Idodolatrye, before that furyous and
cruel king Achab, iii. Re.xix.
and also before so great, a multitude and number of false Prophets and
Baalles pr^estes, though he did think him self too have been left alone of
all thee number of thee Prophets. Let the faith full Pastoure learn by his
example, that it is his duetye, too maintain, defend and uphold, boldelye,
and without any fear the auctorytie of gods word, yea though he doethe see
all the whole world too be against him: besides that, let him not suffer him
self to be frayde or dyscoraged, by that infinite number of false teachers,
and prelates of Baals relygyon, or the people to halte between two opinyons, A
haltinge in religion
that is too say, let him not permyt and suffer, yt the rude and poor
simple people, be entangled or wrapped with that error, wherewythe many
now a days being deceived, are wont to say: that in deed, they do trust in
ye high and true lyuinge god, and yet in the mean season (say they) we have
some co^fide^ce in those creatures, which are already partakers of the
everlasting blessedfulnes, for the people of Israel was wont at some times to
give some honor unto the true God: but that almighty and merciful creator
of all things, does not admit, receive, or allow soche kinds of
worshippinge.

When the self same rasshe, The history of Naboth, and what thee true
Pastor ought by it. i^i Regu^.xxi.
wicked and ungodly Achab, would have bought of Naboth thee Israelite, a
virtuous and godly man, the vyneyarde, which he had nyghe to the Kings
palayce, affyrminge unto him* as much as he would have for it: he did take so
greuouslye, that he was said nay, that he did sodayulye fall into a
syckenesse, or ague, which ague, that ungodly Iesabell his wife, did by and
by, by traiterous means put away. For, she did by false witnesses which should
accuse that virtuous man Nabothe as a blasphemet of the holy name of the
lyuinge God, bring to pass that the innocent man should be stoned to death.
Which thing being done, she did did her husband to be merye, and to rise, and
to go take possession by the kings laws, of the vyneyearde of Naboth. Here
was the Prophet Elias sent the second time, which should rebuke the King,
for this wicked fact, and detestable murder. Which, when he came to the King,
did say unto him: Thus says the Lord. Have thou killed and taken possession?
Thus says the Lord. In the place, where dogs lycked the blood of Naboth,
shall dogs lycke thy blood also. And of that ungodly and wicked Iesabell, ye
did prohetye after this manner: Dogs shall eat Iesabell in the field of
Israel. The scripture does testifye, that all these things were done,
according to the prophecye of Elias. By this example the^, shall the faithful
Pastor learn, that it is required of him, and that it is hye duetye and
ocfyce, to wythstande manfullye, and with a bold stomach, the wicked purposes
of cruel tyrauntes, not only, when he sees all the people, and thee whole
commune weal too be oppressed, but also if he perceaueth that one pryuate man
alone does suffer wrong and iniurye.

The example of Micheas and of the false prophets. iii. re.xxii.
Again, when all thee whole flock of the false Prophets did promise unto the
Kings, Achab and Iosaphat, a most wyefull, prosperous, and fortunate
success of thee matte, exhorting them, too setteforthe their army against
the Syrians: one only Prophet, called Micheas, did set him self against
all them, tellinge them before with a constant and hold mind, all the
fortune, chance, and success, that they should have. He could be let in
no wise, nether by ye greuouse iniuryes of the proud Sedechiab, nor with the
opprobrious blow, nor with his high words, whee with he did boaste his
Prophetical spyryte, to persevere and continue still in thee declarynge and
setting forth of Gods commandment and holy word: Yea, when he was
cast into prysonne, he perseuered still in his purpose. And thee oracles or
prophecyes of gods word, werer so fulfilled, that Iosaphat did return home,
being sore wounded, Achab being slain with an arrowe. And when his
charette, where in he did ride in thee battle, They that have gods word
always i^ their mouths and yet in thee mean season ar liers, must be
^^sisted by ye faithful pastor.
was washed in thee poole of Samatia, that, which was prophesied before by
Elias, did happend ant chance. For, thee dogs did lycke there thee blood
of King Achab. By thee which example were are taught again, that a good and
faithful Pastor ought to resyste them, that have gods word in their
mouths, and are wont to boaste and crake of it, where as in the mean season
they be liars, and set forth either of some pryuate affection, or of a
flattering mind, the counsayls of their own reason. Whether any man does set
forth and handle gods word of a fraudulent and deceyprfull mind, it may
easily and euydently be gathered, known and tried, by gods word it self.
Again, we do se that it is the duetye and office of a Pastor, to rebuke and
let, as much as in him lies, that inordinate lust and desire, that almost
all Princes have to make watte one against another. Let now therefore, Against
popish Bysshoppes, ye styyre and mayntayn wars
those high popish prelates come forth. Let the proud company of mysted
Bishops, and of all other, that ate by a false and wrong name, called
spiritual, show their heads, that it may be known of all men, what they
have done hither to. Who does not know, that by thee space of fyftene years,
and much more, great and mighty nations have with deadly and irreconciliable
hatred, through the crafyte working and couueyaunce of these Antichrists
warred, and yet (thee more is the pyrie) do war one against another Oh Lord
God, how many souls have in the mean season peryshed, how many poor
innocents have been cruellye murdered, how great treasours, and tyches have been wasted and spent? and yet we se no end, but rather fear, that worse times
will follow. And as often as they do reason among them selfs of peace and
concord, they do it for none other cause, but that they having gotten some
profyt, may afterward stir up greater tragedyes of marres, in so much that
to hear them at any time, speak of peace, will make any man afraid. For
truly, when soever they do it, they intend to send forth into this miserable
and wretched world, Ate, is ^^ hurtful sp^rite always doyngeyll to men.
that unlucky Ate, which troubles al things But that I may in few words
conclude all these things, who soever is studious of true peace, and godly
concord, let him first receive the word of God, whose light shines forth
now a days, with so great lyghtsomnesse, for onelesse a man receaueth it, he
shall never euioye the true peace. The are is all ready laid too thee root
of thee tree.

But what neade we to prove, with any longer demonstration, out of the books
and wrytynges of the prophets, after what facion, and manner, the pastor ought
to resyste and withstand the sins and vices of the high powers and
governors? Let the faithful and diligent pastor read their sermons, and
there he shall find none other thing, but a continual fight, which they have
had with the mighty princes and their vicious living. For, who does not hear and
see, with what words Esaias both rebuke, Esaye
the rulers of the commune weal, when he says: Esaye. i. Hear the word of
the Lord, ye princes of Sodoma, and harken unto the law of our God, thou
people of Gomorra. Thy princes are wicked and companions of thieves. They love
gifts all together, and gape for rewards. As for the fatherles, they help
him not to his right, nether will they let thee wydomes causes come before
them. Hieremye.
and Hieremye does also complain, that he can not find a ryghteous man, or
that ministers justice in all the streets of the sytie: which he speaks not
of the commens or rascal people, but of thee Lords and chief rulers, whose
sins and unfaithfulness do far pass the wickedness of the people.
Therefore, the princes and rulers of our time, be wise enough, which forbid by
their laws, that no man shall speak against them, nor against their vycyous
lyuinge, where as the fountaynes of all vices and deuylyshe wickedness, do
spring from none other, than from thee Princes, spiritual prelates, and
gouernoues. Again, with what sharpness, do they speak against false
Prophets? How cruel, dreadful, and horrible a punishment does
Ezechiell.xxxiiii. Chapter, threaten to those Pastors, Ezechi ^.
which are wont to feed them selves only? Of whom, without doubt, there is,
and shall be always a great number, and yet nevertheless the prophets do not
therefore spare their craftye deceyptfulnes and hypocrysye. What shall we say
of the prophet Amos, Amos.
which most sharpelye rebuking the sins of the head rulers does call them
fat bullockes, and also does prophecy and tell before, what misfortunes,
plagues, and calamities are prepared for them? What, Jonas.
Jonas was compelled by the deuyne commandment of God, to goo into a strange
City, which was al drowned in wickedness and sin, and to deuounce and tell
unto them the punishementes and plague that should follow, within the space of
xi. days. To be short, what severity and sharpness did they all use, which
before the captivity of Babylon did prophecye of the utter destruction of thee
people, and yet for all that, they could avail or profit nothing.

The example of John against Herod. mark. vi.
That valyant and noble fore tenner of Jesus christ, John baptist, did right
well know the strength, might, and fycecenesse of King Herod. which was so
great, that none of al his country durst contradicte, or gaynesaye it: and yet
in the mean season, he does also understand, that he ought not therefore to
be spared, nor yet to be suffered at his own pleasure, without the blame of any
man to exercise and use his inordinate lechety: and because that there was none
other, that durst reprehend or rebuke this abominable deed of thee King, he
his own self comes unto him, and layinge thee heynousuesse of thee fact
before him says: Mark. v.
It is not lawful for the to have thy brothers wise. The King therefore,
being offended at his boldness, did both cast him into prison, and at
length put him to death. Whereby, we do gather, that a Pastoure is driven to
this necessytye, that he must rebuke, blame and reprehende, all those fawtes,
vices, and sins, that none other mortal man date rebuke: mark ye this, o ye
faint hearted pastors, ye dare not freeke against agnatter,
here we see no man too be excepted, but that he must resyste the very
Princes them selves, and also ye mighty prelates of the church, and that, too
their own faces: let him not suffer him self, to be dismayde with the
vayue fears, neither of man's strength, nor of dignytye and power, nor of thee
folysshe and mad multitude: but as soon as thee lord doethe warn him of his
duetye, let him goo about it, with a soute and bold stomache, and never
leave of, till he feel and perceive in them a manyfeste amendmente of life.
For, so doethe the lord command Hieremye, saying: And therefore gyrde up
thy loins, arise, and tell them all, that I give thee in commandment, fear
them not, lest I destroy the before them. For behold, this day do I make
the, a strong defenced town, and iron pyllet, and a brase wall against the
whole land, against the kings and mighty men of Judah, against the priests
and people of the la^d. They shall fight against the, but they shall not be able
to overcome therefore I am with the to deliver the. They shall convert unto the,
and thou shalt not convert unto them.

It is the duetye of Pastors, too rebuke chose vices ye none other man dare
rebuke.
For, as among the Lacedaemonians there were certain officers called Ephori, and
among the Romans, other, whom they called Tribuni, and at this presence, in
certain cytyes of Germanye, there be high wardens of companyes or trybes,
which do resyst and wythstande the head ruler, if at any time, Ephori and
tribuni were officers among the Lacedaemonians and Romans too who ye people, if
they were not well used might have aupelled from the higher magistrates.
through over great power, he wareth out of facio^, so god did institute and
ordain Pastors among his people, as certain officers, which should always
watch. For god will have no man to be so high nor of sech auctorytie, ye al
me^ should be afraid to rebuke his sins, or tell him of his fawres. And if
the magistrate, whose office and duty it is to do it, being either let
with fear or infected and syck with the same disease, dare not boldly resist and
wythsta^d the supreme ruler and governor: yet shall he that is a Pastor never
sleep: In deed if thautorytie of the magistrate be joined with his study,
labor, and godly endeuoures or enterprise: Vices and wyckednes, shall the more
easelye, and with greater quietness, or more commodiously be taken away. But
if he be slothful, or negligent, the pastor shall take upon him this hard
cure yea, with the peril and ieopardye of his own head, and shall look for
help and delyueraunce, from none other, that from god only. Thee Pastoures
must watch, il. Croni. xxxvi. Hiere. xxv
and stop the way unto wickedness and sin. For god arysethe yerly
sendynge for the his prophets in time, to monyshe, correct, and amend the
world, which altogether is polluted, with ye stynking filthiness of sin, as we
may se. Hierem xxv. and xxix. But after that, thee admonycyon sent of God, is
ones come, there is none other remedy, but that we must change our former
life, and amend our selves. For, except this be down, a greater evil or
plague is at our own doors, which daily drawethe nerer and nerer, and is
aggraguated, till extreme and utter destructyon do ensue and follow. We have
examples in readynesse, wherewythe this can be proved. For, who doethe not se
thee lamentable destruction of Sodoma, and of the Ninevites? Exo. xxxii
Also ye people of Israel, when they had worshipped the golden calue in the
desert, were received into favor again, but when afterward dwelling in the
land of promission, they had vngddly despised the voices of the prophets,
they were extremely plaged, and carried away captyues into Babylon.

What armure a pastor must be armed with all.
Sith then, that it is the office and duty of a Pastor, to set him self
against, to resyst and withstand, all the Princes, and mighty rulers of this
world, and to fight against them, and their vycious lyui^ges, with al his might,
strength, and power it is very necessary and needful, that he be well armed,
before that he take upon him this hard burden or charge. Wherefore, he must
be brought into the armory of Christ, that out of it, he may be decked and
armed, with thee same armure, that Christ did before hand arm his discyples
with. math. x mark vi. Luke ix. and x
For, he sending forth his dyscyples, did say: Go, and preach saying: Thee
kingdom of heaven is at hand heal ye syck, cle^se ye leapers, raise ye dead,
cast out deuyls, and preach that ye kingdom of god, is already at hand, or at
the very dooore. Freelye ye have received, give freely. Possess not gold, nor
silver, nor brass in your purses, not yet scrippe toward your journey:
neither.ii. cotes, neither shoes, nor yet a rode. For the work man is worthy
of his meat. In the which place, Christ does diligently beware and take heed,
yt the pastor be not inta^gled with any cares of earthli things, or with any
study and thought, how he shall get his living, yea, he will have him in no
wise to provide him self of a living: but does commit unto him, that chief and
principal fode of thee souls, who^ he bids him to set forth, with all
faithful labor and diligence, believing and yt without al doubt, yt they shall
want no manner of externe and outward thing, yt is necessary for ye life of
the body. For, there shall be almaies every where some godly and liberal me^,
which will not suffer the^ that labor faithfullye in thee lords vineyard to
lack or want any such things. Besides that, he can not deny a liui^g, and
other necessary things, unto his ministers and work men, that prouydeth so
liberally for the brydes of the air, and flowers of the fyelde. Moreover, her
commanded the^ to give frelye unto other, ye gifts of ye spiryt, which they
had received, A staf is both granted and forbidden to ye Apostles.
by ye free liberalytye of god. In mark he does pernit or suffer the^ to wear
a staff, which is nothing repugnau^t to those things, yt we have now here
aledged. For, there a staff is permitted or granted unto the^, to help the^
in their way or journey, yt so they should understand that all pomp and pride
of charets and horses was forbidden the^, In Matthew, he does forbid ye same
lest they should think, yt they might bring their matter to pass with stryppes,
and force of arms: besides that, because they should wholly commit the^ selves,
unto his divine will providence and promise, nor go about to provide for the^
selves with their own wisdom and study.

The keys of binding and lousinge, ar given to ye apostles
A little after, Christ does also add: And who soever shall not receive you, nor
hear your preaching, when ye depart out of that house, or that city, shake
of the duste of your fete. Verelye, I say unto you, it shall be easyer for
the land of Sodoma and Gomorra in the day of judgment, then for ye city.
Even as in the fore aledged places he did bid them to use the keys of losing
and forgeuyng that is too say, when he commanded them to preach the gospel,
and to tell forth, that the kingdom of god is at hand: so now, he does bid the^
to bynd such, as will not receive the gospel or glad tydinges of saluac^o^
offered by the^. For, when he does command them, to shake of, ye dust of their
fete, he does teach thereby, as by a certain sign and token, that the
infydels ar snarred and bound with so straight bonds of infidelity, misbeleue,
and incredulity, that they that are faithful, may not have, as much as ye
duste, (tha^ yt which, nothing is more vile and abject) common with the^. After
the same faction and manner, Actu. xviii
Paul afterward (as we may se in the Acts) bid use the keys of bi^ding. For
when certain ungodly and stubborn Jews withstanding ye Eua^gelycal doctrine,
did most ungodly blaspheme ye name of christ* he did shake his garments, and
dust of his fete against the^, saying: Your blood be upon your own heads.
From hence forth will I go blameless unto the gentyls. Also, in this place, we
may se, christ will have no man to be compelled violently to thee faith.
ye christ does violently co^pel no man to ye faith, nor will have any man to be
co^cayued (as we do see many now a days to be foul deceived, which thinkinge
that it is lawful, make ye faithful afraid, yt they do rather seek ye riches
and kingdom of this world, than ye kingdom of christ) that al virtue, power,
and glory, may be adscrybed too his word alone.

The Apostels and Pastors, are destytuted of al externe and outward help
By and by again Christ says: Behold, I se^d you forth as sheep among
wolves. Be ye therefore wise as serpe^tes, and innocent as doves. But beware of
those men, for, they shall deliver you up to the counsels, and shall scourge
you, in their synagoges. And ye shall be brought to thee head rulers, and
kings, for my sake, in witness to them and to the Gentiles etc. Behold he
takes from the^ all earthlye defense of this world, al hope of comfort and
help. For, what could be spoken, more grievous, dreadeful, and horrible unto
the flesh, The flesh ca^ not well away with these things.
then that? ye shall be delivered up to counsayles, ye shall be brought unto
head rulers, kings, and also before judges, they, whom ye do think most
frendely, shall treaterouslye betraye you, ye shall be scourged in Synagoges,
one brother shall deliver an other to death, thee father shall bring his
sons into extreme ieopardye and peril of their own lives, nor the sons will
in any wise spare their poor pare^tes. And yet in ye mean ceason he says,
yt among or in ye midst of so many and great peryls, they shall be naked, and
as touching the body destituted of all help, as sheep that be in the myddeste
of wolves. For, as wolves do in no wise pytie the sheep, nor acknowledge that
they be both innocente and meke, A similitude.
but rather runnynge upon them, do scatter, tear, rent, devour, and destroy
all about, so they, that are the true worshyppers of God, shall find no manner
of mercy before tyrauntes, which will esteem them as sheep, appointed to the
slaughter, yea, they runninge furiouslye and most ragiously upon them, will
think that they do high service unto God, if they do root out from the
earth and murder cruelly as many, as he soche.

This armure, I say, and other like, (as when he says: The disciple or scoler
is not above the master, nor the servant above his Lord. Again: if they have
called the good man of the house, Beelzebub, how much more shall they his
household servants? And when he says: And the world ye shall have
persecution. Item: They shall speak all ill words against you) may seem
unto some, lettes rather, and stoppes, than any defense, or strengthenynge,
where as in very deed, they are nothing^ else but a very armure. For, if any man
be already before fullye persuaded in his mind, that these things will happen
and chance unto him, lokinge for the^ with a bold and coragious stomach, all
fear being banished from his mind he is already well armed, so that they ca^
neither hurt nor harm him any more. If then, these things can nether hurt nor
harm the Pastor, we must neades b^leue, that he is surely fenced and armed,
and that with a strong complete armure, against all thse things. And yet I
do not set forth here the descryptyon, of that armure, whereof Saint Paul
makes mention. Ephesians.vi. Chapter. but I bring forth the same, which
Christ did briefelye and with plain words describe and set forth. For,
when he has, Math. x. rehearsed an infinite number of mysfortunes and
perils, which do daily and hourly hang over the Pastors, To be wtoute
fear is ye most strong am^re of a Pastoure.
he says by and by: do not ye fear them. And a little after: do not ye
fear them that kill thee body, but thee soul they can not kill, but rather
dread him, that can destroy both ye body and soul in thee fire of hell. Not
to fear then, not to be dismayde, for any dread, fear or horror of
perils, is a most strong and sure armure. But paraduenture, thou will
make an Objection, and say: away all fear, do persyste constantelye in his
work, though most greuouse afflictions do ouerwhelme us. For, this is the
nature of the world thus always to exercise and trouble the true worshyppers
of God. Here does lie a most sure hope of our comfort, and an undoubted
defense, that Christ has ouercommed the world. For, if we be his faithful
mynysters, he shall also overcome the world for us. Wherefore, he byddeth us to
be of a good cheer, and to put away al fear. After the same manner Moses
does comfort the children of Israel saying: Exodus xiiii
The Lord shall fight for you, and ye shall hold your peace and be still. The
Pastor then, being endued, or rather armed with soche a mind, shall with
all care diligence, and fidelity admynistre the work of his Lord, committing
all the residue unto him, who, according to his good and deuyne will, shall give
a ioyefull and prosperous end or success.

But because the pastor might here make another objection, defend his
mynisters, even so, that at length they be feign to suffer death. I answer
that then thou art very well defended, The pri^cipal fou^dations of faith and
charity.
where with the whole buyldinge of a Christian man is set up, as it has been
promised before. Do thou believe that there is one only almighty God? I
believe, wylt thou say. Do thou believe, that the same is thy god, thy Lord
and thy father? I believe wylt thou say. Tell me then, do thou put all
thine hope and confydence in him only? Yes, will thou say. Without doubt
then, thou doeste believe this also, that the same God has promised nothing
unto the, but that he will perform it. That do I also believe, will thou say.
If thou doeste then acknowledge God to be thy father, I doubt not, but that
thou wylt love him, and in all his commandments, be obedient unto him. And
if you be thus minded, thou will be glad, I trow, if thou can at any time do
service, unto so bounteous, merciful and gentyl a father, or if thou canste do
any manner of thing, that may please him. Or that faith then, whereby thou do
acknowledge him, to be that most high and almighty God, whereby thou do
acknowledge him to be thy God, and thy father, that also is wont to ensue and
follow, that thou conceaueste a very great hope to come into the presence of
this God, yea, thou will make haste to come unto him, as soon as may be. For,
if thou do acknowledge him to be thy father, thou shalt love him. If thou
do love him, as thou oughteste to do, thou canste never abide that his name
be blasphemed, that his honor and glory be any thing mynyshed, that his word
be not believed, that his commandments be thus so ungodly and wickedly
contempned and troaden under fete. A similitude.
As then, thou wylt rather dye, than to suffer thy father to be brought into
an ill name, or too be diffamed: so shall you much more wyshe and desire to
suffer this bodily death, rather than to see gods glory to be diminished. Again
if thou doeste believe that Gods word is constant, sure, and infallible, you
shalt also know and understand, that no greater glory can upon the earth
happen unto man, and that we can do no greater service unto God, than if we
suffer death for the glory of his name. Therefore, the less fear and horror
of death is in thee, so much thee greater and stronger faith is in thine
heart, on the contrary, thee more thou doeste fear and dread this bodily
death, so much the less do thou love Christ, and trust in God. For,
whosoever is endued with a true faith and is fyered with an unfeigned and
sincere love of God, he does already understand, that this death, which we
must suffer for the name and glory of Christ: is a very lucre and a most true
way, The death yt we suffer for christ's sake is a true w^y to come to
everlasting life
to come to ye everlasting life. Besides that, he does know, that he is in no
wise ouercomed which, for the confession of Christ's name, suffers death, but
rather that he is both ouercomed and all together undone, that for thee love of
this mortal life, does suffer him self to be plucked away from God. He then,
that understands all these things perfectely, shall in no wise excuse thee
peril of death, for, it is the nature of the flesh, to fear death and to
complayn of it, but he that has in him a sincere and so ^nde love of GOD, no
fire, no concupyscence, or coueteousnesse of earthlye things, shall be able to
quench that deuyne heat which is in him We must needs, with the might and
power of this love, as with a must sure armure, to overcome the enemies of
god, as Paul does teach, when he says: Roma.viii. I am sure, that neither
death, neither life, neither angels nor rule, nether power neither things
present nor things to come, nether heyght no: lowenesse, nor any creature
shall be able to depart us from the love of god, which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord.

Why and wherefore love is required in a Pastor.
Now because that charity is before all things, and most chiefly required in
a pastor, as very necessary, the cause must be showed why he has need of it,
and also we must tell, where he may get it, Love is therefore necessary in a
Pastor, A similitude.
because that all his actions and doings, all his endeavors, and counsayls
must be proved, tried and righted by the rule and line of charity or love.
For, as no carpenter, be he never so conuinge and industrious, is so well eyed,
or has so perfect a syghte that he neadeth no rule and live. So, nether ye
strength of the mind, nor ye science and knowledge, nor yet faith, is any
thing worth, except it be righted by ye rule of charity. i. Cor xiii,
For, Paul does speak of it after this manner: Love suffers long, and is
courteous: Love enuyeth not love does not frowardlye, swells not, dealethe
not dishonestly, seeks not her own, is not provoked to anger thinks not
evil, rejoices not in iniquity, but reioyseth in the truth, suffers al
things, believes al things, hops in all things, endures al things. love
calls never away. It may then easily be gathered by these conditions of love,
that before al other virtues it is necessary and nedeful to a pastors. For, as
a shepeherde, A similitude.
does scourge and beat some of his sheep, some he dryueth forwards with his
hands, some with fete, some again he does wystell forwards, some he does
allure with bread and salt, some, ye ar weak, he does bear upon his shoulders,
some again he leaves in ye tables and foldes, till they be growe^ and of
strength, and in all these things he seeks ye prorofit of his marster, having
a respect only, yt the number of ye sheep may increase, and that they may be
safe and sound: So, ye Pastor of ye souls, being kyndeled with the fire of gods
love, shall do all that he can, that ye sheep of god, may both increase, and
abydyng steadfastly in ye true faith, may always, through his dyligence, be in
safegarde. Wherefore he shall, now in time; now out of time call upon them, as
the nature of sheep is wont to require, and as God, according too the true
meaning of his word does admyt. But, what nead^ we many words? she that
has love, does never, deceive or fail, nor is deceived, for, love is not
idle, but moves man, to promote and set forth always the honor and glory of
god, bearyng, and sufferynge in the mean season with a constant and steadfast
mind, Without the love of God it is an easy things to fall into pride.
all those things, that must be suffered for it. But if a man does want this
charytye and love, he shall easelye fall and that headlonge into thee
bottomless pyt of pride: for without the love of god, what is man, but an
arrogante pride, and mere hypocrysye.

Where the love of god ought to be sought.
Now, and where a man shall both seek and find thee love of god, it is easy
to be known by the words of Christ, where Ioh. vi. he speaks after this
manner: No man comes unto me, except my father does draw him. Ergo, it
comes of god ye draws us, yt we do styck unto him, leave upon him, and
trust in him. For, god him self, is love, as John.i. Ioh. ii:i does testifye.
He the, yt dwells in love, dwells in god, and god dwells in him.
Wherefore, it is most necessary and nedeful for a pastor, to call earnestly upon
god, yt he vouchsafe to kindel in him ye fire of his love. But how shall he call
upon him, in whom he believes nor. in who^ he trusts not? To x. The
inuocatyo^ the^, or prayer, comes or springs of faith: For, no man is wont
too call upon him, of who^, he can not hope, to receive salvation and help:
besides yt, men do not call upon him, of whose good will and love they do hope to
have al goodness if in the mean season, they know him, to be so weak, yt he
ca^ not help and aid them. If then, we do in our minds acknowledge god, both
to be mercyful and loving toward us, and also almighty, that is to say, yt he
is not willing, but also able to help our necessyties: it is alredye most
sure, yt god is in us. For our flesh, ca^ not have, of it self, such a
knowledge of god. If therefore, there is in us, and in our minds, such a
knowledge of god, and such confyde^ce, and trust in him, that same is not of
our selves, but it comes of god. For, it is he that learneth us, both his
power, and his will and certyfyeth us of the^ by his only begotten son Jesus
Christ. And who soever, does receive him for the son of god, he is already
sure in his mind, that god both will and ca^ help us: for he has delivered to
death his only begotten son for us: thau the which, nothing ca^ be found in
this world greater, or more excellent. He therefore, which is certified by Jesus
Christ, is borne of god, and god dwells in him i. Ioh. iiii. For, we ca^ not
by our own reason and strength receive Christ, with a sure, and steadfast
faith, for that is wrought in us, by god only. And he, that has god dwelling
in him, is already certyfyed in his mind, that God will both hear his prayers,
and also perform his desires. By these things the^, yt have been rehearsed
hitherto, it is most surely to be gathered yt they* which ar wo^t to complain
of ye feebleness of gods love, and of their cold affectyon toward him, nor ca^
abide to suffer death, for his names sake, have not yet received christ, with a
true and sound faith. For, he yt has embraced christ. from his very heart,
can not, but be ashamed, if he feelethe his flesh too go about some let or
stop, sith yt he sees god the father, to have delivered so liberally his
only begotten son for us. Who soever then, Of whom we ought to desire yt
love of God.
desires the love of god, he must ask of god ye father, the true knowledge of
Jesus christ, and of his whole mystery, and that he may lean upon him with a
sure, true and undoubted faith: and by and by he shall feel in him self ye
fire of love. He shall also afterward give high thanks unto god, ye he does
vouchsafe to spend, bestow and consume, this foul and vile body, to the honor
and glory of his name. For, although our flesh does dread and fear death
(for christ him self, was not a little moved with the fear and horror of
death) yet notwythstanding, being by and by styrred, with that most strong
fire of love, and ince^singes of faith, will be constrained to follow the
faithful soul, into ye very death. Such I say, is the necessitye of gods love
which may be drawn out of those fountaynes, that we have showed even now.

We think the^, What the love of God is able to do
yt it is sufficiently showed and declared, yt the love of god only, can
perform or bring too pass al those things, that are necessary for a
pastoure, which ar these: that he utterly forsake his parents and his own
self, that he take upon him this most peryllous office, without scrippe, purse,
and without any rode or styck, that also, he suffer him self to be brought
before head rulers, before kings and Judges, that he suffer him self, to be
scourged, to be reviled and ill spoken of, and atle^gth to be most cruelly put
to death: Which love again, the reward of a good Pastor.
it is impossyble to stand, without a true and assured faith in god. Now
also, the greatenes of the reward must be considered, if perchance, according
to the nature of man's wit, thee hope of thee reward may encorage the
Pastor, hoth to labor, and also to be pacyente, in his troubles and
afflyctyons. Our lord Jesus Christ does appointe the reward. Mark.x. For,
when Peter had in the name of all ye disciples asked him, saying: Behold, we
have forsaken all things, and followed thee. What shall we then have? Christ
did answer: Verily, I say unto you, There is no man, that has forsaken his
house, or his brethren, or his systers, or his father, or his mother, or his
wife, or his children, or his fyeldes, for my sake and the gospel, but that he
shall receive an hundredth fold in this world, hours, and brethren, and syners,
and mothers, and children and fyeldes with persecutions, and in the world to
come, life everlasting. Here, christ doethe promise an ample and an exceeding
great reward, but he doethe add a very sour sauce, he makes it very
bitter, and hateful or heynouse unto our flesh, when he tells before, that
we shall have, yt reward with persecutions. Wherefore, we must better look and
consider, where, the same hundredth fold reward that he does speak of here, was
ever given. For, it is a very easy thing. to fyud persecution in this world,
but we se, that it is not so easy to find an hundredth houses, and so many
brethren and fyeldes etc. Wherefore po^der more dilyge^tly, what has been done.
Actuum.ii.
When Peter, as ye Acts do testyfie. did upon wytsonday, preaching christ,
convert three. How it ought to be understood, yt we shall receive an hundredth
fold in this world
M men too the christian faith, did he not get unto him, a much greater number
of systers and brethren, and also many mo houses, fyeldes, and much greater
ple^tye of all things than ever he had before? For, he did love all them
which did take thee name of christ upon them, and did believe in him, no les
than his own brethren, he did no less care for their riches and possessions,
than if the substance of all them, had been his own, taking head most
diligently to this thing, that they should not set their minds to much upon
earthly riches, nor abuse them rashely. Truly all faithful pastors were of
this mind. In deed this reward does in no wise serve for the body, nor for
bodily commodities, but rather it does increase the care and solicitude of a
Pastor, which he has over the sheep committed unto him. What needs to speak
of the promises of persecution, which we do se to be so fulfilled, yt by the
space of many years, the pastors and ministers of ye churches have been most
cruelly put to death? whereby, it may easily be gathered, yt the Pastors do in
no wise minister and execute this function and office, whether a Pastor yt is
fa^thful does take this office upon him, in respect of the ^uerlasting
reward, or not.
for any externe and outward reward. But because, the reward of everlasting
life is promised also with these outward things, we must consider and luke,
whether yt the Pastor does take upon him this office, in respect of it, or
not. Where again we shall deprehend and find, yt the Pastor, if so be that he
be true and faithful, is not principally moved with thee promise of ye
everlasting reward, to take this office upon him. For, he yt seeueth for an
everlasting hier and reward, must needs before all things to know, where this
hyer or reward is promised vnt^ him, again, who is the author of this promise,
and that he, which has promised, is true, which can neytherlye, nor deceive.
If then, a man knows, that a reward is promised unto him, by and by does he
inquire, with al dylyge^ce and study, whether that he which has promised it,
is true. If he be eues assured and certyfyed in his mind thereof, he has also
gotten ye true and most assured or strong faith in god the father. And where
faith is, there also must the love of god ensue and fol^w. For, who could
acknowledge god, for that high and infallyble good, for a most benign,
bou^teous, and mercyful father, and not love him, from his very heart?
especyally sith that has certyfyed us of his grace and love, with that most
chyef Jewel, price* and pledge, of his only beg^tte^ son Jesus christ. No man
then that is a faithful pastor, has a respect to ye reward or hyer. For, if
he be already before assured and certyfyed of the reward, knowing that it can
not be taken from him, he must also have faith before in him: If he has
fatyh, he has also an inseparable companyon with it, which is called thee
love of God. If then the Pastor has both faith and love, these two shall
move him: to do his duetye. and to execute truly his office, without any
respect of reward or hyer. Servants and hyerlynges do labor and work for
the hyer, and have an eye only to it, the children not so: but because they
are children they do so faithfully work in the house of their father, without
any solycitude or care of the hyer, or reward, for, they do commit wholly the
retribution or paying of it, what soever it shall be at length, unto their
father. Galat. iiii
And we are children and eyres with Christ, why should we then as servants
and hyerlynges have a respect only to the hyer and reward, and not rather to
the glory and honor of our father, which according to his ryghteous will, and
everlasting wysdo^, does appoynte and assygne a portion of his enheritaunce
for us? What Pastor soever is not come to this measure of gods love, he shall
in ye fla^mes of te^ptacion and persecution, often times waver. For this cause
Christ did strengthen his disciples with his holy spyryte, before yt they went
to preach, and that with an outward sign and token of fyrye tongues, of a
vehement noise and impetuous wynd. Actuum. ii
For, the wynd did go before in toke^ of ye most troublous tempest where with
afterward the world was shaken and moved: which sign and toke^, fyrye
tongues did follow, whereby the strengthening and confirming of god the father,
through his love, being kyndled in our hearts, is sygnyfyed and betokened.

Of false Pastors / and vnpreachinge Prelates.
FAlse Pastors, are they, Who be false Pastors.
which are called false Prophets, whom that most wise and everlasting God,
^oeth in many places lyuelye depicte, and set forth, in their own colors, and
yet for all that, soch is the ignorance and blyndnesse of our hearts, yt we
will not know them. But Christ does so lively, Math. vii. set the^ forth before
our own eyes, that he may seem to have showed them with his finger, saying
after this manner: Beware of false Prophets yt come to you in shepes clothing,
but inwardely they are raueninge wolves, ye shall know them by their fruytes.
Do men gather grapes of thorns, or fygges of thystels? In these words, we do
se a general rule set forth by Christ, which ye truth it self did descrybe,
that thereby we should know all false Pastors and prophets. The hipocrisy of
false prophets is applied to ye Papystes.
For, at the first they come as if a man might say, unarmed or naked, being
decked in simple and homely apparel, contrefeytinge thee sheep, as though
butter could not melte in their mouths, yt is to say, as though they could
hurt no man with their own strength and armure. Such as we do see now a days
the Papists to be, if a man should consider and look upon the words, that they
do use, for, as touching their outward apparel, that both they and their
train are wont to use, it is so replenished, with the pride and pomp of this
world, it is so garnished with all kinds of watrely weapons and armure, that
a wolf can not be easelyer known, by his wide gaping mouth, and long
ravening teeth tha^ these tyrauntes are known by it. But lettinge these
th^nges pass, we will consider and look upon their words. If they do see any
where the pure and sincere doctrine of the Gospel too be sown, by and by,
they come to the Magistrates with soche words: We do see, o men, The
hypocritical oration of ye Papists.
not without a bitter grief of mind, that vnsewed coat of Christ, to be
miserably rent and torn, and that the holy catholyke Church, which Christ
has pourchased unto him self, with his most precious blood, is troubled,
yea, and almost overwhelmed with sundry, and diverse calamities, etc. And who,
Ironia, yt is to say a plain mockinge of ye hypocritecal Papystes.
being a true faithful man, could keep him self from weping, when he hears
the bitter death of christ, and the sheding of his most precious blood, thus,
with soch lamentable words to be rehearsed? But when they are come to the end
of their Oration: thou shall easily perceive and understand, whether that they
do seek christ, or rather the fillinge of their chestes. For they are wont all
most to use soch a conclusion. The laudable traditions of the holy fathers are
scornefullye co^tempned and altogether despised, (here they do understand soche
constitutions, as do maintain their prebendes, their rentes and revenues,
their first fruytes, thythes, Why ye papists do co^playn of the Go^pellers
and excommunication or suspendinge for money, their iuridicial power and
iuridictions). Many say that the Mass is no sacrifyce, (for, this was ye most
gaynful hawking, wherewith they did escape unto them selfs all the treasures and
riches of the world.) Confession is every where rejected and set at naught (for
by it, they did lead the consciences of all men captyues and prysonners, which
in deed they did never deliver, or set at large, till they had always
wrasted from the poor wretches an inestimable ransom. As for that true and
necessary confession, whereby a man may come into the true knowledge of his
sins, and into a repentance, acceptable unto God, they cared never for it.)
The holy and blessed mother of god, the Vyrgyn Mary, is of al men ungodly
despised (and why? because that they do not see her, as she was before times
hitherto, too be decked and trymmed with golden and silver gifts, whereby they
had every year a new harvest of money: but ye al things are distributed and
given to the poor, as we read yt the poor son of Mary did). Monks and
Nonnes, breakinge forth of their cloisters, treadinge most ungodly all their
laws and rules under fete, do forsake their Monasteries. Monasteryes and
Abbeys were thee garrisons of the Bishop of Rome and of his shauelinges.
(For in them was the strongest garrison of the Bishop of Rome and of his
adherentes, for, they did allure into Monasteries, thee sons and daughters of
the noble me^, of thee rich and mighty rulers, that they having their
children as pledges should fear and dread their power the less: Which thing,
we may see now a days by manifest and plain tokens. For, in those places
where there be few or no Monasteries, men are wont to resyste less the
Evangelical doctrine,) priests do take wives (does not God him self
command the same? Of deuylyshnesse.
but if they should use concubynes and harlots, so that the Bishop might yearly
get of every one of them iiii. crowns, when either the children that are thus
unlawfully gotten, are redeemed, or the charges and costs of the visitacion, as
they call it, paid, so that the Bishop might that way scrape.iiii.M. crounes
every year they would compain nothing.) These new preachers, do set forth
things unadvisedly in their sermons that will shortly bread tumultes and
sedycyons (In thee mean season that all men's goods at morgaged unto you, that
ye, challenge unto your selfs all men's richesse and possessions, that ye
oppress the poor with an intolerable yoke of rentes and servitude, and that
with such an ungodly violence, as was never heard of: ye think that there
can be no cause of sedition, where as every man does know, that all seditions
and tumultes, yt ever were sens there beginning of the world, did acyse of the
pride and tyranny of the rich and mighty men of the world.) These things, I
say, and other like, are they wont to bring about the latter end of their
Oration, whereby any wise man may easily gather, that these men will color or
cloak most deceyptfully, The papists do make ye mystery of christ a cloak too
hyde their carnal lusts and affections.
craftily and hypocritically, their inordinate lusts and affections, with that
most free and gratuite mystery of our Lord and Savior Jesus christ. But go
to, let them not bewraye their fylthynes and impiety of their counsel by
soche addition, yet every man does understand what these men go about, by
their unmeasureable pride and exceadinge great train: Whether that they do
seek christ and the glory of God ^eyth a sincere heart, or rather be
displeased that their cyches might, gaynes, and pleasures are mynysshed, for,
Christ never drew with him such a multitude of servants nor such a great
train.

But because they do make me^tio^ of the Christian and Catholic church, Of the
catholic church of Christ.
which christ has does redeemed with the merit of his bitter death, and also
instituted and established by his own authority. We must fetch diligently,
what is that Christian and Catholyke church. But where shall we find it, more
playnelye set forth, than in the words and oracles of our lord Jesus christ,
which he him self has spoken, of this thing? If the^, we may deprehe^d and
find by ye words of christ, that the conspiracy and congregation of ye
Papists, is the christian church, truly it is co^uenyent and mete, yt we do
acknowledge it so. But if christ has not instituted it: with what boldness,
and impudency do they bost, crake, and set them selves forth by that title?
Truly they may be a Papistical church, this we do not deny unto them. But
they can be no more called, If Belial may be called god. Ye congregation or
co^spiratie of ye Papystes may be called thee Church
ye Chrystian church (which we do confess in the Creed, or symbol, and is
the communion of al thee faithful, and spouse of christ) than Belial is god.
For, onelesse this were true, ye fou^dacio^ of our faith and believe, that we
have of the church, should leave upon wretched, frail and mortal men. How
folysshe, absurd and impossyble this thing is, any Christyan heart does
easily understand and perceive.

The bnyuersal church of all the godly.
The church the^ (yt we may also speak of it, as much as ye necessity of this
place and time does require) in his first signification is taken for all the^
that put their whole trust, hope and confydence in Christ only, and in him
do seek all their salvation, according to Christ's saying where Math. xvi.
he sayethe of him self: And upon this stone (which thou Peter had confessed
even now and therefore act called Peter) I will or shall build my church,
that is to say, I will reconcile my people, with god my father, by this one only
mean. I am that true immaculate lamb, and therefore I will offer my self an
omnisufficient sacrifice, for ye sins of al ye whole world. Who soever the^
does put his whole trust and co^fyde^ce upon this rock or stone, he shall be
saved, and is a membre of my saints, yt is to say of my people, and of my
church. By christ's words the^, it is manifest and plain, yt al they, which
do trust in christ, put al their hope and co^fide^ce in him, are the christian
church. For he that is builded upon this rock or stone, must needs to be in the
church, sithe yt the church is builded upon y^ same stone. Part^cul^re churches.
Secondlye, the church is taken other whiles for every paryshe. For, after ye
sense and signification, we do call ye church of ye Corinthia^s, that part of
ye universal church, yt was in times past gathered at Corinthus in ye faith of
christ, where as in the mean season, they were al members of that catholic
and universal church: and yet not wythsta^ding, being gathered together, they
did receive ye name of a church or congregation. After the same manner, we call
the church of London, the same congregatyon, that is in London: where as in the
mean season, al they that be contained in it, are members of that universal
christian church which is that true church, which we do confess in the creed,
the church of ye papists has no power, or iuris^iction over ye Catholic or
universal church
or symbol of the Apostles. But as these partyculare churches of Corynthus and
of London, may nor ought nor, to burden thee universal Church of thee
Christians, which dwell dispersed up on the whole face of the earth, with any
new laws and tradycyons: So ye Romyshe or Papistical church (which is only a
particulare church, if so be that they have faith in christ Jesus) ought in
no wise to prefarre it self unto other nor to make all men subject unto their
traditions. Also these things might be proved, with many testimonies of the
scriptures, but because they are sufficiently and largely enough aledged in
other places, ^oke upon his articles and ^ answer yt he made too one called
Valentin^ Compar.
we shall not neade here to bring the^. For, the matter does not admit, nor
suffer us to speak of this thing as much, as neade requires. Wherefore when
the Papists to complain of any division or subuersyon of the church, they
care for none other thing, but for their own yt is to say, al their care is,
for ye lucre gaynes and commodities of their church, which they se every day
to lose much profyt. For, the more do come to ye true knowledge of christ, and
believe in him thee greater the church is, though no Pope at all, or mytred
Bishop, or high pryeste or patriarch were found in all thee whole world.
But that, that they complain upon, does get unto them no small favor, and
why? it has no small show of godliness: for, they will be coumpted such, as
care for the sheep whereas they seek the wolle, and would rather, be clippers and
sherers, than Pastors or shepeherdes. For, the crafty and subtyl men, knew
right well, that thee church of god, or sheep or people of god, ought to be
brought into none other pastoure, The papists, if they were true pastors,
have more cause to be glad than to be sorry.
but yt the true and only fode of gods word ought to be mynystred unto them.
Sithe then, that thee faithful pastors do every where, minister lyberally this
wholesome and healthful fode of the gospel, it is mete, that they should make no
complaynte of the deuisyon of thee church, but rather, ought to rejoice, and
be glad, that they se thee pastoures of salvation, to spring up and
florysshe, so goodly every where.

Here, against the^ ye will have ye fathers to be observed and followed in the
exposition of ye scriptures.
I do not greatly pass upon their obiectyon, where they do commau^de yt the
preaching of ye gospel, should be ruled, guyded, and moderated, after, or
according to the exposityon of the fathers. For, christ our savior, did not
assubiectize or make subject, this word, whereof he speaks Math iiii saying:
Man does not live, with bread only, but with every word, that comes out of gods
mouth: unto ye Judgment of ye fathers, yt they should pronounce or give
sentence upon it, but he will have ye word to be understood, which comes out
of Gods mouth, as we may se Deuteronomy. viii. But yt these things may be more plain,
and easyer to be understood of every man: Let these fellows tell, Let the
pap^stes answer to these.
I pray, what was ye condition of the christian faith. and how the gospel and
Eua^gelical doctrine could be preached, before yt these fathers were borne into
ye world? How shall, we say that ye Apostles did preach the gospel, or after
what manner did they it? Now therefore, their deceateful crafts ar detected,
whereby they did go about, to deceive ye simple witted me^, under ye name of ye
fathers, and to include with in certain limities and bounds, ye liberty of
gods word. For, this we may boldly affirm and say, yt the christian people
did never live a more innocent and godly life, tha^ when there were no human
tradityo^s at al, the prescriptyon and teaching of the Euangelycall doctrine
being then admixsted with simplicity.

They are want therefore to speak these and other like words, about the
beginning of their oracyo^, or this one cause, yt they may deceive the simple
and ygnora^t people. But praised be god, yt they begin their tale after this
manner, and fashyo^. For, two or tri acts have been set forth by these me^, where
they seem yt they have forgotten, to co^me^d at the first beginning, the
faithful and dyligent preachi^g of ye gospel unto al me^: which we have most
need of, of al things. How beit, they maki^g a very cold me^tio^ of ye gospel,
almost about ye end of their Acts, be wo^t to say: And yet for all ye, we
ought not to be coumpted enemies of the gospel. For we will yt it be preached
etc. Now, thanks be unto god, thee matter is come to yt, yt they be feign at
length to speak and make me^tio^ of the gospel, and to command the pastors
to preach it dilyge^tly: but by and by, lest they should seem to have granted
to much, they do bring ye meani^g, exposition, and judgment, or se^te^ce of ye
fathers and the common mind, or agreement of all ye faithful, and by them will
they have ye preachi^g of gods word to be ruled. In good south, a man might
think, sarcasmus yt in to say a plain mock.
ye god has a very good turn, that these doctors and fathers ar come for
onelesse these fathers had been, it had been laweful for no man, to preach his
word. For, let us faigne, ye none of al ye fathers, did expound or went about
to expound, the word of god and thee scryptures, with their wrytynges and
co^mentaryes, let them tell, I pray, will they suffer then gods word to
be preached or not? If then, gods word can be preached and set forth
purelye and syncerely, without the exposityo^ and labor of the fathers, what
shame and impudencye is this, that they be not a shamed, to alligate and bind
gods word to thautorytye of thee fathers. Whereas their decrees do teach
plainly, that book I have already translated in to English, and is called a
short pathway to come thee right understanding of Gods word.
that the fathers must gue place give place unto gods word, and not the word,
unto the fathers, as we may find Distin. viii. a. and.ix. a. from whom the
true and sincere vnderta^di^g of gods word does come, and where, it ought to be
sought. I have sufficiently declared in a book, which is entitled, De
claritate verbi dei, yt is to say of the playnelynesse or lyghtsomnes of gods
word.

It is evident and plain the^, by this, yt has been said hitherto, yt al they,
yt ar wo^t to have always our lord Jesus christ in their mouths, The
hipocrisi of the papists, and of ye woues.
thereby to commed, set forth, and color their hypochrytical co^plaintes,
wherewt now, yt the gospel begi^neth to flourish, they do tragically fyl yt
whole world, whereas in ye mean season they have not in the^ a cro^me of the
christian faith, whereby they may be known, do seek none other thing, by this
their hipocrisye, but that they may be taken for true pastors, for, if you
do look upon, consider and behold them, from the top to the toes, thou
shall always see woluish claws to appear out, which they can never hyde. We
will not have this thing to be understood only of those high Prelates, and
mytred Bishops, but it ought to be referred to all the ministers of the church
by whose sermons any man may easily espy and perceive, whether yt they do
seek in their doctrine, the health and salvation of thee sheep, or rather their
own ^ryuate profit. The fruytes, whereby false pastrous are known.
Soch are they yt do defend the papistical church, saying openly: that ye
co^stitutions of it, statutes and traditions ought to be no less accepted tha^
the sacred and holy scriptures And what greater blasphemye can be against God?
What greater apostasye or rebellion can be against our heavenly King? For, by
what reason can we make the creature equal with the creator? Soch are they
also, yt do ex^enuate the passion and death of christ, and almost make it
nothing worch, when they say: that man can not only, but also must needs get
and obtain his salvation by the merits of his works. For, if ryghteousnes
does come up works Christ dyed in vain, Galat. ii. But these deceyptfull
wretches, do use this subtyltie and craft, for this one cause, they know right
well, that generally all men do despair of the merits and righteousness of
their own works. If then, they do nevertheless ascribe and attribute
salvation to works, by and by they turn them selfs to the works of other
me^, craving of the^ help and succor. The^, by and by the cold prayers of
popish priests, the mummelinges of Monks, yt rehearsinges of psalms, the
byinges and sellinges of Masses, thee deckinges and trimmi^ges of churches do
come forth, and offer themselves, which, as soon as yt miserable man does
trust, and put his confidence in, this folishe believe of his, does with all
liberality, give unto these false and unfaithful pastors, does milk and
wolle. These things did christ mean in Matthew, Math. vii
when he says: Ye shall know the^ by their fruytes. That is to say, by a
diligent lokinge upon, wayinge, and consyderation of those things, yt they be
wont to seek, ye shall easily understand, whether yt they do feed the sheep,
of any love, that they have toward God, or of coueteousnesse and avarice. It
is yt of fire and part of al godly persons too judge of pas^ours.
This judgment and trial god does commit ^niuersally to all christian me^,
and to all the faithful people. Wherefore, the Papists shall never escape, but
that they shall be feign to submit them selves to the judgment and criall of
other, yea, the vyl^ste and symple^e, that is in the Congregation, shall be
judge over them, which thing they may not refuse. For, Christ speaks
these words ye me have now alleged, to the whole multitude of his sheep. Let
the fathers then together, with the whole stock of Bishops and high
Prelates, submytte them selves to thee commune trial of all men, whether they
be Pastors or wolves. And if the christian church do perceive, that they be
wolves and not Pastors, they ought in no wise to be heard, but to be
diligently taken heed of: though they rage never so much, and take on like
Tyrauntes.

But now, we will return to ye rule of Christ, whereby he teaches us to try
soch pastors, for, in Mat. he does add: Math. vii
So, every good tree bri^geth forth good fruits, and a rotten tree, can not
bring forth good fruit. A good tree can not bring forth ill fruit: nor a
rotten tree can bring forth no good fruit. Every tree that brings forth no
good fruit, is hewed down, and hurled into the fire: therefore ye shall know
them by their fruytes. Here, we must diligently note and mark, what was said
before of ye faithful pastor, yt is to say, yt it is his office and duetye, to
be earnestly studious of those things, which he sees to be contained in gods
word, and commands other to observe and keep, By what works false pastors
must be known and tried
and that he must in no wise set forth him self, with his own, or any other
hypocritical works. And so likewise thee christian people ought to judge and
try their Pastor, not by those works that are required in men's traditions,
but by them, which god does command us in his holy word. Which, because it
is not done now a days, we do see many simple and ingnoraunt persons come
forth which cry out. The complaynts of the s mple and igno^ant people.
See ye not, where unto all things are come? The devotion of the blessed Mass
is clean fallen away, the Images are nether worshipped nor trimmed, the goodly
singu^ge in churches is co^tempned and nothing set by, Indulgences are nothing
regarded, ye priests, Monks, and Nonnes receive few, or no offeringes at al
no man gives toward the mayntenance of our Ladys service, nor toward the
buyldinge of her church, where unto they do add many like things with
mornefull and lamentable voices or words. But if these good folks knew yt
the bying and selling of Masses, does hyghly displease god, and that to cloth
and deck the living Images of god, Mark ye this, o ye simple and unlearned
people, and suffer you selfs no longer to be deceived with ye poynted babels of
the Papystes.
which are the poor nedy me^bres and lymmes of Christ, not blocks and stones,
is a worshipping, most acceptable unto god: Besides that none other singing is
more pleasant unto him than when we do worship him in spirit and truth, and
not when the churches do resounde with pypinge, lulling, belowinge and roaring:
again, that ye wares of pardons and Indulgences, did induce and bring into
christendom, all kinds of evorme sins and vices (for men trusting in them,
give the^ selves up to pylling and pooling, to capines, to theftes, to usury,
to wars, to slaughter and murder, to plain treason, and to al other
heynouse and enorme vices) moreover, what great harm the christian people
should get, if so great a multitude and number of ydell lubbers, as popysshe
Priests, Monks and Nounes are, should be maytayned and kept, where as we
see them, to be not only the folowers but also thee very autours and fynders
of all unclean tybaudrye and fleshelye pleasures or carnal lusts: also, that
no man's work, be he never so godly and holy, can help or further the
salvation of another, only thee merit of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, very God and man, being excepted: finally if they should
understand, that the chyefe honor, which can be given to the Vyrgyn Marye,
does not consyste in this thing, that we should build up goodlye Churches,
that we s^oulde set up the arrogant and proud ^hanones, upon high
pa^frayes, keeping them at our own costs and charges, with their shameless
harlottes and whores: The true worshypp^nge of ye vyrgin marye.
but much rather that we should bestow all these costs and charges upon
them, that do believe and trust in Jesus Christ the son of Mary, and that
those things that are b^^^wed upon buyldinge of churches, s^oulde be given to
Vyr^yus and ^oneste women, whose chastity is for extreme need and pouertye, in
no small peril and danger, that so they may thee better keep them selves
honest. If, I say, these tude and unlearned persons, understood these and
other like good worckes, that Christ does require of us, they would also
learn too know their Pastoure, by them only. But now, for lack of this
knowledge, though thee poor simple and foolish sheep, do see him, that
should be their Pastoure, to be shameful ye given to coueteousnesse,
rybaudrye, dronckenesse and ryottous bancketting to carthyng and dycynge, and
other most abhomynable vices: Yet not wythstanding if he can have some show
of deuotyon or godliness, either by often saying of Mass, or by some other
outewarde ceremonies or toys, they will take him for a true shepehearde of
Pastoure, where as he is none other thing, but a very rauenyuge Wolf.

I have for thee nones, A description of the false Pastor by a col^u^^o^ or
co^paryson of ye true.
and of a set purpose, deferred the description, either of a Bishop, or
Pastoure, which Paul has set forth. Titu i.i. Timo iii. unto this place,
yt by the lightsomnesse and true beholdinge of the light, we may know the
backenesse, and by the nature and property of the true pastor, we may also
espy out the false. Paul writes after this manner: A Bishop therefore musst
be blameles, the husband of one wife, dilligent, sobre, discret, a keeper of
hospitality, apt to teach, not given to over much wyue, no fyghter, not
gready of fylthy lucre, but gentle, abhorring fyghting, abhorring
coueteousnesse, one that rules well his own house, one that has children in
subjection with all reverence. And again, a bishop must be blameless as ye
steward of God, not stubborn, not angrye, not given to much wine, no
fyghter, not given to fylthy lucre, but a keeper of hospitality, oue that
loves goodness, prudent, sobre, righteous, godly, temperate, and soche as
cleueth to the true word of doctrine, that he may be able also, to exhort by
wholesome learning, and to improve them, that say against it. In these
words, Paul does set forth unto us synges and tokens, whereby we ought to
know and choose a pastor. Whereby, this also does necessarely follow, that
they be all false pastors, and unapt to the ministratio of this office as many
as are not enoued with these virtues. Yet all these things, yt Paul does
rehearse, are comprehended with in love and charytye, as we have declared before.

Now, although some pastoure, The Pastor must be blameless.
be through sa^aunderous persons ill reported, and by bacbyters and false
knaves diffamed and also accused, yet it ought no to be hurtful unto him,
except he be convinced of thee crime, that is laid against him, by true
witnesses, and suit arguments and tokens. For, Many of an ill will that they
bear to ye truth scla^der ye ministers of gods word.
now in this most wicked world, we do see a great sort, (which is more
the pity) that of a malice, hatered, and ill will that they bear unto thee
truth, are not ashamed, and that, with most manifest and plain lies, to
sklaunder and dyffame the minysters of gods word. But if he be accused of
some notable crime, and thereof, lawfullye by sure witnesses conuynced, he is
not worthy to mynyster any longer ye sacred and holy office. O, how I might
now dress, ha^del, depict, and set forth in their own colors, certain of
those high prelates, which do sklau^derously lay to my charge, all heinous
crimes, that they ca^ ymagine, or think upon, if I should any thing be moved,
with their shameful backbytynges and sklaunders.

Thee Pastor if he has not ye gift of chastity, must marye.
Again it is manifest and plain by ye words of Paul, yt they are al false
pastor, yt have rather to live abhominably, tha^ to take wives. For, they that
are such, are growe^ and come, to that impudency, and unshamefastness, yt not
only, they be not ashamed of their abominable living, but, also are nothing
ashamed to mynyster unto other, occasyon of evil, The Pastor must be ^obre.
and of detestablenes. Paul does give like judgment, and se^te^ce of bibbers,
dro^kardes. and riotous persons. Yet in ye mean season, we do not fobid any
man to use, a moderate eati^g and drinki^g.

I pastor must not be stubburne, nor without moderation.
Likewise he is commanded, that he be not stubborn, styfnecked, and without
moderacyon, in his words and other gestures of his: whereby we do understand,
that these liars, teysters, and fantastycall reuylers, are false prophets.
Also they, that use no moderatyon, or sobrenes in their apparel, gesture, or
other behauoyour of their body, are not Pastoures, but rauenynge wolves. As
many, Thee Pastor is bound to keep hospitality.
as keep no hospitalytie, especyally toward the poor and neadye, are false
pastors. Yet in this place, may thee commune sort of pastors be excused,
which have scascely, any thing less to live upon: for, al things, as we se,
at come to that poi^t, that thee mighty prelates and Bishops yea the seculare
rulers also, Oye. vnge^till ge^tilme^ y^ dayli do improperate benefyces,
restore for shame, unto y^ pastors their lyuinges.
have taken away from them, their liuinges and thythes, scarcely leaving any
thing to the poor pastors, wherwt they may live at hom a poor life.
Wherefore, it is thee duetye of churches and parysshes, to provide lyberally of
their rhythes and other revenues, for their pastor yt he may both have that,
which is necessary, and also help them, that are in necissitie and need. If
this were done, we should se by and by all those acts, crafts, and deceates,
wherewith they have alured the people committed unto them, to offerynges, to
fall away of their own selves. A pastor must be able to teach.


But before al things, they are unworthy of the name of a pastor, yt be not
apt or able to teach, or though they can teach, yet they will not stycke or
cleave to the doctrine, that they may strongely and with a constant and stout
courage confound and reprove them, A faithful father.
yt speak against the truth. The faithful pastor must have also modeste or
sobre children, godly, and well brought up. Whereby, it may be gathered also,
that young me^, which are inexpert of the world, and are yet ruled by their
affectyons and lusts, ought not to be admytted too this most peryllous and
hard office, but men of ripe Judgment, which have already showed a prove
of thyr study and godliness in the bringing up of their children: except
we might find some Timothes that is to say young men endued with all gifts,
appertayning to a Bishop. That, which folowethe in Paul, any man may easily
understand, For, they are so plain that they need no farther exposition.
Wherefore, we shall by this mean, according to thee saying of christ, know a
false pastor and hypochrite, by his fruits, or worckes, so that we shall also
understand, which be the good and godly fruits, and again which be evil and
deuelysh, lest paradue^ture, we should receive the cockyl for thee good wheat,
or the tares being saved, we should cast away, the good sede. We will tell
afterward, what christ does mean, by the rotten tree, which being hewed and
cut down is hutled and cast into the fire. They are false Pastors yt have
neither faith nor charity


Moreover, they that have unfaithful, and mysbeleuyng hearts, nor be fyred or
kyndeled with thee love of god, as it was showed by the example and words of
christ, when we spoke before of the true pastor, ^r no less false pastors,
than they, that we have spoken of, already. Thou shall playnelye se their
mysbeleue, infidelity and mistrust or incredulytie, by their own fruits and
works. For before, we did learn by the words of christ that it is ye office
and duty of a pastor, to forsake utterly, for the love of god, and his
word, his parents, systers, brethren and other kynsefolkes: it is plain then
and manifest, that they at false pastors, that take this office upon them, to
this intent, that they may euryche them selves, and al their kynred. Which
thing now at this present, we may se, in those mytred Bishops, which with
faygned indulgences, absolutions, and other like deceates and crafts, do
promote and inhaunce al their kynfolkes to high honors and richesse: the
popish prelates do guide ye goods of poor, to yt their kynsfokes and to their
hands,
yea they give also unto bawdes, which when they were yo^g, brought unto the^,
whores and harlots, great and fat benefyces. Wherefore, when we do se them,
which were poor and nedy before, after that they be outs made Bishops, to
enrych them selves, and al their kynsefolkes, it is a most sure, undoubted and
infallyble token that they be false pastors. For, these are the goods of the
poor, whom god byddeth us, to do good to, and not too the^ that abuse these
richesse to vain orientacyon, arrogante pride and glory. Christ does bid us
to forsake our parents and kynsefolkes: but they, when they be made Bishops
and pastors, do imbrase them most, and give them great goods and rychess.
They are false Pastors. ^ do abhor the cross.


Besides that, we have heard, yt it is required of a pastoure, that he be
always ready, ta take up his cross up on his shoulders and to follow christ.
Whereby we do see again, that they are false pastors, and untrue Bishops,
that be so far from that constancye, and strength of mind, that they do not
only think and hard and an intolerable thing to suffer death, but also, can
not abide or suffer pacyently any mynyshynge of their worldly commodities, nor
any rebuke, for the name of Christ for some of them, do so love the^ selves,
and their own lives, yt they do not care, though they do set all thee nations
of the world together by the ears, In exhortation too Princes
so yt they may p^asiblye, enjoy still their own pleasers: Lift up your eyes,
o ye Princes, yt have ye ruledo^ and gouerna^ce of Publyke weals, and look
about you. For, these false pastors can lightly move and stir you to
maddenes and futye, and too take vengeance one of an other, for nay tryflynge
matter: but what has been the end of such counsayles and enterpryses, not
few examples of our time, do manyfestly declare. Whereby we se clearly, that
al pestylent wars, have been styrred up thoroughe the work and counsel of
false pastors, which afterward they neither could, nor yet would que^che nor
pacify. Whereby, infinite calamityes and extreme pouertye did ensue, both to the
Princes and to the poor people, where as in the mean season the inuentours, or
causers of thee ill, did lawghe and rejoice secretly in their own bosom.

It is plain and manifest also, They are false Pastors yt do not show and
declare the^ selfs fathers of the congregatyon
that they are false pastors, which do not, in all their acts, doings,
studyes and counsayles, show and declare the^ selves to be fathers, nor esteem
and take, all the afflyctyons, troubles, cares and solicitudes of their sheep,
as their own molestyes, and cares, but rather seek their own profyt and
advantage or lucre, thondryng out, always this one thing: Pay me that, which
is mine own. I ask my duetye, I ask that, that is my right What shall we say
of the^, which though they do not buyld, and edyfye by their preaching and
doctrine, yet they do always break down and destcoye, with their abhomynable
living and detestable deeds, sithe that it has been showed already before, by
the words of christ that they, which do teach, and do not express ye same in
their works and deeds math. v.
are les in the kingdom of heaven, yt is to say, in the church. Sithe then that
these vain doctors or teachers, ought by right to be numbered among the false
pastors, among who^ I pray, shall we nu^bre and reckon the^, which do neither
teach, nor do yt, that they should teach, where as in thee mean season, they
glory, boast, crake and set forth themselves by the titles of Bishops and
fathers and take away from churches ye livings or reward and hier dued to the
true pastors? (I will not have the, who soever thou be that art godly, and
love true relygion, to be any thing offended. For these sayings pertain
nothing to the) they are rauenyng wolves again, it is plain, and manifest,
that they are false Pastoures, which do seek, They are false Pastors that set
forth, any other works tha^ christ has commanded
or set forth any other worckes, than God has commanded. Besides that,
sith that we have heard al ready before, that it is the chief and principal
office of a pastor, to preach Gods word, and that it is required in the
preaching of it, that sins and vices be rebuked and blamed: it is evident
that they are false Pastoures, and untrue Bishops that do neglecte thee
preachinge of Gods word* nor rebuke vices, as they ought to be rebuked.
Against vnpreachinge prelates, yt nether preach nor rebuke s^nne
It is also most euydent, and plain, that they are all rauenynge wolves,
which do punisshe sins only for this, that they may scrape and get to them
selfs thereby a great sum of money. For, Mark ye this, o ye officials
co^missaries and dotrours of ye arches
if the sins of the people should grieve them, this gryefe could not be
mitigated and assuaged, nor yet taken away from their hearts by money: but
rather they should study, labor, and do all that in them lies, that
sinners being instructed, and taught by the rules of Gods word, should
leave and forsake their sinful ways, which thing, sith that they do not,
they give a manifest prove of the^ selfs that they only seek for the chestes
and purses of their sheep, or of them that are under them, for by the fruit,
that they do seek, we may understand, what they are. Truly, it is to be
lamented, that these men, whom it is manifest to be rauenynge wolves, do usurp
and take upon them, the names of Pastors. Again, sith that the reward of
persecution and cross was promised, unto the true pastors, we can not nor
may not call them pastors, but rather sagitiues, rennegates, They that will
bear no cross, are rennegates and hyerlinges
and hyerlinges, that will bear no cross. But, by what worthy names shall we
call them, that do traitorously lay wait for the true pastors, persecuting
them with al their might, strength, and power and when strength fails them,
do hyre other to persecute them? Many soche could I name, whose bloody works
also, I might describe: How be it, I do wittingly pass them over: for now,
it is not time to do it, for the measure of their wickedness must be fulfilled,
which being done, their iniquity shall be reveled to all men. For, nothing is
so hydden, but that it shall be reveled Mark.iiii.

They that do not rebuke ye fau^es and vices
Also they, that do not rebuke ye fautes of Kings, Princes, Magistrates, and of
the people, nor resyste, or wythstande them, but rather suffer them, Of
Princes, and voylter in the^ their selfs are false Pasto^rs.
and not without a greuouse offense of all godly persons, to voyltre them
selves in the stinckinge mire of sin, are no less false Pastors. But this
might in a manner be borne, if the Doctors or teachers them selves, should
not with their abominable lyuinge, far exceade and pass the naughtynes and
wyckednes of other. For I am sore ashamed, too speak any more of their
rybandrye, and detestable deeds, that they do secretly Ephe. vii. And if any
man might see thorough the walls their secrets and priuities, as in times
passed, thee Lord did reuele unto his holy prophet, Ezechiel viii. he should
see horrible things, that is to say, he should see most ungodly Idolatrye,
detestable plays, most shameful whoredom, an oppressing and murtheringe of
souls, and soche a puddel of all abominable vices, that we might complain
with Christ, that the earth does not vomit, soche ungodly and abominable
knaves. Neuerthelese, we do acknowledge, and take them for Pastors. And yet
these ungodly persons are not content with these things, for we may find some
of them, that are not ashamed to do those things openly, which no man being
sober, or in his right mind, if he did but fear and reverent the light, or the
clear and bright day, would or durst do Math. v. and xviii Mark. ix
Christ our savior does command to pluck our and cast away soch eyes, but
we are come to that madness, that we do plant and set them*

They that usurp here an earthly kingedo^ ar wolves
Christ does forbid his disciples, being gone forth to preach, yt they should
not bear a rode in their hands, nor possess any scrip or purse. Whereby it
appears, that they are not pastors, but most raueni^g wolves, that bear a
rode, that is to say, usurp here an earthlye kingdom. For christ does forbid
the Pastor al kind of ruledom, that princes of this world do use, when he
says. Luke.xxii. mathe.xx.
The princes of nations do bear rule over the^, and they that are great, have
power upon the^, it shall not be so among you. If the^ they have the rode that
the Lord has forbidden, they are in very deed false pastors. Yet not
wythstandinge, they have not only taken the rode, but also the scrip, purse and
beget, for, they are so bent, and given to get gold and silver and al other
riches of this world, that they could not do it, with any greater study care
and diligence, if the Lord had strayghtly charged and commanded the^, to get
all the whole world under their subjection. For, we see the^ to be so spiritual,
yt they have brought the chief part of ye whole world under their dominion,
ruling and governing almost al other men. What? do we not se the princes the^
selfs with empty hands to depend wholly of the^? Did christ command so to
leave and forsake the scrip and the purse? Yet in the mean season, they were
hitherto taken for true Pastors, yea, no man for his life durst have called
them rauenynge wolves, for, soch is their craft and subtlety, that they be
not ashamed, to color and cloak their coueteousnesse, or rather their robbery,
with christ and his mother the vyrgin Mary, also with John Baptist or with some
other Saint, which, when he did live, did esteem the world no better, tha^
potshardes. For, say they, the shameful cross of ye papists in craving and
begginge.
all that we ask is for god: yt, which ye give is for our blessed lady. etc.
which god wot, being now in high felicity and beatitude or blessedfulnes, are
by their most shameful lies, faygned to beg, to exercise usury, to bear
rule, to gather richesse, and to fleye the poor sheep. They, I say, which when
they were alive, did forsake all for Christ's sake, and bestowed vpopn the
poor. And what is to mock the poor simple people, if this be not to mock
them?

Thee Popish prelates are r^uen^g wolves among sheep Mathe.x.
But there is another sign, and token, whereby they may be known. For, Christ
did bid his Pastors, that is to say, his disciples, to goo forth into the
myddest of tyrauntes, as if a man * should sense sheep among wolves: but these
out goodly prelates behave them sel^es among sheep, as ravening wolves. For,
what is it that they do not snatche up to them selfs? What thing is it that
they do not tear and rent? Whom do they not kill and murder? What is it,
that they do not scatter and destroy? As soon as they do hear, that the
gospel of Christ is preached any where, and received of some people, whereby
they see, that they shall lose some pray or botie, by and by they show what
they are. For, they trouble they rent, and tear all things: They fill all the
whole world with tumultes and sedit^o^s, always in the mean season most
deuylyshely layinge this crime to the preachers of the gospel, that they are
the auctors of al troubles, hurlis, burlis, insurrectio^s and tumultes. But
thanckes be unto thee Lord God, that he does so mercyfully favor his people,
that he will suffer no longer the ioyefull tydinges of salvation too be hyden
and kept from them, whose bodies be myserably afflicted. But this can not these
high prelates abide in any wise, for, the people being taught and instructed
by the word of God begins to wax wyser and wyser every day, and learneth
to help and succor the necessity of their neghbour, nor will give any longer
their richesse to this ungodly sort, Why ye papists do call ye preachers of
gods word auctors of tumulte and sedition.
or wanton company of the Papists. Therefore, they being angrye at this, do
say: that they (I mean the preachers and the people ye receaueth ye gospel)
breadeth tumulte and sedition: and why? because that they are not pampered
still with great treasours and richesse, that they may thereby trouble al ye
whole world. But soch complayntes are not to be regarded, for their lewdenesse
has been wyncked at, long enough, they have felt and seen long enough,
how friendly and gentylly their error has been laid before them. How beit,
they are moved with no fre^dly and gentyl exhortacions and warni^ges: therefore,
ye pure simple and sincere word of the truth, must be brought forth, that the
light, and brightness thereof may smite into their eyes: as for ye success, it
ought to be committed unto god. But we will gather together in one, all the
signs and tokens, whereby, as by a most infallible touch stone, the false
pastors may be tried.

I. Commune notes and tokens, whereby false pastoures may be discerned from the
true.
As many as do not teach, are wolves, how soever they glory, boast, crake
commend and set forth the^ selfs, by the tyteles, either of Pastors, or of
Bishops, or of Kings, and I pray, how many of these mytred Bishops, do
now a days execute the office of preaching?













scope, or marcke, than that they may pla^te, set and edifye among me^ the
knowledge fear, and love of god ar raueninge wolves which, if they be not
quickly kept of, from the flock of the sheep, do tear, rent, and devour all
the whole flock.



an exhortation unto the^, that are deliu^red from false pastors, yt they do not
(...) the^ selfs to be begyled again.
But now, sith that almighty god, has determined to punyshe so long ye
enormytye of our sins, by false pastors, which did take thee food of gods
word away from our souls, and by rauenynge wolves, which did spoil us of
our outward and temporal goods, yea did bring us all together, under their
subiectyon and tyranny: and now does vouchesafe to kyndell again, and to
reuyle, ye light of his everlasting truth, so yt we may both se openly and
know false Pastors and rauenynge wolves: it is the duetye of Christian people
in no wise for to kyck against, but rather to suffer them selves with a
glad heart, to be delivered from that hard captyuytye and thraldom of
rauenynge wolves. For here, we ought not too consider and look upon the
^^terne and outewarde incommodytyes of our body: but let this thing move
us rather that we see gods word, both deprauated, and taken away from us.
For, this has been thee custom of false pastors, that they did either hyde
gods word all together, The papists have depraueated Gods word with men's
traditions.
or else deprauate it, with false expositions. Which thing now a days they go
about to bring to pass, intending this one this, in all their crafts and
subtilties, that either gods word be not preached at al, or else that it may
be all together corrupted and deprauated, with humayne or men's tradicions,
false dreams, and expositio^s. For, if we suffer our selves, to be brought
again into darkness, it is plain, yt it is done for none other cause, but yt
because ye heynousnes and abhominacyon of out sins is so great, yt we can
not abide gods word: Sith that the brightness of the truth, ca^ not smite into
our eyes, without great pain, gryefe and dolor. We are therefore, deseruinglye
dampened: it is our own merit and deseruynge, yt our burden and yoke is
increased, and doubled. For, the light did come into thee world, and men did
love rather darkness than the light. Ioh. iiii. Wherefore, that miserable
alteratyon and change, and fallinge again into darkness, is with all
dylygence, and with most vygylaunte care to be taken head of, in all commonweals. For our savior, and lord Jesus christ, is ready, and offers freelye
his grace unto us: it is our part, coragyously to follow him, being our guide
or forgoer. If we wild the children of god, it is mete and convenient, yt we
do harken to his word only: We shall also take heed, yt we do not herke^ unto
the^, that do pluck us away, from gods word: but rather we shall keep of, or
drive they, away, far from us, nor suffer them in any wise to be in our
company. This thing are all parents wont to require of their children: how
much more the^, shall ye heavenly father of us al require ye same of his
children? who^ he has adu^ted or chose^ in his son as a peculiare and most
dear beloved people unto him? We shall therefore, show the ways and means,
whereby, we may quyckely be delivered from false pastors, And first of al, we
will rehearse and show, the reward, and horrible punyshmente, that is prepared
for them, if perchance, they being frayde, with the consyderation of it,
will forsake their wicked and unrighteous ways.

That high, Of the punishment and utter destruction of false postours or
prophets
and almyghtye god speaks after this manner Deuteronomy. xiii. If there arise among
you a prophet, or a dreamer of dreams, and gives yt a sign or wonder, and
thee sign or wonder, which he has spoken of do come too pass, and they say:
let us go after ^rau^ge gods, which thou have not known and serve them: harken
not thou unto thee words of that prophet, or dreamer, of dreams, for, the
lord thy god proves the, to wit, whether ye love the Lord your god with all
your heart, and with al your soul: ye shall walk after thee Lord your god,
and fear him, keep his commandments, and harken unto his voice, serve him
and cleave unto him. And thee prophet or dreamer of dreams shall dye, because
he has spoken to turn you away, from the Lord your god (which brought you
out of the land of Egypt, and delivered you out of ye house of bondage) to
thrust or put yt out of ye way, which the lord thy god has commanded the, to
walk in, and therefore thou shall put away the evil from the: This is a very
great te^ptacyon, o brethren, which, ye lord suffers to chastise and happen
unto us by false Prophets, that is to say, that ye things, that they have
told of before, should come too pass. For, by this mean, not only they, that
are weak, may be offended, but also the elect (if it might be possible)
brought into error, and fraud as our sauyoure him self says. Math. xxiiii.
But in the mean season, the lord does require this one thing of us, The word
ought to be believed before miracles and wonders.
that we believe and credit more, his simple, and infallible word, than wonders
and miracles: besides that, he does with this temptacion try us, whether we
love him with all our heart or not. But that this te^ptacion should not arise to
much, or gather strengthen, by daily encereaces, he commands to kyl up the
false prophet. Truly this reward is appointed of god, for all false prophets
which pluckinge us from ye true, and one only god, do go about to copple or
join us to strange gods. For they yt be soch, by ye commandment of god,
ought to be roted out of ye earth. Obeictio^.
And if they do make here any objection, and say: yt they set forth no kind
of Idolatry nor yet worshippi^g of false gods: again yt the yoke of ye law,
ought in no wise to be put upon them, that be under ye new Testament: Solution
we will answer them after this manner. As touching the first part of their
obiectyo^, it is plain and manifest that al they, yt have not directed the
minds of men to one only god, but plucking them a side caused the^ to serve to
creatures, The papists did seache too worship strange Gods.
or other outward things, did set forth strange, and false gods unto us. For,
yt, is to every man a god, wherein he puts al his hope, confydence and
trust. More over, we may se, that the papists have more dowtingly and
folishly brought the simple to their Idol the Bishop of Rome, making them to
trust in him, than ever any Idolatres, or prelates of the ethnike relygio^
did. For, they did worship the Idols of Jupiter, Juno, Venus, Mars, and of
other, none other wise, tha^ as ye images of the gods (who^ they thought verily
to be in heaven) nor ever were brought, to ye madness, yt they should take and
worship any man, yet living upon thee earth, instede of god. What? were they
nor all called flatterers among ye Heathen, yt did offer sacrifyce, unto
certain men as unto gods? For, they that were wise, never agreed to such
worshippinges: Therefore, the Papists, ar much more folyshe, yt be not afraid,
nor yet ashamed to call ye Idol of theyrs, The Papists do call their fleshly
Idol, the Bishop of Rome, an earthly god.
an earthely god, exhibiting and giving more adoration more honor, more
worship and veueracion unto ye miserable, and wretched mortal man, than unto ye
true everlasting god, and lord of all things. Besides yt, they, even now a
days, daughynge to scorn, mocking, and deriding, the poverty of our lord,
and sauyor Jesus christ, The papists ar blasphemous against Christ.
which he suffered for us, do most despitefully blaspheme hi. For (say they)
christ knew no better estate nor yet could obtain no better: but our most
blessed god and father being not folishely wise, ca^ both easelyer, and also
much better, rule and govern ye world. Wherefore, there is now an other
coudycyo^ of the church which the high Bishops, have set up an high, with
honors, renown, might, riches a force of arms, we may not then follow here
after ye poor and nedye christ. Yea, they do openly accuse Peter of
folysshenesse. Oh most shameful, and most detestable kind of blashphemye.

But now, o Papists, I require this thing of you, that ye vouchsake to
answer me to that, which I will ask you. Did your Bishop of Rome
institute, and set up, soche pride, pomp, and arrogancye, according to the
prescripture and rule of Gods word? No forsooth, no. Therefore, it is his
own invention, he following his own dreams, did ymagyne soche things, and by
them he did pluck us away from God. The Bishop of to me according to ye
law of god, is giltye of death.
He is then according to the law gyltie of death, and ought by and by to be
rooted out of the earth. For, god cannot abide soche dreamers. For. Hiere.
xiiii. chapter, the prophet speaks after this manner: O Lord God, the
Prophets say unto them: Tushe, ye shall neade to fear no swearde, and no
hunger shall come upon you, but the Lord shall give you continual re^^e in
this place (In like manner, now at this present, that all things are infected
and corrupted with detestable wickedness, false pastors are wo^t to promise
peace which they themselves never followed: if they had any understanding of the
scriptures, they should right well know, that so great and enorme wickedness of
this world, either must be changed left, and amended, or else that great
plagues ought to be looked for, as hunger, pestylence, wars, captyuytie, and
other like destructions: But they cry peace, where no hope of peace is,
calling this peace and rest, if they may peasyblye possess, and enjoy
their great rentes and revenues). And then the Lord answered me: The
prophets, preach lies in my name, where as, I have not sent them, neither
gave I the^ any charge, nor yet spoke unto them. Not wythstanding they preach
unto you vysyons, charmynge, vanytye, and deceytfulnes of their own heart.
Therefore, thus says the Lords As for those prophets yt preach in my name
(who^ nevertheless I have not sent) and that say: Tushe, there shall nether
swearde nor hunger be in this land. With swearde and hunger shall those
prophets peryshe. etc. Behold, how he does threaten again the sweard to
the false Prophets. But because we should not think, that here any other are
noted and meant, and not they, that popishly do teach men's tradictions, he does
afterward depicte and set them forth more lively in their own colors, when
he says: Woe be unto the shepeherdes, Hitr. xxiii.
that destroy, and scatter my flock. (Do thou not now hear him speak of
ravening wolves, which do pluck and scatter the flock into sundry opinions and
errors?) I have not sent them, and yet they tanne, I have not spoken unto
them, and yet they preach. I have heard well enough what the Prophets say,
that preach lies in my name, saying: I have dreamed, I have dreamed. How
long will this continue in the Prophets heart, to tell lies and to preach
thee craftye subtiltye of their own heart? Whose purpose is (with the dreams
that every one tells to his neighbor to make my people forget my name, as
their forefathers did, when Baal came up. The Prophet that has a dream,
let him tell it, and he that understood my word, let him show it
faithfully. For, what has chaste and wheat to do together, says the Lord?
Hereby, any man may understand, of what Prophets the Lord does speak, truly
of dreamers. liars, and tale tellers. But what reward does he promise unto
them? Wherefore says he, their way shall be slyppery in the darckenesse,
wherein they may stacker and fall etc. And a little after: I will feed them with
wormwood and make the^ drink the water of gall. Behold, how he does denaunce
and tell forth their slyppery way, and greuouse fall of ignorance, and also
their exceading great bitterness, which as it does daily increase, so at
length, their grievous and peryllous tuyne or fall, as the broken walls shall
ensue and follow, Esaye. xxx. The scriptures are full of such Testimonies,
whereby, we may know, and espy out false Prophets, but they are most lively
depicted and set forth. Ezechiel xxxiiii. Chapter. Which place, the shortenes
of our matter will not suffer us, nor admytte, to write out here. Yet the
end of them is showed every where of thee LORD, Thee end of false prophets.
that they ought without remedy to be rooted out of the earth.

How and by who^ false pastors must be taken away and roted from ye earth
But now, it is doubtful by whom they ought to be roted out of the earth. For,
there be some that are desirous to kill them, where soever they find the^. But
it is plain, that it is lawful for no pryuate person, to kill any man, without
the law, and a judgment given upon him or without a special commandment of
god. Wherefore, certain hot and fierce Christians, do greatly err, which, as soon as th^i se a fail prophet, do think that any man may kyl him: for, so
they stycke to the letter of gods law, and seek or search out, no deper
sense or understanding. We must beware then, yt we give not to much the
brydell to our affections. For all this whole matter and business ought to be
committed to god, who, if he will have the^, to be taken away, shall casely
bring it to pass, by his mynisters, that is to say, by the Magistrates. In
the mean season, be thou of a good comfort, and thinking within thy self, of
whose spirit thou art, submit thy self obediently, to ye meke judgment of
our most merciful master and savior Jesus Christ, which says. Math. vii.
Every tree that brings forth no good fruit, shall be hewed down, and cast
into the fire. If his crafts, and deceyptfull subtilties were know of ye
whole church, he ought to be deposed and put from the office of teaching, by
the commune assent and agreement of all the congregation. But if the church,
has no soch auctorytye, nor may do it, let no man harken unto him: but
rather suffer death, than ye should hearken unto a raueninge wolf, who, with
his doctrine and traditions, goes about too pluck you away from the one
only God and heavenly father. All these things, are manyfeste and plain, by
the plages of the scriptures, before alleged, so that, they have no neade of
any more demonstration. Besides that, the Lord him self Math.v. bydeth us to
pluck out and cast away from us, Mathe.v.
our right eye, if it does offend us. Therefore, it is our part and duetye, to
pluck out that wicked eye, that is to say, the false pastor, which leads
not to the true pastures, and to pulle up by the roots, the rotten and
vnfruytefull tree: but after, that it is done let us commit the judgment unto
the Lord, who will cast it into the fire when he shall think best, when he is
removed, and put from the office of teaching, we shall reken him among the
tares, Mat. xlii.
which ought not be pulled up. till the time of the harvest be come, as our
savior him self says. After the same manner, ^^et. xxxiiii
ye Lord speaks, Ezech xxxiiii. I my self, will upon the shepehardes: and
require my sheep from their hands, and make them cease from fedinge of my
sheep: Yea, the shepehardes shall feed the^ selfs no more. By who^ ye sentence
of and Lord. Deuteronomy..xiii ought to be executed
Wherefore, let them that bear the swearde of iustye, delivered unto them
by God, put too execution that sentence of the Lord, which is expressed. Deu.
xiii. For, they shall easily understand, what they ought to do for the glory of
god, and when they must punish extremely those false prophets. And if they
being of that mind, that the false pastors are, will neither punish them, nor
keep the^ short: we must patiently bear this yoke, laid upon us, as if it
were another capt^uitie of Babylon, till the Lord him self vouchsafe to deliver
us, with his mighty hand. For, this that we suffer in the mean season, is no
loss, nor harm unto us, but an exercise and trial, whereby our faith being
exercised, Psalm. ^ xxxviii
shall shine afterward with greater glory. The lord is ge^tyl, meke, and of
much mercy, in many things also he does spare, and is wont to differ long,
ye plage and punishment: for, no man is able to escape his hand Besides yt, no
soch example of crudelitie is set forth to us, in Christ or in his Apostels:
which never punished no man with death, and sheding of blood. In deed it is
lawful for all churches, to put away, and reiecte ye false pastor, yt he do
not teach And if they begin obstinately, and stubburnly to persevere and
co^tinne, nor will cease to pluck away from god, it is the part and duetye of
thee Magistrates, to kill them up with the sweared. But thou, that art a
pryuate man, do not raye and defyle thine hands with blood. For, the Lord
shall not fail, if these ravening wolves can not peasibly, or without tumulte,
and insurrection be expelled and out away, he will without fail raise up some
Helias, iii. re. xviii
which shall at one clappe kill up. iiii. hundredth and.l. priests of Baal,
and.iiii. hundredth prelates of groves and hill aulters. He shall not fail, I
say, take ye only in good worth this differringe and delayinge. Christ would
not co^dempne to death, ye wicked woman (as we may sie, John. viii.) which was
taken in adulterye, and whom the law did co^dempne. But again, what great
calamities and miseries, hoe horrible a destruction, did he bring upon the
whole people, Read ye Josephus and Sabellicus upon yt
when Titus both got the town, and subdued all the whole countreye? We must
therefore follow the leuge sufferaunce of our most, bounteous father. In the
mean season, as much as in us lies, we must take heed, that rauenynge wolves
do not occupye the towmes of Pastors, which thing, if we can not let, we
must patiently abide the delyueringe hand of the Lord, for, the ge^tyll,
meke and mercyful example of christ doethe move me more, tha^ yt severe and
cruel sentence or punishment of Moses. How be it, in ye mean season. I know yt
the dreadeful judge Christ, will come, which will arm either the Princes or ye
people them selves to vengeance.

The Epilogus or Conclusyon.
Therefore, o ye false pastors, if there be any sparkel of godliness in you, that
does savor, any knowledge of god, if any cro^me of humanytie does remain
in your hearts, I pray, for the honor and glory of god, for ye common
fellowship and amytie of me^, spare the poor people, which, so long a time,
has thorough you, suffered a most grievous hanger, of gods word: being in the
mean season, myserablye burdoned and oppressed, with most heavy, and
intolerable burdens of traditions. And before al things, do I speak unto
you, o most mighty Bishops and prelates of churches. Deliver ye now at
length, and set at large, the people of god, whom, ye have bolde^ captyue so
long. Think no less, but that it is a detestable and ungodly thing, to
bring all the whole world, for your covetousness. and pride sake, into
peril, ieopardye and tumulte. If ye do believe, that there is any god, and that
the same god, is the common judge of al men, what quyete, tranquillity, and
peace, can ye have, in your own conscyences, and souls, when ye se all your
whole ceate, and all thee condycyons wherewyth, it is sensed, to be an
unreasonable burden, and also an intolerable yoke of all thee christyan
people. Thyncke ye, that ye must releasse nothing. Are ye not ashamed to
burden every day the people, with new burdens. popish prelates do nether fear
God nor his judgment.
This, truly, is a manyfeste token, that ye fear neither god, nor his
ryghteous Judgment. For, where there fear of god is, three must needs follow
an amendment of life. Sithe then, that we see none of you, that will lyghten
those most unreasonable burdens, it is most euydente, that ye care neither
for god, nor for his judgments. And what other name is there, wherein ye may
glory? Whose ministers, and servants are ye? But I se playnelye wherein ye
trust. For, ye lean, or stay your selves, upon thee read, Esa. xxxvi.
or bryckel staff of Egypt, that is to say, ye trust in the help of Princes
and kings of this world. But the staff shall break in your hand, and not
without a grievous and fore wou^d. For, what other power, might, and strength,
has a king but his own people? If therefore the people being taught and
instructed by gods word, will not, at ye kings commandment (for in this
matter of god lynesse, better it is to obey God than man) help, succor, and
aid you: The Papists never observe their safe conductes nor keep their
promyses, for say they: No promise ought to be kept to an heretyke, so was
John Hul and Hierome served. The blood of martyrs is the sede of the gospel.
shall not both ye, and your lives be in ieopardye? Or what shall be the power of
the king? Therefore, except ye do cease and leave of, ye shall both feel and
see grievous commotions and bortyble calamities, to happen daily, both to you,
and to your Princes. And if in the mean season ye will not abide by the letters
or safe conductes, that be zealed with your own zeales, nor keep your
promyses, yt ye make, but go on still, to persecute afflycte, and murder most
cruelly the faithful mynysters of ye Gospel ye must needs to provoke darlye,
more and more, the wrath of god against you, nothing else can ye get thereby.
For, the gospel is both planned or set, and also does encresce or grow by
thee cross and persecutyon, till that thee Lord does send a delyueraunce.
For, after the same manner, the Israelytes did grow and increase, and gat
strength when ye tyrant of Egypt did ymagyne all the crudelytye, that he
could agaynst^ them, till that they were delivered by thee hand of Moses.
Exo. i. Also, Exodi. i.
it will avail you nothing, if ye do appele to counsayles. For, now it is
come to that, that ye must live iualye and godly, and cease to burden the
people of God, though that no counsel at all be kept: Do ye not remember
Helias, which under that most wicked tyraunte Achab, did kill up. viii.
hundrethe and.L. of Baals pryestes, and of thee Prophets or pryestes of thee
groves and hill aultares. Due only Prophet, I say, did prevail so much,
under so cruel and ungodly a King. iii. Reg xviii. And after him, iii, Regum
xviii.
Iehu, by a godly deceate and craft, did destroy, all thee rablement of
Baals pryestes iiii. Regum. x. What shall I say of Josias, iiii. Reg. x
which did kill up all the pryestes of thee hill aultates? iiii. Regum,
xxiiii. Having soche goodlye admouytyous, iiii. Regu^ xxiii.
see that ye repent by times. For, it is so far, that ye should recover
your old state, and dygnytye, that rather. Lucifer or Satan may hope and
look for his salvation. Therefore, trust ye, and put your hope or confydence,
in an other thing, that is too say, in God. who comfortethe, and quyeteth the
minds and conscience of all men. Him, I do most mekelye beseech and pray, that
he vouchesafe to bring you, into thee true knowledge of him self, that hu^blyng
your selves, under his mighty hand, and cross of christ our savior, ye
may euioye the eternal, and everlasting felicitye with all the cougregacyon
of the faithful Amen.

Of the metynge of Master John Hooper Bishop of Gloceter, and of Maiester
Doctoure Cole, quonda^ chaunceler of London, and now Wardeyn of the new college
in Oxeforde.
HEre I am compelled, for the great zeal, that I bear unto ye truth, and unto
the maintainers thereof, to detect and bring to light, a most crafty and subtle
pollicye, which ye Papists ar wont to use at this present: being in this point
most like unto certain warriors, which, when they feel them selves, to be
over weak for their enemies, either cause an our cry too be made upon
them, with these or like words: They fly, they fly: yt so they may
encorage their me^ of war, which before were most like to forsake thee fyelde
and ^enne away, and also make the enemies that are within the hearing of it,
too be dysmayed and astonyed, and to think, that their company, whom they
se not, be put too flight, and have utterly forsaken them: or else being
beaten and ouercomed. ^o send tydinges about, that they have gotten thee over
hand or vyctorye thereby comfortyng their adherentes and fre^des, which else,
if their overthrow were known, would have swarued, from the^. A very like
thing did chance and happen in this last, Iulye Anne. M.D.L. That most
valiant soldiour of the lord, and strong propugnatoure or defendoure of gods
truth Master John Hooper, as he returned from my lord Chauncelour, yt then
was in the county of Essex, did (whether it was by a chance, or of a set
purpose, I know not) come unto and certain manor or place of my good Master,
Sir John York Knight the^ Shreue of London, which place is caller Marks.ix.
mile fre^^ the city: where a certain learned man, named Master Doctor Cole,
quo^dam Chau^celour of London^, and now Wardeyn of the new college in Oxeford,
was asserua^ed and kept prisoner (.Wherefore it is, all the world does know)
when these great clerks were met and come together, after a mutual
congratulacion, they did, wtin a while, begin to reason of so^dry and many
things ye belong unto learning, but most especyally of those points of
religion, yt now are in co^trouersy between the Orthodoxes, I mean the true
and faithful Christians and the Papists. This was not so sone begun, but
that is was by and by blowe^ abroad, among the simple and ygnouraunt people,
that dwell, v, ^^. vi, mile of, ye Master ^ooper had not one word to answer,
and that he was so handeled and beaten by the Doctoure that he was feign, with
much shame both to him, and to al these new hererykes, to grant him the
victory. Which rumor with in two or three days, was spread al abroad here in
this noble city of London, and every where else: So that in Cambrige there is
no small reioysynge, yet at this hour, among them, that with al their hearts
do favor and maintain Popyshnesse: (Howebeit thanks be unto god, there be
very few soche in that floryshyng university) How the most part of Oxeforde
do tryumphe at the mattttr, all men that have any wit or judgment may
judge. Is not this, o Chrystyan Reader, a maruayllous and a very wonderful
Pollycye of thee Sapystes? They see that they are over weak to withstand the
truth of Gods word, and that it is impossyble for them to recover by open
dysputacyon or reasonynge (if only the pure and sincere word of God, be as a
most sure and infallyble light, brought and aledged, to decite or determyne
al matters, their estate, that they have lost, by the bright shinyng forth of
the Euangelycal verytie. Therefore, they do with all craft and de^eate noise
abroad, and that by their complyces and adherentes, that the defendours of
thee truth (whom they do most shamefully call peruitious heretics, and
sedicious persons) dare not coope with them, and if perchance they have cooped
with the^, and manfullly with the ^^^erd of the spirit, which is gods word, over
comed them: yet will these rank Papictes, being thus overthrown, by some
subtle means, make all thee whole world to believe, and especyally them, that
are ygnoraunte and simple, that the Orthodoxes or faithful mere over thrown,
and (as their commune terms be) made very fools. Which thing was well sent
at that dysputacyon, that was kept or had, at Oxeforde between thee
Papystes, and that godly learned manne Peter Martyr, in the matter of the Lord
supper: but now move euydentlye, in this reasonynge and communycatio^, that
was between Master Hooper, and Master Cole (though the matters were not of
like importau^ce and weight) For thou shalt know and understand, good
Christyan reader, that it is nothing so, as thou arre informed, or as it is
noysed abroad and that thou may be sure thereof: I (which was present at
it, and departed never from them, not as much, as thee bredthe of a straw,
so long as they reasoned, together) will show and declare and that by order,
whereupon their dysputacyon was, that thee thing being well and truly
known. (For that which I write now, I will iustyfye before Master Cole him
self, and all them, that were there present) thou mayeste now at length
perceive and understand, how thou haste ben: deceived: and if thou be a true
chrystyan, how thou haste been cast into a vain fear and dread, or if thou
be a Papyste (which thing God for feude) how thou haste be^e brought into a
fools paradyse, by such lyinge tales, that immedyatelye ensued upon they,
reasonynge and talk. The first point of their dysputacyon was this: Master
Hooper did affirm, that the Bishop of Rome did by hypocrytycall ways grow
to that auctorytye, power, and Majesty, that he did chose the Emprours, which
thing Master Cole did deny, and that stoutely. For, if he had granted the
same, by and by it had followed, that thee Emperor had been so under thee
subjection of that Antichriste, that he durst do none other thing in matters
of relygyon, but as that Antichriste should will him to do And therefore, ye
might well go shoe the goes, that looked for any redress in Relygyon at the
Emperors hands. Another thing also should have ensued, and that by good
consequence, that is to say, that thee Bishop of Rome should have been ^
very Antychriste, sith that clean contrary to they precepte of Christ, he did
take upon him to rule Emperous and Kings: Where as Christ did say: Thee
Princes of natyons shall rule them, but ye shall not so do. That could not
this great Doctoure abide, and therefore he denied Master Hoopers
proposytyon, which he did prove after this manner: Thee Bishop of Rome,
said he, does by his Chanon law choose and appoynte out thee Electours. That
do I grant, said Master Cole. Then said Master Hooper again: Also when
the Electours have choosen out the Emperor: thee Electyon does not stand,
onelesse the Bishop of Rome does allow and approve it. I do not deny
that, said thee other. Ergo said Master Hooper, thee Bishop of Rome
chooses the Emperor. I deny thee argument, said thee other, is to say,
that thee Bishop of Rome does choose thee Emprour. Here thou seeste, that
this Doctor could escape no way. He did grant (for he could do none
other) that the Bishop of Rome, did by thee Chanon laws, make thee
Electours, and again that thee Electyon did not stand, onelesse the Bishop
of Rome did auowe it. What other thing. I pray you, cast we conclude there
upon, but that the Bishop of Room did elect and choose thee Emperor.
That some thing also was well proved, by notable Hystoryes, which do teach,
declare, and set forth, how those Antichrists have in times passed, handled
the poor sely Emperors. The second point, that they reasoned upon, was, that
Gods word does sufficientlye, without thee help of thee fathers or
counsayls, expound it self, that is to say, that one place of thee
Scripture, ought too be expounded by another, which opinion Master Hooper
did hold. This thing was reasonned in the fields between them both, in the
latin tongue, (only I being present with them.) And when Master Hooper did
bring innumerable testimonies and places of the scriptures, to prove this
truth with all, the other resysted him stoutelye. But surely they were not
both armed and weapened in like. For Master Hooper being armed with a very
eloquent latyne tongue, (In deed I have, thanckes be unto God, some knowledge in
the latin tongue, and many have I heard speak in my days: but yet I never
heard an Ecclesiastical man speak more ^et and clean latin, then he did
extempore) was also weaponed with strong Scriptures, and word of god, whereas
the other, besides his haulte eloquence, had nothing else but the fathers,
counsayles, and I can not tell what church, or if he brought any scriptures,
they were so wrasted out of tune, that they served nothing less, than for
the purpose, that they were alleged for. Upon this matter they were about
three hours by thee clock. At length, when Master Hooper could get
nothing of him, but: The fathers, the fathers, the counsayls, the counsayls,
and I can not tell what church (for the true Church, why the is the spouse of
Christ, and is ruled by his spyryt only, settinge forth nothing besides or
against gods word, Master Hooper did well allow) they made an end of that
argument or matter. And as they were at dyuer, they began to talcke of thee
counsayll that was like to be, by the appoyntmente of the Bishop of Rome,
Which Master Hooper did think to be vnnecessarye, because that there
nothing could be redressed, or determined, but as the Bishop of Rome would
have it. And who, I pray, would think, that the same Antythryste would have
any thing to pass against his detestable pride and deuylyshe coueteousnes?
Next after that, they did confer of thee office and duetye of a King, whom
Master Cole will not have too be learned and seen in Gods laws. But that
fond and deuilishe opinion did Master Hooper confute with strong and
infallyble testymonyes of thee Scryptures, and word of God, showing that it
was most necessary of all, that a King should have a perfect knowledge of
Gods word. How could he else rule and govern his people, according too
thee will and pleasure of God? But Master Hooper did in few words show,
what was the cause, why he would not have thee Kings and Princes too have
learning. Trewely, because that they would have still the whole world under
their jurisdiction. Because that they would have still Princes and rulers too
see thoroughe their spectacles, and too be blinded with thee mystes of their
tradytyons. Last of all at thee instaunce of my Good Master, Sir John York,
they should have reasonned upon thee Supper of thee LORD, but Master Cole
would not meddle in it. Then did Master Hooper offere too dyspute with him
in Hebrewe, Greek, and Latin, and wythall them that be of his fact or sect,
upon al matters of Relygyon, that be now in controuersye. Whom Master Cole
did answer, that, as for the Latin and the Greek, he could well skyll in them
both, but as for the Hebrewe, he was not seen in it. And though he were never
so skylfull: yet said he: that he would not put his foot farther into the
fire. Then said Master Hooper unto him: Ye depredicate and say every where,
that we are in error, and not only that, but that ye be able to convince us of
error. Sith then that ye can confound our error, that we are in: and will
not do it. I say unto you: that as many of us, as do, or shall peryshe,
thorough your negligence or faintness of heart, thee blood of all them
shall be required at your hands. Thus they ended their communycation. And then
my good Master Sir John York, did take the matter in hand, exhortinge
Master Cole, not to hyde his talente, but to employe or bestow it diligently,
according to the will and pleasure of god. This is the whole matter, good
Christian reader, trewely and faithfully set forth unto thee: whereby thou
may understand whether of them two had the vyctorye. Weyghe and poudre
the matter thine own self. Examine and try it with that infallible touch
stone, that can never fail or deceive, Suffer not thy self to be seduced,
with those reprochefull and opprobryous terms, wherwyth, some of them most
lying lie do lode thee true messenger of God, saying: Master Hooper is but
an ass, he is but a dyshe cloute to Master Cole, for trewely, though Master
Cole is exceadinglye well learned, in all lyberall Arts, in Philosophy, and
other of thee profane sciences, whereunto ye may annexe thee eloquence in
both the tongues: Yet not wythstandyng, Master Hooper does far pass him,
in heavenly knowledge and understanding, and being not inferior unto him in
the knowledge of both these tongues, he is well seen in the Hebrew and
Chaldeike tongue, which thee other does lack. How beit, I would that
Master Hooper, or any of us, might be a dyshe cloute unto him, for then, we
should make thee inner part of thee vessel clean, (for it is the propertye
of dysshe clouttes so for to do) but I am afraid, that the inner part of the
vessel is so cankered, with Popyshe superstition, and deuylishe doctrine that
it shall need of a sweard, to scrape it out clean. The Lord God of heaven, from
who^ al goodness does come, vouchsafe to bring him and all other, that are yet
in error, into the right knowledge of his truth. That we may all together
praise and laud his holy and blessed name. Amen.

Imprinted at London by Wylliam Seris and Richard Kele, dwelling in Lombard
street, nere unto the stocks market, at thee sign of the Egle.

Cum gratia et priuilegio ad imprimendum Solum.

Fautes escaped by the Printer.
In A. i. for Sinouoys, read Senonoys, in A iii. for then will they not suffer
read them will they not suffer. ibidem. for lamable ceremonies, read laudable
ceremoni. in A. v. for bearing open, read daring open. in B. ii. for do send,
read do send. in. B. v. for in him ye fatt pastors, read in him ye fatt
pastures. in C. iii, for grievous scorns of persectio^s, read grievous storms
of persecutions. ibidem or there. for though they al offend ye world, read
though they offend al ye world in C.v. for ^^ to any other Pastors, read into
any other pastures, ibide^. for being thus promised, read being thus
promissed. in C.viii. for a long fartinet typpet, read a long lartinet
typpet. in D.i. for lastiuious, read lascivious. in D ^i. for te^perau^ce and
stubburnes, read te^ptra^ce and sobernes ibidem or in the same place, for all
kinds of te^perance, read al kinds of inte^peraunte ibidem for unto oath. r
yt can never, read unto other can never. ibidem for do teach him vain, read
do teach them. in D. v, for of the priests did he, read of the priests did
lie. in D vi. for do use exercise, read do use and exercise. in E. i. for to
turn him from the mind, read to turn him from yt mind. in E. vii. for to
his sound and fleshely, read to this fond and fleshely. in F. iii. for into
any kind or spear, read into any kind or spece, in F. iiii. for the prophets
of graves, read the prophets of the graves. in F. v. for Naboth ye Israelite,
read Naboth the Iesraelite. ibidem. for affyrminge unto him read offeringe
unto him. ibidem. for the field of Israel, read the field of Iesrael. in ye
margyne. for ye pastor ought by it, read the pastor ought to learn by it.
in G.iii. for always, read always. in H.v for sith that has, read sith yt
he has. in H.viii. in the margyne, for of deuyly sh^^s read o^ deuylisshnes.
in I.iii. for into none other pastor, read into none other pasture, ibidem
for where they see the pastors of salvation. read the pastures.


