QUAKER RARE BOOKS

Class Fc K25, no. 2221

FRIENDS' LIBRARY,

Received, 11 Mo. 28, 189 4

BY PURCHASE.

QUAKER RARE BOOKS

CLASS BX7715 BOOK K2A5

THE LIBRARY OF HAVERFORD COLLEGE

THE GIFT OF Friends Library, Phila.

4 MO. 23 19 29

ACCESSION NO. 106815

Wing A11A Smith II: 46

ANIMADVERSIONS ON George Keith's ACCOUNT OF A National Church, etc. Humbly
Presented to the Bishop of LONDON, AND ON George Keith's Advertisement
Concerning the same.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1700.

ANIMADVERSIONS ON George Keith's Account Of a National Church, etc.
IN his Advertisement at the end of his Third Sermon, after Ordination,
Preached at St. Helen's, May 19. 1700. he complains, That in a Printed Sheet,
called, Mr. George Keith's Account, etc. (as aforesaid) is some Quotations long
since Retracted and Disowned by him, in a Book published, called, George Keith
's Retractations; and calls it, The Quakers Cheat and Abuse, that are (he
says) still Charging him with Errors he has Retracted; and then cries out
against the Blindness, Hardness of Heart, and Obstinacy, that has befallen
them; and complains, they seek to Defame and Abuse him, for his Retracting his
Errors.

Animad. I have therefore Examined the Quotations, and find them right; and
have also reviewed his Retractations, and do not find he has been plain and
particular therein. But seeing he now grants they are Errors, may I not
conclude then the contrary is Truth? And then let them, if he please, be read
contrary, and see how he likes them.

Example.
Concerning a National Church.
He does (now he is turned Churchman) acknowledge, That a National Church can be
a true Church of Christ, and that Men should make Preposterous haste to make
Nations Churches, by mere humane Law and Power; and that bare humane Laws,
Edicts and Decrees, will do it; and indeed this has not been the Ground and
Rise of all Persecution that has been in Chistendom; and those that will have
a National Church, would not have others bow to, and join with them, and never
was a Persecuting Church, it is not in her very Nature: So it cannot be always
exceeding Hypocritical, seeing it begets Thousands to be its Children and
Members, by mere Will and Power of Man, which does not at all make Hypocrites.

Concerning the Teachers.
Now he is become one, and pretends to Disown what he formerly writ: Read that
the contrary way thus,

The Teachers have not been generally, and for the most part, Self-seeking,
Worldly-minded Covetous Men, who loved Pleasures and Riches more than God. And
this the Magistrate did not well know, and saw not that the best way to prevent
them, was to Bribe them with Augmentations and Benefices. -- The Preachers of
the Waldenses were not most of them Laymen, and wrought not with their Hands;
as the Teachers of the Primitive Church did not, but had Stipends or Sallaries,
and Preached not Freely again. If People once were Persuaded and Convinced,
That God did not Teach, nor would not Teach them; and then up should all the
Proud, Lording, Lofty Clergy, with their many Degrees of Doctorships, Lordships
and Masterships go.

Animad. And now he is willing to go with them, although he declared, It lay upon
him from the Lord to depart from them, being generally Men void of all Sense
and Feeling of God, that had Framed and Invented perverse Doctrine, for their
own Gains and Ends, as he now does. But not to proceed to farther Examples of
this kind, let us consider, whether G. K. did ever, or does, judge Baptism with
Water, as used in the Church, of which he is now ordained a Preacher, and the
Sacrament, Articles of Faith, or are any of the Fundamental and Essential
Doctrines of Christianity; because he has declared in his Preface to his
Retractations thus, viz. I have not here, or elsewhere, Retracted nor Renounced
any one Assertion contained in any of my former Books, that ever was by me
Judged an Article of Faith. And in p. 4, 5. of his Retractations, he says, I
have an Infallible Faith and Persuasion, touching the Fundamental and Essential
Doctrines of Christianity.

Therefore he having said, Truth's Defense, etc. p. 135.
That Baptism with Water is not meant, because not expressed, nor by any true
and just Consequence is proved to be meant, in Mat. 28.19. Neither this
Assertion, nor any other in any of his former Books, is (that ever was by him
Judged an Article of Faith) Retracted.

Again, Retract. p. 34.
I still adhere to my former Advice, That nothing be required by one sort from
another, as an Article of Faith or Doctrine, in common to be believed, but what
is expressly declared in the Scriptures, in plain and express Scripture-Terms.

Animad. To try his Sincerity, or show his Deceit, let him that would Say and
Unsay, prove from what is expressly delivered in the Scripture, and in plain and
express Scripture-Terms, 1. That Baptism with Water is meant in Mat. 28.19. 2.
That Infants are the Subjects intended.


And let him bring plain and express Scripture for the use of the Sign of the
Cross in Baptism, and requiring Godfathers and Godmothers, if he can, and
obliging them to promise and vow Three things in the Childrens Name, That they
shall forsake the Devil and all his Works, etc.

And let him, by Scripture, and from what is expressly delivered therein, in
plain and express Scripture-Terms, answer the Queries he put, and printed,
concerning the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, so called, or for shame forbear
his Prating and Printing against those that, by the Rule he lays down, he is no
more able to prove them guilty of any Fundamental Error in the Christian
Religion, or of any of the Errors he has falsely and loudly Charged them with,
than to move the Monument; although he may use his Meanings, Interpretations
and Glosses; in which he has been too Guilty to be creditted by them that well
know him.

And for all his Preferment and Ordination, his Black Coat, and White Surplice,
and Empty Noise about Outward Things, in his late Sermon, and pleading for Set
Forms of Prayers, he does but show his Contradictions and Confusion. For he
says, Retract. p. 12.
I would not have any to think, I Relinquish my Testimony to Christ's inward
Appearance in the Souls of Men, and God's Inward Revelation and Teaching by his
Spirit in Men; for I remain in the same Testimony, as to the Main, and I hope
so to do. So that all may consider, that before he was Received into the
Church, and Ordained a Preacher, he had an Infallible Faith and Persuasion,
touching the Fundamental and Essential Doctrines of Christianity, and he would
not be thought to Relinquish it.

He says, Retract. p. 13.
I remain Constant to my former Principles, with respect to the great Doctrines
of the Christian Faith. -- With my present Faith they agree.

So that he was not Erroneous when a Quaker, as to the great Doctrines of the
Christian Faith, nor in his Vindicating the Quakers Doctrines; and yet he would
have the Quakers guilty of gross and vile Errors, Heresies, Denying the Lord
that Bought them, etc. which makes me fear, he has sold himself to do
Wickedly. For it is evident to those that knows them, and are rightly
acquainted with their Doctrines, and that have observed their Conversations,
and are not Prejudiced and filled with Ill Will against them, (which never
speaks well) that they do truly and sincerely Own, and firmly Believe the Holy
Scriptures, and all Doctrines therein contained, both with respect to God,
Christ, the Holy Spirit, or Word of God: And by Believing in the Light, Spirit,
and Word within, (as G. K. says, p. 22. of his Retractations) we are brought
naturally to own the Scriptures, and the things therein declared; to own Moses
and the Prophets, to own the Dispensation of God to the Jews in that day, and
to own Christ in the Flesh, his Miraculous Birth, his Doctrine and Miracles,
Sufferings, Death, Resurrection, and Ascension; together with the Wonderful End
and Design of God therein, etc. And this Method I very well approve of still.
And so do the Quakers; and therefore are many among them so Laborious and
Earnest, to turn People to this Light, Spirit, and Word within, and are willing
not only to spend and be spent, but do spend and are spent, to bring People to
Believe therein, and only for the Good and Benefit of their Souls, and not for
filthy Lucre sake.

And although he says, He very well approves this Method yet through
Conceitedness his strong Will, great Passion, abominable Pride, impatiency
under Contradiction, and being filled with Rage and Prejudice, he is attained
to that degree, that he can now not only confidently Contradict what he once
called Truth, (and what he also affirmed in the Name of the Lord) but himself
also.

And although he pretended with a free and willing Mind, to make a general
Retraction of all the hard Names, and uncharitable Censures, Retract. p. 44.
he has at any time, either by word or writ past, on any -- humbly desiring
their forgiveness. He has in his Advertisement on a Hearsay Story, cried out
of a Quaker-Cheat; this is their Cheat and Abuse; and charges them by
wholesale, with seeking to Defame and Abuse him, and cries out Abuse and Shame,
and all by Hearsay, and on Presumption. But it is to be feared, he is now so used
to Confessing, that he don't mind to Forsake: But it is He that Confesses and
forsakes, that shall find Mercy. But his Building the things which he once
Destroyed, has made himself a Transgressor.

So Requiring him, by plain and express Scripture, and in express
Scripture-Terms, to answer what he has writ against Water Baptism and the
Supper, and particularly the Ten Queries, that he delivered to him and his
Brethren, that call that Eating of Bread, and Drinking of Wine, once or twice
in a Year, in the Public Assembly, the Sacrament, as G. K. and his Brethren
now do; For, according to the Proverb, what is Sauce for the Goose, is Sauce for
the Gander. And there are many other things, which he now practices, he ought
to bring plain and express Scripture for.

So I shall now conclude; beware that thou be not deceived, and brought down in
thy Jollity, Eccles. 1^.8. For an envious Man has a wicked Eye; he turns
away his Face, and despises Men. Let him, and those concerned with him,
therefore Read and Apply Isai. 3.9. Jer. 2.19. and Hos. 5.5, 6, 7.

FINIS.

