SOME QUERIES Proposed by W. A. To the late Flovvn SHEPHERDS, With a desire of
an Answer from them to these QUERIES, so that their discontented Sheep may have
some satisfaction why they left them, when the Visiting hand of the Lord was
amongst them.
1. Whether those Shepherds as fled when the Lords Visitation was amongst the
sheep, are not foolish Shpherds, such as the Prophet Zachariah spoke of, and
that in these words, The Lord said unto me, Take to thee yet the Instruments of
a foolish Shepherd; for lo I will raise up a Shepherd in the Land, which shall
not look for the thing that is lost, nor seek to tender the Lambs, nor heal
that that is hurt, nor feed that that stands up. O Idle Shepherds, that
leaves the Flock, his Arm shall be dried up, and his right eye shall be
utterly darkened; whether such can be said to pity the sheep, that flees? or
rather may they not be said to be no Shepherds, but hirelings, according to
Christ's words, But an Hireling, and he which is not the Shepherd, neither the
sheep his own, flees; the Hireling flees, because he is an Hireling, and
cares not for the sheep, Zach. 11. 15, 16, 17. John 10. 12, 13.

2. Whether a true Shepherd abides not with the flock when the Visitation of
the Lord is amongst them? And if any of the sheep be sick, and they are sent
for, they visit them not? According to the Apostle James's words, Is any sick
among you, let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray for
him, and anoint him with oil in the Name of the Lord. And whether this was not
the practice of Christ and his Apostles, when on earth they cast out many
Devils, and anointed many with oil, and healed them? Christ went about doing
of good, and healing all that was sick. Whether are not Gospel Ministers to be
like Christ and the Apostles? Or, whether are such Shepherds that sees, like
unto Aaron? for he took the Censer, and put fire therein, and went quickly into
the Congrega^ion, and made an Atonement for them; for there was wrath gone
from the Lord, the Plague was begun, he stood betwixt the living and the dead,
and the Plague was stayed. This is the advice of the Apostle Paul to the Elders
of the Church of God, That they take heed to themselves, and unto all the Flock
whereof the Holy Ghost had made them overseers, to feed them, and that so
lalabouring, they ought to support the weak. Mind these Scriptures, James 14.
15. Mark. 6. 13. Matthew. 8. 16. Numb. 16. 45, 47, 48. Acts 20. 28, 35.

3. Whether Christ's Shepherds hearken not to his Voice? And whether this is not
the Voice of Christ, that the Shepherd should abide with the Flock, especially
when the Lords Visitation is among them? And whether that Complaint may not be
made of such as leave their Flocks in this Gospel Age, as was of them under the
Law, and that in these words, The weak have ye not strengthened; the sick have
ye not healed, neither have you bound up the broken? And whether the sick has
not more need than the whole, of the Physician? According to Christ's words, The
whole need not the Physician, but they that are sick: Go ye, and learn what
this means, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice, Ezekiel. 34. 4 Matthew. 9. 12, 13.

4. Whether those Shepherds who flee from their sheep when the Lords hand is
amongst them, are not destroyers, more than helpers of the Flock, and so not
like Christ, the Apostles and Prophets? And whether they are not such as they
have prophesied of, who leave their sheep, that rule with cruelty and rigor,
that thrust with their side, and with their shoulders, and push all the weak
with their horns, till they have scattered them? Whether the Saints are not to
be aware of such, according to Christ's words, Beware of false Prophets, which
come to you in sheeps Clothing, but inwardly they are ravening Wolves. And as
the Apostle says, I know this, that after my departure, grievous Wolves shall
enter in among you, Ezekiel. 34. 4, 21. Matthew. 7. 15, 16. Acts 20. 29.

V. Whether such Shepherds may not be said to be more Lovers of themselves,
then of God, having but a show of Godliness, but denying the power thereof? And
whether they may not be such as receive the Wages of Unrighteousness, and
follows the ways of Balaam? And whether the Apostles Words were not verified
of such, that the desire of money, is the root of all evil, which which while
some have lusted after, they erred from the faith, and pierce themselves
through with many forrows, 2 Timothy 3. 4, 5. 2 Pet. 2. 13, 15. Jude 11. Tit. 1.
11. 1 Timothy 6. 10.

VI. Whether such as fly from their sheep, come in at the door into the
sheepfold, or do not clime up some other way? And whether the sheep of Christ
will hear the voice of such? Or, whether they will not fly from such, not
knowing their Voice? And whether the voice of Christ, and the voice of such
Shepherds, are not contrary the one to the other, John 10.

VII. Whether such Shepherds as leave their Flock, Christ will not say, to such
in that day, Go ye cursed; for when I was sick, ye visited me not? And whether
that woe as God has pronounced in Ezekiel. 34. will not fall on such as leave
their Flock? and whether the Lord will not require the sheep at the hands of
such Shepherds? Mind Ezekiel. 34. Matthew. 25. 41, 43.

VIII. Whether that Observation by the Shepherd^ to the sheep, were true, upon
the late Commet or Blazing Star, in saying, That it signifies Mercy, and not
Judgment; Good and not Evil? and whether the said Shepherd had learned that of
God, to quote for the Truth of what he said, The Star that appeared to the wise
men of the East, which directed them to Christ? and if so, why then did this
shepherd flee from his sheep, when the Lords Visitation was on them? and
whether that Shepherd had any sufficient warrant to leave his Flock, from the
Apostles words, 1 T^^^. 5. 8. and whether the Flock of Christ, and the
shepherd; be not all one Family? If so, then whether that shepherd as flees
from his Flock, is not worse than an Infidel, and denies the Faith, as the
Apostle has said? Or whether that was rightly observed by the shepherd to the
Flock, If thou art persecuted in one City, fly to another? whether it is a
true Shepherds practice? Or, whether a true Shepherd counts God his Enemy? Or,
whether Christ in the foresaid Chapter, speaks of God, or the Enemies of his
Church?

To you, O Shepherds, that did fly, I this do say,
Repent, and turn to God without delay;
For if you do not, sure I am,
Of Gods just Judgment you shall taste ere long.
FINIS.

