The Last ADVICE OF Mr. BEN. ALEXANDER (late Minister of West-Markham, in the
County of Nottingham) To His CHILDREN. In Two Parts.

The Contents follow.

Prove. 24.21. My Son, fear thou the Lord, and the King: and Meddle not with
them that are given to change. London, Printed for Nath. Ekins, at the Gun in
S. Paul's Churchyard. 1659.

The CONTENTS OF This BOOK.
In the first Part.
A Preface to Page 3. A Catechisticall Dialogue. to p. 13. A Godly Form of
Prayer to p. 26.
In the second Part. General and Particular Advice.
1 In Religion, from p. 29. to p. 43. 2 Opinion, to p. 48. 3 Morality to p. 60.
4 Government to p. 65. 5 Study. to p. 72. 6 Marriage. to p. 75.
The ADVICE OF Mr. Benjamin Alexander To his CHILDREN.
IT was great joy which S. John (3. Epistle of John v. 4.) had, when he heard
that Gaius and his Children did walk in the truth; and, if it be a part of the
glory of Heaven, to know what is done on earth, my glory should be exceeding
glorious to know that you my Children did so: But whether I know it or know it
not, if ye do so, ye are certain of the crown of glory. This which I have left
you, concerns you, first, as you stand to God, secondly, to men, thirdly, to
your selves: the Lord bless you, and these, and allother helps of piety to you,
that you may be glorious through holiness here, and in holiness hereafter.

Your loving Father Ben. Alexander.
August 2. 1658.
The first part.
Sarah. I pray thee, Brother, let us sit under yonder green tree.


Ben. I will, sister, for it is pleasant weather. But why will thou go to day?


S. Because I am now at leisure, and would speak to thee in private.


B. Let us go.


S. Pray tell me one thing, Brother?


B. Doubt not Sister, I will if I can.


S. I have seen my Father often times on his knees in the hall, and sometimes in
the parlour, what does he mean by that?


B. My Father goes then to prayers.


S. To pray, what is that?


B. It is a duty.


S. Is there a duty due to any but my Father and Mother?


B. Yea, Sister, that there is.


S. To whom?


B. To God.


S. What is he?


B. A Spirit.


S. A Spirit, what is that?


B. A spirit is an intelligent substance without body or bodily qualities.


S. What is God then?


B. God is a Spirit, most holy, most wise, eternal and infinite, in whom we
live, move, and have our being.


S. How many Gods are there?


B. But one in essence, but three in persons (viz.) Father, Son, and holy Ghost.


S. How shall I come to know him?


B. Three ways.


S. Which are they?


B. By his works about us, his word unto us, his workings in us.


S. What is his word?


B. That which we call Scripture.


S. How came that to us?


B. God breathed it into men, who spoke as they were inspired by the Spirit of
the Holy Ghost.


S. What men were they?


B. Enoch, Moses, the Prophets, Evangelists, Apostles, etc.


S. What are his works?


B. The Creation of the world, and all the things therein; as Sun, Moon, Cloud,
Earth, Sea, and his Powerful, and wise Providence, in upholding, and ordering
all things, till the end come.


S. What are his Workings?


B. Light, Love, Fear, and all affections, acts of Conscience, Faith, and all
Graces.


S. But, why does my Father Pray?


B. That God would forgive our sins, and give all things necessary for life and
godliness.


S. What is sin?


B. Sin is the transgression of the Law.


S. And, have I any sin?


B. Yea, Sister, and I also: for we were born in sin, and are thereby enemies
to God, and all goodness, and subject to sicknesses, crosses, and losses in
this life; yea, we must die also; and, without the special Grace of God, are
cast away for ever and ever.


S. Thou tellest me a strange thing: how comes this to pass?


B. By Adams sin, in whose loins we were, and so are liable to these
punishments.


S. What did Adam do?


B. He disobeyed the Commands of God, in eating the fruit, which he had
forbidden.


S. How is that proved, good Brother?


B. See Romans 5.12. By one man sin entered into the World, and death by him, and
so death passed over all men, for that all have sinned.


S. Is there any more Scripture for it?


B. Yea, Sister.


S. Which are they?


B. Read Psalm. 1.51.5. I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my Mother
conceive, and Epes. 2.3. we are by nature the children of wrath, even as others.


S. Alas, Brother, what case are we then in?


B. In the state of damnation, and God may cast us into hell.


S. Hell, what is that?


B. The place of torments, by fire and brimstone, where is weeping, wailing,
and gnashing of teeth.


S. These are torments, the Lord deliver us from them; is there a way to escape
them?


B. Yea, Sister.


S. How?


B. By the Son of God.


S. Who is he, that I may know him?


B. Jesus Christ, of whom you read in the Bible.


S. Is it he, of whom I read in my Psalter, that was conceived by the Holy
Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified,
dead and buried, rose again the third day, and shall come in the end of the
world, to Judge the quick and the dead?


B. Yea, Sister, the very same.


S. What is he, that I may see him?


B. He is in heaven, thou can not see him yet.


S. How then shall I know him?


B. By mixing faith with thy reading of the Gospel.


S. What is Faith?


B. Faith is the gift of God, by which he gives a mind to believe in Jesus
Christ, and a full persuasion settled, that what he did, suffered in life or
death, as it was sufficient, so it was efficacious for my salvation.


S. And, is there nothing but this Faith required?


B. Faith alone does save us, but, this Faith never goes alone, but, it
works by love.


S. Which is the Rule of love?


B. The ten Commandments.


S. What is the sum of the Commandments?


B. Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and thy neighbor as
thy self.


S. Faith then is a perfect jewel: how shall I find it?


B. The Word begets it, Sacraments confirm it, Prayer increases it.


S. And, will this bring me to Heaven?


B. Yea, if you persevere to the end.


S. But, you told me, I must die, how then can I go to Life?


B. Death is the door to Life.


S. Does my soul die?


B. No, that goes to God that gave it.


S. Then my body only stays in the grave.


B. Yea.


S. How shall that rise?


B. According to the Scripture, by the Power of God.


S. When?


B. In the Resurrection of the last day, when they which have done good, shall
go into everlasting life; but hypocrites, and unbelievers to eternal fire.


S. Will you help me to Pray?


B. Yea, Sister.


S. I thank you Brother, how then must I pray?


The Prayer.
O Most glorious and gracious Lord God, the great Creator of Heaven and earth,
and the wise Disposer of all things, which thou have made for thine own glory,
and for the good and welfare of all thy servants; we the most unworthiest of
all thy servants, do desire to prostrate our selves before thy divine Majesty,
under an humble acknowledgement of thy goodness, thy grace, thy truth, and
faithfulness; thy many mercies renewed and continued every day to us, and our
great unworthiness of the least of any of them. We are not worthy of the
crumbs that fall from thy Table; not only because we were born in sin, but
because we have lived in sin, and have daily added to our sins, by the vanity
of our thoughts, words, and actions, and the unsutablenesse of the whole man to
all thy commands: we are ignorant of them, yea we have dug to our selves
Cisterns that will hold no water, we have doubted of thy promises, and
distrusted therein thy Covenants, broken thy Laws, polluted thy Ordinances,
profaned thy Sabbaths, abused thy mercies, slighted thy judgments, sinned
against the light of our own Consciences, against Grace received, against the
motions of thy holy Spirit, against Heaven, and in thy sight, and we are not
worthy to be called thy Children; and therefore most justly may thou pour
down thy displeasure upon us, and empty the vials of thy wrath upon us and
ours, making our lives bitter unto us, by diseases and manifold crosses, and
deny us the fruition of thy self, in glory hereafter: and yet thou art just in
all thy ways, and holy in all thy works; for this we abhor our selves, and
condemn our selves, (oh let us escap^ the condemnation of thee our God): O
enter not into judgment with us, for, in thy sight, shall no flesh living be
justified; our only Hope is on the Merits of Jesus Christ, thy beloved Son our
Savior, of whom thou spakest from thy Excellent Glory, this is my beloved Son,
in whom I am well pleased; in him, O Lord, be well pleased with us, and sign
thy good pleasure unto us, by a full, and free Pardon of all our sins; Lord,
it is a great Request we beg of thee, and more then such sinners as we are, can
hope for, to receive from thee, but, it was a great Price which was paid for
us; not by corruptible things, as silver, and gold, but, the most Precious
blood of thine own Son; we tender up to thee Lord Jesus Christ, upon the Altar
of a believing soul; O receive him for us, thou laid'st upon him the
iniquities of us all; that we through his stripes, might be healed; magnify
thy mercies toward us sinners, and thy Grace, by passing by our
transgressions; and, Lord, Seal up thy Pardon, by giving thy holy Spirit unto
us, in more enlarged fulness, and let him comfort us, and bear witness to
our spirits, that we are thine, and thou art ours, that being delivered from
the bondage of sin, we may cry out Abba Father.

O let thy Spirit bring gracious answers to our souls desires, plead the
cause of our souls; shed abroad the love of thy self in our hearts, leading
us into all necessary truths: guiding us by Grace here, that we may come o^
Glory hereafter; And, as we desire Pardon of sins, so we pray thee subdue our
sins, mortify those corruptions that dwell in us, and often times do tyrannize
over us, and bring us to subjection to the Law of sin, making us most wretched
creatures; O let it pity thee, to see Satan rule over us, who takes us
captive according to his will: bruise his power, limit his malice, shorten his
chain, divide his Kingdom, hasten his final doom and condemnation; O let no
Lord Rule over us, but thy self, for thou art our only God, and we will
worship thee; And good Father, lead us not into temptation, deliver us from the
evil thereof, strengthen us against them, sanctify us under them, and let us
find the sufficiency of thy Grace under them, to make us conquerors through
Jesus Christ; O make sin loathsome to us, help us to look upon sin, as thou
do look upon it, to Judge it and condemn it, give us a sight of it, in thy
favor, a sorrow for it, and a resolution against it; and hold us up by the
Power of thy Spirit, through Faith to Salvation; Help us to derive our Joy
from Heaven, and our comforts from above the clouds, and to lay up our
treasure above the sun, where the moth, and the thief cannot eat thorough and
steal; Make good thy Covenant to us, in giving us a new heart, and renewing
our spirit in us, let the Scepter of Christ sway over the whole man: our
understandings, wills, affections, bringing all to obedience of the Law of
Christ; Remember thy whole Church, what promises thou have for Jews and
Gentiles, in thy good time make out to them, bring in the outcast of Israel,
and all from the highways, that so thy house may be full; O let the Nations
be thine inheritance, and the utmost parts of the Earth be thy possession;
Remember, and bless these Nations wherein we live; O Lord keep up England from
falling from thee, let it not languish, nor decay in Godliness: and let not
the wantonness under the means of Grace in it, procure the want of Grace in
it; thou have divided us, bring us together again; O Pardon the sins of our
Nation, and help us, to keep our selves free from the pollution thereof; thou
art a God of order, O settle order in thy Church, and unity among thy Saints;
let such as do err out of ignorance, learn knowledge, and such as have sinned
against knowledge, find Repentance; endue the Magistrates with the knowledge
of thy Spirit of Grace and wisdom, as well as with Power, that we may live a
peaceable and quiet life under them, in all godliness and honesty.

O let thy Ministers be clothed with holiness, write it on their breast, let
them shine by holiness of life, as well as by Doctrine, and Crown all their
Labors with a Garland of souls.

And remove not, O Father, thy Candlestick from us, for our unworthiness of
it, and our unthankfullnesse for it, but Pardon our unprofitablenesse under it,
and teach us to profit more and more. And, O Lord, comfort all the children of
affliction, speak peace to the wounded and troubled spirit, bind up the
broken hearted, power in wine and oil into their maladies, that the bones
which thou have broken, may rejoice; convert our enemies, and make our ways so
to please thee, that our very enemies may be at peace with us; bless our
Relations in consanguinity, affinity, and Christian friendship, that as there
is a communion of Saints, so we maystudy to edify one another, in love and
piety, by words and works.

And good Father, set us higher than our crosses, and temporal afflictions in
this life, help us to cast our care upon thee, who has promised to care for
us, and thou that regardest sparrowes, tellest us, we are of far greater value
then many sparrowes.

Now Lord, we bless thy good name for all thy Mercies and blessings, for
deliverance from dangers seen, and unseen; for continuance in prosperity, for
food and raiment, for life, health, peace, plenty and prosperity; for family
blessings, and personal favors; we bless thee that we are born in the pale
of thy Church, where there is the dew of Heaven, and fatness of the Earth the
means of Grace plentifully vouchsafed unto us; O help us to walk worthy of
these thy goings out to us, and teach us the right use of all thy providence.

Accompany us, holy Father, with thy Gracious presence, order us from day to
day, be not far from us, but guide us by thy spirit, till thou shall translate
us to thy Glory, all which we crave from thee, not for any worthiness that is
in us, but only for thy Son our Saviors sake, to whom, with thy self and
Spirit, be given all Glory, and thanksgiving, now, and for ever, Amen.

The second Part. Containing GENERAL And PARTICULAR ADVICE, Touching Religion,
Opinion, Morality, Government, Study, Marriage.


The second Part. Containing GENERAL And PARTICULAR ADVICE, Touching Religion,
Opinion, Morality, Government, Duty, Marriage.

RELIGION.
1. QUestion not the least way, whether there be a God, or not, neither be
curious concerning him: Non nunquam de D^vera loqui periculum est, and* And God
is rather known (...) what he is not, then what he (...)

2. Quarrel not in the least manner with the Mysteries of Religion, as the
Tr^nitie, the Generation of th^^ Son, the Profession of the Holy Ghost, but
bring (...) humble mind with thee and go not without the guide of Faith, and
freque^^ Prayer.

3. Thou art by Professi^^ a Christian, therefore sit dow^ and cast with thy
self, tha^ thou art to Love Things thou See not, Believe Things thou Know
not, Apprehend Things thou Reachest not.


4. Though the Spirit of God works a full persuasion in the heart, concerning
the things of God, yet outward Arguments are necessary; for, that which gave
Thomas the Apostle an assurance of the Truth of Christ, was his sensery, Reach
hither thy finger, John 2.27.

5. Let your Prayers be frequent, and among your premeditated Petitions,
remember to Pray, that God would not lead thee into Temptation, for in these
last days, the shorter Satan's reign, the sharper is his rage,

6. Oppose not any Truth, and be not like the Sea Pie that cannot rise, except
it be by rising against the wind.

7. In matters of doubt, mingle Charity with your Judgment, and temper your
zeal with discretion.

8. Where there are many Sects of Religion, take great heed what thou do,
for nothing is so hard, and chargeable to keep, as a good Conscience.

9. Remember this speech of one, that said, a good Religion may be made of the
Papists Charity, the Puritans Words, and the Protestants Faith.

10. Read the Bible often, and with Reverence; in doubtful matters Consult the
Church, in the purest Ages thereof, which is the Pillar and ground of Truth,
and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against thee.

11. Let your judgment be content, rather to wade where you find footeing,
then to swim in sense of Scripture; in the one you shall know your grounds, in
the other you will foot in uncertainties, or have but a sandy foundation.

12. Despise not Profession of Holiness, but take heed how you trust it, the
Coat of Christ is more worn, then the practice of him.

Keep thy Conscience free and clear, and let thy Conversation show it, that if
dirt be cast at thee, it may not stick upon thy Reputation.

14. Have a care of your Carriage in the World, for no action will please,
which comes from one, whose Person and Profession is distasted.

15. If thy Teacher be wicked, look well to thy self; for the Teachers error
is the Peoples trial.

16. Preaching does lift up Christ more highly then Reading, like spice bruised
or pounded; so is the Word of more sweet savor, when it is Preached.

17. Milk in the breast of the Mother, is far better then Milk in the
sucking-bottle; so Sermons, with lively actions, are far more edifying then
the same Repeated.

18. Prayer is a most prevailing Duty, use it continually by your selves, but
Sollemnly twice a day.

19. Take heed of pride, and let the joints of your conversation be oyled with
Humility.

20. One bended knee will bend many hearts; but pride is an unwining quality,
making thee to be scorned of thy betters, hated by thy equals, feared by thy
inferiors, and beloved of no body,

21. Avoid sin, as to thy self, and consent not to it in others, for it is all
one to hold the sack, and to fill it.

22 In all your losses, crosses, and sicknesses, set Gods Glory before thine
eyes, without much contemplation of thy particular condition; our Savior gave
the gifts of Miracles to his Apostles, to cure others, yet could not, or did
not cure their own weakness; as St. Paul, Timothy, 1 Timothy 5.28. nor his own, 2
Cor. 1.8.

23. Let not dangers or difficulties cause thee to neglect Religion, all
weather is fair to a willing mind.

24. Curious questions in Schoole-Divinity do whet the wit, and sharpen the
brain, but dulls Faith, and proves an Enemy to soule-edification.

25. Ascube not to thine own endeavors, for Divine providence does act more
vigorously, then humane prudence.

26. Let not the errors of thy Teachers cause thee to imitate their vices; they
have Treasure in earthen vessels, 2 Cor. 4.7. and he that will prove a pitcher
of clay to be a pot of gold, takes great pains to small purpose.

27. Be not much wedded to your own opinion, but consult with men of knowledge
and Religion, and then be firm and fixed, like the Axle-tree, though the
wheels often time run forward or backward.

28. You may serve, or bear office under them, that have ascended to the
Throne by bloodshed; for there were some in Nero's house, Phil. 4.22. and in
Herod's also, Acts 13.1. and other instances in Scripture.

29. Duells are an invention of the Devil, and against Piety and Religion, if
thou overcomest, thou loosest, and gainest a stinge of Conscience, scarce to be
pulled out again.

30. As a man that lies uneasy, is subject to turning and tossing, so, a man
unconstant in his Principles, is soon moved to change.

31. In times of change, men account of the Institution of the Church, as old
Coin, not much better then counters; but slight not thou wholesome Doctrine,
because of the General blemish it lies under.

32. Reverence Antiquity, but conclude it not infallible; yet, take her word
sooner then any particular learning, Doctrine being much cleared by experience.

33. If God bless thy basket, be charitable, though man be unthankful; for
God will have some to be so, the better to reserve requital to himself.

34. Mark this, when the Common Wealth fades, the Church flourishes not, one
side of the face will not smile, when the other frowns.

35. It Is a vanity to use Pomps at Burialls, Mourners like Crows devour the
Living, under pretense of Honoring a dead carcass.

36. That man deserves to be forgotten, that has nothing to Register his name,
but a gravestone.

37. Use not Religion as birds do their shells, which, while they are hatching,
do preserve them; but, when they are hatched, are broken, and cast away.

38. Be not given to Acts of Cruelty; for bloody hands have rowing feet.

39. How little soever thou have, get it honestly; no good useing of any thing,
will make amends for the ill getting of it.

40. Thou art born in the Pale of the Church, and so art a visible Christian;
but, content not thy self with that; many knew Nathaniel to be an Israelite,
but, none but Christ could say, Behold, an Israelite, in whom there is no guile.

41. Have frequent thoughts of thy death, for life is but like a little bird,
that flies in at one window of the house, and goes out at another.

42. Be eminent in nothing but Religion, Godliness has the Promise of this
life, and that which is to come; 1 Timothy 4.8.

43. While the men of the World hunt after greatness, do thou study goodness,
it was great Honor that Paul gives Ephenetus, that he was the first man that
embraced the Faith in Acham, Romans 16.5.

44. In Adam we lost three things, Gods 1. Image. 2. Favor. 3. Fellowship.


Assure thy self of Christ, he is the Image of the Father, that has purchased
favor for thee, and fellowship with thee.

45. I fear that Popery will spread again in these Nations, try if your
Principles be sound in the Faith, profound in Judgment.

In order to this last Advice, observe these that follow.

OPINIONS.
1. TAke heed of entertaining a new Opinion in point of Religion, for, if the
passions of the mind be strong, they will easily sophisticate the
understanding, and make it apt to believe upon slender warrant, and imagine
infallible truth, where scarce any probable show appears.

2. The Socinian Religion is to a Trial, subtle and light; ^e Roman is too
earthy and worldly; embrace, and ^old fast the Reformed Re^igion, as the
soundest and sa^est way to Salvation.

3. The Religion of the Church of Rome, especially of the Jesuits, is
imperious, and if they cannot bend others ^o it, they will burn them; but, ^f
thou can warrant thy call, ^ather die, then deny the Truth.

4. The Millinaries have something like truth in them, nor were they condemned
by any Council, for three hundred years after Christ.

One Mr. Archer has a book of that Opinion, buy it, if the Lord bless thee,
an^ observe it well.

5. The Scismatick in Gene^rall, and the Anabaptist in particular, is very
fiery, and wi^^ not be contented, unless (...) has such a Sanctity here o^
Earth, which God never trusted yet out of Heaven (...) etc.

6. The Ranters of Englan^ are the same with the famil^^ of love, formally, or
rather o^ the family of lust.

7. The Lutherans, about the Sacrament of the Suppe^ do err; yet follow thou
Luthers Motto, In quo aliqui^ Christi video, illium dilig^^.

8. Run not eagerly afte^ new Lights, nor endeavor t^ put them out; for, he
tha^ will not quench the smoking of flax, may possibly accept of candles,
though made of rushes.

9. Be not hasty to oppose one of a different opinion from thee; for new
opinions rather gain reputation, then loose it by opposition.

10. When pretenses of Religion are imperious, men carry breasts of steel
against others of their own Profession.

11. Schism, like a flood let out, is only of force, at the first opening to
drive on designs of Innovation; loosing it self afterward, either out of
weariness, or doubt of consequence.

12. If thou have attained to any perfection in any thing, take heed you
blemish it not by any absurdity; for his name that burnt the Temple of Diana,
outlasted his that built it.

MORALITY.
1. TAke heed of wanton nesse, in word or deed for, the snuff of lust, goes
out with the stink of loathing.

2. Strive not for the upperhand with the Pharisees, least thou loose the right
hand of, friendship among Christians.

3. The Cordial woundings of a faithful friend, will keep thee from the
wounding cordialls of a flattering foe.

4. Grieve not for what thou can not help, for what is past cure, should be
past care.

5. If God sends abundance into thy basket, deny thy self; for necessity will
teach thee more, then overmuch enjoyed prosperity.

6. Go to the houses of Great men, for, men in Power esteem better of such, to
whom they have done courtesies, then of those they have received greater from,
they looking upon this as a shame, the other as an Honor.

7. Let nothing unjustifiable, dangerous, or, to be construed in an ill sense,
come under your hand, for, some time it may rise up in judgment against you,
when things spoken are forgotten, Litera scripta manet.

8. Speak disgracefully of no body at Public Meetings, lest a friend, or a
kinsman be present, and hear thee; therefore look upon all free discourse, as
dangerous in mixed companies.

9. Tell not to others your vices and infirmities, least you make them
censorious of your Actions, and judges of your condition.

10. Reveal not the pranks of other men to every body, least thou sell thy
friend, and give him an argument of distrust of your fidelity, and secrecy in
other things.

11. Let your wit serve you rather as a buckler to defend you from others, then
a sword to wound them; for a word cuts deeper then a sharp weapon; and a blow
proceeds from the hand, but a disgraceful speech from the heart.

12. Regard not vain talk, they are light leaves that do wagg with every
wind.

13. When thou art innocent, be not afraid of the high language of an insulting
foe; the Sun looks then biggest on the earth, when it is ready to set.

14. Put not your sickle into another man's corn, least you cut your fingers.

15. Burden not your self with useless notions, no body will carry about
with him that key, that will unlock no Treasure.

16. Search for the truth in a matter, before thou speak, and then be bold,
for truth may be blamed, but never shamed.

17. If thou be a Tennant to any man, consider who was before you, for, that
man will get little with his forke, that succeedes him, that went before him
with a rake.

18. When you write a Letter, so write it, as if the Person to whom you write
it, were present with you.

19. Have a care that you use no words, or phrases, which may be thought to be
learned in unlearned company.

20. Give Advice, when you are desired, and continue it no longer, then you see
it is acceptable.

21. Be not accounted an intelligencer, least you come under the odious notion
of a spy.

22. Grant a courtesy when asked, at the first, for expedition doubleth the
worth of it. Bis dat qui cito dat.

23. Mend not the Copy of your Master, nor contradict his Commands, least you
be thought to value your conceit above his, and so be accounted proud.

24. Write not the faults of Great Persons in a Letter, least it be
intercepted, and you sent out of the World before your time.

25. Wear your clothes neat, but suitable to your fortune, least on the one
hand you be accounted a soven, or on the other, proud, and vain glorious.

26. Live frugally at present, that thou may grapple with what may come
hereafter.

27. Have a care you meddle not with women's quarrels, for women's braules, are
men's thralls.

28. Let not thy judgment be corrupted by a gift, a bribe may not be taken, a
boon may.

29. In expenses, spare, when you may, that you may spend when you should.

30. If anger do boil in your heart, let it not run over in your mouth, open
scandal does more hurt then concealed vice.

31. Do not too much enjoy prosperity, for Manna was despised for variety.

32. Be mindful of received courtesies, and, write not good turns in sand, and
ill turns in brass.

33. Reverence your Mother, and, if need be relieve her; love your brothers and
sisters, remembering that ye are of a piece, and differ from one another in name
only.

34. Take heed you lay not the aspersion of a witch upon any one, for, we are
strangers to the secret Malignities of Nature, and madd men in their
melancholy ecstasies, have had as prodigious confessions, and gestures as they.

35. At a conference be silent a while, to speak last is a great advantage,
for, thereby shall you hear the matter debated, and the strength, or weakness
of others Arguments, to guide your speech.

36. Despise none for the meannesse of their birth, or poverty of breeding, for
true virtue maylodge in a poor Cottage.

37. Be neither pleased nor grieved at reports, the good is enlarged, and the
bad quenched, by nothing sooner then neglect.

38. Judge of nothing by the voice of fame, nor desire it much, for it carries
a trumpet, which, for the most part, gathers more enemies then friends.

39. Provoke not a coward too far, least he turn valiant to thy overthrow.

40. Take heed what company you keep, for example prevails more then precepts.

41. When you speak to any, look them full in the face, other gestures do
bewray want of breeding, confidence, or honesty, and dejected, eyes, argue,
guilt or folly.

42. Ride not hastily thorough a Town, men do think that either the horse, or
your brains are none of your own.

43. Keep a good horse, it is very useful for you, and much may be done that
way, to oblige a friend.

44. If it may be, never buy, but with ready money: and not commonly of your
friends and acquaintance; for they will take it ill, if you will not be cheated
some times, to humor them.

45. When guilty of a fault, seek not to excuse it by niceties, a fine thread
will soon be broke in the spinning.

Concerning GOVERNORS.
1. A wicked man, and a bad Instrument, is to be obeyed, Christ and his
Apostles did so.

2. In bad times it is better to be passive, then active; our blessed Savior was
never heard to inveigh against the present Power, though it made the head of
John Baptist to be cut off.

3. Own the Power, but not the faults of Magistrates, and comply not with
them, that under Pretense of Law, would defraud Naboth of his Vineyard.

4. Forfeit not the trust which is imposed upon you, in neither Peace nor War,
there is none but will befriend virtue, though it be found in Arms against him.

5. Submit to that Government, which Providence has placed over you, for
Conscience sake, though of mean beginnings, and necessary deformities in
obtaining the Sovereignty; David from a small rise, was made a King, and
Treason it was not to obey him.

6. Stand not upon your innocence with those that are able to bring the
greatest into a fault, it is no dishonor to submit to thieves, if fallen into
their hands.

7. To whom your Person must be subject, let your tongue be silent; a fools
tongue will sometimes or other cut his head off.

8. If you can enjoy your Conscience, and the designs of Gods Glory, question
not the Authority of those under whom you do it.

9. Consider all States and Kingdoms had their foundation laid in the dirt; be
not therefore misled in Point of civil obedience, least you make your guide
your stumbling block.

11. If Religion, in the Profession thereof, be blemished, and Law lie dead, a
golden tongue in a prudent head, will have great influence in a Commonwealth.

11. Meddle not with the Powers of a Land, for, he that draws his sword
against his Prince, must throw away his scabbard.

12. What is required by men in Authority, though it be not thanks worthy to
grant, yet it is dangerous to deny.

13. Censure not, nor talk at random of State Matters, there may be a moath
under the Carpet of Council Tables, or a flea may leap into the bed chamber of
Princes, and these are less then the birds which Solomon spoke of, Eccles.
10.20.

Concerning. STUDY.
1. IN the first place, study t^ know God, and call t^ mind that advice of
Davi^ to his Son Solomon, 1 Chro. 28^ 9. And, thou my Son, know tho the God of
thy Father, and serv^^ him with a perfect and willin^ mind; if thou seek
him, (...) will be found of thee, if the forsakest him, he will cast the off
for ever.

2. Latin is more necessary for you, then your own Mother tongue, being an
universal Language, and much Learning is conveyed in it, apply your self to
the study of it.

3. Good and true writing is part of Grammar, and a blessing which God gave to
one of the Tribes of Israel, (viz,) Zebulon, Judge. 5.14. Practice it daily, a
competent substance is got by it, and it is very useful in a Commonwealth.

4. Arithmatick is a very liberal Science, Nature, Reason, and Art, freely
contributing to it; of this, I may say, what Solomon speaks Prove. 22.29.
See thou a man diligent in his business, he shall stand before Kings, he
shall not stand before mean men.

5. Have some inspection in Physic, that will add to your welcome where ever
you come:

6. But, do not imagine the diseases you read of, are in herent in your self,
for, that will argue melancholy.

7. As for books, si non habes, quos leges, lege quos habes, few books well
studied, nurish the understanding more, then many hundred, which are but
gargled in the mouth, as many do.

8. Read as much as you can, but, withal consider, that the more you gather
out of books, the poorer you proclaim your Natural parts.

9. Spend no time in difficult trifles and niceties, which, like tough meat
ask more pains to chew, then they do yield profitable nourishment.

10. If you make use of Poetry, let it be rather your recreation, then your
business; for, men of sound Judgment look upon it rather as fancy, than
solid persuasion.

11. Content your self with ordinary Invention, for, constant exercise in any
Art, will teach you to attain excellent habits.

12. Make not Music your study, for, besides the unprofitablenesse of it, it
renders a man suspected of Levity.

13. If thou attainest to any proficiency in parts, be humble; no greater
ornament to Learning, than humility.

14. Leave your bed, when first sleep has left you, it is very ill for your eyes
to read lying, and worse for the mind, to be a cage of unclean thoughts.

15. Eat not so long as you are able, meats in England, which do most
inveagle the stomach, are stewd up at last in great houses.

16. Drink not while you are hot, unless your drink be not, rather chew
liquorish, or take tobacco.

17. Let not the Irreligiousnesse of any place, cause thee to forget thy duty
toward God; remember, God heard the Prayer of Daniel in Babylon, as well as
David in ^^on.

18. Disputation is for the Schools, and shun thou all Disputes concerning
Religion, it is commonly unprofitable, and sometimes dangerous.

19. But, if it be unavoiddable, make queries, rather then Arguments, for, a
young Student must rather learn, then teach.

20. Be not curious concerning things that are future, least you render your
present condition uncomfortable.

21. Provide not room in your breast for the passion of fears, by a tedious
expectation of what may come; ill fortune, it is as unconstant as good, and a
wet day may be as short, as a fair day is pleasant.

22. Make not your self stupid, by poring upon despair, nor wanton under
contemplation of hope.

MARRIAGE.
1. BE neither a Misogamist, nor a Misogunist, love is a winning quality, but
lust is a deadly sin.

2. Pray for the gift of continency, and if God do give it thee, account it a
most precious Jewel.

3. Marriage is Honorable in all, but, not all kind of Marriage; it is lawful
for any to marry, but, not to marry with any, they that marry, must marry in
the Lord, 1 Cor. 7.39.

4. Boast not of the favoures women bestow of you, least you be accounted light.

5. Fly the embraces of women, and remember Joseph, least you loose your
liberty, strength, and Religion, and turn that to you, which is theirs (viz.)
to have your will subject to them, Genesis 3.16.

6. Dote not upon beauty, it is the fruit of that Tree, which first of all
destroyed man, and made him subject to slavery; suffering her to command, who,
in right reason, ought to obey.

7. Marry not for beauty, (...), unendowed handsomness, ^st you bury your
judge^ent in sensual affection.

FINIS.

