AN ALARM TO AWAKE Church-Sleepers.

Describing the Causes, discovering the Dangers, prescribing Remedies for this
Drowsy Disease.

Publisped, perused, and amended for the benefit of all those that are either
infected herewith, or in danger so to be.

MATH. 26.40. What, could ye not watch with me one hour?

LONDON: Printed for Matthew Symmons in Goldsmiths Alley in Red-crosse-street.
1644.

To the careful and conscionable hearer of Gods Word, comfort in the
meditation of these Scriptures.
BLessed is the man that hears me, Prove. 8.34
watching daily at my gates watching at the posts of my doors,

The ear that hears the reproof of life abides among the wise. Prove. 16.31


To him will I look that is poor, Esa. 66.2.
and of a contrite heart, and trembles at my Word.

Blessed are your eyes, Matthew. 13.16.
for they see; and your ears for they hear.

Unto you that hear, Mar. 4.24.
shall more be given.

Verily, (...). ^.24.
verily, I say unto you, He that hears my Word, and believes on him that
sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is
passed from death to life.

He that is of God, Joh. 8.47
hears Gods Word.

My sheep hear my voice, Jo. 10.27.
and I know them, and they follow me.

Faith comes by hearing, To. 10.17
and hearing by the Word of God.

Receive with meekness the engrafted Word, Iam. 1.21
which is able to save your souls.

Who so looks into the perfect law of liberty, Iam. 1.25.
and continues therein, he being not a for getfull hearer, but a doer of the
work, this man shall be blessed in his deed.

As newborn Babes desire the sincere milk of the Word, 1 Pet. 2.2.
that ye may grow thereby.

Behold, I stand at the door, Rev. 3.20.
and knock. If any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to
him, and sup with him, and he with me.

To the drowsy sluggard, watchfulness, upon the perusal of these Scriptures.
But my people would not hearken unto my voice: Psalm 81.11
and Israel would none of me.

So I gave them up unto their own hearts lust, 12.
and they walked in there own counsels.

Because I have called, Pro 1 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.
and ye have refused, etc.

I also will laugh at your calamity, etc.

How long will thou sleep, Prove. 6.9.
O sluggard? when will thou arise out of thy sleep?

This is a rebellious people, Isa. 30.9.
lying children, children that will not hear the Law of the Lord.

What meanest thou, Jonah 1.6.
O sleeper.

This peoples heart is waxed gross, Mat. 13 15
and their ears are dull of hearing, etc.

He that rejects me, Ioh. 12.48
and receives not my words, has one that judges him; the word that I have
spoken, the same shall judge him in the last day.

And there sat in a window a certain young man, named Eutychus, Act. 10.9.
being fallen into a deep sleep, and as Paul was long preaching, he sunk
down with sleep, and fell down from the third loft, and was taken up dead.

Awake thou that sleep, Ephesians. 5.14.
and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light.

To the careless hearer, hearing ears.
Keep thy foot when thou go to the house of God, Eccl. 5.1.
and be more ready to hear, then to give the sacrifice of fools.

Watch and pray, Mat. 26.41
that ye enter not into temptation.

Take heed, what you hear. Mar. 4 24.


Not the hearers of the Law, Romans 2.13
are just before God, but the doers of the Law shall be justified.

To day if you will hear his voice harden not your hearts. Heb. 3.7.


Be ye doers of the word, Jam. 1.22.
and not hearers only, deceiving your own souls.

A Table of the several Chapters of this Treatise, and matters contained
therein.
The Contents of the 1. Chap.
Sleep properly taken, what it is, page 1. Whence it comes. 2. the Author
thereof, ibid. How needful it is, 3 4. Ordinary when lawful, 5. when
unlawful, 6. Extrordinary occasions through means, natural, 7.
supernatural, 8. Sleep figuratively taken, in respect of the godly, 9, 10. in
respect of the ungodly, and that as well for sin, (considered both in
general, 11. (where diverse resemblances are set down, between sleep and
sin, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.) and in particular, 19.) as the effects
of sin, 20. in respect of the godly and ungodly jointly considered, 21.
wherein the death of the godly and ungodly agree, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26.
wherein they differ, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. Sleep how taken in this Treatise, 32.

The Contents of the 2. Chapter.
Eight Reasons showing and proving the utility and necessity of this Treatise,
33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42.

The Contents of the 3. Chap.
The causes of Church-sleeping, from Satan, who brings the same to pass six
several ways, 43, 44, 45. from our selves, through floathfulnesse, 46
carelessness 47. intemperancie, ibid. and 48. hatred of the Preacher, 49.
dis-esteeme of the Word read or preached, 49, 50 Disobedience unto the
admonitions and reproves of the Word, 51. shamelessness, ibid.
inconsiderateness, 52. want of Gods fear, 53. custom and willingness, 54.
From others, both Preachers, in sundry particulars, 55. and people, both
through commission, 56, and omission 57.

The Contents of the 4. Chap.
Arguments against Church-sleeping, from God, in five particulars, 59, 60, 61,
62. from the Word in respect of its dignity diversely evidenced, 63, 64, 65, 66.
necessity 67. utility, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72. from the Preacher in five
particulars, 73 from the Congregation in two particulars, ibid. and 74. from
the place of meeting in four particulars, ibid. and 75. from the end of
coming, 76. from the time in fix particulars, 77. from Satan in four
particulars, 78, 79 80. from our selves in nine particulars, ibid. and 81, 82,
83, 84. from sleep, ibid from sleepers in ten particulars, 85, 86, 87.

The Contents of the 5. Chap.
Objections for Church-sleeping answered, being taken from the sin it self,
as that it is no great sin, 88, 89, 90. it is ordinary and usual, 91, 92. it is
not hurtful to others, 93. it is not so bad as some others committed at Church
by them that are awake, ibid. it is not done of set purpose, 94. it is there but
a napping, 95. from the persons committing it, such as are accustomed hereunto,
95 are old and weak, 96. watch on the other days of the week, and labor
hardly, 97, 98. rose that day very early, 99. have far to Church, sit far from
the Pulpit, etc. 100. think they may get up at another time, or at home, what
they then lose, 101, 102. of the precifest sort, 103. from the Preacher,
alleged to be no Scholar, 104 105, 106. to live scandalously, 107. to have
done his Neighbor wrong, ibid. to continue long in his Sermons, 108. from the
matter delivered, alleged to be not worth the hearing, 109, 110. the same
before insisted upon, 111, 112. invective, 113, 114. frequently of hell and
damnation, 115, 116. erroneous and heretical, 117. that wherewith his hearers
are already acquainted, 118 unprofitable and not tending to edification, 119.
from the persons reproving it, such as have little to do, 120. such as are
herein most faulty, ibid.

The Contents of the 6. Chap.
To avoid Church-sleeping, we must, before we come to Church, take notice of
gods goodness in affording his Word, 122. consider for what cause, and to what
end we go to Church, ibid. observe our natural constitution, 123. labor for
a true hatred and detestation of this sin, 124. hunger after the Word, 125.
(where we have the means prescribed whereby to attain hereunto, 126) resolve
to attend unto the Word, and make conscience thereof, 127. use the creatures
sparingly, 128. consider whither we are a going, etc. 129. pray for the
Preacher, our selves, and the Word, ibid. An objection answered, 130. When we
come to Church, we must, in general, take heed to our affections, 131. get our
eyes anointed with eye salve, and our ears opened, ibid. be possessed with
Gods fear, 132, 133. be persuaded of the benefit we may get by the Word read
or preached, 134. call to mind that there will be store of witnesses to rise
up against us, if we shall thus sin, 135. In particular, in hearing we must
use attention, 136. intention, 137. retention, 138. devotion, ibid. subjection,
ibid. discretion, 139. means to perform those in five particulars, 139, 140,
141. After we are come from Church, we must use examination, 142. meditation,
143. repetition. ibid. conference, 144. practice, ibid.

The Contents of the 7. Chap.
The application of the foregoing discourse for reprehension, and that both of
Preacher in two particulars, 145. and people in seven particulars, 146, 147,
148, 149, 150, 151, 152. for exhortation unto Preachers, 153, 154. unto people,
155, 156, 157, 158, 159, 160.

Errata.
FOr ceased, read cease, page 10. l. 7. f. either, eithers, 20.25. f.
appointed, applied, 46.6. add evidenced, 63.9. put out it, 84.24. for good r
burt, 98.5. f. their, there, 103.28. add so, 110.13. f. wistest, wiltst,
115.18. f. 6, read 5.141.27. f. cut, call, 152.14.

THE DROVSIE DISEASE. Or, An Alarm to awake Church-sleepers.
CHAP. I. The several kinds of sleep: and what-kinde is here treated of.
Sleep (as it is referred to man) is used in Scripture, The several kinds of
sleep.
either properly, or figuratively.

Properly, The proper acception thereof.
for that natural rest which God has appointed for the continuing and
moistening of natural heat; the refreshing of the wearied spirits; the
quickening and strengthening of the weak members, and the preservation of
wearied Nature.

It is occasioned by vapors and fumes rising from the stomach to the head,
Whence it comes.
where through coldness of the brain they become congealed, and so stop the
conduits and ways of the senses, that they become unable to execute their
office, and may seem for a time to be tied and bound up, which is therefore
not without cause termed of some: Arist. de some. and vig.
The bond of the senses.

Hereof the Lord is the Author (even the Father of lights, The Author thereof.
Iam. 1.17. (...), Homer. Mat. 5.45.
from whom every good gift, and every perfect gift comes down) who (as he
makes his Sun to rise on the evil, and on the good, and sends rain on
the just, and on the unjust) equally communicated this blessing to good and
bad, yet is it not more common then necessary, for, It helps and perfecteth
digestion, How needful it is.
recovereth strength, refreshes the body, reviveth the mind, pacifieth anger,
drives away sorrow, and brings the whole man to good state and temperature,
according to that of the Poet; Thou rest of things, Somne, quies rerum,
placidissime Somne Deorum, etc. Ovid. metant. lib. 11. Translated by Mr. G.
Sandys.
most meek of all the Gods:
O sleep, the peace of minds, from whose abods
Care ever flies: restoring the decay
Of toyle-tir'd limbs to labour-burdening day.


Yea, as without this man could not consist, (for There is no creature that can
always last, Quod care^ alterna requie durabile non est, Ovid, Epist. 4.

Which wholly of his sleep is dispossessed.)
So for the fruition thereof, he has in a manner no less time allotted unto
him, then for the works of his calling (for this craveth the night, Psalm.
104.23
as those the day) yea as it is used, or rather abused, Pars humanae melior
vitae, Senec.
it is the better part of man's life, during the continuance whereof (which is
at the least the one half of man's life) there is no difference between
masters and servants, kings and beggars; Dimidio vitae nihil differunt foelices
ab infoelicibus. Eras. Chil.
Craesus and Codrus. as well those as these entertaining the same; or rather
with a kind of willing unwillingnesse, nill they, will they, subjecting
themselves hereunto. Hereof another Poet speaking to, and of sleep.

Thou charm to all our cares, Tuque o domitor, somne malorum, requies animi,
etc. Senec. Her. fur. act. 4. translated by Master G. Sandys.
that art
Of human life the better part:
Winged issue of a peaceful mother,
Of rigid death, the elder brother:
Father of things, the life of port:
The days repose, and nights consort.
To Kings and vassals equal free,
The labour-tir'd refresht by thee.
Who man (whom death does terrify)
Inur'st continually to die.
This is either ordinary, The kinds of sleep properly taken. Sleep, when
lawful.
or extraordinary.

Ordinary, lawful, or unlawful.

Lawful, when

1. Seasonable, as in the night, implied in that of the Psalmist. Man goes
forth to his work, Psalm. 104 23 1 Thessalonians. 5.7.
and to his labor until the evening. And, in that of the Apostle, They that
sleep, sleep, in the night. So in the time of weakness, sickness, and such
other bodily infirmities, whether it be by day, or night.

2. Moderate: Not so short, as that thereupon our health is endangered, or so
long, as that thereby we are hindered from the duties of our Calling.

3. Sanctified by prayer, without which no creature of God is to be received. 1 Timothy 4.4, 5.


4. Occasioned by the works of our Calling. Eccles. 5.12.


5. Our souls are awake in the meditation of heavenly things; Isa. 26.9. Genesis
28.12. Cant. 5.2.
as it was with Jacob, and the Spouse in the Canticles, if that may be
understood of bodily rest.

6. We are thereby the more fitted for the works of our calling. When
unlawful.


Unlawful, when.

1. Unseasonable, as at prayer, and the preaching of the Word, Col. 4.2. Iam.
1.19.
for we are to watch in the one, and be swift to hear the other.

2. Jmmoderate, as the sluggards in the Proverbs; Prove. 6.10.
Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep.

3. No blessing of God is craved thereupon, which is too too usual with most.

4. Following upon the Commission of sin, as theirs, of whom Solomon, They
sleep not, except they have done mischief, and their sleep is taken away,
unless they cause some to fall.

5. Our souls during the continuance thereof satiate themselves with the
seeming pleasures of sin, whereof our usual dreams may sufficiently inform
us.

6. We become thereby the more strengthened to continue in sin, and to commit
the same.

Extraordinary, Natural means occasioning extraordinary sleep.
occasioned either through natural, or through supernatural means.

Natural, through

1. Care, and grief, Disciples. Luke 22.45.


2. Weariness, Sisera's. Judge. 4.21.


3. Long watching, Eutychus. Act. 20.9.


4. Intemperance, Noah's. Genesis 9.24.


5. Labor, according to that of the Preacher; Eccles. 5.12.
The sleep of a laboring man is sweet, whether he eat little or much.

6. Heat, as was that of Ishbosheth. 2 Samuel 4.5.


7. Artificial Potions made of Poppy, Lettuce, etc. which is brought to pass,
sometimes for a good end, as when means are used to bring sick, weak, and
aged persons into a sleep; Sometimes for a bad, as when Dalilah made Sampson
sleep, Judge. 16.19.
that she might betray him into the hands of his enemies.

Supernatural, as which comes immediately of God, and that sometimes on the
godly, as on Adam, Genesis 2.21. Genesis 15.12.
when Hevah was formed; and on Abraham when God confirmed his promise to him by
a vision; Sometimes on the ungodly, as on Saul, 1 Samuel 26.12
when David took his Spear, ad the cruise of water which stood at his bolster.

Figuratively, The acceptions of sleep
and that as well in respect of the godly, figuratively taken in respect of the
godly.
and the ungodly severally, as in respect of both jointly considered,

Severally, In respect of the godly.

1. For abundant prosperity, tranquillity, peace of conscience; quietness,
and rest of mind, void of carking care, and free from such distractions, as
during the state of Nature disquiet the whole man; I laid me down and slept,
said David. Psalm. 3.5.
And again, Psalm. 1 27.2.
He gives his beloved sleep. Agreeable herreunto is that of Ezekiel, Ezech.
34.2
They shall dwell safely in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods.

2. For a spiritual slumber, and drowsinesse in the mind and heart touching
heavenly things, occasioned through abundance of peace and pleasures, wherewith
a Christian may be at sometimes so overtaken, as that (though bodily awake)
with David he falls into the sleep of sin. 2 Samuel 11.4.
Such was the Spouses slumber. Cant. 5.2.
I sleep (says she) but my heart waketh. Such also the slumber, even of the
five wise virgins. Mat. 25.5.
When the Soul (either through carelessness, or by reason of some temptation)
ceased from good, then does it thus sleep. Hereof what one is there, which may
not justly complain? How often does man seem unto himself, wise, just,
humble, rich in grace? how often goes he on in his vanity glorying in the
multitude of his spiritual riches, and saying in the pride of his heart, Rev.
3.17.
I shall not be moved for ever, I am rich and increased with goods, and have
need of nothing? but when he shall awake, he will be ashamed of such fancies
and dreams. The ungodly for sin, considered in general.


In respect of the ungodly, and that as well for sin, as the effects of sin.

Sin, considered both in general, and in particular.

In General. As in that of the Apostle. Romans 13.11.
Now it is high time to awake out of sleep. And again; Ephesians. 5.14. 1 These. 5.6.
Awake thou that sleep. And again, let us not sleep as do others. Neither
is it without especial cause that sin is thus expressed, Resemblances
between sleep and sin.
there being indeed between sin and sleep, no small resemblance as may thus
appear.

1. Sleep is natural to the body: so is sin to the Soul. Naturally, Genesis
6.5.
every imagination of the thoughts of our hearts is only evil continually.
We leave the paths of uprightness to walk in the ways of darkness: Prove.
2.13.14. Isa. 5.18.
we rejoice to do evil, and delight in the frowardness of the wicked, we
draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as it were with a cart-rope.

2. Sleep steals upon man as it were by degrees, so in like manner does
sin. Suggestion produces delight. Delight, consent; Consent, act; Act, the
habit thereof.

3. sleep, fears no danger, be it never so near, never so great, as the
examples of Ishbosheth, 2 Samuel 4.6.
and Jonah witness; so sin drives into security. Jonah 1.5.
We have made a covenant with death (said some in the days of Esaias) and with
hell, Isa. 28.15.
are we at an agreement; when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it
shall not come unto us. Agreeable hereunto is that of the Lord by Amos, Amos
9.10.
All the sinners of my people shall die by the sword, which say the evil shall
not overtake, nor prevent us, of whom Zephaniah; Zeph. 1.12. Luke 17.27, 28.
They say in their heart: The Lord will not do good, neither will he do
evil. Of this sort were the old world, and Sodomites.

4. sleep, does for the most part retire himself from the company, society,
and fellowship of others, to some one corner or other, that so neither himself
may be perceived, nor his rest disturbed. Lycost. Theat. vitae humanae.
Such a one also neither affects light, nor noise, as Sibertus, who banished
dogs, and tradesmen from the place of his residence, lest thereby his sleep
should be broke, agreeable unto the Poets description of sleep in these words;
Near the Cimmerians, lurkes a cave, Est prope Cimmerios longo Spelunca
recessu, mons cavus, etc. Ovid. Met. 11. Translated by Master G. Sandys.
in sleep
And hollow hills; the mansion of dull sleep.
Not seen by Phoebus, when he mounts the skies
At height, nor stouping: glooming mists arise
From humide earth; which still a twilight make
No crested fowls shrill crowing here awake
The cheerful morn, no barking sentinel
Here guards, nor geese, who wakefull dogs excel.
Beasts tame, nor savge: no wind-shaken boughs,
Nor strife of jarring tongues, with noises rouse.
Secured ease, etc.


So sinners (if not past shame) do especially in secret commit their
villainies. Ezech. 8.10.
Genesis 4.8.
Cain gets his brother out into the fields, and then slays him. Josh 7.21.
Achan hides his stolen goods. Gehezi without the knowledge of his Master (as
he conceived) takes money and raiment of Naaman, 2 King. 5.24.
and they that are drunk (says the Apostle) are drunk in the night. 1 These.
5.7.
And lest they should not thus sleep long enough, and safe enough, they stop
the light of the Word, put out the light of their own consciences, and forbid
even those whose office it is to awake them out of sleep, to awake them till
they please. Ier. 44.16.
As for the word which thou have spoken to us in the name of the Lord, Amos
7.12, 13.
we will not hearken to thee, said the people unto Jeremiah, O thou Seer (said
Amaziah unto Amos) go flee thee away into the land of Judah, and there eat
bread, and prophecy there, but prophecy not again any more in Bethel, for it
is the kings Chapel, and it is the Kings Court. Yea, as a man being asleep,
does for the most part take it ill, when he is awaked; so a sinner when he is
called upon to forsake his sins; Prove. 6.10.
yet a little sleep (says he) a little slumber, a little folding of the hands
to sleep. The time is not come, Hag. 1.2.
the time that the Lords house should be built, said the people unto Haggai.
Have thou found me, 1 King. 21.20.
O mine enemy, said Ahab unto Elijah. If John the Baptist say unto Herod, Math.
14, 3.4.
It is not lawful for thee to have thy brother Philips wife; he will lay hold
on him, and put him in prison. If Paul reason of righteousness, temperance,
and judgment to come; Felix will tremble, and answer, Act. 24.25.
Go thy way for this time, when I have a convenient season, I will call for
thee. If Micaiah detect the forgery and falsehood of Zedekiah, Zedekiah will
smite him on the cheek, 1 King. 22.24.
saying, Which way went the Spirit of the Lord from me to speak unto thee?

5. Sleep, during its continuance, hinders and lets men, even from the
Performance of civil offices, as the Soldier from fighting, the Labourer from
working, the Carpenter and Mason from building, and the like; so cannot we by
reason of sin perform any thing which is acceptable to God (though the same
be in it self lawful and warrantable) till we be raised therefrom. Psalm.
50.16, 17.
What have thou to do (says God unto the wicked) to declare my statutes, or
that thou should take my Covenant in thy mouth? Seeing thou hate
instruction, and castest my words behind thee. Jsa. 1.11
To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me? (says the Lord,
unto his people) I am full of the burnt offering of rams, Jsa. 1.15.
etc. your hands are full of blood. Genesis 4.5.
As Cain could not offer up an acceptable sacrifice unto God, being asleep in
sin; so whilst it goes over our souls, binding up the faculties of the
same, and bringing an heaviness, or rather deadness into all the powers
thereof, we are altogether unfit to go about the actions of an holy life.
Hence comes it to pass, that the mind never thinks seriously of God: the
conscience never or seldom accuses for sins committed: the will never or
seldom wills that which is truly good: the affections seldom or never are
moved at Gods word or works, yea, so long as it bears sway over us, we can
neither pray aright, hear the Word aright, nor rightly perform any other
duty.

6. sleep we do often conceive our condition to be better, then indeed it
is. The poor man dreameth of riches, the sick of health, the imprisoned of
liberty, the hunger-starved of dainty fare, delighting themselves with a kind
of content, in the (imaginary) fruition of these things. So does a sinner
bless himself in his course. I am (says Babylon) and none else beside me:
Jsa. 47.8.
I shall not sit as a widow, neither shall I know the loss of children. Luke
12.19.
Soul (said the rich man in the Gospel, to his own soul) thou have much
goods laid up for many years, Luke 18.11.
take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry. God I thank thee (said the
vainglorious, selfe-conceited, hypocritical Pharisee) that J am not as other
men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this Publican. In
particular.


In Particular

1. For carelessness. Sloth and negligence whether in Pastors, Isa. 56.10.
or people. His watchmen are blind (says Esaias) they are all ignorant: they are
all dumb dogs, they cannot bark, sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber.
Hos. 7.6.
Their baker sleeps all the night, says Hosea. But while men slept (says
our Savior) his enemy came, Mat. 13.25.
and sowed tares among the wheat, and went his way. Prove. 6.9.
How long will thou sleep, O sluggard? (says the Wise man) when will thou
arise out of thy sleep?

2. whoredom or uncleanness. Come (said Lots eldest daughter unto her sister)
Let us make our father drink wine, Genesis 19.32.
and we will lie (or sleep) with him, that we may preserve seed of our father.

The effects of sin. The effects of sin.


1. Ephesians. 4.19.
On the Soul (even in this life) a spiritual lethargy or deadness of heart
by the custom of sin, when as the heart is made past feeling, and altogether
senseless, through continuance, therein. Whereof Isaiah, Isa. 29.10.
For the Lord has poured out upon you the spirit of deep sleep, and has
closed your eyes.

2. destruction, Psalm. 76.5. Psalm. 13.3.
whereof the Psalmist, The stout-hearted are spoiled, they have slept their
sleep. And again, lighten mine eyes, lest J sleep the sleep of death. Ier.
51.39.
So the Lord by Jeremiah, Jn their heat J will make their feasts, and I will
make them drunken, that they may rejoice, and sleep a perpetual sleep, and
not wake, says the Lord.

Jointly, The godly and ungodly jointly considered.
in respect both of the godly and ungodly, either death being by sleep
significantly expressed.

The godlies, 1 King. 2.10
as David slept with his fathers. Ioh. 11.11. Mat. 27.52.
Our friend Lazarus sleeps, and the graves were opened, and many bodies of
saints which slept arose. The ungodlies, 1 King. 14 20 1 King. 15.8 1 King.
16.6.
as Jeroboam slept with his fathers. Abiam slept with his fathers. Baasha slept
with his fathers, etc.

Quest. But as David of Abner, 2 Samuel 3.33.
(died Abner as a fool dies?) Is there no difference between those, and
these, (the godly and the ungodly) in death?

Ans. In some respect there is no difference at all, Sol.
according to that of Solomon; Eccles. 2.16.
How dies the wise man? as the fool. But in others very great, according to
that of the same Author. Prove. 14.32.
The wicked is driven away in his wickedness, but the righteous has hope in
his death.

Their agreement consists in these particulars. Wherein that death of the
godly and wicked agree.


1. Our beds represent our graves: the sheets wherein we lie our
winding-sheets, wherein were shall be wrapped. The clothes that lie on us, the
clods of earth that shall be cast upon us, when we are laid in our graves,
yea as they that are asleep are for the time void of care, and insensible
either of joy or pain, neither being affected with the miseries of others to
mourn with them, nor with their prosperity to rejoice with them, but (having
their eyes bound up from seeing, their ears from hearing, as their other
senses from the execution of their several functions) are wholly ignorant of
things done about them, so is it with those that are dead. To this purpose Job,
Job 3.12, 13.
Why did the knees prevent me? or why the breasts that I should suck? for now
should I have lain still, and been quiet, I should have slept, then had I
been at rest. And Isaiah tells us, Isa. 63.16.
that now Abraham is ignorant of us, and Israel does not acknowledge us. Hence
it is, Job 7.2.
that as a servant earnestly desires the shadow, and as an hireling looks
for the reward of his work, so not a few do daily gape for death, that
thereby they may be freed from their troubles. It is now enough, O Lord, 1
King. 19.4
(said Elijah) take away my life, for I am no better then my fathers. Jonah 4.3.
Take J beseech thee my life from me (said Jonah) for it is better for me to
die, then to live. And in those days (says 8. John, Rev. 9.6.
namely when unto the locusts, that came out of the bottomless pit, power was
given to torment those men which have not the seal of God on their foreheads)
shall men seek death, and shall not find it, and shall desire to die, and
death shall fly from them. Agreeable hereunto is that of Philo; Anton. and
Max. ser. de somno. Aelian. lib. 2.
who being asked what sleep was, answered, The image of death, and rest of the
senses; and that of Gorgias, who being very aged, and seeling deadly sleep or
death to creep on him, unto a friend, who asked him how he did, answered,
Bras. lib. 6. cap. 8.
Sleep now begins to commend me unto his brother, and that of Epaminondas
who having slain one of the watch whom he found sleeping, thus justified his
fact, Such a one, as I found him (says he) I have left him. Eustat. ad Hom.
Ibid. Tertull. de anima, Chrysostom. ad pop. ant. homil. 5. Arist. lib. 19. de
animal.
To this purpose is it, that of some sleep and death are said to be brethren
or cousin-Germans, Sleep Deaths looking-glass, death a sleep longer then
usual, yea sleep a kind of middle thing between death and life.

2. Sleep as it is common to all men, and cannot be driven away or avoided of
any, how sparing soever, or well-spenders of time, Heb. 9.27. Romans 5.12. Psalm.
89.48.
so it is appointed unto him once to die. Death passes upon all men, and what
man is he that shall not see death?

3. Sleep, though usually it comes by degrees, as after labor, meat,
weariness, watching, and the like; yet does it often steal on men at
unawares; So death though usually, 1 King. 13.24.
and by course of nature it follows sickness as the forerunner thereof, yet
seazeth it often on men both good and bad on the very sudden. Act. 5.5.10.
So did in on the man of God that came unto Bethel, so on Ananias and Sapphira,
Luke 12.19.20.
Then said God unto the rich man; Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be
required of thee, when he had said unto his soul; Soul, thou have much goods
laid up for many years, take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry.

4. Sleep is proper to the body, not the soul, Cord vigilamus, etiam cum
corpore dormimus, Aug. de verb. dom. Ser. 22. Isa. 26.19.
(for even then are we to be awake in soul, when we sleep in body) so dies
man in respect of his body, not his soul. Though the body rests and dwells in
the dust of the earth, yet does not the soul so rest. The dust (that is the
body) returns to the earth, Eccles. 12.7.
as it was, and the spirit returns unto God, who gave it; Anima quieti
nunquam succedit. Tertul. de anima.
yea, if the soul do yea, if the soul do not now sleep, whilst it is in
the prison of the body, much less shall it, being freed therefrom. As the
souls of the godly are carried into heaven, Luk, 16, 22.
so are the souls of the ungodly into hell, eithers bodies in the mean time
remaining in their graves. Hist. Florent. lib. 7.
As Cofimo the Florentine to some Rebels that sent him word they slept not,
answered, that he believed the same, because their sleep was taken from them.
So may it be affirmed of men's souls, that as here they cannot sleep, so
hereafter they cannot die.

5. Sleep, though it be of longer continuance with some, then with others,
yet lasts it not always with any; even the sluggard being at the length
awaked, or awaking therefrom, so death must at the last restore her dead, how
long soeverthey have been under the power, and in the possession thereof, 1
Cor. 15.52.
For the trumpet shall sound (says the Apostle) and the dead shall be raised
incorruptible, and we shall be changed. Agreeable hereunto is the of S, John;
Rev. 20.13.
And the sea gave up the dead which were in it, and death and hell delivered up
the dead which were in them.

The difference between them in these. Wherein they differ.


1. Pharaohs Butler was restored, and his Baker hanged, according to Joseph's
interpretation of their dreams.) So both the ungodly and the godly die, yet
does not either death prove advantageous. Ioh. 5.28.
The hour is coming in the which all that are in the graves shall hear the
voice of the Son of man, and shall come forth, they that have done good unto
the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil unto the resurrection
of damnation, Says our Savior himself; All the ten virgins which slumbered
(as well the wise as the foolish) arose, Mat. 25.7.10.12.
but the wise only went in with the Bridegroom unto the marriage, the others
being excluded; Depart from me ye cu^sed, Mat. 25.34.41.
shall it be said unto the wicked on the day of judgment; but unto the godly,
Come ye blessed of my Father. 1 Cor. 15.56. (...). Chrysostom. ad Heb. (...),
A^^est.
Unto these death is not as death (as having the sting thereof removed, which
is sin) but as a sweet sleep, unto those it is otherwise: even of fearful
things the most fearful. Those lose, but these gain thereby, a palace for a
prison, rest for labor, liberty for bondage, God for men, the company of
Angels for the company of sinners, and finally, heaven for earth.

2. sleep proves unto many fatal, wherein they die, and from which they
never rise; so unto the ungodly the death of the body is a forerunner of that
second death, the death both of body and soul; under which they shall lie
world without end. But it is not so unto Gods children. Thereby is put an end
unto all their miseries, Rev. 14.13.
for they rest from their labors, neither do they hunger any more, or thirst
any more, and all tears are wiped from their eyes. Thereby are they freed from
all sorts of sins: Romans 6.7
(for he that is dead is freed from sin) thereby from the being of sin:
from the infection of sin: from the guilt of sin: from temptations unto
sin: from the authority, dominion, and rule of sin: from the imputation of
sin: from the reward or dangerous effect and consequents of sin, and that
wholly, fully, perpetually. Thereby from all sorts of crosses. Thereby from all
sorts of fears. Thereby from all sorts of cares; In a word, thereby freed from
all sorts of evil, past, present and to come. Psa. 57.1^
They lie down in sure and certain hope of resurrection to eternal life, I
Cor. 15.42 43, 44.
Their bodies are sown in corruption, but raised in incorruption, sown in
dishonor, but raised in glory; sown in weakness, but raised in power; sown
natural bodies, (as many go heavily to bed) but raised spiritual bodies,
when through the glorious beams of the Sun of righteousness shining on
them, they shall fully recollect both their spirits and strength, in all which
respects that of Solomon may be applied unto them, that Their day of death is
better, then the day wherein they were borne.

3. Job 7.14.
All the days of my appointed time will I wait (says Job) till my change
come; yea, Job 14.14.
with the Apostle desire to be dissolved, Phil. 1.23. Heb. 9.27.
and to be with Christ, But the ungodly whose consciences tell them that after
death comes judgment, Act. 24.25.
do with Foelix tremble at the very mentioning thereof: yet (how loath soever
to undergo it, what pains or charges soever they are at, when they feel it
or fear it approaching to remove it and put it off) do most of them even
willingly (as it were) through intemperancie, incontincencie, carking cares,
and such like courses bring it upon themselves.

4. sleep they that are in misery are fitted and enabled to undergo more
misery, and they that are in a good condition become capable of more
happiness, so through death are the ungodly, as it were, fitted for hell, the
godly for heaven; those for unconceivable misery, these for unspeakable
happiness.

Take we it in this Treatise in its proper signification, Sleep how taken in
this Treatise.
but for such a sleep as is altogether unlawful, howsoever ordinary and
common, for then to sleep, when we ought to be swist to hear, and then to
be drowsy, when it concerns us to be most vigilant (as at the preaching of
the word, and prayer) who will not judge the same unreasonable, and so neither
lawful nor warrantable.

Be this then, this unreasonable, unlawful, unwarrantable kind of sleep, or
rather sleeping evil (sleeping at Church) this inordinate, ordinary bodily
drowsiness, I say, whereby the Word read or preached becomes wholly
ineffectuall, and no blessing from God, but rather an undoubted curse can be
expected thereupon, the subject of this discourse.

CHAP. II. How convenient and necessary it is to handle this Argument.
NEither needs any to wonder that this should be meddled withal, Reasons
showing the utility, and necessary of this Treatise.
or conceive him to have little to do, unless to keep himself awake, which
busieth himself about such a sleepy subject. These with the like warrantable
reasons will (questionless) justify our proceeding.

1. this is by most no otherwise (if at all) meddled withal, then by a bare
cursory speaking against it, and that not of set purpose, but occasionally upon
the view of some one or other sleeping; yea, and that but in general terms,
which how fruitless and ineffectuall it proves to reclaim any therefrom
daily experience shows. As therefore for the subduing of other vices, Isa,
28.10.
there must be both Precept upon precept, and line upon line, so must there be
for the subduing of this.

2. there are so many which offend herein, and yet think, that either they
have not at all, or but a little offended. Those standing upon their
justification; These going about to excuse their practice. Such had need to be
wrought on, brought on, to see the greatness of this sin, Genesis 19.20.
and that (as Lot of Zoar) they may not conceit, that it is but a little one.
Before those must the evils hereof be laid open, Reasons dissuading from the
same be propounded, as in like manner, their several objections to the
contrary, plainly and solidly dissolved.

3. there are so many, which being customarily addicted hereunto (yet
exceedingly desirous and willing to leave the same) are notwithstanding wholly
ignorant how to effect it. Those must be made acquainted as well with the
Causes hereof, as Remedies how to be rid of the same.

4. there are but a few, which do truly take notice of the danger ensuing
hereby, or consider the wrongs occasioned through the same. The ignorant
therefore and careless are to be showed, that hereby they wrong the blessed
Trinity, hereby are stumbling blocks unto others, which through their evil
example in this kind prove no lest wicked then themselves. Hereby the Word
becomes ineffectuall, and the Ministers thereof discouraged: yea, that this
is one maine cause, why they do so long continue in their sins, to the
grief and hurt of their ownesoules.

5. Because this sin cannot be so well met withal by speaking against it, as
by writing, For if a Minister should in his Sermon, when an occasion is
presented unto him (as when is there not?) inveigh against the same, he might
happily through weakness or want of memory forget himself, neither be able
again without much ado to come to his matter, or rather be forced by new
objects of drowsinesse to renew his reproves, and continually to go on in
that argument; yea, though there were no fear of such destruction, yet in as
much as a Minister is not to nominate any of his auditors in particular.
Neither happily (if it were lawful for him to name them) knows he his
Auditors by name, though he should observe them to be asleep, his reproves
must be general, which (as in other things) who does not almost put from
himself, as if they did not at-all concern him, or the Minister therein had no
aim at him? Mat. 26.21.
Our Savior having informed his Disciples in general terms (not
particularizing the name of any) that one of them should betray him; Verse. 25.
Indas thereupon (who indeed was (the villain, the man aimed at) could say
notwithstanding, Is it I Master? so do too too many in the case we have in
hand.

6. Because there are no lawful means (who will judge this unlawful? Deuteronomy.
22.1, 2, 3.
) which Christians are not to use for the good one of another; Yea, if the Lord
require of us the manifestation of brotherly love, even in such things as
concern our neighbors (our enemies) eestate, Deuteronomy. 22.1, 2, 3.
much more does he it in such things as concern the welfare of their bodies,
and if of their bodies, much more of their souls. Now what can be more
advantageous unto their souls, then their careful and conscionable hearing of
the Word? and how can they thus hear it, if they sleep thereat? and sleep
they will, if means be not used to keep them awake. As therefore one of the
Persian kings Chamberlaines was every morning to come unto his Masters
bedside, and to awake him with these words; (...), Plut.
Arise O King, and be careful of the businesses, whereof Mesoromasdes willed
thee to take care; So may every Christian (must every Christian) carefully use
means whereby as well to withold themselves, as withdraw others from this
sleeping evil. May it be lawful in the words of Solomon to rowse up the
sluggard? Prove. 6.9.
How long will thou sleep O fluggard? when will thou arise out of thy sleep?
And will any judge this unlawful? yea, should we not thus endeavor our selves
according to our abilities to prevent, or to amend the same, we might as well be
truly reputed as justly punished for partaking with others in sin, which
(according to S. Paul's caveat) who is not bound carefully to avoid? 1 Timothy
5.22.


7. Because, Canon 18.
this is a breach of one of our Church-Constitutions, which requires, that
None, either man, woman, or child, of what calling soever shall be otherwise
busied (in time of Service or Sermon) then in quiet attendance to hear, mark
and understand that which is read, preached, or ministered; And that They shall
not disturb the Service or Sermon by walking and talking, or any other way.

8. Tabernacle, Exodus 35.22.
some brought bracelets, and earings, Verse 23.
and rings, and tablets, all jewels of gold, Verse 24:
and the Rulers brought Onix-stones, and stones to be set for the Ephod, and
for the breast plate; So others brought goats hair, and red skins of rams,
and badgers skins; neither of which were rejected, but the offerings of
either accepted (yea, and our Savior did more commend the poor widow, Luke
21.3.
for her two mites which she cast into the treasury, then the rich for their
liberal offerings, inasmuch as they out of their abundance cast into the
offerings of God, Verse 4.
but she of her penury cast in all the living she had.) So if toward the
increase of the kingdom of Christ, and building up one another in our most
holy faith, Some with the Captain of the Aramites meddled only with the king
of Israel, 1 King. 22, 32.
that is, great sins, as swearing, adultery, murder, and the like, (as some
worthily and profitably have done) or detect and confute heresies, resolve
cases of conscience; set forth large commentaries on the Scriptures, and handle
controversies (which are as gold, silver, and precious stones) and all to the
singular good of Gods people, why may not others bring their goats hair? I
mean, discover and oppose, even the pettiest offenses. As there must be meat
for men, (of which kind are the Fathers, Councels, Schoolmen, large
Commentaries' on the Scriptures, etc.) So must there milk for babes, of which
kind are Catechismes, plain Sermons, Prayer books, books of Meditations, and
such like short godly discourses, whereof questionless no small benefit daily
arises, as their often impressions clearly witness. Nay, even the greatest
scholars, and most learned men have not thought their time II bestowed in
writing on such low discourses (as Solomon spoke of the hysope that springs
out of the wall) to the capacity of the meanest. 1 King. 4.33.


CHAP. III. Whence it is, that Churchsleeping is so ordinary, and usual.
THE causes hereof (not to mention Gods justice on the contemners of his Word,
who for the most part being come to Church are cast into such a deepesleepe,
that though they have both eyes and ears, yet (for the time) they are deprived
of the use of either, neither seeing with the one, nor hearing with the other,
of whom it may be said as of Saul and his troops, 1 Samuel 26.12.
a deep sleep of God as upon them that they do not awake;) The Causes I say
hereof may he reduced especially into these three;

The first arifing from Satan. The causes of Churchsleeping.


The second arising from our selves.

The third arising from others, both Preachers and people.

Sect. 1. Satan. From Satan.

As Dalilah made Sampson sleep on her lap to the loss as well of his liberty,
Judge. 16.19.
as life: so does Satan rock us asleep at Church, that he may lead us
captive at his pleasure, to the utter and everlasting ruin both of bodies, and
souls. Hereof took Machetes (of whom Cassianus makes mention) good notice,
Lorinus in Acta Apost. page 591.
for observing his fellow. Monks when he began to speak unto them of
heavenly things suddenly thereupon to fall asleep, but when of other matters,
to lend their attentive ears, he informed them that the same came of Satan;
yea, how many are there found, which if they had no mind nor inclination to
fleepe a day or two before, will notwithftanding sleep at Service and Sermon?
whence comes it to pass? assuredly from Satan who is ready and busy enough
to besprinkle their temples with his spiritual opium of evil motions and
suggestions, and having maliciously inclined them to drowsinesse, diligently
rocketh the cradle, that they may sleep the more soundly. Who brings to
pass.
This he brings diversely to pass, as

1. working with outward means occasioning sleep, such as heat, weakness,
grief, long watching, and the like.

2. keeping men and women in ignorance, or without the knowledge of the Word.

3. persuading, that the Preacher is not worth the hearing, and so that his
words are not to be regarded, or that in his Sermons he venteth his own
spleen and malice.

4. propounding, that though the Minister should preach never so well, and they
should give never so diligent heed thereunto, yet that it will be to no
purpose, they being unable to conceive any thing by him delivered, which for
the most part through his means in most proves too too true.

5. working a general dislike of the Word preached, in respect of its
opposition unto those things, which are with most, in most request.

6. drawing the attention, and intention another way.

Sect. 2. Our selves. From our selves in sundry particulars.

1. Through sloathfulnesse, according to that of Solomon, Pro. 19.15.
Slothfulness casts into a deep sleep, which may be no less appointed unto
this, then unto any other. He that is sloathfull cannot but sleep wheresoever
he is. Neither the fear of danger, nor hope of reward will keep him awake;
Languido sumus ingenio, and in somnum ituro. Senec. de Provid. cap. 5.
we are all naturally of a very dull and drowsy disposition, by reason of
that lumpish flesh of ours, that abides much even in the best, by means
whereof it comes to pass, that we do oftentimes sleep and slumber be we
never so careful and diligent, much more being sloathfull. As it is with
drowsy persons, if they sit still and do nothing, they will soon fall
asleep, so if we give our selves over to slothfulness, we shall soon be
overtaken with this dismal sleep.

2. Through carelessness, or want of attention, when the mind is not set on its
right object, the preaching and reading of the Word, but roveth on by-matters,
neither are the eyes fixed on the Preacher, but walk hither and thither, then
is it no wonder but that sleep by degrees creeps on. Therefore have we
caveats and warnings propounded. Rev. 2.7.
He that has ears to hear, let him hear. Take heed how ye hear. Mar.
4.24. Jam. 1.19.
Be swift to hear, and the like.

3. Through intemperancie; When the stomach is full, how can the eyes be but
heavy? Thereby the senses are so oppressed, that during the same they cannot
execute their office; and experience shows that we do oftener and more
readily sleep at Church in the afternoon, then in the forenoone. Yea, if this
shuts out the Spirit, (according to that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.18. 2 Pet.
2.5. Genesis 9.21. 2 Pet. 2.8.
and be not drunk with wine wherein is excess, but be filled with the Spirit)
made Noah (a Preacher of righteousness) discover his nakedness: occasioned
just Lot (who dwelling among the Sodomites, Genesis 19.33, 34, etc.
in seeing and bearing vexed his righteous soul from day to day with their
unlawful deeds) in beastly manner to abuse himself (by filthy incest) with
those that came out of his own loins, and through the same the day of
judgment shall take men at unawares (as is implied in that of our Savior;
Luke 21.34.
And take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged
with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so that day come
upon you unawares.) How can it but in like manner occasion this? Ecclus. 31.20
Sound sleep (says the son of Sirach) comes of moderate eating, but this
for the most part of immoderate.

4. Through hatred of the Preacher, when we cannot abide him, as Ahab could
not endure Micaiah, when we are so affected toward him, as the Jews toward
Paul and Steven, will we attentively hear what he delivers? Many indeed
(even thus affected) afford the Preacher their bodily presence, but like
images, having eyes, they see not, Psalm. 115.5.
having ears, they hear not; or if they afford them their eyes and ears it
is to a sinistrous end, even that they may have some ground or other from his
carriage, or from what he delivers to bring him into trouble and molestation.

5. Through disesteeme of the Word read or preached. Too too many think that
there is no more wisdom therein, then their Teachers show out of it, which in
their conceit being very small, or none at all, they neither watch thereat, nor
thereunto. As no man cares for grace, but he that knows its worth; so none
cares for the Word, but he that has it in high esteem for its unspeakeable
excellency. Those prize it above thousands of gold and silver, Psalm.
119.72.78.148. Psalm. 19.10.
and unto them (as unto David, who meditated therein day and night) it is
sweeter then the honey and the honey comb. They that have drunk of this water
of life, do more and more thirst after it, and (as Peter being informed how
necessary it was that our Savior should wash his feet, said unto him, Joh.
13.8, 9.
Lord, not my feet only, but also my hands and my head) rest not satisfied
with sipping or tasting hereof, 2 Samuel 23.15
but long as it were (as David to drink of the water of the well of Bethleem
which is by the gate) even to be drunk therewith. Where this desire is, there
is watchfulness, where it is wanting, drowsinesse.

6. Through disobedience unto the admonitions and reproves of the Word, when
being admonished of our drowsinesse, we notwithstanding do not amend, but
rather grow worse and worse, as the people in the days of Jeremy; Ier. 44.16.
As for the word which thou have spoken to us in the name of the Lord, we will
not hearken unto thee: When I say being again and again admonished, we
notwithstanding amend not, do we not as it were through our obstinacy, put
out the light that we may sleep the more securely?

7. Through shamelesnes. When we become so impudent, that though we be
detected, noted, pointed at, spoken of, spoken against, spoken to, as common
sleepers at Church, and so consequently contemners of the Word; yea, and
certainly informed, that thereby we make our selves as gazing stocks, or common
objects of laughter, yet having as it were an whores forehead, we are not
ashamed, but do the more go on in the same. Of us may it be said; Isa. 3 9.
The show of their countenance does witness against them, and they declare
their sin as Sodom, they hide it not; Yea, (as drowsy sluggards which love
to sleep) how loath are we, how unwilling to be awaked? how froward? how angry
when we are awaked.

8. Through inconsideratnesse, or want of consideration, as well of the
excellency of the Word, and necessity of hearing the same, as of our own
pronenesse unto drowsinesse: Satan's endeavors to lull us asleep, and our own
weakness to resist the same; Were we affected with those, we could not but
be more watchful.

9. Through the want of Gods fear. Genesis 20.11.
As Abraham unto Abimelech (enquiring of him, why he had said of Sarah, that
she was his sister) because I thought, surely the fear of God is not in this
place, and they will slay me for my wives sake. So may we of Churchsleepers,
that wanting Gods fear, they will make no conscience of sin. Yea, Psalm.
36.1, 2, 3, 4.
as David lays down the want of Gods fear to be the ground of the
ungodlies, ungodly both works, words, and thoughts, so may we nolesse
confidently affirm, that it is the ground of this wickedness, and as Solomon,
Prove. 1.7.
The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge, so we, Judge. 16.20.
The want of it, is the beginning of this particular folly. Sampson not being
afraid of the Philistims, slept to the destruction of his body, as too too many
being void of Gods fear sleep at Church, to the destruction both of soul
and body.

10. Through custom and willingness. For when being come to Church, and no
sooner set, but we set our selves to sleep (so with the dog returning to
our vomit) holding down our heads, and leaning them on our elbowes, as on
pillowes, pulling our hats over our eyes lest we should see (an unreverent
thing in Gods house) and stopping our ears as it were, lest the noise or voice
of the Preacher should awake us, or hinder us from our sleep, do not we
willingly bring the same upon us? and does not this willingness occasion the
same?

Sect. 3. Others.
Preachers. From Preachers.


1. When they do not at any time, or upon any occasion reprove this sin, or
dissuade their Auditors from the same.

2. When they take no pains in their ministry, neither study to any purpose,
for what they do deliver.

3. When they do either preach their own inventions, Ezekiel, 22.28.
men's traditions, or lies and errors in the name of the Lord.

4. When they do not suit and fit their doctrine to the capacity of their
hearers.

5. When they do not what in them lies to bring their people unto a love and
liking of the Word.

6. When they continue too long in their Sermons.

7. When they lead a scandalous life, walk inordinatly, and their conversation
is such as becomes not the Gospel of Christ, like unto those of whom the
Prophet makes mention. His watchmen are blind: Isa. 56.10.
they are all ignorant: they are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark, sleeping,
lying down, loving to slumber, yea they are greedy dogs which can never have
enough, and they are shepherds which cannot understand; they all look to
their own way, every one for gain from his quarter, etc. and of whom the
Apostle; All seek their own, Phil. 2.21.
not the things which are Jesus Christ's. Phil. 3.18.
And again, many walk of whom I have told you often, and now tell you even
weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ, Verse. 19.
whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly, and whose glory is in
their shame, who mind earthly things. 1 Samuel 2.17.
Through the sin of Eli his sons men abhorred the sacrifice of the Lord; So
by reason of the carriage of such Pastors, their ministry becomes odious and
loathsome, and not a few (even of the best) sleep thereat.

People, From people through Commission.
both by doing and leaving undone.

Doing, namely by giving themselves over hereunto, whereby they become
stumbling blocks unto others, inviting them as it were to follow their course,
and as readily to embrace sleep as themselves do.

Leaving undone; Omission.
namely to awake those, whom they shall observe to be asleep. Hereby do they
wrong both themselves and them that sleep; as who by letting them alone
communicate with them in their sin, and so shall be punished for their
sleeping, they themselves in the mean time being awake.

CHAP. IIII. Reasons dissuading from Church-sleeping, they are of diverse sorts,
and may be reduced into these eleven.
The 1. may be taken from God.

The 2. from The word of God.

The 3. from The Preacher.

The 4. from The Congregation.

The 5. Arguments against Churchsleeping from
from The place of meeting.

The 6. from The end of coming.

The 7. from The time.

The 8. from Satan.

The 9. from Our selves.

The 10. from Sleep.

The 11. from Sleepers at Church.

Sect. 1. God: The Father. Son. God.
Holy Ghost.

1. precept and command to attend, and give ear unto his Word; Hear
instruction, and be wise, Prove. 8.33. Eccles. 5.1.
and refuse it not. Keep thy foot when thou go to the house of God, and be
more ready to hear, Math. 11.15.
then to give the sacrifice of fools. He that has ears to hear, let him
hear, Iam. 1.19.
let every man be swift to hear.

2. promises which he has made unto them which are hearers indeed. Pro. 8.34.
Pro. 15.31. Ioh. 5.24.
Blessed is the man that hears me. The ear that hears the reproof of life
abides among the wise. He that hears my word, and believes on him that
sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is
passed. from death unto life. Ioh. 8.47.
He that is of God hears Gods word.

3. presence about us, and with us, the knowledge which he has of us, and
notice which he takes (though of us unperceived) whether we wake or sleep.
Prove. 5.21.
The ways of a man are before the eyes of the Lord (says the wise man) and he
pondereth all his paths; Yea, not his ways alone (those which are most
conspicuous) but the secret motions of the mind, and the inward intentions of
his heart, Heb. 4.13. (...).
they are all naked and opened) as the inwards of a beast that is cut up, and
quartered, as the original word signifies) unto the eyes of him, with whom we
have to do. And is God present in the Church so fearful and glorious a
majesty, of so sharp sight, and deep understanding, who dares sleep at
Church? Pro. 5.20.21
As hereby Solomon disswadeth from lewd and licentious courses, Job 34.23, 22
and hereby Elihu deterreth men from wicked practices, so by the same may we
be withdrawn from Church-sleeping.

4. it is God which speaks unto us in his Word. So thought the Thessalonians;
These. 2.13.
When ye received the word of God, which ye heard of us (says S. Paul) ye
received it not as the word of men, but (as it is in truth) the word of God,
which effectually works also in you that believe. Would a subject sleep in
the presence of his Prince, advising him for his good threatening him for some
evil committed by him: offering him preferment for the performance of this or
that noble enterprise, and the like? he would not. Care, fear, hope, joy,
would keep him awake. And will any sleep, whilst God offers, promises,
rewards, threateneth, instructs, and the like? 1 Samuel 3.9.^^
When Samuel was instructed by Eli, that it was the Lord which spoke to him,
sleep did then depart from his eyes; So should not we sleep, if we would but
persuade our selves of Gods presence.

5. power, Romans 15.4.
not only to bless his Word that it may be profitable unto us, 2 Timothy 3.16.
for comfort, for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, and for instruction
in righteousness (whereof out of his love toward us, and willingness to do
us good, he is most desirous, and without whose blessing, though Paul plant, 1
Cor. 3.6.
and Apollos water,) it brings not increase, but in justice, to inflict
grievous judgments on them which do not, or will not hear, judgments I say,
both corporal, as on Eutichus, and spiritual, Act. 20.9.
as on the contemners of wisdom, Prove. 1.24, 25, etc. And those obstinate
ones, of whom the Lord speaks to his Prophet; Isa. 6.10.
Make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their
eyes, lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand
with their heart, and convert, and be healed.

Sect. 2. The Word of God. The Word its

1. its dignity, Dignity evidenced by its
which is from the Author thereof: the Nature thereof: the Matter therein
contained, together with the Antiquity and perpetuity of the same, may be
clearly evidenced.

The Author thereof, Author.
God, which is therefore termed Gods ways: Psalm. 25.5. and 29.9. and 33.6.
Isa. 2.3. and 26.19. Luke 11.49. Heb. 4.12. Luke 1.70.
the speech of Gods glory: the breath of Gods mouth: Gods paths: the dew of the
Lord: the wisdom of God: the sword of the Spirit. As he spoke of old by the
mouth of his holy Prophets, which have been since the world began; So does he
now speak by his Ministers, whom as his Ambassadors, he has raised up in
their rooms.

The Nature thereof, The nature thereof.
both as it is in it self, and as it is unto us.

As it is in it self, As it is in it self. Psalm. 19.7. Psa. 1^9.160
it is perfect, eternal, immortal, most pure and precious. A most true,
right, certain, infallible, simple, faithful, absolute, sincere, unspotted,
and undeniable Word, always constant, one and the same for ever, wherein there
is no error, no falsehood; no defect, no imperfection.

As it is unto us. As it is unto us.
It is wine to comfort us; bread to feed us: drink to quench ourthirst: fire
to purge us: an hammer to beat upon our hardened hearts: a staff to uphold us:
a treasure to enrich us: a lant horn to direct us: a guide to conduct us: a
weapon to defend us: seed to beget us: meat for men: milk for babes. Yea, as
the Sun is to the world, so is it to us, the light of our lives, and the life
of our souls.

The Matter therein contained, The matter therein contained.
such as may give content unto all, the same so far exceeding all other
subjects, as the Creator (whose works and will it principally sets forth)
does the creatures. It reveals unto us the blessed Trinity. It makes known
unto us Christ, and him crucified. It points out unto us the virtue of his
death and resurrection. It sets forth the excellencies of a better life,
which for the present are wholly hid from the ungodly, and but in part revealed
unto the godly. Does any loath it for its plainness? It is milk for babes:
Eccles. 11.10
It is pleasant, affording unto each Christian heart more sweetness then is in
the honey, and the honey comb. It is upright, as being void of error. It is
a word of truth, pure wheat without chafe: pure gold without dross. It is a
word of wisdom, whereby alone we become wise. It is as a goad, whereby being
pricked, whilst we sleep in sin, we do thereupon awake. It is as a nail,
whereby indeed we are fastened and confirmed. Is any delighted with history,
Rener. Clivis Script.
prophecies, parables, laws, moral, judicial, and Ceremonial, Geographie,
Cosmographie, Astronomy, Arithmeticke, Logic, Rhetoric, Music, and what
soever else? Yea, who so longs after news, from heave above, from the earth
beneath from the waters which are under the earth; News of wars peace, plenty,
famine, and the like. Hereby may he in ea^^ receive satisfaction.

The Antiquity and perpe^^ tuitie thereof. The Antiquity and perpetuity
thereof.
As it yet continues, so has it done, eve^ from the very beginning, an^ even
the Word written is mo^ ancient, of greater antiquit^ then, all other writings
now e^tant in the world.

2. its necessity, which may appear by considering; Necessity, from
first the estate wherein we are. 2. The estate wherein we should be. 3. The
estate of such as are altogether deprived thereof.

The estate wherein naturally we are, The estate wherein we are,
dead in trespasses and sin; wanderers from God; ^reyes unto the devil,
poor and blind, unregenerate: pollu^ed with sin both in soul and ^ody:
stony-hearted; unfruit^ull and barren, guilty of death and damnation, etc. It
is not ^hen needful? a trumpet to awake us: a guide to conduct us: (...)
buckler to shield us: a treasure ^o enrich us: eye salve to anoint ^s: seed to
beget us: a fountain ^o wash us: rain, both to mol^ifie us, and make us
fruitful.

The estate wherein we should ^e, Alive unto God: The estate wherein we should
be,
the soul^iers and servants of Christ: ^emples of the holy Ghost: ^ruitfull in
good works, and the like; and hereunto do we attain through Gods word.

The estate of such as are altogether deprived thereof, The estate of such as
are without it.
wretched and miserable. No judgment greater then famine, no famine so
grievous, as this of the Word.

3. of its utilitie, which may ^appeare, Amos 8.12. Its utility appearing by
1. By the similitudes whereby it is expressed. 2. By the effects which are
thereby produced. 3. By the duties which are thereto of us required. 4. By the
meane^ which for the suppressing and hindering thereof have been at all times
by Satan and his instruments used.

The similitudes whereby it is expressed are diverse, Similitudes.
as Manna, bread, water, light, a rod of strength, wine, fire, silver, a
precious stone, a new garment, a banner, a sharp sword, a glass, a staff,
etc. This being no less (or rather much more) profitable for the soul then
those (and the like) for the body.

The effects which are thereby produced, effects.
are such as concern either this, or the life to come. This. It cleanses us.
It inlighteneth us. It regenerateth us. It changes us. It makes us fruitful.
It makes us wise to Salvation. It gladdeth our hearts with spiritual joy. It
^egetteth faith in us. We are hereby informed of the duties which we owe one
toward another. It tells the Magistrate ^ow he should rule, who else ^night
be either too severe, or ^oo mild. Eras. apophth. lib. 4.
mild. As Machetes appealed from Philip asleep (for whilst his cause was
pleading ^e was asleep) to Philip awake, so sends it them from their ungodly
government, un^^ that which is lawful. It tells ^udges, Act. 24.26.
that with Festus they ^ust not look for bribes. It ^ls Subjects, that with
Sheba, 2 Samuel 20.21
^ey must not be rebellious. It ^s husbands, Col. 3.19.
that they must love their wives, and not be bitter to them. It tells wives
that they must not be taunting Peninnaes, painted Jezabels, whorish Dalilaes,
scolding Zipporaes. It informs Ministers to be instant (in preaching the Word)
in season, 2 Timothy 4.2.
and out of season. It tells Lawyers, how and for whom they are to plead: 1
These. 4.6.
It directs the Merchan^ and tradesman, how to bu^ and sell, etc. Now if it
were not for the Word, would any of those perform their duties ^nay, Cic. de
fato.
by it (as Socrates from hi^ natural constitution by the study of Philosophy)
they an^ bettered both in their judgment and practice. Through (...) do the
covetous forsake the^ Mammon; the drunkard hi^ wine; the adulterer his lu^^
which (till it thus work) a^^ unto them no less preciou^ then their lives.
Would Her^ have heard John Baptist, an^ Eli his sons their Father, either
might have learned their duty; Rev. 16.15.
and escaped the judgments which befell them. By hearing this and watching
hereat we are blessed; Luke 16.29. Mat. 26.41.
hereby are saved from hell, and hereby avoid temptations. If hereat we be
informed of the malice of Gods enemies, shall we not hereupon profit the Church
by calling upon God, in the words of the Psalmist, Awake, Psalm. 44.23.
why sleep thou O Lord? arise, cast us not off for ever. And as when
Ahasuerus could not sleep, Ester 6.3.
he had his Chronicles brought unto him, and thereupon came to know what
Mordecay had done for him, so if we would awake at the reading and preaching
of the Word, we should hear what deliverance the Lord has wrought for our
poor souls. The life to come. Joh. 12.48.
The Word must judge us.

The Duties required of us. The duties required of us in respect of it. Prove.
3.3. Prove. 7.2. Col. 3.16: Iam. 1.19.21
To write it in the tables of our heart. To keep it as the apple of our eye.
To let it dwell in us plenteously. To be swift to hear. To have it ingrafted
in us, and receive it with meekness; Yea, not only to be hearers, but doers
thereof, prizing it above Rubies, and accounting it sweeter then the honey and
the honey comb, even as the words of eternal life. The opposition which by
Satan and his instruments has been made against the same from time to time.
Some have been brought to dislike it, others not to believe it, others to fall
from the hearing of it, others to deprave it, by mangling, mingling, perverting
and misapplying the same. Others to prohibit the reading and hearing thereof,
and diverse the like, which might particularly be instanced Every of which
implies the utilitie of the same.

Sect. 3. The Preacher. The Preacher.

1. discouraged.

2. disturbed.

3. contempt of him.

4. lose his pains, as if one should preach to a deaf man, or wash an
Ethiopian.

5. Gods steed, as his ambassador, 2 Cor. 5.20.
and who brings the glad tidings of salvation, Romans 10.15.
whom if we shall not hear, we hear not Christ himself, they being Wisdoms
his maidens.

Sect. 4. The Congregation. The Congregation.

1. best are hereby offended, and their attenti^n hindered.

2. ignorant either come not to Church, or if they come, slight the Word, as
not worth the hearing. Yea, as those which did eat in Idols temples, 1 Cor. 8.9.
occasioned others also there to eat by their example, and as the very sight
of those that yawne, is wont to set others on yawning; so the very sight of
others sleeping, may make a man sleepie, that were otherwise wakefull, much
more shall one slothful man infect another, and the rather, because we are
prone enough of our selves to take infection without help, our inbred and
inward corruption being as flax, easy enough by the least sparkle to be set
on fire.

Sect. 5. The place of meeting.
The place of meeting.
1. Bethel, Gods house As Jacob when he had the vision of the ladder, Genesis
28.17.
could say how dreadful is this place This is none other but the house of God;
and this is the gate of heaven. So (the Lord being here present in his own
ordinances) are we to conceive of this.

2. It is as Bethesda, Joh. 5.3.
and such other soule-diseased creatures may have comfort; and are not we
such? We think we see, but we are indeed blind; think we know, but do
not indeed understand.

3. storehouse of all needful commodities. Here are Gods stewards, his
almners, Jsa. 55.1.
his Physicians? lackest thou meat, drink, money, raiment, or whatsoever else?
here is for thee. Ho! every one that thirsts, come; and who so hungereth,
come, etc.

4. It is as Athens, news were to be heard; and Ephesus where shows were to
^e seen. What news? Isa. 9.6.
that unto us a child is borne; that he is the propitiation for our sins; 2
Cor. 5.18.
that God is reconciled unto us through Christ, etc. What shows? 1 Pet. 5.5.
God resisting the proud, but giving grace unto the humble. God breaking the
horns of the ungodly. Little David, vanquishing great Goliath, with store both
of Comedies and Tragedies.

Sect. 6. The end of coming.
The end of coming.
Not to gaze, laugh, chide, prate, neither yet to sleep, as once one who had
not slept well the night before, and in the morning hearing the bell toll to
Church, willed her maid to make ready, for she would go to Church to take a
nap, but to hear, Luke 21.38. and 22.46.
pray, and sing, and why then will thou sleep? Tho^ must rouse up thy self,
til^ which time thou must often hear, rise and pray, and hear and sing.

Sect. 7. The Time. The Time.

1. It is time now to awake. As when the Sun shines we are to make hay, Romans
13.11.
and we must strike whilst the iron is hot. The Pismire follows her business
in the Summer, Prove. 10.5.
and prepares meat for Winter.

2. It is Gods harvest; Now he that sleeps in harvest is a son that causes
shame.

They that sleep, sleep in the night, 1 These. 5.5.
and the night comes wherein no man can work.

4. The time is but short, could ye not watch with me one hour? Mat. 24.42.


5. We must give an account for the same; and at what hour we shall be
called to an account we know not. It is required of us to number our days,
Psalm. 90.12.
which assuredly whilst we sleep we cannot do.

6. No time but should be well spent; how much more this? Titus conceived that
he had lost that day, H^st of the Church.
wherein he had not done some good, and so do thou the profit which comes
of the Word, by sleeping thereat.

Sect. 8. Satan.
Satan.
1. Isa. ^.27.
and the flesh within (as Isreal's enemies) sleep not. Philip said, he might
safely sleep, Eras. apophth.
for Antipater was awake; but we contrarily, must awake, for the devil (an
Anti-pater indeed) is not asleep. 1 Pet. ^.8.
Be sober and watch (says the Apostle) for your adversary the devil, goes
about continually, like a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour. Shall men
watch (says the heathen man) to slay and destroy others, Vt jugulent homines,
etc. Horat. lib. 1. Epist. 2.
and wilt not thou watch to save thy self? So say I, shall Satan be more
vigilant to do us a shrewd turn, or a mischief, then we in watching to keep
our selves safe from his malice? Simile:
Those that would tame Dear, keep them from sleep, but the devil to make us
wild, sets us to sleep. As he watches continually to assault us, especially
when we are at Church, we must then especially awake to resist him.

2. Mar. 3.24.
As a kingdom divided cannot stand; So could he divide us from the Word, we
were undone.

3. a thief; The Scribes and Pharisees set a watch, Mat. 27.66.
lest Christ should be stolen, and so must we, lest being asleep all
goodness be taken from us: and as the Soldiers, of Christ, though untruly,
Mat. 28.13.15.
whilst we slept his disciples came and stole him away. We may say truly,
whilst we have slept, the devil came and deprived us of much good; Judge. 16.20.
yea, as whilst Sampson was asleep his strength was gone, which to his
unspeakable misery he quickly felt being awake, so through thy Church-sleeping
have thou not experimentally found decay of spiritual strength?

4. envious man, Math. 13.25.
who sows tares whilst we are asleep.

Sect. 9. Our selves.
Our selves.
1. Our Religion and honesty will be called into question; yea, hereupon shall
we be suspected (and that not without cause) that we did spend the night
before in riot, wantonness, or doing some other mischief.

2. Our profession. We are of the day, 1 These. 5.5.6.
and they that sleep, sleep in the night. In this regard, as unto Peter, Mar.
14.37.
Simon sleep thou? So may it be unto us. August.
It is unseemly that the Sun should at any time find us asleep, but much more
at Church.

3. The thankfulness which we owe unto God for our bodily rest. Eccles. 8.16:
Prove. 3.28. Job 7.4.14.
God gives us quiet rest and sleep (whereas others happily have it but seldom,
and therein are much terrified by dreams) and should we not then employ on
God the whole man, when we come to his house.

4. The uncertainty of our death. Mat. 24.42.
Watch therefore (says our Savior again and again) for you know not in what
hour your master will come. 1 Pet. 4.7.
So Peter, The end of all things is at hand, be sober therefore and watch unto
prayer. Though we be neither weak, nor sick, nor old, yet may death seize on
us, and our Sun may even set at noone. How many have risen well in the
morning that never went to bed again? Some have died whilst they were a
preaching the Word; Some in hearing the same; why may not others in sleeping
thereat? and that in justice, but who would willingly so die? Did thou think
that when thou set thy self to sleep at Church, thou should never sleep
more, thou should die upon the doing thereof, and be presently called to give
an account, and make answer to God for it, would thou so do? would thou
that thy master should find thee thus doing? Mat. 13:36.
thou would not. If thou lookst not to it, who can tell but that thou may
be taken away in this act of iniquity? oh that they were wise, Dent. 32:29.
that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end!

5. Our ignorance in points of Christianity, and of such things as tend unto
our souls salvation. 1 Cor. 14.20.
How few are there which are indeed men and women of knowledge, or rather are
not children in understanding? unto how many is not the Scripture, as a book
sealed up? Isa. 29.11.
who is able to tell the meaning almost of any place of Scripture? how many
take such things literally, which are to be understood figuratively, and such
things figuratively, which are literally to be taken? where is the fault? when
by the Word they might receive instruction, and wisdoms maidens are offering
them understanding, Prove. 9.4.
they are asleep.

6. We watch about our callings, Non principem solidam dormire noctem. Eras.
chil. Luc. 2.8.
and in respect of temporal businesses, Captains, Mariners, Soldiers,
Shepherds, etc. watch in their places, and servants must not sleep when their
Masters speak to them.

7. We would be angry, we speak, other would not hear us, or sleep
thereat.

8. We can wake, if a tale be told us. We sleep not, when we are informed of
our worldly businesses, we sleep not, if one tell us of some great estate
befallen us, or some great good procured for us, as pardon being rebels, riches
being poor, happiness being miserable, and the like; every of which the
Scripture reveals unto us.

9. Our care to do good. The wicked sleep not before they have done some
mischief, Prove. 4.16.
neither there should we before we have done some good, which we do not, Act.
16.14.
if with Lydia, we attend not on the things delivered.

Sect. 10. Sleep.
Sleep.
It is a Publican, Quantum ad debitum concinui profectus, nibit ita deperit de
vita nostra, qudmquod somno deputatur. Bernard.
A Culler, or rather devourer of time, it neither does any part of time Waste
to less purpose, then that which is spent in sleep, and what then is to be
thought of that, which is spent in sleep at Church?

Sect. 11. Sleepers. Sleepers.

1. Such as are given hereunto are of bad report. 1 These. 5.5.6


2. Such as will not hearken are given over. Psalm. 81.11.


3. Their prayer is abomination. Pro. 28.9.


4. Doing the work of the Lord negligently they are accursed. Ier: 48.10.


5. They are in danger of Gods judgments, and so continuing shall not escape
them. What befell Noah, Sisera, Sampson, being asleep, who knows not? Theirs
might be lawful after a sort, yet were then met withal, but how much more
this, being wholly unlawful? The mother being asleep, 1 King. 3.20.
had her live child taken away, and a dead child put in the room; If thou
be not watchful, in stead of a living, thou may be possessed of a dead
heart. As the Disciples unto Christ being asleep, Luke 8.24.
Master we perish; so may it unto us thus sleeping, if thou do not awake,
thou perishest, there being prepared (as once one which crying fire, fire, and
being demanded where, answered in hell for sleepers at Church.) Prepared (I
say) for such, fearful judgments.

6. They are for the present as dead.

7. They are as Images, having ears, Psalm. 115.5.
but not hearing therewith.

8. They lose the comfort or admonition intended for them.

9. They shall be clothed with rags. Pro. 23.21. Pro. 20.18.
As he that loves sleep comes to poverty; So he that loves to sleep at
Church cannot but be poor in grace, and seeing the abundance of the rich will
not suffer him to sleep, Eccles. 5.12.
thy sleep bewrayes thy poverty.

10. They receive no benefit by the Word preached, the same being unto them
wholly unfruitful.

CHAP. V. Objections for Church-sleeping answered.
THey are of diverse sorts, (some justifying it, others extenuating it, others
translating the fault thereof on others) all which may be reduced into these
five; The sin it self. The 2. from The person committing it. The 3. from The
Preacher. The 4. from The matter delivered. The 5. The persons reproving it.


Sect. 1. The sin it self. From the sin itself.

I. It is no great sin. It is at the most but one of the little ones, A.
and so not worth the regarding. A. 1. If it be a sin, it is to be avoided,
Ier. 4.14. Isa. 3.16.
The Lord takes notice even of vain thoughts, disdainful and proud looks,
wanton eyes, walking with stretched-forth necks, and such other unseemly
gestures, Mat. 12.36.
and of every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give an account on
the day of judgment; how much more then takes he notice of this sin? How
much more shall we be called to an account for the same? Gutta cavat lapidem
non vi, sed saepe ^adendo.
2. Even small sins continued in, and unrepented of, becoming at the length
sins of customeare most dangerous. A drop of water by falling on the hardest
stone makes it at the length hollow, and the smallest sin continued in, does
at the length no less wound the conscience then the greatest; yea, those which
at the length prove heinous crimes, were but (as we may so speak) petty
offenses. Did not Mariners daily pumpe out the water, that by little and little
(unperceived) enters the ship, it would be thereby no less endangered, then
by some sudden great leake; so did not Gods children daily mortify their
smallest corruptions, they could not but at one time or other, make shipwreck
of Faith and of a good conscience. 1 Samuel 24.5.
If David do but but off the lap of Saul's garment, his heart smites him for
it. Exodus 10.26.
As Moses would have the cattle to go with them, and not an hoof to be left
behind for Pharaoh, that thereof they might take to serve the Lord their God in
the wilderness, so must not we employ any one member on the service of Satan,
Romans 12.1.
but our whole man in every part and faculty thereof on the service of God at
all times. Genesis 20.2. 6.18.
as on the family of Abimelech, who had taken (but not touched) Sarai Abraham's
wife: 1 Samuel 6.19. 2 Samuel 6.7.
On the men of Bethshemesh for looking into the Arc, and on Vzza for putting
his hand thereon, David for the sins of his youth) so ever the least
occasioned the death of Christ. Psalm: 1.25.7.


II. It is an ordinary usual thing, and so the less to be regarded. A.
A. Therefore it is the more dangerous, the more to be avoided, 1 Pet. 3.20:
Gods judgments being chiefly inflicted because of National sins. Was not
disobedience the common sin of the old world? yet was not it left unpunished.
2 Pet. 2.5.
God spared not the old world (says S. Peter) but saved Noah the eight person
a Preacher of righteousness, bringing in the flood upon the world of the
ungodly, Ezekiel. 16.49.
were not pride, fullness of bread, abundance of idleness, and unmercifulness
to the poor the common sins of Sodom? 2 Pet. 2.6.
yet ^urned he it into ashes, and con^emned it with an overthrow. Agreeable
hereunto is that of he Prophet touching Israel; Hos. 411.
The Lord has a controversy with the inhabitants of the ^and, because there
is no truth ^or mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land. By swearing and lying,
and killing, and stealing, and committing of adultery, they break out, and
blood touches blood. Therefore shall the land mourn, and every one that
dwells therein shall languish. The Benjamites (one and all) took part with
those wicked men in Gibeah, Judge. 20.14.
and did they not (notwithstanding) smart for it? Though then Church-sleeping
be common, it follows not, that therefore it is warrantable. The rifer any
evil is in the places or ages we live in, the more careful should we be to
shun and avoid the same. See then (says the Apostle) that ye walk
circumspectly, Ephesians. 5.15, 16
not as fools, but as wise, redeeming the time because the days are evil.
Ar^ the times then we live in, o^ the places we abide in more then ordinarily
evil in thi^ kind? That gives us no liberty, but should make so much the more
wary, lest we b^ taken napping. Genesis 6.9.
Noah was a just man in his generation, even in that generation, wherein the
whole world was overgrown with wickedness; so should we watch at Church,
though others be thereat taken with the sleeping evil.

III. To sleep at Church is not hurtful or prejudicial unto others. A.
A. But what good is there hereby done unto any? Malum est non fecisse bonum,
Chrysostom. de virt. and vit.
To do no good, is in effect, the same with to do evil; yea, thus doing,
thou do both hurt thy self and others. Thy self as being hereby deprived of
the sincere milk of the Word. Others, as being unto them through thy evil
example, a stone of offense.

IIII. To sleep at Church is not so bad, as then and there to have thoughts of
covetousness, Ezekiel. 33.31.
eyes of adultery, revenge, disdain, and the like by being awake. A. 1. A.
The question is not, lesser evil, this, or that. 2. If thou did seriously
consider in whose presence thou art, (even in his who is a God clothed with
majesty and honor, Heb. 12.29.
a consuming fire, and an everlasting burning, who cannot away with sin (the
least sin) in any) and to what end thou did come into Gods house, thou
would neither sin, so nor so. Psalm. 119.36.
Jncline mine heart unto thy Testimonies, and not to covetousness. Turn away
mine eyes from beholding vanity, and quicken thou me in thy way, thou should
have no such cause to object.

V. It is not done of set purpose. A. Of set purpose leave it undone. A.
Let it be thy stedfastresolution whilst thou art at Church, not to give sleep
to thine eyes, norslumber to rhine eye lids.

VI. Sleep there is but napping; a small time, a shutting of the eyes, a wink
and away. A. Yet so that thou thereby losest the whole Sermon. A.
Though thou hear the Word now and then, yet how it hangs on the former,
how it precedeth the latter, thou can not tell.

Sect. 2. The persons committing it. The persons committing it.

I. I am accustomed hereunto, that either J must stay at home, or
(notwithstanding of mine unwillingnesse to sleep, and pains which I take to
shake it off) sleep, when I come to Church. A.
A. 1. Though thou customarily sleep at Church, Latimer once said) thou
may be there taken napping. Mr. Latimers Sermon.
it, and strivest against it, it is not thy sin, neither shall it be laid
unto thy charge.

II. I am old and weak, and so am to be borne withal. Whatsoever it is in
others, in me I hope it is no great sin to sleep at Church. A.
A. 1. The older thou art, Simeon was as old as thou art, yet when he came into
the Temple, Luke 2.28.
did he not thus behave himself, and Anna the Prophetess, who was a widow
about fourscore years departed not from the temple, Ioh. 3.2^
but served God with fastings and prayers, night and day: yea, and Nicodemus to
enjoy Christ's company came by night unto him, when he should have slept.

III. I watch on the other days of the week, A.
and labor hardly. Eras. apophth. lib. 4.
but was it for thy neighbors good (as Parmenio excused Philip of Macedon unto
the Grecians which complained one time that he sleept by day, wonder not
(says he) that Philip now sleeps, for when ye slept (and seemed careless
of your own affairs) he was awake) was it not rather for his good, or to
work him some mischief? Job 24.14, 15, 16, 17.
The murderer rising with the light (says Job) kills the poor, and needy,
etc. for the morning is to them, even as the shadow of death. To the same
purpose is that of the Poet, Horat.
Thieves rise by night, that they may slay men, as has been already alleged.
If thou have thus watched unto villainy, whilst others were at their rest, thou
shall find one day, that better it had been for thee, that thou had been
asleep. the weeke-dayes as thereby to make thy self unfit for the sanctifying
of the Lords day. 5. Psalm. 134.1. Psalm. 119.55.
much more then by day, and on Gods day.

IIII. I rose very early. A.
Did thou not rise about thine own worldly affairs, that have been any let
unto this, nay rather, prayer, reading, meditation, and conference preceding
it, would be especial furtherances thereunto.

V. I have far to Church, sit far from the pulpit, am thick of hearing,
and the Preachers voice is weak. A. A.
Though thou can not do as thou would, do so much as thou can. Rise
earlier, and come sooner, and sit or stand nigher, waiting on Gods providence,
who as he has given thee ears (and both can and has made the deaf to hear)
so may be pleased to bestow on them their proper office of hearing; Mar. 7.37.
yea, though thou can not hear, and so profi^ thy self, yet thou must not
sleep lest thou offend others which may and would hear.

VI. I know my duty already, as well as they that give bes^ attention. A.
A. Suppose thou do, yet should thou know it much better by thy
watchfulness, neither does the Word only teach thee to know Gods will, but
calls upon thee to be a doer thereof. Iam. 1.22.
Be ye doers (says S. James) and not hearers only.

VII. What I shall lose at one time by sleeping at Church, I can get up, either
when J come home, or at another time when I go to Church. At home, either by
reading as good a Sermon, or one on the same subject, if not the very same
words, or by hearing the same repeated by some one in my family which writes
the Sermon. At Church, by giving attendance, unto what shall be then and there
delivered. A.
A. To the first branch of the former, To the former and (...) branch thereof.
Mal. 2.7.
1. Experience teaches that the lively voice is more effectual then ocular
reading. 2. As the Priests lips are to preserve knowledge; to hear it at his
mouth. Mal. 2.7. etc.
3. The second branch.
1. Does he so write it as that he neither adds thereto, To the latter.
To the latter. 1. That thou sinnest, sleep at Church.

VIII. Even the precisest sleep at Church. A.
A. 1. It is none of their virtues, them.

Sect. 3. The Preacher. The Preacher.

I. He is no scholar; He is not read in humane Writers. He is no Logician,
Historian, linguist. He is not acquainted with the Schoolmen. He cites not
the Testimonies of the Fathers, and Doctors of the Church. A.
A. 1. How know thou that he is no scholar? Welsh in stead of any of
those, were thou able to detect him? nay, rather would thou not applaud his
learning? sell his shoes, but he must needs sell or show his lasts, Scultet.
meth. concionandi, Artis est celare artem.
whereby he makes them? It is art to conceal art. 3. There is none so
learned, but he may learn something from the very meanest, even from those
that be far his inferiors in gifts, as Apollos did of Aquila and Priscilla,
Act. 18.26.
a learned Teacher, and well read in the Word, of a silly Tentmaker, and weak
woman. 4. None forbids to speak with tongues, if it be to edification. 1 Cor.
14.39 1 Cor. 14.18.19.
8. S. Paul a learned scholar thus says, I thank my God, J speak with
tongues more then you all, yet in the Church I had rather speak five words
with my understanding, that by my voice I might teach others also, then ten
thousand words in an unknown tongue. Jsa. 28.11.
that being fulfilled which in the law is written, with men of other tongues, 1
Cor. 14.21.
and with other lips will J speak unto this people, yet for all that would
thou not hear. Act. 12.21, etc.
not seek applause unto himself with Herod. 11. What has Horace to do with
the Psalter, Hier. ad Eust. de custod. Vir.
Virgil with the Gospel, or Tully with the Epistles? as S. Hierom says.

II. His life is not answerable to his doctrine. A.
A. 1. Mat. 23.2, 3.
The Scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses seat, all therefore whatsoever they
bid you observe, that observe and do, but do not ye after their works, for
they say, and do not.

III. He has done me wrong. A.
By speaking against thee in the Pulpit; Who is able to justify the same? Thou
art, but thou art a party, and through self-love may be mistaken. Others
are, but are not they pick-thankes and flatterers? yea, are not both of you
guilty of the same sin? But come thou unto the Physician, and will thou
not let him rip up thy wounds? Complainest thou of the disease of sin, and
will thou take no purge to remove it? Thou complainest that the Minister has
wronged thee in thy name and reputation, and will thou wrong thine own soul?

IIII. He continues long in his Sermons, A.
and wearieth his hearers. Paul, tha^ upon occasion offered, he did at one
time continue his speech until midnight, Act. 20.7. and 28.23.
and at another, from morning till evening. 3. Lorin. in Acta. p^g. 591.
and so (ordinarily) no to exceed his hour, yet are no^ hearers so to tie Gods
Word, Sed and Auditor meminerit, non esse alligandum verbum Dei. etc.
or stint his Spirit, as if it were not lawful at some times upon special
occasions to exceed that time.

Sect. 4. The matter delivered. The matter delivered.

I. It is not worth the hearing. A.
delivers nothing worth the hearing? surely thou conceitest it, or fainest it
(as the soldiers which watched the Sepulcher gave out, Mat. 28.13.
that the Disciples came by night, and stole Christ away while they slept) for
know that thou can not. Ob.
But thou will say, thou have often heard him so preach, let it be granted,
what then? does it therefore follow that he does always preach? Resp. Eras.
apophth. lib 4.
yea, I make no question, but (as Philip of Macedon being asleep whilst
Machetes his cause was pleaded before him, and therefore having against equity
determined against him upon his appeal to him being awake, and better notice
taken thereof, repealed his sentence,) so whereas thou condemnest thy Preacher
being asleep, thou would justify him being awake. 6. 1 King. 22.8.
But as Ahab hated Micaiah (for that he did not prophecy good concerning him
but evil) do thou not hate thy Minister? bear thou him no grudge? If it
be for well-doing, neither shall thou escape punishment, nor he lose his
reward.

II. It is the very same before insisted on. A.
1. Paul the like (and that at the earnest entreaty even of those which heard
him before.) So Christ himself, Act. 13.42.
Apostles Peter and John, and before them the Prophets? 2. Is there no
alteration? catechetically by way of question and answer, at another, by way of
common place, at another by way of doctrine, and Use, at another by-way of
paraphrase, and the like. 3. Have thou indeed amended by that which thou have
formerly heard? Thou have not. Thou should then be content, yea, willing and
desirous to hear the same things again and again, until they shall work on
thee, that for which they were at the first intended and delivered. Being
addicted to whoredom, thou should especially affect such Sermons (though
often repeated, and long insisted upon) which may withdraw thee therefrom. The
like may be said of every other sin. Iehojakim had burnt the roll which
Jeremiah had written, Ier. 36.32.
the Lord commanded his Prophet, to write it anew, whereunto were added many of
the like words. hour long) in penning it, it will take thee far more to
conceive or remember it.

III. It is invective, most times in the general, sometimes in particular. In
general. A man cannot be a little joviall with his friends, or swear an
oath, but it is brought up in the pulpit, and takes up a good part of the
Sermon. In particular; There is scarce a Sermon preached, wherein the Preacher
to my great discredit ^ymeth not at me. A. A.
To the General, To the general.
1. Whatsoever is sin is to be spoken against, how small soever the same
seems unto many, divides between the narrow and the bones, Heb. 4.12.
and takes notice as well of the smallest as of the greatest sins. Gat.
spirit. watch. page 46
4. Can we not use Gods creatures (as one says) unless we abuse them, and
make that the bain^ and poison of our souls, tha^ was given us to be the food
an^ stay of our bodies? or can we^ not be merry, unless we mak^ the devil
our play-fellow? I^ there no mirth at all but (...) swearing and swaggering,
an^ in blaspheming of Gods blesse^ name? Is our mirth nothing worth if it be
not mixed wit^ prophanosse? To the particular.
far be it from us to be thus merry. To the particular. person, etc. are
there not others as bad as thy self? There are. Why then may not the Preacher
be conceived to speak against them, not against thee?

IIII. It is frequently of hell and damnation, and so enough ^o drive a man
into desperation. A.
(...). 1. The law is a schoole-ma^^er to bring us to Christ, Gal. 3.26.
who (...) not first thrown down (...) legal comminations. First must
Preachers be Boanerges, sons of thunder, then Barnabasses, sons of
consolation. 2. Prophets. Isa. 30.27. etc. Luke 11.42. etc. 2 These. 1.8. Rev.
15.6, 7.
So Christ and his Apostles. This seems figured in that vision o^ John; The
seven Angels which came out of the Temple, though clothed in pure and white
linen, and having their breast girded with golden girdles, ye^ had the seven
plagues, and t^ them one of the four beast gave seven golden vialls f^^ of the
wrath of God, to pour^ them out upon the earth.

V. It is often errone^^ and heretical, wherewith (were I awake) I could not
but be in danger to be infected, or otherwise forced to present the broacher
thereof to his utter undoing. A.
A. 1.

VI. It is that wherewith I am already very well acquainted. A. A.
1. Art thou the only hearer? that thou know nothing yet as thou ought
t^ know.

VII. It is such, as where^^ I have not profited all the while, though I have
been an hearer thereof these many years; yea, and have been so watchful, as
that J have not given leave unto mine eyes to sleep, nor my eyelids to
slumber thereat. I am no less sinful, then before; no less covetous,
malicious, lascivious, and the like. A. A.
The woman with ^he bloody issue was diseased ^welve years, yet at the length
^ured. Mat. 9.20.
The woman which ^ad the spirit of infirmity for ^he space of 18. years, Luke
13.16.
and was ^owed together, and could in ^o wise lift up her self, yet ^as at the
length loosed from ^^er bonds. Joh. 5.9.
The man of the ^alsie was diseased for the ^pace of 38. years, and yet at
^ength at Christ's command, and ^y his power, rose, took up ^is bed and walked.
The ^ind blows where it lists, and thou hear the sound ^hereof, but
can not tell, Joh. 3.8.
^hence it comes, and whither it goes; So is every one that is borne of the
Spirit. Abide an hearer, wait Gods good leisure, for assuredly if thou
belongest to God, thou shall hear something at the length which will do thee
good.

Sect. 5. The persons reproving it.
The Persons reproving it.
I. They have little to do that meddle herewith. A.
A. They are never out of their calling which would work in thee a dislike of
sin, and further thy salvation, whether in this o^ other particulars. Some
are enabled to encounter the greatest. Every one may seem sufficiently
qualified to cop^ with this.

II. Such oftentimes as are most faulty herein do most fin^ fault hereat. A.
A. Though their zeal against this sin in thee does not excuse or tolerate
them thus to sin, yet art not thou thus to sin, because thy reprovers may
be justly reproved for the same.

CHAP. VI. Remedies for the cure of this sleeping evil.
IT is observed that those grounds do bear most corn, and are freest from
weeds, which before they are sown, are duly prepared, and after the seed is
sown, are carefully harrowed, What is to be done to avoid Church-sleeping.
well fenced in, and diligently looked unto; So those which would profit by the
Word, and be free from this drowsy disease, must both before they come to
Church, when they are come to Church, and when they are returned home set
themselves on work.

Sect. 1. Before we come to Church.
Before we come to Curch we must,
1. Take notice of Gods great goodness toward us, in affording his Word unto
us; the same being so needful, as Without which our condition could not be
but indeed miserable, the same being so profitable, Amos 8.11. Rev. 2.5.
as that no greater judgment can befall a land, then the removal thereof
therefrom, no greater happiness then its continuance.

2. Examine our own hearts thoroughly, for what cause, and to what end it is,
that we go to Church; as whether it be not more, for fear, then love; out of
custom, then conscience; to see and to be seen, then in obedience unto Gods
Commandment. This is to ponder the path of our feet; Prove. 4.26. Prove. 14.15.
and surely the prudent man looks well to his going.

3. Observe our natural constitution, and by what means it comes to pass,
that sleep at Church seazeth upon us, as whether it comes not, through long
waking; excessive eating and drinking, Genesis 22.5.
distracting cares of the world (for as Abraham when he went to sacrifice his
son upon the Mount, left his ass and servants at the foot of the hill; So
when we come to the holy hill of God, with the Congregation, we must abandon
all by businesses) prejudice against the person of the Teacher. Pride for some
measure of knowledge received, Amputemus causas morbi, ut morbus pariter
auferatur. Hier.
carnal security or the like; for the cause being known and taken away, the
effect will of it self cease. Upon this discovery will ensue an holy
jealousy, whereby we shall be made so wary, as that we shall not trust our
selves, but use means ^o prevent this evil; for as they that know themselves
to have a weak stomach are very chary of their diet, so he that is
suspicious of himself, and jealous of his own drowsinesse and pronenesse
thereto will be careful to avoid the same. And as they that have gunpowder
in their houses, are careful that fire come not near it, so finding our
corruption as gunpowder, and the forementioned causes of drowsinesse, as fire,
we shall endeavor that they may not meet together; yea, hereupon (if we shall
at any time be stirred up to a dislike of the Teacher, to an admiration of our
own knowledge, and the like) we shall thus argue. If I shall give way unto
this suggestion, then will sleep seize on me, then shall I lose the benefit
of the Word, etc.

4. Romans 12.9.
Labor for a true hatred and detestation of this sin Never shall we closely
cleav^ unto that which is good, till w^ have brought our hearts to detest and
abhor that which is evil, were this thoroughly wrought, there needed no
rhetoric to dissuade us from Church-sleeping. 1 Samuel 13.16
As Amnon loathing Thamar thrust her out of doors, Pro. 8.13.
so (it being the fear of God to hate evil) would we drive it away. And as a
man cannot endure the sent or savor of the meat which he loatheth, our very
hearts would rise against the same.

5. Hunger after the Word. Vulpiesurienti somnus obrepit. Eras. chil.
Sleep comes upon the hungry fox) but this hunger drives away sleep, for
as the stomach hungering for meat, cannot be contented without it, so neither
can our souls without the Word, being once taken with an earnest desire
thereof. 2 Samuel 23.15
Great was David's longing for a little water of the Well of Bethleem; Oh!
(says he) that one would give me drink of the water of the Well of Bethleem,
which is by the gate) but much more vehement was it for the Word. Psalm. 42.2.
My soul (says he) thirsts for God, for the living God, when shall I come
and appear before God? Psalm. 84.2.
And again, My soul longs, yea even faints for the courts of the Lord.
(Assuredly had David had leave at this time to have come to the hearing of the
Word, he would not have slept thereat.) And who will not hunger after the Word,
if he do but 1. By what means an hunger after the Word may be wrought in us.
Take a taste thereof in private by reading and meditation. Hereby the soul
cannot but get much both instruction and consolation. 2. Consider the
excellency, necessity, and utilitie of the same, whereof I have already spoken
at large: Psalm. 19.10. Prove. 3.15. and 8.10.
and wereof both David and Solomon did make so much account, that they esteemed
it above gold, silver, rubies, and what not?

6. Resolve to attend unto, and make conscience of the sacred ordinance of
preashing there delivered. as Job, Job 31.1.
J have made a covenant with my eyes, why then should I think upon a maid? So
do we make a covenant, as with our ears to hear, so with our eyes not to
sleep at Church. Such was David's religious care for the Arc, Psalm. 132.4
that he would not give sleep to his eyes, nor slumber to his eyelids,
until he found out a place for the Lord, and habitation for the mighty God of
Jacob; And such must ours be at the Word, if we would have any communion with
God in that sacred ordinance. Jacob being Labans shepherd, Genesis 31.40.
and making conscience of his duty, his sleep (by night) departed from his
eyes, and assuredly so would sleep depart from ours, (especially by day) if we
made conscience of hearing the Word.

7. Use the creatures sparingly, both sleep (for what is said of drinking
water, may be said of this, Quo plus sunt potae, plus sitiuntur aquae.
the more it is taken, the more it is desired) and meat and drink; for when
men have over-liberally eat and drunk, they are wont to be heavy and
drowsy, ready to slumber as they sit, fit for nothing, but for sleep. Such
excess, as it is a means even to drown the mind, and by casting reason and
understanding into a deep and deadly sleep, to make men unable to watch
against the motions of sin, to shut the door of the heart against all
virtues, and to set it open to all vices, so much more stupifieth it the body.
contrarily, 1 These. 5.6.
Sobriety is an especial help to vigilancie, 1 Pet. 47.
which therefore the Apostles are usually wont to join together.

8. Consider whither we are going, before whom to what end, and who we are?
To Gods house, into the presence of the God of heaven, to be made partakers of
the Word for the good of our souls, we being (as of our selves) of all others
the most unworthy.

9. Pray, as for the Preacher (that his lips may preserve knowlede; Mal. 2.7:
he may be faithful in delivering the whole Counsel of God unto us, Act.
20.27.
and he may powerfully and wisely speak to our consciences. Romans 1.16.
) and the Word read or preached (that it may be unto us the power of God unto
our salvation, 2 Cor ^2.16.
the savor of life unto life, and as good seed sown in a good ground) so for
our selves and others, that our ears may be attentive, our eyes fixed on the
Preacher, our minds be opened to understand, and our hearts and affections
sanctified to obey the holy Word.

Ob. I cannot possibly spare so much time from my Calling, as to think on
these things; or be thus prepared.

A. Martha; Martha, Martha, thou art careful, Luke 10, 41:4^.
and troubled about many things, but one thing is needful; and Mary has
chosen that good part which shall not be taken away from her, so may I unto
thee. The soul is to be preferred unto the body, and thou art more careful
of this, then that.

2. Bodily exercise profits little, but godliness is profitable unto all
things, having promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come.
3. Seek ye first the kingdom of God, 1 Timothy 4.8.
and his righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you. omit
not our bodily recreation notwithstanding the works of our calling, and why
should wethis? 6.

Sect. 2. When we come to Church.
When we come to Church we must
In General; In general.


1. Take heed unto our affections (which the Preacher signifies by these
words) Keep thy foot when thou go to the house of God, Eccles. 5.1.
and be more ready to hear, then to give the sacrifice of fools.

2. Get our eyes to be anointed with eye salve, that we may see, Rev. 3.18.
and our ears open that we may hear. Remembering that as God has bestowed
upon us eyes and ears, so when we are come into his house, both must be set
on work. As our eyes must be seeing, so must our ears be hearing, and
obedient, as we our selves swift to bear. Iam. 1.19.
to this purpose is that so often reiterated phrase, He that has ears to
hear, Mat. 11.15:
let him hear. Yea, as it is usual for one that is drowsy to wash and rub
his eyes, or that feels any impediments in his ears to pick them; so when
we perceive drowsinesse to creep on us at Church, we must then rouse up our
selves.

3. Be possessed with Gods fear, Isa. 66.2. 1 Samuel 4.13.
that we may tremble at the Word. As Eli whilst he sat on a stooleby the way
side, watched, because his heart trembled for the Ark of God; So if when we
are at Church, our hearts shall tremble in respect of our present danger
through Satan, we shall be kept waking. Dan. 2.1.
Nebuchadnezzar being troubled, his sleep went from him, so were we troubled
for sin, or did stand in awe of god, because of the same, it would not fall
on us. Grief and sorrow occasion sleep, Luke 22.44. Vigilabis, si timebis.
August. Timor domini janitor animi. Ber. formido facit solicitudinem. Ter.
Psalm. 4.4. Pro. 16.6.
but fear and care make vigilant and watchful. This is as a Porter set at the
door of our soul; and will also keep our eyes waking. There is no affection
more watchful then this. Stand in awe and sin not; yea, as by this men
depart from evil, so shall we through it, from this of sleeping at Church.
This being kept fresh in our hearts, will make us careful to shun, and
fearful to do ought that may offend him whom we fear. In fear of invasion
men are wont to keep due watch and ward, but when there is no such danger
misdoubted, like the men of Lachish, Judge. 18.7.
they are the more careless and secure, and thereupon are often upon the
sudden oppressed. At the hearing of the Word, we are at all times in danger of
the assaults of Satan, there is then neither time nor place to sleep thereat.
The Crane which is by the rest appointed for Sentinel, Franc. Senens. de
Excub. and vigil.
holds in its foot a small stone, whereby it may be kept awake; and Alexander
the Great, held in the night a silver ball, over a brazen basin, that if he
should fleepe, by the sound thereof he might be awaked, such a stone, such a
ball, will Gods fear prove unto us, to keep us from Church-sleeping.

4. Be persuaded that the Scriptures to be read, or the Sermon ready to be
uttered, may do us more good, then all those we have yet heard. Yea, that they
may be the last which we shall ever hear, as that very hour, Platar.
the last of our lives. As Miltiades his triumph hindered Themistocles from
sleeping; So did we consider the benefit of the Word, and duly weigh what good
God may thereby convey into our souls, (as he has done to others) we would
questionless not sleep thereat. Ecclus 31.1.
The care of riches drives away sleep, says the son of Sirach. So did we
care for the durable riches which the Word affords, we would not sleep
thereat.

5. Consider, that as God sleeps not for our good, Psalm. 121.4.
and the devil sleeps not for our hurt; So if we should sleep at Church,
God would leave us, and the devil would make a prey of us.

6. Call to mind, that there will be store of witnesses to rise up against us
on the day of judgment, if we shall thus sin. Then will the Lord say, I spoke
unto them, but they would not hear me; I was present with mine own ordinance,
but they would not look upon me. Then will Christ say; I offered, my self
unto them, but they would none of me; I called upon them, but they would not
answer me; I would have showed them what I had done for them, but they did not
regard me. Then will the Holy Ghost say, I would have entered into their
hearts, I would have there lodged; I would have made the Word to take root in
them, but by their sleeping thereat they grieved me. Then will the Word say;
They despised me. The Saints say, They offended us. The ungodly say, They
hardened us in our sins, and occasioned our contempt of the Word.

It were not amiss, Dan. 5.5, 6.
that (as Belshazar was driven from his carnal mirth by viewing the
handwriting which appeared on the wall) they that are accustomed to sleep at
Church, would imagine at least, that it were written over their Pewes, Awake
thou that sleep. Ephesians. 5 14.


In particular, in hearing we must use, In particular use.


1. Attention, which is when the whole body, Attention.
especially the ear and the eye, are reverently composed about hearing the
Word. The ear; Act. 10.33.
as Cornelius and his household were already, waiting for Peter to hear the
Word. The eye; Luke 4 28.
as the eyes of all that were in the Synagogue were fastened on him; that is,
on Christ when he began to teach them; we must with Mary sit at Jesus feet,
Luke 10.39.
and hear his Word. Does not the hungry stomach watch for meat? and should not
we watch for the food of our souls?

2. Intention, Intention.
when we diligently mark those things which we are taught; We see by
experience, that in a deep meditation, though our eyes be fixed on some
certain object, yet we smally regard it, so if the mind be not present
as well as the body, all is to no purpose. To this purpose is that of Solomon,
Prove. 2.2:
Cause thine ear to hearken, and incline thine heart to wisdom and
understanding.

3. Retention, which is of the memory, Retention. Luke 2.52.
when we lay up the word of God in the heart, as the Virgin Mary, the sayings
concerning Christ. He that makes conscience here of will hardly sleep hereat.

4. Devotion, which calls for an heart truly religious. Devotion.
A devout soul, never hears of mercy but with comfort; of Gods justice but
with fear; of his truth without assenting to it, of his works without
admiration, and where devotion dwells, drowsinesse is shut out.

5. Subjection. God speaks, and must not we hear? Subjection.
yea, yield obedience thereunto, how repugnant soever the same seems unto our
corrupt nature? now how can there be obedience, when there is no subjection?
how subjection, where knowledge wants? how knowledge be had without
instruction? how receive instruction without hearing it? how hear it if sleep
be entertained?

6. Discretion. Discretion.
as the mouth is to the body; The mouth refuses unsavory meat, that may be
hurtful to the body, so must our ears reject erroneous and heretical
doctrine. But if the mouth be out of taste, what food will it not receive, how
noisome soever? so if the ears be dull and heavy, will not falsehood be
embraced for truth? men's traditions, as Gods commandments?

Those that we may the better perform, Means whereby to perform those.
we must

1. Remember that we are in Gods presence; at Bethel, Psalm. 16.8: 1 Cor. 11.10
and that he both sees us, and speaks to us, we must set the Lord always
before our eyes, especially at this time. If Paul will have women reverently to
behave themselves in the congregation, because of the Angels; much more ought
all both men and women, to behave themselves reverently, because of the
presence of God, who is the Lord both of men and Angels. This was that which
kept David in compass; Psa. 119.168
I have kept (says he) thy Precepts and Testimonies, for all my ways are in
thy sight. Do we at any time begin to find our selves drowsy at Church?
speak we thus unto our own souls, Should I thus do in Gods presence? yea,
as the Lord called Samuel; 1 Samuel: 3.10.
Samuel, Samuel, and the shipmaster unto Jonah, Jonah 1.6.
What meanest thou, O sleeper? So do we imagine that the Lord speaks unto
every one of us in particular; Why sleep thou, O sluggard? awake thou that
sleep.

2. Stand up. It is very memorable, which is reported of Constantine the Great
by Eusebius. Eusebius. de vita Constant. lib. 4 cap. 33.
Being requested by Divines that disputed before him, that after long standing
he would sit down and take his ease, answered; It is an impious thing to
hear negligently disputations concerning God.

3. Rouse up our selves ever and anon; as the cock clappeth his wings, that
he may the more cheerfully crow, we must stir up the grace of God in us;
yea, 2 Timothy 1.6.
we must check our selves when we perceive our drowsinesse. Prove. 6.9.
How long will thou sleep, O sluggard? when will thou arise out of thy sleep?
We must say unto our selves, art thou in a way to heaven? will the Lord be
pleased herewith?

4. Use now and then short and sudden ejaculations, Psalm. 13.5.
as in the words of the Psalmist, lighten mine eyes lest I sleep the sleep of
death.

6. Go along with the Preacher from point to point, applying the Word in
particular to the part affected, as the stomach conveieth nourishment to each
member. Hear we comfort? we are to apply it to our fear, as Gods promises
against distrust; So if we hear threatenings against sin, whether whoredom,
covetousness, pride, or any else, and know our selves guilty thereof, we are
to apply it to our selves for our humiliation, saying of both upon occasion;
This is for me; This promise; This comfort; This threatening.

Sect. 3. After we are come from Church, use
After we are come from Church we must
1. Call our selves to an account how we behaved our selves at Church,
Examination.
as about Church-sleeping, whether we be guilty thereof, or not, that upon our
not guilty we may express our thankfulness, See Gatak. Spirit. Watch page 81.
as upon guilty remorse and humiliation.

2. Recall and revolve in our minds such gracious instructions, Meditation.
as the Word afforded us; thus bringing into out remembrance, what we heard
formerly delivered, as the Bereans who as they received the Word with all
readiness of mind, searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things (which
they heard) were so. Whereupon will arise such profit and pleasure, as that we
shall endeavor thereafter, not to deprive our selves through unseasonable
sleeping, of the good which may be gained by the Word. This is the very life
of hearing, neither can we without meditation bring the Word into practice.

3. Impart unto others by repetition, what the Lord in his Word has
communicated to us, Repetition.
not doing the same at some one time, but constantly (as a duty whereunto we
are tied) upon our hearing the Word.

4. Confer of such things at home, Conference.
as have been delivered at Church, and that especially by way of Catechizing,
or by question and answer.

5. Put in practice such gracious things, Practice.
as the Word has revealed unto us. If thou did profit by one Sermon (as
assuredly thou might, if thou did practice, what thou art therein
prescribed) thou would not sleep at the next. Prompt s^p. refor. page 456
A certain Lady having asked her servants, whether the Sermon was done, to
whom affirming that it was; she answered, It was said, not yet done; implying
that though the Minister had performed his part, they had not yet done theirs;
that is, though he had taught them, yet they had not yet followed all his
instructions.

CHAP. VII. The Application of the foregoing discourse for Reprehension. Use of
Reprehension unto Preachers.
Exhortation.

Sect. 1. Reprehension of Preachers. People.

Preachers,

1. Which do any way occasion this evil, Whether by taking no pains in their
Ministry, by aiming more at applause unto themselves, then at Gods glory
therein; by delivering erroneous and heretical doctrine; by wearying their
auditors; by leading their ^ives scandalously, and the ^ike.

2. Which do not what in them lies to remove this evil. Should they not at
sometimes ^all into a commendation of Gods word, to bring their people into a
liking thereof? should they not at other times set forth the misery of such as
are without it? should they not now and then inveigh against those, which do
negligently hear it, or sleep thereat? should they not be as Boanerges, even
filled with zeal against those that thus despise it? Must not their voices be
lift up as a trumpet, and upon occasions sound these words of the ship-master,
unto Jonah, What meanest thou, Jonah 1.6.
O sleeper? and that of Solomon to the sluggard? Prove. 6.9.
When will thou arise out of thy sleep? how long will thou sleep, O sluggard?
And those of the Spirit, Ephesians. 5:14.
awake thou that sleep?

People, People:


1. Which (whilst the Word is taught) laugh, talk, read gaze up and down in
every corner, and the like, every of which (through the just judgment of God,)
does (for the most part) end in sleeping, when the senses are wearied with
those, then do they retire unto sleep for their recreation.

2. Which make a jest of it; Iam. 4.9.
Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep, let your laughter be turned to
mourning, and your joy to heaviness.

3. Which do what in them lies to continue in it; yea, do so love to sleep,
as that they will further their inclination hereunto, through intemperancie,
worldly care, self-conceit, prejudicate opinions, and the like; thus
entertaining ^uch things as may make them more drowsy.

4. Which are angry with those that do awake them; They come to Church against
their will; They there stay against their will; and if they there hear any
thing, it is against their will. Ecclus. 22.7.
They love sleep, set themselves to sleep, and cannot abide to be awaked.
Their untoward faces, froward words (Let me alone, what have ye to do with
me? meddle with your selves, etc.) and uncivil behavior toward those that do
awake them, were worth the observation. Would thou when thou come to
Church sleep all the while? far be it from thee. As the Disciples unto our
Savior Christ being asleep, Mar. 4.38:
Master, carest thou not that we^ perish? So may it be said unto thee that
affectest drowsinesse; Carest thou not though thou perishest? Mar. 4.24.
Do thou already know too much? or have thou already heard too much? would
thou hear, more should be given unto thee.

5. Which being guilty hereof, Non fenestra nunc, non fames, non somnus
interturbat; (ait Chrysostomus) attamen (...) audimus, (...) angustia lo^^, non
aliquid horum. Lorin. in Acta. p. 591.
do notwithstanding use one or other excuse for their justification. What
can thou pretend? long preaching, much crowding, heat, hard labor; and the
like? Beware lest in pleading not guilty unto one sin, thou be not guilty
of lying, and so punished for both.

6. Which will not by any means be reclaimed therefrom. God calls thee, as
he did Samuel, 1 Samuel 3.3.
and will thou not hear? He would acquaint thee with his will, and shall
thine eyes be always heavy? How long will thou sleep, Prove. 6.9.10.
O sluggard? yet a little sleep, a little slumber, and a little folding of the
handsto sleep. Know thou not that many littles make a great, and that but a
nappe at a time comes in time, to a good deal of time? Of old, they that
slept, 1 These. 5.7.
slept in the night, as they that were drunk, were drunk in the night; and
will thou now sleep in the day, and that in Gods house? Art thou an Image? or
will thou make thy self one? having eyes, see thou not? Mar. 8.18.
and having ears, why will thou not hear? would thou die, whilst thou
sleep at Church? were that the way unto heaven? Not any thing the devil
more hinders, Mar. 9.25.
then hearing the Word, and should thou be possessed with a deaf devil?
Homer.
As it was Ulysses his chiefest care for his own preservation to deprive
Polyphemus of his eyesight, so is it Satan's to deprive thee both of seeing and
hearing at Church, Mat. 26.43.
for thy destruction. As Christ came the second and third time, and found his
Disciples asleep; So when shall one observe thee, but asleep at Church? Pro.
29:1:
He that being often reproved hardens his neck, shall suddenly be
destroyed, and that without remedy (says Solomon.) And have not thou been
often reproved for this fault, and yet art never the better? Deuteronomy. 32:1.
As both Moses and the Prophets directed their speech, Isa. 1.2.
unto the heavens, earth, and mountains; so might we well do, considering
the general drowsinesse, which has taken hold on most men and women. As the
Prophet of old, Isa. 53.1.
Who has believed (so may we now, who has heard) our report? How many like
the dormouse, sleep all Winter, that it may live the better in Summer; So do
they sleep at Church, that they may wake about their worldly businesses. Eras.
Apophth.
Alexander the Great knew himself to be a man by sleep, so may thou know
thy self to be a sinful man by sleeping at Church. What a shame is it, Heb.
5.12.
that when for the time ye ought to be Teachers, ye have need that one teach
you again, which be the first Principles of the Oracles of God, and are
become such as have need of milk, and not of strong meat. What is the reason?
Prompt. sap. reformat. page 456.
how comes this to pass after so many Sermons? Even because ye are dull of
hearing, either hear not at all, or to no purpose.

7. Which when the Sermon is done, will not stick to cut the points delivered
into question, and dispute about the same, themselves notwithstanding for the
most part having been asleep thereat; or when they are come from Church will
commend the Preacher, and his Sermon, telling how zealous, how learned. how
eloquent it was, etc. when as happily they hear but a little thereof. Thou
commendest it. It is well (so may a sick person commend a physician, whose
Physic he never tried) but what profit have thou gained thereby? what fruit
has it produced on thee? If none, thou were no otherwise an hearer, but in
imagination.

Sect. 2. Exhortation to Preachers. Use of exhortation unto Preachers.
People.


Preachers.

Be we careful as well to prevent this evil, as to remove it, when it
seazeth on our Auditors. Iam. 2.^.
As we are not to have the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory,
with respect of persons. So let not our Sermons be with respect of persons,
but so study, and so preach at all times, that thereby we may enforce hearing
ears, and the eyes of all may be set on us. Lift we up our voices like
trumpets, especially when we shall observe our people drowsy; So shall we,
nill they, will they, rowse them up. Endeavor we also that our Auditors may
truly love us, as children their parents (for where the man is despised, how is
it possible that his doctrine should be regarded?) which they will do,
through our love of them, and their souls salvation. Whatsoever may bring our
ministry into contempt, be we careful to avoid, being assured that such as
shall loath our doctrine, (though happily they come to Church, that thereby they
may avoid the danger of the law) will rather set themselves to sleep, then
give ear thereunto. Such indeed will take exceptions at our doctrine, as being
either too harsh, or too mild, too vehement, or too cold, at our utterance, as
being either too slow, or too quick, at our voice, as either being too high,
or too low, and at our conversation, as being either too loose, or too austere,
but we must not be discouraged. But why should I offer to instruct you, both
knowing what you should do, and doing what you know?

People. People.


When thou come unto Gods house, Prove. 6.4.
give not sleep unto thine eyes, nor slumber unto thine eyelids; 2 Chro. 23.6.
Here must thou keep the watch of the Lord; yea, lest sleep should assault
thee to thy prejudice, thou must set a watch against the same, as the
Israelites did against Sanballat and Tobijah. Neh. 4.9. Psalm. 123.2^
Behold as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their masters, and as
the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her mistress: So here especially should
our ears and eyes wait upon the Lord our God. If thou sleep at Church, thou
shall assuredly find that Gods judgments sleep not; yea, Rev. 3.3.
if thou shall not watch, he will come on thee as a thief, we are all
children of the light, and children of the day, we are not of the night, 1
These. 5.5. Ephesians. 5.14.
nor of darkness, therefore let us not sleep as do others; but let us watch.
Sleep thou? Oh! awake thou that sleep. Psalm. 145.15.
The eyes of all wait on the Lord; oh! let thine also wait on him, Pro. 20.13.
love not sleep, lest thou come to poverty; sleep not at Church, lest thou be
poor in grace. Genesis 15.11.
As Abraham drove away the fowls from his sacrifice, so must thou drowsinesse,
or what else may bring thee to sleep at Church. Awake here, Pro. 6.22.
as thou would have the Word to keep thee, when thou sleep elsewhere.
Did thou consider how Satan has entangled thee, from which thou can not be
loosed but by the Word, thou would not give sleep to thine eyes, Prove. 6.4,
5.
nor slumber to thine eyelids, (by hearing the Word) thou were delivered as a
Roe from the hunter, and as a bird from the hand of the fowler. Go to the Ant
thou sluggard, consider her ways and be wise. The sleep of a laboring man
is sweet, whether he eat little, Eccles. 5.12.
or much, but such will not be thine at Church. Act. 16.14.
Lydia heard attentively, and profited wonderfully (for, hearing is the sense
of learning) so if thou would learn, thou must needs hear. Here especially
let not thine eye be satisfied with seeing, nor thine ear with hearing.
Eccles. 1.8.
Yea (attention being the forerunner which prepares the way to the Preacher,
as the plough-share cutteth up the ground, that it may receive the seed) do
thou carefully attend unto the Word preached, neither let Satan who labors
either to stay thee from coming to Church, or coming from hearing, or hearing
from marking, or marking from liking, or liking from practicing, prevail
against thee either way. Iam. 4.7. Jonah 1.5.
Resist him and he will fly from thee. Jonah was fast asleep when the boat
was ready to perish; assuredly now there is no time for us to sleep,
considering Gods judgments hanging over our heads. The Prophet said of Baal,
King 18.^7
unto Baals Priests by way of ironie, peradventure he sleeps. I would that
touching us there were a peradventure, and not rather, Turkish. hist. page 654.
He was murdered sleeping, because Solomon (whilst he was in favor) had sworn
to him, that he would never kill him whilst he lived, whom now being asleep
he did repute as dead, and so caused him to be murdered.
that we do indeed sleep at Church; and (as Baal) do not hear at all.
Abraham the Turkish Basha would not have so carelessly laid himself down to
slumber, if he had known that then the angry Sultan would inflict on him the
fury of his wrath to his destruction; and thou would not at Church, if thou
did conceive that the Lord would then cut thee off by his destroying angel.
What means does not the Lord use to awake us; mercies, judgments, promises,
and what not? Oh that some of them, or all of them would awake us thoroughly!
Thou have heretofore slept at Church, but happily (as Sampson forgot be like,
Judge. 16.19.
that the Philistines had once and again bound him, whilst he was asleep, and
so still ventured on Dalilah to his destruction) thou have not taken notice of
the hurt which has come through the same. Had thou remembered it, thou
would be more vigilant, whereunto also, if thou would consider thine heavy
constitution and drowsy disposition, thou could not but be stirred up. The
Disciples said of Lazarus, Ioh. 11.12.
If he sleep, he shall do well. But contrarily, if thou sleep at Church,
thou shall do ill. Christ would awake thee, Christ calls upon thee, do thou
therefore awake and hear, lest as unto his Disciples, he say unto thee in
justice, Sleep on now. Eccles. 8.16.
There is that neither day nor night sees sleep with his eyes, says the
Preacher; So let it, so may it be said of thee, whilst thou art at Church,
Mar. 14.38.
The Spirit truly is ready, but the flesh is weak, watch ye therefore and
pray, lest ye enter into temptation; And what I say unto you, Mar. 13.37.
I say unto all, in one word of our Savior; Watch.

FINIS.

