At Theobalds, the 12. of April 1622.
The Copy of a Reference from the Kings most Excellent Majesty: As also a
Letter from the Right Honorable Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council, to the most Reverend Fathers in God, the Lords Archbishops of
Canterbury and York their Graces.
HIs Majesty is graciously pleased, That the Lords Archbishops of Canterbury
and York, do in their several Provinces proceed according to the Letters of
the Lords of the Council, bearing date the last of June 1621. as well in
recommending Captain Whitbournes discourse concerning New Foundland, so as
the same may be distributed to the several Parishes of this Kingdom, for the
encouragement of Adventurers unto the Plantation there; As also by furthering
(in the most favorable and effectual manner they can) the collections to be
thereupon made in all the said Parishes, toward the charge of printing and
distributing those Books, and the said Captain Whitbournes good endeavors,
and service, with expense of his time and means in the advancing of the said
Plantation; and his several great losses received at Sea by Pirates and
otherwise, of which his Majesty has been credibly certified; And further his
Majesty's pleasure is, that the said Captain Whitbourne shall have the sole
printing of his book for one and twenty years.

God save the King.
AFter our very hearty Commendations to your good Lordships, Whereas Captain
Richard Whitbourne of Exmouth, in the County of Deuon, Gentleman, having spent
much time in New Foundland (whither he has made sundry voyages and some by
express Commissions) has set down in writing diverse good observations and
notes touching the state and condition of that Country, and the plantation
there, which being by order from us now printed: It is desired to be published
throughout the Kingdom, for the furthering and advancement of the said
plantation, and to give encouragement to such as shall be willing to adventure
therein, and assist the same, either in their persons or otherwise, to which we
think the publication of this Book may much conduce: And we do give good
approbation to his good endeavors and purpose. So have we thought fit,
earnestly to recommend him unto your Lordships good favors, both for the
distribution of his Books within the Provinces of Canterbury and York, unto
the several Parishes thereof, and also for your Lordships help and
furtherance, that after his great travels and charges, wherein he has spent
much of his time and means, having long time been a Merchant of good estate,
he may reap by your Lordships assistance some profit of his labors, and
toward the printing and distributing the said Books by such a voluntary
contribution, as shall be willingly given and collected for him within the
several Parish Churches of the said Provinces: which will be both a good
encouragement unto others in the like endeavors for the service of their
Country, and some reward to him for his great charge, travels, and diverse
losses at Sea which he has received, as we are credibly certified. And so
commending him earnestly to your good Lordships, We bid your Lordships very
heartily farewell.

From Whitehall the last day of June 1621. Signed by the Lord Treasurer, Lord
Privy Seal, Duke of Lenoxe, Marquess Hambleton, Earl of Arundell, Earl of
Kelley, Lord Viscount Doncaster, Lord Viscount Faulkland, Master Treasurer,
Master Secretary Caluert, Master of the Rolls.


The names of some, who have undertaken to help and advance his Majesty's
Plantation in the New Foundland. viz.
THe right Honorable, Henry Lord Carry, Viscount of Faulke-land, Lord Deputy
General of the Kingdom of Ireland, has undertaken to plant a Colony of his
Majesty's subjects in the New Foundland, and his Lordship is well pleased to
entertain such as are willing to be Adventurers with him therein, upon such
Conditions as may appear in the latter part of this Book: And in his
Lordships absence, he has authorized his Agent, Master Leonard Wellsted,
Gentleman, by warrant under his hand and Seal, to ratify whatsoever shall be
by him concluded therein. The said Master Wellsteds Chamber is near to one
Master Garlands house, at the lower end of Saint Martins lane in the field.

The Right Honorable Sir George Caluert Knight, principal Secretary unto the
Kings most excellent Majesty, has also undertaken to plant a large Circuit of
that Country: who has already sent thither this year and the former year, a
great number of men and women, with all necessary provisions fit for them;
where they live pleasantly, building of houses, cleansing of land for Corn,
and meddowes, Cabage, Carrets, Turnips, and such like; as also for Woad and
Tobacco. Likewise they are there preparing to make Salt, for the preserving of
fish another year, and for diverse other services. And his Honor is likewise
well pleased to entertain such as will adventure with him therein, upon very
fit conditions.

The Worshipful John Slany of London Merchant, who is one of the undertakers
of the New Foundland Plantation, and is Treasurer unto the Patentees of that
Society, who have maintained a Colony of his Majesty's subjects there above
twelve years, and they are willing to entertain such as will further his
Majesty's said Plantation, upon fit conditions.

Diverse Worshipful Citizens of the City of Bristoll, have undertaken to plant
a large Circuit of that Country, and they have maintained a Colony of his
Majesty's subjects there any time these five years, who have builded there
fair houses, and done many other good services, who live there very
pleasantly, and they are well pleased to entertain upon fit conditions, such
as will be Adventurers with them.

The Worshipful William Vaughan of Tarracod, in the County of Carmarthen,
Doctor of the Civil law, has also undertaken to plant a Circuit in the
New Foundland; and has in two several years sent thither diverse men and
women, and he is willing to entertain such as will be Adventurers with with
him upon fit conditions.

And there are many other worthy persons Adventurers in the said Plantation,
whose names are not herein mentioned. And it is well hoped, that diverse others
will also put their helping hand to advance the same, when they are given to
understand what honor and benefit may accrue thereby. And if his Majesty's
subjects of this Kingdom may be willing to set forth from every several
County, but one good ship yearly thither, with people and provisions fit for
them, it will be then not only a great honor and benefit unto his Majesty,
but also a great increase of shipping and Mariners, and the employing and
enriching of many thousands of poor people which now live chargeable to the
Parishioners. The which may be easily performed by the able subjects, to set
forth the charge at first, and so every Parish to receive yearly their equal
parts of the benefit which may accrue by the said stock; and thereby not only
disburden yearly themselves of some of those which lie chargeable unto them
within their several Parishes: but also yearly yield a great benefit to every
several County, though it lie something remote from the Seacoast, if they
employ a discreet honest man therein, who may yearly be accomptable to every
Parish of the charge, and likewise the benefit. The which will not be any way
burdensome or hurtful unto any; as the following discourse which I have
written, will plainly inform them.

From my Chamber at the sign of the gilded Cock in Paternoster Row in
London. R. W.


