HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT royal blazon of England,
surmounted by a crown, flanked by the English lion on the left and the Scottish
unicorn on the right
Bed. ss. Ad General. Session. Pacis Domi. Regis tent. apud Ampthill, in and
pro Comitatu predict. Decimo quarto Die Januarii Anno Regni Domini nostri
Caroli Secundi Dei Gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei
Defensor. etc. tricessimo sexto, Annoque Dom. 1684. Robert Earl of Ailesbury,
Custos Rotulorum of the County aforesaid.
REligion being the great Instrument of Political Happiness, and Unanimity in
it the most certain Promoter and Band of Peace, upon these two Reasons,
therefore all prudent Governments of the World have by their Laws endeavored
to secure both the Interest and Unity of it. And whereas the Religion
established by Law in this Kingdom, was intended to be, and by long Experience
has been found, an happy, as well as the only means to both those Ends: This
Court has resolved, That all such Laws as have been provided for the reducing
all Dissenters to a through Conformity, shall be forthwith put into a speedy and
vigorous Execution. We do therefore, with the Concurrence of the Right Reverend
Father in God, our most Learned and Worthy Lord Bishop, desire all Ministers,
and require as well all Constables and Churchwardens, truly and punctually to
present, both at our Quarter Sessions and monthly Meeting, all such in their
respective Parishes, as shall absent themselves from their own Parish Church
upon any Sunday. And that such be presented also that come not at the beginning
of Divine Service, and during the whole time of it, do not behave themselves
with that Decency and Reverence as the Rubrich (which is confirmed by Law) does
direct (viz.) Kneeling at all the Prayers, Standing up at the giving of Glory
to the Blessed Trinity, at the repeating of the Creed, the Hymns after the
first and second Lessons, together with other things contained in the said
Rubrich. And that none may pretend Ignorance in their Duty, we therefore desire
the Lord Bishop of this Diocese (that together with an injoyning all Ministers
exactly to perform their own Duty) He please to command them by their Sermons
and Catechizings to instruct their Parishioners in all those things the Laws
require from them. By which Means, we hope in some time the true Worship of God
will be thoroughly understood, and honestly practiced by the People of this
County, to Gods Glory and our own Peace, Prosperity and Comfort.

PER CURIAM.
SEeing it is a certain Truth, that all Subjects (by the indispensable Law of
Nature and Scripture) are bound to obey those Powers which God has set over
them; especially in those things which are ordained for the Preservation of the
true Christian Religion; wherein the Glory of God and the Salvation of their
Souls are more immediately concerned: and whereas by the prudent and pious Care
of our Governors, a Godly Liturgy, and form of Gods public Worship, has been
provided, and by our Laws (Ecclesiastical and Civil) established, requiring all
Men, on the Lords Day (and other times by Law appointed) to repair to their
respective Churches, and Communicate with the Congregation in Prayers, hearing
the Word, and receiving Sacraments. A Liturgy not only for many years received
in our Church, with little or no Opposition, till the late unhappy Times of
Rebellion and Confusion; but also which has had the Approbation and
Commendation of the most learned and pious Divines in other Protestant
Churches. A Liturgy which Archbishop Cranmer and his Fellow Prisoners in
Oxford daily used, till a little before their Martyrdom; when by the Cruelty of
their Persecutors it was taken from them; and then (as appears by their Letters
yet extant) those pious Martyrs sadly complained that they were deprived of the
benefit of that Book: The Rejection of which, and the Disobedience to the Laws
injoyning it, renders our Dissenters evidently Schismatical in their Separation
from the Communion of our Church, as shall (God willing) in convenient time be
made further appear. Seeing then our dissenting Brethren will not conform out
of Conscience of their Duty and Obedience to God and their Governors; it is
not only convenient, but necessary, that our good Laws be put in execution, for
the Preservation of the public Peace and Unity, and for the Good of the
Dissenters themselves; for Afflictio dat intellectum, and their Sufferings by
the Execution of our just Laws, may (by Gods Blessings) bring them to a Sense
of their Duty, and a Desire to do it. For the attaining of which good Ends, I
require all the Clergy of my Diocese within the County of Bedford, to publish
this Order the next Sunday after it be tendered to them, and diligently to
promote the Design of it, according to those prudent and pious Directions given
in the Order, and by Catechizing and Preaching (that they may have no pretense
for their Ignorance) instructing the People in their Duty to God and the King.
And that God Almighty would be graciously pleased to give a Blessing to your
Endeavors to promote those good Ends, is and shall be the Prayer of

Your affectionate Friend, Brother and Diocesan THO. LINCOLN.

London, Printed by T. H. and sold by Henry Bonwicke at the Red Lion in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1685


