SAINTS Duty discoursed, from 2 Pet. 3.18.

And the SAINTS Dignity handled, from Ephesians. chap. 1. v. 7.

With Directions to both, delivered from a Chatecheticall, DIALOGUE.

By him that was, and is, (...) (...) (...)



Luke 3.10. And what shall we do?

12. What shall we do?

14. And what shall we do?

Mark. 13.37. What I say to you, I say to all, Watch.

LONDON, Printed for William Franckling, and are to be sold at his Shop near
the Sign of the George in Norwich. 1649.

TO The mirror of her age, and example of her years, Mrs PHILIP HOBART,
(Daughter to the Right Honorable the Lady FRANCES HOBART) the Author in all
humility and sincerity wishes the growth of grace in this life, and glory of
grace in the life which is to come.
Truly Virtuous,
NOne that know you but know your worth is so far above a Complementall
flattery, that who harbors a thought thereto, be wraies himself a
sycophantizing Parasite. None that know me, but know (...) is as far beneath
me, as a Complement is above me: In down right fidelity, did not your ample
and admired testimony of good seed, sown in good ground, discover it self,
the world should never have been intelligenced thus, of your continual
practice, to understand and record the principles of Religion: your
attentiveness at, your delightfulness in, sacred Ordinances; a shame, as
pattern to riper years: May I add, it is pity, but all encouragement to a
further progress, should raise it self, to steel your resolution, in
imitating and exceeding Honorable precedence: That the last may be the best
gener^^ (...) ^^mber (hopeful offspring) what advantages you have above
millions of Families in the continual dropping of Gospell-Ordinances; if your
measure surmount not other, you come short; if you grow not in grace, as in
years, you frustrate expectation. I have over-boldened my self to present
this to your eye, which was tendered to your ear, and taken by your Pen; but
your gracious and noble spirit can accept the desires, and connive at the
failings of them that wish you well in the Lord. I must tell the world, that
among many whom God has blessed (since your Lady mothers zealous piety (...)
weekly Lecture in her private Chapel) to the rejoicing of diverse precious
souls, the fair hopes of your imitable graces luster you far and nigh,
renowned. Wisdom with an inheritance is good, spoke that wise, and rich man,
and King: your inheritance is fair in respect of the nether, let your
continual growth in the grace of Jesus Christ speak you still wonderful in
regard of the upper springs. Proceed (gracious stem) to flourish, so as long you
may continue an example and honor to your Family, an encouragement to all that
fear God, a president to all young noble plants, and an ornament to the (...)
Christ.

For this purpose (pardon the presumption) I have dared to Dedicate to your
worthiness, the Saints practice, with their privilege, and pathway to both;
the two first discoursed in your Chapley-field Oratory, the last to my dearly
beloved Parish.

May the Lord reap glory, you, or for your sake any, benefit; Who can express
my joy or thanks? Thus bowing the knee to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
making continual mention of you in my prayers day and night without ceasing,
that the Lord would bestow upon you length of days, with (...), perfecting the
good work he has hopefully begun in you, to his eternal glory, and your
everlasting salvation by Jesus Christ, to whose intercession and acceptance I
commend your soul and body: resting,

Your humble Orator at the Throne of Grace, R. A.

The SAINTS duty discoursed.
2 PET. Chap. 3. ver. 18. But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord
and Savior JESUS CHRIST.


THe Penman of this Epistle is specified in the first Chapter and first verse,
thus: Peter a servant and an Apostle of Jesus Christ. The persons to whom this
Epistle was dedicated, to such as from free grace had obtained like precious
faith with them that were of the Privy Council: the Apostles, by the
righteousness of our God and Savior Jesus Christ, verse the first, even to
such contemned, condemned, poor, scattered ones, through Pontus, Galatia,
Cappadocia, Asia, Bythinia, as in 1 Ep. chapter v. 1.
The scope, is to forewarne them of dangerous days and perilous times
approaching, in which many will endeavor to pervert their life, and subvert
their faith, even to the making shipwreck thereof; whereby they might prove as
ignominious to themselves, so inglorious to the Gospel of Jesus Christ; he
therefore in the precedent, and in this present Chapter reminds them of diverse
and dangerous positions and practices of men, that forewarned, forearmed; and
walk as Pilgrims, and strangers warring against whatever will endanger their
precious souls, holy faith, or godly life, not knowing when the day of the
Lord comes nor with what speed, nor dread; by a convincing interrogatory he
winds up their faith, to an exact pitch of the power of godliness, and holy
conversation, verse 11. seconded by variety of arguments, ver. 14, 15. that
they may keep themselves from being plucked away with the error of the wicked;
either (...), or (...), which to prevent, he prescribes my Text as an Antidote.
As the last words usually best remembered; So, But grow. The words contain a
needful direction for all Christians scattered to and fro throughout the face
of the whole Earth. If any ask the question, what is required in the Text?
it is answered, To grow; In what? In grace and knowledge; Of whom? Our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ; In what order? here the method, In grace and knowledge:
from which might be raised these three observations:

First, it is our duty to grow in grace.

Secondly, it is our duty to grow in knowledge.

Thirdly, it is our duty to grow in grace

I shall insist on the first only.

It Is the duty of Christians to grow in grace. In the handling of which, Doct.
1.
I shall according to my usual method, First open the terms of the Doctrine,
grow and grace; Secondly, prove the point by the (...) of Scripture, and (...)
of reason; and Thirdly, make the use and application; and the strength and
blessing of the Lord be in and on us all.

To grow, is a metaphorical expression, and may fetch its illustration from
Plant, Trees, Flowers, Corn, etc. which from small spires, sprigs, seed,
augment, spread, enlarge themselves, so may be said to increase, grow; this the
word (...) signifies: As these grow deeper, bigger, stronger, higher; so must a
Christian sprout, flourish, waxing stronger and stronger in the strength of the
Lord, and power of his might: Or to grow; may send forth an understanding to us
of the duty, by observing of our natural or civil growth; as we desire to
manifest our selves by our long trading, to be richer, wiser, better: So by our
longer continuance under the breathings of the spirit in Gospell-dispensations,
show ye your selves to have received an increase of more light, life, zeal,
love, knowledge, etc. this is to grow in grace. I conceive the grace in the
Text, is not that grace of graces, free and perfect, displaid upon a soul by
the infinite riches of wonderful mercy, that admirable free, full grace of
Justification. But by grace here, the graces of Gods holy Spirit, through the
Word, with power and life, conveyed into the believers soul, by the Holy
Ghost; which may therefore fitly be phrased, the fruit of the spirit, Gal.
5.22, 23.
which are thus in Apostolical account enumerated; Love, Joy, Peace,
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance. These are
graces of Gods Spirit, and this grace in the Text includes the graces of this
kind, in which we must endeavor to grow; to which knowledge is added in the
verse, even that distinct understanding of divine truths revealed in the Word,
concerning the knowing of God and Christ, whom to know aright is not less then
life eternal. John 17.3.
The sum is, that little grace of Gods Spirit in thee, thou must be sure to
act, that it increase more and more: that as to men there is evident a growth
in your body; so to God and men you may make it apparent there is an increase
in your soul, in the gracious exercise of a conscience and conversation void
of offense before God and man. This I conceive, with submission to better
judgments, the sense of the term of the Text. I proceed to the point to be
proved.

It Is a Christians duty to grow in grace: which growth may have a reference to
the number of graces, or to the measure of graces; in respect of both, we must
grow.

This Paul advises Corinth. 2 Cor. 18.7.
Therefore (as ye abound in every thing, in faith, utterance, and knowledge,
and in all diligence, and in love to us) see that ye abound in this grace also:
a bundle of beautiful excellencies are here collected. And our Apostle in the
first Chapter, the fifth, sixth, and seventh verses: And besides this, give all
diligence, add to your faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge; and to
knowledge, temperance; and to temperance, patience; and to patience,
godliness; and to godliness, brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness,
charity. An addition, increase and growth of graces in the number. Is not this
intimated in the parabolicall History of the Lord and his servants concerning
the expected increase of the talents? in which the honoring Encomiums,
speaking them good and faithful, that increased and multiplied their two to
other two, their five to ten, with an euge, well done good and faithful
servant, thou have been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler
over much, enter thou into thy Masters joy. Mat. 25.21.


For the growth of the measure of grace; grow in it: has not Christ given
grace that we should grow to a higher measure, even to the perfecting of the
Saint, and come up to the measure of the stature of Christ, the fullness of
Christ Ephesians. 4.13.
for-which Paul greatly rejoiced, hearing the faith of the Thessalonians grew
so exceedingly, and their charity toward each other so abounded 2 These. 1.3.
to this Paul expects in the 1 These. 4.1.
that as they had received of them that were dispensers of the
Gospels-mysterie, so they would walk in pleasing God, and abound therein more
and more, as in the forementioned place; as man, so God, calls for more
weight, more measure; to add to the number and measure of grace; grow.
Christians had need to look to their growth, Non est bonus qui non vult esse
melior, he that has no care for the growth of his grace, will soon bring the
truth of his grace into suspicion: by an Apostaticall revolt, or Cork-like
levity in being removed from, or wavering in the first and best principles.
Need we have to grow in grace, from the (...) to the (...)

grow in grace, and not tell you, God has more for you than yet appears in
you, less reason, to be up and doing. But God is an inexhausted Fountain,
that both can and will bestow, more upon every soul that truly desires the
growth of grace: Ask thy soul if it had not need be better stocked, and more
stir up it self to lay hold on God, if he will not give further supply of
grace and knowledge: It Is my happiness, I know in my need how to be furnished,
it shall be my reason; Therefore I Will grow.

Therefore grow in grace: The more Hebrews, of weak (by the grace of faith)
they became strong, strong to an unmatchable power: So by the growth of grace,
the soul that was wont to be as water, becomes to be as strong as steel it
self; the Apostles witnessing the truth of this to the world. The want of
saving grace hinders the want of saving knowledge, that enlightens, emboldens:
when heaven afforded many an advantageous opportunity to satisfy thy darkened
judgment, doubting spirit, let me appeal, if thou have not returned home,
likewise, as came out: the sad experience of our own heart, dictates want of
grace proudly kept back, that in many things, we remain as newborn Babes,
poor, weak Creatures. The truth of grace (O Christian) quickens, but the
growth of grace strengthens thy soul: that panoply of God makes the Saints
strong, the breathing of the spirit of grace makes a stripling more puissant
than the Goliah's of the Nations. It Is recorded of Father Abraham, being not
weak in faith, he staggered not at the promises of God, but being strong in
faith, he believed in hope even against hope Romans 4.20, 21.
Christians meet with Principalities, Powers, and the Rulers of the darkness
of this world, a terrible army; how shall a poor soul encounter with this
maine body, when only the strength he has is little more than a forlorn
hope? let him strengthen himself with the graces of Gods Spirit, and he shall
find a power invincible; none more need of strength than a poor Christian:
The more grace the more strength; Whether,

1. Against sin, that is not satisfied with a being in, but would dominiere
over a Christian: or what struggling with secret corruptions, as wrestling with
too many corruptions, hard to be subdued, enforcing Paul to cry out Romans 7.24.
Oh wretch who shall deliver me from this body of death? Oh, the sobs and
groans, tears and fears of a weak Christian, when corruptions begin to
discover themselves, then they in apprehension, the undone of all the world:
Amaleck fights and sometime prevails, the want of strength foiles the soul,
the height of grace upholds the soul, the more grace the more strength against
sin.

2 Against suffering, the Church and people of God meet with opposition,
contradiction, persecution, who more? it was the Fathers appointment, as the
sons prediction Io. 15.16.
and this Apostles, the great Doctor of the Gentiles often in sacred Writ, To
pass by bad report, hunger, nakedness, prison, etc. it is difficult, for some,
not all. When strongly grown in the grace of Christ, Paul can conquer, the
Apostles with admired resolution, daunt their enemies; when formerly all left
he Lord Jesus Christ, and why? they were grown in grace, and more grace, more
strength against suffering.

3. Against Temptation: our Savior would not have taught his Disciples to
pray, Lead us not into temptation, had not he known, the devil and an evil
heart, laid snates to tempt; which of Gods choicest Jewels free? Not Abraham,
Job, David, not Christ himself; And can thou expect or request to be above
thy Lord? Poor weak Christian, thou must look to be buffeted, assaulted. Labor
for more grace; so more able to resist: for by the grace of God you may stand,
as withstand.

4. Against Desertion: The more grace the more strength. It Is a condition Gods
people sometimes meet with, and complain of: A bitter expostulation, My God,
my God why have thou forsaken? Faith and fear in a double combat: Whither in
reference to David, the Type, or the Son of David the Antitype, The Lord
Christ: And may not your full tide ebb? Your bright moon eclipse? Your fair
day cloud? and your clear Sun misten? Oh know ye that are dandled in the arms
of an everlasting God may yet not be ever danced in Gods everlasting arms? He
may shoot bitter Arrows against you, and his everloving smile may frown it self
to a momentary indignation, as bitter as death, as dreadful as hell it self;
Labor therefore for more grace, so more strength to suffer all, and endure
hardship, as the good soldier of Jesus Christ. So that either silently with
Aaron hold your peace: or with David religiously Language, It is the Lord, let
him do as seems him good. The more grace the more strength in all, against
all. Ergo.

The more grace the more comfort; receive by the tender of a Princes pardon,
than a poor soul comfort, content, in the truth and growth of grace; were it
not for the grace of God in them, of all men Christians were most miserable: in
the sad apprehension of many and mighty corruptions within them, diverse and
great troubles upon them, and several scandalous reproaches against them:
Whither shall the soul search for comfort? To whom fly for solid consolation?
Can that honor that is fading, that estate that is flying, that name that is
blasting, that friend that is dying afford any? Alas, miserable comforters all!
nothing so much as the least spark of divine grace; and if a little will
cherish, what strong consolations will the growth added to the truth of grace
afford? view and review the instances of Sacred Writ, and you shall find, where
most grace, there most comfort; Therefore grow in grace,

soul? a poor body: What is a soul without grace? a poor soul: And what is
grace without the growth thereof? uncomfortable grace: What advantage to have a
name to live, and want life? What profit to have a form, and void of the power
of godliness? This will upon good ground witness to the world the truth of
grace is in you, when they see your light shine, that they may glorify your
father in heaven; and your light which was at first as the dawning of the day,
appearing as the Sun heightened to the top of the Zenith, fairly discovers the
truth of grace in you to men: And to conscience an evidentiall sign of truth,
when that which flames as a fire begins to live, to a never dying worm, it is
quenched and crashed by this: my conscience bears me witness, that I, though
my beginning was small, yet am increased to a second, a fifth, a tenth talent:
behold oh conscience, did I make bones of Curse, Lie, Oath, Sabbath, Gospel,
Ordinance, Hypocrisy, Pride, Passion, secret Impiety, or open Enormity, in
times past? And do I not, do not thou oh conscience, oh heart, hate and abhor
every false way? Do not perform and delight to do what God pleases,
pressing hard to be found in the righteousness of Jesus Christ? Who in my
Infancy hoped to be justified by duties, desires, well-meaning, etc. whence
comes my love to God and his? Whence Patience, Zeal, Faith, more then in times
past? Comes not my growth from my truth? oh enemy be my Judge, speak
righteously. And to God also, when at the hour of Death, day of Judgment,
summoned to appear, disarmed of all hopes, and helps, no more muse or buroughs
to save or shelter; This will witness for thee, though thou have been a poor
comfortless one, yet a true one; behold Lord, thy Talent has gained,
multiplied, it is increased and grown, though little yet good evidence, the truth
of grace is in thee: When as on the contrary, to man, to conscience, to God, I
have no more grace now then from my Infancy and day of youth; This comes off
with sin, shame, sorrow, to the blackness of despair it self: Therefore
being the growth of grace evidences the truth of grace, good reason we should
grow in grace, etc.

According to my usual method, I proceed to the Use.

Learn hence, The life of a Christian Instru.
It Is shameful impiety to practice (when once enlightened, graced from God with
precious Truths, Promises, Privileges) nothing: Such a lazy devotion as brings
in question the truth of grace: Grace will make us faithful husbands, wives,
servants, as Christians: If man cannot endure a Lurdan Lozell, God cannot
endure a loitering idle Christian, nor in reference to the things of this life,
or that which is to come; I know not a Christian as a man or woman but have or
might have employment, or in works of necessity or charity: And as a Christian
man or woman has to work out Salvation, a work hard enough, to so far from
thinking them idle drones, that may spur them to be as busy as the Be, and
all little enough to give a good account at the last day: Jacobs Ladder is
usually applied here, as Angels some ascending, some descending, but none
standing still, to intimate so it must be in the Church of God; Either looking
up to God, or into the soul, that admire God for his Majesty, Glory, Mercy, or
humble our selves for our unworthiness, sin, and iniquity. Did not God set his
Adam presently after he had made him a living soul into the Garden to dress
it, so to become a laboring soul; and why? But to tell the children of Adam
that they must not be without motion, action; God gives no Supersedeas for a
Christian to be idle, or standing still: Nay, he checks with a Why stand you
idle all the day long Mat. 20.6.
? It Is here in the Text required that he be doing, thriving, growing, Grow in
grace; This of the first Use.



1. They are grown more and better in duties: Grace is like Ezekiels waters,
though little at first, discovers it self by streams to run, rivolets, rivers,
to waters impassable: Or as fire, that increases in light, heat, more, greater,
so grace in growth makes a Christian in his duties more frequent; whereas
before he would court the Lord in a morning, so bid him good morrow, or
complement with a goodnight, he now begins to be more frequent, grace acts him
to morning, evening, and when occasion serves, at midnight as high-noon: at
first seldom, since he is grown more frequent.

2. They are more fervent, more zealous, if not, I could question that truth as
growth of grace; Though at first grace as fire, of which comparatively we say,
it is a cold fire; so a soul finds it self, in the duty of hearing, praying,
receiving, cold devotion in all, chill, almost stiff, but by that time
increased, grown, grown warm (...), seething boiling hot; the affections
kindled to a flame, a zeal as hot as fire.

3. More conscionable, what in times past was done in custom, formality,
hypocrisy, education, self, is now steeld, from conscience he does it, and
dare not but do it, and delight to do it also: He at first saw the observing
the Ordinances, and Sabbaths, of God his duty, now grown beholds them his
privilege, so that as in time past he acted them as a task, now he performs
them as his delight, and joy to think of his communion with the Lord: Now he
makes conscience and will not omit a duty, as not commit a sin, he makes
conscience of all; so does a Christian that is grown in grace: discover it in
his duties, being more frequent at them, fervent in them, and conscionable of
them: Try and enlarge the particulars in your meditations, I must hasten.

2. The growth of grace discovers it self by the death and dwinging away of
sin, at first sin lives, but when grace comes sin pines, and graces growth is
sins decay; as the house of Saul weaker and weaker, and the house of David
stronger and stronger: So grace and sin in the soul. As it is in the body with
nature and the humor: If the humor prove predominant then nature decaies, and
soon man is gathered to his Fathers; but when nature gets the upper hand by
degrees the killing humor lessens, and abates to a perfect recovery; so that
the bed-red one walks strongly and comfortably. This grace, like his blood,
runs through every vein, actuates in every faculty of the soul, as the soul
in the whole body; Now mortifying this, now crucifying that corruption, laying
the axe of zeal, revenge, care, to the root, and so cuts down root and branch,
he leaves not a hoof behind, spares not the Dalila, the darling, the sweet bit
under the tongue, or bosom sin in any corner of his heart, nothing in his
Judgment, Understanding, Will, Memory, Affections, but shall relate to grace;
The Enemy thereof shall be brought and arraigned before Jesus Christ, and
cashiered for ever, his precious, gracious soul; he is grown and acts to the
utmost, as fire, heat, and water moisten to the utmost, so grace, that dwinges
sin to decay and dye: The gallant Adonijah shall not be spared, the delicate
Agag not connived at, nor the least of his sins (if sin against God can be
called little) but shall be examined, traduced, and gibbited before the God of
Israel: He spies the inside, he views the outside, what graceless thing is
discovered, is discarded, he abstains from, and abhors secret as open
wickedness: So that no sin shall have a willing being in his soul; but he is
sensible, so sensible of their imperfection, as a bone in throat, or mote in
eye, never quiet till removed, using all means to recover the health of the
soul into the state of strength, Oh try, which dwinge and decay grace or sin.
So second trial.

3. Grown Christians more boldly, manifest the grace of God in them,
confidently they dare to speak and act upon the growth than they did upon the
first truth of their grace; The Apostles would fly and deny Christ before they
would suffer or die: But after the truth of their grace, faith, knowledge was
strengthened, then they feared not the Synods, Councels, of countermanding
preaching Jesus Christ, as you that are versed in the Acts of the Apostles can
attest. A soul at first is like Nicodemus, it loves and would feign be with
Christ, but a great deal of fearful sin clouds the new inspired grace,
secretly it dare but appear for fear of the Jews; I wave quotations for that
I speak to (or I am much misinformed and mistaken) Scripture-searching
Christians: But grown as Daniel, and the 3 Children, they are gloriously
manifesting their zeal for God, and none but God, though controled by
Sovereignty itself: As a child that has life in operari and esse, goes but
by this support, and that assistance, for but weak now, new going; When a few
years over-past, a shame to hold by a Finger, Chair, Stool, etc. but now
strength increasing he goes confidently by himself: So a poor soul at
first creeps, cannot go; but his grace strengthened, renewed, he ventures in
nomine Domini, as David against Goliath and dreads not, when all Israel is
struck with a misgiving doubt, if not Panick fear. A grown Christian manifests
his grace by undanted profession in the hardest of body-torturing persecution,
and midst of (precious name) disgraceful slander: In a word, by what
contradiction soever of men, opposition of the gates (the power and wisdom) of
hell the poor Christians grace is assaulted with it discovers it self void of
fears as offense, in the flames of a Sacred love to God, Christian love to the
Saints of God, in a steadfast resolution to walk up to Covenant and Gospel
Reformation, and in a Christian deportment of themselves, with the exercise of
a good conscience before God and man: here I conceive is growth as truth of
grace: Try, oh try if it be thus with thee or not. I must hasten, time bids a
dispatch.

4. They can trust God with outward and inward estate also, sometime in
weakness he feared one, sometime the other; Now steer over both, knowing that
God has given the Promise to godliness, of this and that life which is to
come. No distrustful thoughts for things temporal; Christ has commanded, and
his (...) warrant for a grown Christian, Mat. 6.25.
and assured for things of eternity to the truth as growth of grace, that nor
faint nor fear: by which well may the soul rely on the Lord for its outward
and inward estate. Abraham the Father of the Faithful sometime doubted, but
after Romans 4. from 16. to verse. 22.
Try how this reflects on thy soul, by a patient, humble waiting, till God
answer.

5. Lastly, they that are grown in grace, grow and endeavor to grow in the
knowledge of Jesus Christ more and more in the (...) and (...) thereof: truly
to believe God and Christ, in God and Christ, and to acknowledge the Lord
Jesus, by a separation from the goats, and communion with the sheep of Christ:
Not only notionally to know and understand more of the history of Christ, but
practically to do for Christ more then in times past; that we may read in
conversation one sanctified and strengthened in the grace of the Lord; and
experimentally, that God may have experience, and the world also, that their
grace, is a grace and knowledge of and according to Jesus Christ: making them
more humble Job 42.5, 6.
and more desirous to know and find more, so the truly wise and knowing
Christian; not to display the radiant beams of their vainglorious
understanding, but to discover the riches of Gods free and infinitely full
grace to their souls, in looking upon them when blind in understanding, and
unsanctified in heart; after this they press to know more of themselves, and
more of Christ, to the praise of the Lord their God for bestowing as truth, so
a growth in grace. Try, and by this comfortably conceive growth of grace.

3. Now after Trial the uses follow, of terror to some, comfort to others,
exhortation to all. If not grown in grace, come in, come in, I have bitter
things against thee, yet shall this Law condemn none before it hear him
speak: Ask conscience then if grown in grace; whence bleating of sheep,
lowing of oxen? whence in the soul, or Family, or Congregation, neglect of
duties, or if performed, resting on duties? how many cast the word of God
behind their backs? profane the Sabbath, condemn the soule-ravishing promises
of the everlasting Gospel? whence is it men trust to and rest in their duties?
as the hypocritical Jews, Isa. 58.23.
rising to too lofty an expostulation, in questioning the Deity it self, a
nontimely answering, regarding their prayers and performances? how many as the
Pharisees vainly gracing themselves Luke 18.11, 12.
? A soul grown in grace, would nor make it an Idol, nor a slight, yet how
many of us thus guilty?

2. The falling of (too many) from their first love, like that Ephesine Church
in the second of the Revelation; and is not the love and zeal of many waxen
cold in this day of affliction, in the winter of our adversity? when if ever,
God, Covenant, Church and Kingdom had need of champions, zealous for the glory
of the one, the renown of the other, the safety and honor of all; Now, but
woe, and alas, oh what cold, dead spirits, hearts, are we possessed withal?
when at first zealous, since remiss, matter of humiliation and fear: it is
neither natural, nor supernatural, for either would make the nearer the
center more life, vigor and activity: let conscience speak if thou did not in
time past better affect Gods ways, Worship, Sabbaths, Ordinances, Ministers,
People, then now: fear we may: guilty we are.

3. The pride of thy grace speaks the not growing of grace: and how many plume
themselves in this unhappy age, with the men-admiring virtue, when they put off
the God-bestowing grace? into what assemblies shall we enter? in what company
shall we be? but God shall be robbed of his glory, by man's boasting of his
grace; Grace keeps a soul low, and exalts the Lord, knowing whatever received,
received of God: the Apostle and the strong Christian, number not themselves
with such as commend themselves, and measure themselves with themselves, for
they are not wise 2 Cor. 10.12.
the more grace the more humility, while men advance and exalt, so as boast of
zeal, grace, John-like, etc. it speaks us not grown.

4. Lastly, the seldom searching of our hearts speaks no growth of grace, if I
cast not up my account, I know not whither my receipts or disbursements be
most, I fear a bad reckoning, in this the Lord be merciful unto us, we know
not the windings of our hearts, desperately wicked and deceitful, we try not,
search not: how many (nay how few) Sermon after Sermon, Sabbath after Sabbath,
month after month, commune with their own hearts, to see in what this or
that grace is increased since the reception of so many mercies? When a man
seldom looks into his heart, I cannot conceive how it should be discovered he
is grown in grace, but must pass sentence: (I speak to wise men) are they not
blameworthy? And may I not?

1. When the Lord has graciously affoorded time and space; it was a check
severe; he gave her space to repent, and she repented not: Rev. 2.21.
And may not the Lord say, many a day and year have I offered free grace
stretching out my hand all the day long, and ye despighted hitherto the spirit
of grace? Go graceless soul into graceless society; sad sentence.

2. Yea, when in that space called and tendered all the means that infinite
understanding conceived conducible to the growth of grace; no pruning,
dressing, nor watering wanting; Judge I pray betwixt me and my vineyard, what
could I do more? it is heavens gracious condescending appeal: Oh England, what
shall I do unto you? Oh People, how should I entreat you? your goodness yet
as a morning cloud, your grace so far from growing, as it is the early dew
dismissed, dispelled: When a father thus by a child, or a Prince thus by a
Tyrone, the doom of death must follow. A harvest is set, and at due time the
axe must be laid to the root of the soul, and the tree cut down Mat. 3.10.
: What in Christ? at his Church? and Ordinance? of his profession? and not
fructify, multiply, increase and grow? See Joh. 15.2.
he takes away God, and God takes away the firm influence of his spirit, from
the possession of his inheritance, he takes away, and then the soul withers,
and withers, till fuel for everlasting burning. Oh dismal: when man endued
with such a soul as an Angel of God, should so undervalue it in the neglect of
grace and sleight of God, the God of grace, such a grace, such a God vilifyed:
what can be expected less then the height of calamity, and depth of misery to
be inflicted, while Gods justice, and Satan's tyranny shall remain? but hoping
better things of you, and wishing better things to you, I wave the terror, and
pass to the use of comfort.

Grow in grace, Comfort; for,

1. Thou art more then a natural man, then take comfort: were in nature only,
I could not line or letter of consolation thus, but daub with untempered
mortar; but entitled to, or invested with grace, true comfort indeed. When a
Parent sees a child outrun his extravagant courses, to become a man, and a man
of God in the world, is it not great comfort? so for a believing husband or
wife, to perceive the work of grace in each other, joy to ravishment. Nor can
the Minister be silent in this, but when he beholds Jesus Christ formed in his
Congregation, he must rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory, for his
people being filled with grace; and is it not a joy for the Church of God nigh
you, by you? so let it be to thy soul also: Thou art more then a natural man.

2. Art grown in grace? herein is comfort that more shall be given thee: to
him, to her that has shall be given, Mat. 25.26.
more given to you, more done for you, God himself will purge you, that ye
may bring forth more fruit Joh. 15.2.
: the Lord seldom, never, meddles with a soul, but it fares the better,
grows the faster: A secret influentiall virtue distills it self to the
flourishing in grace and duty, and perfecting to every good work; this talent
doubled, thy grace blessed, that more and more fruitful and abundant in the
work of the Lord be comforted.

3. Ye can more boldly go to the Throne of grace, the grown righteous man as
bold as a Lion: so comfortably a weak newborn babe cannot approach before
the presence of a jealous God and consuming fire, as one that with resolved
exercise of sanctifying grace, has waded through the troubled waters of
mortification, etc. and landed at the haven of full assurance: Jesus Christ
being our High Priest warrants it, the Apostle inferres it, Heb. 10.21, 22.
for he by his one oblation for ever has perfected them that are sanctified
Heb 10.14.
: He therefore exhorts and so comforts the Saints as Heb. 4.15, 16.
, and may not that comfort?

Compl.
But oh, I see other that younger, more illiterate, unlearned then I, have more
grace and knowledge of Jesus Christ then I; therefore I fear the truth, the
growth of grace, and what can I take of comfort?

Resp.
And what if so? why O soul should thou be disquieted? take heed of a curious
eye, when the hand of providence disposes as pleases him, beware it displease
not thee; lest you murmr and suffer: it was none of Joshua's virtues to
exasperate Moses for the prophesying of Eldad and Medad Number. 11.28, 29.
, but Moses is for our imitation: And bless ye the Lord, that he adds to the
number of his Church, and you behold others to magnify the name of Jesus
Christ. A grown Christians eyes gush out with rivers of tears, when men sin
against God, and their hearts leap with joy at the conversion, salvation of
others, seeing the Gospel of Jesus Christ enlarged. Go ye and do likewise:
ye and they shall have eternal possession, be not overwhelmed with sorrow.

2. The less ye have, the less to answer for, the Lord requires no more then
he gives: if you have five talents, five more will content; if you have but
two, two more will satisfy: The Lord is not severe, austere; if you have not
an ox or heifer, a goat, kid or lamb, nay a turtle Pigeon; God will not
extort, be but faithful, fruitful in thy little, and he will make thee ruler
over much: God looks to the truth of thy graces, to the quality rather then the
quantity; so that if but a mite, a cup of cold water, accepted, rewarded, be
therefore comforted.

3. Thou that growest though but little and other more, thou shall never want,
thou shall hold out; it is to the happiness of salvation, and why not to the
hearts consolation? thy grace is Gods grace, he a fountain, when thou beginnest
to be dry, know God can refresh, renew: In the Prophets phrase I end all; Thou
shall be as a Tree planted by the waters, whose root spreads out by the river:
thou shall not see when heat comes, but thy leaf shall be green, thou shall
not be careful in the year of drought, neither shall cease from yielding
fruit Jer. 17.8.
. Take this for thy comfort, and I am now dismissing this Assembly.

Suffer but a word of exhortation:

Grow, grow, thrive and prosper in grace and knowledge of God, let me crave
leave to prescribe means, to propound motives, and I have done.

1. Exercise of grace, that little, that truth of grace you have; do we not
direct, use legs and have legs, use memory and have memory? actions intend
habits: Stir up and exercise that grace of God in you, and your morning,
dawning, will appear bright as the Sun.

2. Unite to gracious company, join to the assemblies of the Saints, withdraw
not from such as speak to edification, giving grace to the hearers; the
tongues that are tipped with the language of Canaan, will advantage to
enlightening, to greater heat, and further growth: sit not in the seat of the
wicked, that cooles; discourse furthers the Scholars studies; good counsel
helps forward to heaven: it is sad (because often too late) to say, oh that I had
followed good counsel, of such Ministers, friends, parents, I had never come
to this place of execution: lest we repent too late, use the society of the
Saints.

3. Beware of secret corruption; as fame and credit will keep a natural man from
open, scandalous, transgression; let grace and piety keep a spiritual man from
secret corruption; strive and pray against it, as David in the nineteenth
Psalm. Dust, coals, and such trash, in secret, will overthrow the stomach,
and make the wholsomest food, loathsome: so will sin, if we harbor with
delight a close iniquity under our tongue, it will nauseate all the saving
truths of Jesus Christ gloriously held out in his Gospel, and hinder the
growth of grace.

Lastly, conscionably use the Ordinances of God, do not as many for custom,
formallity; but hoc age, do it in the integrity and simplicity of conscience;
the Law and statutes of God Ps. ^9.7, 8.
are beneficial, that which issues out of the Sanctuary increases Ezekiel. 47.12.
, when pray, read, receive, exercise your selves conscionably, and your benefit
will be profitably discovered to all.

Motives.
Mot. 1. The more grace, the more exalt Christ, it is a souls burden, I cannot
live to honor Christ for all his merit, goodness, truths, and mercies; labor
then for more grace, so speak more of his name, and ye will be in life, death,
to magnify Christ little lower then Angels in their praises to their Maker:
grace brings you higher and higher to these Seraphicall spirits; so you will
chaunt the perpetual Hallelujah's with the Quire of Heaven, of whom Christ is
to be praised: as of you to be honored.

2. Grace makes the more eminent; grace and fame are said to be companions, as
the righteous so the gracious is more excellent then his neighbor: the world
cleares this truth when the most debauched wretch would not but seem gracious;
the strumpet, lukewarm Laodicea: all outwardly as the Pharisees: yea the
Devil, else why transformed into an Angel of Light, but that with more credit
to act in the children of darkness, and heirs of light also; but grace with
God and Christ, a name better then of son or daughter.

3. Time may come need of more grace, these are the plundring times, and
exercise the faith and patience of many a precious soul, though (blessed be
God) we hear it only with our ears, and see it not with our eyes, nor feel
it to our hearts; but a time may come: one grace fits not for every temptation,
no more then one shoe for every foot or one garment for every back: The
Apostles harness in his Panoply Ephesians. 6. from 10. to 19.
that complete: sometime a Christian has need of this grace, sometime of
another, we know not which God will call us to exercise; leave not a hoof
behind, as in one, grow in all, and strengthen every one, fearing and feeling
the time bad to be worse: be not unprovided, consider the season, and grow in
grace.

4. This will keep you true and steadfast to God, to Christ, and the principles
of Religion, that ye waver not in a corklike ventositie, to the hazard of faith
and a good conscience: this will arm you against all delusions, errors,
sins, fears; and keep you entire to Christ, till you come for ever to be
with him, where is the Crown of grace, glory; with which he confirm you
here, and assure you hereafter, for his own name and glory sake. Consider what
I have said, and the good Lord grant you a true understanding in all things,
that ye may grow in grace and knowledge of Jesus Christ. To whom be glory for
ever and ever.

EPHESIANS. Chap. 1. ver. 7. In whom we have redemption, through his blood, the
forgiveness of sins, etc.


PAVL by the will of God, separated to the Gospel for the Churches sake of the
Gentiles, renders the work of his Ministry faithful as to others, to this
Church of Ephesus; which after his Apostolical salute in the first and second
verses, does magnify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has
blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ, verse
the third. Amongst which precious excellencies, this in the Text for the
consolation of the faithful in Christ, is little inferior to life
everlasting, this being the troublesome obstacle to a believing soul till it
apprehend Jesus Christ, in whom it has redemption, etc.

Doct.
The Text contains this truth, fully to redeem from sin, cost no less then
the blood of Jesus Christ, or the blood of the Savior is the redemption of the
Saints. That this is so, why this is so, and what use hereof, are the three
things I shall burden your memory and patience with at this time.

That it is so, appears by the Text: 1. In whom, that is, in Christ, verse 3.
in whom elected, ver. 4. predestined unto adoption, ver. 5. in whom we are
accepted, ver. 6. In whom redemption, as in the Text: We, the Saints, etc.
faithful, ver. 1. blessed with all spiritual blessings, ver. 3. Select Paul,
elect Ephesians in Christ, In whom we have redemption, freedom, full
plentiful freedom, the word in the Original having a Preposition added,
speaks the perfection of the redemption: To take redemption as in reference to
the body or soul here, body and soul hereafter, no redemption but by Christ,
in whom full redemption; Redemption is said to be fourefold.

First, by Manumission, as Lords, their vassels freely discharging, so Christ
by his grace freely justifying. Romans 3.24


Secondly, by permutation or change, as in wars; so Christ himself bare our
sins in his own body on the Tree 1 Pet. 2.24.
; the wrath of the Father went down in the Son to redeem the Saints: he
suffered in his body that we might be redeemed in our souls; so a redemption.

Thirdly, by violent ablation; so Abraham rcscued Lot; so Christ redeemed his,
having spoiled Principallities and Powers; blotting out the handwriting of
Ordinances that was against us, taking them out of the way, Col. 2.14.
and through death destroyed him that had the power of death, delivering them,
who through fear of death, were all their lifetime subject to bondage. Heb.
2.14, 15.


Fourthly, by price and ransom; so slaves and captives are redeemed from the
thraldom of cruel Turks, and the hands of barbarous enemies: Thus Christ
redeemeth his also captived under captivity, ye are bought with a price 1 Cor.
6.10
, not with corruptible things of silver and gold, but with the precious blood
of Christ himself, that immaculate Lamb 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.
. In whom we have, etc. Through his blood: that is, the shedding and oblation
of his blood. As in the Law the blood of bulls and goats sanctified to the
purifying of the flesh: so Christ by the sacrificing of his blood obtained
through sanctification, Heb 9.14.
and eternal redemption, verse the tenth. In whom, etc.

The forgiveness of our sins: That is, Remission, or as the word signifies,
retromission, or sending back again from the soul to the first Original the
Father of all sin: A full remission from the defilement and destruction, from
the guilt and curse, from the dominion and power; by his blood, from the guilt
of sin; and by his spirit, from the power: In a word, from all that relates
to, or attends upon the blackness and darkness of sin. The forgiveness of
sins: The forgiveness, not only by the blood of Christ have we redemption
Col. 1.20.
, or sanctification Heb. 9.14.
, but remission also, as in the Text; so Col. 1.14.
in whom we have redemption by his blood, even the forgiveness of sins. John
in his Revelation Rev. 1.5.
confesses that Christ washed us from our sins by his blood; and to fetch the
record (bearing witness to this truth) as high as heaven Rev. 5.9.
the four and twenty Elders acknowledge, Thou were slain, and have redeemed us
to God by thy blood, out of every kindred, tongue, people, and Nation. Agreeing
to this, is that of 1 John 1.7.
, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin. Has a
poor soul need to be healed? Christ is a Physician to cure him; does thy
soul parch and burn within thee? Christ is a fountain to refresh thee; art
thou laden with the unsupportable burden of thy sins? Christ is
righteousness to ease thee; if thou fear the stroke of death, he has for
thy poor believing soul the gift of eternal life; and if thou walk
mournfully apprehending damnation for sin, he has redemption for thee from
sin, as in the Text. The Reasons follow.

Christ only acceptable to God, the Mat. 3 17.
, and in the verse before my Text, he has made us accepted in the beloved; all
the oblations Legal, and offerings Ceremonial, had a redolent savor in the
pure nosthrils of the Almighty, as they stood in reference to Christ. Without
God none could please God, says Ambrose; whatever is presented to the Father
without the Son, is said to be unprofitable, and unacceptable; as the
High Priest offered all in the time of the Law, so the Lord Jesus presents all
in the time of the Gospel, without him nothing is accepted: therefore of him
the Saints have all, to, and of, redemption. This is the first Reason, the
second follows.

M^c 6.6.
, It will neither be pleasing to God, nor satisfactory to divine justice; the
leaprous person was to be cleansed by the blood of the little bird Lev. 14.51.
, and the leaprous soul is to be purified and redeemed from all its sin and
uncleanness by the blood of Jesus Christ, that bird of Paradise, the
celestial Pelican, that sacrificed himself to death to save his to
everlasting life: when sin was to be remitted, it was to be put upon another,
none must expect a satisfaction in or from himself; the sins of the people
were to be put upon the Scapegoat: Thus they were delivered Lev. 16.
, to teach us under the Gospel, our sins must be put upon Christ to be the
only satisfaction to Almighty justice.

Two things are required of such as satisfy Gods justice.

First, he that satisfies must be free from all sin: if any man under Christ,
says he have no sin, he deceives himself, and the truth of God is not in
him; 1 John 1.9.
Christ in every thing like us, sin only excepted: his enemies being Judges
he has done all things well; so he, he only free from sin, can satisfy Gods
justice.

Secondly, that which satisfies must be pure, only pure in the offering, and
such oblations, sacrifices, poor mortals cannot tender to their God, there is
iniquity in their holy things, they are unprofitable, and come short of grace
now, and must of glory for ever, if the Lord be not freely gracious in
accepting, as bestowing: Oh the wants and weakness in our hearing, praying, in
our duties, graces, unclean, unclean, imperfect, imperfect in all, but Christ
a pure and holy offering unto the Lord: hence in the Law, when the High Priest
went for an atonement, he only entered into the Sanctum Sanctorum, and in the
Gospel, Christ trod the wine press of his fathers wrath alone Isa. 63.3.
, and that's the second reason.

Hos feci, tulit alter honores, is injustice; rich mercy, full merit is the
ground work and foundation of all our excellency. The Saints good and comfort
arises from the free grace of the Father, and the full merit of the Son, and
why to man or Angel should the glory be given? when Scriptures speak any
thing of this spiritual blessing, redemption, or forgiveness of sins, there
is usually annexed a doxology or blessing, as Rev. 1.5, 6 So Rev. 5.9, 12. Col.
1.12, 14. 1 Cor. 1.30, 31.
with this in the Text, as appears in the third verse; and thus of the third
Reason.

That the Type might correspond Heb. 9.22.
, so no forgiveness of sin but by the blood of Christ: herein is a large
field, but I hasten to the Uses.

Instruction; Use instr.
If the blood of the Savior be the redemption of the Saint, learn we first,
what an unhappy and cursed thing sin is, the forgiveness whereof cost no
less then Christ's dearest hearts blood, it deludes us to defile us, it defiles
us to destroy us, that our poor (yet precious) souls should perish for ever
without remedy, but for Christ in whom we have, etc. Sin Dalilah-like, speaks
fairly, acts friendly, for her advantage; but when opportunity serves, then
shall Sampson smart for it; Adam bemocks himself to a being made immortal,
and doomes his self, and posterity as low as death and deep as hell, When he
had fair promises to be as God, high as heaven, lofty as Eternity; by eating
the forbidden fruit, fruit though pleasant in the taste, bitter in the bowels
as everlasting burning; cursed sin as a leaprosie and plague infects and
overspreads all degrees, faculties, persons, estates, souls, bodies, insnaring
millions to the eternal, infernal tortures of devouring Tophet, as impossible
to avoid, as intolerable to endure, without the blood of Jesus Christ, in whom
we, etc. Oh that the Lord would enlighten our understandings to see sin in
its nakedness, then we would (as purity it self) hate it with a perfect
hatred: Did we consider aright that Christ is so long in sorrow as we are in
sin, would we thus transgress? Unhappy Oath, curse, security, unbelief,
sin of what sort or condition soever, crucifying the Lord of glory,
unpardonable but by the alsufficient merit of Jesus Christ. What meant in the
Law an oblation of a Hegoat for a sin-offering? but to teach us that sin is
of an odious sent, and an ill savor in the nosthrils of the Lord: Oh cursed
sin, when not all the Saints on Earth, nor all the Seraphicall spirits in
heaven can expiate that sin which notion called the least: Oh that the
children of men, and the Sons of God would apprehend the Lord speaking to a
soul, as once Leah to Jacob: I have hired thee with my sons Mandrakes, thou
must come unto me. So the Lord to our souls, ye are mine, you must come unto
me by faith, love, obedience; I have bought thee with my Sons teears,
sufferings and blood; precious souls, set your esteem on every sin, as is
the redemption, and it will speak you to remember how unhappy and cursed a
thing sin is, when for the pardon thereof it cost no less then the
unvaluable blood of the Son of God, the Lord Jesus Christ, in whom we, etc.

Is the blood of the Savior the redemption admired, not to be expressed;
greater love then this can no man show. What greater then this could God
declare? his love engaged that piety be scourged, and impiety by his stripes
healed; it was content wisdom it self be derided, and folly pass unscoffed;
truth suffers, and falsehood triumphs; Justice is condemned, and
unrighteousness escapes free away; mercy is afflicted for cruelty; life
resignes it self to death, to preserve the damned from the sting thereof: In a
word, God dies once, that man might live for ever; by right propriety, he does
redeem the poor soul as his creature, by right of propinquity, redeems man as
his creature-Saint: he undertook that which would have mouldred ten thousands
of men to dust to have endured, and attomed the myriads of Angels to have
suffered. Oh the depth, breadth, length, height of Christ's love, speaking to
the Father in a loftier expression then Paul to Philemon concerning Onesimus, I
beseech thee for my son Onesimus, whom I have begotten in my bonds, formerly
unprofitable to thee; I Paul have written it with my own hand: Holy Father I
beseech thee for this my poor soul, whom by my Gospel I have begotten, to
thee formerly unprofitable, unserviceable, and yet unfruitful enough, but let
me obtain all his sins to be laid upon my shoulders; it is thy beloved Son,
that Son in whom thou art well pleased, I have writ it, and sealed it, with
no less then my precious blood: Behold, love, love and admire! was not, was
not Rebeckah's love great to Jacob? do as I advise, the curse be on me and the
blessing on thee: so Jesus Christ, Soul, follow my advice, do as I bid, and
all the blessings of thy Father be upon thee, and if any curse, let it light on
me, for in me thou shall have redemption: Oh, see as to serve Christ for his
love, and thy redemptions sake, dear and tender, when his life is not spared,
that thy sin may be pardoned, and soul saved in the day of the Lord. You see
then how dear a Saint is to Christ; thus of the first Use.

Deal faithfully O ye beloved of the Lord, 2. Use is of exam.
and examine whether or no you can say, in him we have redemption: David speaks
of the goings of God in his Sanctuary, the singers before and the minstrels
follow after: O holy, O happy progress; so may I behold the soul going to,
and coming with pardon of sins; try we first by what precedes and goes
before, then see what follows after remission of sins, so may we apprehend
terror or comfort to a remitted or unforgiven soul: This I premise, the
foregoings of a pardoned soul, are not to be looked on as causes, though
conditions, or as kind of qualifications that support a soul to hopeful
comfort.

1. Try and examine whether or no you sense your sins deeply, I cannot
instance in whom sin was pardoned comfortably, that was never sensed deeply;
the experimental Christian knew once sadly, as truly, it lay a load upon his
soul, and a burden upon his spirit, that nothing but a secret support kept
him from resigning up infinite mercy: A load to a grief, a grief and load
with a witness, and can it be less to thy soul when such a dishonor to thy
God, A curse to thy Christ, a grief to thy spirit, a sadning to Angels, and a
vexation to all the Saints of God? a deep sense as that reported of Queen Mary,
were my heart unript, you should find the loss of Callice there; so the soul,
were my heart uncased, it would be known to men and Angels, and is known to
the Lord that knows all secrets; never any sorrow like this, never any burden
to my spirits as this; my unbelief, my unprofitablenesse, my deadness, my
unworthy walking to that high calling and rich mercy, to which I am called, and
which I have received, none like my sin, a burden too heavy for me to bear,
If I have not a supply from my Christ, in whom I hope to have redemption: Try
whether suffering or sinning most burden thy soul, it is that which is deeply
sensed, if hopefully to be pardoned.

2. The soul before it comfortably can expect the forgiveness of sin,
fears dreadfully, to this dread and fear the poor soul must needs step.
When it senseth sin deeply, apprehends it rightly, dismay, terror, must
appale the spirit, and affright the heart; when the soul looks on the sins
many and mighty, that every sin is a crucifier of Christ, and not fear, and
not be troubled, it is impossible: When David apprehended his sin Psalm. 38.3.
There is no rest in my bones because of sin, ver. 6. I am troubled, I am
bowed down greatly, I go mourning all the day long fear and trembling make
all my bones and every vein of my heart to shake: If apprehending of judgment
will make the quaffing Belteshazzer shake and tremble, what must the deep
apprehension of sin and judgment too? When the malefactor perceives the
sentence of death passed upon him, Oh what a shaking stupid trembling falls upon
him? so a poor soul receiving the sentence of death in himself; oh what
fear, what amazement, and horror? unspeakable; the apprehension of sin
discovers the frowns of an everliving, and ever-gracious Father, this
troubles a soul to astonishment; the promise is, God will come and save you,
the Lord will come with recompense and vengeance (oh sweet) vengeance on thy
sins, recompense on thy poor desires; but what goes before, to whom is this
salvation engaged? to the fearful heart Isa. 35.4.
, Try, have, do fear sins curse, heavens anger? hope thy Savior is
working a pardon for thee his Saint.

Once more, if thy soul be pardoned, then it has been thoroughly humbled, will
not experience tell you, reason inform you, when a sin is deeply sensed, a
soul is terribly afraid, and how can it then but be thoroughly humbled, how
should it less? When the promises of the Lord are engaged to comfort the
broken, contrite, and humble soul, and the Lord of Promises inhabiting
Eternity, inthrones himself in such a soul Isa. 57.15.
, when the day of expiation was, the soul was to be afflicted Lev. 23.
, why but to hint as God was ready to show himself merciful, so the people
ought to show themselves humble. A child when faulty, or servant guilty,
expect no favor except they be submissive: so a poor soul, little hope of
mercy till humble. Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand, that kingdom
that affords the subduing of, and pardon for sin to a poor penitent humble
soul: Try, have bin humbled for every sin, as any sin? have sentenced thy
self to hell? have been afraid to come before God? lying low in thy eyes,
worth nothing but confusion? have aggravated thy sin against such a God, such
a Father; fair hopes for a gracious pardon.

Lastly, Try, have sought, do seek with all earnestness and intensenesse of
soul and spirit? making it the great request, that the Lord vouchsafe pardon
and forgiveness to thy poor soul? When a man is in danger of the Kings
wrath, will he not endeavor a composition? and when a poor soul sees it
self by sin, in danger of hell, will it not seek the Lord while he may be
found? and call upon him while he is near? by and by the Lord will abundantly
pardon: How earnestly will a condemned malefactor sue and cry, good my Lord,
mercy, mercy my Lord I beseech you for Christ's sake: even so the soul
sentenced to the gates of death, and chambers of hell, hearing the God of
sinners is a merciful God, in all duties, upon all opportunities, seeks for
redemption, the forgiveness of their sins, crying for Christ's sake to find
grace; the soul knows well that prayer breaks down the bank of sin, and
makes a sluice for the streams of divine pardon to flow amain to a praying
soul. Pray if perhaps the thoughts of the heart may be forgiven, was the
advice of Simon Peter to Simon Magus Acts 8.22
; when a soul knows it is blessed in heavens account, if the sins be remitted
Psa. 32.1.
, what can impead the soul from making out with such earnestness that neither
lets it self nor the Lord be quiet till a pardon be sealed, by this time I
conceive the Lord Jesus discovers himself to the soul, the one, the only one
in whom it has redemption, etc.

These precedent foregoings for pardon, experience will attest sure enough,
lets hear the minstrels which follow after.

First, the soul accepts thankfully; who can express the gratitude? the
gladdest tidings and joyfullest news that could be related to a poor drooping
Christian, that all the day and night long cries out, oh my sins; oh my sins.
How thankful will a poor bedrid man be to his Physician that is isntrumental
to his enlargement? how thankful a prisoner endungeoned for his freedom? or a
condemned person at the place and minute of execution to hear and see a
pardon? And what thanks unutterable to the Lord will a poor soul render? what
huggings, and embracings? what speakings and actings of thanks? till obtained;
deep load, dreadful fear, humble dejection, and earnest seeking, now an
answer of peace enjoyed, how thankful? Higgaion Selah can best express though
far beneath the thanks of a soul redeemed by the blood of Christ. Try if thy
soul has gladly accepted, joyfully received this unspeakable mercy, by the
return of ineffable soul-hearty thanks; can thou in some measure subscribe
to Rev. 1.5.
, or to Rev. 9.
, or this third verse, to bless God as for other, so for this his spiritual
blessing, redemption, forgiveness of sins? a comfortable sign. To proceed.

Secondly, a soul pardoned will henceforth shun sin carefully; it well
knows there is forgiveness with the Lord, that he may be feared; the child
once flamed or gasht will fear the burning fire, and cutting knife long after;
the prisoner coopt up to hardship and dungeon-straights, released, will be
fearful of debts and sin again: And shall not a soul long fettered by the
hellish guilt and apprehension of sin, redeemed through the only worth of
Christ's all-meritorious blood, dare to meddle with sin, the way to hell as
hell it self? The pardoned soul knows there is only one Physician to afford
forgiveness, to attain his care and cure, a work and labor of highest
difficulty: nor can the son of man, or Daughter of Jerusalem be more
watchful over an unparalleld glass, than the pardoned sinner, over his soul,
fearing if once broken, hard, if ever possible, to be repaired. The
apprehension of this made one of the Ancients to say, Till sin has done as
much for me as God, I will have nothing to do with the stool of iniquity. Try
precious soul, can say, I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them?
gracious pardon has cast off the rags of sin, what have I to do any more
with Idols? shall such a one as I flee? have I shed so many tears to the
dimming of my eyes, to the breaking of my heart? have I been often hurried as
low as everlasting burnings to obtain a pardon for my sin? and has infinite
goodness enricht my soul in its forgiveness? and shall it be in vain? shall
I again return with the Dog to the vomit, and with the Swine to wallow in
wickedness? God forbid: I Will shun sin hereafter carefully; do thou so?
desire thou truly so? a hopeful sign.

Thirdly, a pardoned soul will live honorably: if once thou gain Redemption
through Christ, thou will live like a Saint on earth, yea a Citizen in heaven;
yea thou will walk like the redeemed of the Lord; not as one imprisoned in a
mierie Dungeon, but as one walking in a Paradise of Eden; now as the Prodigal
in a new Garment, a Vesture of Righteousness; not as the Brat of Hell, but as
heavens Royal Offspring; not with the menstruous Clothes of sinful Adam, but
the Candid stole of Christ's innocence, daily invested with his holy day
apparel: his conversation in heaven, his vain thoughts dislodged, his frothy
words checked, his idle ways refrained, the whole man Saint-like, he is
bought with a price, he will glorify the Lord with body and soul, he puts
to his Seal, it is a sin with a shame and curse to keep the Laborers hire
Deuteronomy. 24.15.
. A soul that sees his Redemption in Christ, knows it cost his precious
blood: should he live any longer to himself, to his former sins, he easily
understands he detaines his soul and body from Christ, the purchase of
Christ, he resolves therefore henceforth to know no thing, no person unrelate
to Christ, he has obtained his pardon, his deportment shall be as Coheire
with Christ, and heir to God of eternal glory, he will live honorably. Try
if you so live and breath, act and affect, that your conversation may be
suitable to your privilege, and all your endeavors answerable to this Princely
prerogative, the forgiveness of sins: Do thou labor to exalt the Lord,
and magnify Jesus Christ above sin, creature, self? comfortable signs, if
not, e contra.

Fourthly, the soul pardoned walks more comfortably than ever: A man long time
confined to bed, home, or prison, set free, with what inward joy, satisfactory
content, his soul is comforted, experience can best express; so a poor soul
formerly plunged in ghastly fears, and hellish apprehensions to dwell and live
in everlasting darkness for want of pardon: Now the Lord by his Spirit sealing
as full, as free remission, no stranger can intermeddle to relate his joy
unspeakable and full of glory, pardon and peace; remission and consolation like
Aaron and Hur, hold up Moses hands, support the pardoned soul; Go in peace,
and be of good comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee be frequent expressions
of holy Writ. When by pardon of my sin, my soul beholds it self once a
far of, now nigh by the blood of Christ, how can I but rejoice? the fears,
sorrow, trembling, horror, because my sins were unpardoned, dispelled, must
needs create inward joys unspeakable, for that mine iniquities are forgiven.
Try what inward joy and consolation in some measure, at some time, Gods Word
affords from Christ, in whom thou have redemption. Thus for the trial.

Thirdly, 3 Use for Reprehension.
this serves to reprove such as cannot say, in him we have redemption; has
not pardon been tendered? free, full, long as the sin? the doom must be
thine, if no redemption by Christ, thou art a Captive to the power of thy lust,
and a bond slave to the curse of thy sin; to an ingenuous spirit, it is
misery to be a prisoner to a superior, deep calamity to be subject to an
equal, but a slave to his drudge vexation high; little comfort left for the
gallantry of bravest spirits but this, they are enthralled by men, and in that
little comfort too, but to be enslaved under Hels Darling, Heavens scorn, the
souls everlasting shame and confusion, sin, makes not only the ear to
tingle, heart to tremble, but dumbes, because it doomes to that Lake which
burns with torturing fire and sulphurous brimstone; whether the pains of
sense, or loss be sorest, needs no determination, either enough to fill a soul
with the terror of black despair, well consider Job 20.11.
, The thoughts of a resurrection speaks the soul glad to return to dust
again: But hoping better things of you (precious souls) I spare to reprove,
and pass to the fourth Use.

4. Use of Comfort.
To all you that can say in any measure, my Saviors blood is my Redemption, let
your souls rejoice, and all within you bless his name: For,

First, thou art blessed, as the sweet Psalmist Psa. 32.1.
, in this happy enough, happy in Gods account; what if deprived of earthly
contents and enjoyments? yet thou have remission, forgiveness, that's worth a
thousand Worlds: I deny not (dear soul) but that many have more of blessings
without, but thou have that white stone, that new name Rev. 2.17.
affording such a consolation within as may fill thy soul with joy ineffable
and full of glory.

Secondly, by this assured of Salvation; it is the souls trouble, the
uncertainty of the reward, so that it works it out with little below fear and
trembling; the forgiveness of thy sins distills with a sweet influence
enlightening to salvation: as by the heat I know the fire burns, by the light I
know the Sun shines, by the pardon of my sin, I am confident of the
salvation of my soul. Luke 1.77


Thirdly, in this comfort, whatsoever God sends or suffers, it is in mercy; no
affront from beneath, no desertion from above, no affliction without, no
temptation within, but proceeds from a Father as well as from a God: Jonathans
Arrows were shot for David, as at David; the tender Mother gives with a bitter
Pill, closely Sugar to sweeten: so the Lord, though he sometimes answers with
terrible things, yet he is the God of salvation, take comfort therefore.

Fourthly, God will sanctify thee as well as justify thee, thou shall be
partaker of his Spirit as well as of his blood: I know thy soul longs to be
sanctified, it shall be, be comforted, where God pardons he purges, so
runs the Covenant Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 27.
seconded by the Apostle John 1 John 1.9. Object.
. But here a soul is ready to complain, there is nothing in me from me, that
I should hope of the Lords pardon to me.

Answ.
To this I Answer: Have thou not as much as God looks for? what had the Infant,
the Churches Hierogliphicke Ezekiel. 16.
but blood in it, polluted, defiled? yet God pitied: What had the Prodigal?
yet his Father freely pardoned, and joyfully entertained him. Fear not then,
for Christ's sake, the Lord will do more than this, in him there is
Righteousness, Grace, Perfection, Merit enough to redeem from Hell, the
nethermost Hell, to save, to save to the highest Heavens: Has not he offered
himself a Sacrifice for sin for ever? and will not he for ever perfect them
that are sanctified? and will the Lord remember their sins and iniquities any
more Heb. 10.12. and 17.
? Be comforted therefore, and if this will not serve, let God himself answer
such an objection made Isay 43.22, 23, 24. Exhort.
. I hasten to the last Use, Labor to subscribe to this truth, you that cannot
say you have redemption through his blood.

Means.
First, labor for a forgiving heart, and a remitting spirit; do as you would
be done unto is the Royal Law Mat. 6.14
, with that of Mark 11.25, 26.
.

Secondly, labor for a truly humbled spirit, a thoroughly humbled soul, so
that Promise sealed to thee, in the twelfth of Zachary, the latter end and
beginning of the thirteenth Chapter.

Thirdly, believe in Christ, entertain him in all his Truths, his Promises,
exercise thy faith in spite of opposition, and Acts 10.43.
. A fair instance Mark 2.4, 5.
.

Motives.
God will then be one with you; the first Adam by his sin lost you, the
second Adam by his merit regained you, no more a stranger from God, or the
Covenant of grace, his Royal Attributes are martialled while you are in the
valley of tears to do you good.

Paul Romans 8.32
challenge all persons and things; that thus you may remain faithful, and
with comfort wade through a sea of blood, labor for Redemption.

Lastly, ye that can say with Paul in the Text, We have redemption, etc. Love
him, live to him, and to none but him; let your Duties, Mercies, Graces, Lives,
be praise to Jesus Christ, you need not question Gods love; the favor of the
royal breast is known by Mercy, by Remission: has the Lord delivered me
from the power of darkness, and translated me to the Kingdom of his dear
Son? and shall not his free grace be magnified? Praise the Lord O my soul,
and let all that is within me bless his holy Name for his Christ, by whose
blood I have redemption, the forgiveness of my sins, and let all that wish
well to my soul, for my soul, say, blessed be the Lord for ever and ever.
Amen.

FINIS.

