THE APPREHENSIONS Of some poor Observers of present Dispensations, and
Providential Actings, imparted to the Lords Remnant in the Nations, for the
provoking of them in this day of Jacobs trouble, to look unto their Maker, and
that their eyes may respect the Holy One of Israel.
THE LORD OF HOSTS having roared as a Lion from his dwelling place against his
own Heritage, for their halting, settling on their Lees, savor of the world,
and their sore iniquity, so that he has smitten Jacob, and made the fatness
of his flesh wax lean, rebuking all his Idols, and disappointing expectations
round about, from any short of his own saving hand, turning many years
endeavors, even in the fire, in these three Nations, into a dismaying Chaos of
confusion, whether we look to Rulers, Ruled, Armies, Churches, Prophets, or
People; so that we may say there is no healing Medicine in any hand, but our
breach is wide as the Sea, etc.

And in the sense of great iniquity in all, yet under some hope we have
against hope of the Lords pleasure in mercy to rebuke the pride of MOAB, who so
sorely revileth his Heritage, and to arise for therelief of his people as in
MOUNT PERAZIM, and as in the valley of Gibeon, yea as against PHARAOH of old,
to the glorious exaltation of his Son, and salvation and peace of his Subjects,
even now the ASSYRIAN has spread over his land, we account it our duty more
earnestly to call unto all, who have received the adoption of children, to
appear in the advantage of their ACCEPTABLE ADVOCATE at the Throne of the
Father, in all meekness and fear to bewayl over the evils, and intercede for
the blessings needed, in the Nations, and in particular to lay to heart these
things following, which we have thought on toward their help, and our own, in
the time of solemn assembling before him, which we humbly propose might be very
frequent in, the several Assemblies, or remnants of the faithful in the three
Nations; and to the end our cry may be joint herein at the Mercy-seat, and
there may be a communication of what the Lord in grace shall grant in answer
hereunto, that if beauty be given for ashes. we may also obtain mercy to
abound more in thanksgiving than heretofore, we humbly signify our intention,
if the Lord please, to begin our solemn Supplication the next fourth day come
sevennight, being the eleventh day of the eleventh Month, commonly called
January, and are desirous to understand from others, and observe and
communicate what acceptance the Lord will signify, that we may understand
together, and be glad in the salvation of God.

Matters referring to the Churches to be bewailed.
1. The deep sleep and spirit of slumber fallen upon Churches and people of the
Lord, and as a sad effect thereof, little discerning, either what the Lord is
doing, or his people ought to do, but a strange divided language amongst them
calling for a lamentation. 2. That a spirit of the love of this world, in the
profits, pleasures, honor, and reputation thereof, has ensnared so many to
the Lords dishonor, Truths differvice, and their own hurt, and horrible
declining. 3. That there is so little zeal or activity for the Lord, or his
concerns, in comparison with what has been, each one now minding his own, but
few the things of Jesus Christ. 4. That instead of through witness-bearing for
the Lord in this day of deep Apostasy, See and bewail the Doulis Tongued
Declaration of 23. People called Anabaptists, in and about London, debasing
their holy Profession, and exposing their dissenting brethren, with the
Quakers, and others, to the Persecutor, which Declaration, we detest, and some
baptized Congregations in, and about London disown.
costly services are declined, and a fearful unbeleeving confederacy rather
said with whomsoever the world says a confederacy, bowing down the neck to
every yoke, like home-born slaves, to whomsoever, or howsoever any get up, or
being up, do manage their power.


Matters referring to the Nation to be bewailed.
1 The horrible Treachery that has lately abounded betwixt Rulers and Ruled,
yea, even those that have been in nearest bonds related, supplanting and
dealing falsely with each other, to the sore pollution of a righteous profession
in the land, together with the shameful profaning the pretense to the fear of
the Lord, so often proclaimed to be respected by Rulers, who in the
distribution of their trust unto men, have so little truly regarded the same. 2
That a spirit of open profaneness of all sorts increases, and that almost
without control. 3 That there is an implacable desperate rage reaching up to
heaven against the Lord his works and people. satisfied with nothing less than
the ruin of all, running back to Egypt, and licking up again the vomit of
every old exploded abomination, which the late Country insurrections, and City
tumults abetted so much by men in power, and the National Clergy, sufficiently
evidenced. 4 That there is continued in this day of Gospel light, that
soul-afflicting iniquity, of exacting Tithes, both from the Lords Heritage, and
such as are yet unconverted, and this contended for by the Nations Ministry,
assifted by force over us, ruling by their means, whereby the Lords services
are loathed, and the Land exposed to the destroyer, as at Shiloh of old.


Particulars to be prayed for.
1 That our dear Redeemer, who both by decree and covenant, etc. is entitled to
the rule of Nations, may in this day, when the Lord has so sorely shaken other
foundations, be more clearly discovered to be the only Potentate, King of
Kings and Kingdoms, and his Laws and Government in the excellency of them in
their own nature so made known, as these Nations may cloze with them and him,
in whom only the Lord has said Nations shall be blessed. 2 That those two
great Ordinances of Magistracy and Ministry may be brought forth in their
truth and beauty, distinguished from the counterfeits of them, by pouring forth
more anointing to those offices, by which it may be demonstrated that the
sufficiency of both is only of and from the Lord, and that he may in all
humility and fear be appealed unto, for a gracious decision in this day of the
worlds rage, and accusing his poor people for being against Magistracy and
Ministry, whether the accused or accusers are most for that which he will own.
3 That those of the Army and their adherents who have been so forcely visited
by the Lord, and whose affliction is like to be helped forward, and added to by
unreasonable and cruel revilers, might have that dispensation of his, so
sanctified to them, as might tend effectually to renew them to repentance, for
their great Apostasy and treacherous dealing with the Lord his cause and
people, that so the Lord in mercy might put a checque to the boundless rage of
the enemy, and avenger, and in due time reprove their insulting Reprovers. 4
That in this day of so eminent a sayler of the visible protection of his poor
peeled people, he might be earnestly sought unto, and found to be their sure
defense, and yet again this song might be in their mouths, SALVATION IS OF THE
LORD, HIS BLESSING IS UPON HIS PEOPLE, and it might be known to the ends of the
earth, that there is no enchantment against Jacob, neither is there any
divination against Israel. 5 And lastly, but espec^^lly, that the spirit might
be so poured out upon all the Lords sons and daughters, about whom he has been
hitherto as a wall of fire for defense, that they may weep very bitterly over
all iniquity which has separated betwixt them and their God, and have great
occasion continued and renewed to cry Grace, Grace, unto his great name, and by
recalling former, and better observing his works of wonder to come, may be
taught to order their conversation aright, that he may delight to show his
salvations, and increase in the midst of them the shout of a King, to whom be
dominion and glory for ever. Amen.


John Berwicke, Phil. Pinchon, John Proud, Rich. Goodgroom, Hump. Hathorn.
Perc. Goodricke, Clement Ireton, Wentworth Day, H. Courtney, John Vernon, Will.
Allen, H. Danvers, Will. Lance, Rich. Bowney, Jews Powel, John Garbrand,
Rich. Robinson, Joseph Archer, John North, Nicho. Gilbert, Tho. Johnson, Tobias
Picks, Will. Smiter, John Edkins.


London, Printed for Livewell Chapman, at the Crown in Pope's Head Alley. 1660.


