AS it is very much the Parliaments honor, so we account it no less our
happiness, that the doors thereof stands so freely open, wherein we may
present our desires, as also acquaint it with such fears and grievances, as for
the present we do, or for the future may suspect to suffer under. And as for
the full discovery of both, we have presented our several Petitions, so we
think our selves in duty obliged to tender our hearty and thankful
acknowledgements, for that return for the present we received by the mouths of
those two worthy Gentlemen Sir Henry Vane and Col. Lister. Not doubting but
that we shall suddenly find our hopes crowned with such further answer, as the
merits of so just and honest a cause deserves. In the mean time, we cannot but
to our great regreet take notice of a false and scandalous Paper, put in by Sir
William Killigrew, miscalling our humble and modest Addresses, Clamours, our
Appearances Riots. A strange mistaken confidence, so foully endeavoring to
abuse their credulity, from whom he expects to find favor or Authority.

A Paper delivered and dispersed by Sir William Killigrew.
1. BY reason of the many greater affairs in Parliament, the Bill for
perfecting the Earl of Lindseys Fens, has not yet found a time to be read: by
which unhappy delay the season of this year is near spent for works of this
nature; and if the work begin not till next Summer, the profit of that year
must be also lost. By this unhappy delay also new obstructions are now raised
against this public work; For I am credibly informed by several persons of
quality, that the people have been lately invited and encouraged at Boston to
come up in great numbers to make new clamours, by telling them that they have a
good cause, and but few friends in Parliament; that three or four only spoke
for them; that when the Vote passed, but thirteen were for the Country, and
twenty seven against them; that their Fens would be lost unless they did come
generally up to petition; and if that failed, then they should bring up their
wives and children to the Parliament door, and there leave them.

II. I do conceive, by these invitations and encouragements, many poor
ignorant people are persuaded to sign Petitions they understand not, and may
be did never see. And to make the noise and clamor greater, many rich men of
Boston, with others bordering on the eight hundred Fens, are now come up (who
would have no draining, that so themselves with their great stocks may still
continue to eat out the poor Commoners, and do therefore well to declare in
their last Friday books, that the poor Commoners have no interest in the Fens,
but by their Landlords right: which is a pretty preamble to rob the poor people
of their Commons, in case their design should follow of enclosing all the
Commons.) These men also are now come up to petition against the Drainers, in
hope to stay the Act from passing, thereby to keep the said eight hundred Fens
from being drained, and thereby to defraud the State of eight thousand Acres in
that Fens belonging to the late King, as Lord of the Soil, and Drainer of the
said Fen.

III. I shall not trouble my self to answer their railing books given abroad on
Friday last, because the substance of the same books has by them been
published long since, and long since fully answered by books of mine: nor much
value what their Petition or themselves can say after so many years hearing,
and such full debates at so great a Committee, where all the House had Voices;
and after a Bill ordered by this honorable House to be brought in to perfect
the said draining: for I do humbly conceive, there being no new act done by the
Drainers, these men's repetition of old clamours fully answered, can signify
nothing but some few men's endeavors to delay the Act, in hope to starve the
Drainers while the cause depends; filling men's ears with terrors of the
peoples discontent, as if two or three hundred Riotters, with their Abettors,
signing a Petition, or as many rich men's coming up with a Petition were the
voice of the whole people of Lincolnshire! and as if all England did desire the
Fens should not be drained! when as most of this Nation do wonder that any
should oppose so general a good.

IV. I do glory in my part of the merit of this work, because I may safely say
that no work of this nature was ever carried on with a more general consent,
and applause of the most eminent Lords, Owners, and Commonets of the Country;
or with more equity pursued, or less prejudice to any man, or has produced a
greater improvement (I mean proportionable to its quantity) nor has any such
work been brought to a greater perfection. In consideration whereof, I cannot
apprehend that the whole Land shall be taken from us; but my fears are, lest
some artificial delays, or prejudicial accommodation be found to bring us to
ruin, to wit, by recompencing our charge, hazard, and losses, which the whole
twenty four thousand Acres will not now do, nor can the Country ever perform
it by a sum of money, though they and we should agree to it. My only hope is,
that the Parliament will think it just and honorable to settle us by the same
like Act with Bedford-Levell, having the same title and merit. In which Act
there are provisoes to meet with, and prevent all mischiefs and inconveniences
which have, or may happen to any person concerned in this work of draining. It
is therefore a vain thing by Petitions to anticipate the intentions of the
Parliament, who intend so much their good, if Lindsey-Levell be established by
the like Act with Bedford-Levell; the profit of these works being done, will
encourage the draining of all the Fens in England, as a high improvement to the
public good of this Nation, and therefore worthy of the Parliaments
protection; for which there are arguments enough to convince any opinions to
the contrary.

1 June, 1651. William Killigrew.

A Reply to Sir William Killigrews dispersed Papers, by the Owners and
Commoners in Lincolnshire.
TO the first. We are civilly sensible of the Parliaments affairs, as appeared
by the manner of our petitioning: We conceive there cannot be a time found to
settle the Fens in the Earl of Lindsey, who petitions not for them, nor in Sir
William Killigrew, who has not produced to the Committee any Deed or
Conveyance, whereby to derive a Title to himself. We may complain of
unhappiness, who have been delayed and interupted in our Drainings these sixty
years by Court-Undertakers: We cannot be called obstructors of a Bill, that
petitions for one. If it was good manners for us to print what we hear and are
credibly informed, we could tell to whom Sir Thomas Dawes is indebted, and to
whom Sir William Killigrew is engaged; and that our Lands must discharge those
debts and engagements; and who are interessed in other Undertakings. But to
avoid calumniation, we will hold our babbles; persons of quality are seldom
tatlers. To invite and encourage people in a good cause, is noble, honest, and
commendable: humbly to petition, cannot be called clamor by a tongue well
guided. We cannot learn of any Votes that passed against us, neither can we
believe it, nor that any of this Parliament is against us, who was so much for
them; nor that the Fens can be lost, if kept out of the hands of
Parliament-destroyers. We shall never be so uncivil or unnatural, as to leave
our wives and children at the Parliaments door: nor can we imagine that ever
any thing will come from thence, to cause them to beg at other men's doors.

To the second. Sir William knows the poor need no invitations; it was they
only who were found guilty, and punished for pulling down their houses, etc.
as appears by several Indictments, when Sir Williams friends and sharers was
by Court power made high Sheriff and Justices of the peace, and Parliament men
put out. Had Sir Williams charity sooner appeared, it might have been better
for him and us. He argues Leveller like, to gain the poor by telling them that
is theirs they have no propriety in, for all Lawyers will tell him, right of
common belongs to the lands and houses of men, and not to their persons; and
such poor as have land or cottage, has as good right of Commons, as he that
has a hundred acres. We are as willing our Common should be stinted and
enjoyed in common, if so thought fit, as any poor man can desire it, practice
that only, and condemn us if we oppose it. When Sir Williams power prevailed,
it is well known how the poor was oppressed; so that his charity and arguments
are but self ends. He says the rich men of Boston eat up the Common with great
stocks, and so he says of the rest of the Towns, which great stock those Fens
ever maintained before Sir William knew the Country, and is an argument the
Fens are not at all hurtfully surrounded grounds, and needs draining, since
they bear such great stocks. He says the Commoners would defraud the State of
eight thousand acres in the eight hundred Fenne: It is he that would defraud
the State, by inviting them to own what was condemned in the King; and so
metamorphize a dear-bought-Common wealth into a Kingdom again. He knows the
King, when Court-power ruled, having no Title, could never out the Commoners,
though he perplexed them with long and tedious suits in the Court of Exchequer,
where he was cast, and the Commoners possessions never interupted.

To the third. We say, it is great discretion in Sir William not to reply to
books, he is so unable to answer. But we much value, that after a cause so
fully heard in Parliament, as to be remonstrated a grievance, it should now be
a question, whether the grievers should be recompensed or not. What our
petitions or repetitions signify, we must leave to the judgment of the
Readers, who will soberly determine who is most clamourous. He says it is but
some few men that oppose him: We will join issue with him there, if he can
either of persons or hands procure four in ten, of rightful Owners and
Commoners, we will cease in opposing him. Sir William much insisteth upon the
Act or Bill that is ordered by the House to be brought in by Jo: Gooding Esquire; a
Member thereof, as if it was either made by or with his and his sharers
privity; for he says the delay of it will starve them (it is better starving
ten then ten thousand.) But we cannot but imagine he abuses that worthy
Member, in fomenting cause of jealousy, being well assured the House ordered
no compliance more with them then us. Sure we are, we have had no insight or
privity at all to the Bill, and why they should we wonder. It is strange that
one who has received so much mercy, should be still so foul-mouthed, as to
call humble Petitioners riotters and abettors. He falsely accuses us for
riotters, and yet invites us to be so, in excepting against many rich men,
being trusted to represent the grievances of thousands; as if it was fit to
trouble the Parliament with multitudes. But as before, if Sir William can
procure the greater number, we will be silent. We know none in England that
opposes drainings, neither do we believe any in England think us such fools or
mad men, that we need Guardians for our estates. We are persuaded few of the
Nation knows how we have been abused by Court-Undertakers; if they did, they
would wonder such propriety-destroyers should go unpunished.

To the fourth. We are sorry to hear Sir William glory in oppression, our
imprisonments, fining, selling our cattle without any account making, taking
our Land against our consents, and commanding Commissioners by the Kings
letters, deserves little applause, and expresses less equity. Produce the
consent gained of the greatest part of the eminentest Lords, Owners, and
Commoners, otherways then by force, and we will acquiesse. A for the
improvement made, we shall submit to the view of indifferent honest Gentlemen,
who may judge by the soil turned up, what was the former condition of the
Fens. Sir William argues much for Recompense (we can easily prove a good
recompense he has received) for our parts, we have more cause to expect it,
Micah 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. shows what recompense such deserve.
many of the Commoners having lost their lives and estates in the Parliaments
service, by the violence of Sir William and his participants; which blood was
of greater value then any estate Sir William ever had. If we be unable to
satisfy his pretended estate, he is far more unable to answer for our blood
and estates, he and his participants in the late war so lavishly shed and
spoiled. In the pardon of his violence done to the five Members, and his
hostility to the Parliament, he has received more then ever we did for our
lives and estates we lost and hazarded. What Bedford Act is, concerns not us,
their convenience and inconveniences may not be the same with ours. It is high
presumption for such an offender as Sir William has been, to say its vain to
petition a Parliament. Could his bribes prevail there, as they did at Court, he
would anticipate the justice thereof, and divide betwixt them and the people;
the which we hope providence (that in our extremity raised us a Parliament)
will prevent. In a late paper Sir William boasts of 78 Commissioners that did
act for him. Its well known how unwilling they were to act, until they were
commanded by the Kings letters. Again, those Gentlemen were not actors in that
which was the root of the evil; for the view of what grounds was hurtfully
surrounded betwixt Bourne and Kime Eae, was taken only by Undertakers and
Sharers, viz. the Earl of Lindsey, the Lord Willoughby his son, Sir Edward
Heron, Sir John Brooks, William Langton, and Robert Long, Esquire; these being for
themselves, were tempted with that sin of covetuousnesse (yet unreformed) and
certified that all was hurtfully surrounded; the other Gentlemen not privy to
the design, being commanded by the Kings letters to proceed accordingly; and
did, until they understood the evil of that design, and then they endeavored
to oppose it. But when the Undertakers perceived their dislike of the
proceedings, they put out of commission o^ Sewers those Gentlemen, of which
number Sir William Armin and Mr. Lister were two; and neither of them viewed
the Fens now in question. We wonder Sir William Killigrew should so unworthily
charge Sir William Armin, that worthy deceased Member, as a Viewer, who cleared
his innocence of that act before the Committee of the Fens. Though what he
said, and what Sir Anthony Irby testified before the Committee, what Fens he
and others meant, when they writ to the King for an Undertaker, be left out of
the depositions, yet many worthy Members and Gentlemen standing by remembers
it. Sir Anthony Irby being still living, we desire he may again, if occasion
requires it, declare himself; he formerly testified, that it was not meant the
Fens between Bourne and Kine Eae.


