An ANSWER to a late Abusive Pamphlet, Entitled, The True-Born ENGLISHMAN,
etc. Together with the True Character of A True Englishman.
A Certain Barber, fraught with much Ill Nature,
Having thrust out into the World a Satyr,
Which, that he may his Reader best Trapan
To Read, he Styles, The True-Born Englishman:
Wherein he goes about, with no small Stir,
The Character of Englishmen to Slur;
And all their Faults in Black and White Display:
But if himself be One, as he does say,
The Work but ill becomes him; for, at best,
It Is a foul Bird that thus bewrayes his Nest;
And all the Odium Casts he can devise,
With most apparent Falsities and Lies,
Upon his Native Countrymen: Sure he,
At best, some Bastard-Englishman must be:
For none, but such a One, could be so Base,
To fly, like him, into his Country's Face:
Peers and Plebeians he together mixes,
And upon all, his Envious Venom fixes.
Then, to Atone for all the Dirt he flings,
A Panegyric on King WILLIAM Sings:
But this, alas! is but a Feint he uses,
Whilst he the English Nation thus Abuses:
We need not such black Pens as his, to Sing
The Unsullied Glories of Great Britain's King:
King WILLIAM's Praise by English Bards is Sung;
With Abler Pens, and a Diviner Tongue;
For His Great Actions show His Mighty Soul,
Even from the Arctick, to the Antarctick Pole.
And Englishmen, maugre what He can say,
King WILLIAM Love, and Honor, and Obey;
And do as much His Royal Title Own,
As any Monarch's ever possessed the Throne.
And therefore, that the World may plainly see
How very much unlike the English be,
To what he represents them, I have here
Set down in Brief their proper Character:
The True-Englishman.
THE Freeborn English, Generous and Wise,
Hate Chains, yet do not Government Despise:
Rights of the Crown, Tribute and Taxes They,
When Lawfully Exacted, Freely Pay;
Which cannot be, but by their own Consent,
And given in a Free-Chose Parliament:
Force they Abhor, and Wrongs they Scorn to Bear;
And to Assert their Rights they always Dare.
More guided by their Judgment than their Fear:
Justice by them was never held Severe:
Their Power by Tyranny was never got:
Laws may perhaps inslave them, Force cannot:
Nor can their Freedom be by Laws Destroyed,
For Laws against Magna Charta still are Void:
They therefore know (should they be thus Betrayed)
Laws that are Void, are not to be Obeyed:
Kings are less Safe, in their Unbounded Will,
Joined with the Wretched Power of Doing Ill:
Forsaken most, when they are most Absolute:
Laws GUARD the Man, and only BIND the Brute.
To force that Guard with its worst Foe to Join,
Can never be a Prudent King's Design:
What Prince would change to be a Cataline?
Break his own Laws, shake the Unquestioned Throne;
Contpire with Vassals to Vsu^p his Own?
Let France grow Proud beneath the Tyrant's Lust,
Whilst the Wrac^'d People Crawl, and lick the Dust:
The Mighty Genius of this Isle Disdains
Both High-shoon Slavery, and Golden Chains.
England to Servile Yoke could never Bow:
What Conq'rours never Presumed, who dares do now?
In vain Rome's Bishop then does Wrack his Brain;
No Popish Prince can in this Island Reign.
Though Spain be added to the Crown of France,
It will their Courage, not their Fear, Enhance.
Armed with Blessed Bibles, and Vndated Law,
They Will guard Themselves, and keep the World in Awe.
And it is their Honor, Europe now must wait,
And from their Great Resolves, Receive its Fate.
London, Printedby, and for Benj. Harris, next the Golden Boar's-Head,
Grace Church Street, 1700.


