An Answer TO THE PROTESTATION OF THE Nineteen LORDS Against the Rejecting of
the IMPEACHMENT OF Mr. FITZ-H ARRIS.
THEY say, first, That because in all Ages, it has been the undoubted Right of
the Commons, to impeach before the Lords, any Subject for Treasons or any Crime
whatsoever; and the Reason is, Because great Offenses that influence the
Parliament, are most effectually determined in Parliament; and hence they
affirm, the Impeachment of Mr. Fitz-Harris unduely rejected.

The Parliament is certainly the most High Court of the Nation, and by the
Writs, the Members of both Houses are called to Treat, de quibusdam arduis,
certain difficult Matters, or Things of a high Nature, which concern the King,
Kingdom, and Church; and therefore it is rational, to think, that any Crime
whatsoever, does not properly fall under the Cognizance of this High Court; nor
can any Crime whatsoever, be such a great Offense, as (to use their own Phrase)
may influence the Parliament, and be most effectually determined in it. If this
were admitted, in a short time the Jurisdiction of all inferior Courts, would
fall to the Ground; and, it may be supposed, it would be thought necessary, by
these Noble Lords, to have a perpetual Parliament, for Goal-deliveries, and the
determining Crimes and Misdemeanors of the lowest Nature.

The great Offense in this particular Case, is High Treason; and, if what has
been said above, be a valid and convincing Reason against the Lords, for
rejecting the Impeachment, it does seem to infer a Necessity or Right of trying
all Treasons by Impeachment in Parliament; because they influence Parliaments,
and are most effectually determined in them.

Certainly, if there were any Force in this Argument, or Reason, the Righ of
Trial of High Treasons was never understood before this time; for in all Ages
there have been Traitors, and the greatest numbers of them have been tried out
of Parliament, either in the Kings Bench, or in the Counties where the Treason
was committed, or by special Commission of Oyer and Terminer: or, Noblemen by a
Lord High Steward, and their Peers: and very sew have been tried in Parliament,
in respect of the many which have been tried out of it: as for Instance, in
later times Camb. Eliz. A. D. 1572.
the Duke of Norfolk, and Earl of Northumberland, sixty six ibid. A. D. 1569.
petty Constables, and others: engaged in the Northern Rebellion, ibid. A. D.
1584.
Carter Throckmorton, and diverse others, in the latter end of Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, the ibid: A.D. 1601.
Earls of Essex, Blunt, Danvers, and Maricke Knights, Bainham, Orell,
Littleton, ibid. A.D. 1585. sol. 308.
Dr. Parry, who was arraigned at the King's Bench Bar in Westminster Hall,
condemned and suffered Death as a Tray to, in the Palace yard at Westminster,
sitting the Parliament at that time. 3. Jacobi, the Gunpowder Traitors were
tried by Commission of Oyer and Terminer, sitting the Parliament, and the
Regicides were tried at the Old Baily, c. 29.
sitting the Parliament, 1660.

By Magni Charta, no man is to be condemned, but by lawful Judgment of his
Peers, which has been confirmed and declared to be the Common Law of the Land,
by many Acts of Parliament. The House of Commons were never chosen, entrusted,
or empowered by the people they represent, to do any thing which is not
according to the Common Law; nay, the whole Parliament cannot do any such
thing, unless they make a Statute, first, to make void that Law.

It Is farther the Common Opinion of Lawyers, That all Acts of Parliament are
void in themselves, or not binding, which are made against the Fundamental
Laws, of which, if this Trial by Peers be not one, there is none in England.

He knows not the value of Trial by Juries, that desires to be tried any other
way. It Is dangerous, and against the Liberty of free English men, to admit of,
and have Precedents made to warrant Trial without Juries; Innocents may be
harangued to death by their Prosecutors, and the vilest Criminals saved by the
same means; the Speeches, passionate Expressions, and Inclinations of such men
prevailing much upon, and influencing the Witness^s, either to Contract, or
Delate their Evidence against the Person Impeached, especially when they know
they may do it freely, with Impunity, and by approbation of potent Pursuers.

But, it may be said, What if the Commons desire to impeach a Commoner before
the Lords, for Treason, may it not be done?

Yes, if the Lords be willing to receive the Impeachment; for they cannot be
forced, or obliged against their wills to hear and pass Judgment in Criminal,
Capital Cases, upon any but their own Peers.

In the 4th of Edward the Third, Rot. Parl. N. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
in parliament, Simon Bereford, Tho. Gournay and John Matravers Knights, Bogo
de Bayons, John Devarel, and William Ogle, all Commoners, were sentenced to
Death by the Lords, for murdering King Edward the Second; and afterward, in
the same parliament, when the Lords had given Judgment against them, proviso
and agreement was made and recorded, in these words;

Et est assensu and accord. etc. And it is assented and accorded by our Lord
the King, ibid. n. 6.
and all the Grands, in full parliament, That albeit the said peers, as Judges
of Parliament, took upon them, in the presence of our Lord the King to make and
render the Judgment, etc. yet, that the said Peers, who now are, or the Peers
which shall be in time to come, be not bound or charged to render Judgment
upon others than their Peers. For that the Peers of the land have Power to do
this; But thereof for ever to be discharged and acquitted. And the foresaid
Judgment now rendered, be not drawn into Example or Consequence in time to
come, whereby the said Peers may be obliged and charged hereafter to Judge
other than their Peers, contrary to the Law of the Land, if the like Case
happen, which God forbid.

This Proviso and Argument was made in full Parliament, and it had these two
Respects.

1. To satisfy the Commons, that the Lords intended not by their Judgment to
alter the course of the Common Law, and therefore they declared and disclaimed
against Power to do this, and confessed, it was contrary to the Law of the Land.

2. To preserve their own Right, to Judge none but their Peers, in Case of Life
and Death.

From hence it may be presumed, that, if at any time the Commons force an
Impeachment upon the Lords against a Commoner, for Treason, that may be tried
at Common Law, and then Vote that it ought to be tried in an Inferior Court,
men may be apt to censure such Proceedings, and look upon them as a Design and
Artifice, either to delay Justice, by deferring the Trial of the Criminal, and,
as it were, by that means, to contrive his Pardon, or by passionat Harangues to
urge and procure his Condemnation, which might not have happened in Trial by a
Jury, who gave in their Verdict upon Oath, and are not so easily encouraged,
overawed, or biased by Rhetoric.

And, it may be farther urged, that there is a Statute yet in Force, entitled,
An Act to proceed, by commission of Oyer and Terminer, against such Persons as
shall be examined and confess Treason before the King's Conucil, without
remanding the same to be tried in the Shire where the Offense was committed;
which seems most particularly to direct the Trial of this Criminal, and the
manner of it. 33. H. 8. c. 23. Be it therefore Enacted by the King, our
Sovereign Lord, and by the Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
Commons of this present Parliament assembled, and by Authority of the same,
That if any Person or Persons, being examined by the said Council, or Three of
them, upon any manner of Treasons, Misprisions of Treasons, or Murders, confess
any such Offense, or that the said Council, or Three of them, upon such
Examination, shall think any such Person so Examined, to be vehemently
suspected of any Treason, etc. that then, in every such Process, by the King's
Commandment, His Majesty's Commission of OYER and TERMINER, etc. shall be made,
etc. to such Persons, and into such Shires or places as shall be named by the
King, for the speedy Trial, Conviction, or Deliverance of such Offenders, which
Commissions shall have Power and Authority to Enquire, Hear, and Determine all
such Treasons, etc. within the Shire and places limited by their Commission, by
such good and Lawful Persons as shall be returned before them by the Sheriff,
or his Minister, or any other, having power to return Writs and Process for
that purpose, in whatsoever Shire or Place within the King's Domions or
without, such Offen^^s of Treason so examined, were done or committed; and
that, in such Cases, no challenge for the Shire or hundred shall be allowed.

Secondly, They say they cannot reject the Impeachment of the Commons, because
that Suit or Complaint can be determined no where else; for, if the Party
impeached, should be indicted in the King's Bench, or in any other Court, for
the same Offense, yet it is not the same Suit; for, an Impeachment is at the
Suit of the People, and they have an Interest in it, but an Indictment is at
the Suit of the King.

This is all artificial Reason, or rather a mere Quible, if duly examined;
for, whether this Criminal's Trial be by Indictment in the King's Bench, or by
Impeachment, it is the same Accusation, namely, for Treason, and the Prosecution
in both Courts (which is really and truly the Suit) is for the same end and
purpose; that is, That the Delinquent be punished according to Law; for it is to
be supposed that was the Intent of the Impeachment, and this may be done most
effectually and legally, by the Trial of his Peers, in an inferior Court,
according to the Course of the Common Law.

The ground of this wonderful Reason, is the different use of the two Words,
Impeachment and Indictment, both which, signify an Accusation, and the End and
Design of this Accusation, is the same; and it is no great matter, whether this
black Criminal receives the Sentence of being Hanged, Drawn, and Quartered, for
his vile Treason, from the Lords in Parliament, the Judes of the King's Bench,
or by special Commission, of Oyer and Terminer: but, most certainly, the most
Legal way of Trial, is by his Peers, by whom he may have the most equal
Condemnation or Acquittal, there being not one precedent to be found, that
comes up to, or is parallel with this Case.

Nor is the pretended preservation of the Interest of the people, an Argument
of greater Moment, for, first it is very difficult, in Cases of Treason, to
separate and divide the Interest of the King and People from each other. Have
not the People an Interest in the King's Life, and in the Government, and is
not this Interest the same with the Kings? The preservation of both, is the
joint Interest of both, which really cannot be divided.

Secondly, the Interest of the People is founded upon public Good and
Benefit, by that it is measured, and of that they have their share; so that
tho it should be granted, one and the same public Crime or Offense may entitle
both King and People to several Suits; yet, if by either Suit, such Offense may
be duly, legally, and effectually heard, discussed and punished, the Interest
of the people is equally safe, which way soever it shall be determined, whether
in Parliament, or in an inferior Court, in which last, such public Crimes as
this have been most frequently tried. It Is not the Name Greatness or Title of
the Court, but the Public Justice, that is legally done in it, that secures
the Rights and Interest of the People.

Thirdly, The Protesting Lords say, by way of Example, or putting a Case, to
confirm, or at least to illustrate their Reasons, That one and the same Offense
ma entitle several Persons to several Suits; as if a Murder be committed, the
King may indict at his Suit, and the Heir or Wife of the murdered Party, may
bring an Appeal, and the King cannot release that Appeal, nor his Indictment
prevent the Proceedings in the Appeal, because the Appeal is the Suit of the
Party, and he has no Interest in it.

But, this Example of Appeal in Murder, if rightly understood, signifies
nothing either to the Confirmation, or Illustration of the Reasons of their
Protestation.

For an Appeal of Murder in our Common Law, signifies an Action or Suit given
by the Law to the Wife, Coke Is It. Instit. fol. 123. and 187. o.
for wrong done to her Husband being murdered or to the Heir, for wrong done to
his murdered Father, Brother, or Anceestor; and any one that Shepards Abr. word
Appeal. Stat. 30. Hen. 7. c. 1.
sues an Appeal, must sue it in proper person; and for advantage to be taken by
the Wife, or Heir, for this wrong done, is the reason assigned in the Law
Books, why an Appeal is given to them; and why the King cannot release an
Appeal, which is to be brought within a year and a day; and if the Appellants
fail in proof of the Accusation, the Appellees shall recover Damages against
them or their Abettors.

To make an Impeachment of the Commons the same with this case, they must make
it appear by precedents out of the Parliament Rolls or Journals, or by the
Common or Statute Law, that the Commons have such an Action or Suit as an
Impenchment of a Commoner for Treason, which may be tried in an inferior Court
given them before the Lords, so as they cannot refuse to hear and judge it, or
they do nothing.

Otherways it may be in Impeachments, for Misdemeanors: Where though the Common
Law may take notice of them, yet happy the Misdemeanor may be such as it cannot
be sufficiently punished thereby; but for all High-Treasons the Law has
provided ultimum supplicium, which is sufficient, and after that there can be
no other Inflicted.

To enforce this Instance of an Appeal, they add by a Note in the Margin, That
it is always to be preferred, and upon notice thereof, all prosecutions at Suit
of the King are to stop, till the prosecution at the Suit of the party be
determined: But the Statute Law is otherwise. The time limited for an Appeal to
be taken, 3. Hen 7. c. 1
is a Year and Day, and the King shall not stay this Year and Day from
prosecution at his Suit, to save the Suit of the party, as was anciently
accustomed, but may Arraign the Murderer at any time within the Year and Day,
and not tarry that time, for any Appeal to be taken for the same Murder, but if
the Murderer be Arraigned and Acquit at the Kings Suit, the Wife or next Heir
to him that is Slain, may have and take their Appeal within the Year and Day
after the Murder done against the person, so Arraigned and Acquit.

There have been also appeals of another nature, Vide pl. Coron. coram Rege in
Parliamento. 21 Rich. 2. Stat 1. H. 4. c. 14.
made and pursued in Parliament, as well against Peers as Commoners, by certain
Lords called Appellants, which caused great Mischiefs and inconveniences in
the Realm, and therefore it was Ordained and Established, That from henceforth,
all Appeals to be made of things done within the Realm, shall be tried and
determined by the good Laws of the Realm, and it was then Accorded and
Assented, that no Appeals be from that time made or pursued in parliament, in
any time to come.

The word Appeal signifies an Accusation, and so does the Word Impeachment, and
the Word Impeachment seems to have been more frequently used for prosecutions
in parliament, when the Word Appeal grew out of use; now if all Appeals which
had been before brought in parliament, and being chiefly in capital and
criminal Causes, were removed from that Judicator by this Law, and referred to
be Tried by the Laws of the Land, why ought not Impeachments of a Commoner for
Treason by the Commons, to be also referred to the Common Law, seeing great
Inconveniences and Mischiefs may arise from this way of Trial, by the Impeached
person losing his Trial by his Peers, or by being wronged by a passion at and
violent prosecution, or the King and Nation injured by the too remiss and cold
management of a contrived Method of Accusation? It Is not to be doubted, but the
Ground and Reason of this Law is and may be the same against impeachments of
Commoners, that it was against Appeals; and therefore by consequence in force
against them, especially seeing there is not so much as one Precedent to
warrant them, an in truth an impeachment of the House of Commons, is no other
than an Appeal to the King in Parliament.

These Lords interpret this Rejection of the impeachment to be an absolute
Denial of Justice, because they say as before, the same Suit cannot be Tried
any where else; it has been shown before, that this reason is a mere Quibble
of afond Groundless Nicety. Nor can any Man, though but of a mean capacity,
think it to be a denial of Justice to reser the Trial of a Crime to an
Inferior Court, where it is most properly tryable by the Laws of the Land. Nor
was it certainly a Denial of Justice in the Lords in Drakes Case, which they
ordered to be Tried in the Kings Bench. The Words of the Order are these:

The House taking into consideration the Impeachment, Lords Journal, Merc. Dec.
19. 1660.
brought up from the House of Commons in the name of all the Commons of
England, against William Drake, Merchant and Citizen of London, and their
Lordships apprehending they may not have time before their Dissolution to
proceed in Judicature against him: It is therefore ordered and declared by the
Lords in Parliament, That the King's Attorney General do in His Majesti's Name
proceed against the said William Drake in the Court of Kings Bench, upon the
said Offenses, according to the ordinary course of Law.

This reference of this Case to the Kings Bench was not protested against by
any of the House of Peers, nor so much as questioned, nor thought to be
Arbitrary, Illegal, or against the constitution of Parliament: His Crime was
for publishing a Pamphlet in the name of one Phillips, called, The Long
Parliament revived; Com. Jurnal, Mart. Dec. 4. 1660.
the Impeachment was in this form: The Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the
House of Commons in the name of themselves, and all the Commons of England, do
hereby declare, complain, and show against William Drake, Merchant, and
Citizen of London, that in contempt of His Majesty's Crown and Dignity, and of
the Laws and Government of this Kingdom, and out of a wicked and malicious
in^antion to raise and stir up Sedition and Division in this Kingdom, and
against they Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, etc.

By this proceeding of the Lords, it seems they thought not then, that one and
the same Impeachment might continue from Parliament to Parliament without being
revived, or a new one brought up; and a man would think they had reason on
their side; for 'its hardly conceivable, when a Court is dissolved and not in
being, how any thing depending in that Court should have a Being, or remain:
What can support it? What can give it a Being or Existence? In the
Prorogations of Parliaments, all business cease, and begins new, much more
it ought to do so, when the Court it self falls, and loses its being.

Lastly, they say, Our Law says, in the Person of the King, Nulli negabimus
just^tiam, We will deny Justice to no single person; yet here in this case, as
they apprehend, Justice is denied to the whole Body of the people, and this may
be interpreted, an exercising of Arbitrary power, and will, as they fear, have
influence upon the constitution of the English Government, and be an
encouragement to all inferior Courts to exercise the same Arbitrary Power, by
denying the Presentiments of the Grand Juries, etc.

As to a denial of Justice in this ca^e, it has been clearlie made appear
before, there neither is, nor can be any such thing, by rejecting this
Impeachment, and referring the Treason contained in it to be determined and
tried by the Common Law; and therefore what is not; nor can be, cannot be
interpreted an exercising of Arbitray Power, nor have any influence upon the
constitution of the English Government.

This whole last Paragraph is indeed a severe Reflection, rather than Reason (to
what end it is needless to tell the World) for this very action of waving his
Impeachment, is so far from encouraging inferior Courts, to exercise an
Arbitrarie Power, by denying the Presentiments of Grand Juries, as manifestly it
has a contrary operation and effect in Law, for by this means, this great
Conspirator in the Popish Plot to murder the King, and destroy and subvert the
Protestant Religion, will receive his Trial as the Law directs, by Presentment
and Verdict of a Grand Jurie, and Petty Jury, one or both, who are his Peers.

Having done with the Protestation it self, it may not be impertinent to make a
Query or two about the subject matter of the Indictment, and Impeachment. What
if there be several and different Treasons, for which Mr. Fitz Harris may stand
accused? Shall not the King proceed to try him according to the due course of
Law? The Treason for which he is prosecuted at Law may not be the same, and in
all probability it is not, for which he was impeached: The House of Commons
declared not what the Treason was in particular, and the King had the first
possession of the Case, having first examined the Criminal. Shall the course of
the Common Law be obstructed, or delayed by the Impeachment? When if he
receives not sentence of Death upon his first Indictment at Law, he may be
remanded to Prison, and afterward prosecuted by Impeachment, or upon new
Indictments at the Common Law for his other Treasons, if the Gentlemen of the
late House of Commons, who have, or received the Information against him shall
think it expedient. Have not all the horrid damnable Popish Plotters which were
Commoners been tried by the common Law, notwithstanding the Sitting of the
Parliaments? What necessity is there then of any extraordinary way by
Impeachment.

EDINBVRGH, Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most
Sacred Majesty. Anno Dom. 1681.


