April 6.

News from the West OF IRELAND: Relating what happened to Captain Weldon and
Captain Aston after their passage from Bristol to the Fort of Duncannon in the
mouth of the River of Waterford, with many particular enterprises performed
against the Rebels in those parts, to the terror of our Enemies, the glory of
God, and the honor of all brave English Commanders.

With a Letter sent from the Mayor of Waterford to Captain Aston in excuse of
his rebellious designs, with Captain Astons sharp and worthy Reply sent in a
Letter to the said Mayor.

Published by the consent of a worthy Member of the House of COMMONS.

London, printed for Francis Coals. 1642.

A brief Relation of all the passages that happened unto us, Captain Anthony
Weldon, and Captain Thomas Aston, in pursuance of His Majesty's design for
Ireland, since our departure from the City of Bristoll.
SHrove-monday the 20. of February we departed out of Bristoll with 200.
proper men well armed, and colors flying, and shipped them aboard, in the good
Ship called the Lamb of Bristoll.

Tuesday the 21. we set sail from King-roade, near Bristoll, for Ireland,
having with us for our Convoy, the good Ship called the Fellowship of Bristoll,
a man of war. Tuesday night, and Wednesday all day, we kept company together
at Sea. Wednesday night the wind being contrary, ere Thursday morning our Ship
and Convoy were separated.

Thursday about noone we descried land, and in the evening we arrived before
the Fort of Duncannon, in the mouth of the River of Waterford.

Friday and Satterday we landed our men safely within the Fort, wherein we
found the noble old Lord Esmond Governor thereof, with 100. men resident for
the defense thereof; the enemy laying within Musket shot thereof.

The Enemies Commanders under their General the Lord Mongarret, are Colonel
Butler, Lieutenant Colonel Maylor, and Sergeant Major Butler.

The enemy before our landing had made a Truce or cessation of Arms with his
Lordship for five days, which was expired the Sunday following our arrival:
During the time of the Truce, a Parley was sought by Sergeant Major Butler; the
effect whereof was, that the evnemie might be admitted to bring into the Fort
as many men of theirs as his Lordship had therein, upon pretense to strengthen
the same: If this might be granted, they would lay down their arms, but his
Lordship would not embrace any of their treacherous propositions.

At the time of the Parley his Lordship demanded restitution for the wrongs and
injuries done unto His Majesty, and His Highness Subjects, the poor
Protestants in Ireland; Answer was made by the Enemy, They could do nothing
in that particular without conference with their General.

Before their first Truce was ended, the Enemy desired a second for 14. days,
but his Lordship would not condescend thereunto.

Monday the last of February, Colonel Butler sent a Letter unto his Lordship,
perporting a further cessation of Arms, as also a parley with four of our
best men of quality, and then with eight men; and by and by a Messenger sent
from Colonel Butler, to desire private conference with his Lordship in person,
which his Lordship refused; for that he would have no conference at all with
any one of them, without public notion to my self and Captain Weldon.

Wednesday the 2. of March, we sallyed forth upon the enemies quarters with 60.
Musketeers, intending to have fired their quarters, and bring away such
necessaries for lodging as we could get, for lodging for our Soldiers: Our men
came bravely on, and exchanged diverse bullets with the enemy; but by
extraordinary numbers of men increasing upon us, (being but an handful)
occasioned by the sudden intelligence sent unto the neighboring Garrisons, as
by burning of Furzes, setting Beacons on fire, etc. we retreated into our Fort
without loss of any man, only one man received a small hurt in his shoulder.

Friday the 4. of March, we sallyed forth again upon the Enemy, removed their
Sentinels, forced them to retreat from their quarters, and brought away their
Court of Guard, made of Deal boards, which served very well to make our
Soldiers Huts, lodging being somewhat scarce within the Fort. This day also
we brought our men safe off, only one man shot in the face, but not mortal.
This day likewise our Convoy, together with a Pinnace, came into the Harbor.

Sunday morning the 6. of March we sallyed forth again, intending to have some
further bandying of bullets with the Enemy; but marching up their quarters, we
found they had raised their siedge, and were gone we knew not whether; of which
opportunity we taking advantage, presently fired diverse of their houses, near
adjoining unto the Fort, and brought away diverse small stackes of Corn, to our
no small comfort, and then retreated (to give God praise) into the Fort,
resolving to fally forth again in the afternoon.

Sunday in the afternoon we sallyed forth again, and then marched forth with
some 150. men, about a mile and half distant from the Fort, where we fired
diverse other houses, there being good store of Corn, Goats, Sheep, and
Swine; some Sheep, Goats, and Swine we brought away, but could not bring any
Corn: First, in regard the day was almost spent; and secondly, for that the
Enemy was discovered drawing to a place of ambush, that was between our men
and the Fort; but some of our men remaining behind in the Fort, perceiving
their drift, prevented their coming; and presently some 50. Musketeers were
commanded to march thither, and make good the same against the Enemy, until
our men should come off, which was done accordingly; the Enemy not daring to
approach any further, but were forced to retreat with shame.

Sunday night, his Lordship, my self, and Captain Weldon resolved together
with the Captain of the Man of War, that on Monday morning by the break of day,
the Ship together with the Pinnace, should go up the River about two miles
distant from the Fort, and there lie between a Town called Passage, and another
small Town called Ballyhacke, opposite against Passage, the one having a Fort
with four gunnes in it, the other a strong Castle, but no Artillery in it.

Monday morning the seventh of March, I went up my self in the Man of War
together with the Pinnace, and lay between those two Towns, the Fort of,
Passage shot thrice at us, then our Ship shot one shot into the Fort, and
presently the Fort hanged forth a flag of Truce; whereupon, and for that there
were diverse of the poor English Protestants Prisoners within the Town, we made
no more shots, but wholly intended our battery against the Castle of
Ballyhacke, being the only convenient place of Rendevous and Garrison for all
the rebellious Crew, that besiege the Fort of Duncannon; our Ship lay before it
most part of the day, sending many shots to the Castle, but could make no
breach therein, then I commanded some 20. Musqueties to go on shore, and set
fire on one side of the Town, which they did landing at one end thereof, where
they set a fire one house, thinking the rest of the houses on that row would
have taken fire by degrees. All this while the Rebels from the Castle played
upon our men with their small shot, very thick; our men retreated into the
Boats, and came aboard again all safe, only one man at the first landing was
shot through the shoulder.

But finding the fire not to take effect, I commanded the Boats to be manned
forth again, and to land our men on the other side of the Town, and set that
on fire: Our men being landed, marched up very boldly to the Town, in despite
of the Castle, (which still played upon our men with their small shot) and
fired the most part of the Town, and came off bravely, only one other man (one
of the Ships company) received a shot into his belly, but none of our men
mortally wounded.

A true Copy of the Letter which was sent me from the Mayor and Recorder of
Waterford, at the time when I lay before Ballyhacke.
M. Aston,
I Understand, you are come with ships to the haven of Waterford, the King has
granted the port protection, and jurisdiction of it to our Corporation, and I
would be glad you would give us an account, why you come so far to the port,
and what your intent is, and why you would not acquaint me with your purpose
before you came, and sought not my license, I desire an account rather, that I
am informed you offer battery, and offense to the Kings subjects, I writ an
answer to my Lord Esmonde, what the reason is the English went not down, and
infer the effect was their faults, not ours, I would desire to know by what
Commission you come, as well as the rest,

Waterford, March 7. 1641. Francis Briver, Major of Waterford. John Leonard,
Recorder.

A Copy of my answer to the Mayor and Recorders Letter.
M. Mayor, and M. Recorder,
I have received your Letter dated the 7. of March instant, wherein you desire
an account from me, why we come so far to the port, and what our intent is, and
why you should not be acquainted with our purpose, before our coming, and
wherefore your License had not been first sought, and further you desire an
account the rather for that you are informed, Battery and offense are offered
to the Kings subjects, and for countenancing of these your peremptory demands,
you infer His Majesty's grant of the protection and jurisdiction of the port
unto your Corporation, in all which particulars I shall render an account, not
as you desire, but deserve: first, admit you had his Majesty's grant as
aforesaid, I do aver the same to be (by your revolt) annihilated and made void,
and whereas you say we offer Battery and offense against his Majesty's
subjects, I utterly deny that honorable style to be appropriated unto any one
of them, who have in pursuance of the breach of their fidelity and loyalty, to
his Majesty and the Crown of England, most insolently and rebelliously taken up
arms, and in defiance of his Majesty and the Crown of England, advanced
themselves against his Majesty's Fort of Duncannon, and against my Lord Esmond,
his Majesty's true and loyal subject, Governor thereof; and whether they can
justly or at all deserve the denomination of his Majesty's subjects, when as
they have so rebelliously demeaned themselves as aforesaid, I refer my self to
his Majesty's Proclamation, which I have sent you herein enclosed, the like
whereof has been delivered unto Colonel Butler, the tenor whereof, I do
intend, (by the grace of God) fully to observe, and prosecute with effect,
which you may assure your self of, by the example of Ballyhacke, this is the
account you may expect from

Your loving Friend if his Majesty's Subject you shall really demonstrate your
self to be Thomas Aston.
Duncannon Fort, March 8. 1641.

