The Anatomy of the inward parts o^ (...) lively set forth, and diligently,
declaring the principal V^ (...) the use of letting Blood: very necessary for
Physicians a^^ ^rurgians, and all other that desire to know Themse^^^^
The signification of such Letters as are placed in the Figure.
A Signifies the gullet of the throat, called also the throatbole, in Latin
Gurgulio, and Canna pulmonis, that is to say, the Lung-pipe and Weson
pertaining to the lights and the heart conveying air to them both, and it
divides it self into many hollow pipes within the Lungs, as ye see,

B Signifies the Lungs or Lights, called in Latin pulmo, and it is called the
bellows of the body, for it draws and sends forth again the air, with the
which the heart and other members are tempered: wherefore the Lungs be full of
hollownesse, even like a sponge, and empty, opening itself to the receiving of
air, and gathering itself together to expel it again, as does a pair of
bellows, fashioned much after the shape of an Ox hoof.

C. Signifies the Heart called in Latin Cor, the seat of life, the ruler and
directer of the spirit and blood. It appears within against the left breast,
it is figured round, tending to sharpness at one of his ends, the which is
toward the breast: it is of all other members the principal, and is called
the Sun of the less world: For man among Philosophers is called the less world,
and the heart being in it, is to all the body as the Sun is to all this great
universal world, which approaching near unto us, all things rejoice, herbs
bring forth flowers, trees spread their branches, all fowls, fish, and beasts,
receive great comfort (...) the heart in man being heavy and pensive, all the
b^ (...) sad and ill disposed: The heart again being glad (...) merry, all the
body is light and lusty, for it illuminat^^^ (...) and lightneth all other
members with his spirit. It (...) ^he first member in man that receives life,
and the la^^ that dies. Only this part in man is never griev^^ ^bly with any
disease, but if it be, forthwith it dies and all the man with him.

D. Signifies the Middriffe, called Diaphragma, Septum transversum, and
Praecordia, and it is a thin skin which divides the upper part of the body
from the nether part, that is to say, the Heart and Lungs from the Spleen and
Liver, etc.

E. Signifies the throat-pipe, called in Latin Gula, and Interior Colli
fistula, that is to wit, the inner pipe or cunduit of ^he neck, the which
comes from the neck (...) ^ck, and thorough it is conveyed the meat and (...)
by the mouth is sent into the stomach. And (...) ^pe does appear above the
shoulders, where also the throat-bole is seen, there it is called the throat,
and the outward pipe of the neck, And this part of the same pipe showing it
self in the bulk of the body, is called the inward part of the neck-pipe and
throat-pipe.

F. Signifies the upper part of the mouth of the stomach, called in Latin, Os
stomachi.

G. Signifies the stomach, called in Latin Stomachus, the receptacle of meat
and drink, a place devised of nature to concoct and digest food, as a furnace
wherein meat is sodden; and it is offended with many and sundry diseases.

H. Signifies the bottom of the stomach, the (meat being in the stomach,
undigested) is very and the same being once decoct and digested, it (...) it
self again.

I. Signifies the nether mouth of the stomach (...) issue of the same called
in Greek pylorus, and co^ly in Latin Protonarius, the way by which the m^
digested, passes down to the guts.

K. Signifies the Liver, called in Latin Hepar ^^cur, this is the place where
the juice coming of n^ ^^gested in the stomach is transmuted and alter^ (...)
blood: but that part of this juice, which is no^ converted to blood, is altered
part to phlegm, p^ (...) ^ler, and part to melancholy.

L. Signifies the Gall, called in Latin Fell: (...) receives the refuse and
dregs of the blood, an^ ^veth chiefly to the laps of the Liver.

M. Signifies a certain vein, called in Latin, (...) and Manus jecoris, that
is, the hand of the L^^^^ vein receives the digested juice, by diverse, (...)
the stomach and other bowels, and sends (...) ^^^^^choly part into the Spleen.

N. Signifies the Spleen, called in Latin (...) Lien, which is the receptacle
and sink of mel^

O. Signifies a vein, which in Latin is called (...) and Vena jecoraria, the
hollow vein, the vein (...) for by this Vein the blood engendered in t^^ (...)
ministered to all parts of the body, to nouris^ (...) therewith.

P. Signifies the Kidneys, called in Lat^^ (...) fastened to both sides of the
body near to the L^ (...) the right Kidney stands somewhat highe^ (...) left;
by those the watery part of the blood (...) drawn, descends thorough certain
other v^ (...) see in the bladder.

Q. Signifies the bladder, in Latin Vesica, (...) and receiver of urine.

R. Signifies the Stones, called in Latin Tes^^^ this is the place where seed
is engendered.

S. Signifies the Cods, called in Latin Scr^^^

T. Signifies the privy part of man, call^^ ^^nis, in whom be two notable
ways or issu^^ (...) one is the urine issue, the other is called the (...).

V. Signifies the small guts called in Latin Il^ is engendered the cruel pain,
called the gnawin^ in the belly.

X. Signifies the grosser and greater part (...) in Latin called Colon, in
whom the excrements (...) long withholden, receives a certain form (...) after
the place. This part many times is ^or^ (...) the colic.

Y. Signifies the latter end of all (...) which immediately the ordure is
expell^^ (...) Fundament. This place many times i^ (...) disease called the
Piles or Emeroids, (...) Latin is named Longanon.

A Declaration of the Letters, signifying the principal veins to let blood
THe Veins of the forehead and the temples, do spring and grow of the exterior
throat-veins, like branches, the which must be opened, drawing the Launcer
overthwart the vein. I call it letting overthwart the vein (according to
ancient Doctors) the which is not fully along the vein, nor fully overthwart
the vein, but keeps a mean between both: and the letting blood of this vein
is good for apostems in the eyes, and the Megram, and for great headache, and
for alteration of the wit, for Frenzy, and for the new leper.

B. The veins of the neck (that commonly are called the veins Guiden, or
Jugulare exteriores) must be opened overthwart the vein, letting the Launcer
decline a little along the vein, but not too much; or else it should be hard to
stanch the blood. And he that shall open this vein well, must cause the Patient
to bow his head from that side where he will open the vein, that it may be
bent. And this vein must be opened (as says Avicen) with a Launcer (cum pilo)
that is to say, that has a pin overthwart about the end of the Launcer, to
keep it from going to deep in the vein: And the letting blood of these veins is
good for the humors of the head, for the Rheum, and the Megram. And it is to
be noted, that all the veins of the head ought to be left after a man has
eaten; neither ought these veins to be let in those, in whom is required the
power to engender. For (as says Avicen) through these veins are voided the
spirits that nature does send forth for generation.

C. The Vein on the outside of the arm, the which the new practisers commonly
do call Cephalica, and Galen, Vena externa and also Humeraelis, takes his
original with the Guiden or Jugulares exteriores, from the hollow veins. And
this vein Cephalica must be opened with a greater hole than the other ^eins, or
else (as says Haly abbas, the ancient Physit^^^ in the fourth book of his
practice) the foresaid vein (...) ^ous to fall to an apostumation. And great
heed (...) be taken for failing in opening this vein, for it is ^rdous to let.
For if you dare not touch this vein C^ike, and fear to open it as some Barbers
and Chyrurgeans that be not well expert, do, ye shall do great harr to the
Patient, and cause danger of apostumation. Always if ye touch this vein well
at the first lancing, it is the same that of all veins does grieve least in
letting of blood: howbeit howsoever ye do, make the hole meetly great. The
opening of this vein is good for running of the eyes, and all manner of
headache, and for the falling sickness.

D. The vein that appears in the middle of the arm, before the bowing of it,
or after the bowing, the which commonly is called the Median or Mediana, or
Nigra, after Avicen, or after Haly abbas Mediastina, and after Rhasis and
Almansor it is called Vena matrix, or Cardiaca; and has his original or
spring, partly of the Cephalica, and partly of the Basilica, the which must be
opened overthwart the vein; or at the least declining the Launcer a little
awry, except one will let twice; and the letting blood in this vein, is good
for all griefs and diseases of the members, stomach, ribs and sides, for it is
the fountain of all the body.

E. The Vein that is common called Basilica, and after Galen, Vena interna,
sometimes it is called Jecorria, others do call it Hepatica, or Regia. Rhasis,
because it does go thorough the armholes, does call it Vena axillaris: and it
does proceed and come from the hollow vein being yet in the breast, before it
has furnished the Interiores Jugulares, or throat-veins. The original of this
vein is of the stomach, liver and heart, and the best perceiver is in the
outside of the arm. Of the which vein, he that shall open it, ought to take
diligent heed for launcing, for hard by it is a great sinew like unto a vein,
wherein the spirit of life runs up and down, and is mixed with blood, the
which if it be opened, the Patient stands in jeopardy of his life, as says
Galen in his book of letting blood. Under the same Basilica are also great
sinews touching the foresaid vein. Therefore says Rhasis in his 28. book,
eschew the Basilica as much as possible, without it be for great need,
otherwise it is better to take the Median.

F. The Vein that appears upon the top of the pulse, is the branch or twigg
of the Cephalica.

G. The second vein that lightly appears about the middlemost finger, and is
commonly called Funis Brachii, is also a branch or twigg of the Cephalica.

H. The third Vein of the hand, the which appears about the little finger,
and is commonly called of the Physicians or Chyrurgeans, Salvatella, or Vena
Titillaris, or Ascelaris, is also a branch of the Basilica. The which veins of
the hand, as also other outward veins are of small value or profit to be let
blood or opened, because they never yield much blood: and these must be opened
as those of the feet, namely in warm water, to cause the veins to swell above
the sinews.

I. The vein of the inner ankle of the foot, the which appears more perfectly
than the other, is commonly called Saphena, and comes (as does also the
Sciatica) from the great hollowness that is under the knee.

K. The other Vein that is on the outside of the foot, is called Sciatica, and
comes likewise of the great hollowness under the knee. And the letting blood
of these two veins, is good for all manner of swellings and apostems of the
privy members. The which veins of the feet are jeapardous for deep launcing,
and especially the Sciatica, which is more dangerous to be touched than the
Saphena. For if ye open the Sciatica and launch it deep for fear of failing,
because they appear so small, ye shall hardly escape, but that ye shall touch
some sinew adjoining to the same veins, whereof might come great pain and other
evil accidents: as we have seen otherwhiles, that for ignorance of the Barbers
and Chyrurgians, the Patient did fall into diverse griefs of the sinews or the
cramp. This and such like griefs therefore are the causes, why it is needful
to have the hands and feet in warm water, when they shall be lanced, to cause
them to swell and appear the better: for they be little of themselves, and in
giving them a cut with the Launcer, ye must always beware of the sinew. Also
the Sciatica must be launced as the Saphena, namely, a little overthwart,
seeing they appear enough. And generally every vein that is in a place full of
sinews, or between sinews, must be opened along the vein, and that for two
reasons. The first is, to eschew the sinews in what place soever they be. The
Second is, that the vein that is cut or blemished along the vein, is not so
dangerous for the cramp, or other evil accidents (as says Galen in his fifth
Book of Methodus Therapeutice) as when it is launced along a little overthwart.

Behold (Gentle Reader) these are the Veins that, are commonly inured to be
cut. There be many other Veins that may be cut for diverse griefs; but because
they are little in use, and Galen and other ancient Greeks have made no mention
of them, let this suffice.

anatomical diagram

anatomical diagram

anatomical diagram

anatomical diagram


