LA STRATONICA OR The Unfortunate QUEEN. A NEW ROMANCE

Written in Italian by Luke Assarino, and now Englished By J. B. Gent.

LONDON: Printed by J.F. for Humphrey Moseley and are to be sold at his shop at
the Sign of the Prince's Arms in S. Paul's Churchyard. MDCLI.

^o the Right Honorable and most Virtuous Lady, my Lady Katherine Howard,
Eldest Daughter to the Right Honorable and my most Noble Lord, THE Earl of
Arundel and Surrey.
MADAM,
BEing to Sacrifice Stratonica, I humbly beg your Pardon if I do it on the
Altar of your Ladyships Perfections and Patronage, where I hope I may take
Sanctuary, and holding on my course (since your Honor's at the Helm) have a
favorable Passage through the World of Men's Opinions. To you therefore Madam
(whose delicate Composition can be equalled only by the Beauty of your Mind)
I offer up and consecrate these my First Fruits in this kind. And though the
little Brook (which returning to the Sea, and there gratefully emptying it
self) may as well make the Ocean overflow, as this Tribute of Gratitude express
my Devotions to your Ladyship, yet be pleased (Madam) to accept of this little
Oblation from the Hands and Heart of

MADAM Your Ladyships most humble and most devoted Servant, John Burbery.

LA STRATONICA; OR The Unfortunate QUEEN.
The First Book.
WHen Alexander was dead, his Commanders who then numbered more Victories then
days of his Life, like Stars at the setting of the Sun, made themselves
conspicuous with the Rays of Regal Power; for, dividing that great Empire
amongst them, every one of them became a King.

By one of them which was called Antigonus, Demetrius was begotten, a Prince no
less famous for the greatness of his Mind, then the handsomness of his Body.

To him alone it appeared, That Heaven with a hand rather Prodigal then
Liberal, would give what it had of most value in the Rich Treasury of Nature.
Demetrius was observed by all as a Prodigy of that Age: Not Virtue, but Fortune
only was wanting to him, to equal him to Alexander.

When he was pleased to be seen in the Camp, and gloriously to appear amongst
his Soldiers, he made all that beheld him, to think of an Adonis in the habit
of Mars.

This Prince then and Fila his wife were Stratonica's Parents.

She was presented to the World in that time, when the Stars were most active
to Characterize a Woman's Nativity with the gentleness of their Influences. The
^hilde grew apace, and her Hereditary Beauty displaying it self (which,
restrained in the narrow confines of that so tender Age, was not fit yet to
raise up with a Grace the appetite of Sense) arrived at that height, That
possessing the Minds of all her beholders with a sudden admiration, gave
occasion to men of doubting, whether she was Mortal or no.

I would willingly draw here to the life the pourtraicture of this Queen, if my
black Ink were not too unfit a color to set forth a Celestial Beauty.

Let the Reader therefore imagine a Face, and a Body shaped with the most
exquisite proportion, of a hew as white as the driven Snow, and clothed with
the best Grace. Let him conceive in his fancy such a Readiness in her, as is
most commended in Speaking; such a Modesty, as is most approved in
Conversation; and such Courtesy, as is most desired in Courtship; and of all
these particulars, let him finally believe Stratonica's Composition. Nature
left her nothing to desire, but bright shining Hair; for hers was neither
yellow, nor black, but of a middle color; but the brownness of her Chestnut
colored Hair, together with the whiteness of her Face and black Eyes, without
doubt represented her more beautiful.

Now Stratonica's Fame grown greater then Belief, though not the Truth, flew
with most glorious applause through the remotest Provinces of Asia and Europe.

Its flight was so fortunate, that where by it self it could not arrive, it
came driven by the sound of her Fathers Martial Trumpets; so as where they
recounted Demetrius his Victories, they likewise made mention of Stratonica's
Beauty.

The Prisoners which were brought from the Camp to the Court where she was,
having frequent occasions of seeing her, took it for a very great happiness
that they had been overcome; for they knew it was not lawful for any to see so
much Beauty, without the loss of his Liberty.

Apelles lived in that time. His age, though then great, yet was not at that
pass to diminish one jot the force of his Body, or the vigor of his Mind. He
no less famous for his Pensil in the Excellency of his Art, then bold of Spirit
in the variety of his Designs, made it appear to the World for an undoubted
Maxim, That the greatest Wits are more violent and hardy in their Affections
then others. He hearing Stratonica's Beauty much commended, desired extremely
to draw her Picture. He supposed that the Glories of his Pensil could no where
receive greater honor, then from that Princesses Fame. Being then resolved for
such an enterprise, he stole away from Corinth, the place of his abode, and in
few days arrived at Bursia, a City seated at the foot of the Mountain Olympus,
where Demetrius had his residence.

The Custom of the Queens in never showing themselves publicly, unless on
Solemn days, for some Months would have retarded the execution of Apelles his
design, if his Fortune had not brought him to that place in a time, that was
near a noble Sacrifice, which they every year used to celebrate for three days
together in the Temple of the Idol Baal.

All beginnings do concur in order to the end, when the end crowns the Work.

Amongst the rarest Fabrics of Asia, that Temple was esteemed as the greatest.
It had four Frontispieces of the finest polished Marble, and as many great
Gates. In the middle of the Temple was erected a proud Altar, very easy to be
seen from all the four doors.

The first of the days (which were destined to the Sacrifice) being come, and
the greater part of the Nobility and People gathered together with solemn pomp
within the Court, Apelles (who had with anticipated time made choice of a very
fit place behind a Pillar) as soon as he saw among the waving multitude the
longed for Stratonica, with her Mother the Queen, to enter into the Temple, I
know not by what cause (being overcome with wonder) remained not senseless.
That pillar peradventure (which he used as a wall to stand before him)
bequeathed to him its qualities; if we may not rather say, That he needed much
a pillar to keep him on his legs, at the first encounter of that fairest sight.

She, with her Mother, being seated near the Altar on a Throne, which they used
to prepare for their Majesty's on such days, seemed a Goddess worthy to be
bowed to by the Idol it self, whom all bowed to.

Demetrius was not present with these Queens, for he was engaged in the war he
had made against Ptolomy. His absence eclipsed the rays of Apelles his glory.
He, after he had for a good while (while the Priests were expected at the
Ceremonies) fed the first hunger of his eyes, with the sight of an object so
rare, began (as if come to himself) to think of his Pensil, and Designing. To
that end snatching suddenly a Black-lead Pen with some Paper, he designed in
haste the lineaments only of her face, to be able better afterward in his
lodging, to color with his Pensils her Image so lively imprinted in his mind.

The good old man (while he formed his design in that manner behind the pillar)
resembled another Prometheus, stealing the beams from the Sphaer of the Sun.

That would certainly have happened to him, which befell him in the painting of
Campaspe, if the frost of his snowy age had not kept his heart unhurt from the
flames, which were breathed by that countenance.

So in those three days of the Sacrifice, he having the opportunity of
beholding Stratonica at his pleasure, so happily finished her Picture, that in
nothing but silence it differed from the original.

The joy he had that the Picture was well done, exceeded far Pigmalions for the
beauty of his statue.

Being therefore ready to go homewards, he seemed a proud Jason, returning from
the conquest of the golden Fleece. He found no opportunity of returning to
Corinth, to adorn with that Picture his Cabinet, where he kept the dearest
pieces he had, but forced to deviate from the shortest way (by reason of the
wars of the adjacent Countries) he arrived at Nicomedia: Finding there a Galley
that was bound for Corinth, he embarked himself very gladly, and began his
journey.

The Sea showing its beauty in a calm, and the Wind in that serenity its faith,
enticed all the passengers to be enamored of their voyage; but their constancy
lasted but a day.

The Sun did set that Evening, covered over with clouds; and the Heavens, by
the color of that funeral habit, seemed to represent to the Saylors the horror
of an approaching death.

The first hours of the night, assembled together all the breath of the Wind,
which blew from the land; and they went not much farther, but by little and
little they heard the North Wind blow fresh a far off.

As the waves grew bigger and bigger, so the clouds in like manner were
condensed, as if that the Stars had procured them to hide all their faces,
because they wanted courage to look on the destruction which the sea was about
to commit.

Now the wind, grown impetuous, roared aloud among the Masts and the
Sayl-yards, which beaten by the Ropes, seemed in a manner to inform them by a
doleful whistling, That the Sayls being too big with wind, were straight to be
delivered by the death of the Galley.

It rained without end, and lightened most horribly. 'Twas fearful to see by the
light of the Lamps, the huge height of the waves, which (resembling snowy
mountains, by the foam which grew white on their backs) came rolling all along
to bury the unfortunate Vessel.

The Mariners therefore turning all pale, fell hastily to easing of their
Galley, by throwing into the Sea all the Fardels and Chests which came next to
their hands.

Apelles in so great a confusion, having nothing but a Hamper, in which were
locked some clothes, together with Stratonica's Picture, was not wanting to
conceal it for some time; but seeing that they continued casting overboard,
knew not how longer to preserve it.

What will thou do unhappy Apelles, now that thy life and thy glory depend (to
speak so) on the will of a mad Sea? If with drowning thy self, thou were sure
to keep thy Picture, I believe thou would gladly lose thy life to save that,
which would make thy life eternal; but the evil of it is, that thy loss both in
this and in that is the same.

O Gods, if any one could have seen what variety of things in a moment, that
Wit then thought of, who showed himself always co^tagious in his actions!

When he had been for a while so ambiguous, he suddenly snatched the Hamper, and
seeing that the Rain was gone by break of day, which though dusky, yet came on
apace, he took out Stratonica's Picture, and exposing it in haste to the eyes
of the Mariners, cried out,

Behold, O Friends, behold her Picture, who now can only save us! Behold, O
Sacred Goddess, behold our Dangers, hear our Lamentations, suffer not the Waves
to drown the devoted to that Deity which is born of the Sea.

Every one being stupid and dazzled at the Beauty of that Face (which they
certainly believed was the Picture of Venus) made so doleful a noise, and wept
in that manner, as it would have moved to pity any other thing but the Sea.

While they so prayed, were it by chance, or diabolical operation, the Galley
arrived in a Neighboring Creek, where the Sea with a great deal less noise did
beat the sandy pavement of the shore.

The wretched shipwrack'd-men had now some time to breathe, but they breathed
in that manner, as if they had been doubtful of their safety, so sudden a change
of Fortune had astonished them so much: But assured that they were safe, they
went ashore, and although they were far off from all Humane commerce and
habitation, yet in touching that barren Coast, they had all the pleasures which
the greatest and most flourishing City could afford them.

They stayed there two days, till the Sea was appeased, to recover themselves
of the disasters they had suffered. Thence putting again to Sea, they landed in
a little time after at the much desired Haven of Corinth.

Certain Ambassadors of Seleucus (driven by the same tempest) arrived also
there, who returned for some Affairs from Cassander then reigning in Caria.
They desirous to see a City renowned for many things, after they had visited
the principal places, came to Apelles his house.

There he (in the middle of a very great Hall) stood with his miraculous
Pensil, distinguishing from the Chaos of colors, so many Worlds as he had
Pictures at hand.

The Figures then finished, seemed as if they gloried in their Being; and on
the contrary side, to desire their perfection, who had not then obtained it.
The Skin and the Flesh grew visibly on those Muscles, which had nothing that
was feigned but Opinion. The Figures would have spoken, if Apelles, like
another Pythagoras, had not first of all taught them to be silent in his School.

The Ambassadors were amazed, and seemed no less Figures, then the Figures
themselves. Being at last in his Cabinet, where his perfectest things were,
they presently fixed their eyes on Stratonica's Picture. They would have kneeled
to it, for the majesty of that Countenance would not let them believe it was a
Picture. They could not understand how those Eyes and that Mouth had not life;
and they stood with so much reverence contemplating it, that they blushed.

They thought that Stratonica said, I boast of two Forms, the one from Jupiter,
the other from Apelles: If I had not had the first, it had been no matter,
provided that I had not wanted the second. To be born in Apelles his time, and
painted by him, is to have (as it were) the privilege of being twice born.
That Being which Apelles has given me, envies that of Jupiter, because it has
no life; that envies this, because it is not subject to death.

The Ambassadors (taken up with such like thoughts) said, 'Twas happier to be a
Picture, and have always the sight of Stratonica, then a man, and not present
in that place.

Man has no happier Deceit to feign himself a Deity, then the Art of Painting.

It is a glorious thing to know how to make a Body, it would be more glorious
to know how to form a Soul; but if the Soul were a visible Object (so much
imitation has entrenched on sacred things) the Painter would give life to his
Pictures.

But the Ambassadors returned to Seleucus (among the most memorable things they
had seen in their journey) related to him the story of that Picture.

The King believing what they said in the praise of Stratonica's Beauty, and
enticed with the Fame of Apelles his Art, was presently on fire for the same. A
Gentleman to that end was dispatched to the Painter, with order to pay him for
that piece any sum he should demand; provided he would part with it.

Apelles (as soon as he had heard what Seleucus desired) much lamented his ill
fortune, which always endeavored to deprive him of so precious a Jewel. In the
end, having very well considered what was best to be done, he refused the Money
and delivered the Picture.

It is needful to sell dearly to Princes, or to give freely to them; the first
is more secure, the latter would be Nobler, if many great persons hated not the
actions in private men, which (having more of greatness then the state of a
private life requires) resemble the actions of a Princely Mind.

The Picture being come to Seleucus his hands, it is impossible to describe his
astonishment at it. Those Eyes and that Face (which were nothing but shadows
joined together) darted such a light on the old man's Mind, that they dazzled
his Reason, and inflamed his Heart.

Seleucus grown a Lover, what childish things fell not he into? what
indignities did he not commit? Made an Idolater of a Goddess more conceived in
Opinion then Essence; while he adored the Copy, he sighed for the Original. He
spoke to himself, and had no Body with him at that time, when his business gave
him leave to be alone, he beheld it, reverenced it, kissed it, being only so
happy in his unhappiness, as he could, when he pleased, satisfy himself with
those shadows of Beauty, which in being only shadows, were extremely like
Beauty.

Having thus, with the memory of Stratonica, oftentimes an occasion of
remembering Demetrius, and thinking very seriously on the credit and glory he
had purchased in the Wars, he resolved for the love of his Daughter, or as
Plutarch rather says, (to strengthen himself with a potent Kings friendship)
To request her in Marriage.

Ambassadors being therefore dispatched to Demetrius, he expected the issue of
the Embassy with great uncertainty of Mind.

Demetrius was a very wise Prince, though lascivious: And though he was then in
that condition, that it seemed easy to him to aspire to the Empire of all
Asia; yet, considering that nothing was less certain then Martial Expeditions,
he neglected not the means to fortify himself with that assistance, which he
judged to be best against the assaults of all sudden Accidents whatsoever.

Having therefore understood the Kings mind, he not only was well pleased
with the offer of his Alliance, but likewise resolved to conduct the Bride
himself into his Kingdom.

The Ambassadors returning to Seleucus with so fortunate an Answer, so
transported him with joy, that he was almost distracted.

He no sooner had heard that news, but he was all a fire to celebrate the
Nuptials.

He therefore gave order to Antiochus his Son, to prepare himself speedily
(with the greatest Princes and Lords of the Court) to be gone toward Bursia,
and from thence to accompany Demetrius, and the desired Stratonica.

Antiochus (who was a youth of great hopes, and of an age ripe for marriage)
without doubt seemed fitter for that match then Seleucus; but he that with the
color of his hair had not changed yet the vigor of his mind (being still in
an age that could command in Loves assaults, and preferring his own pleasure
before his Sons) would have her for himself.

All things being ready, Antiochus departed with a very good attendance of the
noblest of the Kingdom, and carrying with him very fair Presents, in less then
eight days arrived in Bursia.

Demetrius (who then was come back from the Expedition against Ptolomy) there
received him with great Demonstrations of kindness, and presented him to
Stratonica, who was lodged in the end of the Palace.

His Reception was glorious, and the Complements which passed between them,
confirmed their affection and mutual Devotion.

The eyes of the Prince (which were eager in gazing on Stratonica's face)
should in reason have caused a sudden fainting in his heart, yet his inward
alteration was not great; were it that Antiochus being young, and not knowing
the true value of Beauty, was not ripe yet for Love; or were it (as it is more
credible) that Love being to win him by little and little, could not with those
first flashes kindle a fire which could be perceived.

All Demetrius his Court was full of joy for so great a Persons coming, and
many Shows and Feasts were ordained in the City to entertain him the more
honorably.

While they were thus employed in Bursia, Seleucus (who had no other life, but
what the hope gave him of soon being in his Mistrisses arms) solicited with
frequent and indefatigable Posts, Antiochus his return.

The hours of the day (too too fleet and soon gone) seemed Ages to him. He was
offended with himself, that his Scepter wanted Power to invert the Motions of
the Celestial Machines, to make that Day instantly come, which was to
illuminate his Nuptials.

They are extreme in their affections, who are in the extremity of fortune. A
Prince (that resembles a God) is angry to do things like a man. He thinks it a
defect, if his Power be not as ready in performing, as his Will is in desiring;
whence running to the end of his desires the shortest way, he invades and
overthrows oftentimes all the humane and sacred respects which do thwart him.

In the end after three Months, which were spent by Demetrius in preparing all
things needful for the Voyage, and expecting a time fit to sail in, he departed
with Fila his wife, Stratonica and Antiochus, and arriving at Nicomedia, where
a gallant Navy was in order for that purpose, he embarked himself for the
coast of Soria.

'Twas then the Month of June, from whose serene Majesty the fearful Winds
flying, durst build no more clouds in the Heavens, nor erect any Waves in the
Sea. The Fleet sailed on a Plain of moving Crystal, having only so much wind
in their Sails, as served to make peaceably their way.

'Twas a very fine sight to see the huge Galley (which carried the three
Princes) flame all of Gold, and draw after it for bravery its Streamers of
Purple along the contiguous shore.

The proud Ornaments that decked it, were a Pattern perhaps to Cleopatra's Ship,
which was afterward seen to ride in such Pomp upon Nilus.

It was so capacious, that it held two thousand of the Guard, and besides many
very useful Chambers, had a Piazza and Gardens proudly compassing the Prore and
the Poupe.

The Pride of the Kings of Asia was not only not content to tame the Sea with
the weight of such prodigious Fabrics, but would also (inverting the Order of
Nature) have Trees seen to blossom, and fruit ripen too in those Barren and
Salt Plains.

Amongst other Maids of Honor which Stratonica had brought with her, was by
chance Sophonisba, the daughter of Faustus, Demetrius his kinsman. She had (to
accompany the Nobleness of her Blood) a most beautiful Body, and as fair a
Mind.

She was skilful in Rhetorique, and very well learned; She had good skill in
Music, and made as good Verses as any of the Poets of her time. She was
infinitely well Fashioned, but humorous; and all her Actions showed a kind of
Greatness and Spirit, which made her much admired.

She was for those qualities, not only well beloved and esteemed by
Stratonica, but likewise of all the Court. Antiochus his Gemus resembling
Sophonisba's both in Music and Poetry, he took delight to be every day in her
Company, to Sing and make Verses.

This Recreation increasing with Pleasure, was a little while after the cause
of great Amity between them; but the friendship so augmented in Sophonisba (who
was very full of life) that it quickly turned to love.

Antiochus at that time was but seventeen years of age. He was tall of stature,
and very finely shaped, though still growing. His Masculine gravity (increasing
with his age) began then to bud in the full blown Beauty of his Face. He looked
and spoke so sweetly, that all swore the Graces had their residence in his Eyes
and in his Mouth. His Mind was as Resolute as Gallant; and though he was
young, yet he always showed great Constancy in his Resolutions.

The now Lovesick Sophonisba felt therefore her Bowels to burn with more
violence, by how much she endeavored to conceal with greater secrecy her flame.

Those amorous fits would have shortly come to dotage, if she had not very
wisely used means to help decaying Nature.

To be often in the sight of her beloved, was the way to feed in her a great
part of that desire, which was nourished by nothing but Antiochus his Presence.
But the Waters of those Visits served for no other end to her Amorous Dropsy,
but to make her thirst the greater. All the ease she had (if it be credible
that a secret Lover can have any ease) consisted not in any thing, but in
mentioning him often, and praising him to Stratonica her Mistress.

She disguized her Praises of affection in the habit of Duty, adventuring to
hide with some pretext that which no pretext could do her the favor to reveal.

But the Sentinels now began to discover Demetrius his Navy from the Mountains
of Soria. Seleucus (who two days before was come with a reasonable Army to
Tripolis to meet with his Bride) as soon as he knew it, gave orders to his
Soldiers to be ready, and he with the Flower of his Court very gloriously
Adorned, went aboard certain Bucentori of the nature of Galleys, to go meet
with his heart which was coming to him in his Mistresses Bosom.

The first Salutations in the approaching of the Fleet, were artificial Sounds,
passing through the holes of a thousand hollow instruments of Box.

Perhaps they joined to Seleucus his Sighs, formed an equal Wind, either to
refrigerate his Flames, or to blow them with more Violence.

As soon as they had Boarded one another, 'twas a Sight (that deserved to be
seen by all the World) to see with what Majesty and Ceremony the two Kings
received one another, at whose only Names the remotest Confines of Asia
trembled.

Seleucus beheld Demetrius and admired him. The Beauty of his Body and the
Gallantry of his Mind represented him to Seleucus for more then a Man.

Demetrius on the other side reverenced Seleucus as a Relick of Alexanders
Glories, and as a Captain who had been a Soldier under the Command of a Man, to
whom the Command of one World seemed too little.

Seleucus was tall of Stature and strong of Body, in so much that on a time
when Alexander was a sacrificing, by chance a wild Bull having fled from the
Altar, was by him caught again, and held fast.

He was clad that day in a sky-colored Armor sparkling with pieces of polished
Silver. He had on the side of his Heart (set in his Corslet) a heart of fine
Corral, near which a Sun of Gold was represented darting its Beams on it.

The extravagant wearing of his Crown, which (resting on a Roll of fine Bisse,
woven with diverse colors) gilded his temples, and the wanton negligence of his
regal Mantle falling from his right shoulder, and hanging on the side he wore
his Sword, were an alluring Habit, which though they were fitter for a man of
fifty years, misbecame him not at all.

Having ended their Complements, and rejoicing much together for their new made
Alliance, Antiochus (who had at the first done his Duty to his Father) bowed to
him again, and Seleucus (having quitted Demetrius) embraced him with great
kindness.

Thence going all three toward the Chambers of the Queens, they were very well
seen by the Gentlemen and Soldiers there present of both Crowns.

The Sea groaned quietly under the strokes of the Oars of so many Galleys, and
the Air being beaten with Millions of Sounds of Drums and Trumpets, made so
great a noise, that it wearied the Eccho's of the neighboring Shores.

The three Princes (being come to the Antichamber of the Poupe) heard
themselves welcomed on the sudden by a Consort of Viols, whose strings without
doubt would have played away Seleucus his Heart, if the hand that touched them
had played more then once.

But no sooner they had begun, but the door was opened to them.

I want a Similitude to express with it the wonder that by drawing of that
Curtain was presented to the eyes of Seleucus. The removing of a Vail, which
shows in the night the Glory of a Scene beautified with innumerable Lights, is
a vile Comparison.

Seleucus resembled a man, who departing this life opens his eyes in another
world.

The Chamber was all covered with Mother of Pearl: The Conjunctions of Gold
which held them together, were wrought with fine Figures. Stratonica with Fila
her Mother sat on a Couch of cloth of Silver on Cushions of the same. Eight or
ten Children clothed like little Cupids with a Bow and a Quiver at their
flanks, played up and down. More below in a circle sat twelve beautiful Maids
of Honor, among which Sophonisba appeared no less eminent in Beauty then in
Dignity.

Stratonica was habited like a Nymph; the Gold and Jewels she wore, exceeded
much the value of a Kingdom. But Fila seated with a Crown on her head, was
Majestic and Grave.

Those amorous Archers had a custom (when any went in to the Queens) to shoot
at them (for Ornament) with their Bows. Were it by Chance, or by Art, one of
the Arrows (gilded and blunt) as Seleucus entered in, hit him on the heart,
which we spoke of before.

He was so transported in that his first appearance, that by his disorder his
good grace was in danger of miscarrying. All his life was reduced into a look,
and the Queens only knew he was a live by his looks.

The admiration in seeing one another was reciprocal in all.

The Queens had heard often of Seleucus his Fame, and desired as much to see
him, as he to see them.

The good King kneeled as they rose up, and with a stammering tongue desired to
kiss their hands. They forcing him to rise, would by no means permit him to do
them that service. At last being gently reproved by Demetrius, he rose up and
said to them,

I should rejoice with you (my Ladies) if in having acquired a Son in Law and a
Husband so unequal to your merits, you could say you had gained by the
Purchase. My Crown (though esteemed by the world) deserves not to be valued by
you, but for this, that it is rich in incomparable Devotion and Affection to
your Majesty's. It belongs then to you (O my Queens) to rejoice with me. I
only (among all that are this day alive in the World) have more obligation to
the Stars, then any man besides. To live when Stratonica lives, to be the
Companion of her Fortune, and the end of her Thoughts, are such Graces, as
Heaven never gives, but when it intends perfect Happiness. To make me very
fortunate, be pleased, O Stratonica, my Mistress, to accept of me readily for
your Servant, and give me some assurance of it, that my Happiness being known
to the World, every one may swear, I no longer am Mortal.

Having said so, he embraced her with much reverence, and kissed her.

Thou diedst not Seleucus of pleasure, because it was impossible for thee to
die in the mouth of thy life. Thy Soul in that kiss had contracted all the
pleasures which Love has to give. If thou had not loved Stratonica in that
manner, that thy passionate Affection made thee chaste, that sweet Povson would
not doubtless have found an Antidote against it.

The Queens were well satisfied with Seleucus his Behavior and Expressions, and
answered him with that courtesy, which is due in like cases.

In the mean time all the Courtiers there present, hung at the mouth of the
Princes, observing their Majesty's, and admiring their carriage.

Having ended their Ceremonies, they discoursed of other matters; in the
progress of which, Seleucus stealing often his Soul from his words, gave it to
his looks.

His eyes were so eager in beholding Stratonica, that they were like the eyes
of the Bird that hatches her Eggs with her looks.

O what immensity of Beauty, restrained in the narrow confines of a Face,
presents it self, Seleucus, to thy view? Why see thou it, and die not,
since Seeing and Dying deprive alike of life an enamored Heart? It perhaps
preserves thy life to think, that those animated Alabasters live not, and
soften not for any but thy self.

The possession of a Happiness so great, is certainly able to give life; but if
the possession of Beauty be not otherwise enjoyed, then by looking upon it,
That possession is unprofitable which has no longer pleasure then the lasting
of a look.

By that time the Navy (slowly sailing on toward the Haven) arrived.

They dis-imbarked with that greatness and pomp, which became well the Majesty
of a King, and a Lovers first desire.

But among the stateliest things which were seen in Seleucus his Delights, was
a very great Palace, made all of Wood in that manner, that Two thousand men
hired for that purpose, could instantly set it together. It was rarely well
built, all gilded, and curiously Painted: When it was taken asunder, they
carried it conveniently on Carts in the journey.

In this Palace, every night (while they traveled from Tripolis to Damascus)
the Princes were so gallantly lodged, that Lucullus his Apolline, and the
Delights of Heliogabalus (which followed after) in comparison of them, might be
justly called Shadows.

Stratonica rode in a Chariot drawn by four Birds of that bigness, that it is
liker a fable then the truth to relate it.

They breed in the Inhospitable Mountains of Giava the greater; and it is
written of them, that they carried with such ease through the Air a Calf,
fastened to their Talons, as a Falcon would a Sparrow.

By the Winged Coursers, we may judge of the rest of the Chariot.

The Armies of both Crowns went before, and Fifty other Chariots followed
after; in which were the Princes, the Ladies, and chief Officers of the Court.

It was Majestic to see with what Military Rule and good Order they traveled.
The Pioneers joined in two Legions, levelled the Hills, removed the Woods, and
dried up the Rivers, if need so required.

The power of Kings can do these wonders, and it is not a wonder that it can do
so much. If man be the King of Animals, to be King of many Men, is to be King
of many Kings; and who wonders, that the Actions of a King should be great,
since in them the Assistance of so many Kings concurs.

All Ages envyed the Plains which Stratonica passed over, being the Scene of so
beautiful a sight.

Let the Reader imagine, That the Soul of Seleucus was distributed among all
his Soldiers. Every one of them co-operated with that diligence to his end,
that the new Lover had nothing else to do but to desire. The slowness of their
march only vexed him: He desired that Stratonica's Chariot would have flown,
and perhaps to that end he put the Birds in it; but who knows that those Birds
were not Seleucus his winged Desires? They doubtless would have flown in my
Opinion, if the Bridle of Respect, due to his Queen, had not checked them.

But being near Damascus, they were met, and received by the City, with the
greatest signs of Loyalty, that faithful Subjects could demonstrate to their
Prince.

The Arch-Triumphals and Altars were erected, the streets hung with Tapistry,
and the Plays and Balls which that day were seen, would weary any Tongue, and
any Pen.

The concourse of people was so great, that besides the Inhabitants of
Damascus, torrents of persons came tumbling from the neighboring Cities. The
Galleries, the Balcones and Windows were all filled; and the rest of the
people, not knowing which way else to come to see, hung on the ridges of the
houses, and kept themselves from falling, by leaning on the Walls.

The huge throng of people would have doubtless stifled thousands of the
Curious, if a Masque recreating their spirits, had not kept them alive.

Stratonica used always to go masked; were it that the World was unworthy to
see her Face, or were it, that she feared lest her Face might occasion some
ruin to the World. Howsoever it was, a little piece of Velvet, or
Black-Taffaty, hid from the eyes of Damascus that Beauty, which neither high
Mountains, nor vast Seas could conceal from the eyes of Seleucus.

Being arrived at the Palace (which stood at the head of a very large Piazza)
and weary of their journey, they reposed four days, and the Sacrifices in the
mean time, and nuptial Magnificence, were prepared.

In the end, the day being come that was appointed, Seleucus (after he had
solemnly Sacrificed) espoused his dear Stratonica by the hands of the high
Priest. Having afterward caused her to sit down on the right hand of his
Throne, he made all his Lords swear Loyalty to her, and acknowledge her for
their Queen.

The Feasts that then followed, and the Banquets which were made, are far
beyond all imagination.

No Pleasure was omitted, nor Show laid aside: But that which had power above
every thing else, to transport the hearts of all with a wonder, was a very vast
Theater, which the Engineer of the portable Palace, that we spoke of before,
had built on that spacious Piazza.

It was (like a Geryon) composed of those three Bodies which make Architecture
admired. The great Pillars, the beautiful Statues, the majestic vast Beams,
the curious Pictures, the various Devices, and quaint Motto's, made a heap of
Wonders able to amuse the clearest understanding.

It contained Twenty thousand Spectators, and had Six moving Machines in its
vast hollow bulk, every one of which made a Scene. In them Orpheus was
represented in Hell, playing on his Harp for Euridices recovery; Theseus in the
labyrinth when he killed the Minotaure; The same when he deserted Ariana in the
Island; Circes transforming her Lovers into Beasts; Ulysses retreating from the
Music of the Sirens; and Arion saving himself on the back of the Dolphin.

Those Acts were seconded with most excellent enterludes of Music. The
Spectators were amazed in that manner, that many learned men thought it
necessary to deliver them to posterity in Books.

The pattern of those Representations (being afterward by those ancient times,
delivered from one another, to our days) was lastly seen to flourish in the
Feasts of the Princes of Italy, and particularly in his Highnesses of Parma;
the Machines of whose Nuptials, if they wholly exceeded not those of Seleucus,
exceeded them at least in having there present one Claudio Achillini, whose
admirable invention, not only with the harmony of Order, but likewise the
design of the Carpenters work, perpetually made them famous.

Other pleasant Shows succeeded the former, and Damascus for the space of a
month appeared the Worlds delight.

When that time was expired, Demetrius (to ease Seleucus his Country of the
inconveniences caused by his Army, and to carry back his Navy to the Havens of
his Kingdom) took his leave of his dear Daughter, and his new Son-in-law, and
returned with Fila to Tripolis, where he embarked himself.

Stratonica felt their departure with that grief, which was taught her by the
Law of filial affection. And while she was alone in her Chamber, to accompany
their voyage with her sorrow, Antiochus came to see her.

He saw her (ah sight!) he saw her in that posture, which would have mollified
a Flint.

Her Face was so sweetly full of pity, that even sorrow it self looked well in
those Cheeks. The fire of her looks, though bathed in sadness, was not lessened
at all; but albeit it burned in the water, yet it could not be said to be
artificial fire. It was too natural to Stratonica to burn him with her looks.

It is hard to describe with what affection those eyes big with grief brought
forth tears. The fair Queen in that act resembled Aurora in travel of the day.
Her tears much exceeded the morning dew in Beauty.

To hear her name pitifully her Father, so wounded the heart of the Prince,
that the hurt was incurable.

He beholding so pleasing a sight, was wholly transported with her Face, and
began to consider more seriously Stratonica's great Beauty.

That his pity (which he felt pierce his heart) was the Embryo, of which, by
little and little, Love afterward came to be formed.

It was but Reason, that what began of Pity, should make an end in Love. And it
was a lucky sign to Antiochus his love, that it began of grief.

Joy and Sorrow are the two Centers of all humane Actions. He that begins with
the one, ends necessarily in the other.

Antiochus undertook to comfort the Queen, and so affectionately comforted her,
that he even kept her company in weeping.

His Compassion assured her of his Love, and her Sympathy and Affection to him
from thence increased infinitely.

The remembrance of that afflicted Beauty was a Key, which opened to Antiochus
the door of acquaintance. From that time, ever after, when he looked on
Stratonica, her Beauty seemed greater to him, and her Behavior more pleasing.
He delighted in nothing but her Conversation. To be the mark of her Looks, and
the echo of her words, represented to him the felicities of Paradise. Now
Antiochus was grown almost a Lover, but perceived not that he loved.

On the other side Stratonica, who saw that in all Feasts, and particularly in
the Balls, and in Tilting, Antiochus alone was reputed the most valiant, and
esteemed the most handsome; considering too no less, the most pleasing and
amorous dispositions of his nature, was by little and little so enamored of
him, that she acted more the part of a Lover then a Friend.

Reputation in Arms, is a very great motive to Love.

Women, as deprived of that excellency (in this unlike themselves) envy not
Valor, but admire it in Men.

They hate so much Feminine weakness, that they cannot love the man that is
Effeminate; or being to be subject to man, they cannot without blushing endure
to be commanded by him, who cannot show himself to be more then a woman.

So by little and little, the Fire fortified it self in the two Princes hearts.

But the flames were so great in Sophonisba's beyond measure, that there was no
hope of remedy, unless she would discover them. If either Love showed her
Antiochus in Armor in the Field, to show his Valor, or if he presented him to
her unarmed in the middle of a Ball, to make a new Conquest with his Graces,
his presence had still the same power, either this way or that to unbowel her.

The Unfortunate Lady sang frequently with him, and perhaps composed the Songs
in order to her Passion; but Art could do nothing where Nature would not help.

She was now so far gone in her Love, that it either would have shortly caused
her death, or forced her to speak; but Love very strangely delivered her from
the danger she was in.

She received advice, That Faustus her Father was dead, and that she as his
sole Daughter, was left Heir of a large Country; that therefore it concerned
her (in the company of her Cosen Periander, who was come to convey her from the
Court) to resolve to depart.

She retired into her Chamber at that news, being invaded in a moment with a
Million of thoughts tormenting her Mind. Her serene Brow was uncalmed, the
color of her Face turned Pale, her Eyes wept abundantly, her Breast sighed
aloud, and she in an instant was made an unfortunate Winter of Affliction.

She felt her Fathers death by the absence of her Lover; she felt her Lovers
absence by the death of her Father: One grief increased with the memory of
another, and in the Ashes of that, the Fire of this kindled apace.

It is no little Happiness to one that is unhappy, to vent without scandal his
Torments, when his Torments are derived from a Cause, which may occasion
Scandal.

The Mind of Sophonisba (over-flown with the torrent of such Sorrows) could
not choose but transport her to a firm Resolution of discovering her self to
Antiochus.

The state of that Lover seems to her too unfortunate, who is silent and far
off. She therefore sought occasion to be with him alone; but when she is
beginning to speak, affrighted with the Majesty of the Face she adores, little
more then half alive she congeals and grows mute.

The Prince took no notice of her Passions, because she was still to be
unhappy. She seeing she had lost so fit an opportunity, knew not how with any
thing to punish more her self, then by going away presently.

'Twas now night when she began to take her leave of all.

'Twas fit a black License should forerun so dark a Voyage.

Seleucus having given her a very rich Jewel, kissed her on the forehead.

All happiness go with thee Sophonisba. The Gods know (he said to her) what a
loss my Court has of thy Presence.

Stratonica wept, and embraced her oftentimes; only Antiochus wished her a
good journey, and took his leave of her without much alteration.

That was very good luck for Sophonisba: one pale look of his would have made
her dye of wanness.

Having ended her Ceremonies with all, she locked her self in her Chamber. She
went not to bed to take rest; but after much uncertainty of mind, wrote a
Letter to Antiochus, and delivered it to one she loved well in the Court called
Eleuteria, entreating her to give it into his hands, when she guessed she might
be a little way off from Damascus.

The morning being come, Aurora scarce blushed when she with her Company took
Coach, and set forwards on their journey.

The disconsolate Lady was glad, that then all the Court was asleep, that she
might meet no more of those Objects, which would cause her to weep. She
concealed her self in her funeral Coach, lest the Objects she might see, should
seem to reprove her of her distance from Antiochus.

Eleuteria about noon supposing Sophonisba was far enough off, found Antiochus,
and presented him with the Letter. He blushed a little at it, yet thanked
Eleuteria, and locking himself in his Chamber, opened it, and read as here
follows:

I Am too bold, O Antiochus. To write then to you when I may speak, is not
always a sign of Modesty. If these Characters (in which my mourning thoughts
like a Serpent move hither and thither) had the force to make you penetrate
what I fain would have you know, how your virtues have had the Power to make me
feel what I would conceal from all but your self, I should live more contented,
you remain better satisfied. But what do you expect that I should tell you? In
what an ocean of thoughts waves your Mind while you read? Where think you will
these rows of Words, or rather these Lines find an End, which are drawn from
the Center of my Breast? Alas, I want Power to express it. My Antiochus, who
truly art not mine, but as I represent you to my self. Since it was my fortune
to contemplate your Virtues, and receive your Favors, Love so invaded me, that
I could not resist him by forbearing to be yours. Many Months are now past,
since my heart has increased the number of your Vassals. You have commanded
one Soul more then you knew of, and still are Lord of it. My Actions, my Looks
and my Words would have well informed you of it, if you had made reflection on
them. But I have been either too fearful, or you too negligent. Being content
howsoever with my Fortune, which was careless in acquainting you with it, I
rejoiced as much in loving you, as another would perhaps have rejoiced in being
loved again. I was to my self (as I may say) both the Idol and Idolater too.
The Sphaer of my Fire had no greater Circumference, then what was turned about
by the Circuit of a Heart. To see you, to speak to you, and to be in your
Company, were the greatest rewards I could desire for my Love. That Lady seemed
too happy to me, who had leave to lay her heart in the bosom of a King. But
since the death of Faustus my Father has made unhappy the happiness of my
life, by forcing me to go from your Court, I (wounded past all Cure) knew not
what other remedy to have recourse to (to preserve me alive) but this of
informing you, That I love you more then my self. To love you at a distance,
and without your knowledge, were too cruel Conditions to the Fortune of one so
unhappy as I am. I must either have died, or informed you of it. To have done
it with my tongue, would have been more pleasing to me, with my Pen it has
been safer. If you should have refused me, I should have died of grief; if
accepted of me, of delight. Either this way or that I must have died, if she be
said to dye, who is Crowned with a triumph or Martyrdom. Be not scandalized my
King. A woman that so long has known how to be silent, would have known never
to Love, if it had been in her Power.

I am sure that you will not condemn in your Servant, the Flames which your own
Rays have kindled. Pity my sorrows, which only are mine, because I am
excessively yours. And remember, that I (turning sometimes to the Heaven, under
which you take your breath) will invoke that name often, which would only make
me happy if I had not occasion to invoke it. I desire you not to Love me, for
it would be temerity to desire so great a thing. I only beseech you to pardon
me, if those offenses be worthy of pardon, which in nothing else have Wronged
you but in Loving you.


Amazement seized Antiochus, as soon as he had read over the Places, which had
Power to make him wonder; and, as if his Soul from that Letter had drunk some
liquid Poison, he began to perceive a sudden fire in his Bowels.

An amorous Letter to a youthful Heart is a learned Enchantment. The Hooks of
those Characters are artificial pick-lock-tools to open the secret Bolt of a
Heart. To see a Leaf written, is like seeing an Army in the Field; Every Line
is a File of Men. Words give Battle to the Mind and overcome it, for there is
no force more powerful then that of Words to batter a Mind.

Antiochus read over the Letter once or twice, which was a Composition too
pleasing to uncalm the tranquillity of his Thoughts; and causing Eleuteria to
come to him, questioned her earnestly to see what she knew else of Sophonisba.
Thinking then again on the accident, and Love making in the Field of his Memory
a Muster of the Virtues of that Lady, he lamented much her absence, and so
violently fell in Love with her, as he would have repaired all his past
negligence, if what is once past could ever become present.

He omitted not to answer her Letter, and mingled in his answer many amorous
Conceits, to assure Sophonisba that he loved her again. But his answer come to
Bursia, was returned with this answer, That the miserable Lady was dead.

The sorrow she had for leaving her Antiochus, was the cause of her death. And
who wonders that she died leaving him, if Antiochus was her life?

The Fame of her Death being spread through Damascus, all that had known her,
wept for her. Every one bewailed the too untimely death of Sophonisba, the Sun
of whose Virtue had given so much Luster to that Court.

Antiochus above all (clothing in Black his dearest Thoughts) erected in the
Temple of his Heart, a Monument of Tears to his deceased Mistress.

His sorrows were the greater, in order to the strife within himself to conceal
them.

But all he could do, could not hinder the Marks of his grief from appearing
with state on his Countenance.

Those Remembrances are sorrowful, which called to the Heart make the Echo of
a Tomb. They have something of poison, which fuming to the face, makes it pale.
Sepulchers contain only ashes, and can give no other color to him that thinks
on them, but what is of ashes.

But the Mark being removed toward which the desires of Antiochus began to
run, he remained as deprived of sense, because he could no longer be sensual.

The man that applies not himself to some Love, is like a Body without Life.

The good Prince is unsatisfied, till he fill afresh his heart with some other
Affection.

Humane Condition is of such a constitution, that if once it lose its modesty
in desiring, it presently becomes dishonest in its Desires.

He waving up and down in these irresolutions, Love presents before him
Stratonica. He before having carelessly designed the first Draughts of a Love
more then filial toward her, thinks it easy to pursue it, until it degenerate
into lust. He therefore begins to wish to see her, and is pleased with her
favors. But returned to himself, it is probable that he said oftentimes to
himself,

What ways are these? Whither runnest so Antiochus? Do thou invent Treasons?
Treason's the more heinous, since they are against Honor? Can thy Heart have a
corner where a Thought may hide it self; a Thought that is so foul to be an
Adulterer to thy Father? And live thou, and breathest? And have the impudence
(wicked wretch) to endure the others looks? And on what are founded all thy
Hopes, though they are just Hopes? Perhaps on Stratonica's allurements? And
think thou that she flatters thee lasciviously? Madman that thou art, can
not be faithless enough thy self, unless thou likewise think Fidelity it
self faithless?

With these or the like internal Motions, Antiochus mortifying his Senses,
stopped the course of his Affection to the Queen, and was afterward more
cautious, and less careful to preserve it.

She seeing him grown tepid and sad, was not wanting to make use of all
occasions to rekindle his Affection.

And he (after some little resistance) returned to the Happiness of her Favors,
and began to desire them afresh very passionately.

So the course of his Affections altered by turn, till after some days
Antiochus arrived at that point of his Life, in which a Change of Fortune was
decreed him by his Fate.

On the side of the Palace, Seleucus had a Garden no less spacious then
beautiful: In it, as in a leavy Lycaeum, or an Academy of Plants well looked
to, the vegetative Creatures taught men the Sciences of the most learned
Beauties. There in the Summer the King used to walk in the Evening, and to Sup
oftentimes.

One Evening therefore among the rest, being there at Table with the Queen and
the Prince, they were infinitely merry.

It was in that part of the year, when the World (become young again) uses with
flowery Hair to array his naked Face. To see Stratonica in a Garden, was to see
the Sun in his Sphaer. That Garden seemed the Epitome of all the Worlds Beauty,
and Stratonica's face the Epitome of that Garden.

Antiochus (grown drunk with the pleasure of a thousand little flatteries of
the Queen) was no sooner a Bed, but disordered his mind with a Chaos of
Thoughts now unquiet, now calm, and penetrating into the Contemplation of what
had passed that day, sighed to himself through abundance of Compassion, and
cried out oftentimes.

Sweetest Stratonica! And who would be happier then I am, if what thou do to
me as a Mother-in-law, thou would do as a Lover?

In these or such like words he continued, and his Senses being fettered with
the soft snares of sleep, he dreamed in the night, That passing through the
Garden, he had found Stratonica all alone in a labyrinth of Mirtles, which grew
there in the middle. The afflicted Queen being seated (as he thought) in those
shady retreats, immoderately wept.

What ails you Madam? Why weep you so disconsolately?

She then looking on Antiochus with a countenance between angry and pleased,
seemed thus to answer him,

Cruel man! Art still so inhumane to ask me why I weep? I so long have been
dying for thy love, and thou returnest not my kindness, nor make account of
it, and yet thou ask me why I weep?

The Prince (congealing at those words) was inmoveable and senseless. Having
afterward by little and little recovered his spirits, he endeavored to
mitigate her Sorrow, by assuring her, That he suffered as much for her sake.

The Dream wrought so powerfully, that Antiochus awaked. Being come to himself,
O Gods (said he) who can tell if Stratonica loves thee not unfeignedly? who can
tell? But Fool, what say I? Is Stratonica false to my Father? Ah! these are
distempers of a youthful Brain, they are distempers.

So he reasoned with himself, and leaping out of his Bed (when the Sun had now
gilded the Windows) came into the Room, where he used every morning to do his
duty to the Queen.

Poor Antiochus, how near is thy Liberty to an end?

Round that Presence Chamber, from the top, hung rich imbroidered Cloth, the
height of which (being adorned with a circle of Pictures done by rare Masters)
entertained the Eyes of all the Beholders with a very stately Sight. On one of
the four sides, on a Table of Silver, was erected to the middle of the Wall, a
very great and clear apiece Looking-glass, which resembling a calm Sea,
bounded with the Ethiopian shore of a transparent Ebony, invited all the Faces
and Species of near Objects to fail on its Bosom.

Now while Stratonica, the King, and many other domestics (which coming from
their Chambers, had assembled there themselves) stood discoursing on the rest
they had taken the night past; the Queen (who was afraid to be observed by her
Husband, if too often, as she otherwise would have done, she had fixed her Eyes
on her beloved) learned to look kindly upon him by stealth in the Image, which
the Glass reflected of him: so while she was secretly delighted with his sight,
Antiochus by chance casting his eyes up and down, found the Queens fixed on him.

But who can now repeat the great force of that encounter of their looks? And
how significant was that sudden correspondence of their eyes? It was the Work
of an Angel, that she in an instant assured, reproved, and encouraged the
enamored Prince.

If thou doubtest that I love thee (he thought that those Eyes said to him) if
thou doubtest that I love thee, O Antiochus, behold this my Soul, which wholly
contracted in the little circle of a covetous Apple of the Eye, hopes only to
be helped by a dying Aspect. To assure thee of my Love, methinks the many
signs thou have had of my Affection, should suffice thee. But since thou
would never credit them, nor believe the last Nights Vision, will thou credit
this Glass? Ah, see Antiochus, see that I love thee.

The Eyes are the Wonders of the Face, and dark Figures of Divinity. We may
call them too the Dyals of Love, which fastened on the Wall of a Countenance,
show with the Style of their Looks, the minutes of hours, either happy or
unhappy to Lovers. They showed Lovesick Antiochus that infallibly from that
Moment, by assuring himself of Stratonica's Affection, he burnt in that manner,
that his Flame was almost after past extinguishing.

The second Book.
NOw the Heart of Antiochus was combustible Matter. The form of that Look so
kindled the Fire in his Bowels, that he being unable to contain it entirely in
his Bosom, it likewise fell to flaming in his Face.

Philosophy has no Secret that is able to repress the first Passions of the
Mind. They invade with that violence, that they tyrannize.

Poor Lovers amongst their Miseries, count not for the least, that of Blushing,
and frequently growing Pale, because in the colors displayed on their Cheeks
by their Mind, they cannot help declaring those Affections, which they would
most conceal.

But Nature that has contracted the universe in man, has placed in his Face
the echo of his Heart.

Antiochus his blushing, made Stratonica blush too; for she could have no sign
that he was aware of her Affection without being ashamed.

The Prince therefore taking notice, that his stay there was dangerous to that
Secrecy, which he too much had professed in all his Actions; he took his leave
of her, and (running like a wounded Stag) took covert again in those Chambers,
which (considering the green Pictures and Tapistries) differed in nothing from
Forests, but in that they were Painted.

There transported in an amorous Ecstasy, he frequently lay in the trance of a
thousand Delights. Between him alone, and his heart, was the Conference, which
in cases like this, is easier phansied then described. He was so well pleased
with himself, that he seemed a Courtier complementing with a Friend.

All that while his fair Mother-in-law was no less pleased then he, only she
could not have the liberty to perfect her Joy, by reason of her Ladies
attendance, who were always waiting on her.

But they limited the Violence of their Joy, with a reciprocal Desire of
reseeing one another that Morning, before they went to Dinner, to return to the
Cement of those Looks, with which their Souls had begun to be acquainted.

So when the inundation of Blushing had ceased in Antiochus his Face, he went
out well composed, and being come thither where he had left Stratonica before,
he found her standing there, and reading certain Letters from her Father, which
she newly had received.

Days which begin luckily, seldom end unhappily: Disasters and Joys use
commonly to come single. The beginning it seems infuses certain Qualities into
things, with which it does either vivificate or infect them.

It was a day of Felicity to the two enamored Princes. It began with the
Private, and was to conclude with the public Joy.

The said Letters brought advice, That Demetrius having caused Alexander, the
Brother of Antipater to be slain, who lay in wait for his life, was by the
Macedonians (the deceaseds Subjects) saluted for their King, and conducted into
Macedonia.

Stratonica very glad of the news, gave order that Seleucus should be called in
all haste, and in the mean time communicated it to Antiochus with so pleasing a
Countenance, that in it he had more things to read then in the Paper.

The young Prince transported with the joy of that pleasant gesture, if once he
looked down on the Letter, often lifted up his eyes to look the Queen in the
Face. In the end, having heard what the Letters contained, he cried out, and
expressing great contentment, said to her,

I wonder not (Madam) that Kingdoms owe their Being to the valor of your
Father; I wonder that the Subjects of slain Alexander knew not how to revenge
their Kings death, but by giving the Crown of his Kingdom to his Murderer.

Indeed, I confess (dearest Prince) answered Stratonica, That if this news had
not been written to me by my Fathers own hand, I should not have believed it;
howsoever, the stranger it is, the more it has replenished me with Joy.

From whence (replied Antiochus) we only may argue, That King Demetrius his
Merits are so eminent, that Fortune afraid of their greatness, has turned into
peaceable Scepters their vindicative Swords, and changed Blood-thirsty Wars
into Vassallages full of Devotion. If therefore his Friends and his Servants
are bound to rejoice for his Victories, I (amongst them all who am the most
obliged to him, as well for his Valor, as the Interests (Madam) which I have in
your person) cannot do less then kiss your Hand to show you my Gladness:

And bowing himself, he desired to kiss it. But Stratonica making a pleasing
resistance, very cheerful and smiling, returned him this Answer;

Prince, I will never permit you to be so obsequious to me, I am very sure that
your Joy for my Fathers prosperity equals mine; wherefore it is unnecessary for
you to assure me of it otherwise then you do by your Countenance.

But Antiochus persisting in his desire to kiss her Hand, at last overcoming
her, kissed it.

I believe (O Antiochus) the Repulses of thy beautiful Queen, were the usual
tricks of witty women. Peradventure for the sweetness of thy kiss, she wished
then her mouth on her hand.

But thou would have been certainly very happy, if thou could with that
kiss have buried thy life in one of those fair little Graves.

While they were so discoursing, Seleucus came to them, and informed with
emulation now by Stratonica, now by Antiochus of Demetrius his good fortune, he
seemed externally to be very glad of it, but really within himself he was very
sorry for it.

Men applaud, but fear his Greatness, who is able to suppress them. Princes
like Plants cannot endure the height of those Trees which can shade them. Every
one hates in his Companion that happiness, which he fain would have himself,
and continually seeking to balance another power, comes many times to lose
his own.

Seleucus howsoever to conceal his own resentments, gave order the same morning
for the making of a very Solemn Feast, where by the number of the Lords which
were to be present, the quality of his Love (which he fained to his Father in
law) might appear the more Glorious.

Tables (like Tragical Scenes) use oftentimes to kill noysom Thoughts with the
death of Meats. And those cares which (sailing on the Ocean of the Mind) are
afraid to lose themselves, being plunged in the little Lake of a foaming
Crystal, suffer often Shipwreck.

Man has no Theater more delightful to entertain all his Senses then a Table,
and nothing more hurtful to his health, or more scandalous to his behavior.

The Fame of Demetrius his good Fortune, and the order for the Banquet being
spread through the Court, the joy was universal in all Hearts, especially in
theirs, who professed themselves the Subjects and Dependants of that King.
Among them Licofronia a Lady well in years, and Stratonica's nurse, made show
of great contentment.

She was at that time the greatest among those near the Queen. Stratonica, who
had sucked her Milk, had likewise sucked the Custom of respecting her as a
Mother. The Authority in her Face equalled that of her State. No Lady spoke
more eloquently, and none led a more unblemished Life.

In those joys (which were the cause of Confusions and Whisperings) the two
enamored Princes could very well mingle their pleasures, without running the
hazard of being observed; for the Ladies, the Pages, and other Domestics of
the Court, being busy about one thing or other, had no time to stand still,
and take notice of the Actions of their Patrons.

But Seleucus (when he had conferred some time with the Queen about the news of
his Father-inlaw, and the preparations for the Feast) retired into his usual
Lodgings, the better to attend the Affairs of his Kingdom.

Antiochus (to give no suspicion of himself, with his being continually with
his Mother-in-law) did the same; The Gods know with what Mind. Being come to
the Threshold of the Door, which locked his Heart from him, he turned himself
to see his Life which remained there within, and he saw her stand looking on
him.

Farewell they said, in that encounter of their Looks. Heaven knows how I
depart, Love knows how I stay here.

Antiochus went away full of Joy, but what caused his Affliction to depart from
his Happiness. He goes through those Rooms, he wanders through the Galleries of
the Palace so transported; that saluted, he returns not the Civility; that met
with, he is ignorant of the Person: He answers when he is not spoken to, and
asks Questions when alone.

Love is the Wine of the Soul. He muses on the world of the Looks he had
received: He repeats the words that followed, and his destiny lastly (whether
to make him turn Physician, or to distemper him, I know not) makes him a
careful Anatomist of the Body of every little Favor.

When he had mused enough, and concluded with himself, that he was very much in
Stratonica's Favor, he was pleased to speak to some of his Favorites, to pass
with the Discourse of diverse things that short morning, which before dinner
came, seemed to him an Age.

Stratonica in the mean time (who raved in her Thoughts no less then he)
resolved to appear to Antiochus more glorious that morning, and (to honor the
Feast with the stateliest show which she could represent of her self) to be
regally adorned.

To that end, being gone into her Cabinet with two diligent Chamber-Maids, she
sat down by a Table the Pedistal of a Looking-glass, which within the Frame of
enamelled Silver, seemed as if it came to beatifie that Face, in which there is
not a Heart that feels not a thousand Beatitudes.

But here I confess, I would fain know how to describe her. The dalliances of a
Pen which are delightful, would not be ungrateful to me in this occasion. It
was too strange to the World, to see a Looking-glass look in a face, and a
Woman run no less the danger of Idolizing then Deifying her self.

Stratonica could in nothing show more her Affection to Antiochus, then in
looking on her self at that time. Being ready to be enamored of her self, she
omitted to do it, because she would not be a rival of her self to her Dear.

The Queen (though she had no need to instruct in any Action her Countenance,
to set out her Graces more lively) yet studied how her laughter might be
pleasinger, her looks more compassionate, and her face more attractive.

It is the disease of all handsome Women (though Nature has enriched them with
her gifts) to be begging still of Art those Affectations which infect their
Beauties often.

Looking-glasses are Magic Books to Women; They learn in them those Spells,
which (to charm a man) become sweetly cruel. A Lookingglass has the Quality of
a Counselor, and a Privilege granted to no Counselor, and a Privilege
granted to no Counselor, it speaks always the truth, and is always beloved.

While therefore Stratonica was either the Glass, or looked in it, the Chamber
Maids began to unpin her Head, and untangle the Knots of Ribbands, which rolled
up together in the folds of her Hair, served either to bridle their Boldness,
or bury their Errors, their Boldness or Errors committed in ensnaring Lovers
Souls.

The Queens Hair like a deluge over-flowed her Neck and her Face, to hinder
peradventure with their inundation the Looking-glass from silvering its
Crystal in the whiteness of that flesh.

As soon as she was combed, she washed her Face with a Water, which distilled
from many Herbs, was in opinion with those Chamber-Maids, of having the Virtue
to make fairer the skin. I say in Opinion, because in reality though its Virtue
had been such, yet it could not do any thing in her Beauty, which (an infinity
having filled all places) had rendered incapable of any Augmentation.
Howsoever, they began with this Water, and they ended with this Water all their
Painting in Stratonica's face.

She to so many Prerogatives had from Heaven, added that of not being an
Alchymist. Whosoever went to spy in the secretest Repository of her Cabinet,
found not there a world of little Boxes (not to say Crucibles) in which most
Women think to find the Stone of Beauty.

Stratonica knew very well, that in the elaboratory of those distilled
Labyrinths, nothing would be gotten in the end, but the color of Coals on the
Teeth, and the wrinkles of burning on the Skin.

When the Chamber-Maids had done washing her Face, they fell to ordering her
Hair. Its triming at that time was as stately as it was new.

On the Crown of her Head, like a glorious Diadem, was a circle of Tresses of
Hair adorned with Diamonds; in the middle of which (looking toward the height
of her forehead) was placed a Jewel of an extravagant fashion, the greatest Gem
of which, was a very large Carbuncle reduced into the Figure of a wounded
Heart. Two thick Locks of curled Hair hung on her Temples, within which (as it
were in living Cages) the soft Thoughts of Lovers played like little Birds. She
had for her Pendants two little clusters of Grapes, which (to agree with the
Jewel) had sparkling Stones. Then from the top of the plaited Roll, hung loose
a fine Vail inter-woven with Silver, which swollen with the Air of Ambition, that
it had in serving for so Noble a use, fell waving to hide the hinder part of
her Head, and came down to the back of the Queen.

Being adorned in this manner, she from the Neck upwards, resembled very well a
Spring full of Flowers, when in a clear Morning it is seen overcast with a
little thin cloud.

When her Head was artificially dressed, they brought her a Silk Gown from the
Wardrobe, in which the Weavers Shittle had most fortunately assembled all the
Colors and Figures of the Wheel, in which the stately Peacock turns about the
pride of his Feathered Beauty. The Gold mingled with the Jewels (with which she
was richly adorned) fell short of the first Quality of its worth. She, perfumed
with Amber and Musk, had taken such deep scent, that for a good space breathing
fine fragrancies on the circuit about her, she made every breath of air of
incomparable value. Moreover, the fashion used then by the Queens was so proper
to make them seem handsome, that she could not desire more of Art, whose end is
to further dishonesty.

Stratonica being dressed, and those Jewels distributed, some to her Breast,
and others to her Neck, to make all that saw her more dearly prize her sight,
she attentively stood to see what opinion of her dressing the Looking-glass
would have.

What would thou have else, O Stratonica, of Nature and Art? See freely with
all diligence, if by chance this or that have been wanting in any thing that
you can desire. The miracle of Perfection which no where else is seen, with
what a miracle now may be seen in you alone? What is this heap of Beauty like,
with which in an instant you affront so the weakness of a Crystal? It is
comelier, and more terrible then an Army shining all in Steel. Poor Lovers, why
do ye not rather believe it then die?

So it seemed that in Stratonica's Breast a Thought said to her, which she her
self knew not if it was hers, or of her Antiochus.

To be armed in that manner with Ornaments, that her Beauty was about to be
Cruel, seemed to her a sin of Homicide. She considered, that the Bowels of a
Lover were too weak to resist that invasion of Joy, which a presence of that
nature must occasion; and that man used no less to die of Joy then of Sorrow.
To have so much Authority in her Face, and so much grace in her Looks to offer
violence to Affections, seemed not fit Qualities for her, who desired to be
rather a Queen then a Tyrant. She knew very well that the Soul of her Dear had
sworn voluntary subjection to her, and that to compel his Affection (which was
not behinde-hand of it self) was to hazard him to a precipice, or condemn him
to die quickly.

These Considerations could not be debated in the mind of Stratonica, without
causing her to alter. The Alteration died her with a Blushing, which was caused
by pity. She who in the Glass desires to be less Fair, the less to afflict him
that loves her, when by her new color she perceives her Desire is derided,
with an Alas full of Anger, throws away the Crystal far from her, and turns
her back on the Cabinet.

A Woman's condition would be too disproportioned, if she had not some natural
gift to balance the endowments of man. Nature therefore gave her Beauty, that
it might be as useful to her, as Strength is to a man. But because to be Fair,
imported too much to the Nature of Man, and to be strong, to that of Woman; she
so tempered these two Qualities, that changing the color, she made the Strong
seem Fair, and the Fair Strong; Strength that is not Beautiful to allure, and
Beauty that is not strong to overcome; neither truly can we say it is
Beautiful, nor with Reason affirm it is Strong.

Now the Ladies that were invited beginning to appear, the Queen gloriously
Adorned, went out of her own into the Presence Chamber to receive them; and
being seated under a very rich Cloth of State, with a Circle about her of her
Noblest Maids of Honor, caused all that were then come to enter in.

The Ladies from one to another were amazed to see, that thinking to do their
Duties to a Queen, they were encountered with the Majesty of a Goddess there
seated. The fear and alteration in their Ceremonies made it very conspicuous,
that the Soul affrighted with the sight of so much Beauty, abandoning only all
the parts of the Body, was in the little Circle of the Apple of the Eye weakly
fortified.

The usual signs of Reverence and Affection being made and received, all of
them sat down in order to their Condition and Quality.

They spoke not at first, for the Spirits which (to manifest their joy for
Demetrius his increase of good Fortune should have run to the tongue) were all
employed in their eyes, in gazing with delight on the wonders of Stratonica.

Silence too augmented the qualities of that Beauty, whose first Quality was to
infuse a Silence.

The Ladies beheld Stratonica, and having beheld her, beheld one another. The
amazement which every one showed, served to her Companion for a Testimony, to
assure her that she saw no illusion.

Every thing was admirable in the Queen; but that was most admirable, that her
Beauty served not, but commanded the Beauty of Art. That rule failed in her of
beautified Arts, That the more they are Adorned, the less they Delight.

The artificial Lights could not be so powerful as to darken the Rays of
natural Brightness. In vain the Stars in a serene Night put themselves in order
to dazzle the Moon.

At last the Bridle of their Tongue being given them, an Encomium with a very
low humming began to sound among them, which (resembling an amorous Be) went
about, producing in the ears of this and that Lady an Affection of Honey. They
contended all gladly in exercising their Fancies on that Beauty, whose Fancies
by too Fatal a Decree were only reserved for Seleucus.

They said Demetrius was Happy, because he was Father to so fair a Princess;
they said Stratonica was Glorious, because she was daughter to so renowned a
King.

Her Beauty added Splendour to his Arms, and his Arms augmented the Fame of her
Beauty.

Fila was invoked and envied together for the Fortunat'st Woman then living,
and only was pitied for her dear Daughters distance.

These and such like things were quietly muttered and thought on by the Ladies;
when the Queen aware of their Conceits, and unwilling to hear her self praised
(though it were but with a thought) broke the thread of their discourse, and
began now with one, now with another, to speak of several things.

In the mean time the Sergeants which assisted at the Banquet, came in to
inform them that all things were ready. At that saying the Queen rose up,
desirous peradventure now at last to feed her amorous eyes with the dear sight
of her beloved Antiochus. All the Ladies rose up with her, and while they were
Complementing together about precedence in going, a Page came to the Queen to
give her notice, that Seleucus staid to speak with her in the Chamber.
Stratonica fained to go away about some other occasion, and suddenly went
thither, where her old husband like a young Lover attended her.

So fine without telling me any thing? So Glorious without first of all
acquainting your Seleucus with your Bravery? Ah! what see I? What Deity
transports me? And here making of his Arms an animated Chain about the Neck of
his beloved, he kissed her with such ardency, that the kiss (as it were
changing Nature) seemed an offense. Stratonica rekissed him many times, more
moved I believe with Compassion then Love, and gave him this answer: My Beauty
(my Lord, if it be so that I am beautiful) aims at nothing else but your
Pleasure. These gay Dressings (whose greatest Art is Negligence) may only call
happy the Day that they are not neglected by you. If I had dared to have called
you this morning a spectator to that Theater, where your Majesty (it seems) is
pleased to be Conquered by my Weakness, my Joy would have been much more
pleasing to me then any till now I have felt.

These words she intermingled with kisses, perhaps with them as with so many
Seals to authenticate her sayings, or to equal with number what she failed of
in the quality of her kisses to her husband.

He thinking of no other Contentment, would have willingly entertained himself
with that Pleasure, if Stratonica telling him that the Ladies staid for him,
had not hastened him to dinner.

The Room appointed for the Feast was very large: the Roof glittering with
leave-works of Gold, lost its esteem in the value of the Mettle, because it
surpassed it in the richness of the work.

The Furniture was so Stately, that the Walls in a manner grew proud, that on
them hung the Pensils greatest Glories, and the famousest Labors of the
Shittle. The Eye dazzled with the Tissues, and amazed with the Silks, knew not
which Beauty first to admire. The doors at which they went in, and were two,
were seen guarded by two Wings of Halbardiers very proudly apparelled. The
shining Irons which they brandished in their hands, were so many glittering
Tongues, giving notice with terror that there was the Majesty of a King.

Selencus and Stratonica entered in severally, and almost together; he
accompanied by Antiochus, and his Courtiers, she attended by the Ladies, and
her own Maids of Honor.

The Provision, the Music and Odours, so subverted the Senses of all that went
in with a threefold Confusion of Pleasure, that every one was dubious for a
time, and unable to determine if what he saw and heard was a Dream or a Truth.

Unhappy Antiochus; and what a Glorious Scene is prepared thee by Fortune, to
exercise the Acts of thy unfortunate Love?

When Seleucus had saluted all the Ladies, and the Queen, and ended his
Ceremonies with the Lords, who received one another with various demonstrations
of affection, he commanding a Silence in all, began thus to speak.

Princes, Ye cannot be ignorant of the News spread this morning in this Court,
of the fortunate successes of the King my Father-in-law. I unable by the
shortness of a morning to demonstrate greater joy, have invited you all to dine
with me, that ye rejoicing with me for the growth of that Crown, we may drink
to his health.

May it increase, answered all; and with that they heard a harmony of musical
Instruments, which beginning a rare Tune, they sang a certain Song used at the
triumphs of Princes.

In the mean time a deluge of Dishes overflowed the Table, in which, as in so
many Silver Sepulchers the Meats were brought interred, which had for their
Sawces exhausted Arabia and the India's of their Spices.

He that knows not the Delights of the sumptuous Feasts of Asia, which boast to
devour in a Bit the value of a Kingdom, cannot conceive in his mind the least
part of the greatness of this Feast.

In such a rejoicing, who is able to imagine with what softness the Hearts of
the two enamored Princes dissolved? They, divided by their old Rival (who loved
no less passionately then they did) beheld one another, and discoursed
together, being so much the less taken notice of, by how much the more they saw
themselves assisted by the Kings continual Presence.

Love is the greatest Philosopher in the world; He can transmute Substances
without altering the Accidents. These two Lovers change Subjection into
Liberty, and no body perceives it, because no body can believe so bold a Change.

Man securely makes use of Excess, when the Excess is come to a certain kind
of Eminence, which makes it incredible.

The Pleasures of Antiochus would have been more delicious, if his Father had
been absent; but his Father being present, if they were not more delicious,
they were at least more frequent: What they wanted in the Quality, they could
make up with Number, since it is fatal in this world to have any thing perfect.

While the glad Guests in that manner expected to satisfy themselves with all
the Pleasures which could be administered to them by the delights of a Royal
Feast, one of the Princes (turning his looks by accident, to behold a Picture
done by Apelles, where Tereus cut out the Tongue of Philomene) gave occasion to
the King of commending it greatly. Thence passing from the discourse of the
Picture to Philomenes singing, and from one Song going to another, the King
commanded Gelmindo to sing.

Gelmindo was then the famousest Musician of that Age. As soon as he had heard
the Kings command, he stood thinking what to sing to please them most; when a
very fair Lady called Aurinda, one of the Guests, said, Gelmindo knew some
Verses made by I know not what Poet, in order to Apelles, when he was in love
with Campaspe. The King hearing of it (and all being curious to hear them)
commanded they should be sung presently.

Every one being silent, Gelmindo began to prepare the attention of their
minds by tuning the Strings of an Arabian Cittern. Then drawing from the
bottom of his Breast, a long but sweet Voice, he caused a chilness to run up
and down in the bones of the Auditors, which making their hair stand an end,
and uncolouring their Cheeks, drew tears in many to the Confines of their Eyes.

The Preludium represented the gushing of a Wave, which carrying on its back
the soul of him that heard it, while it ran now high, now low, now swift, now
slow, made it really appear that even in Music Tempests are not wanting to
Shipwreck a Heart.

The Verses were these. They were admirable in their own language, but being
transformed, have lost very much by the traduction of their own native beauty.

Burn, and consume, burn wretched Heart,
Unhappy in extremes thou art:
If dying looks serve not thy turn,
To say, I for Campaspe burn.
From thoughts enflamed pale Colors fume
Into the face, and it consume.
O my poor heart, what charms thee so,
That thy afflicted face cannot show
Thy death, nor tell who murders thee?
Yet will thou still a Lover be?
Who hides Campaspes eyes, that she
(Whom I adore thus) cannot see
How thou for her art made a prey
To sorrow, and do pine away?
O foolish custom, and vile use
Of Silence! he deserves no truce,
Nor peace to his just grief, who is
In pain, and will not say it is his.
Apelles so (who for love groaned)
Himself unto himself bemoaned,
But durst not practice what he thought
In his conceit fit to be taught.
Gelmindo went on, and at last concluded his Song by telling them, That
Alexander pitying Apelles, with an inimitable act of Liberality, depriving
himself of her gave him Campaspe.

The Lovers beheld one another many times, and blushed at the Sense of those
Verses. The Signification of what he sung was as admirable as the Song it self.
A thousand times both the one and the other reproved with their Eyes the
cowardice of their Hearts. And lamenting much the time, which they had so
unprofitably let slip, they encouraged themselves to perform with all study,
what the musical Orator without any study had persuaded them to.

When the Feast was ended, diverse sorts of Games and Pastimes (agreeing with
the Majesty of a King) were introduced for the entertainment of the Guests.
With these and the Music, which played from time to time, they at last brought
that day to a period, which for the many accidents that happened to Stratonica
and Antiochus was eternally Memorable.

Leave being given to the Ladies and Lords to go away, every one retired to
bed. Antiochus, like one passing from the Active to the Contemplative life,
began there to ruminate on the whole order of the Pleasures he had enjoyed. The
sighs which intermissively came from his soul, and the softness into which he
felt his heart dissolve, can only be described by him, who is as he was, A
passionate Lover.

Stratonica did the same, and perhaps with more piercing resentments, as she
who more sensibly then Antiochus was acquainted with amorous Delights.

The Hearts of these two Lovers were united, their bodies disjoined. The walls
of the Chambers too far distant the one from the other, were the cause of this
bitter divorce. Their nocturnal studies aimed at nothing else but to join too
their bodies. To see that both the one and the other showed the same desire in
the actions of the day, made them both hope that the effect would shortly
follow. But many days passing away (though in them many fair opportunities were
offered them) they never discovered their Passions.

Fortune and Chance (esteemed by the Ancients as Gods) playing with these two
Lovers, gave them occasion of crediting more their Deities. They often reduced
the Prince and the Queen to that condition, that one moment only was wanting
to them to render them happy.

Of what great importance is a Moment? Stratonica expected, and with reason,
that Antiochus would have begun. Antiochus not daring so much, thought
Stratonica would have spoken the first. Losing in this manner their time, and
driven back with that extreme, which only with a word they could have
overcome, they precipitated themselves into a Sea of a thousand strange
Misfortunes.

The lamentations (which one without the knowledge of the other made of his
condition) are incredible to him who is not a Lover.

Stratonica now accustomed to bewail her unfortunate love, used often to retire
into her Chamber, to extinguish that Fire with her Tears, which (because it was
concealed) seemed to her the more violent.

Licofronia had first noted many days the paleness of her Queen, and argued
with her self, that those colors could proceed from nothing else but an
amorous Fever. She therefore observed her proceedings, and perceived at last
that she was in love with Antiochus.

The strangeness of the Case seemed no less temerarious then horrible to her.
Howsoever, being wise she would not believe it, till she first had had such a
countersign as was capable of freeing her from all doubt. It seemed to her no
little offense against the honesty of a Princess, but to think her dishonest.

Great Persons have always advantage in the esteem of being good, as if the
opinion of men was afraid to measure the height of their Fortune, with any
other rule but that of Goodness.

One day in the end as Fortune would have it, Licofronia happened unawares to
hear behind a Hanging, a very sad complaint made by Stratonica. She was about
to go help her, being unable to endure, to see her own Heart distill in flowing
Tears at the Eyes of the Queen. But she heard a low voice pronounce twice the
name of Antiochus.

At that saying, the wise Matron listened more attentively, and stood a while
fixed, to see if she could understand the sense of the words which the
afflicted Queen uttered. But her Sorrow occasioning an alternate change in her
voice, which sometimes was low, and sometimes clear, her words (ere they came
to Licofronia's Ears) died among the multitude of her Sobs. She perceived
howsoever that Stratonica lamented Antiochus his cruelty, in that he complied
not with her Love in the manner she desired.

Licofronia's amazement was so great, that it almost made her swoon. Being a
little returned to her self, she was about to run distracted into the Chamber,
to reprove the Queen sharply, and tell her how much she had degenerated from
the Virtue of that Blood which (when she was a Child) she had sucked from her
Breasts. But remembering her self, that the Remedies of the Mind were not to be
applied in the fervor of Passion, she forbore then that Office, which only to
her as to a Mother was due in all Reason.

She therefore retired to bewail the disasters of a Daughter, in whom an
amorous flame had obscured all the splendour she had formerly purchased in the
time of her breeding.

The Water of those Tears quenched not the Desire of correcting her, but
swelled and increased it in that manner, that she resolved to do it with all
speed.

Having therefore one day found a fit opportunity, and gotten Stratonica into a
Chamber, she began first of all to speak gently unto her, by putting her in
mind with what diligence she had always served her, and how affectionately
loved her. Then she showed unto her, that as the Affection and Service she
professed to her, obliged her to be glad for the excellent Qualities, and
gallant Behavior that she saw in her; so on the other side they forced her to
mourn, and reprove her, in case she had committed any fault. Then speaking more
plainly unto her, she told her (and not without anger) what she had discovered
concerning her love to Antiochus; and raging as she spoke, represented to her
how enormous it was in a Woman, to have her Heart revolt to any Love, but what
was prescribed her by Chastity. Deploring at last her own evil fortune, she a
thousand times cursed that Destiny, which had brought her to see so much shame
in a Daughter, whom rather then her life she had preserved.

While Licofronia spoke, The Authority of her Reason, and the Force of Modesty
(which lightened in her Countenance with the brightness of Terror) made her
appear in the Eyes of the Queen more then a Woman.

She presented before the Tribunal of her own Conscience, and feeling her self
accused as guilty of Incest, had no cloak but that of Shame to cover her
Defects.

Her Sorrow was the greater in the act of her Repentance, in order to its
smalness in the time that she had committed the Errors.

When the good Nurse had ended, Stratonica (who had tried with how many Stings
a Heart is transfixed, that is not armed with the Breast Plate of Innocence)
answered her droopingly, and half dejected in this manner:

Mother, the love you bear me, needs no testimony. Any notice of it is too
much, since the length of time, and variety of Occasions in which it has been
exercised, have had the power to authenticate it so, that there is no doubt of
it. I know that this Love, and the Milk you have given me, give you a
privilege to treat me in this manner, otherwise neither you, nor any in the
World durst have had so much boldness. But alas, what answer shall I give thee?
To remember my self I am a Queen, makes me not forget, that a lie must not be
found in the tongue of Princes. If I should deny to thee my Love to Antiochus,
I should injure my Condition, and deride thy Prudence. I confess my Error; for
I confess it, I know, not to a Judge that has Authority to judge me, but to a
Master that has power to correct me. I will not excuse my fault, by
attributing that to the force of the Stars, which has been the mere election
of my Will. It is true, that (I know not by what power) I have felt my self
often inclined to this Love, but if I had resisted it, what could have
tyrannized over my Will? The fault is wholly mine, I alone have made the Net,
in which my Reputation and Honor have been caught in the Passage. These Tears
which I shed (though they dropped from my Eyes for the space of an Age) would
not have water enough to cleanse my Offense. The Stains of Honor can only be
washed with blood. I know I deserve all correction; I know that none living
should to me be a crueller tormentor then my self: But since (to save my Honor)
no other chastisement is expedient to my Person, but what my own Sorrow does
give me, be contented, O Licofronia. Leave me not a prey to my Sense in that
manner, lest falling into despair I lose all my Senses. Permit me to say (to
preserve me alive) That the Age of Antiochus, the Prince, is more suitable to
mine, then the Kings my Husband. The Comeliness of his Presence, his Lovely
Behavior, and Courteous Conversation, would have had the power to inflame the
chastest Breast. Let this be of Comfort to me (though a weak one) That since I
have known him, and loved him, never any word (but what was honest) passed
between us, nor act, but what was decent. He rather still carried himself so
severe and even toward me, that ever since I loved him (cruel as he was) I
could never come to know if he loves me or no.

These last words of Stratonica were expressed with a Countenance, which (even
in the midst of her Torments) had the power to sparkle a brightness of amorous
fire toward her Antiochus.

When Women once come to a certain height in Love or Disdain, which surpasses
their Reason, they no longer are able to verify the saying, That they are more
subtle then men in concealing their Affections.

Licofronia assured by so great a Contrition, that Stratonica would no more
relapse into sin, wept pitifully at her Sorrow. She comforted her as a Mother,
and encouraged her as a Nurse. She gave her much Advice, but desired her above
all things, to avoid as much as possibly she could the Conversation and
Presence of Antiochus.

Love is, my Daughter (she said) among other Vices, as the Lion among salvage
Beasts. All others are conquered by encountering and resisting them, this only
is conquered by flying either from it, or throwing our selves on the Earth.
Man, like Antaeus in wrestling with this strong Hercules, while with the memory
of his own vileness, he touches the Earth, is never overcome; but as soon as he
suffers himself to be exalted by vanity, is choked.

The Queen admonished and encouraged, went to her usual Lodgings with some
black and blew prints in her Eyes caused by weeping.

Many hours had not passed, but it being toward the Evening, Antiochus (who
longed to see her) according to his custom came to visit her.

That trouble (I know not how to call it) which he was aware of in her
Countenance, was a Proeme to the approaching Disasters which invaded him first.
Being before her, and bowing unto her, the Queen did salute him with so
languishing a smile, that she in its weakness expressed the sickness she had
suffered.

The Prince astonished at those alterations, and feeling his spirits fail him,
sat down, not as he used to do at other times, but out of necessity. And when
he had rallied together some relics of that Spirit which before had deserted
him, he said something to her, rather to sound the Foard of Stratonica's Favor,
then out of a desire (by reason of his Grief) to discourse.

The Queen answered him as severely as she could, without offending the respect
that was due to the Prince, and swerving from her promises made to Licofronia.

To hear her speak without her accustomed sweetness, and see her look without
her usual Affection, so affrighted the heart of Antiochus, that he was about to
cry out aloud; but the violence of his Sorrow (which was ready to speak) was
entertained with the presence of Licofronia, who came thither on the sudden.

When the good Lover had bethought himself, and assembled some strength from
his generous Mind (which accompanies still royal Blood) he looked cheerfully,
and composed so his Countenance, that no body perceived his alteration.

Stratonica no less subtle then he in concealing her Passions, at the coming
of the Nurse (to cause no admiration in her) disarrayed her self of that rigor
with which she was apparrel'd, while she was with Antiochus alone, and began to
discourse now with him, now with her, with her usual Sweetness and Courtesy.

The Prince perceived those Arts, and was very glad of them, hoping that the
cruelty which his Queen had expressed to him, either proceeded from mere
Capriciousness, or was bred of a Desire to make trial of his Constancy.

Being afterward departed with her usual License, he employed himself in
thinking, if by chance he had any ways deserved the disdain which his Queen
showed to him. His Sighs were many, his Compunctions great, and his Discourses
to himself not concise. But afterward finding for many days together, that
when Stratonica was alone, she still kept her self on her guard, but when they
were in company, she used the forementioned dexterity, the unfortunate Prince
began to lose all hope.

His sorrows become Giants, so tyrannized over his mind, that he sometimes was
almost distracted. Knowing therefore the imminent danger not only of his Life,
but his Honor, he resolved to provide for himself all the remedies which seemed
to him the best to remove Stratonica from his Heart.

He first of all therefore fell to reading certain Books of Calisthenes of the
Contempt of the World, that by them, as by so many Counselors (because he was
diffident to discover his passions to any) he might receive advertisements and
means to despise all terrestrial affections, and use contemplation, by help of
which only a man may make himself very happy on earth.

His Mind being plunged in this kind of reading, he considered oftentimes the
Nature of a Woman, and how subject to frailty; why the intellect of man (that
is of so noble and so sublime a Nature) should abandon it self in that manner,
as to lose the best operations of its faculty in tracing a Woman.

Being encouraged many times with such like thoughts, he fell (in Stratonica's
absence) to neglecting of her Qualities and Beauty; so fortifying himself in
those Speculations, that he thought he then had courage enough to oppose the
power of her Presence.

But afterward having occasion of seeing her, in order to the accidents of the
Day, the unfortunate Prince ravished with beholding the Majesty of that Face,
and the lightning of those Eyes, changing himself wholly in a moment, said
aloud to himself,

Alas, who would not understand it for a happiness, to lose his life for one of
thy looks? Who only to see thee (dearest soul) would not adventure all
Fortune, and hazard all danger? O Antiochus! and have thou the heart to neglect
her? have thou a mind that can form a thought that is not hers? ignorant man
that thou art, and what torment deserves not an ingratitude like thine?

His Soul (which within him dictated those thoughts) made the Queen very fully
understand his resentments by the force of his looks. But she (though she
pitied him) was more sensible of her own Honor. To that end neglecting all
those actions, which might seem to mollify her toward her Antiochus, she
sought too to make her self inexorable by Custom, where she had begun by Choice.

The Prince by this manner disconsolately living, studied how to cure the
disasters of his mind (besides by the reading of Books) with much Playing and
Hunting.

It is hard to relate, how pleasing he was to the company of the Courtiers, how
lovely, and how much desired. He played to lose, because all gain, but that of
the favor of the Queen, would have been ungrateful to him. The greatest
pleasure he had in those pastimes, was to sigh. His friends supposed that he
sighed for his ill Fortune, and he only fighed for Love; the effects of his
cruel condition, which while he was a Lover, made him thought avaricious.

Sometimes in the middle of the thickest Woods, which Libanus backs, straying
from the company that followed him, and lighting at the foot of a Tree, to
which he tied his horse, he sat on the grass, and leaning his sad head on the
Trunk, which doubtless was softer then Stratonica's Heart, washing his Cheeks
with Tears, soon after he echoed forth Accents, which would have moved to pity
the most pityless Tigers.

One time then among the rest, after he had wept a good while in those uncouth
solitudes, he was invaded by a thought, which said thus unto him,

To what purpose bewailst so thy Fortune, and Stratonica's Favor, if thou
know not by how many ways Love compasses his ends? Who assures thee that
Stratonica shows not her self so rigid to thee, that by forcing thee to tell
her what kindness she has ever received from thee, thou may have the
occasion to engrave thy Love in her? and why losest so unprofitably thy time,
and seek the most solitary Woods to dissolve thy self with Weeping? O
foolish, O careless man! Rise, comfort thy self, take Courage, encounter the
Opportunity.

O ye Gods, which inhabit hereabouts, if there be any among you that hear my
complaints, and pity my disasters, now show your gentleness in prospering my
Desires. Deny me not your help, O Sacred Napeae; ye happy Oreades infuse
boldness into this Heart, which only is too Timorous, because too Amorous. I
go to end my Woes, or to begin them for ever.

He had scarce said that, but leaping on his Horse, he impatiently rode through
those leavy obscurities to find out his attendance, and return with all speed
to the City, and discover himself to his Queen.

And behold, turning by the corner of a High and Precipitious heap of Stones,
which made as it were the Frontispiece of a Landskip-work at the foot of a
great Mountain, he saw in the midst of some bushes a Bear fly slowly away.
Antiochus follows him, and when he came near him, saw by his hair that was
bloody, that he is hurt. He straightways throws at him a Dart, which he had in
his hand, with great force, and wounds him beneath the neck: The Bear groans
and roars in that manner, that the eccho's thereabouts of those silent Deserts
repeat them. His roaring was a kind of wild Trumpet, which called from a Grot
a Shebear of that infinite greatness, that she seemed a hairy mountain.

Antiochus had an occasion to show there, that his sword could wound as well as
his heart was wounded. He employed all the valor he had, for the two enemies
before him omitted no means with their Tusks and their Paws to rob him of his
life; but Sweating and Panting often hard for the victory, he at last overcame
them.

The two Beasts lying prostrate on the Earth, were a horrible Spectacle to the
Eyes of all the Court, which presently came together in defense of their Lord.

The She-bear was there known by many Country people for the terror of those
Woods, and the scourge of those Countries. They related many murders done by
her, they recounted many slaughters of herds of Cattle. Every one blessed the
wounding Hand, and cursed a thousand times the unlucky Beasts.

The bravery of Antiochus was spoken of by all, and inserted in their hearts a
wonderful reverence.

He commanding a fresh Horse to be brought him (after he had ordered some
horse-loads of his game to be carried along) set on toward Damascus.

Sighs were the Heralds of his coming, and Fears the companions of his journey.
The unfortunate Prince rode perpending, if by Fortune his Queen were to be
appeased by the Present of those Beasts. He studied what means would be the
fittest to present them unto her.

O Gods! What does not an enamored Heart ruminate?

When he arrived at the City, the Discourses were great about the danger and
the prey. The King embracing his Son, praised him modestly, and heard with much
pleasure of the Lords that were with him, the Courage and Bravery he had shown.

Great Actions have more luster in young men then old. To be greater in Age, is
to be less in Admiration, for a great Age obliges to grave Things. Youth is so
Beautiful, that even the Actions it does, learn of it beautiful Qualities.

Stratonica being come to behold Antiochus his game, showed very much joy in
commending him highly, and was glad on his behalf, that he had without harm
escaped such a danger. Her serene Countenance, and sweet Presence, had the
power to deceive a second time the unfortunate Prince. He (when he had
presented her with the prey, and passed some fine Complements with her) had no
opportunity of finding her alone by himself, to assure himself if truly she had
left her first rigor.

But when he had a time very fit for this trial, the Queen showed her self to
him very severe and reserved, as if that she had not been the Woman that had
courted him before in that manner.

Antiochus would have spoken, and put in execution his design determined in the
Wood, but had not the courage to do it. He knew very well the cruelty of his
Fate, and had not the power to defend himself from it with any thing but
silence.

Lovers resolutions are Mists; They condense in the absence of the party
beloved, but vanish at her presence, as at the Suns rays. The will of a Lover,
like one that is bound, may move, but not determine actions.

The unfortunate Youth departed from his Mistress in that manner, as if his
departure had been liker a flight, then a going away. He wept not, he no longer
bewailed his ill fortune; his grief was so great, that it found no more tears
nor words.

Now he took a pleasure in being desperate, for only in despair he had placed
all his hopes. He desired to die; and the sooner to die, he studied how he
might leave the Court. He feared that a look of Stratonica, would one day or
other, by asswaging his torments, make them longer-lived. These things designed
in his mind, made him seem pensive in the eyes of his acquaintance. His
conceits and witty mirth in Conversation, forsook him, and every day they saw
him more solitary and retired.

Melancholy now encamping it self in his Face, painted in his Eyes a
Lead-colour, and a paleness in his Cheeks. He no longer lifted up his sight
toward his cruel Mistress, for Nature had taught him not to look on what had
killed him. Having lost the pleasure of Eating, and the case of Sleep, Leanness
with a horrible extenuation began to consume all his Flesh. Only broken sighs
were heard to come from him, which resembling Musket-noises, informed them with
a small report, that Death now made a breach in the Rock of his Heart.

These Mutations being noted by the Court, gave matter to various Discourses
and Whisperings. Every one pitied the disasters of that Antiochus, who not
only for being their Prince, but for being so good and so just, to the
vassallages of their Bodies, had the power to join that of their Minds.

They attributed to several Causes, the Effect of this his Indisposition. Some
said it proceeded from weariness and disorder, caused by Hunting; others
affirmed, that it grew of some secret Witchcraft: This swore it came from his
own Saturnine Complexion, and Melancholy, which in the flower of Youth uses to
turn to a hectique Fever.

Stratonica, who faw in his sad Face, the Effects of an unknown disease to
increase every day, could do no less but bewail with the Tears of Affection
more then Maternal, the lost Health of so dear a Son-in-law. Though she (as
obliged by the Laws of Honesty) appeared externally rigorous, yet internally
loved her dearest Prince more then her self.

And how could she ever hate him, who had not offended her in any thing, but in
serving her too much. The amorous Queen remembered point by point all the Favors
which the courteous Youth had ever done her.

O barking Remembrances (she said) ye truly upbraid my Ingratitudes to me with
an eternal Reproach! But alas, what should I do? Heaven forbids me to love him
as a Lover; my Honor interdicts it. I would do it howsoever, but what avails it
me, if when I have done it, he has not returned my Love? What can I expect
from one who complies not with me? Ye see well, O Heavens, if I have not given
him occasions, with what prejudice too to my decorum.

So Stratonica spoke to her self, and bewailed her self. But Seleucus above all
as a Father (to whom the Interest of an only Son imported the whole sum of his
happiness) was afflicted in that manner, that little less then Antiochus he was
pitied of the Court.

The good King was distracted in thinking what it was that could ever have
reduced to that state his dear Son. He consulted his wisest Counselors, he
asked Stratonica's opinion, and above all he enquired with all diligence of the
Troop of Domestiques which attended his Person, if by chance the young Youth had
committed any disorder, of which might be bred this indisposition. He would not
ask him himself of it, for fear of displeasing him. He only asked him what he
had a mind to.

Every thing (my Son) is obedient to thy beck, so that thou be merry, so that
thou tell me if any thing discontents thee, wherein I may give thee
consolation; this Scepter can have no greater Glory, then to be employed for
thee. And of what use would this Scepter be to me without thee? Alas, it can do
me no pleasure, unless it be supported by thy right hand. All my hopes hang on
the third of thy life; Have then a care of thy self, O dearest Antiochus! Thou
see that at the very same time thou have a care of me too.

So spoke the disconsolate Seleucus, and could hardly forbear weeping.

The Prince, who long had desired occasion to beg leave of his Father to depart
from the Court, having the opportunity to effect his desire, returned this
answer:

Sir, What it is that I feel, I know not. I know very well that I am not the
cause of this my diseases Effect. No discontent afflicts me, but that which
proceeds from your Majesty's Affliction. My indisposition I hope will not
increase, and perhaps the change of Air would do me much good, if your Majesty
were so pleased. I am of opinion, that the Air of Laodicea would help me very
much, as well for the beauty of the Situation, as the Curiosity I have to see
a City built after your mind, of which I hear wonders. But I would not have
with me there the Court; My pleasure would be to go thither only with those
Lords which would please most your Majesty.

I am most willing (replied Seleucus) to let thee go to Laodicea, and I will
send thee with that Honor that is fit for thy Person. But why (dearest Son) art
unwilling to have me go with thee? Who better then I can have a care of thy
ease, and provide for thy necessities? And why would thou at any time desire
me to suffer by staying far from thee when thou art sick? I will come then
likewise, and my coming shall not displease thee.

But Antiochus replying (that he requested him to let him go alone, and that
there was no such danger in his sickness, that required the Person of his
Majesty; and that if he went, he would consequently draw after him all the
dispatches and affairs of the Kingdom, so that in stead of enjoying a calm
tranquillity, he should be subject to the Tumults of that concourse of People
which always the Court carries with it) so prevailed, that the King was
somewhat satisfied, and said he would consider a little of this resolution, and
do afterward what he should be advised to for the best.

So they continued, and Seleucus fell presently to ordering those things which
seemed to him necessary, not only for the convenience, but the delight of a
voyage, and his abode in the City.

He first of all ordained so ample and numerous a Court, that it envyed not the
greatest Eastern Kings. He allowed the Prince Gentlemen, Overseers and
Counselors. He declared him supreme Governor of the Province and City of
Laodicea. He sent Letters to Doride, a Castle seated on the bank of the River
Licus, That they should have in readiness with all speed five and twenty
convenient ships, for from thence to Laodicea they were to sail on the said
River. He then selected forty men famous in all Professions to give him
entertainment, and cause him to spend virtuously his time. He gave him
Hermogenes and Carneades the best Physicians of the Kingdom, to the end that
they should be continually assistant to his Person; and lastly he made him a
stately and an abundant provision of Movables and Moneys.

He then frequently consulted the chiefest of the Court, if he should let
Antiochus go alone, or rather accompany him and assist him. It was decreed that
since Antiochus desired to go alone, his desire should not be crossed, lest his
sickness should grow worse. That therefore two Posts should always be kept
going to give the least notice of his health.

Antiochus in the mean time (like one that is condemned to dye) when he heard
any noise in order to his journey, felt his blood freize, and his Vital
strength fail him. He would have departed alone with his Fancy, and willingly
have staid with his Body to adore Her that hated Him.

These desires passed through his mind, but made no stay there. As soon as he
perceived them, he did a thousand contrary actions, and compelling the very
same desire, reduced it to desire his departure with violence.

O Tumults, so much the fiercer and more to be deplored, by how much they are
heard to make a noise in the Republic of the Heart! So it comes to pass, that
he makes a War with his Senses to tame them, who because he has been too
indulgent to them, comes to lose the dominion he had over them.

Antiochus looked sometimes in the glass, not to court his Face, but to see in
his Countenance, as it were in a living Dyal, what Figure the hours of his Life
were still at.

To see buried his lively Looks in the double grave of his concentered Eyes,
and perceive in the barrenness of the mountainous place of his meager Jaws the
freshness of his Cheeks, caused (it cannot be denied) in the unfortunate Lover
those Motives of sorrow which Nature cannot choose but be sensible of, when she
sees her self decay by little and little. But drawing from the center of
weakness that force, which is the inseparable companion of a generous Mind, he
joyfully smiled at the sight of his miserable Image, comforting himself not a
little, that from the yellow color of his face, he argued that his Death began
to vary.

The Physicians hastened his departure to change Air, for they every day saw him
irrecoverably grow worse. He himself (because he knew he went to die, and
desirous to die as soon as he could) solicited the necessary things, though he
could scarce stand on his Legs.

At last the day before that of his journey being come, he was not wanting to
disquiet himself at the rising of the Sun, which enlightened (to speak so) the
vigil of his death.

He made himself remember, how that Light was the last which he should ever see
under his Fathers roof. And as one who was sensible in his Heart that he was
dying, he called all the Family to him, which served him in the Court, to every
one of whom (as it were in the nature of a Will) he began to bequeath Moneys
and give Rewards.

Both Sexes wept bitterly with a melting Affection, to see with what love their
afflicted Prince, by dispencing his gifts, took his leave of them.

That day all the Court was as sad, as if one of the greatest of the Kingdom
had been dead.

Seleucus, the poor King (although it mis-became his royal Grace) could not
forbear weeping in that common Affliction.

The Cup of an Eye is too narrow a Vessel to retain the Tears which the grief
for a Son does afford.

His Physicians and Friends were not wanting to comfort him, and persuade him
to the hopes of his recovery and welfare; but he either resolved not to give
credit to their Promises, or had not the patience to expect the Fruits of them.

Now the amorous Prince had spent all the day in taking his leave of his
Friends, and the Ladies. He was only to be dismissed by his Father, and his
fair cruel Mother. But knowing that both the one and other would accompany him
the day following a little way out of Damascus, he retired into his Lodgings no
less weary of what he had done, then dejected with melancholy.

There the unfortunate Prince recollecting well himself, fell a thinking in
what a sad condition he was; and when he had been a good while immovable, he
brake out sighing:

Go to poor Antiochus, this is the last Evening; Be thankful to the Gods for
all the favors they have done thee. The continuation of thy life has been an
effect of their Clemency, not the fruit of thy Merit. Be glad that thou art
born a Prince, that thou have been the Son of Seleucus, that to inherit his
Crown, Heaven had made thee only. Rejoice that thou have lived in Stratonica's
time, that she has been thy Mother, that thou have served her as a Mistress;
such happinesses could never continue in any supposed mortal. It is no wonder
therefore that thou art dying so opportunely. Thou die beloved of all but
Stratonica; and thou die innocent, unless for the offense committed against
thy Father. Howsoever it is no little Consolation to a pious Son, to purge with
death a fault done only in Thought. Go to Walls, farewell; farewell paternal
Roofs, I shall never more see you again.

When he had said so, feeling his Eyes fill with tears, to deprive himself
likewise of the comfort which weeping might afford him, he took a Harp into his
hands, on whose strings (singing so often with Stratonica) he had woven the Net
for his own dear Liberty.

The Strings sounded so sadly at the touch of his Fingers, that it seemed (they
mourning too) were desirous to sing the Obsequies of their Princes dead
Felicities.

Even in those dry Nerves of the resounding Wood, Antiochus his Disasters had
the power to infuse a mourning Quality.

When he saw he no longer was able to struggle with Nature, he looked up
toward Heaven, and with an Action, even comely in Sorrow, let fall some tears
so great and heavy, that it seemed they came from a Country where Grief was in
abundance. Thence allured with the pleasure that is found in weeping, he fell
to singing in this manner: POur out, pour out sad Eyes your tears
By hundreds, and by thousands too,
To the last torments all the arrears
Of every drop of Sorrow's due.
Now since the haughty sparks of Fire
Must covered with the Ashes be
Of Death; Eyes ere ye have desire
To die, and hence depart, first see
That ye at last your old course take,
And of your selves two Rivers make.


When he had ended his Song, and recovered his Bed, he was invaded in the night
by a gentle Fever. Behold unhappy Antiochus the beginning of thy death. The
Physicians which thought in the Morning to cause him to be gone, finding him so
altered, changed presently opinion, and informing the King of it, his departure
was deferred till a better opportunity.

The third Book.
ANtiochus by this Fever felt no less his desire to inflame toward Death,
then his Blood to Corruption. As many strokes of his Pulse as he observed to
reverberate on his Arm, so many advices he seemed to receive of the ruin of
his own individuum. The wretched Prince remembered not himself to be Feverish
without Joy, because his Miseries were at that pass, as they made even his
Fever seem a Happiness to him. Seleucus therefore seeing the dangers to
increase, and the hopes of his Sons health to fail him, found no courage in his
Breast to manage the resentments he had of them.

The unfortunate King sat like an aged Heraclitus, to bewail in the dark
corner of a Chamber the Miseries of humane Mutability. His tears were witnesses
of that Sorrow, which made an Artificer in his Mind, caused him to see a Crown
turned into a Coffin. Poor Seleucus, and who would not have pitied the Tears in
the Eyes of a King, while he mourned for the greatest occasion that can be
mourned for.

Tears mis-become the face of a man, for they being the sweat of the Heart, a
man should not seem to have so soft a Heart, that can thaw it self into Water.
But if ever we may weep, we can never weep better then for that life's loss, on
whose being depends the Command of a Kingdom. It is a sweet thing to live, and
by living to reign.

The Grief of the Courtiers receiving its nourishment from Disasters of that
kind, many of them seemed so concerned in the King his Misfortunes, that
affecting a Sorrow in their Faces, they forced themselves in a manner to
vanquish Seleucus in Tears.

It is truly deplorable in a Prince, to see that in a time of his Adversity, he
has not a Countenance about him, with whose serenity he may cheer up in some
sort his own Sadness. It seems fatal in a kind for all to seem feignedly sad,
because that adulation which makes him proud in Joy, increases his torment when
he is in Affliction.

Stratonica, who had by Licofronia's persuasions (so frequently as aforesaid
retreating from Love) been cruel to her Antiochus, when she saw him extended on
a Bed, and languishing among the flames of a gentle Fever, thought her self
most surely the Murderer of her Dear. Thence often repenting her self, that
she had with too much Obedience observed the Precepts of a barbarous old Woman,
cursing her own Credulity, and the others Severity, she bewailed with Tears
surpassing Bitterness, the disgusts she had caused to her Prince, and swore to
her self to omit no occasion, whereby she might assure him of her Love, which
missed of its purpose. But seeing that the Sorrow which had not joined to it
some means of assistance, was too bitter of it self, and too unprofitable to
the sick Prince, forbearing her Tears, she fell with a courage derived from
Demetrius, to seeking of Comforts for her Husband, and finding out Remedies for
her Son-in-law. It is impossible to describe the sweet words, the lovely
Countenance, and compassionate Looks, with which I imagine to my self she
sought to encourage Seleucus at that time: Fortunate King, to whose
Consolations were designed the finest Pleasures which the Loves of a Stratonica
had the power to instill. How much envied would he have been, if at a less rate
then Antiochus his sickness, he could have bought the pity of so beautiful a
Queen?

The Physicians called together to a Consult, their Opinions were as various as
their Discourses. Their difference in the knowledge of the Quality, made
infinitely increase the quantity of Causes, to which they did attribute the
disease of Antiochus. Every one of them studied to overcome his Companion in
Opinion, because by this means he hoped to overcome him in Essence; but they
were not aware that on the Being of the Physician, the Prince his not Being
depended.

Stratonica and her Husband assisted at this kind of inquiry, not as Kings,
but guilty Persons; because for their love to Antiochus, they might say they
assisted at the trial of their lives. And indeed, as guilty, they grew pale at
every saying, and blushed at every motion of that College, which (resembling a
criminal Wheel) was come to that pass, to have even Authority over the life of
the Prince.

No man more participates of extremes then a Physician; He (if we may speak
like a mere Philosopher) is a God or a Devil. If he cures with Foundation, and
makes well, the World is not able to reward him; if he kills temerariously, it
cannot enough punish him. When he gives an assurance of Life, every one cries
up his Fame; when he happens to kill, even the Earth hides his faults. He can
never want Happiness, for either as Virtuous he is exalted, or as Vicious not
suppressed.

After long debates, Hermogenes and Carneades dissenting the one from the
other, disputed it fiercely. This would have Antiochus to be sick of a Hectique
Fever, that to be Bewitched.

This discord of the Physicians being divulged through Damascus, gave matter of
Discourse to the Idle, and of Revenge to the Malicious.

The Reader may imagine what health that must be, poor Seleucus hoped for to
the Prince his disease, while by the Physicians uncertain Contention, he
foresaw the sick Princes certain death. His condition seemed the more
deplorable, by how much being forced to endure his Sons Murder, he was to
approve of his intention that killed him.

Stratonica in the mean time, watching like an Argos how to comfort her beloved
sick Prince, counseled the King to have him removed to a Palace without the
City called Elysium. She (though she did not fully comprehend the quality of
his sickness) perceived that Antiochus was mortally Melancholy, and that
therefore that Palaces situation could not choose but give great ease to his
sorrows.

Elysium is a Place, which now humbling it self in fallowed Plains, now proud
in well husbanded Hills, marries barren Woods to cultivated Villa's, and joins
neat Gardens to elaborated Fountains. There, as in a Frascati at Rome, or a
Sampierdarena at Genoa, the greatest Rulers of Soria dwelling in the Country in
the Summer, Palaces are seen, which resembling the tallest sons of
Architecture, with their Gyant-like Roofs wage an innocent war with the Stars,
and causing Admiration to tumble down headlong from the height of their
Fabrics, make dreadful in a manner their Beauty.

Nature, that has constituted an Air to this place where the Spring is
perpetual, seems that with reason she will always have that soil enameled with
flowers, which is destined for the Garden of the world. Now there on a hill
covered with the pleasantest verdure that can be represented in any Dutch
Tapistry, the Kings house was built.

To describe a Palace is to petrifie a Pen. Let it therefore suffice to say of
it, That Nature has not hardened any Marble, nor refined Jewels, nor burnished
Gold, but for this house's Structure. The Pillars seem only to be made to
cause Admiration, the open Galleries to assemble Magnificence, and the Statues
to civilize the Stones. The Halls echo for their vastness, the Chambers
glister with Riches, the Cabinets are proud of the Ornaments they have, and
every thing in fine is Majestic, every thing infuses a reverence.

Antiochus being removed to this Place, the King delayed not to come thither
with all the Court. There was a Gentleman lately arrived in Damascus, who
boasted of Cyprus for his Country, and was called Climenes. He, versed in many
Tongues, and experienced in the Customs of several Nations, seemed to have
traveled a great part of Asia and Europe, and to have seen the Courts of all
the greatest Princes then living. Whereupon being infinitely capable of any
employment, he was valued by all for a man of extraordinary Parts, and
invincible dexterity in the affairs of the World. But as Nature had enriched
him with the gifts of the Mind, so she had made him very inconsiderable in the
qualities of the Body. For being Squint-eyed, Toothless, and Flat-nos'd, he
would doubtless have offended the eyes of all that beheld him, if the garb of a
strong and well proportioned Stature, and the cheerfulness and vivacity of a
Noble deportment, had not almost quite concealed in him the Deformity of his
Countenance.

But he having brought some Letters to Licofronia from her only Son Alcestes,
for whose absence the poor Matron lived disconsolately, began on that account
to insinuate himself into the favor of the greatest at Court; and being
extremely commended by Licofronia, who professed her self very much obliged to
him, he came so to be master of Antiochus his affection, that he being greatly
taken with this Gentleman's conversation, admitted none but him into the most
intrinsecal and freest familiarity in his Chamber. The Prince therefore one day
much desiring to hear of some disaster in another affections, to see if the
torments of others were comparable to, or surpassed his torments, spoke to
Climenes to relate something to him, in order to his love; for as much as that
he being (for ought he could see) placed under a great, but not altogether
fortunate condition, he imagined that his adventures could not without wonder
be heard, nor pitied without pleasure.

Climenes, who encountered with all earnestness the desires of the Prince, to
fasten the surer himself in his Favor, returned him this answer, That he
refused not to obey him in this, as he had always done in every thing else; he
only considered, that the accidents of his love (although they exceeded the
limits of an ordinary Fortune) were not so considerable to deserve a Princes
hearing. That therefore the Relation which his Highness supposed might occasion
him half an hours pastime, would doubtless prove to him a day of vexation. But
Antiochus renewing his instance, made Climenes begin in this manner:

Since your Highness will have me relate the greatest torment that ever I have
suffered for Love, you must know, that scarce I had entered into the fourth
luster of my Age, but a malignant Fever (I know not by what means) having
seized upon me, had almost epitomized my life in a sigh. My Father (who only
in me numbered all his Progeny) being inseparable from those Feathers, of which
he thought my breath could make it self Wings to fly to the other World, made
his sorrow the more to be pitied, by how much my disease was esteemed the more
dangerous.

But the flame now burning within all my bowels, had so dried up my Palate,
that my Tongue deprived too of that little humidity which makes it fit for
motion, was not only unable to speak, but inflexible likewise. I was more
oppressed with Thirst then the Fever; and my Fortune to make me sufficiently
unhappy, when it had painted in my Fancy all the cool Waters that I had ever
seen to gush out of the earth, offered me to drink in the Cup of two weeping
Eyes, the Tears which my old Father shed.

While I burned in this manner (the hopes of my health being abandoned before by
the Physicians) a Matron, called Mirtenia, who dwelt near our house, showed
such skill in preparing me a Potion, that (my Thirst and Fever being drowned
in that draught) I found my self wholly recovered. This Favor (then which there
could be none greater done to me) so obliged me to Mirtenia, that to visit her
almost every day, and serve her in all her occasions, seemed to me very slender
demonstrations of that Love which I owed her. But alas, many days had not
passed, but I perceived that the drink which had plainly refreshed my body, had
with all burnt secretly my heart.

I felt by little and little a Thought rising in my Mind, which continually
represented to my memory the resemblance of this Lady, who was not very
handsome; and joined to the Thought I found grown a Desire, which forced me to
spend the greatest part of my time in her fruitless Conversation, which I could
not else endure. This Lady was a Widow, who besides her Riches and noble Birth,
had an excellent Wit, which had dedicated her to the Science of Physic and
Magic from her Childhood. She therefore accustomed to fantastical Humors,
surmounting her Sex, and well pleased with my Shape, was very much enamored of
me. And encountering an occasion by that my disease, to introduce into my
Bowels with some specious pretext, the tyranny of her Desires, she raised in
the Calm of that Potion a boisterous Tempest to my life. I had not long been
well, but a Son of hers died, called Sylvio; to the Tears of whose Funeral, the
eyes of her Sister, named Gloricia, came running.

I, who had often heard commended this Maid for a very great Beauty, in whom
Nature had assembled her utmost Ability, desired much to see her. But because
it is a custom among the Gentlewomen of Cyprus, to appear in no Company but
their Friends, my Curiosity was unsatisfied till she came to behold the dead
Body of dear Sylvio. Who is able to relate what a wound that weeping Beauty
then made in my Heart? Perhaps it was the pity of Love to bring it so about,
that the first time I contemplated those Eyes, I should contemplate them
weeping. What would not that fire have caused in me, if as it was diminished by
the moisture of her Tears, it had been augmented by the rays of her Smiling?
Her Hair being spread on the bewailed Body, showed either that she had set at
liberty the Souls she had tied there, to the end they should run to revive him,
or had offered up a treasure to Death, to the end it should not be any
hinderance to his Resurrection.

But what need is there of this relation? Even the mourning attire which she
had on her fair suitable Limbs, concurred in declaring Gloricia Beauties Queen.

I on the one side finding my self naturally inclined to love Gloricia, on the
other knowing I was forced by a supernatural Power to wait on Mirtenia, was the
most afflicted, and most troubled man in the World. Having therefore one day
chosen a fit opportunity, I said to Mirtenia, That I knew very well, how she
had by her Charms made me a Servant to her, to whom my Obligations, and the
Favors she had first of all done me, disposed me; that it therefore seemed
needless to me for her to make use of Compulsion, where my Will so many ways
concurred without Artifice. And that if Loves true Happiness consisted in
nothing but a natural Sympathy, how could she ever be sure to enjoy my
Affection, if she could not come to know whether I freely complied with her, or
by force? These Reasons, together with those Prayers which every one knows how
powerful they are in his Mouth who pretends to be a Lover, so wrought in the
Mind of Mirtenia, that she was content to disengage me from her Charms, and
entreated me to promise her, to be wholly hers willingly. I answered her, That
I used not by way of an Oath to bind my Will, howsoever that she might be
assured, that I would not be ungrateful for the Love which she bare me.

Being freed in this manner from her Bonds, many days had not passed, but I
consecrated wholly my self to the love of Gloricia, and presently after had the
means to discover my self to be a Lover. She who had a very good Opinion of me,
expected not that I should be lavish in beseeching her Favor, but granted it me
at my first entreaty, and swore unto me a reciprocal good Will. Mirtenia was
aware of our Love, insomuch, that being desperately jealous of what I had done,
she endeavored by all possible means to allure me to her Love, and divert me
from her Sisters.

This Gentlewoman was Lady of a Country called Feacide, in which there is a
Mountain of Wonders. This dreadful for its Nature and Form, ascends (all Spungy
with Rocks) so high toward Heaven, that the Eye being weary of so steepy an
Ascent, abandons it often before it arrives at the top. There the horrors of
Winter (as it were in their own Nest) perpetually hatching Snow, Arm with sharp
Ice gasping Rocks, and clothing (to speak so) their backs with white Weapons,
with their stony points defy the Airs sharpness. Nothing else is to be seen on
all the Mountain, but crusty rugged Stones, clear Stones, and precipices of
Rocks, among which grow thin and scattered solitary Fir-trees. Rivelets of
Water run tumbling down from the snowy Summit, which foaming among the Stones
by their Fraction, seem afar off to be so many Silver Selvages, which with
barbarous Pomp are desirous to beautify the rugged Mountain; at the foot of
which a troubled River running, enters into a narrow passage, which runs
afterward emptying it self into a woody Plain. The noise of the Wind that lies
in this Straight, together with the roaring of the Water, which breaks among
the Caverns of the Channel, so fill every Heart with astonishment, that they
make this place thought the habitation of Hell. Thither I was brought by
Mirtenia, under pretense to go visit her Lands. When we were come to the
Mountain, and had left the Servants we had there at the mouth of a craggy Grot,
only she and I went passing through the Straights of the Cave, into the Court
of an enchanted Palace, where I saw incredible things. When she there had
refreshed me with Dainties, and most excellent Music, she showed me in a Room
adorned all with Pictures, the resemblance of my Progeny, who being to be
transplanted (as she did assure me) from Cyprus into the City of Giano, the
Metropolis of Liguria, she desired that I should entertain my self a while in
beholding the Heroes of that Nation, among whom I remember she commended one
much, who was to be the famousest Warrier that ever should be seen; and he had
these Letters engraven at his feet, The Marquess AMBROSE SPINOLA. More below
among men of a different Condition, though known well by Fame, she caused me to
write in a little Book, the names of three Poets and three Painters, some of
which she said would be very great Lovers of one of my Lineage. The Poets were
called Ceba, Chiabreta and Cavallo: The Painters Paggi, Borzone and Sarzana.

All these things, which I thought the greatest Wonders that ever could be seen
in the World, so obliged me to the love of Mirtenia, that albeit naturally I
found not my self inclined to affect her, yet forgetting now Gloricia, I was
willing to dispose my self openly to love her. She, who by mine Eyes, and my
Countenance, began to perceive my good liking of her, continuing her kindnesses
to me, conducted me into another Room, where the Pictures of all the handsomest
Women (that had been or were to be in the World) were exposed to view. Among
them by chance turning my eye, I perceived a Ladies Picture, who was and shall
be the first and last flame of my Heart, whose Eyes (although they were
painted) being fastened on mine, I thought said to me, Behold me, O Climenes,
thou know in what manner I was killed, and I know how much my Death has been
pitied by thee. Be confident, That albeit I am in the other World, I will not
fail to love thee, as long as I shall have my Being.

How senseless I was at the Sense of those words, your Highness may imagine. My
Heart had not a Vein, which converting it self into a River of Tears, ran not
emptying it self at the Flood-gate of those Eyes. Mirtenia, who saw me on the
sudden become all a Deluge, being unable to penetrate the cause of so strange a
Sorrow, anxiously asked me, What Accident had the power to alter me in that
manner. But the frequent Sobs not permitting me to speak a whole word, I
informed her as well as I could, That I desired to go out of that Room as soon
as was possible, and out of the whole Palace likewise. I had scarce said that,
but I was I know not how at the mouth of the Cave where we had left the
Servants.

Mirtenia there asking me again, very earnestly, of the cause of my Weeping, I
answered her only, That this was a Disaster, which used to befall me, since I
had had a very great Misfortune at the time my Mother died.

She falling to comfort me as well as she possibly could, endeavored to make me
merry, and drew all her Lines to this Center to gain my Affection. I who had
engraven in the sensiblest part of my Heart, the Looks of that Picture, which
had represented to my memory the Being of my Mistress, the more I saw my self
made much of by Mirtenia, the more loathed her Love. Whereupon she perceiving
my Ingratitude, when we were returned to the City, and being persuaded that all
did proceed from my Love to Gloricia, bewitched her to Death, then killed my
Father, and confined me to the straights of a Bed, where I endured such
diseases both in Mind and Body, that it was an Excess of Heavens Miracles to
preserve me alive.

At last when Mirtenia had seen, that I could by no means be induced to love
her, she sickning of Madness, died desperately soon after: So after many
Troubles and many Months being recovered of my disease, hating that Climate
under whose Influences so many Disasters had befaln me, I resolved to leave
Cyprus; and when I long had wandered through several Kingdoms, I came lastly to
this Court.

This Relation was a Lecture to the Prince of the Calamities of this World. He
repondering to what Miseries his Condition was subject, whose Ruins were
designed by Fortune and Love, bewailed his own Disasters in the Misfortunes of
Climenes. And when he had expressed the Consolation he had felt by knowing some
success of his Life: Since (he said to himself) we must live, if Life be an
hostage, why trust we Fortune with it, to give her assurance of all that which
her Cruelties will have? I before was resolved to die, to free my self from the
Torments of a desperate Love: Now I am resolved not to live, to be quit of the
Troubles of a pitiless Fortune. Lets die, O Antiochus! what can at all
adventures be hoped for of a Woman's Inconstancies? And if the flames of a
gentle Fever, and the weakness of a long Extenuation, are unable to kill us,
let us add a forbearance of Meat.

So spoke Antiochus; and so cunningly he prepared himself to perform his
Resolutions, that hiding his determined Fast under the pretext of having no
Appetite, he seemed to be pleased with nothing, because he would not be
constrained to eat any thing.

It was then the Month of January masked like April; whereupon all the Lords
of the neighboring Palaces, being persuaded no less by the Beauty of the
Season then Stratonica's commands, came to dwell in Elysium. The Court and
Conversation being multiplied by that means, the Nobility studied nothing else,
but the inventing of ways to recreate the Prince. Every one supposed that some
sudden Pastime would more vigorously awake in Antiochus his lull'd-asleep
Mirth; and that a Ball, which owed its beginning to nothing but Harmony, might
mitigate with its Motions, a diseased Hearts Sorrows. But yet this Resolution
was not so concealed, but it came to the Ears of the disconsolate Stratonica.
When she heard of the leave which the Gentlemen asked him to bring their Ladies
thither, going together with the King to Antiochus his Bed, she conferred with
him about the business, and desired him to be pleased, that the Banquet might
be kept in his Chamber.

He, who by the greatness of his sickness, was not so estranged from himself,
as not to comprehend what degree of malignity his condition was arrived at,
which made use even of Feasts for the increase of his Melancholy, when he saw
that to deny his Consent was to displease his Friends, shrugged patiently his
Shoulders, and intimated to the Queen, That they might do there what she
pleased. Leave being obtained in this manner, the jolly Assembly delayed not to
crowd themselves together within the Princes Room. The Ladies appeared in the
most extravagant Fashion that their Glasses could advise them unto. The Gold
and Gems, which by reason of the Torches blazed within their Clothes, increased
the splendour of their Faces, and took away the light from others Eyes. A sight
miserably fortunate, to whose testimony even the brightness of the Lights was a
Liar. And who could with reason commend that Pomp for Beautiful, which judged
to be guilty by it self, they saw tied in Chains, and stoned with Jewels? Many
of the Ladies, as enemies to mankind, being angry that Nature had not imparted
that Beauty to them which they would have had, martyrizing with Curling-Irons
their Hair, and poisoning with Sublimate their Cheeks, had resolved to kill
whosoever beheld them. Now when they had taken their places in order to their
Quality, they heard the Air beaten with very pleasant Music, by a regulated
Confusion of several Instruments.

A Ball is the Feets sensuality. It is raised with noise, and evaporates with
weariness. Nature (that is the beginning of Motion) would not enrich the Head
so with Sense, as to leave the Foot quite deprived of it. Even this takes its
time to be Luxurious; neither is there any Itch that more foments Luxury then a
Ball. It can confirm Love with a fortunate Madness among its changing Motions,
and unite the Will with the measure of short Distances.

The Lovers danced, being only then happy with their Mistresses, because they
did exercise the Acts of Inconstancy. They might call the Dance their
Benefactor, for they received not greater favors of any other action then that.
To have the means of seeing, of speaking to, and touching the hand of their
Mistress, they could not but esteem a great happiness; but to be bowed to by
her, and invited to move to the very same Motion with her, they could not but
esteem the greatest happiness.

But the Queen (who together with the King was exposed to a trial, by sitting
over against her Antiochus) being much more observed by Licofronia, then she
willingly would have been, could not feed her Eyes at Pleasure with that
paleness, which rendering compassionate the Countenance of the Prince, was made
the dearest Mark of her looks. Yet who can relate with what affection she sent
out at that time a sprightly look, to discover by stealth in Antiochus, if he
yet was aware, that she would not any longer make use of that severity, which
for the rigid Nurses consideration, she had many times practiced against him?
The poor sick Prince reduced on the one side to behold himself before that
Beauty, which always with too eloquent a Tongue did dictate tacit persuasions
to his heart, on the other necessitated to contemplate the Countenance of his
Father, who with very great compassion of his sickness, informed him how
unwilling he was to offend him, did not know (though he was resolved to dye) to
what determination to revolve the sum of his resolutions.

Climenes the stranger was seated at the Feast near Hermogenes. He, whether it
were by the power of Sympathy, or desire (for some secret end of his) to
intrinsecate himself in the Physicians affections, had before laid with him the
foundation of a very firm friendship. Being therefore asked by him, whom he saw
in a brown study, What think you on (he said unto him) O Climenes! are Feasts
furthered with thoughts? I thought (answered the Gentleman) that he who would
aptly represent this Noble Assembly, could compare it to nothing but a perfect
Sphaer. Behold the Primum mobile, which as nearest Eternity, is constituted of
a Circle of the oldest. If you ask for the Heaven of fixed Stars, see the Ring
of the Young men; If that of the Planets, behold the Orb of the Ladies. If the
Earth, behold the space where they Dance; If the Changes of Fortune, see the
Ball. And if lastly, O Hermogenes, you desire to see Mirth there, look on
Stratonica; If sorrow, behold Antiochus.

Indeed to have Conceits of the Stars (replied Hermogenes) you could not choose
any other Subject but Heaven. Howsoever I wonder not, That he who has a
Chrystalline Sky in his Brain, should discourse of the Sphaers as of things
which he well understands.

I allow, replied the other, That I have a Chrystalline Sky in my Brain, if it
be true, that the Chrystalline Sky being a Place replenished with Divinity,
has nothing for its Object but Beauty. And how is it possible for me to have
no Conceits of the Stars in the Presence of so many Suns? And when he had made
here a beautiful Catalogue of all those Ladies, which seemed to him to be
admired above the rest, he canonized with the Authority of his own Eloquence
the other Beauty's Miracles.

So they discoursed together; when a Tumult on the sudden arose which was not
understood, and disordered the Feast. Every one being amazed, looked steadfastly
toward the place from whence the noise came, and they saw that the Gentlemen
confusedly rising up, ran toward the Bed of Antiochus. The Multitude increased
out of curiosity, and they asking one another what the matter was there, many
knew it not, and many durst not answer them. The melodious Sounds ceased, the
Ladies were affrighted, and the Hall which but newly was not capable of holding
them for their Jollity and Laughing, became in an instant a Desert full of
Solitude and Terror.

A Curtain was drawn, within which the King and the Queen were concealed, so as
it was impossible for Antiochus (although he were near) to discover what it
was; and soon after a sad voice issued forth, commanding every one to go home.

So worldly Joys end. The company went away mute, Terrified and Cautious. The
hours of the Night (it being then the deadest time of Silence and Obscurity)
increased so the horror in their Minds, that many of them thought that they
should not get alive to their houses. Fear is then the greatest, when we know
not what to fear.

The good sick Prince called aloud to those of his Chamber, desiring them
earnestly to tell him what had happened; whereupon to content him, they
answered him at last, That Stratonica had been a little while in a swoon.

What News is this, O Antiochus? thy Goddess discovers her self to be Mortal,
and runnest thou not to behold this Miracle? Thy Life languishes near death,
and lie thou Stupid in a lazy bed in the Arms of the Thoughts of thy
frivolous Sorrows? Who Is there? help to dress me. When the Soul is about to
free it self from the Bosom where Love has imprisoned it, it is not good to
keep its Body far from it. Go to, go to, O Antiochus, lets hasten to our
dangers. But mad Man, what do thou? Heaven pitying thy Miseries, opens a way
for thee to happiness without injuring thy Resolutions, and thou Ignorant of
thy own good, precipitatest thy self into those Impatiences, which are
undoubted prejudices to thy Modesty. Thou have resolved to dye, to behold no
more Stratonica, and can thou not endure that Stratonica should dye, to
obtain without thy hurt the same end? Ah dear one, too well beloved! Ah dear
one, too much abhorred!

So the poor Prince's Mind was disquieted at the news, which could not strike
his Ear without passing to his Heart. In the mean time the rumor increased in
the Court. The Guards in the Palace were doubled. They sent hastily to
Damascus for Soldiers, and gave many other secret Orders.

In the Morning about break of Day Clitarcus was carried to Prison. He next to
Antiochus was the nearest of kin to the King, so as if he dyed without out
Issue, Clitarcus succeeded in the Kingdom. This his sudden imprisonment being
divulged, caused various admiration and sorrow in all. Yet all were of a mind
that it was by Arsinda's persecution.

Arsinda was a Princess of the Blood, rich in Possessions and Opinion. Being
left a Widow without any Issue but a Daughter, she resolved to live near the
King, as under the shadow of a Kinsman, who could on all occasions assist her.
Her Daughter grew apace, who was called Euripia, but grew with very little
Obligation to Nature; for she had neither Beauty of Body, nor endowment of the
Mind. But the Mother, who by reason of the greatness of her Birth, was
extremely Ambitious, being infinitely proud in her expressions, and of a fiery
behavior, had directed her Thoughts to too sublime Marks. She knowing that
Clitarcus might succeed to the Crown, had foolishly designed Euripia for his
Wife; and intended so to operate in the end, that he by the death of Antiochus
should be sure of the Kingdom.

This her design was favored, by seeing that the Gentleman insinuated himself
so much into her friendship, that he almost seemed to sue for her alliance. But
their ends being discovered to them both, they began to hate mortally one
another. Now when Noon was past, and that the Changes at Court had been settled
as well as they could, Stratonica came to visit Antiochus.

The fair Queen went in; but before she went in, what reflections made she not?
The sad Queen remembered her self, that she went in to visit that sick man, in
whose Bosom her own Soul was Feverish. She cared not for repressing her
Passions, as she had done so many other times, because she was not fearful of
her husbands arrival who kept then his bed. The Colors in her face (the lights
of the Tempests in the Mind) appeared sometimes kindled, sometimes ghastly, in
order to the several affections with which she felt her self to be inwardly
agitated. Hope taught her to make use of the opportunity of time, to discover
once that Fire, which at last had reduced into Ashes her Life's most dear
Delights. Fear on the other side set before her the danger of the Action, and
the Obligations of Honor. What will thou do, poor Stratonica, since the
consequences of a sudden opportunity have placed thee in a straight of this
nature? Shut the Eyes of thy Mind, and go as it were into the Dark, to run
that hazard which Heaven has decreed thee. So reasoning with her self, neither
resolved nor yet wavering, the unfortunate Queen at last urged her self to
salute her adored Prince.

What appears to thy Eyes from the space of the door, O Antiochus? What Sun of
Beauty comes, O happy unfortunate Prince, to clear up the darkness of thy
Sorrows? Thy weakness will never be able to endure the force of so many Lights.

The encounter of those first Looks caused a fainting to them both. Antiochus
congealed not, for the heat of his Fever did not yield to a contrary quality.
Yet his forehead was besprinkled with a cold sweat, and the Pulse of his Hand
grown stupid, remained without Motion. He blushed, he became mute.

How do you Prince, began the Queen. Ah Madam, do you cousen so the sick?
There Is no deceit at all, be merry, replied Stratonica, I have great things to
tell you, but alter not, all has gone well. Its no longer in my power not to
alter, O Madam. And when Antiochus haid said so, fixing his Eyes languishingly
on the Eyes of his Life, he remained a little while without speaking. Then
taking a little breath, I cannot deny (he added) but that since yesternight
till this time, I have been in a continual Agony; for albeit by all which were
sent to see your Majesty, I was always informed you were better, yet I
overcharged with too much fear, could not be induced to believe them entirely.
But now to my great consolation, I perceive by your Countenance, that they told
me even less then the truth.

Pardon a Lie in your Servants, O Prince, since they said so to make you
overcome a Disgust. Not I, but the King was troubled the last night with an
Accident which still keeps him a Bed, though without any danger by the Favor of
Heaven.

Alas said the anxious sick Prince, was my Father destempered? I, my Dear; but
alter not at it, replied Stratonica. I perceiving the Accident ran quickly to
help Seleucus, and some Gentlemen seeing me stir, stirred likewise, among whom
Antipater and Cimones taking him up between their Arms, carried him unto the
first Bed that they came to. When the Physicians were come and found the King
Pulseless, one of them was not wanting to say softly, He was dead. This report
being spread through the Palace, the tumults it caused are not easy to be
told. The Captain of the Guard reinforced himself with men. They sent away the
Guests from the Feast. A President made haste to levy Soldiers in Damascus, and
every thing in fine was Deplorable and Dreadful. His Swooning lasted almost an
hour, of which being recovered at last, I comforted him with some Remedies; and
when every one was commanded away, I asked him, if he could not imagine the
cause, that had the power to distemper him so grievously. He taking my hand
between his, after he had been a while silent, answered me Sighing, that being
at the Feast, and beholding how every one was merry and laughing, and that
only among them all his beloved Antiochus extended on a Bed, abounded with
Sorrow in the Arms of a desperate Melancholy, he had by that reflection so
contracted his heart, that unable to sway longer himself, he ceased to live,
and fainted under his Sorrow.

Unadvised Stratonica! If thou aimest at all Antiochus his Love, why do turn
with that relation the stream of his Affections to the duty of his Father?
Know thou not that only the Love of his Father opposes thy love?

With what pity was the Prince not wounded, hearing of his Fathers so tender,
so humane an Affection? He instantly pondered his Merits in the space of a
moment: So afterward he said to himself, For a Father like mine, I rather
should die, rather be annihilated, then come to have a Thought that might
offend him. And here being unable to contain his Tears, he softly brake forth,
Ah most dear Father, most Beloved!

Stratonica, who though late, yet knew that to mollify the Rigors of her Dear
with other pity but that, which she of her self could awaken in his Heart, was
to prejudice her Pretenses, attended to draw away his Mind to other Thoughts,
and spinning out the Relation, went on:

While I stood so discoursing with the King, a Page came to tell us, That
Terpandius the Priest demanded Audience for some very earnest business. He was
brought in unto us, and we easily read in his Countenance, the Characters of
ill News. When he had done his accustomed Duty, he began in this manner:

Sir, my desire to save your Life, urges me at this so unseasonable a time to
trouble your repose. Your Majesty is to know, That Hermogenes died just now,
who was killed in going home. Before he had breathed out his Soul (I being his
Neighbor and intrinsecal Friend) he sent for me to him, and sobing (having
wallowed up and down in his Blood) said to me, Terpandius, go to the King, and
inform him, That I seduced by Clitarcus, have poisoned the Drink which his
Majesty uses to take every morning; and that Clitarcus seeing that the King did
not die of his swooning, being doubtful that I either deluded him, or
discovered it, has caused me to be slain. Entreat him to beware of the
Treacheries of others, and to pardon my Treason. I desired to ask him more
Questions to discover something else, but the Frost of Death beginning at that
time to stiffen his Tongue, he could not return me any Answer. May, O King,
this advice be as useful to you, as my Affection presents it; and be pleased
not to mention who truly advertises you of it, lest Clitarcus fall foul on me
likewise.

When we had heard that so Tragical story, we could not leave wondering, that a
Prince so near unto us in Blood, and a Physician of that credit for his
Faithfulness, would have ever undertaken so enormous a deed: Yet when we had
made some reflection, in order to something that was noted heretofore in the
Actions of these two wicked men, the King had some Foundation on which to build
his Doubt. To that end he consulting long with me, we resolved at last to
imprison Clitarcus. The thing now done, and break of day not yet peeping,
imagine dear Antiochus if we rested that night. But I thinking again on the
course of things which succeeded, was doubtful lest Seleucus, who had drunk the
Poison, albeit his first swooning was over, might again be surprised. But
Carneades not delaying to arm him with strong Antidotes, did free me in part
from that Doubt. That which since wholly has assured his Life, and rid me of
my Fear, was the knowledge I had, That the Cup Bearer putting the poisoned
Drink into a little Vase of Purslain, it no sooner was full, but the Vase
breaking to pieces, spilt all the Liquor; whereupon without speaking a word, as
soon as he had mixed a new Draught, he brought it to Seleucus in another Cup to
drink. Behold, O Prince, if Fortune has done miracles for us.

Antiochus his Wonder and Sorrow in hearing of Successes so strange, were such
as may well be believed of so pious a Son. He answered and asked the Queen many
Questions; and she in this occasion, speaking more with her Eyes then her
Tongue, omitted no means to inform her Beloved, That if others did design
Conjurations against the Life of the Father, she contrived Snares against the
Liberty of the Son.

While they two so reasoned together, behold a Gentlewoman asks in all haste
for Stratonica; Madam, the King stays expecting you. The fair Queen took her
leave: The Gods know with what Heart. The Remembrance of her coming to discover
her self to her Dear, and departing before she had done any thing, awaked such
Resentments in her Mind, as cannot be otherwise expressed, but with a weeping
silence.

Go thy ways, O unfortunate Queen, to reward the most cruel Repulses of thy
Lover, with the sweet Embraces with which thy Husband has always received
thee. Lastly, though he is old, Seleucus alone is he that adores thee.

But being come to her Husband, she was shot with the Arrow of Terror, by the
Bow of an angry Eye-brow. Alas, to what Disaster are such Mortal signs the
Prologue?

Know you this hand, Stratonica? And she affirming, Yes: Read the Letters, and
then I will tell you the rest, replied the King. Stratonica began to read with
that Alteration, which the surprizal of a sudden Misfortune, and the fierceness
of an unusual look from Seleucus, could probably be the cause of. And when she
had declared in the various colors (with which her Cheek was dyed) the several
stings which her Soul was wounded with; I see (she said) O King, these are my
Fathers Letters, but I cannot comprehend what designs he has practiced with
Clitarcus, and how I am promised to him for his Wife.

Then the old King unable to contain himself longer, cried out, Ah Stratonica,
Stratonica, your Father has always conspired against me, and with too
implacable hatred (when he could not deprive me of my Life) laid wait for mine
Honor! And proceeding in telling her with how much Ingratitude Demetrius had
returned the Affection which he always had born him, he upbraided Stratonica
with the sundry Favors he had done him, and the many Occasions he had had of
suppressing him. Then with an act truly horrible, he swore by the Life of
Antiochus, to hold him no longer either for his Father-in-law, or his Friend,
but persecuting him perpetually, to spend his own blood to procure his Death.
And he protested, That if it had not been indecent for his Honor, he would have
returned Stratonica to Demetrius, as an eternal refusal of his Blood, and of
his Friendship. For his mind every way presaged to him little good that by her
he was ever like to have.

So Seleucus vented his Passion, because in the Letters of Demetrius there was
this particular, Be confident of the Friend, whom I have sent thither for that
purpose. He consulted who was meant by this Friend, and Climenes much suspected
by him, he suddenly caused him to be secretly imprisoned.

But Stratonica, who by reason of the words of the King, had staid in the Room
as one smitten by a Thunderbolt, being unable any longer to manage her
Disaster, departed from the sight of her Husband, and enclosing her self in the
most remote Room that was to be found in the very bottom of the Palace, when
she perceived that she had no other witness of her Sorrow, but her own
Unhappiness: Why should I live longer (she began) unfortunate Woman, in a time
when Heaven is resolved to Rain on thy Life all Disasters? To what hopes does
that Blind Fortune reserve longer my Young years, that never knew how to
distribute her Favors, but where they are merited least? I condemned to frieze
in the insipid Colds of an aged Husband, while I burn in the unprofitable
flames of a young Lover? I a follower of him, who for loving me too much, is
come now to hate me? I possess a Beauty, whose Flowers have been watered
perpetually with my Tears? And should I live in the World? Should I look on the
Sun? Suck in the Air? Walk up and down on the Earth? Ah no, Unfortunate
Stratonica. It is no longer time to live. Die poor Queen, and if thy Sorrow
cannot kill thee, have recourse to the helps of Iron and Poison.

Where art Demetrius, my Father, my Hope, that thou see not the Tears of thy
Stratonica? Of that dear Daughter, whom thou so often huging in thy Bosom, and
laying to thy Face, have called the Bowels of thy Life? If at least when this
Heart shall no longer be able to breathe, when the colors shall fade in my
Face, and these Eyes want the power to look upwards, thou should come
opportunely to say to me, Go hence in Peace my Daughter; my Passage would be
happy.

So mourned the Delight of Asia, and the Love of Soria. And her Tears had no
body to comfort them, her Sighs no body to receive them. So those dear Eyes,
those divine Cheeks, and that heavenly Countenance, were by cruel Destiny
condemned to Sorrow. And shall my Pen pass over her cruel Afflictions, without
rending in pieces my Heart at every Motion? Ah let us go on, O Reader! We
cannot without Sacrilege describe a weeping Deity.

Seleucus in the mean time assured the next day of his health, fell to thanking
the Gods, by giving order for Sacrifices. The slaughtered Victimes fumed every
where on the Altars, and by writing on the Ground with the Characters of Blood
the Kingdoms Joys; nothing it seems but Purple Ink could witness the common
Affections for the health of the King. The devotedst Vassals pretended, That
within those sacred Flames their Hearts burned more then the Holocausts; and
with the Tongues of Smoke thanking Heavens Protections, they the same time
offered Incense with acts of Adulation to Seleucus his Ambition. It is hard to
relate how many Embassies of Princes arrived in few days at the Court, to
congratulate with him his recovered Health, and how many public and private
Feasts were made through all Soria for that occasion.

Only Antiochus and Clitarcus, Princes truly worthy of another Condition then
what they then enjoyed, the one extended on a Bed, and the other buried in a
Prison, made a dolorous Descant to the Harmony of those Joys.

A Prison is a Hell epitomized in Ten spans of Situation. Humane cruelty,
which in tracing of Torments, has imitated always diabolical Operations, has
in no other Machine more expressed the Marrow of Barbarism, then in the
Invention of a Prison. It is the sum of Evils, because it is an enemy to
Liberty, the sum of all Happiness. The Indispositions of the Body, and
Disasters of the Mind, be they never so great, come never to martyrize all our
Senses at once as a Prison does. Even Hope, that is the comfort of every Evil,
becomes in a Prison the disquieting of the Heart.

Clitarcus was environed with Chains in a Room so full of Sadness, that the
Darkness in it did the office of Pity.

Its Horror which showed not the Inhabitant there all his Miseries at once,
might call in a manner a Loss, a Benefactor. Laden more with Thoughts then with
Irons, the wretch lay on a Bed, which with too great a poverty, was fain both
to serve him for a Table and Repose. Solitude, which was the greatest Company
he had, could give him no ease with other Conferences, but those of a
Melancholy silence. Only the Sighs which too violently issued out of his
Breast (more pitiful then any thing else) strove to break those Walls, which
too unworthily constituted a miserable Palace to a Prince disgraced by Fortune.

Seleucus, whom it greatly concerned to find out the Fact, not so much to
punish the guilty, as to know in what manner the offense was devised, seeing
that by virtue of the Laws he could not condemn, whom he had not proofs against
to convince, was extremely disquieted concerning this Matter. And he was the
more disquieted, by how much that desiring by a certain occult alienation of
Mind to condemn Climenes, he saw that if Clitarcus confessed not something, he
should be compelled to free him. Seleucus tossed up and down between these
Doubts, was not wanting oftentimes to communicate his Thoughts to Antiochus,
who relaxing a little the rigor of his despair, by reason of these Affairs,
desired very earnestly to know how the business was managed. He counseled
therefore his Father (since there was no other remedy) to cause Clitarcus to be
beheaded by his absolute Power. For since they were discussing so enormous an
Offense, it was not blameworthy at all, to come thither by way of Equity,
where they could not arrive by way of Justice. Antiochus forgot not (though he
meant not to live) that Clitarcus could only oppose him in the Crown.
Whereupon, not only for this Reason, which is always very powerful in the
Minds of Princes, but likewise for the love which he bare unto his Father, he
strove by all means to procure their Destruction, who had studied to offend
him. Moreover, these Deliberations of the Prince were fomented by the
Complaints and Rage, which against Clitarcus, but more against Climenes,
Licofronia made daily. For she loving the King very dearly, but withal more
affectionately Antiochus, was not able to endure, that they should go
unpunished by any means whatsoever, who were suspected guilty of Treason
against the King. She was changed in that manner on the sudden (as Women use to
be) against the unfortunate Climenes: And if at the first, because he had been
her Sons Friend, she had brought him by her Favors to the height of the
greatest acquaintance at Court, now because he might be thought to be guilty,
she labored by all means to bring him into hatred with all the World; and
persecuting him with all her might, she swore, That if he even had been her own
Son, she would have had the courage to behold without weeping his Head severed
from the Body.

Seleucus then adhering to the Counsel of the Prince, without making more ado,
caused death to be intimated to Clitarcus. It was greatly disputed in the
Council of State, since the King had no other Successor (besides Antiochus) but
his Nephew, if it was not expedient for the Crown to reserve him alive against
all Mischances. But Seleucus speaking gravely, said to them, That he desired
not to leave him the Crown, who deserved the Ax; that his Succession could not
have better fortune then to end with Virtue, never to begin with Vice; and that
he could not possibly be so impious, to recommend his peoples Life and
Protection to one, who not knowing how to spare his own Blood, had attempted to
leap into the Throne with the foot of Homicide.

Behold Clitarcus, what an end to thy life that Star has determined, which
beholding thy Nativity with too unlucky a ray, has imprinted inclinations in
thy Mind, which must make thee do infamous Things.

Punishment is not always remote from Noble Persons. Princes even dye in that
manner as the basest men expire. For the Sword of Justice exempts only
Innocence from its Edge.

The Conspirator was at this pass, and yet his sorrows fell very much short of
the sorrows which the Queen did feel for the disaster of her Love. She seeing
in the Court so many disgusts of Wars, of Conspiracies and Diseases, and
perceiving that they treated of nothing but Revenges, Prisons and Axes; and
that which is worse, finding her self vilified by her Husband, contemned by her
Lover, and far from her Father, fell into so cruel a Melancholy, that she
wanted but a little of Raving.

The fresh Comeliness in her face being therefore decayed, and the Colors of
Beauty turned Pale, the unfortunate Queen resembled nothing else in her
Countenance, but a nocturnal Heaven, in which the Sun of Joy was put out. She
was glad to be alone, and glad to weep, to wash perhaps with Tears those Spots
of Immodesty, which her wanton Looks might have Printed in the Crystal of her
Mind.

Being now (to say so) habituated to mortification and displeasure, she was at
that pass, to be able to look Antiochus in the face without any alteration, and
to be unmolested though she saw him not at all. All the restaurative she
allowed the afflictions of her Mind, was the sound of a Cymbal, which with its
Strings of Steel rendering warlike the Harmony, by force overcame (though it
were in a short space of time) the Army of Passions by which she found her self
to be besieged.

In love, what is Beauty worth though rare,
But to cause torment to a Heart?
No matter for fine Golden Hair
Or Cheeks by Nature Red, or Art.
Ah! Beauty can us only move,
It Is Fate that causes Death for Love.
So she made an end of singing one day, when a sealed Paper came to her hands,
which was brought her very cautiously by one of her faithfullest Women.

The Letter came from Clitarcus. He seeing himself near to death, and being not
unwilling to dye; but because he could no longer beatifie himself with serving
his dearest Stratonica, resolved to write her this Letter, and in it to excuse
his own Actions, that he might in some sort make them seem to the Queen the
less faulty. Stratonica perpetually accustomed to find some black disaster in
white Paper, did not open it without fear, nor read it without alteration. The
Contents said as follows:

MADAM, Since my life is so near to an end, that I may no longer reckon Days
but Hours, I must not go out of this world, without taking leave of you, who
have always been my Patroness; nor leave imprinted in your Mind an Opinion
cruel to my self, without making you that excuse for it, which the Duty I
profess you requires. If therefore peradventure with little satisfaction to
your Pleasure, I have induced you to read this Letter, excuse my necessity,
and be not displeased with my boldness. For albeit I know, that to say nothing
of it, or confess it, neither makes me liable to death, or delivers me from it;
yet I should be very glad, that what you shall read here within, may
perpetually be buried in the bottom of your Heart. I shall never be censured
for confiding in you; for besides that in you all those qualities concur, which
can assure me of your secrecy, I may always say to have trusted in my life.

You already know Madam (and you know it too well, unfortunate that I am) That
I was born to adore you. My Age increasing by the Rays of your Beauty, was no
otherwise life to me, then I had hope to obtain your good Grace. Arsinda the
Princess observing my qualities, was taken with them, and designed them to the
Fortune of her Daughter. I likewise reflecting on her parts, esteemed her very
fit to implore for me your Love. She met with me as a friend on the Trace of
her Ends, I followed her on the Footsteps of my Wishes, as one whom she
trusted. The relation of my Passions succeeded the beginning of our friendship.
Whereupon she discovering an occasion to gain me, on the one side undertook my
assistance very willingly, on the other caused me to despair of the effect;
being secure by these Arts to loose me from your Love, and tie me to that of
her Daughter; You know, O Queen, the offices, the trials and persuasions which
she used to you in my name. Your cruelty was my ruin and her anger. When she
saw that neither by your rigid behavior toward me, I sold be diverted from
you, nor by her allurements be induced to love Euripia, she resolved to
persecute me. It occurs not to survey again Distastes. It is to no body more
known then to your self, to what trials she has often exposed my Reputation
and Life. But now since I must dye, I forgive her all offenses, and love her as
formerly. Finding then my self deprived of her assistance, and despairing to
have you as a Mistress, I did cast about how to gain you for my Wife. The
dissentions between your Father and Husband, were the foundation on which I
erected my Engines. Suppose me a Lover, and you will grant all exorbitances! You
would offend your wisdom, if you wondered and examined my Actions. It is
sufficient. The business went on well, if the breaking of a Vase of Purslain
had not ruined in a moment my Fortunes. Heaven, that knew me unworthy of your
Love, would not let me have the experience of the worth of your favor. Your
Beauty, which has made all men happy, has rendered me only unfortunate. A
just punishment of the Gods, who knowing that by adoring you, I preferred you
before them, would not let me brag that I had couzened them of their Honors,
without losing my life. So go the things of the world, O Stratonica! Clitarcus
born a Prince, grown up to the Hopes of a Kingdom, endowed with good Qualities,
beloved of Vassals, and reverenced by Strangers, is brought to be be headed in
the Flower of his Age. I dye O dearest (dispense with me, if at the end of my
life I make use of this word) I dye full of all those discontents, and
abandoned by all those Consolations, which in Cases like this, have at any time
been of force to encourage every other wretched man. My death would be happy,
if I might be assured, that these my disasters were but pityed by one single
drop of your Eyes. But it is temerity to aspire so high. I know your Eyes in
that they are Stars, are mine Enemies, and I must not hope for pity from mine
Enemies. Be you happy, O Madam!


It is hard to relate how many impressions the Letter made in the Mind of
Stratonica, in order to Affection and Pity. The sad Queen upbraided her
misfortunes to Heaven, since in the first ending to find one that loves her,
she began to lose him. In fine, she could not choose but communicate the Letter
to Arsinda, who then was her Beloved, her Favorite. And so much the more
willingly she communicated it to her, by how much that heretofore she had seen,
that Arsinda following the Fashion of womanish inconstancy, having changed all
the Hatred she bare to Clitarcus, into an Affection and an unspeakable Pity,
had made her self famous among others of the Court, by bewailing his disastrous
Condition. When they had then consulted long together, Arsinda without speaking
any more had recourse to Seleucus, and informed him with most powerful Reasons,
That now since Clitarcus was contented to dye without confessing any thing, it
was expedient to the Crown, to discover the Wiles and Treacheries of his
Enemies by offering him his life, in case he would manifest their design. The
King was most unwilling to Consent to this Resolution. But lastly, when he knew
of what use it was to him, he Condescended to all Arsinda desired. When she had
obtained this Grace, she was doubtful of Clitarcus his kindness, though in the
Queens Letter she had had some earnest of it before. Whereupon it seemed
necessary to her, before she would Treat with him of any thing, to penetrate
his Mind with a Note. She therefore wrote to him very kindly, and assured him
how much from her heart she repented her self, that she ever had displeased
him, and how bitterly she grieved to see he was brought to such an end:

When Clitarcus had read the Note, he thought without doubt, That Arsinda would
even in the end of his life, afflict him with some specious deceit. Yet
dissembling his doubt, he answered her thus in a Letter:

PRINCESS,
TO purchase your good Grace in that Moment, when I am to lose my life, is a
necessitating of me, to bewail one thing more that I leave in this world. You
would, O Arsinda, have used greater pity to me, if Treating me like an Enemy in
that manner, as you have been to me till just now, you had made me unconcerned
in the Sorrow of not being longer able to enjoy your Courtesies. You have done
nothing else by reconciling me to you, but added the weight of your Memory to
the burden I carry to the other World. I impute all to my Stars, which have
had the power to make me so unhappy, that even Favors prove Misfortunes to me.
Howsoever (Madam) I am glad to die lamented by you, since I lived before
persecuted by you. And assure your self, that he who has never resented your
Injuries, till forced by his Honor, will never forget your Affection, till
mastered by Eternity.


When Arsinda had received this Letter, she flew full of joy to the Prison. She
complemented and negotiated with Clitarcus a good while. In the end she so
wrought, that he was contented to buy his life at the rate of Confession. The
Examination succeeded the Charge; and in the Examination he discovered many
things that were not fit to be revealed; one of which was, the accusing of
Climenes for one of the principal Actors in the Conspiracy.

Climenes on this Evidence was most cruelly tormented; but assuring himself
that he could by no means escape Death, he declined the residue of his
Torments, by saying, He was ready to reveal every thing, provided, that
Antiochus and Licofronia would be present at his Trial. Then the Presidents of
the Cause being assembled together in the Chamber of the Prince, together with
Licofronia, who, as zealous of the life of the King, had persecuted extremely
in all things the said guilty Person; The Judges had scarce taken their places,
but they heard the noise of the Irons which Climenes trail'd along on the
ground.

The poor Youth appeared like a Traveller into another life. His Countenance
(which by Nature had no vulgar Air in it) grown lean by Affliction, expressed
in a pale disagreement of Colors, that the Harmony of his individuum began its
Dissolutions from the Head. They read in the Apple of his Eye, Tears manfully
repelled, and Horrors imperfectly designed by Death. Yet when he had rallied
the Relics of a Cheerfulness, which before was dispersed, with a smiling that
had nothing else of life but the shadow, he spoke in this manner:

To be Mortal, and consequently subject to Passions and Errors, should not make
it seem strange to you, O Judges, that now before your eyes, ye see me fallen
down to the bottom of humane Adversities. He that incited me to this Precipice,
is so powerful, that with an example of extraordinary wonder, he could have
subverted more robustious Breasts, and Hearts far more generous then mine. But
I speak not this to diminish in any sort the greatness of my Fault, but to
assure you (my Lords) that what I have designed against the King, had relation
to nothing but Love and Revenge.

The Physicians dissension in order to your sickness (O Prince) was the cause,
from which such sad Effects are derived. I am not in a condition to enlarge my
Discourse. Hear the true Relation, and pity (if you please) not my Offense, but
my Frailty.

When Hermogenes saw he was vilified by Carneades, for their Difference in
Opinion in order to your Highnesses disease; and that to that contempt was
joined the little Favor the King showed him; he being vexed, sent a Letter to
Demetrius, my Master, strewed full of Ambushes and Treasons, which Seleucus
devised against him. And amongst other things (to confirm them) wrote to him,
That the King the last year perceiving that your Highness was familiar with
Sophonisba, fearing lest at last you might marry her, and (...) wards Demetrius
his Kindred, had caused her to be poisoned by Carneades: Whereupon the
unfortunate Lady departing shortly after for the Death of Faustus her Father,
could scarce get to Bursia alive.

Demetrius, who before was persuaded of the hatred Seleucus bare to him, when
he saw its Effects in Sophonisba, did presently believe whatsoever Hermogenes
wrote to him. Whereupon being inflamed to Revenge (having before made sure of
Clitarcus the Prince) he resolved to send to this Court some faithful Lord of
his, who embracing with him the Design, might persuade him to conspire against
the King, and to seek by all means, either by Iron or Poison to deprive him of
Life.

None of his Barons seemed fitter to him for this business, then my self. To
that end having drawn me aside one day, to discourse with him in the secretest
place of one of his Cabinets, when he had complained greatly of Seleucus; and
showed me the Letters of Hermogenes, he commanded me to come to this Court, and
told me what to do with Clitarcus.

I, who had loved Sophonisba more then my life, and that if I came not to this
Court when the Queen brought her with her for one of her Ladies, it was,
because I was far distant at that time from Bursia, for certain Affairs of the
King, my Master; Imagine ye, O Judges, what sorrow I felt by seeing in
Hermogenes his Letters, not only the Memory, but the Quality of her Death.
Whereupon, it appearing to me, that by obeying the King, not only concurred
the Satisfaction of doing my Duty, but that too of revenging my Lady, I was
very willing to perform his Commands.

It disordered me only to think, that I should be known not only by
Stratonica, but many others of this Court; but Demetrius telling me, that (when
I had gotten a Beard, and changed with my Voice in some sort the Features of my
Face, I might easily be freed of this doubt) did encourage me so, that I
imbarqued my self for this Coast: Being surprised at Sea by a Tempest, I was
cast on the Island of Cyprus, where forced to expect many Months the Commodity
of Passage, the Relation befell me of that Witch, which I made some days past to
your Highness, which differs in nothing from the Truth, but in that
particular only, in which I made mention of my Father, and in the Infirmities
which I said I had had in the end.

Your Highness I know calls something to mind that I signified to you of a
Picture which I saw there in the Palace of that Mountain, for whose sake
afterward I could not endure to see any other. Now this was the Picture of
Sophonisba. Being inflamed by this sight more then ever to the Enterprise,
Fortune to facilitate the more my Disasters, did likewise provide against the
danger of my being discovered; for going a hunting one day, I fell from a very
high Precipice of Rocks, and breaking my Nose and my Teeth, and losing an Eye,
as you see, I securely did negotiate with my Friends, and no body knew who I
was.

Being healed, and a very convenient Passage afforded me, I arrived at this
Court. Here feigning my self to be a Stranger, as your Highness beheld, I only
discovered my self to the Prince your Cozen, and procured the Friendship of
Hermogenes. The Prince (though he very much desired it) was troubled in
resolving with himself to conspire against the King. But I knowing he was
cruelly in Love with the Queen (though she knew nothing of it) did promise to
him on the part of Demetrius, to marry her to him as soon as Seleucus should be
dead. He, who was not able to stand firm against these Motions, when the
promise was authenticated by the Letters of my Master, corrupted Hermogenes
with a great sum of Gold, and many Hopes, and incited him to Poison Seleucus.
As soon as I knew that he had done the deed (though it was without Effect, by
the Rupture of the Vase) I killed him the night following, to be sure he should
be silent. But by the same way that I thought to have secured the Secrecy, by
that very same I happened to reveal it. For Hermogenes as ye know having so
much life left him, as to be able to inform Terpandius of the Fact, every thing
was discovered. So the business exactly has passed, O Judges. Now it remains
(he spoke with a great sigh) that ye know who I am; but no body can give
greater testimony of that then this Lady, who sits here among you. And in
saying so, showing Licofronia a skar that he had on his Arm, now speak you, he
added (O Madam) if you know your Son Alcestes.

Reader, I have not the courage to delineate the resentment of a Mother, who
after a very long time that she has been far distant from her only Son, comes
to re-behold him with an Ax over his Head. Let him (who can) arrive there with
a Thought, where I cannot come with my Pen. I will only say this, The Judges
so much pitied this case, that if his Offense had been any thing but Treason,
perhaps changing the Punishment of Life into some other Punishment, they might
in some kind have been indulgent to him.

Thou diedst so, O Alcestes. Thy ill Fortune could not be divided from thee,
but by the Iron which cut off thy Head. Unfortunate Man! Thy Misfortune would
not have been lamented at all, if thou had undertaken the Conspiracy, set on
fire by other flames, but those of Revenge and of Love. Where is that Heart, be
it never so generous, that spurred on by these two Affections, runs not to any
kind of Precipice? May that be an example to the Liver.

But Clitarcus (who had by the means of Arsinda been delivered out of Prison,
and from Death, though perpetually banished from Damascus) was willing to
gratify in some part the kindness he had received from that Lady, by marrying
Euripia. So one of the Conspirators (because he was a Prince) passes to his
Nuptials, while the other (because a private man) goes to the Gallows.

The Disturbances of Seleucus and Antiochus being quieted in this manner, and
the Court filled with joy for this Marriage, their Contentment was the greater,
because Demetrius seeing his Designs were discovered, endeavored a Peace with
Seleucus, and obtained it.

Stratonica therefore awaked with the noise of the Feasts out of that
Melancholy in which her great Beauty lay asleep, and began to rekindle in her
self the accustomed splendors of her Face, and revive the usual Graces of her
Looks and of Laughter.

Antiochus, thy Sun prepares himself to run toward the end of thy life. What
is to be done? Preserve thy Chastity, and thou losest thy Life. So this poor
desperate Prince, when he saw in the Roses of his Enemy, the Thorns of his
Condition to re-blossom, fell to Fasting again, because he would not nourish in
the weakness of his Life, the danger of his Modesty.

But Seleucus, who wanted not any thing to perfect his Happiness in the Joys of
the Peace, but the sight of some amendment in Antiochus, being consecrated
wholly to Sacrifices and Devotions, spent only the hours of the day in sighing
to Heaven for some reparation to the Ruins of his decaying Son.

Near Damascus, some three Miles off, there is a Valley, which within a sad
Pleasantness of Cypres Trees, by which it was encumbered by reason of their
Thickness, a Temple lay hid, erected to the Glory of a nameless Deity. There
Solitude (whose Kingdom it seemed) commanding with the Scepter of Silence, did
intimate to all that entered into the Wood, the decrees of Terror and Admiration.

The Fabric (which showed in the Architecture a Majesty, to which even Ages
did homage) assisted by those Circumstances of Horror and Antiquity, which make
a doleful Edifice, was reverenced by Pilgrims, as a dwelling that could not
contain any other thing in it, but the obscure Deity of a Power unknown.

Black Bats, and unlucky Birds, which (compassing the Temple with sad
flutterings) did form an unfortunate Chattering, were the Citizens which
inhabiting the Obscurities of the Wood, accorded to the colors of their
Feathers the sadness of those Leaves, which even in their trembling breathed
Tears.

Hither the King resolved to have daily recourse, without any other attendance
but two Lords; being confident that as he prayed against an unknown Disease, so
only of an unknown Deity he could obtain the Remedy for it. And behold at the
third station, when the Sacrifice was done, he soundly sleeps at the Foot of
the Altar, and hears a voice in a dream that says unto him,

Seleucus, cause Erasistratus to be found. If he cures not thy Son, his Death
is unavoidable.

The unfortunate King awaking with this voice (which struck him like Thunder)
returned in all haste to Damascus. And when he had distinctly inquired, if
there was a Physician in the World called Erasistratus; he received this
Answer, That there was not only such a one, but that he was the Vassal of his
Majesty; and that it was not long since he had married a most beautiful Citizen
of Damascus.

The King having caused Erasistratus to come to him, beheld him Counter-marked
with so Noble and so Comely a Countenance, that by his lively Carriage, and
cheerful Condition, he straight-ways presaged some good Fortune to the Cure of
Antiochus. Poor afflicted men, how quickly they run to believe, what they would
have succeed in order to the effecting their Desires. All men offend concerning
this Levity, but great men there offend most of all; for they (as more proud in
their Desires) cannot comprehend how Hope can be so bold to deceive them.

Erasistratus exposed to the Eyes of the other Physicians, and of the Court,
became soon a Mark for the blows of Detraction and Envy. But he (who had spent
the greater part of his time in the Courts of other Kings, being skilful in the
art of insinuating himself into every ones favor) prevailed with them in time
no less by his Knowledge then his Wit.

But Seleucus (who procured with all diligence that the Physician should not be
distracted with any other Thoughts, but those which were necessary for the
study of Remedies) was desirous that his Wife should be brought into the Court,
to live there with him; and gave order to have her Treated as a Lady esteemed
by the Queen.

Things being composed in this manner, Erasistratus went in to make his first
visit to the Prince, and with him Seleucus, and Antipater the Princes Overseer.
The Room half dark, was the first sign which they all three had of the little
Life of the sick Prince. Their Looks hastened to the Bed, which (now beginning
to transform it self into a Coffin) contained nothing else but a miserable
Conjunction of Bones animated by a fugitive Soul. Antiochus was defaced in that
manner, that having by his sickness acquired a Figure wholly different from
himself, he retained nothing else of his former Similitude, but a lively Look,
in which alone, as in a secure Counter-sign, his unfortunate Father was reduced
to acknowledge the Stamp of his own Resemblance.

Nature peradventure then robbing him of his native Form, had with a
compassionate cruelty delivered him from the residue of those Tears which
Seleucus would have shed by reseeing in him his own Image. But what greater
misery could arrive to poor Antiochus, then to be brought to that pass, that it
seemed but reasonable to defraud him of that weeping to which his Fathers Tears
were indebted by the law of Compassion. Yet the unfortunate King was not
wanting to water his Cheeks in that manner, That if the Overseer and Physician
there present, had not signified to him that he should forbear weeping, he
would without doubt (forerunning the death of his Son) have provided his dear
Body of a Bath. They considered him possessed by Melancholy, oppressed with
Silence, and abstracted from Humanity. Every thing about him seemed to infuse
Horror, and to savor of Misfortune. Even the Air (infected with his Fate) moved
up and down in the Circuit of his Chamber something that was Noysom and Deadly.

When the King had made much of him, and frequently asked him how he did, being
unable to get from him any answer at all but a turning of his shoulders, he
weeping, consulted the Physician in order to what they should do to revive this
dying health.

Erasistratus then taking into his hand the arm of Antiochus, observed (musing
much) by the drum of his Pulse, if his Soul yet began to beat the march. Then
he said very gravely, That there wanted not causes of sadness; That
nevertheless in that his first visit he durst not yet prognosticate any thing
of certainty; That he should have thought it a most excellent remedy, to cheer
up Antiochus his sorrows with much merry Company and sweet Music; for he saw
very well, that chiefly two things were the infirmities which caused his Death,
to wit, Melancholy and Weakness. The Physician going on in his discourse, so
satisfied the Kings expectation, that he hanging at his Mouth, preserved his
Words as answers from an Oracle.

Antipater had the Charge to give order for the Feasts, and to assign the time
for the Ladies Assemblies. There the Queen being often to intervene, not only
as chief in Authority, but as principal in Beauty, was the cause that the
others so much inferior to her (because they would not stay in the place) went
out with their Attires and Embellishments, devised without doubt by Emulation,
and embroydered by Envy.

Antiochus his Chamber being therefore become an Epitome, in which Ostentation
had contracted all its Bravery; and a Scene, where all the Torches of Beauty
were lighted, the poor Prince felt himself mount miserably toward Paradise.

Next to Stratonica, there was not a Lady (though the Court did abound with
extraordinary Beauties) more handsome then Polibia the Wife of the Physician.
She (whose years resembled a Nosegay of Flowers tied by Youth) surpassing the
others as much as she was surpassed her self by Stratonica, seemed a middle
limit placed in that Company, to prove that infinity which the Beauty of the
Queen arrived at.

If I knew which way to describe a Deity, perhaps I should dare to shadow those
Sweets, which all Eyes felt by fixing themselves on the Countenance of the
Queen, while she sat near the Bed of Antiochus, to solace her self with the
rest of the Ladies. But it is madness to attempt an impossible thing.

Erasistratus (who well understood the language of the Eyes) perceiving that
looks passed between the Queen and the Prince, which carried and recarried
arrows, was not long a comprehending in what tempest the Health of Antiochus
was lost. Being cautious therefore in observing, in less then two days he
perceived, that every time Stratonica appeared, the poor Prince (grown pale)
was in a sweat; his Tongue trembled in his Mouth, and his Heart did beat in his
Breast; and the Motions of his Pulse varying in that manner, it seemed by the
frequent beatings that he panted in calling for help.

Pensive Erasistratus, what remedy will thou find for this Princes disease,
now thou have had the furtune to discover it? He turns to Ashes for a fire,
which nothing suits better with then Silence. How will thou be able to put thy
self in order to make use of any Medicaments, if thou may not define the
disease nor speak of it? O my very cruel Condition! And what avails it me, that
thou have brought me to the greatest cure in the world (to make me get honor)
if thou have put a rub in my way, which may make me lose my life? so spoke
sighingly the Physician in that affliction of Mind, who could have no greater
Consolation then Despair. But after much uncertainty of Thought, he ran to
Seleucus, and informing him that at length he had discovered the disease of
Antiochus, he tells him it is incurable.

Alas, then (answered the King) dare thou tell me such unfortunate News? And
from what so mortal Cause is derived a disease, which my Crown is not able to
Cure?

Sir, replied Erasistratus, Love is the cause of his Sickness. The Prince by
Excessively loving, is near the last moment of his Life.

The King lost between Wonder and Incredulity, on the one side Laughed, on the
other was Sad. But the Physician swearing that all he said to him was most
true, and offering to make it appear to his own Eyes, Seleucus grew pale. And
who may be probably this Lady, which has had the power to Charm my poor Son in
this manner, that he must dye for her Love?

When the Prince was in health (replied the Physician) Fortune one day brought
him to see Polibia, who was not then my Wife; and he seeing her very handsome,
and consequently worthy of any Noble man's Love, was enamored so of her, that in
brief he attempted all means to obtain her. But it being repugnant to his
Nature to make use there of force, where Prayers were not prevalent, he was
grieved so to the heart, that he resolved to go dye in Laodicea. Your Majesty
knows better then I, if that journey was intended. Melancholy afterward
augmented in him hourly with Silence, has (extending him on a Bed) consumed
him as you see. Yet his sickness peradventure would not have been incurable, if
by the occasion of my fatal coming to his cure, he had not both reseen and
re-known Polibia for my Wise. Behold, O sir, how excessively unhappy your
Condition is and Mine; how your Majesty believing to find a Physician that was
able to restore him to his health, and I a Cure suitable to my Ambition, We
have both of us unfortunately co-operated to his Death.

If the King then Wept infinitely and Lamented, let that Father imagine, who
reduced to the poverty of one only Son, has placed in his Life all the hopes
of his Progeny.

He cursed the day of his own Nativity. He said he was deceived by the Oracle,
and protested to Heaven his Despair. Then heated with the boiling of his
Affections, he collected all the wittiest Enthymems, and subtilest Syllogisms,
to imprint in the heart of Erasistratus an Argument of Truth, that in him all
the happiness of Antiochus consisted. And that if he would as a Husband be
willing to abandon Polibia to the Princes desires, he would make his Family as
fortunate as any ever was.

He then dilated himself in showing him the happiness of the People, which
depended on the Life of a Prince so well Qualified; the joy of a Father, who
would by that means be seen to re-flourish in a Son; and the Obligation of a
Favor, which a Posterity owing him could never be forgotten.

But the Physician feigning an Anger, which passed not the Confines of
Dissembling (artificially grown proud) returned him this Answer, That he could
not tell if his Majesty would embrace those Counsels himself, which he labored
to give him, if he was in Erasistratus his Condition; That he was very sure,
That provided Antiochus had been enamored of the Queen, his Majesty would not
have endured that any should have persuaded him to renounce her to the Lover.

Here Seleucus could not suffer him to go on, but crying out with a violence
derived from paternal Affection, Would the Gods would be so pleased (he said
weeping) that my poor Son were in love with my Wife, that I without losing any
time, might run to dispossess my self of a Woman, to gain a King; but the Stars
have not vouchsafed me so much happiness. My destiny (which has wholly seen my
will devoted to my Sons) would not let his Life depend on my will. O, amongst
all that have ever had children in the World, most unfortunate Father! And how
gloriously happy should I be, if Antiochus being in love with Stratonica, it
lay in my power to get my self a privilege in his gratitude, by giving him
life a second time? So spoke Seleucus; and he bathed in the mean time (with his
eyes dissolved into water) the reverence of that hoary old Age, which rendered
his Countenance no less Grave then Majestic.

We desire that Ability which we have not; not so much to use it, as to have
something more then we had. Privation is so loathsome a thing, that when there
is even a privation of any superfluity, we are troubled. Our Mind, which is
always desirous of Dominion, runs willingly to those Actions that are the
effects of a quality newly gained, though otherwise the Actions be of little
Satisfaction.

If this King had perceived he had been able to beatifie Antiochus, before he
so fervently desired this Power in another, he would not peradventure have put
into practice with so great a violence.

When Erasistratus saw the King in the height of his Sorrow, he cast himself
down at his Feet, and besought him to be quiet; for it was in his Power to give
Life to the Prince. And proceeding in discovering to him Antiochus his Love to
the Queen, he caused the pitiful Father to swoon through abundance of
Tenderness.

He employed then himself in observing his Sons alterations when Stratonica
arrived, and was confident of all the Physician had affirmed to him. Then
without losing of time (for the Life of the Prince was no longer in a state to
suffer delay) he assembled his Counselors. There gravely debating the matter
(after he had given them a true Information of every thing that had succeeded
in order to the Princes disease) he showed them how great the loss was all the
Kingdom would have by his death. He dilated himself (not without Tears) in
commending his Qualities. He proved the utility which they hoped for by his
Government. He declared the impotency of his own old Age. He bewailed the Royal
Progeny that would end in his Sons individuum, if he died in that manner: And
lastly, he commended his renouncing of Stratonica to him, to preserve him alive.

The Kings opinion was unanimously approved of, and no less were all astonished
at the love of the Father to the Son, then the respect of the Son to the Father.

This no sooner was done, but Seleucus called Stratonica aside into a Chamber.
He desired her not to wonder at what he had to tell her; for the Extravagances
of the World caused greater Amazements. That he was well assured, That the
sickness of Antiochus did proceed from an infinite Love which he bare unto her:
That it should not appear strange to her, for her Beauty could do more
stupendous Miracles: That he saw no other Remedy to preserve his Son's Life,
but to renounce to him her Body, though he did not renounce unto him his
Affection to her.

That at least he felt this Pleasure, that her Merits had a greater Reward,
then that which his wasted old Age had the Power to bestow now upon her: That a
Prince of less Virtue then Antiochus, was unworthy of so qualified a Queen:
That she should comfort her self, that if he lost her as a Wife, he gained her
as a Daughter. And finally, he besought her, That if she made Profession of
complying with all his Desires, she would comply with this of accepting of
Antiochus willingly; for nothing could express greater kindness, and nothing
was more beneficial to the Kingdom.

The Gods only know (while Selencus spoke thus) what Conflicts in his Heart
the Interests of his Son, and his Wife's Affections made. Heaven in that
instant made her seem to him more Beautiful, that in giving her away to
Antiochus, he might be more sensibly Mortified.

Stratonica dyed with a Blushing, which seemed the effect of Strangeness, and
was Joy's effect; returned him this Answer, That she could do no less then be
amazed, that Antiochus was come to that pass; yet that she was ready to perform
the commands of his Majesty.

So they both went to the sick Princes Bed; when the King had caused all to be
gone, he began to speak to the Prince in this manner:

How much Sorrow, O Son, thy sickness has continually brought me, is known to
that Heaven, which never yet has seen (since thou kept'st thy Bed) these my
Eyes free from Tears. I almost felt as much by not knowing thy Disease, as by
losing thy Life; for it seemed to me, that by my wanting Power to comfort my
self in giving thee a Remedy, Death took thee not from me, but robbed me of
thee.

But now since thy silence has been understood, and thy desire read in thy
Melancholy, behold here Stratonica. If thy Virtue has gained her at the rate
of thy Life, my Generosity renounces her to thee out of abundance of Affection.
To hold dearer my Honor then thy Happiness, has been the effect of a Son, but
not of an ordinary Son. To cure thee of thy sickness, though it were with the
loss of my Life, must not be the work of a Father that is less then a King.
Stratonica (who was born to greater Fortunes then any she could hope for of me)
by the Favor of Heaven is now to be happy in thee. Receive her, and cheering up
thy Sadness with the gain of such a Happiness, endeavor to deliver thy self out
of the snares of death. No man will ever be able to deny, that I have not (to
recover thy health) given away the most Beautiful thing in the World. But my
Gift is voluntary, and my Will has been commended by the Council of State. All
our Subjects see me willinger a Widower, then without a Son. Let this be a
Circumstance to increase the Beatitudes of thy Fortune.

Antiochus his weakness was not able to endure the strokes of such infinite
Joys. Life fled from his Tongue, because with humane words to thank his Father,
was esteemed by him too manifest an Ingratitude. In the mean time he fell into
a Swoon. It availed very little poor Seleucus to speak rather Gravely then
Affectionately to him; for by his speaking, neither more nor less the Accident
arrived which they labored to avoid.

The good old King bewailed his sudden swooning, and the Queen kept him company
in weeping. And perhaps those Tears served likewise for the Obsequies of their
separated Nuptials.

Erasistratus called to the swooning of the Prince, entreated the King to send
away Stratonica, for the sick Princes Soul could not long sustain it self
against her sweet Presence. Antiochus (returned to himself) fetched so great a
Sigh, that they thought in that first noise, his much tormented Soul fled away.
He then fell to weeping extremely; nor for any thing Seleucus said to him,
could he answer him otherwise then by frequently kissing his hand. The King
seeing that, thought it good to be gone.

Erasistratus (left alone with the Prince) cheered him up, and he disposed
himself by little and little to receive with Joy the Fortune which Fate
presented to him. So in few days he recovered, and preparations were made for
the Marriage.

I should now relate here the Feasting of the Nuptials, but my Invention (which
has lost its Tranquillity) finds it self unfit to fancy Joys. Let this
Subject be a Field set apart for the Pen of some other. Mine (accustomed to
bewail in another Disasters its own Calamities) must not alter its Custom. If
ever I shall change my Condition, I will change peradventure my Mind; and
knowing how Laughter is formed with the Mouth, will show you how it is Printed
in Books. Be happy.

THE CATASTROPHE OF STRATONICA; OR THE Unfortunate Queen.
The fourth Book, WRITTEN By John Baptist Cartolari.
STratonica began to count the years of her Life from the day she was resigned
by Old Seleucus to Young Antiochus. That day her fading Beauty re-blossomed; Her
Cheeks (which began to grow lean) became again smooth, and the Lilly
re-appeared streaked in her with a better Purple. Her Eyes shaded with Sorrow,
beheld again the light. Her Hands busied heretofore in drying of Tears, fell
again to the exercise of making in her Hair Nets for Hearts. She made a new
Inventory of her Clothes. No Jewel, no Dressing, no Artifice was forgotten. She
returned to the Noviship of Love, by Consulting her Glass, Studying again
Looks, and Instructing with Patience her self. She distilled Tears with the
Martyrdom of Fire by Alembicks into several Waters, this to serve for
Paintings, and that for Fragrancies. Having resolved to have Antiochus for her
Deity, she desired to seem a Goddess to him.

The Waiting-Women saw their own punishment proceed from the Joys of
Stratonica. All hours are destined to the Services of Wantonness; this
appointed for distilling, that for tempering Ambre to several Uses; this for
curling Hair, and that for such like Exercises.

But now Impatience set a fire Stratonica's longing, to whom one hour appearing
a thousand to better her Condition, she grew froward with the Sun, banned the
Time, and cursed the dents of the Celestial Wheels, which brought about so
slowly the days, every moment of which imported an Age to her Wishes.

Antiochus recovered, but yet in Death's black and blew marks, the whiteness of
the Privet decayed in his wan Countenance.

Desire suggested to Stratonica several ways of procuring amorous strength with
much Gold for the new married man. The Chambers were most sweetly perfumed, and
the Baths in order to make him grow fat.

The people in the mean time understood it differently so prodigious a thing,
that both in the public and private Records it was without a President.

To behold a King (a Father) give consent to the passing away of the Treasures
of his Bed to his Son, who had dared to lay his Thoughts in his Step-mothers
Bosom; O what temerity of a Son! O what indignity of a Father! The wisest men
detested it so far, as to take up Arms against him, and revenge the Kings
affront on the King himself, not on the impudent Prince.

They wondered that Seleucus (who had punished the signs of Conspiracy against
the Crown in Climenes) had not killed Antiochus conspiring against the greatest
Interests of men; and that there was a Parliament (a Body of such corrupt
Members) that suffered not only, but supported such ignominious Matches.
Others (swiming down the stream) commended the mad Pity, which gave by Consent
to the Kingdoms Successor, the Wife of the Father the King, to preserve (if
really it was true that there was a necessity in it) a rebellious Princes life.
Some imputed the Violence of Antiochus his Affections to the Stars, for
Villainies have no greater a Protector then the idle Terminations of Fate. But
all strivingly cursed Stratonica, the Tinder-Box and Fuel of this wicked Fire.

Antiochus howsoever unfit for Nuptial Conflicts, in stead of recovering,
consumed himself in the sufferings of desire, longing extremely to enjoy the
Widow of a Husband yet living.

Now in a confused distinction the orders given to Artificers were hotly
pursued; and because the offense might appear the more deformed, and more gross
in the Eyes of the world, they were willing to bring him on the Stage, and
inrobe him with Pomp. He was to be Arrayed like a King. These Nuptials
celebrated against all Custom, not deserving so much as the shadow of darkness
it self, they desired to manifest, and make appear as Lawful as Beautiful.

O colored Glasses of Passions, how far from the truth represent ye the
Objects? Vices are gilded with the names of Virtues, and the most heinous
Villainies enjemmed with specious Titles: Yet the Thunderbolts lie neglected and
idle in the Thunderers Hand, for he thinks of nothing more then of being a
Deity.

The Glass of Seleucus his Conscience represented to him the foulness of his
corrupt and rotten marriage. He knew he had given for a dishonest woman his own
Wife to his own Son; He perceived that the People derided in secret this his
cowardly dullness, though they openly applauded it: and Stratonica likewise was
much troubled, to see her self pointed at as the Son-in-laws Mistress: but the
flesh was unruly; whereupon with the danger of Antiochus his health, they
hastened the Pleasures of the lascivious Queen.

She was dressed more extravagantly and wantonly then ever. Her sleeked hair
hung displayed, but was parted on the Forehead; on her Temples she had placed
two great Locks of Hair finely Curled, and very rarely Plaited, which hung down
to the tip of her Ear. The Tresses were reduced into a Rose; the hinder part of
her head was bound with a single Ribband woven of many Colors. Her Neck (the
delicious excess of Softness and Whiteness) seemed Alabaster and not Flesh, but
that by its Motion in breathing it appeared to have Life. Her Throat (Beauties
Pillar) laid a foundation to the first desires, which going on farther to her
Bosom, did precipitate themselves from two little Hills into the Gulf of
amorous Impatience, little Hills with cunning Artifice exposed to the sight of
all Eyes (having the Vail drawn maliciously) and jetting out with laborious
advantage in appearance of Severity, but yet very pliable.

She was dressed in a Green Gown, the displayed Standard to her amorous Hopes.
Two Bracelets of Pomandre of Ambre (covered with Gold) adorned her Wrists, and
her Elbows were shrouded in a Muff of Silk-caulwork, among whose Knots the
Needle toyed, fastening on each of them a Jewel.

On her Neck with an obstinate bragging of Emulation, the choicest Neck-lace of
Pearl (that was ever worn by Queen) proudly humbled it self with a Row of the
smallest Granate Stones, which with their dusky color befriended the pretenses
of the Pearl against her Bosom.

Two Serpents of Gold were her Pendants, which seemed with open mouth to have
fastened their Teeth on the Stalk, and at their wreathed Tails hung two shining
Emeralds.

On the left Lock of Hair was a little Rose of Gold with Six Diamonds, and
another somewhat bigger sported up and down between her Breasts. But every
thing offended their sight, who gazed on her Eyes, in whose brightness they saw
Epitomized the Miracles of Light. These were the Calamity, where not only
Antiochus was involved, but to which by a fatal Disposition all men's Minds
were inclined.

The Nuptials, were to be celebrated, to which with great shame Hymenaeus
approached, marked with the foul Character of Adultery and Incest. Luxury
(going hand in hand with the most obscene Wantonness) had resolved to conquer
it self, and consulted the most riotous Pleasures that ever the Roman or the
Grecian, to wit, the learned Lust had invented.

But in the mean time Antiochus and Stratonica were not wanting to meet
together secretly, by means of the Faithful and timorous Silence of the subtle
Waiting-Women.

All the Reins were abandoned to wickedness; but they desired to cover the
filthiness of Incest with the Snow of a Contract, which was nothing else but a
Lie before the Gods, before the People, and the Conscience too of the
Contractors.

They would have endangered the Health of the newly recovered and longing
Lover, if she (who was very voluptuous) had not out of Love to her self
procured his preservation for a longer use. Scarcity redoubled their Appetites,
but delay was a very pleasing punishment, the Blinde-lovers believing like
Cupid, that they should be immortal like him, and that sensual Pleasures could
not but be maintained by Life, which often miscarries in the infancy of
Fruition.

Looks in the mean time and Sighs, and (in the view of the World) the lawful
touch of the Hand, supplied what fell short of the Pleasure which in Secret
they enjoyed. Two Hearts (that prescribe to themselves a nonplus ultra at
their own little Pillars) deceive those Thoughts which are never contented,
unless they obtain something more then they possess. The Soul (which thinks all
the World a narrow compass) cannot endure to be forced by Sense to the
miserable servitude of adoring a Face, in which (though it never so much
counterfeit a Deity) yet sees in the end that it lies, and that a fair Cheek is
but a flitting shadow, and that the Sighs of a fond Heart melt in the end into
the bitter Juyces of Tears, and the Waters of Repentance.

A thousand Nets were pitched to allure to these Nuptials, whole Provinces, or
at least the best of them. But amongst other things, they prepared three
wonderful Spectacles, which had as good success as any thing that graced the
Feasts.

The first was a rare Pastoral; the second a Royal Tilting; the third a most
sumptuous Feast.

There had continued in the dear and honored Memories of a free Prince of a
most happy State, a very fine Pastoral, whose Title was ARCADIA SET AT LIBERTY,
the Fruit of a rare Youths Invention, who vouchsafing to imitate the famousest
men, was angry with himself that he had not surpassed them. All the great and
Noble things (which Aristotle's School boasted of) were found in that Comedy.

Though the Work was extremely delightful, yet it did not fully answer the
Royal Expectation, which aiming still higher, had resolved to amaze the
Spectators, giving them together with Arcadia, great Enterludes of Galatea.

Fame already had Canonized the Poem with the applauses of all the World, which
had much surpassed the known Lyrick vein of the Latin and Greek Poets. The
happy Composition represented all the Graces of Love, and expressed in the
fortunate Leaves whatsoever Art feigns to be Beautiful, or Nature its Model.

They were busy about the Theater. It suited not with every capacity, for
those Heroical Delights are unfit for common people. A moderate Hall was
therefore made choice of, and immediately filled with innumerable Workmen, and
abundance of Materials under the conduct of a famous Engineer, without limiting
the Expenses. They distributed Billets to a limited number, which were a
Wedding Garment to him, who was for the space of four hours to be in an ecstasy
of Pleasure. The Spectators were brought in with great Majesty, but though
there were multiplied Guards, yet the torrent of the Persons was so strong,
that they could not interdict the effects of Desire without hazarding many
lives, whilst a longing Expectation offered Violence to the Curious, whereupon
in a very short time the Theater seemed replenished with one single Body.

The Ladies crowded together, resembled the Stars in the Milky way. Every
Pillar, every Base, and every Chapter were taken up.

The Evening-star appeared, and the Night was now as bright as the Day. When
the Spectators were assembled (all Eyes beginning to poize their own sweetness)
a warlike melody of Drums and Trumpets resounded in their Ears, whose short
noise was seconded by an harmonious Consort of several Instruments.

With a swiftness like Lightning, they drew the finely colored Curtain, which
the Eye could scarce follow. A fortunate ecstasy then transported the
Spectators; for a moving Heaven discovering it self with pleasant Draughts of a
Country afar off, they saw an Air glister of the color of a Sapphire, mingling
it self with the fine Purple of a Jacinth, the purest Dies of the finest Blews
being mixed with them; and they saw afar off some little Brooks bubble, which
expressed the whiteness of the broken Foams, the painted Waters deceiving the
most subtle.

With that slow Majesty which in Heaven the Light moves with, accompanying the
Sun its fair Fountain, they saw rise from the Pavement of the wonderful Scene
(as it were from the natural Horizon) a regular Volumn of most shining Beams,
which encompassed a Golden Chair made all of fiery Brightness. A Youth
representing Apollo sat in it, having his Head adorned with a Diadem of
Lights; his right hand held a golden Scepter, and his left leaned on a Cittern
set with precious Stones: and while the Chair insensibly ascended by an
invisible Engine, he sang the most delicate and the smoothest Verses that ever
humane Ear was pleased with, and that great Machines ascent to the highest
Region of the Air, and the ending of the Music (the Prologue to the Fable)
were at the same time, as it was at the very same time that they saw new
wonders take place of the former, while the Prospect changing it self into
another Prospect no less Beautiful, they saw vast Plains succeed those Motions
of the Air, together with huge Woods, which being (near at hand) composed of
growing Leaves, represented the Rural Delights with some Pastoral Habitation,
and then it was that (the fairest Nymph and the gallantest Shepherd coming
forth on the Stage) they saw Acted those so sweet, but chaste Loves, which made
the Woods famous in the true golden Age.

But when in the Intervals of the Acts (the Prospect being wholly
metamorphosed) diverse Rocks consumed by time and destroyed by the Waves did
appear, every one believed that he was by magic Art removed to the shore of
some Sea; while behold the Clouds open, and with reverence denoting their
Subjection, give way to a Machine, which descended with swift Motion, carrying
a flying Child on a Globe of the same, taken from their Station. He covered
with rich Nakedness (having his Eyes blinded with a golden Vail) with a Bow in
his hand, and a Quiver at his side, boldly threw himself from the Prop, and
with a Pleasant and imperious Accent Sung thus: Ye Clouds which want only to
bear
Me here below, were proud, again
Go to the known Fields of the Air,
It Is pleasure to these Wings, not pain,
At once to waft me from one Pole
To the other. Be the Earth and Sky
So vast, as all Bounds to Control,
Yet Cupid in a trice can fly
Beyond the highest Heaven, and
If yet there be an empty space
Above that (such is his Command)
He can ascend beyond that place;
But ah what narrow limits are
One World, one Heaven, To whose Wings
A hundred at a time appear,
For all their length contiguous things?
What shall we do, my Bow? must we
Neglected lie, because each breast
That Is Mortal, Homage does to me?
And with the flames of Love's possessed.
But why name I but Mortals, All
The Powers above (enamored grown)
Show their enflamed breasts, nor shall
This quiet me; All Heaven with one
Love-wound shall burn with Love: Give here
My Quiver, and the hottest Arrow,
The swiftest too, which in that Sphaer
(To which compared the earth's but narrow)
May wounding deeply stick, and there
Set all afire; A Nymph more fair
Then Venus, Yonder does appear
From those waves like a dewy Star;
She with the Pearl contends, and is
Far whither then the milky way;
The wanton Lover seeks his
Fair Galatea, who well may
Compared in a calm Sea be
To breathing Snow, she, she I say
Shall heaven inflame, and make it see
How hard it is those lights not to obey;
And that if it have influence
At will on others, of her Eyes
(Which Beauty to the world dispense)
It shall attend'its qualities,
And sighing them invoke. Behold
The Goddess does appear, and I
Will now direct my shaft of Gold
Against the bosom of the sky,
And where of its Sphaers is the heart,
There print Love with my fatal Dart.


When he arrived here, he shot as quick as lightning into the Air, and with a
wonderful flight vanished out of the sight of the Spectators.

And behold, the Sky was colored with a light of Fire, and opening, delivered
of a Deity, which (courted by the most radiant Figures in departing from the
bosom of Sovereign bliss) made harmonious Lamentations, while from the Waves
lightly moved arose a most beautiful Nymph, swimming softly, and wantonly
advancing among the broken Waves. Her lascivious Motion, and most lovely fair
Countenance, made a Consort of Beauty and Comeliness surpassing all Description.
She represented the dear Daughter of Dorus enamored of the Beautiful Acis,
whose Loves, whose Death, and whose Obsequies were so Nobly expressed in those
Scenes, by the help of rare Musicians, and with Machines made by Daedalus
himself, that when they had drawn from the rigidest Eyes abundance of Tears,
they drew too loud Applauses from all Tongues.

That renowned Spectacle being ended, the little remainder of that night was
spent in fine Balls.

The succeeding day produced a Tilting worthy of the Nuptials of a King. The
night was not neglected, when the hours of the day had been bestowed on several
Pastimes; the least part was spent in Sacrifices, the subsequent in Feasting,
where Healths were soundly drunk. One drank to Stratonica's happiness, pouring
down Wines to inebrate the spirits, and conveighing looks to the heart to
enchant it: Another emptied Cups to the Health of the Prince, with whom he was
otherwise ill satisfied, the trick of malignant Adulation. It was necessary
likewise to set apart some time for Repose; the Head was encumbred with the
Vapors of Wine, and the Body did languish under the tyranny of Pleasures. The
vain illusions of the Nuptials (for the Dignity of the Kings) unknown to none,
provoked all persons to extravagant riotousness. When they had slept
disorderly, every one rose weary and discomposed. All corners were full of
voluptuous entertainments, yet they were too to be present at those spectacles,
which had Kings for their Authors and Protectors, for even a negligent Contempt
of little things gives offense to a Prince.

A Theater very capacious was made choice of, and the Bride now and Bridegroom
were seated together with the old Widower. The place was large, but could not
contain the concourse of people, which was great beyond all belief.

At what time by the sound of several Instruments (besides the huge number of
Trumpets) they saw come through the Air on a shining Chariot drawn by two
flying Dragons, a Woman of rare Beauty, and which, with a full hand strewed
Papers among the people, all printed with the same Character. When they had
opened the Paper, they read there these words;

Ceres to the Heroes of the Elysian Fields.
THe Tears of a Mother deprived of her only Daughter by the tyrannous Lust of
a Lover will be lamented, or find pity at least (if I am not deceived) to
accompany her Sorrows. My Proserpina ( ravished by Pluto the infernal King)
bewails those years that she has not seen her, who brought her into the World,
who gave her Suck, and tenderly and affectionately nourished her; she went from
the light of the World to the darkness of Styx, which (but for the light it
receives from horrid Flames) is perpetually obscure. The Bride lies in a Bed
environed with Serpents and Basilisks, and though she be safe, yet always she is
sad. And she feels more torment then pleasure in the Arms of a Deity, that is
nothing but Fury and Loathsomness. Behold her insipid Delights, she has been
now married many Ages, and yet still is barren. A beggarly Queen of hidden
Treasures. I hear the wretches groans, which thunder in the Ear of a Mothers
Heart. Her moans resound from the damned Center, and beseech me to succor her.
I have attempted every thing in vain. I have invaded the Oracles, and they give
me this answer, That if a fatal Lance beat not down with force the Gates of
Hell (which otherwise are invincible) I shall not see again my Proserpina. I
therefore have recourse to the Elysian Heroes, now that Heaven has abandoned
me, the World deluded me, and Hell betrayed me. And I invoke you (O Heroical
Souls) and resign to your Noble right Hands the high adventure of my Daughter
buried alive among the damned.

When those Papers were read, they saw the Cavaliers of the great Habitation,
behave themselves with majestic anxiety of Mind, going several ways toward
the enterprise.

The place was pleasant, representing Elysium to the life; to wit, in a cool
Summers shade without Horrors, and a Verdure without Winds. The Trees bearing
perpetually leaves, sported without fear of hoar Frosts, and of Ice. The ground
produced no Flowers worse then sweet Rushes, then Anemones, and Daffodils; nor
Birds (less esteemed then the Nightingale) sang in those odoriferous Verdures.
Cool Brooks ran purling in several places, which making a noise among speckled
little Stones, called the Herbs to feed the little Flowers in their Waters.
Innocent wild Beasts (all white) ran up and down in that civilized little
Forest, and the Rabbats and Hares were secure when they met with the Greyhound
and Leopard. The Pigeons and Turtles appeared from many parts, now bewailing,
now chanting their Loves; this enjoying her mate, and that deprived of him. The
Fawn played with the Maistiff, and the Stag (corvetting as he rudely used to
do) met friendly with the Dogs, which in stead of biting him, licked his
Haunch, and wantonly played with him. In fine, there was nothing there but Love.

The Spectators were delighted with wonders of that kind drawn to the
appearance of the truth, while with that celerity that one dream is transformed
into another, they saw from one head of the great Theater in vast shows a
delicious Seacoast, on the Chrystals of whose calm Tranquillity, a Vessel of
rare Form came dancing, as it were, whose Sails were Clothes of unknown
Colors, but graceful; insomuch that they rendered contemptible the finest
Blews, and the Purples.

All the Fabric was resplendent with Gold, finely extended on the Figures and
Pillars which adorned it: When it arrived at the shore, it rested securely on
its Anchors; and when they had let down certain Ladders, they saw some
Ethiopians richly arrayed, dis-embark certain Steeds very pompously trapped,
with the like number of Squires. One Cavalier alone of a very gallant presence
went ashore, with a shining Helmet, gilt Arms, and an upper Garment empailed
with Knots of Pearls. He began at the sound of many Trumpets to walk very
softly in the Field, and in the mean time Six Damsels distributed through the
great Theater the like Writ of Defiance.

JASON.
A Goddess beseeches, and what rude or rather Sacrilegious Heart will not be
moved to hear her, who deserves to be reverenced, not only obeyed? Ceres, the
Life-giving Nurse to the World, does entreat, and run ye not turbulent Nations
to serve her? May ye then want Bread to eat. Ungrateful People are unworthy to
live. I (fed with the Nectar of Elysian Happiness) engage here my self, because
I see Mortals (whose negligence is as great as their rudeness) contemn her
Prayers, who deserves to be sacrificed to. Behold me here with my Lance, now
long since used to Victories, and which excepted, I have obtained nothing of my
own here below among the Ghosts. The Ship that I had for the Conquest of the
Golden Fleece, as it was heretofore translated to the Stars into a radiant
Figure, so now is conveyed to this place under Water. Behold her near the
shore. Ye Tartarean Gates being shaken by this Lance, shall restore the gage of
the Daughter of Ceres, whom ye seized on by violence, that the afflicted Mother
may encompass with her Arms, the Neck of that Daughter, which being lost a
Virgin, cannot be recovered but as a Woman.

Jason had no sooner retreated to the Station, whither the order in Tilting
invited him, but on the other side issued forth a Cavalier with a stately
Device. He came in a great Chariot beset with Jewels and Mandilions of fine
Gold under a stately Canopy, and several Pillars with several Rows supported
the Majestic Architecture, diverse Standards being ranged in many places.
Spoils gotten from conquered Enemies, and full Trophies of Arms did serve for a
warlike Embellishment. He was drawn by Six Coursers which were sadled, and on
every one of them rode a Squire of rare Beauty, in a white Garment like Milk.
One of the rest that was the finest, led a Steed in a Silken slip, who though
he was naturally generous and fierce, yet came prancing by custom very quietly,
and obeying as it were with judicious Distance the tender hands command that
did lead him: when they had turned about softly, the Chariot stood still with
the Cavalier, while the Papers were distributed, which said in this manner:

THESEUS.
WE have formerly touched the thresholds of Hell. The ways of Styx are well
known to us, nor is there peradventure a Monster that fears not our Valor; and
why shall we not at present return with more willingness to retread the known
Path, to procure us the favor, and oblige the affections of a Goddess? Neither
the conquered Amazons, nor the slain Procrustes, nor the defeated Minotaures,
nor the fiery vanquished Bulls, can equal our Glory to that, which even can
augment our felicity in the Elysian fields. Behold my right hand prepared for
the enterprise, at whose strokes the horrid Gates shake already, rather fall:
Ye Laurels, which rejoice in being sprinkled with Martial sweat, bow ye your
branches to my rising Glories, and intress your selves in Crowns to honor my
Praises.

Theseus was scarce got to the limited place, when from a high hanging Hill a
Cavalier issues forth, arrayed with the splendour of a Sapphire, the most nimble
of Body, and of the noblest Countenance that ever any Hero could boast of. In a
Majestic demeanor, yet affable, he came standing on a great triumphal Arch
like an Imperial Colossus. He was gently drawn on invisible Wheels by six
African Giants, and held in his choice Shield three Rampant Lions, certain
Crosses, and some Bars. The Palm Trees bowed themselves as he passed along, and
all the great Heroes of Elysium distinctly did him Homage. In the nature of a
vile Varlet that fierce Hanibal led his Steed, who when he was hardly ten years
old, swore eternal enmity with the Romans on the Sacred Fires. He, who
destroyed the great City Saguntus in a short space of time; who blocked up the
Alps against the power of the Barbarians; who passed into Italy, defeated
Sempronius at Trebia, Flaminius at Thrasymenus, Paulus and Varro at Cannae^; he
finally who encamped at Rome, and reduced it to that exigence, that if the
courageous Scipio (so the Cavalier was called) had not sustained the fears of
the Citizens, Latium would have lamented its lost Liberty.

So great a Captain, who was very rich in Glories, came no whit puffed up.
Haughtiness increases not Majesty, but diminishes it. He seemed not to
remember, That when he was young, in the first Conflict against the
Carthaginians at Pavia, he had preserved the life of his Father; That in the
mortal Battle at Cannae, he had upheld the Nobility, so as he left not empty
Romes Nests, who being at five Lustres made Praetor, had won the vast Spains,
had defeated the two famous Asdrubals, and set his triumphing Foot on the
Gullet of Africa. He seemed not to remember the great Surname procured to
himself for the Third of the conquered World, nor the Title of Asiatick,
acquired by his Valor to his Brother; Neither seemed he to remember the
incomparable enterprise of commanding himself, while he fortified himself
against the rare Beauties he had gotten in the Wars.

So great a Heroes (from whom was to descend one of the worlds greatest
Pedigrees, to make the State of Venice more and more renowned in the Cornelian
Progeny) seated himself with the rest in a convenient place, while with sundry
Devices the remainder of the Champions went forwards. One seemed the pious
Trojane, whose shoulders supported the Majesty of the exiled Houshold-Gods, and
the decrepid age of his impotent Father. Another appeared like Romulus, who of
an humble Shepherd became the great Founder of Rome. This counterfeited the
great Macedonian, that Achilles the terror of the Palladium; and others
represented diverse Heroes, every one expressing his own meaning in several
Papers.

Jason began with his strong Mace to shake the Stygian Gates, and they heard
rude lamentations answer the strokes in a melodious manner, as of people
affrighted. And they saw issue forth from the tops of certain Towers, Globes of
thick Smoke and horrid Fire. Various Monsters passed along the Walls with
terrible Snowts, and Weapons unknown to this world. These sometimes threatening,
sometimes flying, represented several Figures in an unusual Dance expressing
Fury and Fear.

At the third Shock of Jasons Lance the Gates opened a little, and great
Volumns of fire issued out at them; but they quickly closed again, scarce
suffering the Miseries of Hell to appear. All the rest made successively trial
of their Force, but that high adventure was reserved for the generous Scipio,
who at the first stroke hit the Stygian Gates so powerfully, that falling with
a horrible noise on the ground with a terrible Earthquake, they discovered on
the sudden the unhappiness of the Kingdom of Sorrow. They saw there the Nieces
of Belus, with eternal torment of fruitless labor carry Waters perpetually
running out, and perpetually increasing. Sysiphus there likewise to roll up and
down the great Stone with continual Vicissitudes of ascending and descending.
Besides, they saw there the unfortunate Prometheus tied to a stone, and feeding
a torturing Vultur with the living meat of his bowels still reviving. A little
way off, the greedy Tantalus, Thirsty, with his lip touching the cool water,
and Hungry, with his hand on the bait of the Odoriferous and Vermilian Apple.
Neither wanted there infinite other spectacles of sad Miseries. Pluto,
overthrown by the Power of a fatal Victory, surrendered now Proserpina, who at
last came running to meet the open arms of Ceres, to kiss reciprocally one
another. She went from a Scorched, to a Flourishing Ground, from Fires to
Coolness, from Weeping to Joys; in fine, from Hell to the Elysian Fields. They
saw Joy triumph in their smiling Brows, and all the Theater seemed to rejoice
at the pleasure which at last the glad Couple enjoyed. All the instruments
(which many ages past had been used in Music) were here heard to fill the Air,
while the Stygian Smoaks (not bituminous and of brimstone, but of Benjamin and
Ambre) delighted their Nostrils.

The Enterprise being ended, and Proserpina and Ceres seated in a very fine
Chariot with triumphing Scipio, they saw Fame descend on two great Wings with a
loud Trumpet, who approaching at last to the Spectators, with a few, but neat
and pithy Verses, did dismiss the people.

The Banquet remained, the last Prodigy of Royal Magnificence. All diligence
was used to find out skilful men to please the Palate. Cooks and Sewers were
sent for from far. Even these in their kind boasted much, and as the emulation
was Ignoble, so the strife was Audacious. One would have them Banquet after the
manner of the Persians, another as the Syrians use to do, and this after the
fashion of Asia. They bought up in all Countries all the Flesh, Fish and
Spices, by measure, without measure, not forbearing for the price. The
Exchequer can maintain profuse Expenses: The Ships (when the Wind was not
favorable) made the Seas submit to them by the force of the Oars, and (in
despite of adverse Aeolus) brought the flitting Pleasures of a Bit and a
Draught.

For this preparation (made to the shame of a Father, of a Wife, of a Son, of a
Bride, of a Widower, and of a Lover, the Riddle of Sphynx, and a Knot to be
dissolved by the Sword) it seemed they were not satisfied with any possible
Tribute: What should have maintained a Court many Months, they prepared for
one day. It is not hard to persuade men to excess.

In the first Court he gave order for placing four great Marble Cisterns (a
cost rather vicious then splendid) which for some hundred years had served for
a receptacle of Waters in the Gardens of the Kings his Predecessors, and
assigning to every one of them as much Wine (of the four best sorts, not only
of the growth of the Country, but which came from foreign Provinces) as for
the space of two days running out of very large Mouths, with free access to
those of the Country, and to Strangers, might content the most inordinate
Appetite.

In the second Court were dispensed to satiety (to innumerable heads of the
people) Bread, variety of Flesh, and rare Fish.

In the third costly Tables stood provided for Three thousand persons, which
were nobly served, where none but the Soldiers had leave to sit down. Two hours
were allowed to every company of the Guests, and all the day and all the night
were employed in that manner; and to every one was given at his departure, a
Golden Meddal with the Pictures of Stratonica and Antiochus.

In the last Court were assembled all the Officers of War, every one of which
had presented him a Horse, and the chiefest had likewise a Chain, and an
Ethiopian Page.

Neither was the great Hand of Royal Munificence less open to the Ladies.
Jewels of a great value, Squires of a rare wit, proud Horse-litters, Clothes of
Gold; brave presents in fine, fit for great ones to receive, and for Kings to
bestow.

Every working hand was employed in setting out the Banquet, the supreme
Prodigy of Luxury. Even the vacant Vestals spent their preciousest time in the
provocations of Wantonness and Gluttony.

A most splendent Hall opened in a Quadrangle, supported by twelve rows of
Pillars: There the Tables were prepared; one by it self, for Seleucus and the
new married couple; one a little lower, for twelve Princesses and the like
number of Princes, placed one against the other. Others without much
distinction, for above Three hundred Knights. The best Musicians met there, who
singing unchaste Songs (by calling Venus to Bacchus) even in the Bosom of the
coldest decrepid Age, could stir up wanton Thoughts.

While they Dine, and that infinite Cups are now emptied, with great abuse
always of the Gifts of Nature, and the Labors of Art, behold an Eagle comes in
at the Window, which (three or four times flying round) descends, and with his
Talons and Beak, seizes on the Crown from the Head of Seleucus; nor could the
Waiters (though they did all they could) forbid his departure together with the
prey. He flew where it was impossible to refinde him. Now this unworthy King
deserved not that Heaven should vouchsafe him the Honor to presage his
destruction by Prodigies; but the Character of Kings (the greatest thing Heaven
gives to Mortals) did grant this Mortal privilege to him.

The Expedition arrived on the Wings of an Eagle, and denoted Celerity in the
execution. It was not the Screech-Owl of Pallas, a Warrier, a Goddess, but at
last a courteous Virgin: Not the Peacock of Juno, a Bird very stately, and
which ends her threats, or rather her anger in cries; much less the Pigeon of
Venus, the Messenger always of Love. It was the Provost-Marshal of the
Thunderer, who is not soon angry, and threatens not but to strike. The Gods had
determined in a full Consultation, that the Thunderbolt should not fall in
vain.

Many were the Discourses concerning this matter. The wisest men grew pale at
it, but the imprudent King (behaving himself ridiculously) interpreted so
considerable an Accident, as a thing of Chance. It is Fatal in such cases
(which threaten near at hand) when Princes become stupid, and see not
themselves what all men behold. Histories give Presidents of it to a number
without number. Antiochus (more a Statesman then a Son) though he outwardly
seemed afflicted, was inwardly well pleased; and since he had taken the Wife
from his Father, he thought to rob him likewise of his Kingdom. The Water
having broken down the Banks, was not satisfied in violently running with part
of its force, but will carry with it all its whole power; and though the Corn
be spoiled in the Field, the Vine-roots extirpated, and the Edifices
overthrown, it cares not for any thing but the Effects of its Violence.

The wanton Stratonica trembled likewise, and brake (that she might not be
observed) a Groan, which issued out of her Breast; but she could not suppress a
hot file of Sighs, which came from her Breast: Not for Seleucus, whom she hated
at last as the Author of their common shame; but because in the Father she
beheld the Son threatened, and in the ruin of Antiochus, foresaw her own fall.

Only the Mother of Climenes was exceedingly glad of the Prediction: She
intervened the joys of others, being pursued by her Sorrows. Her Body was
apparrell'd with gay Clothes, her Mind with mourning. She went musing how to
further the Disasters of that Court toward its utter destruction; and though
her Design had no effect, yet her Will was not wanting.

Now the Dinner inclined toward an end, and several Birds let loose out of
Cages with Golden Bars, made the Hall resound for joy in a glad noise,
compelling all to catch them; for they were not Birds of that Country, but
taken with Golden Nets cast in remote Mountains, and in Woods afar off. The
Ginney-Bird, the Parrot, the Pheasant, and several less Fowl esteemed for their
Beauty or Singing. At which time a Herald (clothed in a Bloodcolour Suit)
enters in the heat of the Revelling, with three Arrows in his Hand, and a dead
Man's Skull in-wrought in his Coat, with artificial Horror, and demands
Audience. Then she (who took ill the Death of her Son) cheered up her self, and
in those deadly Prodigies read her unlucky Joys. A horrid Silence accompanied
the paces of the unfortunate Messenger, from his entrance into the Hall, till
he came to the Royal Tables. The Soul (which participates of Divinity) chiefly
presages mischievous Accidents. They could conceive nothing but Disaster. The
Herald without bowing himself at all, or showing any sign of respect, in a
clear sound, and intelligible to all, said as follows, That there was a
Cavalier below in the Court, whom Victory only, or Death could discover; That
(inflamed with the Desire of a just Revenge) he was come to defy Antiochus
body to body, to prove to him by Arms, that there lived not an unworthier
Prince then himself. Antiochus (though surprised in a time when his Mind was
besotted with his Loves, and his Body abandoned to his Lusts) yet naturally
being turbulent and fiery, throwing far from him the Chair in which he reposed,
rose up, having only a Sword by his side; but Stratonica neglecting the
gravity of a Queen, and retaining the Fury of a Lover, without having regard to
the encumbrance of her Royal Robes, threw her self from the Throne, and crying
out like a Mad-woman, and breaking forth into Sobs and Groans, clung about his
Neck as pale as Death, and swooned indeed, and was dead, by what her Face
expressed. But being recovered with Vinegar, and recalled to Life by cool
Waters, Antiochus besought her not to forbode him so ill, and in the mean time
he Armed himself to fight with the unknown Cavalier. He descended environed
with many Princes, whom (entreating) he commanded not to stir, except it were
to convey him out of the Field either Dead or a Conqueror. His panting Heart
did hasten half as fast again the course of his life, now at last very
flitting, and sang to it self in Deaths tone, the now unappealable disastrous
Divinations. But the vain Prince seemed unconcerned and undaunted, though
possessed with fear. Mars (it is true) is the Lover of Venus, but he lets
himself be caught in the Net of a Smith. Seldom a curled Hair, and a
Countenance perfumed with Sivet and Ambre, is the dwelling of a courageous Soul.

The Court being gone with mute Fury from the Combatants, Antiochus coped with
his unknown enemy. He skilfully fencing did put by his thrusts, covering his
flank with his Sword, which had not any other defense. Antiochus offending him
likewise defended himself, endeavoring to master Art by Art. Sometimes he
contracted his stride, sometimes elonged it; directing one while the mortal
Point to the Eyes, and one while to the Breast of his Adversary. The other as
cunning as he and as strong, did affright him with sudden Passado's, and the
male of his Corslet being broken in the end, the Prince saw himself wounded in
the Thigh. The blood began to spin out of it, insomuch that as a Bull becomes
fell, when he sees himself bleed, he raging fell on him, and wounding him
deeply in the Arm, was revenged of his Adversary. But Antiochus now hurt in
many parts, lost blood in several places, and his life sought an exit at many
holes, while not resolving where, the concealed Champion with the fatal Point
thrust it out, displaying him sooner dead them in an agony.

When Seleucus beheld his Son fall, in whom he supposed to live after death,
and for whose sake he had parted with his Honor, he was so transformed through
vexation mixed with anger, that he seemed to lodge all Hell in his Countenance.
He blaspheming demanded his Arms, so as (being mastered by Fury) he was hardly
understood. He precipitously armed himself, for the Stars opposing him with
violence, seek the way to their Effects. In the mean time the unknown Cavalier
walked warily, but proudly in the field of his Victory, and beheld his Laurels
watered abundantly with the blood of dead Antiochus.

Whosoever has beheld the Maistiff-dog, who (having his neck armed with sharp
irons) with his foaming Chops, and enflamed Eyes falls on the Bull, who comes
bellowing and carrying his Horns low, and bravely seizes on his Ear, beholds
Seleucus, who abandoning himself went toward his Sons murderer, who receiving
him like one that is willing to preserve himself and suppress his adversary,
stroke at him impetuously; but the mortal edge glanced aside most opportunely,
and caused the blow to fail to the ground; by reason of which Seleucus felt
great pain in his arm, so as very hardly he was afterward able to use it. The
other returned the stroke with more cunning, and began to clasp Seleucus in
that manner, that at last he showed fear in all he did. He could not stir, but
he trod in the blood of his dear Son, and stumbled at the bloody corpse, in
whose wounds for his sake he saw the Kingdom lost, and the World dead to him.
The unfortunate King bewailed himself extinct by his only Sons death, and
lamented the Royal Posterity decayed in that only sprowt; whereupon redoubling
his weak force, and provoking to more fierceness his adversary, he flew on him
(throwing away his sword) with his unarmed arm, and clasping him about the
hips, with a sharp Hanger which he drew from his side, he wounded him often
between the joints of his Breast Plate; but so to overcome him, was the way to
kill himself; for the unknown Cavalier (when he felt himself thrust through the
Reins) drew out a short Dagger, and hid it beneath in the belly of Seleucus:
Whereupon with reciprocal death they fell down in their mixed blood, and expired
at the same time. While the people saw Death (armed with other Weapons then his
ordinary Sith) mow down the Kings, they felt a deadly chilness run up and down
in their Bones.

Then the Helmet was pulled off from the concealed strangers head, and
presently he was known by Stratonica for Demetrius her Father. Amazement and
sorrow possessed then all the corners of her Soul. She saw the Conclusion, but
understood not the Mystery. Whereupon she seemed a Niobe, That in her Lover and
her Father had lost fourteen Children at once. Her Cheeks lost their red, and
resigned up their whiteness, a sad Lead-colour succeeding their Beauty; and
where her Affliction could not represent her rather dead then tormented, her
Hand supplied with blows that defect; so (killed many ways) she threw herself
on the Corpse, sometimes of her Father, and sometimes of Antiochus (being all
bloody and weeping) giving them kisses mixed with Love and with Pity, and
howling (like a woman transported in the service of Bacchus) till laying her
hand by chance on the bloody Dagger which wounded her Father (ere her Governess
could hinder her) she thrust it into her Bosom, but lightly (for an incontinent
hand is always cowardly) and bending downwards, fell on the dead Bodies of her
Father, her Husband, and her wanton Lover. She was taken up while she seemed to
expire (more wounded with Anguish then the Iron) and on the arms of several
Maids (which served her in the nature of a pitiful Beer) carried into the
Palace.

All the Court did nothing else but weep bitterly, only among so many
discontented, the old Mother of Climenes seemed comforted.

While every thing was disordered, and the Kingdom tottered without Pillars to
support it, they saw descend through the Air from on high, a Globe of a thick
Cloud, from which they discovered ever and anon with great crashing, flying
Fires. This staying over the middle of the principal Court, opened with a
terrible Earthquake, and an incredible horror of the Spectators.

The Night came on, and the darkness now increasing, did cover the unfortunate
Palace, when it was driven away again by many Lights, which (issuing out of
the bosom of the great-bellied cloud) distributed themselves with limited
measures into distinct spaces, without showing in what manner they existed. A
woman of a declining age (with her hair hanging loose, of a severe and grave
Countenance, clad in a Brown Robe, with a Wand in her right hand, and a Book in
her left) commanded a Silence, and stilled their weeping and cries, in a shrill
tone afterward began in this manner:

People, Lament not the deaths of unworthy Kings, bewail your selves, and
accuse the Stars for so basely subjecting you to the Rule of such Monsters.
Bewail ye rather the increasing Disasters which reserve you to greater
Misfortunes.

Seleucus, Demetrius, Antiochus, Stratonica (though Kings) were all born of
base Seed in a Cradle of Gold, whose Mothers many ways committed foul
Adulteries. Of abject Embraces (sought after in the Stable and the Field) they
conceived their Issue the dregs of the People. Behold the Son that presumed to
dishonor his Father; behold the Father, who endured, rather favored his own
shame; behold the engenderer of the Adulteress, whom youthfulness (wanton of it
self) had made by his connivance more Audacious.

This Kingdom a whole Age shall be the sport of Fate, and scorn of the World.
Every Luster shall have a new King, they shall dye all by Poison or the Sword;
for dishonest Beginnings have unfortunate Ends.

She said so, and vanished, and the Lights vanished with her; whereupon by the
light of the Funeral Torches, every one retired to his home.

When the Sun was risen, many troubles arose in that Court, many pretending to
the Crown, this by open Force, and that by clear Right. Among other, Alicander
Seleucus his kinsman (a haughty man and indiscreet, being opposed very stiffly
by some, but followed by most) having imprisoned or killed his Competitors,
usurped the Throne, investing his shoulders to Tyranny with the specious Robe
of a King.

The first Prey he aspired to was Stratonica, who (easily rehealed by the
Surgeons) in all those Disgusts and Lamentations, was forced to take again the
possession of her usual Beauty. Alicander was the ugliest of all men, as she of
all women the most Beautiful. The small Pox had so eaten his Face, that he
seemed a Monster. He was quite Bald, excepting a few single Locks about his
temples. His Nose stood awry, and was flat, his Eyes grim, his Lips swollen, and
his Face full of ulcerous Pimples. Some Tufts of hair hung down from his Chin
inclining to Ash Color, and very ill ordered. Such a one Stratonica enjoyed,
who was exceeding luxurious and comely, as another Venus in the six and
twentieth year of her age, while (loathing him in her mind, and sweetning her
disasters with the memory of Antiochus) she embittered with contempt his
insipid Delights. Whereupon, being distasted if not glutted, he resigned her up
as a prey to the unruly Soldiers, to the end they might have their fill of her.
So, broken in a short space of time, and disfigured by unhappy Diseases,
STRATONICA, a little before the Treasure of the Age and Wonder of the People,
without having so much as a course Cloth to cover her, returned rotten, not
only naked, to the Womb of the Earth.

FINIS.

