SOME Buds and Blossoms OF PIETY Also, Some FRUIT Of the Spirit of LOVE, Which
Directs to the Divine Wisdom.

BEING A Collection of several Papers, Found in Manuscript, Written by a Young
Man, many of them in the time of his Apprenticeship, some of them at several
times since.

Who, as appears by his Writings, had a true Travail after the Knowledge of
God, and Heaven, and Heavenly Things. And did attain to know him, and his Son,
Christ, whom he has sent, which is Life Eternal.

To which subjoyned is a Tripple Plea,
Touching Law, Physic, and Divinity,
Formerly Printed and Subscribed T. C.
Printed by Andrew Soul, in the Year 1684.

SOME Buds and Blossoms OF PIETY Also, Some FRUIT Of the Spirit of LOVE, Which
Directs to the Divine Wisdom.

BEING A Collection of several Papers, written by a Young Man, some of them in
the time of his Apprenticeship, some of them at several times since, and the
latter part of them in his late Consinement, by a Writ De Excommunicato
Capiendo.

Who, as appears by his Writings, had a true Travail after the Knowledge of
God, and Heaven, and Heavenly Things; and did attain to know him, and his Son
Christ, whom he has sent, which is Life Eternal.

To which subjoyned is a Tripple Plea,
Touching Law, Physic and Divinity,
Formerly Printed and Subscribed T. C.
Also, some Lines written by J. C.

London, Printed and Sold by Andrew Soul, 1684.

Friendly Reader;
IF in these following Lines thou ought espy,
Seems not right, not pleasing in thine Eye,
Pray be so kind, so courteous and so fare,
Excuse the Author, don't hard on him bare;
For what he wrote, I judge, well did intend,
I pray, his Faults, the Reader to amend.
One while 'twas with him, neither day nor night,
But in the Ev'ning-Tide appeared Light;
And as unto this Light he did take heed,
The Morning Day Star did arise indeed,
And Sun of Righteousness did shine more clear,
And Truth more plain and obvious did appear.
If some things dark, obscure, seem not so sound,
Pray pass them by; some things herein are found
Both sure and certain Truths, and plain and clear,
As who reads to the end, may find. And here
As I in several Papers did them find,
Present them to thee with an honest Mind,
Believing this, they will no harm produce,
So make them public to thee for thy use:
And in that Love, wherewith I them present,
Do but receive them, and I am content.
N. B.

I Thought it well, these Lines came to thy Hand,
Thou would then publish, I did understand,
Because thou knew'st the Lad, as from a Child,
Was sober Bred, Religious bent, not wild.
For unto some, acceptable they will be,
Though many pass their days in Vanity,
Not fearing God, not thinking of their end,
Not mattering how their precious time they spend,
Sporting themselves in Pleasures and Delight,
In deeds of Darkness, Evil Works of the Night,
Forgetting still to Judgment they must come,
For their bad Deeds receive a heavy doom,
Of Go ye Cursed, depart from me, I say,
You workers of Iniquity, away:
This is the sentence, Christ the Judge will give
To those in Pleasures lived, dead while they live.
J. C.

The CONTENTS.
AN Introduction. Concerning the Works of God. The Serpents Subtilty. The
Serpents Punishment. The Woman's Punishment. The Man's Punishment. Cain the first
Murderer about Religion. Cain's Punishment. To remember thy Creator in the
days of thy Youth. That Self, more than Adam is to be blamed for sinning.
Several Petitions and Prayers to God, to be taught of him. Some Directions
where to find Wisdom, with a Psalm on her Praise. And concerning the manner of
her appearing. Also, Reproof to those that talk of Righteousness, and live in
Sin. And to those that profess the Truth, and don't live in the Power of it.
With a word to the Haters and Despisers of the Grace of God. A Prayer. An
Alphabet of Two Lines. An Alphabet of One Line. Concerning Outside Professors.
A Call to Old and Young, to behold the Day of God, now dawned and broken forth.
Concerning God and Christ bearing the Name of Light. And concerning the
Glorious Day of Light. Concerning divine Love. An Exhortation to dwell in Love.
Christ the true Light, Christ the Son of Gods Love. A Salutation of Love to J.
C. etc. Concerning bearing the heavenly Image. Concerning a Righteous Man's
Work, and a Wicked Man's Work; to what each tends. A Complaint against
New England Professors. Concerning Persecution. Another Prayer. Concerning the
Philosophers Stone. Concerning Covetousness. Concerning Pride, Avarice and
Luxury. Concerning Temperance, Health and Happiness. Concerning the Cross of
Christ. Concerning the Souls Travail. Concerning the breaking forth of the Word
and Power of God. Concerning Gods powerful and glorious Presence. Concerning
Maintenance for the Poor. Concerning the Uncertainty of Worldly Riches. A
Lamentation and Warning for England. By the Author, B. A. To which is added, A
Tripple-Plea, by T. C. And some Lines written by J. C.
The Introduction.
BEfore that Light or Darkness did Appear,
When the Earth lay void, and all things now in it were
As nothing, then Jehovah, fashioned all;
By the Word Created he both great and small;
The Sun, Moon, Stars, and all in the Heavens be,
The Day, the Night, the Dry Land, and the Sea;
The Lord Jehovah, has all these things made,
Yea, they were formed by the Word, He said.
But when made God, the Heavens, Earth, and Light,
'Twas in the beginning, as does Moses write.
By the Word Beginning, we must understand,
Not from Eternity, God made the Land,
Or ought therein, but first of all, before
Fishes did swim or Fowls in the Air soar,
That is, before God did create the Whale,
Which is the first of all things Animale,
'Twan't from Eternity the World was made,
But then when time, its first beginning had.
And why did Moses write, and thus declare
To us, that these things in the beginning were?
First, to confute, or that we might not be
Deceived by those maintain its Eternity;
For if that People seriously do mind
To know the Truth, in the Scriptures they may find,
That from Eternity, Eternal none
Is, but Jehovah, who is the Holy Oue,
Although it is so, that World to come, we say,
Is without End; yet this World goes away,
And as some say, that what e're had beginning,
As had this World, must also have an ending.
Some do not stick, to say, A Generation
Of men there were, before Adam's Creation,
And that there was a World, before was he,
If we them credit, and no further see,
Or rather unto Moses Writings may
Incline our Ears to hear what he does say
Concerning the Creation of Mankind:
The first man, God created, (as we find)
Was Adam, unto whom Dominion he
Had given him, over Birds, Beasts, and Fish in the Sea;
'Twas he to whom God brought the Fowls that fly,
And Creeping things that on their Bellies lie;
The Cattle all, and Beasts both wild and tame
Were brought to Adam that he might them name,
By which, may not I there Sayings here disprove;
For was a World, then what did in it move?
Did Fowls of the Air, Fishes, and Beasts of the Field,
Who gave them Names, and to whom did Trees yield
Their Fruit; God gave to Adam for to feed
On every Tree and Herb that bears Seed.
Though Atheists dream, and Heathenish People fain
Fabulous like, their Fancies would maintain;
Yet those themselves deem Christians, they ought not
Open their Ears to hear, but rather shut
And close their Ears, than hear the Tales of such
Those things do broach, invalid Scripture much.
Concerning the Works of God.
HOw does the Sun and Moon, God's work declare?
The glittering Stars, which in the Heavens are;
The Hills, the Mountains, and the Valleys low,
The Works of God, and his great Power do show:
The Woods, the Trees, the Bushes, and the Bowers,
The Herbs, the Grass, and all the Garden Flowers;
The Tender Plants, which from the Earth do spring,
Praises to God from time to time do sing;
The rolling foaming Waves his Might do show,
The Hard congealed Ice, and Milk-white Snow;
The Fountains, and the Meadows every one,
The running Brooks, and clear Springs make him known:
The Fowls o'th Air, the Birds in time of Spring
Most sweet melodious Harmonies do sing.
The roaring Lion, and the Unicorn,
The firey Dragon, all God's Power adorn.
Disobedience the first Sin of the World.
BEhold the subtle Serpent's Subtilness,
Who to the Woman, thus made his Address,
Saying unto Her, Has God said unto thee,
Thou shall not eat of the Fruit on every Tree?
Then said the Woman, thus to him indeed,
The Lord has given unto us to feed
On every Tree, save that in the midst does stand,
To which We may in no wise lift our Hand,
Lest that We dye. The Serpent he said, No,
Ye shall not dye at all; But God does know
That when Ye eat Thereof, then Ye shall see,
And like to Gods, (knowing Good and Evil) be.
The Tree being good, and pleasant to the Eyes,
A Tree to be desired to make one wise,
She took the Fruit thereof, did eat, saying, Lo,
Take this, O Husband. He did eat also,
Their Eyes being opened, knew they naked were,
And to make Breeches, Fig Leaves did prepare.
Soon after this, the Voice of God They hear,
Walking in the Garden, which made Them to fear.
The Serpent's Punishment.
THe Serpent's punished three ways, First,
He of all Creatures most is cursed;
Next, on His Belly goes, not feet;
And Last, the Dust of the Earth must eat.
The Woman's Punishment.
IN Sorrow thy Conceptions are,
In Sorrow Thou shall Children bare;
To Man shall Thy desires be,
Thy Husband shall rule over Thee.
The Man's Punishment.
ADam, that did his Eve obey,
And do the thing which God said Nay.
The Ground was cursed for His Sin,
Then Thorns and Thistles grow therein;
In Sorrow all his days must eat,
With sweat of the Brows, his Bread, his Meat,
Till to the Earth, thou go, thou Dust,
For thereunto return, thou must.
Cain was the first Murderer about Religion.
CAin was the first, we read of Tilled the Land,
And Abel used often by the Flock to stand;
And in process of time, Cain hap't to take
Of The Fruit of the Ground, an Offering for to make
Unto the Lord; and Abel brought also
The Firstlings of the Flock, and Fat, to go
To offer up to God, who did respect
HIS Sacrifiee: But Cain's he did reject.
Then Cain was Wrath, his Countenance soon changed,
Thus said the Lord to Him, Why art thou strange?
If well thou do, thou shall accepted be;
If ill thou do, Sin at thy Door does lie.
Soon after that, Cain talked with Abel, when
They were in the Field, he slew his Brother, then
Thus said the Lord to Cain, What have done? I,
The voice of the Brothers Blood from the Earth hear cry.
But how hap't this? or what is the cause I pray,
That Cain his Brother Abel, thus did slay?
'Twas Envy, for in that he did proceed
To execute this Bloody treacherous deed,
Because the Lord, the Sacrifice of Cain
Rejected, and accepted his, was slain.
Cain's Punishment.
WHat Punishment, to Cain was sent,
And what Plague, fell upon
Him, Cursed was he, of God, to be
For e're a Vagabon.
REmember thy Creator in the prime
Of The Youth, before the Evil days or time
Come, when thou wilt say, I take no Pleasure in
The Years and Days that lately I have seen.
Whilst Light of the Sun, of the Moon, of the Stars remain,
Before the Clouds return, after the Rain;
That Is whilst thy Eyes lend to thy Body light,
As does the Sun by day, the Moon by night;
Or Cloud return after the Rain, (that is)
Before stark Blindness, as a dark Cloud seize,
Upon thine Eyes, when many a woeful Tear,
With Humors, have them washed from Year to Year,
When the Housekeepers, and the strong men all
Shall bow themselves, and tremble like to fall.
The Grinders cease, because they are but few,
And those look out of the Windows, dark shall show.
The strong men are the Legs, as Pillars stands
The keepers of the House, the Arms and Hands
Which with the Paulsie waggel, shake and shiver
The Legs, though Props, shall tremble, bow and quiver.
And in the Street, the Door then shut shall be,
When noise (or sound) of the Grindings low, and he
At Voice of the little Bird shall rise, and all
His singing Daughters, their attention fall;
That Is when thy Ears have past Musical season,
And cannot attend to hear, Deafness the reason.
The Door without, that is the Mouth, so faint
As cannot be opened, but by some constraint.
The rising up at voice of the Bird, does show
Old Age is wakened, even with Cock-crow.
When Men shall be afraid of that is high,
And likewise in the Way, they fear espy;
That Is when they climb, Fear does possess them, and
They stumble likewise on the Plain they stand.
When the Almond Tree shall flourish, that (i will show)
Is when thy Head, shall with white Fleeces grow.
When the Grasshoppers shall a burden be,
That Is when thy Legs, gouty are, and crasie.
When all Concupiscience from thee's gone quite,
That to thy Meat, thou have small Appetite.
Or e're the Silver Cord be loosed, or slack't,
Or Golden Bowl be broke, or Pitcher cracked;
Or Wheel at Cestern broke, that is, says one,
The nervous Pinacles to the Urine gone.
The Silver Cord, the Backbone stretched out,
And golden Bowl, the Heart, whence Life does sprout.
The Pitcher broke, at Fountain does narrate,
The heat of the Liver lost, the Stomachs fate.
THough Sin at first, on all, through Adam came;
Yet let not him, (but Self) bare all the blame.
For as I heard, perhaps the thing was true;
A Rich Man, to a Poor Man, this did show,
Set him to work, who dig'd in the Ditch apace,
Till sweat of the Brows did trickle down his Face;
Then tossing up the Earth with Shou'l or Spade,
This Cry did utter, and these Words he said,
O Adam! Adam! Adam! And hard-by
His Master walking, thus did hear him cry,
And to him called; Friend, why do Adam blame?
O Sir! (said he) I need not tell the same,
It Is full well known how I by Adam's fall,
Not only I, but We his Offspring all;
As he himself, with sweat of the Face in the Dust
Must work, since he from Paradise was thrust.
Had He not sinned, we'd not subjected bin,
Think I to work in the Earth: But for his Sin
God sent him forth to Till the Earth: He came
From it, and to 't he must return again.
Thou Adam blames; but how if in his stead
Thou were, then thou would do just as he did.
For this observe, these Words I speak to thee,
Cast down thy Spade, leave Work, and follow me.
If my Command and Precept thou^lt obey,
Two strokes of Work thou shall not do all day;
But live at ease, and from thy Labor cease,
Taking thy Rest in Safety and in Peace.
If this my one Command thou keep, it is small,
Thou shall not want for any thing, but all
Thou can desire, to thee I Will freely give,
And thou as 'twere in Paradise shall live.
Thou at my Table shall set down to Meat,
And eke Diurnal of my Banquets eat
Of Dishes rare, of every Mess but one,
Which shall be covered, look not thereon;
I mean not that thou may not see the outside,
But don't uncover't; in thy place abide;
Lust not to know what it is, but do refrain
From touching it, if I thee entertain:
Then if thou do this one Command obey,
And keep my Precept, thou shall with me stay,
Living at Ease, with Comfort, Joy and Pleasure,
Rise when thou will, and lie down at thy pleasure.
Touch not the Mess, the Dish uncover not,
But let it stand always closed up and shut.
So whilst thou do this my Command obey,
Within my House thou may be sure to stay:
But if my Precept thou do not observe,
But disobey, and from my Counsel swerve,
Then of my Dainties rare, thou may not feed,
But from my House shall be expelled indeed.
So, for some time, this Poor Man he remained
Within the House, being bravely entertained;
For he had all his Heart could well desire,
Food in due season; when cold, a good Fire;
If weary, then a Bed, his Bones to rest:
Surely (thinks he) now I am greatly blessed!
But on a time, when he to Dinner went,
Sat down at Table, none being there present.
Then in his mind it secretly did spring,
This is the time to see what is in this thing:
So up he starts, the Dish uncovers, then
Out leaps a Mouse, away it runs; and when
He sees this Mess, no other Rarity had
Forbidden Fruit, to take, does make him sad.
In comes his Master, who brought him to his House;
What now! (says he) Why sad? Have seen the Mouse?
Yea, (quoth the Man) I in the Dish did peep,
And suddenly a Mouse there out did leap.
So says his Lord, Now see, leave off for shame,
No more blame Adam, Self's only to blame:
When Adam sinned, from Paradise he went:
So have thou now broke my Commandment,
And from my House and Table thou must go,
Because what in the Dish was, thou would know.
Could thou have been contented in thy place,
Thou happy were; but now art in disgrace,
And to thy Work i^th' Ground, with sweat of the Brow,
Return again, thy Mind to digging bow;
And learn for time to come, content to be,
When placed where thou may live so happily;
And learn for time to come, not Adam blame,
But Self, Self do, Self have, it is still the same.
If this be so, although the case was sad,
Yet 'twas no more than his Desert he had.
TEach me, O Lord, thy Fear, which will begin
Wisdom in me, and lead me from my Sin.
Teach me, O Lord, thy Truth, and I thy Fame
Will spread abroad, trusting in the holy Name.
Teach me, O Lord, of One Accord to be
And of One mind, with Those that Trust in Thee.
Teach me, O Lord, that I acquainted may
Be with the Children of the Light and Day.
Teach me, O Lord, by thine Admonishment,
In all estates, fully to be Content.
Teach me, O Lord, for to rehearse thy Acts,
And let my Hands commit no Bloody Facts.
Teach me, O Lord, according to thy Will,
To ask in Faith, that thou my Heart may fill.
Teach me, O Lord, my Ways for to amend,
And grant I may to Idols never bend.
Teach me, O Lord, when Vain Thoughts do arise,
I Christlan-like by Prayer them surprise.
Teach me, O Lord, by thy Eternal Might
Against thy Foes, courageously to fight.
Teach me, O Lord, that I may never Mock
At Sin as Fools, nor be a Laughing Stock.
Teach me, O Lord, Offenses for to take;
Yea, ten times told, rather than once one make.
Teach me, O Lord, as I desire of Thee
To be forgiven, to Forgive Injury.
Teach me, O Lord, to slight all Earthly Toys,
And let my Heart be fixed on Heavenly Joys.
Teach me, O Lord, a true account to give,
Even of my Stewardship whilst that I live.
Teach me, O Lord, that I my Sins to thee
May all confess, and by Christ be set free.
Teach me, O Lord, by Divine Inspiration,
To sound thy Praise, amidst a Crooked Nation.
Teach me, O Lord, that what in Hand I take,
With Wisdom I accomplishment may make.
Teach me, O Lord, Ambitious Pride to shun,
That naught may be Mis-thought, Mis-said, Mis-done.
Some Breathings of Love, which truly do move
Unto such, that do Wisdom desire,
Declaring the Way, in which Wisdom may
Be found of those, for her enquire.

WHo seeks for Wisdom, and would Virtue find?
A secret Treasure, and a quiet Mind,
A fruitful City, and a pleasant Hill,
Whose glorious Prospect Sharon's Rose does fill,
Dropping down Virtues Distillations sweet,
Cooling the Sons of Zions ardent heat,
Whose strong Desires, as lively Sparks aspire
Still upwards, as does naturally the Fire.
Its Situation toward the East does stand,
(Or rising of the Sun its Soil or Land;
Its F^rtile Pleasant, Amiable and Fair,
Which B^shans Oaks, and Lebanon's Cedars bare,
With all the stately Trees o th Forest, and
The choicest Garden- Spices, in this Land
Do grow, as Myrrh, Spikn^rd and Cinnamon;
With Trees of Mence, Calamus and Saffron.
A goodly Place it is, pleasant to the Eyes,
A Place to be desired, where dwell the Mise,
And Prudent Minds, who value Virtue more
Than precious Stones, or Gold within the Ore;
Because compared unto Her, all things are
But Dross and Dung. A Spotless Virgin fair,
In whose Right Hand is Time, with length of Days,
Her Left Hand Honor, Riches; all her Ways
Are Paths of perfect Peace, and Pleasantness
With here is great Treasure; Joy She does possess:
A Crown Immortal on her Head, she wears,
Decked with bright Diamonds, like to glittering Stars.
Her Tyer is rich, her Necklace of pure Gold;
Her Bracelets filled, with precious Pearls never told,
For number, numberless, innumerable,
Unto all Virtuous Minds most delectable.
This is that Queen of Wisdom, who her finds,
A greater Treasure has, than all Earth's Mines
Of Gold and Silver: For she will guide thy Way
From Darkness gross, unto Light's perfect Day.
Who does her seek, assuredly may find
Her in the Closet of an Humble Mind,
In which she dwells, darting her Beams of Light
Into the Heart, that she discover might,
The crooked Paths, and sinful Ways, wherein
The simple Soul, a Captive long has bin,
To free the Soul, that if it will, it may
Refuse Night Darkness, and embrace Light's Day.
O! then come all, who Wisdom does desire,
And thus, as once I did, for her enquire,
Who sought not long for her; but she revealed
Her dwelling in my Heart had been concealed.
To Wisdom I my Mind will bend,
And Understanding she will send
To me; for on her I Will depend,
And she alone shall be my Joy.
I Will seek for her, and she will be
A Guide, delightful unto me,
Walking in the Paths of Equity;
With her alone will I rejoice.
Where e're I do her Works espy,
They are delightful to mine Eye,
For she is of Assiduity.
With those that on her do depend.
She Is better than the Silver fine,
And Richer than the Golden Mine;
As bright as Sol himself does shine:
With her dwells Immortality.
I Will prize her more, than Gold most pure,
And on her, would be fixed sure;
For she is a Rock that will endure,
And conversant with Elohim.
She Is Comely, Beautiful and Fair;
All precious Pearls, cannot compare,
To her a Tree of Life so rare,
And she alone will I exalt.
THus seeking Wisdom, Wisdom as a Light
Within my Heart, appeared most glorious bright.
Like to the splendour of the glorious Sun,
Expelling Clouds, and causing Mists to run
Like scorched Scrowls, and vanish quite away,
That Truth and Righteousness might now display
Its self, and put forth Fruits of the heavenly Vine,
Against the which the Esaubites combine:
But let them know, their Combinations are
To Samson's strength, no better than a Hair.
The Stone cut out of the Mountain without Hands,
Must now increase, and greatly fill our Lands,
Assuredly, on whom this Stone does fall,
Its ponderous weight, to Powder grind them shall.
But they are happy: Fall upon this Stone
Whose Hearts are broke, with true Contrition,
They shall be mollified with holy Oil,
And by the Lamb's Blood, cleans'd from Filth and Soil,
That they as Virgins pure, arrayed in White,
Prepared may be, to walk in Wisdom's Light,
Which shines in their Hearts, who It obey,
Even more and more, unto the perfect Day.
Yea, Wisdom cries without, her Voice in the Street
She utters loud, the Simple for to meet.
And turn them from that Way, to Death does lead,
Wherein, like to Post, they haste with speed,
Calling amongst the press of all desiring,
And thronged crowd of Thoughts, that We retiring
May seek for Wisdom: O! ye Fools, says she,
Why will ye dye? Return, return to me,
That I my Mind may pour out to yon, and
May give you Knowledge, for to understand
Dark Words, and prudent Sayings of the Wise
With Parables, in Wisdom to surmise.
And recreate your selves, with Solace sweet,
That to embrace her in your Hearts you meet;
Then keep her, and to you she will be a Guide,
Receive her in your Hearts, and she will abide,
And to your Souls, with Knowledge bring delight,
And cause you through her Counsel walk upright.
O! seek her early, while she may be found;
She often Instruction, with Reproof does sound,
To those her seeks, that they may understand
The Fear of God, is the Beginning, and
First Gate of Entrance, to that City where
None but the Sons of Virtue do appear,
Who sought for Wisdom, more then Gold refined,
And till they found her, could not rest in mind,
But rove from Hills, to barren Mountains, where
Like scattered Sheep, amongst the Wolves they were
Grievously bitten, pritcht and torn with Thorns,
Yea, often push^ with Bashan's Bulls Brass-Horns,
Till almost tired, yet at last did appear;
Where think you? even in their Hearts, most near
The proper Habitation of her Rest,
That those who seek, may of her be possessed.
Who so does find her, hold her fast, be sure,
Fot she is a Rock, that will for e're endure;
A hiding Place, a Covert, and strong Tower,
Whereto the Righteous run, God's Arm of Power,
His Word, by which all things created were,
That in the Heavens, Earth, Sea and Land are.
A Queen; before the Depths, with Honor crowned,
And Virgin fair, for Beauty most renowned.
He that approach into her presence will,
Must Self-deny, Self-mortifie and kill,
And enter with the patient Crown of Job,
And she will cloth thee with a princely Robe.
Would thou her blessed Company enjoy,
Then bid adue, to all Lusts base annoy.
If thou desire to have her for thy Friend,
With Peace toward all, what may be, thy Mind bend:
For where is Peace, there Wisdom may be found;
But where is Strife, can any thing be sound?
She is a Virgin of more purer Eyes,
Than to behold Sin's base Deformities.
She is a precious Pearl, and valued high:
Come, who can part with all, thou may her buy.
Stay, I Am not bought with Money; nay (says she)
Come, buy; come buy without Price; I am free;
Come, buy ye Milk and Honey, is My Call;
Come, buy without Price, it is free for you all:
Why spend you Labor, for that is not Food,
And Strength for that which will not do you good?
Awake, awake, it is high time, ope' your Eyes,
Obey Christ's Voice, let Wisdom's Light arise
Within your Hearts, that checks for Evil; and
Be sure Obedience yield to Its Command,
That as a Sword and Hammer, by great Power
It may smite down, and as a Fire devour
The Stubble; for I know the Lord demands
The Fruits of Righteousness at all your hands,
You great Professors, that long time have been
Talking of Righteousness, but found in Sin.
And you who to God's Light and Truth confess,
Have felt its Virtue, yet do not posses
It in you: I a word of Exhortation
Unto you give, make you the Application.
Consider, First, why God discovers Sin.
(The strait Gate) and broad Way the World walks in,
Vain Customs, Pride, Hypocrisy, Deceit.
(Truth, Righteousness and sound Words, these more meet
Are your Profession to accompany,
Yea, perfect Fruits of true Christianity)
As those, who in the Life of Christ do dwell,
Experimentally to you can tell.
Are not these things thus laid before your Eyes,
That you the best may choose, the worst despise?
And now, a word to you that hate the Light,
And to Gods gracious Spirit do despite,
'Counting that an Unholy thing, and Low,
A Natural Light, which does to all men show
Their secret Sins; a Common Grace, whereby
There Is no Salvation: thus you villifie
Christ's precious Blood, that on the Cross was shed
For your Redemption, who through sins are dead,
Counting Gods only Son, our Prince and King,
The Lamb, Christ Jesus, an Unholy thing;
Despising Gods Free Grace and tender Love,
That in your Hearts from time to time has strove,
Calling that Natural Light and Common Grace,
Which gives true Knowledge of God in the Face
Of Jesus Christ, Gods Covenant of Light
Unto the Gentiles, and his Arm of Might,
By which, Salvation he does work for all,
To the ends of the Earth, that on his Name do call.
But Lord! who has this our Report received?
And who has in thy Christ, the Light believed?
And to whom is thy powerful Arm made bare,
And Outstretched Hand, by which all Nations are
Invited and allured by thy Love,
To taste of the Bread of Life, comes from above,
And drink abundantly; for now Christ says,
He that believes in Me, though dead, I Will raise:
I am the Resurrection, Life and Light,
Believe in me to Day, before the Night
Of Darkness nigh, over spread your Land, wherein
That Light once shined, which manifested Sin,
And secretly reproved, when none was nigh,
The Evil to discover or discry.
This was Gods Love, and is his Grace to all,
Which never consents to Evil, but does call
From Sin to God, from Darkness to Light clear,
Breaks down Partition Walls, and so draws near
To God and Christ, by Love's strong tying Band,
Against the which, the Gates of Hell cannot stand.
Its Strength's so great, it Armies over-powers;
Its Scent more sweet than Garden spiced Bowers;
Its Nature such, makes stoney Hearts to bleed,
Forgives its Foes, its Enemies does feed;
Seeks not Revenge, but puts up Injuries,
Forgives and covers Faults, and so discryes
Its heavenly pure divine immortal Birth,
From that below, born and brought forth in the Earth,
ARise, O Lord, in this the mighty Day
Of thy great Power, and richly do display
Thy glorious Light and Truth abroad this Land,
That all, both Old and Young, may understand
The Riches of thy matchless conquering Love,
Thou God of Glory! who do dwell above,
To whom, on well tuned Instruments let us sing
Praises and Honor: Glory to our King,
Who Rules in Power on Earth, and Reigns over Hell,
And in the highest glorious Heaven does dwell.
A Princely Tribe all Wisdom's Children are,
Decked with a Crown Immortal which they wear.
A Precious Light in all Hearts does arise,
Take heed thereto, be sure, all who be wise.
BElieve in Christ the Light, who checks for Evil,
God's mighty Power in all to slay the Devil.
Can thou, O man! complain for want of Power?
When God's Love, Light and Free Grace, every hour
Does in thy Heart for Truth and Justice call,
That thou may be redeemed from the Fall.
Examine well thy Heart, and thou may see
God's Love, Light and Free Grace is great to thee.
FOr oftentimes a Light, thou cannot deny,
Within thine Heart does Wickedness discry.
GReat is Its Power, for this I right-well know,
Could Satan with Hell-Gates It overthrow,
HE would by no means suffer That to be,
Makes known his dark Deceit so perfectly.
INnto that Light then, let thy Mind return,
Which as consuming Fire all Dross will burn.
KEep low in It, and It will purge thee so,
Thou shall appear more White than driven Snow.
LIke one of Sion's Sons in Righteousness,
Whose Robes are Grace and Truth, a comely Dress.
MInd, mind that Light, all who desire to be
Freed from the Bondage of Iniquity.
NO other Power but Christ, Gods Sons of Love,
Can from the Bondage of Corruption move.
O! That men's Eyes were opened to behold
Gods Light and Love, more worth than finest Gold.
PRepare your Hearts, this Tidings to receive,
Great Joy and Gladness to all those believe.
QUake, Quake, ye Stout, before this Light to stand,
Which is the Thunders of Gods great Command.
RAise up your Forts, and let your Trench be cast,
Call all your strong, prepare to War, make haste;
SEt up your Standard, and your Ensign show,
Sound Babel's Alarm, and her Trumpet blow.
THis is the Day the Lord of Host will be
A King in Zion, and set Israel free.
UNto the Lord, ye Lambs of Light, sing Praise,
Now and forever, bless his Name always.
WOE to the stout and lofty Cedars tall,
Who hate the Light, and slight Gods Mercies all.
YOu stubborn hearted Ones, who still persist
To smite the Harmless with a bloody Fist,
ZEalously will the Lord in flames of Fire
Render you Vengeance in his dreadful Ire.
ADAM by Sin brought Death over all Mankind,
B ut Christ is come, to quicken Soul or Mind
C AIN did his Righteous Brother Abel slay;
D estruction comes on all, walk in his Way.
E VE, she the subtll Serpent s Voice obeyed,
F orbidden Fruit did eat, so was betrayed.
G OD cursed the Serpent, Dust must be his Meat,
H e on the same all days on's Life must eat.
J OSEPH was by his Brethren sold away,
K indred unkind, their Brother thus betray:
L ittle they dreamed, when it they did effect,
M ight come the time, to Io. they must subject.
N o other Project would these Men content,
O nly poor Joseph from them must be sent,
P osted away into dark Aegypt's Land,
Q uite from his Country, yet in this, God's Hand
R ight well is seen. Poor Joseph he became
S o great in Egypt as to rule the same
T his was his Portion, he the Lord did fear,
U nto Temptation would not yield, nor hear:
W hat did his Mistress unto him propose,
Y ou see denied the same, and would not close,
Z ealously bent against Sin, did her oppose.
To Outside Professors.
YOu great Professors, who possessors are
Of earthly Riches, but of heavenly bare;
Why do Ye thus for Husks and Shells contend,
Figures and Shadows, which must have an end?
To Rich, to Poor, to Old, to Young, to all
I sound Alarm, and with loud Voice call,
Awake, awake, rouse up, ye Slugs arise,
Shake off the Dust, with Eye Salve 'noint your Eyes,
That you this great and glorious Day so nigh
Approaching, yea, now Dawned may espy,
In which Gods Promises fulfilled are,
Of which the holy Prophets did declare
How that in the latter Days the Lord would be
A God to Jacob, his Captivity.
Return, and eke Jerusal'ms Walls rebuild
(In The Cituation of a pleasant Field)
And that Mount Zion's holy Hill should be
Above all Hills exalted in Glory,
To which the Nations round about should flow,
And many People say, Come let us go
Unto the Mountain of the house of the Lord,
That he may teach us, and with one accord
We in his Ways may walk. From Zion shall
The Law proceed, and Gods Word unto all
Within the New- Jerusalem plain be heard,
That he may Reverenced be, obeyed and feared,
Who shall judge Nations: many he rebukes,
And makes them beat Spears into Pruning Hooks,
And Swords to Plow-Shares; Nations shall not learn
To War, nor lift up Hand to fight again.
The time draws near, these things fulfilled must be,
And happy are they that these things shall see.
For Christ is come, men's Lives not to destroy,
But them to Save; and this is cause of Joy:
He is not come to Kill men, but give Life,
And free from that which is the cause of Strife,
That men may live in Unity and Peace,
And Amity; and Wars and Bloodshed cease.
A Time of Darkness over this Land has bin,
So thick, so dark, so gross because of Sin,
That many People Truth will not receive,
That God is Light, nor in his Son believe;
Although the Scriptures amply do declare,
That God and Christ the Name of Light do bare.
And first concerning God, who all things made
By his eternal powerful Word, He said,
Let it be so, and so it came to pass,
That all in Heaven, and Earth created was.
This God is Light, and in the Light does dwell,
As does the holy Scriptures plainly tell:
In many places you may plainly find,
Who read the Scriptures with an humble Mind,
And that his Son our Christ, who is the Lamb,
Is called the Light, who from God's Bosom came
To lead Man up to God out of the Fall,
In which through Sin we are concluded all;
And so through Sin, in Death and Darkness be,
Till by the Light of Christ we are set free,
Who came to lead, all those that him obey,
Out of the Night, into the perfect Day.
O blessed Day! O glorious Day of Light,
Which conquers Darkness, and expels the Night.
Blessed be time in which thy Day Star bright,
And Morning redness of Eternal Light,
Our Hearts did visit, and by splendant Rays
Reveal the Glory of these latter Days,
In which the Lord of Host, our God most-high,
According to his Promise, does draw nigh
Unto his People, and their King will be,
And by his powerful out-stretch'd Arm set free.
His Sons and Daughters, who long Captives were
Under oppressing Pharaoh, and did bear
The heavy Yokes, oppressing Burdens, and
Increasing Talks of black dark Egypt's Land.
Of Divine Love.
WHat shall I say of Love, the chiefest Good?
It Is Bread of Life, the Soul's Celestial Food;
The blessed Mansion of Eternity,
The Residence, and Dwelling of the high
And lofty One, the New-Ierus'lem bright,
Filled with that glorious Splendour and great Light,
Which does the sevenfold Light of the Sun transcend,
Which Light transparent, never shall have end.
O depth of Love, and boundless Ocean wide!
Under the shadow of thy Wings us hide,
And keep us, Lord, in perfect Rest and Peace,
Shower down thy Mercies, make all Discords cease;
Reveal thy Light, thy glorious Truth make known,
And by thy conquering Love bind all in one,
That in a Oneness all may sing amain,
Iehovah-King, on Earth, in us does Reign.
An Exhortation to dwell in Love.
DWell Friends in Love, and then no Strife will be;
Nay, nor Contention, but a Unity:
For Love in all things does for Oneness call,
Thinking no Evil, but pure good to all;
Yea, Love is God, and God is Love and Light,
Fullness of Pleasure, Joy and great Delight;
Dwell ye therein, and ye shall witness, Friends,
Such sweet Enjoyments cannot be writ by Pens:
For since the Lord in mercy has made known
This Dispensation of his Love, and shown
To me its Virtue, and choice Nature pure,
To ye with boldness, this I dare assure,
That Love's the highest Dispensation, yea,
That ever has, or will dispensed be.
Christ the true Light. Christ the Son of God's Love.
DWell in the Light, and there true Love will be;
Dwell in true Love, and great Light ye shall see;
For in the Light, there true Love does abound,
And in the Love, there true Light may be found:
For Light and Love, though they seem two by Name,
Yet one, in Substance, and in truth the same.
DEar Friend J. C. with true unfeigned Love
I thee salute, which in my Heart does move
Toward thee, and all our tender Friends most dear,
Whose Minds are staid on God, in his pure fear.
Feel me, dear Friend, a Member jointly knit
To all, in Christ, in heavenly Places sit;
And here to Friends no Stranger would I be,
Though they my Face, as outward, never did see.
For truly Friend, I dearly love and own
All traveling Souls, who truly sigh and groan
For the Adoption, which sets free from Sin.
And works Redemption, from that state wherein
The Prince of the Power of Darkness long did reign:
But blessed be God the time's at hand, a Chain
In utter Darkness must his Portion be,
There to be bound, and never more set free.
O! all the Riches that are here below,
Pomp, State and Glory, man esteems so:
What is It all? if I It once compare
Unto a Child, that does Gods Image bare,
But Dross and Dung, yea, filthy Dirt and Mire,
To purest Gold refined in the Fire.
How can I then but dearly love and own
Those precious Members, which are Bone of Bone,
And prize their presence, and enjoyment more
Than Butts of Wine, and Oil, and Barns of Store.
THe man that lives in Sin, walks in the Night,
And spends his days in Darkness, not in Light.
A righteous man his Works to Life do tend,
But wicked men their Minds to Strife do bend.
Avoid the Ways of Satan, they are not right,
But traoe the Steps of the Just, which Shine as Light.
Comfort the Comfortless in time of need;
Distribute to the Poor, and Hungry feed.
A Complaint against New England Professors.
O Sad! New England, I have heard strange News
concerning Thee; Why did Thou thus abuse
Gods Children dear, Male and Female? Surely
Their Blood Thou Slew, and Hanged, aloud does cry
Unto the Lord, who will avenge the same
Upon Thy Head, (A Record to thy shame)
A shameful thing indeed! what shall I say?
You are the stock of Cain; this was his way.
Your cruel Works, Your hardened Hearts make known
Your Babel great, must to the Earth be thrown;
Your boastings high, like Caparnaum tall*
Must all come down; your Pride shall have a fall.
You that so cruel and merciless were;
The Vengeance of Almighty God must bear.
Concerning Persecution.
SInce Abel's time unto this present day
There is an Evil that has born great sway,
An Evil Great, A Horrid and Black Sin,
Called Persecution: All that walk therein,
What e're they say, profess or do pretend,
By Persecution People to amend;
Yet none of them could ever make appear
Co-ercive Means was a good Course to stere;
It never did Mend, but rather always Mar;
Who e're harpt on that ftring still made a Iar;
IT is a hateful, foul, destructive thing:
To King nor People, It never good can bring:
The Work and Fruit thereof, as many write,
Naught else produces, but a Hypocrite.
I think it strange, why some should pleasure take,
And Toil themselves, but Hypocrites to make.
It is work that Marks all in it are,
With Mark and Badge of Satan, which they wear,
The Mark of the Flesh, and Birth that is from below,
A Badge with which all Persecutors go.
For as it was, so still it is, I say,
The Fleshly Birth the Spirits Birth would slay.
Nothing more certain is, the Mark and Seat
Of The wicked Whore, than Persecution great:
Nothing the mark of the false Church more plain,
Than Reformation per force to maintain.
Nothing more plain is writ in Letters Red
Than Antichrist, where they men's Blood do shed
About Religion, and Religions things;
This is a truth; Conviction with it brings,
To all that sober, serious, moderate are,
It is an Argument great weight will bear;
For Christ commanded, that the Wheat and Care
Should grow together till the Harvest were.
The Tares to be plucked up he gave no leave,
Lest that thereby the Wheat should hurt receive.
He also told to his Disciples all,
When that from Heaven they would Fire call,
They did not know nor understand aright
What spirit they were of; for his delight
Was, Men's Lives for to save, and not to kill;
For this end did he come, to do Gods will.
He also said, when that you Cursed are,
Then you should Bless; when Persecuted, bear
It patiently, and Pray for Enemies,
Do Good to those that hate you; none despise,
Because they are not now just as you are:
The time may come, they may Gods Image bear,
Though now Adverse, Idolatrous and Vain,
The time may come, they Mercy may obtain.
If now their Way be False, Erroneous, and
Not Right, in time, they Truth may understand.
The best way then, is still to let them live,
And let your Light so shine, as it may give
A better Understanding, that they may
Receive the Truth, and walk in the Right Way:
After this manner Christ his Scholars taught;
And those 'teach otherwise, their Doctrine's naught,
They never did learn it of the Light, the Lamb.
For Persecution from the Devil came;
It Is he that sets men to this Work, and they
Shall of him have their Wages and their Pay.
Therefore let none, that this bad Work attend
Expect Good Wages in their latter end.
Their Work is bad, and their Reward will be
Gnashing of Teeth to all Eternity.
Thus much concerning Persecution here,
A thing from which all Christians should keep clear.
LOrd God Eternal! by thy mighty Power
Preserve, I pray thee, in the approaching hour,
Thy Lambs, thy Babes, thy little Ones, yea, all
Who in Thee trust, and on thy Name do call.
Support them (Lord) by thine Outstretched Hand,
And give them boldness valinntly to stand
True Witnesses for thee, thy Truth and Light,
And bear their Testimony (in despite
Of Wicked Men, who wilfully oppose
That saving Light, their deeds of Darkness shows)
Against their false Worships and Idolatry,
Which holds the Seed in sore Captivity,
That so the Righteous Seed over all may rise
To praise thy holy Name, thou only Wise,
To whom be Glory, Honor and Renown,
Who only worthy art to wear the Crown.
Concerning the Philosophers Stone.
Blessed is that man can want and can abound,
And rest Content in all states, he has found
That precious Pearl, much hidden and unknown,
Which may be termed the Philosophers Stone;
For it turns all to Good, the chiefest Gold.
What-e'er it haps on, either Heat or Cold,
Sunshine or Rain, Riches or Poverty,
Stripes or Reproaches, all things well comply;
And with this Stone so jointly mix and change,
Its course most swift, throughout ye World does range,
And by its sublime Virtue still convert
All things to Riches and great Joy of Heart.
Press forwards, Chemists, and this Stone attain;
For it is the Sumnum Bonum, and the main
Point of Religion and Divinity.
Thus in Gods hand in true Content to lie,
And at the ordering of his mighty Power,
With true submissiveness, even every hour,
In still and quiet Resignation stand
To his disposing Providential hand.
Concerning Covetousness.
THere is a Sin too much lived in,
It many Cloakes does wear.
These Cloakes much used and much abused,
Are almost grown Thread bare.
The Rich Men yet these Cloakes will get,
And wear them frequently,
As if so be no one could see
What under them does lie.
Alas! Alas! these Cloakes may pass
Avarice to cover,
Yet all will not do, to tell them true,
Though wrapped over and over.
This Sin which has so many Cloakes,
Is named Covetousness;
Here ye may see Idolatry
In some great things profess,
Although this sin so much lived in
Be mere Idolatry;
Say what one will, they will live in it still,
It Is Truth, none can deny.
Concerning Pride, Avarice and Luxury.
PRide, Avarice and Luxury, these three
Are Evils great, avoided for to be,
By all who Christ profess, and bare his Name;
His Life and Doctrine did condemn the same:
Pride was the Evil, which did first prevail
Misery (on all, through Adam) to entail.
Pride and Self-love desires to grow so great,
Persues, and craves to know what is not meet;
And when obtained, it works a strange exchange,
Drives out from Paradise, on Earth to range.
So Pride before Destruction goes, and all
That are of Haughty minds must have a fall.
Proud man God did resist, and does so still,
But does the Humble teach to do his Will.
His Will then done, Man does enjoy Gods Peace,
Rests in his Sabbath, and from Sin does cease.
Avarice is an Evil great indeed,
Because from it all Evils do proceed.
A Root of Mischief, it is Idolatry,
A Sin from which we all should swiftly fly.
But having touched on this great Sin before,
The less need say, and so now pass it over.
Luxury next is that of which I write,
An Evil great to indulge the Appetite.
It Is an Excess of Pleafure and Self-ease,
With Christian moderation never agrees.
To say, What shall we eat, or drink, or wear,
It was the Gentiles for those things took care.
But Christ to his Disciples thus did say,
Take ye not thought; he showed another way.
First seek Gods Kingdom, and his Righteousness,
All other things the Lord will add and bless,
By which those that Luxuriously did feed,
And drink excessive, are reproved indeed.
Indeed the same severe Reproof does merit;
For those it use, strange Mischiefs shall inherit,
Not only to their Bodies and Estates,
But on their Souls brings burdens and great weights,
Impareth Health, it shortens Life, and still
Unfits the mind to do Gods holy Will.
And those in Luxury and Self-ease dwell,
Forget God, so must be turned into Hell.
There Is One thing more, to you I now may name,
Apparels, first ordained to hide man's shame.
And why of these should man be proud, I pray?
And for what reason should they be so gay?
Since the first Coat, which Adam wore, was spun
By Sin, a Thread and Work has all undone.
Why then should Man use so much Cost and Care,
His Lapse to show, thus trim the Badge to wear,
As if to all he meets, he would impart
His Innocence lost, and Pride of's Heart.
Well, this I say, Pride, Avarice and all
Luxurious ways, sprung up through Adam's Fall;
And as Man comes to be Restored again
By Christ, these Sins are mortified and slain.
But those live in such Evils and Excess,
Be no good Christians, what e're they profess.
TEMPERANCE is a Virtue choice and rare,
(This Age) these Trees are scarce, such Fruit does bear.
This is an Age, Intemperance and Sin
Too much in Fashion is, too much lived in;
An Age so strange, in which some strangely deem,
None can be Loyal, Temperance esteem.
Temperance seems as banished from our Land,
While Healths and Huzza's in repute do stand.
Temperance yet good Men will highly prize,
It always was much valued by the Wise,
Because it leads in Ways, preserves Health,
Ought more to be preferred than earthly Pelf:
The Contrary, great Ill Convenience brings;
Most of Diseases from Intemperance springs.
Extremes. Excess in Meat and Drink, anoy,
They hurt the Mind, and Body do destroy.
Therefore the best Advice that I can give,
Is Abstinence, not too much to receive.
More are destroyed by Superfluity,
And dye, than those through Want and Penury.
Besides, the Sin is great, men cannot enjoy
Gods Mercies and his Blessings, but destroy
And spend the Creatures on their sinful Lust,
Offending God, provoking of the Just,
To bring their Heads down low unto the Dust.
IF Health and Happiness thou will obtain,
From Costly Food, Rich Dainties then refrain.
If Health and Happiness thou highly prise,
Not many Dishes use, Two may suffice;
For many sorts of Food not well agrees,
Hinders Digestion and breeds Crudities.
The first Concoction then, if not made well.
The next cannot mend it, as Physicians tell.
The meaner Food and simple Diet plain,
The Bodies health most bravely does maintain.
An Healthful Body and a Quiet Mind
Amongst the Epicures, who can them find!
What Health, or Strength, or Peace, or Quietness
Can those enjoy, live daily in Excess?
If happiness in Health a man may find,
Surely much happiness in clean Mind.
A Man whose Mind is Holy, Humble, Pure,
A Treasure has that always will endure.
God gives his Creatures unto Man to use,
But Gods good Creatures many do abuse.
And on their sinful Lusts do spend the same,
Him they dishonor and blaspheme his Name.
Concerning the Cross of Christ.
THe Cross of Christ, the Power of God,
The Enmity does slay,
And bring the Soul from Death to Life,
From Darkness to Lights Day.
The Cross of Christ, the Power of God,
Over Hell Gates does prevail;
Whoever in the same does trust,
To help, it never does fail.
The Cross of Christ, the Power of God,
To Jews a Stumbling Block,
Unto Believers precious is
Elect, their only Rock.
The Cross of Christ, the Power of God,
To Greecians Foolishness:
They after earthly Wisdom seek,
But Folly do posses.
He that does not take up Christ's Cross,
And bear it willingly,
Cannot be Christ's Disciple, till
Hunself he does deny.
The Cross of Christ preserves from Sin,
And all who with it dwell
Are ransomed from Death and the Grave,
And all the Powers of Hell.
True Christians love the Cross of Christ,
And highly prize the same;
They greatly do rejoice therein
To suffer for Christ's Name.
Concerning the Soul's Travait after the Knowledge of the Right Way.
THere was a time in days by past,
When in my tender Years
I greatly cried unto the Lord,
To free me from my Fears.
My Fears, and Doubts, and Questionings,
Which greatly did attend,
Lest that I should miss of that Way
Leads to an happy End.
That Way in which the Lord alone,
To serve, I might be sure,
That Way in which he is worshipped,
By such whose hearts are pure,
Who do the Face of God behold,
And see his Glory great;
This was the thing I more longed for,
Then for my natural Meat.
Then as I cried, and sought the Lord
The Right Way for to know,
The Lord was pleased in his due time
The same to me to show.
But whilst among the Watchmen of
The Night I did enquire
The Way, and my Beloved seek,
Whom my Soul did desire,
I could not find the Way, nor yet
See my Belovod dear,
Till past blind Guides and Watchmen of
The Night I was got clear.
One cried lo here, and one lo there;
One that is the Way, one this;
So I still here was in great fear,
Lest Right Way I should miss.
For all their Sounds Uncertain were,
Their Trumpets did not blow,
So as to give a certain Sound,
And Right Way for to show.
For all their Sounds, and Cries and Calls
Were unto things without,
Wherein no Certainty was found
For to resolve my doubt:
Then I remembr'd Christ foretold,
When some lo here shall say,
And some lo there, then go not forth
After them in their Way.
For Heavens Kingdom is within,
And who the Way will find,
Which unto Rest and Peace does lead,
Turn Inward must his mind.
For what is to be known of God
Within is manifest;
And till the Mind be Inward turned,
None finds the way to Rest.
For till unto the Light within,
And gift of Gods Grace free,
The Mind and Heart of man be turned
The Right Way, he cannot see
Therefore the great concern of all,
Who after God does seek,
And long to know his Way and Truth,
Is to be low and meek.
For those who Meek and Humble are,
The Lord will teach his Ways,
And raise them up by his great Power,
For to show forth his Praise,
And as the Lord in mercy did
To me his Truth reveal,
So I will publish loud the same,
And not the Truth conceal.
Because I know the living God
Would all the Truth should know,
And none perish for want thereof,
Nor to Destruction go.
For God that did all Nations make
Of one Blood, for to dwell
Upon the face of the whole Earth,
Wills None should go to Hell.
He made not man to be destroyed,
But for a better end,
Namely, to serve and worship him,
And on him to depend.
The purpose of Almighty God,
Was man might glorify,
And honor his Creator great,
To all Eternity.
And not live unto himself,
Nor Satan serve in Sin,
With Lust of the flesh or Lust of the eye,
Nor Pride of Life live in.
For Such things they are not of God,
But of the wicked World;
And all that from them ben't Redeemed
Must into the Pit be hurled.
Now to the end that all Mankind
Might answer Gods design,
He his good Spirit freely gives,
And those to it incline
Their Ears, and hearken what it says,
And do the same obey,
Be sure therein they cannot Err,
Nor miss Gods Perfect Way.
The Way of Light the Way wherein
The just men all did go,
The Way of Life, the Way of Truth,
The right Way all do know,
Who walk therein, it is the Way
That leads to Peace and Rest,
The Just Man's Path, a shining Light,
All walk therein are blessed.
This is the Path Avel trod in,
And Abraham also;
Our Fathers Isaat and Jacob
In this same way did go.
It is a way the Vulters Eye
Cannot see; no Ravenous Bea st
Can tread or set a foot therein;
Nay, nor no Hireling Priest.
It is a way for Ransomed Ones
From the Earth are Redeemed;
Those walk therein are loved of God,
Though by men dis-esteem'd.
Blessed be the time in which this way
And day Light did appear,
Which leads to God out of all Sin,
And frees from slavish Fear.
And frees from Wrath and Vengeance sore,
For Evil Deeds is due;
Which is the Portion of the Unjust,
The Scriptures plainly show.
Blessed be the time in which this way
And Truth and Light did shine
To the satisfaction of my Soul,
That for the same did pine.
I hungered after Bread of Life,
And ^^^^ited for Drink sore,
That Bread and Drink, which who receive,
Never hunger nor thirst more.
That is to say, for other Food,
Or other Drink, but still
They daily pray unto the Lord,
Thereof to have their fill,
For they that hunger, and do thirst
For Righteousness most pure,
Are blessed of God, and shall receive
Mercies that will endure.
And now the goodness of the Lord,
In making known his Way,
And gathering out of the bypath,
Where many go astray.
And feeding of my hungry Soul
With Bread, and Peace, and Rest,
Does me constrain still to declare,
His Name forever blessed,
Who has done more for my poor Soul,
Then I could ask or think.
It Is said in times of Ignorance,
(By past) the Lord did wink;
But now the Lord to all men calls,
Repentance for to make,
And from their sinful ways return,
Or else go into the Lake.
It Is not he that Lord, Lord, shall say,
But he that does Gods Will,
And through great Tribulations goes,
Shall stand on Zions Hill,
With Harps in hands, singing aloud,
Praises to God most High.
Such they love not their Lives to Death,
But for the Truth can dye.
And those that can dye for the Truth,
And sor Truth lose their All,
They are the Sons of the most High,
And have obeyed his Call.
They are a chosen People, and
A Generation pure,
A Royal Priesthood unto God,
That shall for aye endure.
Concerning the breaking forth of the Word and Power of God.
WHen God appeared in his Power,
In his great Love and Light,
And to the Sons of men made bare
His glorious Arm of Might:
When by his Word he brake their Hearts,
Which hardened were by Sin,
And cleared their Understandings dark,
By Light shining within.
Then did they feel and see and know,
And understand aright,
That all the works which they had wrought
Were but toiling in the Night,
Though they did read, and pray, and preach,
And frequently attend
Duties and Exercise (so called)
From Weeks end to Weeks end.
Yet being erred in mind from that
Which is the ground, wherein
All Sacrifice accepted is,
Which from the same does spring;
To wit, the Spirit of the Lord,
And gift of his free Grace,
Without the which none can approach
To God, nor see his Face.
What e're such said, or thought, or did,
It sinful was and vain,
Their Offerings did no more please God,
Than if a Dog were slain.
And when by Light, and Truth, and Grace,
These things were understood,
Then from Self-acting they did cease,
For that could do no good.
And into Silence they were brought
On God alone to wait,
That in that Way they now might go,
Which Narrow is, and Straight.
And in those pleasant Rivers swim,
Where no Galley with Oars,
Nor gallent Ship can pass thereby
In The Channel, nor near Shores.
Where Self no Reputation has,
But Man's Will must be slain,
And all the Clory of proud flesh
Into the Dust be lain,
Where all Flesh must be silenced,
And Death not dare to speak;
No Woman in Transgression here,
Nor Man in the Fall so weak,
But only they whose Hearts the Lord
Prepares, whose Tongues also
The Lord has touched with a live Coal,
None else his Praise can show.
And till the Lord does touch their Hearts,
And open their Mouths wide,
In pure Retiredness they wait,
In silence they abide.
And when in silence they do wait,
And on the Lord attend,
To do what he commands them,
And go where he does send.
They do not Speak until they feel
His Word which is a Fire,
Within their Breast to burn, as they
To him their Minds retire.
Some then offended are hereat,
When they thus on God wait,
And say, no Profit can be known
In such a Silent state.
What benefit can be (say some)
When none do Preach nor Pray,
But Dumb and Silent do remain,
It may be all the Day?
Thus they, who call their Tongues their own,
Too much can Prate and Talk,
And gird themselves, do as they list,
And where they please will walk.
But such as know the Lord to gird,
And lead them in that Way,
In which they would not go, when they
Formerly went astray.
They dare not Speak their own words then,
Their Tongues are not their own;
That Member so unruly was,
A Taming time has known.
Then as the work of God is wrought
Upon the Heart within,
And Tongue is tamed, by that great Power
Which frees the Soul from Sin:
Such they can open wide their Mouths
Gods Works for to declare,
And what they meet with for the same
Enabled are to bear.
For they are past the Fear of man,
The Lord alone they fear,
And preach the Gospel (...), that all
The (...) thereof may hear.
Inst ant in Season they are found,
And out of Season too,
Always in readiness the Will
And Work of God to do.
And if by some they are for bid
Thus to Preach in Christ's Name,
More bold, and more courageously
They do declare the Same.
The more the Truth opposed is,
The more the Truth does thrive,
Like Camemile, the more oppressed,
The more it does revive.
Truth may be blamed, cannot be shamed;
Truth stronger is than all,
And all that dwell therein shall stand,
When Babylon shall fall.
Mystery Babylon the great,
Mother of Harlots, she,
Like to a Millstone shall be thrown,
And cast into the Sea.
Concerning Gods Powerful and Glorious Presence.
THe Presence of the Living God,
And working of his Power,
Does rend the Rocks, and scatter Clouds,
His Name is a strong Tower,
To which the Righteous fly apace,
And there in safety dwell;
It also precious Ointment is,
The Virgins wise can tell.
The Presence of the Living God
Is comfortable, and
Great Pleasures are forever more,
Enjoyed at his Right Hand:
In his pure Presence there is Life,
And Peace, and Joy, and Rest,
And those that do not know the Same,
What they enjoy, e'nt blessed.
The Hills flow down, the Mountains move,
The Earth does reell and shake
At the great Presence of the Lord,
Who all the World did make,
Therefore the Presence of the Lord,
From it where can man fly?
If he descend into the Deep,
Or mount up to the Sky;
Or do the Wings of the Morning take,
And to the Earth's end go,
The Presence of the Lord is there,
Man's Thoughts to him to show.
The Lord, the mighty God of Hosts,
For so is called his Name,
Who did the Mountains form, the Winds
Create, and all things frame.
The Upright in his Presence dwell,
And thanks to him do give,
For Mercies that from time to time,
From him they do receive.
But those that walk in sinful ways,
And in Uncleanness dwell,
Shall from the Presence of the Lord
Be driven into Hell.
Concerning Maintenance for the Poor.
IN ancient days, as we may read
In Deutronomy plain,
The Lord ordained ways and means,
The Poor for to maintain.
Yea, he took care, and gave strict charge,
The Poor Relieved might be.
As also in Leviticus,
We may both read and see;
And in the Book of Samuel,
God made both Rich and Poor;
He lifts up and brings low,
Let all his Power adore.
The Persons of the Princes great
Accepts not the Lord,
Nor more regards the Rich than Poor,
He made both by his Word.
The Rich, who do the Poor despise,
And Needy Ones disdain,
The time will come, that all their Wealth
Cannot free them from their Pain,
The expectation of the Poor
Shall perish not, nor fail,
Though Wicked men them persecute,
And in Pride, them assail.
The Proud lay wait to catch the Poor,
Their Eyes are priv'ly set;
The Needy they seek to ensnare,
And take them in their Net.
But they are blessed who do the Poor
In their Distress consider,
And help the Needy in their straits,
Their Leaf shall not soon wither.
The Lord will certainly maintain
The just Right of the Poor,
The Cause of the afflicted Ones,
For-a ye and evermore.
Although his Neighbors hate the Poor,
And Brethren him despise,
Much Food is in his tillage, and
A Blessing on it lies.
Whoever do the Poor Oppress,
And to them are unkind,
They do dishonor God, them made,
In The Scripture we so find.
We also read, that man is blessed
Has a Bountiful Eye,
Because his Bread unto the Poor
He gives, when they do cry.
The Churl does ill devices make
For to destroy the Poor;
And them to slay with Lying words,
That they may rise no more.
The Person Vile no more shall be
A Liveral man esteemed,
Nor yet the Churl thought Bountiful,
It must not so be deemed.
The Poor who walk in Uprightness,
And in Gods fear do dwell,
Are better than the Rich, Perverse,
Whose ways lead down to Hell.
He that unto the Poor does give,
Shall Not lack in time of need;
But he that hides his Eyes shall have
Many a Curse indeed.
Does not the God of Heaven and Earth
The Poor of this world choose?
Does not the Lord reject the Rich,
No kindness to them shows?
The Rich and Poor together meet,
The Lord them both did make,
And though the Rich regard them not,
God for them care will take.
Concerning the Uncertainty of Worldly Riches.
AS does the Eagle soar aloft,
And toward the Heavens fly,
So Riches to themselves make Wings,
Gone from us by and by.
No Certainty nor Confidence
A man can in them have:
His precious Soul they cannot Redeem,
Nor Ransom from the Grave.
Those that them eagerly pursue,
And to grow Rich make haste,
Do often into great Michiefs fall,
And Heritage lay waste.
Therefore it is good, content to be
With what the Lord does give,
And whether thou be Rich or Poor,
Still in Gods Fear to live.
Man's Happiness and Life don't stand
In his Abundance great;
Therefore let all contented be,
Not wanting Clothes and Meat.
For who so to Content is come,
A Creasure has before
That man whose Barnes are filled and thronged,
So full they will hold no more.
The Cares and Riches of this World,
The good Seed often does choke;
When some grow Rich, then they grow High
And so casts off Christ's Yoke.
Therefore said Christ, How hard it is
For those have Riches store
Into Gods Kingdom for to go;
More easy for the Poor.
How sorrowful it made the Young Man,
Christ said, lacked One thing more,
Which was, to Sell all that he had,
And give't unto the Poor,
And thou in Heaven Rich shall be,
And come and follow me:
But having great Possessions here,
How sorrowful was he!
More easy for a Camel it is
A Needles Eye go through,
Than for a rich man, as says Christ,
Gods Kingdom get into.
The Widows Mites, which she cast in,
The Creasury was more,
Than all the rest, what they cast in
Of their abundant store.
A Lamentation and Warning for England.
OH, England! England! surely now
Thy case is very sad,
When many in thy Borders are
So wicked grown, and bad.
That at good men they make a Scoff,
At Purity deride,
Disdain the name of Holiness,
Exalted in their Pride.
Contemn the Worship of the Lord
In Spirit and in Truth;
This is a state to be lament,
In old men and in Youth.
Because of Oaths the Land does Mourn,
Swearing is grown so great,
Daming and Sinking may be heard
Too frequent in the Street.
Cursings, Plague-rot and God-confound
So commonly are used,
With Gluttony and Drunkenness,
Gods Mercies are abused.
Moreover and besides all this,
Wicked Informers are
By some too much encouraged,
Christ's flock to rend and tear.
Their Goods to Spoil, Houses Rifle,
And them in Prison cast,
And go on still to work that ill,
Will Ruin bring at last.
But if these things encouraged be,
And no stop put thereto,
The End will but Destruction bring,
And Nation quite undo.
For certainly the God of Truth,
That does in Heaven dwell,
His great Displeasure will make known,
For such things, I foretell.
But though to thee, I tell the same,
Yet some will not regard,
But still will Mock at Warnings fair,
Their Hearts are grown so hard.
E're long the time will come, in which
A Reckoning God will make,
With them that do his People wrong,
And from them their Goods take.
It Is not for Evil they have done,
But only and alone
For worshipping and serving him,
Who is the Holy One.
Yea, certainly the thing is strange,
Did you the like e're hear,
If one do either Preach or Pray,
He Fined is severe?
And if one neither Preach nor Pray,
But with Gods People meet,
Although in Silence they remain,
In Meeting House or Street.
Then this is deemed a Crime so great,
Some say, they will not it bear;
And threaten, if they stand in the Street,
A Riot they will swear.
They choose not in the Street to stand,
But forced by Constraint
Out of their hired Houses, then
To meet in the Streets are faint.
In Peace and Quietness they stand,
Upon the Lord to wait,
That so their Strength renewed may be,
And bettered in their state.
For this they know, their Duty is,
Assembled for to be,
And wait upon and Worship God
In true Sincerity.
And God, the Searcher of all Hearts,
He their Intent does know,
That for no other end they Meet,
And to Assemblies go.
They are a People principl'd,
Their Practice has made known,
No wrong to do, nor seek revenge,
Good Will toward all they have shown.
Their Principle and Practice is,
Superiors to Obey,
And do those things which they require,
Wherein God don't say Nay.
But if it happen to fall out,
Some things they have enjoined,
The Lord contrary-wise requires,
In The Scriptures ye do find.
It better is, God to Obey,
Than subject be to Man;
To This all good Men do agree,
Let rest say what they can.
Their Meetings are Religious, and
Most Peaceable and Quiet,
And yet some Vile Ungodly Men,
Swears thus meeting, a Riot.
Where nothing Riotous appears
In Words, Deeds, nor Intent,
And yet they will boldly swear the same,
So wickedly they are bent.
But certainly the time's at hand,
God will his Children dear,
That serve him uprightly in Truth,
From all false Charges clear.
And they that wrongfully accuse,
And hate them without cause,
Shall bear his Righteous Judgment fierce,
And Rigor of his Laws.
Who Rigorous to his Lambs have been,
Severe beyond all Reason,
Conspirators against the Lamb,
And guilty of High Treason.
They at his Bar of Justice then
Arraigned all shall be,
And sentence from the Judge receive
For their Iniquity.
Depart from me, ye Workers of
Iniquity and Sin
Unto the place prepared of old,
Tophet it is called, wherein
The Worm never dies, and Fire burns
Exceeding hot and fierce;
A flame of Brimstone kindles it,
Where Piles of Wood's not scarce.
In Everlasting Torments, they
Their Teeth shall gnash with Pain:
In Chains of Darkness they will be bound,
Not to be freed again.
Therefore to those that persecute
The Righteous and the Just,
I say, Repent, before God say,
Depart from me, ye Cursed;
For if Repentauce ye don t know,
And from these Evils cease,
Then into Thraldom must you go,
Never more to have release.
And what you have to good Men done,
And that without just cause,
The same to you, shall measur^d be,
By those contemn your Laws.
Oh! that my Native Countrymen,
And Subjects of this Realm,
To Moderation might incline,
And those set at the Helm,
The Cry of the Oppressed, and
The Case of all the Poor
Would hear, and those in Goals now lie,
To Freedom would restore:
And grant to all the Israelites
Free leave to serve the Lord,
And go to New-Ierusal'm, to
Praise him with one accord.
Then Blessings from above will come
Upon this Nation great:
The Nations round about shall all
Not only hear, but see it.
When Truth and Righteousness prevails,
Justice and Judgment to,
The want of which, where-e're it be,
That Nation will undo.
Where Judges for Rewards do judge,
More then the Case of the Poor,
The Righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth
Will judge with Vengeance sore.
Where Priests that preach are Hirelings found,
And tear the Wool from Sheep,
They Shepherds are, void of Gods fear,
Not fit his his flock to keep.
And God, whose Eye goes to and fro,
And all things does behold,
His Controversy with them's great,
As Prophets said of old.
That Light is come, and now does shine,
False Teachers does discover,
And It must break forth more and more,
And spread all Nations over,
For to discover Babylon,
And all her Merchants great,
That so the Whore may reign no more,
But come down from her Seat.
She long has sat and reigned as Queen,
No Sorrow she would see,
But now the time's at hand, in which
Will come her Destiny.
She long the Blood of Saints has drunk,
'Cause from Truth they would not turn.
But now the Kings shall hate the Whore,
Her flesh with Fire burn.
B. A.

A Tripple Plea.
Law, Physic and Divinity,
Were at a jarr, could not agree,
To prove their Right, which of all three
Should have Superiority.
The Law pleads, It preserves Men's Lands,
And keeps their Goods from Ravenous Hands,
Therefore of Right challenges he
To have Superiority.
Physic prescribes Receipts for Health;
Which men prefer before their Wealth,
Therefore of Right challenges he
To have Superiority.
Then steps up the Priest demure,
That of men's Souls takes Care and Cure,
Therefore of Right challenges he
To have Superiority.
LEt Judges judge this Tripple-Plea,
Then Lawyers shall bear all the Sway.
Let Empiricks their Verdict give,
Physicians most of all shall thrive.
Let Bishops be Judge in this case,
Then Priests shall have the highest place.
Let Honest, Sober, Wise Men judge,
Then all these three away may trudge.
For let men live in Peace and Love,
The Lawyers Tricks they need not prove.
Let men forbear Excess and Riot,
They need not live by Physics Diet.
Let men attend what God does Teach,
They need not care what Priest does Preach.
But if men Fools and Knaves will be,
They shall be Ass-rid of all Three.
T. C.

THe Day of God does now draw nigh,
From which the Wicked fain would fly,
Which Day discovers all their Deeds,
And plainly shows they are but Weeds,
And fit for nothing but the Fire,
And to be burned in Gods Ire,
Who now will thoroughly purge his Floor,
And save the Wheat for evermore.
Christ is the Door, he is the Way,
Where all should walk, where none can stray;
Turn in thy mind without delay,
That thou may joy in Gods pure Day.
To God Most-high, Ancient of Days,
My Soul aloud does sound forth Praise;
This is the thirsting of my Heart,
That God his Love would more impart.
My Soul does magnify the God of Light,
For my Redemption great out of the Night;
Blessing and Praise to him for evermore,
Who has inricht me with his heavenly store,
And gave me Entrance in by Christ the Door,
To dwell with him now, and for evermore.
Glory and Praise be unto God, I say,
Who brought me from the Night into the Day.
HOw fresh and green Things are in time of Spring?
How sweetly then the Turtle Dove does Sing?
A heavenly Song of Praises pure I hear,
The time of my Redemption now draws near,
Praises pure, Praises unto God forever,
Who by his Word my Soul from Sin does sever,
And fit the same, to enjoy endless Life,
By perfect Freedom from all Iars and Strife,
To live in Peace, and in a joyful state,
With Christ, my Head, my Portion, and my Mate.
Now I no longer in the World may dwell,
To me to live therein, seems like to Hell.
The Course of the whole World, which lies in Sin,
Too much therein I heretofore have bin,
But now my Life it stands in God most pure,
And here, O Lord, let me for a'ye endure.
And when that Satan did draw out my Mind,
I often did in me hear a Voice behind,
Which said to me, keep to the Good within,
For by It thou may be preserved from Sin:
Keep to its Teachings, and mark the effect,
For by Its Power, All Sin thou may reject;
Of this thou need in no wise for to doubt,
For by Its Power the Devils are cast out,
And that State known, that is always pure and clean,
Wherein no Spot nor Wrinkle can be seen;
And here the Soul may now for a'ye Rejoice,
And Praise the Lord with a pure holy Voice.
The Lord has often knocked in my Breast,
That my Immortal Soul might have its Rest,
And be Redeemed from all that has oppressed,
To have my Life in Freedom, which is best.
And so know Death through Life destroyed quite,
And Mortal clothed with Immortal Light.
THe Day of God most holy is and pure,
Which Day and Light the Sinner cannot endure;
He hates the Light appearing in his Heart,
Because the coming of it is his smart;
For as an Oven, it will fiercely burn
All that is bad, and to Truth will not turn;
Yea, all that is in Man, it now will try,
And all that is Impure must surely dye,
And be consumed, as with a burning Fire,
And be destroyed in Gods dreadful Ire;
So only that which can the Fire endure
Shall stand, and so come forth holy and pure
And shall be crowned with a Crown of Life,
Prepared as a Bride, and the Lamb's Wife.
Therefore ye Sinners hear, lest that ye dye,
The Voice of Christ, Gods Son, with him comply,
Who is the Savior great, and kiss him strait,
And to him bow, before it be too late,
And take his Counsel; for I plainly tell,
Those that reject the same, go down to Hell.
Therefore with speed, come turn your Minds within,
Obey that Voice which does reprove for Sin,
And say, This is the Way, come walk in it,
That you with me upon my Throne may sit:
Go not therefore in Ways and Works of Evil,
No longer live in Sin, and serve the Devil;
But follow me in those Ways that are Pure,
For dark and sinfnl Ways I cannot endure;
My Soul in all respects does loathe the same,
Those walk therein, dishonor Gods pure Name:
My Counsel heed, and do not run before,
Incline not to the Spirit of the Whore,
Her Cup of Wine, is Fornication great,
Vials of Wrath shall come upon her Seat.
THe Lord does feed his Flock and give them Rest
In pleasant Pastures, where they richly feast,
And drink of Shiloes Brooks that run so clear,
For they only, the living God do fear;
They hear his Voice, and do his Will aright,
In Holy things their Souls have great delight.
But this unto the Sinner seems strange,
Whose great delight in Darkness is to range
And rove about, and from the good to raven,
Walking in sinful Ways, yet hope for Heaven.
It Is a false Hope, the Hope of the Hypocrite,
It leads not out of Darkness into Light;
Therefore that Hope, I say, trust to no more,
But come to Christ within, the Hope, the Door;
Come from that place where Satan has his station,
Enter the Kingdom through great Tribulation;
For all that will live godly in Christ, they
Shall meet with Persecution in their Way;
But God preserves the Humble and the Meek,
The Proud and Persecutors Head he will break.
Therefore thy Neck subject unto Christ's Yoke,
Fear not, thy Bands, though strong, shall all be broke.
His Yoke is easy, Burden light, and shall
Give to thee Rest, and bring out of the Fall,
Into that Way, which narrow is and strait;
Bow to his Yoke before it be too late.
J. C.

THE END.
Page 9. line 8. read look not thou thereon, l. 16. r leisure. p. 10. l. 9.
dele who, l. 24 for placed r. placed. p. 14. l. 23. f. does r. do. p. 16. l.
26. r. like to a post.


