The Redemption of Time: OR, A WORD TO THE WISE; Persuading and earnestly
entreating them, as they tender the Salvation of their Souls to all eternity,
to mind the time past, present, and to come, before it be too late; drawn from
those pathetical words of Moses,
O that men were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider
their later end. Deuteronomy. 32.29.
O that Men would Be wise in lamenting things past with sorrow, viz. The evils
they have committed against God in thought, word and deed.
their neighbor in harming him in body. soul. fame. substance.
themselves by sinning without fear. proceeding without shame. persevering
without remorse.

The good they have omitted in rooting out vices rising out of nature. frailty.
malice.
not getting virtue for to rule passions. break evil customs. overcome evil
occasions.
not serving God as nature bound them. grace moved them. promise in baptism
urged them.

The time they have lost, then which nothing is more precious to gain heaven.
avoid hell. lessen temporal pains.
slippery, because time past is ended. to come is not begun. present is but a
moment.
irrecoverable, either by price, power or prayer.

The death of Christ, by his enemies cruelty, because the man was innocent. the
manner unmerciful. the malice excessive.
by his friends ungratefully, because they either betrayed him. denied him.
fled from him.
for his friends and enemies willingly, to save them from hell. to procure them
grace. to buy them heaven.


Understand things present with shame, viz. the multitude of Gods benefits in
soul, by curing it from sin. enduing it with grace. helping it with Sacraments.
body, by keeping it from infinite diseases. from maims and deformities. from
want and necessities.
goods, by substance. children. friends.

The vanity of the world, whereof the pleasures are few. short. damnable.
miseries are infinite in number. grievous in quality. common in experience.
fruits are contempt of God. carlesness of the soul. final perdition.

Their frailty in sinning by reason of the flesh that follows sense and
appetite. resists reason and grace. betrayeth the soul.
devil, whose malice is implacable. deceits are infinite. assaults continual.
world, that ministereth occasions of sin. oppressions of virtue. cumbers of
body and mind.
infancy is a dream without use of will. memory. understanding.
youth is a madness full of idle words. roving thoughts. disordered deeds.
manhood is a combat with evil customs of things past. occasions of things
present. fear of danger and evil to come.
age is a sickness wherein the body languisheth. senses fail. judgment
impaireth.


Provide for things to come with fear of The day of death, then which nothing
is more certain to sever us from the body. cut us off from the world. summon us
before the judge.
uncertain in what manner. in what state. in what time and place.
bitter, by reason of the pangs of the body. the remorse of conscience. the
fear of damnation.

The appearance before the Judge, whose wisdom is infallible, for that it sees
into all places. searches the hearts of all persons. knows the course of all
times.
justice is inflexible, for that his mercy was refused. injuries must be
revenged. enemies must be confounded.
presence is unavoidable, for that Angels withold. the Devils draw back. no
place will protect.

The danger of hell, where the place is dark. uneasy. loathsome.
torments are infinite. uncessant. everlasting.
company consists of the devils. the wicked. the worm of conscience.

The loss of heaven, where the place is delightsome. ample. glorious.
company is the Trinity. the humanity of Christ. all the Saints.
felicity is such as neither eye has seen. nor ear has heard. nor heart has
conceived.




By R. B.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Clarke, at the South-entrance of the Royal Exchange.
1663.


